THE GROUNDS Of Divinity, Plainly discovering the Mysteries of Christian
Religion, propounded familiarly in diverse Questions and Answers: Substantially
proved by Scriptures; Expounded faithfully, according to the Writings of the
best Divines, and evidently applied by profitable Uses, for the help and
benefit of the Unlearned which desire Knowledge.

To the which is prefixed a very profitable Treatise, containing an Exhortation
to the Study of the Word, with singular directions for the Hearing and Reading
of the same.

By ELNATHAN PARR Minister of the Word, at Palgraue in Suffolk.

PROVE. 3.13.14. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding.

For the Merchandise thereof is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the
gain thereof is better then gold.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for SAMVEL MAN, and are to be sold at his Shop, in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Ball. 1614.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, RELIGIOUS, AND MOST WORTHY LADY, the Lady JANE CORNEVVALLEYS,
Widow: Grace and Peace from God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
MADAME,
I Present unto you these my weak and homely labors, being the first fruits
of my pains in this kind, humbly desiring that your Ladyship would vouchsafe
to patronize them. That which has emboldened me to dedicate them to your
worthy Name, is Partly A mind willing in the best measure I can, to testify
my thankfulness for your many undeserved favors, whereby I confess you may
justly challenge more then my Mediocrity can ever perform: Partly, your love
unfeigned, and sincere profession of the Gospel, (whereby you are an honor to
your Degree and Sex) clearly euidenced many ways, during your abode in
Suffolk: which, as it is a sweet testimony to your own breast, that you are
beloved of God, and has made you far and near honored by all such which
love God: so also it has made me very confident, that your Ladyship will
favorably accept these my thankful endeavors. Go on I humbly beseech you
(good Madame) go on in that good way which you have chosen: and constantly
continue, as a bright Star, to shine (without waning, or being ecclipsed) to
the directing, confirming, and comforting of many, as hitherto you have done.
And, for my part, I shall never cease (among many other) to stand up as an
humble Suppliant to God; that you may be more and more strengthened in his
Grace, and directed by the Eternal Spirit, that as you have already, by your
zeal in Religion, provoked many: so you may persevere unto the end, in this
holy course, and bring on, and encourage others by your singular example: Then
shall your Name be still more honorable while you live here, and your account
furthered in the day of our Lord JESUS. And thus humbly tendering my best
service to your Ladyship, and to the hopeful Gentleman Mr FREDERICK, your
joy, (upon whom I beseech God to double the glory of all his Ancestors) and
wishing unto you both, and to your whole family, all temporal and eternal
blessings by Jesus Christ: I humbly take my leave, and always rest,

Bound to your Ladyship to my uttermost in all Christian duty, Elnathan Parr.

To the courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader; Thou have here the fruit of my sickness, whereby in the
beginning of this Winter, I was made unserviceable for my public duty. In
this while, considering that Time is precious, and the days evil, as the
Apostle says, the Lord put into my heart, to redeem the time: Whereupon (as
God enabled me to hold up my head) I looked over my ragged Notes, and scattered
papers. Part of which, after my rude manner pollished, are here offered unto
thee. I am not without hope, but that (by the good hand of God) as I had
experience of the profit of these things, being delivered by lively voice: so
also the charitable reading of them may much avail thee. I know that every day
there are many new Books set forth, and of this kind not a few: yet in this
method, with sound and brief Propositions of the principal points of
Divinity: evident and infallible proofs: succinct and perspicuous
Explications; and plain and lively Applications, I have not observed any: So
that, this, and also the great ignorance of the multitude considred, I doubt
not but the Indifferent, will free these my Endeavors from the censure of
superfluous, and of writing Iliads (as they say) after Homer. I confess
ingenuously that much of my Explications is drawn from the fountains of other
men, both foreign Writers, and many our own worthy Countrymen. So that, as the
little Be, greatly industrious, flies over many a garden and flower, to
gather a little honey: so have I out of many men's gardens, selected and gathered
many such choice things, which I judged might most make for thy benefit. And
this can be no Imputation to me, in as much as the Learned know, that (not to
speak of some of the Penmen of the holy Ghost) both ancient and later
Writers, have, to the great benefit of the Church, taken this course: and also
because I have made such things, which I have received from others, so to serve
my purpose, either by contraction, addition, exposition, or marshalling into my
order: that I may in some sort justly challenge them as mine own.

The sum of this my small Labor, (to the which is prefixed an exhortation to
the study of the Word) is an Exposition of the Description of God, named the
Grounds of Divinity, expounded and applied, because it propounds, preueth,
and as a key opens, and easily vnlocketh, the hidden mystery and counsel of
God, concerning our salvation by Jesus Christ. The Questions and Answers, are
familiar and friendly depending. The Explications, plain, and for the most
part, concise, pointing at some things in a word, at some in a parenthesis,
which to the industrious Reader will be the more aduantageable: and for the Uses
(which being practiced, are the praise and life of knowledge) I have not
observed every thing, nor so pressed any thing, but that I leave much more to
be gathered and observed, by such which are accustomed to Meditation. In a
word, that which I judged most profitable, I have performed for thee.

If thou be learned, as thou need it not, so I humbly entreat thee to
know that I writ it not for thee yet I bar thee not the reading, but most
willingly submit it to thy censure. If thou blamest the Phrase and Style, that
it is not fluent and round, but ragged and harsh: Truly neither can I commend
it. Happily, I have striuen, to be plain, or at least, having no skill in
finer cookery, have dressed it as I was able, after our homely and country
fashion for the stomachs of the unlearned, who relish and like better, of
that which is plain and easy, then either learned and deep treatises which
they understand not, or such cooked conceits where the cost is greater then the
nourishment. Some delight in toys like children: I should then think very ill
of my self, when I should go about to please their humor, fitter to be
purged then norished. Some (and worthily) in regard of their great acuity and
judgment, like nothing (for themselves) but that which transcendeth common
capacities: I do not think my self able to do that which might give them
satisfaction. And, in as much as there are three fold more which have but mean
knowledge, then which abound, it shall content me, that even as Gold is common
in Rich men's pockets, but Silver is current among the common sort; it shall (I
say) content me, if, while those of deeper judgment be conversant in the
Writings of the learned, my Labors may be in the hands of the meaner sort, for
whose sake specially I have taken this pains.

For thee therefore which art but a beginner I have labored. If I may add to
thy knowledge and affection, and be a helper of thy Faith and Joy; give thou
God the glory: I have then attained the end of my labors: Read once, and read
again; it may be the second reading will be more sauory then the first. If
thou profitest herein, according as I have prayed for thee, I know thou shall
never repent thee. And thus, desiring the help of thy prayers, I commend thee
to God, and to the word of his Grace, wishing thy farther vp-building in all
saving knowledge, godliness, and established comfort of conscience, through
Jesus Christ.

Thine in our Christ. E. P.

A Table for the ready finding out of the principal things contained in this
Book.
A
ATTENTION in hearing. page 22. Application necessary of that which we hear
and read. 37. Of Angels Good and Evil, and what they are. 77.
B
Of Baptism. 272.
C
Not only for the Church do we believe the Scriptures to be Divine. 52. 53.
Of Creation, and what it is. 73. Of the Works of Creation the first day. 80.
Of the Works of the second day. 83. Of the Works of the third day. 85. Of the
Works of the fourth day. 88. Of the Works of the fifth day. 94. Of the Works
of the sixth day. 95. Of the Creation of Man. 96. Of Conscience. 103. A
consideration of Christ, how and why his Righteousness is sufficient for the
Justification of all the Elect. 182. 183, etc. That Christ is God and Man in on
Person, and why. 187. Of the righteousness of Christ whereby we are justified,
what it is. 192. How we are made partakers of this Righteousness. 193. Of the
Offices of Christ. 199. Of the Church. 241. The Church but one, and how. 260.
What a visible Church is. 262. Of the notes of a visible Church. Ibid.
Churchmen subject to Civil Magistrates. 293. Of the Civil Magistracy. 294.
D
Difficulty of the Scriptures, to whom and why. p. 7. 8. 9. Distracting care a
hinderance to wise Hearing. 18. Of Church Discipline. 288.
E
Of Eternal Life. 226. Of Eternal Death. Ibid. Of Election. 247.
F
A description of God the Father. 68. Of the Fall of Man. 140. How the fall of
Adam and Eve belongs to us. 148. Of Faith what it is. 196.
G
What GOD is, described. 54. Of diverse Attributes of God. 55. 56. 57. Of the
Relations of Persons in the Trinity. 61. There are three Persons but one God.
Ibid. What Essence and Person are in the Godhead, and why the Church uses
such terms, as also Trinity in Unity. 64. 65. 66. A description of God the
Holy Ghost. 68. Of the Generation of the Son. 70.
H
Of wise Hearing the Word. 17. and seque Three things required to wise Hearing.
17. Three things necessary in Hearing. 21. 22.
I
Intemperance a let to wise hearing. 17. Intention in Hearing. 23. Judgment to
be used in the Reading of the Scriptures. 33. Judgment in Reading consists
in three things. Ibid. Of the Image of God in Man. 115. Of Justification. 173.
Of Justification by the Righteousness of Another. 177. Of the day of
Judgment. 232.
K
Of the Knowledge of God. 39. 40.
L
Of the Law. 155. How the Law is abrogated and how not. 161. Of the use of the
Law. 165. None can perfectly keep the Law. 169. Of the penalty of breaking the
Law. 172. How we are freed from the Law. 173.
M
Of Meditation after we have heard, and how to be practiced. 25. 26. 27. The
right Meaning to be carefully sought out in our Reading, and how we should
find it. 35. 36. Of the Creation of Man. 96. Of the Soul of Man. 99. Of
Mortification. 211. Of the Ministry of the Word. 267. Of the Civil
Magistrate. 293. Of the Power and Authority of the Civil Magistrate. 294.
N
Of the New Man. 212.
O
Of Order to be used in Reading of the Scriptures. 30.
P
Of Preparation to the Hearing of the Word. 17. Preparation consists in two
things. 17. Five things to be avoided that we may be prepared. 17. 18. 19.
Prejudice against the Teacher, a hinderance to wise Hearing. 18. Pride a
hinderance to wise Hearing. Ib. Three things to be done that we may Hear
Wisely. 20. Prayer necessary to Preparation before Hearing, for whom and for
what. 20. Of the Procession of the Holy Ghost. 70. Of the Providence of God.
117. Of Prayer. 220. Of Predestination. 247. Predestination brings not in a
neglect of Godliness. 248.
R
Retention necessary to wise Hearing. 24. Of Reading the Scriptures. 28, etc.
Reverence to be used in Reading the Scriptures. 28. Of Redemption. 127. How it
comes to pass that we stand in need of a Redeemer. 132. Of Repentance. 204.
Of the Resurrection. 237. Of Reprobation. 247.
S
The Scriptures difficult. 7. 8. Our pains ought to be the more. 9. 10. The
Scriptures are the word of God. 12 Security a let to wise hearing. 19. We are
wisely to read the Scriptures, and three things necessary thereunto. 28 The
Scriptures the best means to attain the sound knowledge of God. 39. What the
Scriptures are described. 40. Why called Scriptures, and Holy. 41. Why the
Scriptures are called a Covenant and a Testament. 44. Of the authority of the
Scriptures. 48. How we know the Scripuures to be Divine and Canonical. 50. A
Description of God the Son. 68. Of Original sin. 151. Of Sin what it is.
155. Of Sanctification. 204. Of Free Will. 207. Of the parts of Sanctification.
211. Of the measure of Sanctification attained in this life. 218. Of helps to
sanctification. 220. Of the Reward of sanctification. 224. Of the Sacraments.
271. Of the Lords Supper. 280. Of reverent coming to the lords table. 282 How
often to come to the Lords table. 283 Of Subjects and their duties. 295
T
Timely coming to the congregation necessary to preparation before the hearing
of the word. 21. A fit time to be observed for reading. 33 Of this word
Testament, referred to the Scriptures. 43. The Testament how one, and two 44.
45.
V
Of the Vtility of the scriptures. 10. 11.
W
Five reasons showing that all are bound to the study of the Word. 3. 4.
Diligence in study of the Word. 5. 6. Two Reasons to provoke our diligence in
the study of the Word. 7. Two parts of the study of the Word. 16.
A SHORT AND PLAIN EXHORTATION TO THE STVDY OF THE WORD, WITH Several
directions for the hearing and reading of the same, very necessary for these
times.
AS the Sun is to the World, so is the Word of God to his Church and People,
the light of their lives, the life of their souls: But as the Sun in regard
of the commonnesse, is not duly considered; so the commonnesse and plenty of
the word (a benefit unspeakable) breeds the contempt of it. Even as the
Manna at the first admired, was afterward loathed: so does our corruption use
the word. When the Lord struck Egypt with darkness, then they understood the
benefit of the light; so if the Lord should deal with us, sending such a
famine of the word, as the Prophet Amos speaks of, Amos 8.11
we would then acknowledge the plenty of the Gospel to be a happy blessing: For
we are brought to the acknowledging of good things, rather by the wanting, then
the having of them. So the sick man learneth greatly to account of that
health, for the which before his sickness he was seldom thankful; but this
is of corruption: and grace must teach us never the less to esteem of the
word for the plenty of it, and our liberty in professing it; but so much the
more to love it, and for it to praise our merciful God in Jesus Christ.

This also we must know, that the more plentifully the Lord gives the means,
the more fearful is our blindness, and the nearer we are to judgment, if we
make not good use of it. When John Baptist preached repentance, and the
kingdom of God, Mat. 3.10.
he says: Now is the axe laid, etc. as if he should have said: Howsoever God
has hitherto spared, yet when the Son from his fathers bosom shall teach,
He that hears not now, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. How
culpable this way our English Nation is, is too too manifest, and what we have
cause to expect for it, I tremble to write.

Wherefore as in the morning when the Sun arises in his strength, we open
our doors and windows to partake of his comfortable brightness: so, in as
much as the Lord causes the beams of his glorious Gospel to shine clearly
among us, it is our parts to open our eyes, and to endeavor to be illustrated
by the same. Is it not the Commandment, Ioh. 5.39 Coloss. 3.16.
binding all, and to all industry in the searching and study thereof?

That all are bound, may appear by these reasons: First, if any might be
dispe^sed with, for not studying in the word; either in regard of the
worthiness of their person, or for the multitude of their business, then Kings:
but not Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
and David is an example; therefore none. Secondly, all parents and children
are bound to the knowledge of the word: but all degrees, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
orders, and conditions of men, are in these contained: therefore all. Thirdly,
the reason of the commandment shows it: In them you hope to have eternal
life. John 5.39.
But all hope for, and would have eternal life: ergo. Fourthly, the Scriptures
set down the duties of all men in their several callings: but these duties we
cannot perform, unless we know them; and know them we cannot without the
word. Ergo. Fifthly, the Apostle Peter writes thus: 1. Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you. But render a reason, and readily we cannot, without
the word: therefore all, whether teachers or learners, able or not able to
read, are bound to the study of the word. Away then with the figgeleaues of the
multitude, who think themselves here of discharged, either for their worldly
business, or because they are not booke-learned, or for some such foolish
excuse. This also reproves the Papists, who bar the common people the
reading of the Scriptures; fearing least that thereby they should prove
Heretics: But this is a foolish fear; for the Scripture teaches the
contrary; affirming, that the law makes not wise men simple, but simple men
wise; not putting out the eyes of them that see, Psalm. 19.7.8.
but giving light to the eyes. And indeed, their reason is without reason: for
the word is a rule; but the rule makes not the work wrong, but is a means to
right the same. The word is a light; but the light causes not darkness, but
the absence of the light: So the word causes not heresies, but the absence of
the word: yea, and if they well consider, they shall find, that not the simple
common people, but the learnedest Clearkes, priding themselves in their wit,
have been the brochers of heresies.

As all are bound, so to use all industry and diligence to know the word: which
is expressed in those significant terms and phrases: Search the Scriptures,
and, let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously: Search, that is, not
slightly and ouerly, as many do, not regarding whether they find or no: but
narrowly, and painfully, as Solomon expounds, by calling, crying, and
seeking, Pro. 2.3.4.
as for silver, and searching, as for treasures: Then shall we understand the
sear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. Let the word of Christ dwell
in you: that is, even as they that dwell with us under the same roof, are well
known unto us, and we familiarly converse with them: So ought the word to
be, not as a stranger; but as a welcome and wel-knowne guest: Let it dwell
plenteously, or richly: that is, even as cuery corner of a rich man's house is
fraughted with stuff, so ought we to be full-filled with divine knowledge:
This condemns those blind ones, who live like bruit beasts, that have no
understanding; whose brutish ignorance cannot be but exceeding fearful: For
even as a house without walls and windows, and other necessary furniture is
accounted forlorn; so that is a very forlorn and naked conscience, which is
destitute of the knowledge of the word: And as it is an easy matter to lead
the blind out of the way; so the ignorant are easily lead, and taken in the
snares of the Devil. And this reproves the negligence of such, who are not
careful to apply themselves with all diligence to the study of the word: our
negligence herein being the cause of the barrenness of knowledge in these
plentiful times. If men would bestow that time in the study of the word, which
they for the most part bestow, some in hunting and hawking, some in dicing and
carding; some in drinking, swilling, and following bad company, some in sloth
and idleness, thus wisely redeeming the time, then certainly knowledge would
abound among us, as the waters that cover the sea. Even as in matters of the
world, though a man have never so good a Trade; yet without labor and
diligence he can do no good in it: and as the diligent shall bear rule, Pro.
12.24. Pro. 22.29.
and stand before Kings, so knowledge shall increase to the diligent, when the
negligent shall be under darkness.

There are two principal causes among many, which ought to provoke our
diligence herein. The Difficulty, and the Vtility of the Scriptures: The
Scriptures are difficult and hard, but first not to all; but to them which
perish, 2. Cor. 4.3. 1. Cor. 2.14.
and to them which are natural, and have not the spirit: but to them which
have received the enlightening spirit, it is otherwise: God, who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, shining into their hearts, and giving them
the light of the knowledge of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 4.6.
Secondly, they are difficult, but not always, the Lord more and more
scattering the darkness of the minds of his elect Children, by his holy
spirit. Thirdly, they are difficult, but not all: for in the foundation of the
doctrine of salvation, and of faith and manners, they are easy and plain: but
some places indeed are wonderfully hard: There is milk for babes: that is
easy, and meat for strong men, Heb. 5.12.13.14.
there is hardness. The Ancients of this have excellently spoken: One says,
The Scriptures are like a mighty river, in the which a Lamb may walk safely,
and yet an Elephant be drowned. And another: The writers of holy Scripture are
in some things like Angels, descending to the capacity of the simplest; and in
some things as Angels, transcending the capacity of the learnedest. And again,
In the holy Scriptures some things are open, and some things obscure: those are
for our nourishment, these for our exercise: by those our hunger is stayed, in
these our loathing. And indeed, this variety adds to the excellency of the
Scriptures, as in the globe of the earth, some land, and some sea, makes both
the more esteemed; and in the land, some hills, and some valleys makes both
the more delightsome; and as the Summer is so much the more welcome, after a
hard and stormy Winter: even so this mixture in the word, makes both the more
pleasing, and continues the edge of our desire to study: which if it were all
alike, would soon be dulled.

These reasons may be rendered why the Lord would have some things in his word
to be thus folded up in the clouds of obscurity; making (as it were) darkness
their pauillion: First, that we might know, and acknowledge the understanding
of the word to be the gift of God. Secondly, to tame the pride and arrogance of
our nature, which would soon appear, if all things were obuious and easy at
the first sight. Thirdly, that we should not vilipend and make light reckoning
of the word: for this is our corruption: Proffered kindness, or grace is not
esteemed. Fourthly, that impure dogs, and swine may be kept from holy thing.
Fifthly, that we should make high account of the ministry of the word,
ordained for the opening and interpreting of the same. Sixthly, to stir us up
to prayer, and to continual diligence and pains in the hearing and reading of
it: As matters of great difficulty, are not compassed (we see) with ordinary
pains.

Many by reason of the difficulty of the divine Oracles, do quite give over
the study of them; like unto the sluggard, or idle person, Prou. 26.13.
who says; A Lion is in the way. But as generous and noble spirits are not
daunted nor dismayed by the dangers of great Enterprises, but rather so much
the more inflamed with courage to set upon them: Even so the difficulty of holy
Scriptures should not abate our pains; but in reason so much the more whet on
our diligence: without the which, not only no excellent, but no ordinary
comfortable measure of knowledge can be achieved. Is the word difficult? Then
it requires of thee so much the more industry in reading, hearing, conference,
meditation and prayer; In which things if we did exercise our selves in a
conscionacle manner, we should soon become men of ripe age in these hidden
mysteries.

The second reason to excite our pains, is the vtility and profit that comes
by the word. As David said of Goliath his sword, There is none to that: 1. Sam.
21.9.
So I may say of this reason, There is none to this: For amongst men, whose
heart is so hard but profit and gain will persuade him? 2. Tim. 3.16.
But the Scriptures are profitable: By them we believe: By them we are
converted, Ioh. 17.20. Romans 10.14. Psalm. 19.7. 2. Tim. 3.15. 1. Pet. 1.23. Iam.
1.18. Act. 10.44. Iam. 1.21. Luke 11.28. Ioh. 6.68. Act 13.26. Psalm. 119.105.
Pro. 6.23. Deuteronomy. 32.2 Esaias 55.10.11. Ephesians. 6.17. 1. Pet. 2.2. Cant. 2.5. Mat.
5.13. Psalm. 19.10. Psalm. 12.7. Psalm. 119.72.
and made wise: By them we are regenerated. By the preaching of them we
receive the Holy Ghost. By them we are saved, therefore called, The words of
eternal life, and of salvation. The word is compared to Light, to enlighten
us. To Rain, Snow, and Dew to make us fruitful in good works. To a Sword to
defend us. It is a Key, to direct us to Christ, the treasury of all happiness.
It is as Sincere Milk to feed us, and make us grow: As Flagons of Wine, and
Apples of Paradise to comfort us. As Salt, to season, purge, cleanse and
preserve us. Preferred before Honey for sweetness, before tried Silver and
Gold for price, and inestimable value. What shall I say? The praise and
excellency of the Scriptures, exceeds all the praise and commendation that
can be given unto them. If I had the tongue of Angels, I could not express it,
but must be compelled to say, as the Apostle in another place: O the deepenesse
of the riches of the wisdom of God, and of his word! Is any thing then so
profitable as this? O what a base, slavish and foolish nature have we, which
run and hunt after the feathers of the world, neglecting the true and
certain treasures of the word. You have a sure word of the Prophets, 2 Pet.
1.19.
to the which you do well if you take heed, etc. Yea, if we study in the word,
we have the Angels fellow-students, searching, enquiring, and desiring to
behold the things that are revealed to us by the preaching of the Gospel. 1.
Pet. 1.10.11.12. Ephesians. 3.10.


But some percase, will thus object: The word of God is to be studied we
confess; but how shall we know that those Scriptures are the word of God?

That the Scripturs contained in the old and new Testament, are the word of the
living God, may appear, either by Testimonies, or other Reasons.


The testimonies are either Divine, or Humane.


The testimonies divine, confirming this truth, 1. Cor. 2.13. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2.
Pet. 1.21.
are either of God, speaking in the word: or of The holy Ghost speaking in the
conscience.


God so witnesses in his word: and what more ordinary in the Prophets, then
Thus says the Lord? as Zachary also, He spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, Luke 1.70.
which have been since the world began.

The Holy Ghost bears this witness unto the consciences of the elect: And
this testimony is that inward force and efficacy of the holy spirit, by the
which we feel our hearts moved, bowed, and persuaded to believe the word. 1.
Cor. 2.10.11.12. Ioh. 2.20.27. 1. Ioh. 5.10
He that believes, has the witness in himself. This testimony (next to the
voice of God speaking in the Scriptures, who indeed is only a sufficient
witness to himself) is to be preferred before all other testimonies and
arguments whatsoever. But this must be remembered, that this witness of the
Spirit in the heart, serves not to confirm doctrines, and to confute
adversaries: but only, that every one for himself by this witness might be
certain in his very conscience, that the holy Scriptures are of God. In this
the conscience rests, and is satisfied: and it arises, and is wrought in our
hearts, by the word read, heard, meditated upon, and translated to the use of
faith and life: as, Ioh. 7.17.
If any man will do his will (says Christ) he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.

The humane testimonies are either of the Church, or of The enemies of the
Church.


The perpetual consent of the Church, and of all the people of God, in
receiving, embracing, and conseruing the word of God, so many ages,
notwithstanding their diversity and disparity of minds and judgments; argues
no less then a divine authority in the word.

The enemies are either Jews, or Heathen.


The Jews acknowledge the books of Moses, and the Prophets, to be given by
divine inspiration. And among the Heathen, when Ptolomy the King of Egypt
demanded why Heathen Authors in their writings, make no mention of the books
of Scripture: one made answer, Because they were divine; and that God the
author of them, was revenged of all those that presumed to touch them, as
Josephus and Eusebius report.

The other reasons may be drawn, first from the antiquity of them, being of
all writings the most ancient: Moses the first Penman of holy Writ, being
far elder then all other writings now extant in the world: a thing well
known to the learned. Secondly, from the certain event and accomplishing of
the diverse prophesies, which neither by natural causes, nor by the wit of man,
could ever have been foretold. Thirdly, from the miracles which Satan never
could bring to pass. Fourthly, from the matter of them, containing the whole,
pure and perfect law of God; and describing such a means of salvation, which
both agrees to the glory and perfect Justice of God, and satisfies the
conscience. Fifthly, from the majesty of them, which shines even through the
humility and simplicity of the phrase. Sixthly, from the invincible firmity and
continuance of them, notwithstanding the rage of so many persecutors, laboring
to abolish their very memory. Seventhly, from the beautiful harmony, and
admirable consent of all the parts of the doctrine contained therein. Eighthly,
from the force of them in the minds of men, effecting, moving, converting and
transforming us into new men, and kindling a lively consolation in our minds
in the day of trial, as appeared in the Martyrs. Ninthly, from the
irreconcilable hatred of Satan and his complicies, tyrants, persecutors, and
all profane men, against the Scriptures, more then any other Books. Tenthly,
from the vengeance of God upon the contemners, blasphemers and enemies of the
word. It were almost infinite to reckon all that might be said herein: all
which are good, jointly and severally considered, to confirm unto us the
authority of the Scriptures, and to convince the consciences of all them, which
in the vanity and wickedness of their hearts, shall any way call them into
question.

Wherefore it appears (and nothing can be said to the contrary) that all are
bound with all diligence, to study in the word of God.

Two principal parts of our study in the word, are the Reading, and the
Hearing of it. All then must give all diligence to hear and read the
Scriptures.

And because things good in themselves, through bad and negligent usage, become
oft-times unprofitable and hurtful unto us, therefore the Apostle Paul prays
and exhorts, Colos. 1.10 Colos. 3.16
that the Word dwell in us in all wisdom.

That we ought wisely to hear the word preached, appears by our Savior
himself in his monitions to his Apostles and Disciples: Mat. 15.10 Mark. 4.24
Luke 8.18.
Hear and understand. Take heed what you hear. Take heed how you hear.

Unto this wise hearing, three things are necessary: First, something is to be
done before we hear. Secondly, something in the hearing. Thirdly, something
when we have heard.

That which is to be done before we hear, is called Preparation; which
consists in the avoiding of some things, and in the doing of other some.

Those things which are to be avoided, may be reduced to these five heads: The
first is Intemperance: in riotous eating and drinking, and pampering the body;
whereby we are made unfit for the exercises of the word: the body being then
more apt to sleep then to hear. Full bellies (for the most part) have empty
souls; and therefore our Savior Christ monished his Apostles to beware of
surfeiting and drunkenness, Luke 21.34
which oppress the heart.

The second is Distracting cares of the world: these must be banished out of
our minds when we come to hear the word: As Abraham, when he went to sacrifice
his son upon the mount, Genesis 22.5.
left his Ass and Servants at the foot of the hill: Even so, when we come to
the holy hill of God with the Congregation, we must put off, and abandon all
our own thoughts, words and servile labors: For as thorns choke the Corn,
so will these the word, as our Savior teaches. Luke 8.14.


The third is Prejudice against the person of the Teacher: for when the person
is once distasted, we relish not his doctrine, though never so good. So Ahab
could not abide Micaiah; and therefore would not endure his teaching and
admonitions.

The fourth is Pride for some measure of knowledge received: As many will say,
they know as much as the Preacher can tell them. It may be they do: But do
they practice it? Such must know; first, that preaching is not only to teach
men that which they know not, but also to stir them up to practice that which
they know: not so much ordained to inform the judgment, as to reform the
affection. Secondly, they must remember that part of the song of the Virgin: He
fills the hungry with good things; but the rich he sends empty away.

The fifth is Carnal security: when we come to the hearing of the word with a
resolution, that speak the Lord what he will; and cry the servants of God
against our sins, as long and as loud as they will, yet we will do as we
list. For many by this means come into the congregation, as the unclean
beasts into the Arc; they come in unclean, and go out unclean. Well, Romans
1.28 2. These. 2.10.11.
this of all other is most fearful, and the high way to a reprobate mind.

These especially, and so all other sins must be carefully avoided, and
unfeignedly repented of: Wisd. 1.4.
For wisdom enters not into a defiled soul. And as the eye, if it be evil
affected, cannot discern the object; so the mind infected, and the conscience
polluted with these and the like sins, cannot possibly understand the things
of God: Satan by these means stealing out of our hearts the precious seed of
the good word of God.

Those things which are to be performed before the hearing of the word, are
especially two. The first is prayer. If we must pray before the receiving of
our bodily meat, much more before this heavenly food of our souls. And in our
prayers we must commend our Teachers and our selves unto the Lord. For our
Teachers we are to pray for three things: First, that their lips may preserve
knowledge. Secondly, that they may be faithful in delivering the whole
counsel of God unto us. And thirdly, that they may powerfully and wisely
speak to our consciences.

For our selves also we are to pray for three things: First, for the pardon of
our sins. Secondly, that our minds may be opened to understand. Thirdly,
that our hearts and affections may be sanctified to obey the holy word. For
oftentimes we do not that we know to be best; but that unto which our
affections carry us. An honest and a good heart is a notable sign of Gods
Spirit.

The second thing to be done, is timely and seasonable resorting, with the rest
of Gods people, to the house of God. Negligent coming, that is when we come
one straggling after another; howsoever it be ordinary almost in all places, yet
it argues a gross carelessness and neglect, if not contempt of the worship of
God. If our love unto the word should be measured hereby, it would soon
appear to be a great deal less then our love to Faires, Markets, Feasts and
merry-meetings, as they call them, unto the which we will be sure to come with
the first. O that we had but half the care to come to the market and feast of
our souls, which is the mystery of the word! Why should we not be like to
Peter and John in striving to outrun one another to the house of God, John.
20.4.
as they to the Sepulcher of Christ?

In the time of Nehemias the people gathered all together, Nehem. 8.1.
and called for the reading of the Law: Act. 10.33
And Cornelius and his household were all ready waiting for Peter, to hear the
word. Luke 5.1.
And the people pressed upon Christ to hear him. The forwardness of these is
for our imitation.

In hearing, three things are requisite: first, Attention; second, Intention;
third, Retention: The 1. orders the body, the 2. the understanding, the third
the memory: Attention is, when the whole body, but specially the ear, and the
eye are reverently composed to hear the word. Eccle. 4.17
Of the ear we read, Be more near to hear. Luke 4.28
Of the eye, The eyes of all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him,
that is, on Christ, when he began to teach them. Of the reverent carriage of
the whole body Constantine the Great may be an example, who as Eusebius
reports, though he were the most noble Emperor that yet the world has seen,
for the most part would stand at the preaching of the word, and not sit down,
though admonished of his Nobles. Luke 10.39
Marie also is an example hereof. Wherefore, to sleep, to talk, to read, to
gaze up and down in every corner, which is the mark of a fool, as Solomon
teaches, are specially to be avoided. So also departing out of the
Congregation, without just and reasonable cause; as the people stayed for
Zachary, though in regard of the vision he held them very long: Even so
should we stay with reverence, till the Congregation be dismissed with the
blessing of God. Luke 1.21.
More reverence then must be of a great many practiced in hearing. If Paul
will have women reverently to behave themselves in the congregation, because of
the Angels; much more ought all, both men and women, behave themselves
reverently, because of the presence of God, who is the Lord both of men and
Angels: of the which his presence we have his promise: and therefore David
called the meeting the saints in his time the presence of God. Mat. 18.20.
As therefore Jacob was stricken with great reverence for the vision which he
had at Bethel, Psalm. 42.2.
and said, How fearful is this place? Genesis 28.17
this is none other but the house of God, this is the gate of heaven: so should
we esteem of the assemblies of the children of GOD, worshipping in fear, as
David; Psalm. 1.7.
remembering we are present before God himself, as Cornelius. The second is
Intention, and this is of the mind, when we diligently mark those things
which are taught. For if our thoughts wander, Acts 10.33
and be not bent on the things spoken, we hear without profit. Even as we
see by experience, that in a deep meditation, though our eyes be fixed upon
some certain object, yet we smally regard it: so, if the mind be not present
as well as the body, all is to no purpose, For this is to be like the Jews, who
honored God with their lips, but their hearts were far from him. Wherefore
here is required, that we suffer not our hearts to wander, but that we call
home all the powers of body and soul to this holy business; not only marking
some words, and sentences, but the Book, the Text, the Parts, the Doctrines,
the Proofs, and the Uses. This is Intention, and this is commanded to the
Church: Psalm. 45.10
Hear O daughter, and consider, incline, etc. And, Cause thine care to
hearken, Prou. 2.2.
and incline thine heart to wisdom and understanding. The third is Retention,
and this is of the memory; when we lay up the word of God in the heart, as the
virgin Marie, the sayings concerning Christ: Luke 2.51.
Not so to lay it up, as the evil servant the talent, never to use it; but as
Joseph in the years of plenty, laid up corn for relief against the years
of famine; so should we store up the word, that we may have it ready for our
use upon all occasions offered. And this is noted to be the property of good
ground; Luke 8.15. Ioh. 14.23.
To keep the word. But many are like to siues, or broken vessels, into which
whatsoever is poured, is lost. That body thriueth not, where the stomach
wants a retentiue faculty to keep the meat till it be digested: Even so, all
the hearing in the world profits not, if we be not careful to remember it.
Wherefore, as a man having received a precious jewel casts it not at his
heels, but lays it up charily under lock and key: so should we lay up the
word which we have received. The word is a well of life; but (as Jacobs well)
it is very deep: Preaching is the drawing of this water; our hearing the
fetching of it: But as we go not to the river for water to spill it by the
way; so if we spill and loose the word we have received, what profit shall
we have? And because we are nimble to apprehend, and strong to retain evil
things; but slow, and weak to good things; we must earnestly pray and entreat
the Lord, to sanctify, and to strengthen our memories, that that which we have
once heard, we may often remember, to the benefit of our souls; Amen.

That which is to be done after we have heard, is Meditation, the very life of
our Hearing and Reading; and it is a reuoluing in our minds, and a repeating
again those things which we hear and read: without the which, I dare be
bold to say, that never any did, or shall profit in the study of the Word:
This meditation is either with God or man: Meditation with God, is either when
we give thanks, or pray, concerning things heard or read. When thou have heard,
praise God for it, and pray that by the finger of his Spirit it may be written
in thy heart: and that thou may find in thy self, the lively forms of the
doctrines delivered: It is a good degree of profiting by the Word, when we can
conclude the things we hear and read in the form of a prayer.

Meditation with Man; is, either with our selves, or others.

With our selves, when we make trial what we can remember of that we hear
and read: and here we must not stay, but proceed to the heart and
conscience, and examine them upon every point we have heard. As if thou have
heard that which before thou knew not: bless God, and labor to be more
confirmed in the truth. If any thing has been reproved, that either thou art
guilty, or not guilty: If guilty, bless God that thou art admonished of thy
fault, and from hence make thy rise to repentance: If thou be not guilty,
praise God, for preserving thee from such sins, so condemned in his word: If
thou have heard a virtue, or good duty commended, then either thou have not
practiced it, or thou have: If nor, begin here in the name of God; if thou
have, praise God for such grace, and let such exhortations encourage thee to
proceed in well-doing.

Meditations with others; is, when either with our family, or with any other of
the godly brethren, we do reverently and discreetly confer of the things
delivered. The benefit hereof must needs be great; for as two eyes see more
then one; so when we meet to confer of that which we have heard, that which
one forgets, another may remember; and that which is not well understood by
one; is, it may be, better marked by another. Luke 24.31.
The two Disciples thus coferring, had their understanding opened: And the men
of Berea their faith confirmed: Act. 17.11.12.
And this is wisely to hear: The Lord bless al his people with this grace for
Christ's sake. Amen.

Thus much concerning wisdom in hearing the Word: Now follows to be
declared, how we should read the holy Scriptures wisely.

That we are wisely to read, teaches our Savior, Mat. 24.15.
Let him that reads consider: and we find by other experience, that our
affairs undertaken rashly, and without due consideration, succeed not.

That we may read wisely, three things are necessary: 1. Reverence: 2. Order:
3. Judgment.

First, Reverence is required in our reading of the holy Scriptures; both in
regard of the Majesty of the Author of them, which is the living God; and also
in regard of the worthiness, and weightinesse of the contents, and matter of
them: which is the hidden, and great mystery of godliness, concerning Jesus
Christ, and eternal life: The sum of the word of the Lord, is, The word, the
Lord: In these two respects, besides many other, the Scriptures are far more
excellent then all other writings whatsoever.

Therefore when thou take thy Bible, remember the Lord whose word it is; and
sanctify thy exercise therein, with a godly and devout prayer, for leave; and
for an understanding heart: yea, as Moses at the setting forward of the Arc,
and at the resting of it devoutly prayed. Numb. 10.35.36.
So whenever thou read, begin and end; open and shut thy book with
prayer: For as they which come to the Lords Table, and eat and drink
unworthily, and irreuerently, eat and drink their own judgment, not
considering the Lords Body. 1. Cor. 11.29.
So they which come irreuerently to the reading of the Scriptures, as to the
reading of any profane or common book, read to their own judgment for not
considering the Lords Book. As we read that the Lord commanded Moses to put
off his shoes, when he drew near the burning Bush; Exodus 3.5.
because the ground whereon he stood was holy ground. So when we drawn
near to the Lord, in offering to read his word; he commands us to put on
holy and reverent affections, because the Book we read, is a holy Book.
For, which way soever we turn or cast our eyes: in every leaf and page
thereof, the holy and reverent name of the Lord is engraven. As Peter therefore
writes of speaking, If any man speak, let him talk as the word of God: 1.
Pet. 4.11
so may I say; if any read, let him read, as the words of God. For as many
thousands of the Bethshemites were sore punished for their irreuerent gazing
upon the Arc: 1. Sa. 6.19.
as we read also of Vzzah: 1. Chapter 13.10
So verily, the just Lord strikes many Readers with blindness and hardness of
heart, for irreuerent usage of his holy Scriptures. When thou read
therefore, be reverent, and pray. Pray; for this is the way to obtain
wisdom: James 1.5. Luke 11.13
and to obtain the Spirit: which spirit, leads in to the knowledge and
practice of all truth: John 18.13
and which reuealeth unto us the hidden things of God: 1. Cor. 2.10
Use reverence also: For the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: Prou.
1.7.
And the secret of the Lord is revealed to them which fear him; and his
covenant to give them understanding: The Lord put in our hearts this fear for
Christ's sake, Psa. 25.14.
Amen.

The second thing required in the reading of the word is Order; and Method;
which is a great furtherance of knowledge, and a singular help of memory. An
army disranked in and out of battle array never getreth the victory: so neither
does disorderly and confused reading, get any great measure of grounded
knowledge.

As Saint Luke wrote the Gospel in an orderly manner from point to point: Luke
1.3.
so we are to read the word, in an orderly manner going forward from point to
point. Memorable is the example of one Alphonsus, a King of Spain; who;
notwithstanding the affairs of his kingdom, read over the Bible fourteen
times in order, with certain Commentaries upon the same: As his diligence is
here very commendable, and for our imitation; so also this: He read in order.
If therefore I were worthy to give directions this way, I would thus advise:
First, what book soever we take to read, to begin at the beginning, and so to
continue reading till we come to the end of it. And thus shall we carry the
sum and the drift of the History and argument before us; of which in a great
part, they which read now a Chapter in one book, now a lease in another, must
needs be ignorant. Such simple readers I may liken to those simple women, which
are always reading, but are never able to come to any sound knowledge of the
truth. 2. Tim 3.7
For as he that goes but an easy pace in the right way, speedeth his journey
faster then he that makes more haste in a wrong way: Even so a little read in
good order, aduantageth the knowledge more then greater pains, if it be
confused. Secondly, I would advise, that in our reading we begin first with
the easiest and playnest Books, as the history of Christ, set down by the
Evangelists, and the Book of Genesis: Then to read the Epistles, first the
shortest, as the Epistles to the Philippians, Colossians, the first and second
to the Thessalonians: then the Epistles to the Galathians, and to the Romans,
which last Epistle is called of some, the Key of the Bible. And when we have
tried our selves in these, then to begin the Bible, and to read it through:
For even as in Trades there are some things more easy, to the which the
apprentice is applied; and afterward, as he grows in capacity, he is
taught the harder and more secret things of his mystery: so in the scriptures,
there are some things easy and familiar for learners, and beginners, as milk
for babes: and there are other things, hard and obscure, which it is not safe
to meddle withal, till we have our senses well exercised in the word.

The third thing required in wise reading, is Judgment and Discretion; by the
which, first we make choice of a fit time to read: secondly, discern the
right sense and meaning of that we read; and thirdly, apply and make the
right use of our reading.

Judgment is requisite; Psalm. 112.5
for a wise man ministers all his affairs with judgment: and every thing is
beautiful in his time. Eccle. 3.10.
Therefore the time is specially to be regarded. All time is not to be spent
this way. For our callings must carefully be followed: neither is all the time
to be taken up in our callings, but some time is to be spared for reading,
prayer, and meditation: One of these may not hinder an other, which must needs
come to pass without Judgment. David and Daniel observed prayer thrice a day;
and they that fear God, will so divide their times, that at the least once a
day they will read a chapter or two in the Bible; and because of the
stuggishnesse of our nature, soon weary of good things: it were good to task
our selves; and when it so falls out that we are constrained upon extraordinary
occasion, to leave our task unperformed one day, then to double our pains and
diligence the next time, rising the earlier, and working the harder in our
callings, that we may redeem that time without any loss.

Theodosius the second Emperor of that name, is reported to have written out
the Books of the New Testament with his own hand, accounting it a special
Jewel; and out of it he read every day, praying with his wife and sisters,
and singing of Psalms. And it was that famous Eunuchs practice, as we may
gather out of the eight chapter of the Acts. I read of another Emperor of
Rome, who was wont to account that day lost, in the which he had not bestowed a
benefit upon some of his subjects: So we may well reckon that day among our
losses, in the which we read not, or meditate not of something in the word.
But foolish men thus object; I have no leisure, by reason of vrgency and
multitude of business. To such a one I answer: Is any business more urgent then
this? Martha is troubled indeed about many things; but this one thing is
necessary: namely, the knowledge of God by his word. Again, Thou will spare a
time to eat and sleep, why not then to read? Job esteemed the words of God,
more then his appointed food: If our love were such to the word, Job. 23.12.
we would rather spare the times of our eating, then of our reading; as Jacob
spared the meat out of his belly to buy the blessing. Has the body need of
nourishment, and has not the soul much more? Genesis 25.30 etc.
Now the bread of the soul is the word of God. O Lord give us evermore of this
bread, Amen.

Judgment also is requisite in reading, that we may understand the meaning of
the Holy Ghost: For the word of God is not in the letters and leaves, but in
the meaning and sense, as some of the Ancients have spoken; yea, one of them
says: that the word of God foolishly understood, is not the word of God. Our
Savior Christ having oftentimes to deal with the learned Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 12.3. and 19.14. and 21.16.42. and 22.31. Mark. 12 24.
and with the Sadduces, asks thus: Have you not read? and, Did you never
read? and You err, not knowing the Scriptures. And yet these Scribes did so
diligently read the Scriptures, that they numbered the letters and words: but
they read without judgment; not discerning, nor searching into the heart of
the sense, but staying in the bark of the letter. Thus to read is
unprofitable. And here, as we must be careful to find the meaning, that we
may not read as children; so also we must take heed, that we feign not a
meaning of our own, and thrust it upon the word; lest we prove Heretics.
Therefore the right, true, and fit sense is to be sought out: which of one
place can be but one: And that must be, not according as we think; (for no
Scripture is of private interpretation, 2. Pet. 1.20
) but according to the Scriptures, which are the only best expounders of
themselves. The means, and ready way to find out the genuine and true meaning
of any Scripture, are especially these: First, a due and learned considering of
the original Tongue, in the which the Scripture is written. Secondly, a
diligent marking of that which goes before, and that which follows. Thirdly,
a wise comparing together, the place in hand, with other places, both like and
unlike. Fourthly, a heedfull examining of the sense arising, with the Analogy
of faith; that is, with the doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed, so
called, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, which are a short sum of
the whole Bible. Fifthly, conference with the learned Interpreters. Sixthly
fervent prayer to God for understanding: for as we cannot see the Sun
without his own light; so we cannot see the wonders of the word, unless the
Lord manifest them unto us by his Spirit.

The third thing that is to be done, that we may read in judgment, is
Application, to make use of that we attain unto by reading, in the reforming
of our lives. Many esteem highly of the tree of knowledge, with Eve; but they
regard not the tree of life: when as the very life of our knowledge consists
in the practice of that which we know. As it is said of Hearers, so it is true
of Readers. Not the readers of the word, Ioh. 13.17. Iam. 4.17.
but the doers shall be justified. And, These things if you know them, happy
are you of you do them. Nay, he that knows, and does not, shall be the more
beaten, and is guilty of the more sin. As therefore wise men labor to make
profit of all things they deal with: so we should propound this end to our
selves in all our reading, that it may be profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and to instruct us in all righteousness, that we may become absolute
and perfect in all good works. Some read only to this end, that they may know
more then they did; and this is vanity: Some that they may be known to know
more; and this is pride: Some to make a gain of their knowledge; and this is
filthy lucre: Some to edify others; and this is charity: Some to edify
themselves, and this is Christian prudence: such like words has one of the
Ancients. Another says thus: Then is our reading to be commended, when we
turn the words into works. And again, the Scriptures are Gods Epistle
written to men, to the end they should live well: And the Holy Ghost better
then all; Revel. 1.3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein. Amen. Now to God only wise,
be honor and praise for evermore. 1. Tim. 1.17.
Amen. Amen.

THE GROUNDS Of Divinity.
The prime and chiefest place of Divinity is concerning God, Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them which seek him: and this is life eternal, John 17.3.
that they know thee the only very God, and him whom thou have sent JESUS
CHRIST.

QVESTION.

HOw may we come to the sound knowledge of God?

Ans. The best means to attain such knowledge is by the holy Scriptures. Esaias
8.20. John 5.39.


Explication. The knowledge of God is either Natural or Revealed: That which
is Natural is either by the notions imprinted in every man's mind, whereby the
conscience is convinced; or by the consideration of the creatures: which
natural knowledge is insufficient to salvation, Romans 1.19 20.
though sufficient to leave us without excuse: The Revealed Knowledge is that
which is attained by the word of God; who, though he dwell in the Light, which
none can attain unto, 1. Tim. 6.16.
yet has therein revealed himself so far as he saw fit for us to
understand: This knowledge, beyond comparison, is far more excellent then the
natural, 1. Cor. 8.1.
and is sufficient to salvation in regard of Knowledge, but not in regard of
working or effecting it, which only is by the holy Spirit, making this
knowledge effectual; to sincere faith, love, fear, obedience, etc.

Quest. What are the holy Scriptures?

Ans. The holy Scriptures are all those books of the old and new Testament, by
the direction and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, written, or approved by the
Prophets and Apostles.

Explic. These are the writings of the Prophets which are contained in the
Hebrew Canon of the old Testament: Those the writings of the Apostles, which
are contained in the Greek Canon of the New. But all those books usually
contained in our Bibles, from the end of the small Prophets to the Gospel of
Saint Matthew, together with the prayer of Manasses, are called Apocrypha, that
is hidden, which though they contain many wholesome things, and for many ages
have been read in the Church; yet are to be distinguished from the other,
being neither equal in authority, nor of any more credit, then as they agree
with them.

They are called the Scriptures, that is the Writings, in regard of their
supereminent excellency, being unto all other Writings, as the Sun unto the
lesser Stars: both in regard of their peerless worth, and also, because
that all other books obtain a degree of worthiness, according as they more
or less accord with them: They are called Holy, Rom 1.2.
because of the Author, which is God; 2. Tim. 3.16
because of the Penmen, 2. Pet. 1.21.
which were holy Men; because of the matter, which is the holy Will and
Counsel of God; Act. 20.27.
because of the use to make us holy and perfect in all good works. 2. Tim.
3.17.


It pleased God that the heavenly doctrine should he written, both that it might
be the better conveyed unto succeeding posterities, and also that it might be
the safer preserved from corruption, there being an infallible stands for
the examining and determining of all doctrines and opinions which should arise:
If the worship of God, and the doctrine of salvation has been meruailously
depraved, now it is written; what, think we, would it have been, if it never
had been written.

Use Whosoever then desires the true and sound knowledge of God, are to be
admonished to procure themselves Bibles, and diligently to read in them, or if
they cannot read, to hear others; that they may fetch even from the Fountain
it self the doctrine of salvation: and also that they may even discern the
books wherein the same is infallibly contained. For though it be possible for
a man to be saved (holding the sum of the heavenly doctrine) without the
distinct knowledge of the several books: yet it is the duty of all Christian
men and women, so far as they have means, and are capable of it, to endeavor
to attain to the Historical knowledge of the Bible, and books Canonical
therein contained: First, that they may with all thankfulness, honor the holy
Scriptures above all other Writings: Secondly, that they may make the best
profit of the Preaching of the Word, which they cannot do, who, when
Authorities are alleged, and places quoted, are not able to distinguish the
worth of the authority, as whether it be Divine or Humane: Thirdly, for the
more certainty of their faith, when they can themselves find and examine by the
holy Scriptures those things which are Preached: In which regard the men of
Berea are commended as an example unto us. Act 17.10.11.
For all doctrines of men are to be examined by the Scriptures, and no further
to be credited then they have warrant from the same: This condemns them which
are negligent this way, which negligence is (by too well known experience)
found to be the cause that after long Preaching, many remain very grossly
ignorant.

Q. What do you mean by this word Testament?

Ans. By Testament I understand the unchangeable Covenant between God and man,
Genesis 17.1.2.7.9. Ier. 31.1.31.32.2. Cor. 6.18
concerning the mercy of God by Christ to man; and man's obedience to God.

Q You say that the holy Scriptures, are the Books of the Old and New
Testament: Are there then two Testaments?

Ans. I believe that the Testament or Covenant of God, is but one in regard of
Substance; though in regard of Circumstance it be said, Gal. 4.24.
that there are two.

Expli. The Doctrine of Grace offering to men, in the name of God, salvation,
and binding man to obedience and thankfulness to God, is called, in regard of
the form of conuention and agreement between God and man, a Covenant, and in
regard of the manner of confirming it, a Testament; being in many things like a
Testament: For, first, as in a Testament or last Will, the Testators mind is
declared; so is the will of God in his word: Secondly, as in a Will, so here
is a Testator, which is Christ: a Legacy, which is eternal life: Heirs,
which are the Elect: an instrument and Writing, which are the Scriptures: and
Seals, which are the Sacraments: Thirdly and principally, as a Testament is in
force by the death of the Testator; Heb. 9.16.17.
so the Covenant of God is ratified by the death of Christ.

This Covenant is, and has been always one and the same; to Abraham and the
Elect before Christ, Romans 4.23 24.
the same that it is to us, for all are saved by Christ; they by him to come,
we by him come in the flesh: Acts 15.11
But because God in his manifold wisdom, otherwise propounded it to the
Fathers, otherwise to us: Even as a Physician administreth after one manner to
a child, after an other to a man grown, for the diversity of their age and
temperament: therefore it is said to be double: God bringing them and us after
a diverse manner to the knowledge of salvation by his Son Christ: For before
the coming of Christ, the manner of the Covenant, to the Fathers, was dark,
burdensome and costly; they being governed and tutored by the ministry of the
Law, a severe Schoole-maister, Gal. 3, 24.
under hard conditions, as the yoke of many and diners Ceremonies to be
abolished, Heb. 15.10 Gal. 3.10.
and the burden of the Curse: and hence it is called Old: but unto us all
things are after a more plain, easy and free manner, without the same strict
exaction of the law of obedience to be performed in our own persons: Act.
13.38.39.
the grievous burden of ye Curse, and the intolerable yoke of Ceremonies
being removed from our necks by the preaching of the Gospel: and for this it
is called New: Therefore Saint Augustine said, that the new Testament was
hidden in the Old, and the Old manifested in the New: Wherefore when you read
in the Scriptures, that the old Testament was but for a tune, Heb.
8.6.7.8.9.10.11.
and to be abolished, etc. and that the new is better, and such like;
understand this opposition and abolition, not in the books: for the books of
the old Testament are the word of God, which abides forever, nor in the
substance or matter, but in regard of circumstances before spoken.

Notwithstanding this, the Law it self, or Decalogue, which by a figure is
sometimes called the Covenant, must be holden to be a diverse kind of doctrine
from the Gospel, and bringing forth (in respect of us) contrary effects: 2.
Cor. 3.7.8.9.
and the Gospel not to be a new Law, differing from the old, only by a
further degree of perfection, or by addition of Councels, as the Papists teach.

Use 1. Remember, that to be in covenant with God, is the fountain of all thy
happiness: which Covenant the Law is not: but it is the Copy (as it were) of
the Articles and points agreed upon between God and thy self; declaring not
why God is thy God, but what he requires of thee: nor why thou art received to
grace, but what thou promisest to do. As then when thou sealest to Covenants or
Indentures, which are for thy great advantage, thou labourest well to
understand what thou sealest to, and art careful to keep conditions on thy
part: so this requires that thou should know the law of thy God, with the
particular points thereof; and (if thou expectest the advantage of the
covenant) that thou should precisely keep ye conditions on thy part; which
if thou do not, but transgressest, it is as if thou should deny thine
own hand and seal.

Use 2. Remember also, that the Scriptures are Christ's Testament, wherein thou
have a rich bequeathment of eternal life. As men neglect not to have the
Copies of their fathers wills, wherein the inheritance is given them, and ask
counsel, and are very conversant in them, that they may understand every tittle
in them: John. 5.39. Col. 3.16.
so should thou be diligently conversant in the word of God.

Q. Of what authority are the holy Scriptures?

An. I believe that they are of a divine Authority, whereby we are infallibly
certain of the Doctrine contained in them, Psalm. 119.9 Esaias 8.20. Gal. 6.16.
Phil. 3.16. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.19
and necessarily bound to believe and obey the same. Being therefore called the
word of God, and the perfect and only Canon of our faith and life.

Expl. The Scriptures are two ways taken, essentially for the doctrine
contained in them; and accidentally for the writings wherein such Doctrine is
expressed: now in both these they are Divine, but Canonical properly the first
way. The whole Scripture is the rule, but not the whole of the Scripture: as in
a Carpenters Rule, every thing that is of the Rule, is not the Rule.

The Scriptures are Divine and infallible, because God is the Author, who can
neither be deceived, nor deceive by word, sign or writing. They are Canonical,
2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.20 21. Esaias 8.20. Romans 15.4. 1. Tim. 3.14.15. Ioh. 20.31
because written to this end; namely, to be the rule of our Faith and Life. And
of this authority they are in themselves, though all the world should
contradict it, or be ignorant of it: As the sun was the measure of the day
and night, before either man or beast were made to behold it. That they are
divine, it must needs be, Deuteronomy. 5.32. Eze. 20.29 2. Tim. 3.16.
because of God the Author: and Canonical they must nees be, because divine:
which two agree together, as the cause and the effect.

Use 1. Hence we learn, that by the Scriptures, as by a supreme Judge, all
controversies in Religion are to be decided. Even as all difference and strife
about weight, is ended by an even and just balance: so all dissension in the
faith, is by the impartial beam of the Sanctuary, which is the Scriptures,
easily and certainly compounded: Yea, we attribute this power only to the
Scriptures: and therefore we must exclude all unwritten Traditions, or Decrees
of men, though never so holy and learned, from being this Rule, or any part
thereof. Therefore we are forbidden to add, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Reu. 22.18 19.
or take from the written word of God. Beleeuest thou the Scriptures? They say,
thou shall not add to them. And therefore Tertullian says: When we believe,
we believe this first, that there is nothing more which we ought to believe.

Use 2. This binds all to all reverence in reading, Prou. 1.7. Psa. 25.14. 1.
Pet. 4.11
speaking, hearing of the word, because of the Author, which is God, and to all
care to know, understand, believe and obey the same, because to this purpose it
is given us as a most perfect Rule, by God himself.

Q. The holy Scriptures are Divine and Canonical in themselves; Esaias 8.20.
Deuteronomy. 5.32 Ioh. 5.39. 2. Pet. 1.19 Gal. 6.16. 2. John. 10 John. 7.17 1. Cor.
2.10.11.12. 1. Ioh. 2.27 and 5.10.
but how do we know that they be so?

Ans. We know that they are so, both by the testimony of themselves: (for so
the old Testament testifies of it self; the new of the old, and of it self;)
and also by the witness of the Holy Ghost in our hearts.

Expli. There are two principal arguments of the Divinity of the Scriptures to
us: 2. Sam. 23 2. Luke 1.70. 2 Timothy 3.16 2. Pet. 1.21 1. Cor. 2.13
the first is their own voice, witnessing that they are of God; as often this
is repeated in the Prophets, Thus says the Lord. And this is the chiefest
Argument, even the very voice of God himself: of which we may safely collect
thus: If the Scriptures be true, when they speak of things to come; then also
when they speak of things present. The second argument is like unto the first,
and it is the testimony of the Holy Ghost; which as it inspired the holy men to
write, so also it teaches the children of God to believe the Scriptures: 2.
Pet. 1.21 1. Cor. 2.10
for if faith be the gift of God, as it is, then also to believe the Scriptures
to be the word of God. The first of these is to persuade others and our selves:
the other chiefly to satisfy our our selves: which also is always agreeable
to the Scriptures, and is to be examined by the same. Unto these two you may
add also, their miraculous preservation, notwithstanding the rage of all
Iulians, and Devils: the divine vocation, mission and life of the Writers, the
Majesty of the style, the purity of the Doctrine, their power upon the
conscience, for the confounding and breaking of the stubborn, and for the
raising, converting, and comforting of the broken, and such like.

Use. This serves to confute ye Papists, who hold, that the only and chief
argument whereby we are persuaded of ye authority of the Scriptures, is the
testimony of the Church: we willingly acknowledge, that the Church is a means
whereby we come to the knowledge of ye Scriptures; but not that for the which
only we believe them to be divine. The Scriptures are a Rule, 1. Tim. 3.15.
the office of the Church is to keep and to use this Rule. Now as the worke-man
which uses a Rule, gives not that power to it, whereby it judges ye
dimensions, but it has it of its own nature, by an inward essential property
as it is a Rule: so also the Scriptures have not this power of ye Church,
though the Church have power and skill to use the same. And therefore our
Savior when question was whether he were ye Messiah or no, rests not on ye
witness of John, John. 5.36 Ibid. Verse. 37. Verse 39.
but upon greater and better witness, and this witness was, his works, the
witness of his Father, and of the holy Scriptures. So when the Tessalonians
received the preaching of Paul as the word of God, 1. These. 2.13.
it was not the testimony of any Church, nor the worthiness of Paul, a mean
and poor man, but the very force of ye word it self, which bowed their
hearts. The testimony of the Church is to be reverenced, and is good, but not
infallible. The testimony of the Scriptures themselves is better, and
infallible. The Church is to be proved by the Scriptures, not ye scriptures
only by ye Church. Yea, the Papists to prove the infallibility of the Church,
fly to the Scriptures. And universally, Mat. 16.18 1. Tim. 3.15.
the authority proving, is greater, more certain, and more known then the
conclusion proved by the same. Yea, if we should believe the Scriptures only
for the authority of the Church, which is in conclusion the Pope and his
Prelates: then first, they should be Judges in their own cause, which is
unequal. Secondly, there could be no certainty of Faith or Religion, because
the Church has varied diversely in her judgment of the Canon. Thirdly, why may
not the Turks persuade themselves, that their testimony of their Alcoran is as
sufficient as ours of the Scriptures. Fourthly, this is to subject the Word of
God to the will of Man: yea, God to man: so that God shall not be believed to
speak to us, nor we believe him when he speaks, unless it please the Church;
that is, the Pope and his Prelates: yea, there shall be no more difference
between God and the Devil, truth and lying, the sacred and divine Scriptures,
and the Alcoran of the Turks, then the Church shall think fit, which is most
horrible blasphemy: The Lord open the eyes of our Adversaries (the Papists) to
consider it.

Q. How do these holy Scriptures set forth and describe God? or what do you
believe God to be according to the Scriptures?

Ans. I believe by the Scriptures, that God is a Spirit, being of himself, and
giving being to all things, Infinite, Eternal, Almighty, Knowing all things,
etc. Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Truth, Justice it self, etc. The Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: The Creator, and Preserver of all things: The Redeemer
and Sanctifier of his Church.

Expl. None must imagine, that I have set down all that can be said of God,
for there are many other particulars in the holy Scriptures; but these are the
heads: neither can the knowledge of Men and Angels express fully the amplitude
of his essence and glory. Though that so much as is available for us to know,
himself has revealed in his word: for it is most true, that a learned man
said: Ramus.
God cannot be defined without his own logic: This is not a Definition, but
a Description, taken out of the Scriptures, consisting of three parts, first of
Attributes: secondly, of Relations and proprieties of persons: Thirdly, of
Actions and Effects, which are general, as Creation and Providence: special,
belonging only to his Church, which are principally two, Redemption, and
Sanctification. Of these I purpose (according as God enableth) to enquire in
order, according to the Scriptures: and first, I will briefly expound the
Atributes as they are alleged.

We believe that God is a Spirit. Ioh. 4.24.
Now this word Spirit is taken many ways, but when it is attributed to the
Godhead, it is either essentially taken, or personally: here not personally,
for so it is only attributed to the third person; but essentially, and so the
meaning is, that God is most simple, without composition, merely incorporeall,
neither to be perceived by any bodily sense, Luke 24.39
according as you read that Christ distinguishes.

That God is of himself, Exo. 3.14. Romans 11.36.
and gives being to all things, is proved. And this of all other attributes
best sets forth what God is, and is most peculiar to him, signified by the
name Jehovah, which principally betokens two things: first, the Eternity and
always being of God: secondly, his cause of being to all other things,
specially his promises: and therefore was it that God told Moses, that he was
not known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by his name Jehovah, Exodus 6.3.
because the promise of the Land of Canaan was not performed unto them: Hence
also it is, that usually in the Prophets, when either some special mercy is
promised, or some extraordinary judgment threatened, the name of Jehovah is
affixed; which is a name incommunicable unto any creature, and ineffable: not
in respect of the letters (as thought the Jews) but of that which is thereby
signified, the Nature and Essence of God.

Infinite, is that which can neither be comprehended by any creature, nor
contained, nor circumscribed in any space, or bounds, but being whole and the
same every where, fills Heaven and Earth, not only with his virtue and
operation, 1. King. 8.27. Ier. 23.24.
but with the greatness of his Essence. And thus is God infinite.

Eternal, is that which neither has beginning nor end of his Being: Psalm.
90.2.
and such is God.

Almighty, is that which without any difficulty or labor, only by his will,
can effect and bring to pass all things, which he wills, or which in his
Nature, Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 115.3 Mat. 19.26
or Majesty, he can will, and that in an instant: And so we believe of God.

Omniscience, or to know all things, when we attribute to God; is meant, that
God does always most perfectly understand, and in a wonderful manner,
unknown to us, see and behold himself, and the whole order and purpose of his
mind, revealed in the nature of things, and in his Word: and whatsoever
agrees, or disagreeth there with; and all the works, words, and thoughts of
all men, and all creatures, past, present, and to come, Ps. 147.5. Romans 11.33
Heb. 4.13.
with all the causes and circumstances of all things: and this is proved.

For the rest of the Attributes, as Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, etc. they need
no Exposition: Only this is to be remembered, that we believe, not only,
that God is Merciful, Wise, True, etc. but Mercy, Wisdom, Truth, because
they are his Essence, and Being; even every one of them, being his whole
Essence. In the Creatures these are Accidents, that is Qualities, which may be
changed, lost, increased, or diminished: but not so in the Creator, for nothing
is Accidental in him, but Essential: and therefore by such form of speech is
signified that God in always the same, like himself; Unchangeable, either in
regard of time, or the malice of the creature: As, in the creature the person,
which has life and wisdom, is one thing, and the wisdom and life in the
creature another thing: but in God they are not distinct from his Essence, but
his Life and Wisdom are his Essence, and cannot be changed in him as in the
creature: Numb. 23.19. Math. 36. Psalm. 102.13. Iam. 1.17.
When we say then that God is Mercy, we mean an Essence, showing Mercy, and
so of the rest: These things are proved.

Use 1. That we remember exceedingly to praise God, for his Word, whereby he
has made himself manifest, who otherwise could never have been comfortably
known of us: 1. Tim. 6.16. Ioh. 1.18.
For as we cannot see the Sun without his own light: so not God, if our
Sun of Righteousness had not revealed him. A certain Heathen Philosopher,
called Simonides, being asked of Hiero, the King, what God was demanded a days
respite, then two days, afterward three: and being asked why he did so;
answered, that the longer he thought what God should be, the less he
understood of him: What was the reason that so wise a man was to seek herein;
because he wanted the word of God to direct and teach him. Plato.
And therefore a wiser then he said well: It is hard to find God, but to
understand him impossible: But now, to understand so much as his pleasure is
we should know, and is necessary to lift, is possible, through his infinite
goodness by his word: for the which to him be praise for ever.

Use 2. That we suffer not our minds to roue beyond the rules of the word, but
that we stay all our thoughts and canceits of God therein. For the Scriptures
must be the bounds of our thoughts and speech of God; and withal we are bound
to know what therein is revealed of him: Deuteronomy. 29.29. Genesis 32.29.
There is a wonderful and secret Name of God which he will not have known:
And there is a wonderful and excellent Name, which we must know upon peril
of our best lives. Psalm. 79.6. ler. 10.25. Ambrose.
Concerning which point one of the Ancients gives notable counsel. Those
things (says he) which God will have hidden, search not: those things which
he has made manifest deny not: least in them, thou be unlawfully curious, in
these damnably ungrateful.

Use 3. God is Almighty, knowing all things, Mercy, Justice, Truth, etc. The
knowledge of these things auailes not without application: Many can say, and
prove by Scriptures, that God is Just; but they fear him not; and Merciful,
but feel him not; and True, but glorify him not: As a sword in a scabberd, or
in the hand of a child, so is the knowledge of these things without
application: Therefore we must labor to know these things in all wisdom and
understanding: Col. 1.9.
Otherwise we are no better then the devil, who knows more Historically,
then all the Divines in the world: but it is to his greater condemnation: as
Solomon says: I have seen riches reserved to the hurt of the owner: Eccl.
5.12.
So even knowledge, without wise application and use, is hurtful to them that
are endued therewith: Know thou that God is Just? fear him; that Merciful?
love him; that present every where, and knowing all things? walk uprightly;
Beware of hypocrisy; be afraid of that in secret, and in the dark, which thou
would be ashamed of atnoone day. Again: Is God justice, and Truth it self?
then woe to the wicked; for if God be himself, they shall surely be damned
without repentance: Is God Mercy and Truth it self? then be comforted thou
which art penitent: For though a woman should forget the child of her womb,
Esa. 49.15.
yet the Lord will not forget thee: Yea, Esa. 54.10.
the Mountains shall remove, and the Hills fall down; but my mercy shall not
fail, nor my covenant of peace fall away, says Ichouah, who has compassion.

Thus much of Divine Attributes, Mat. 3.16.17. and 28.19. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Deuteronomy.
6.4. Esaias 44.4. 1. Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.5. 1. Tim. 2.5.
now of relation of Persons.

Q. You said that God is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: are there
not then three Gods?

Ans. No: These are three Persons, subsisting in the Divine Essence: I believe
there is but one God: Ex. That there is one God and 3 Persons, is a Mystery
propounded in ye Scriptures to our faith to believe, not to our reason to
dispute, and discuss: We know it is so, because God has so revealed, but the
reason of it, we are not capable of; and therefore we must be wise unto
sobriety, admiring with humble acknowledgement this great Mystery: We may not
be ignorant of it, nor curious in inquiring into that which is not manifested:
both are very hurtful. This then must be holden, that the Godhead, or Essence
of God is one undivided; the Persons only distinguished, not Essentially, for
every one has the whole Essence of the Godhead, and is that only true God;
nor only rationally, but really, and yet, in a manner, incomprehensible, and
unknown of us. The Father is that God, so is ye Son, so is the Holy Ghost; Not
three Gods, nor three Eternals, but One: As Athanasius excellently in his
Creed: Neither aforencr after other: And yet the Father is not the Son, nor
the Son the Father, neither of these the Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost
either of them, but really distinguished one from another in regard of their
Persons: So that the Father is another Person from the Son, not another
thing, or another God, etc. We must believe the Essence to be one, the persons
to be three, neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance.

Use Be exceeding careful rightly to understand these things: For, as August.
we cannot live well, unless we believe well of God: And again, Error is no
where more dangerous; seeking and study no where more painful; Finding no
where more profitable. If we conceive amiss here, to whom are our prayers
directed? to whom our Worship? Not to the true God, but to the frame of our
own brains: When we pray therefore, sometimes naming the Father, sometimes
the Son, sometimes the Holy Ghost; we direct our prayers to the Divine
Essence, and together to the three Persons: Because we believe and profess,
not only that the three Persons are the true God, but that every Person is
(not a part of that one Divine Essence, but) the whole Divine Essence, that is
the only true God, besides whom there is no other: They that call upon one of
the Persons, as separate from the rest, err from the true God, according to
that of our Savior: The Lord eulighten us. Ioh. 5.23.


Q. What mean you by these words Essence and Person?

Ans. Essence is the Nature common to the three Persons, being the same,
undivided and whole in every of them, subsisting by it self: A Person is a
Subsistence in the Divine Nature, or that one Essence; which being referred to
the other Persons, is distinguished from them by an incommunicable Property.
And this is the sacred and secret mystery of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, for ever to be adored.

Expl. These words, Essence, Person, as also Trinity, Unity, are not all in the
Scriptures, but the things signified by them are: which terms the Church has
been driven by a necessity of speaking to find out, and to use; to avoid the
snares of Heretics, who under the words of the Church in time past, hid
their heretical prauities, and so by their likely speech, conveyed their
poison to ye unskillful. As the Church acknowledged God to be one; so the
Heretics: but in a diverse sense. The Church, one in Essence; the Heretics
not so: but one in consent and will, etc. And therefore the Church, out of the
common and usual manner of speaking, upon this necessity; borrowed certain
terms to defeat the Heretics: which terms it has taken, not as though
these or any other, could fully express this mystery, but, that it might not
wholly be concealed: of the which an Emperor spoke well and modestly; Gratian
to Ambr.
We speak of these things, not as we ought, but as we can.

Neither does the Church use these terms Essence, Person, in their common and
usual meaning wholly; as namely: The Essence of man, is a thing communicable;
but it is an universal Name, which truly exsisteth not by it self, but is
only a collection of the mind, and therein conceived. But Essence Divine as
it is communicable, so also it truly is and subsisteth, and is not an
imaginary thing as the former; nor an universal name, as the Philosophers
speak of the humane Essence; but the Divine nature, subsisting indeed, being
common to the three Persons, and whole in every one. So also of the word
Person. In men, what a person is we understand: as Peter, John and Paul, are 3.
persons, to whom is common one humane nature: So, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are three Persons, to whom is common the Divine nature; but here is
wonderful difference. First, the Divine nature common to the three Persons,
truly subsisteth, so does not the humane. Secondly, The three Divine Persons
differ not in substance; but the three humane Persons do substantially differ,
so that one whole, is wholly distinct from an other. Thirdly, In the humane
Persons, there is a difference between them, in time: as one younger then
another. In dignity; one more worthy then another: In will; one contradicts
another: In works one labors more then another, but there is none of these
things in the Divine Persons: Fourthly, In humane Persons it follows not,
John 14.10
where one is, that there the other should be; Paul is at Rome, Peter at
Antioch: but in the Divine it is otherwise; John 8.29.
where one is, there are all, for their common and undivided Essence. These
things are after an unspeakable manner.

Use. That as we reverently think of this wonderful mystery, so that we
wisely speak of it, not taking to our selves, liberty to use new forms of
speaking, or to swerve from the received custom approved by the Church
according to the Scriptures: but that as duetifull children we tie our selves
to her wholesome language. For as Saint Hierome said; Heresy breeds out of
words improperly uttered. And Saint Augustines caveat is singular, If thou
can not find what God is, yet take heed to think of God that which he is
not. This doctrine of the true God, one in Essence, three in Persons, is most
religiously to be learned, kept, professed, maintained, and taught in the
Church, both for the glory of the True God, and also to distinguish us from
Jews, Turks, and Infidells; and for our own comfort and salvation, 1. Ioh.
2.23
as it is said: He which denies the Son, has not the Father. And, He that
honors not the Son, John 5.28.
the same honoreth not the Father which has sent him. And, No man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, 1. Cor. 12.3
but by the Holy Ghost. Therefore we conclude that the doctrine of the Trinity
ought in some measure to be known and believed, and that such faith is
necessary to salvation.

Q. What is the Father?

Ans. The Father is the first Person in the Trinity: 1. John 5.7.
that only true God: not begotten nor proceeding, 1. Cor. 8.5.6. John 1.14.
Mat. 10.20. Romans 8.11.
but being of none, and from everlasting begetting the Son; and sending forth
the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Son?

Ans. The Son is the second Person in the holy Trinity, 1. John 5.7 Iere.
23.6. John 1.1. Romans 9.5. 1. Ioh. 5.20 Prou. 8.22 etc. John 1.14. Galat. 4.6.
Romans 8.9. 1. Pet. 1.1. John 5.7. Acts 5.3, 4. 1. Cor. 3.16 Ex. 4.11, 12 2. Pet.
1.21 Ioh. 15.26. Ioh. 16.15. Ioh. 17.3. Romans 16.27 1. Tim. 6.16
that only true God, not created but begotten from everlasting of the Father;
with the Father sending forth the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the Holy Ghost?

Ans. The Holy Ghost is the third Person in the holy Trinity, that only true
God, compared with, not made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding from
the Father and the Son, compared with.

Expli. The Father is God only, so are the Son and Holy Ghost, and therefore
when you read in the Scriptures, that the Father is the only true God, and
only wise, and only has Iunnortality, and such like; remember to understand,
that it is spoken exclusiuely, not in regard of the other Persons, but in
regard of Idols, and the Creatures. The Father is the first person, the Son
the second, the Holy Ghost the third: not in time and dignity, but in order:
all equal in all attributes and works, though in regard of us, Creation be
attributed to the Father, Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the
Holie-ghost, without excluding the other persons: for one and the same God does
all these things, according to a common saying; The works of the Trinity out
of it self are undivided. So these persons are two ways distinguished, first
by their common outward operations, which with a common efficacy they work
in, and toward the creatures; saving always this order of the persons, that
the Father works of himself by the Son and the Holy Ghost; the Son and
the Holy Ghost, not of themselves, but by themselves. Secondly, they are
distinguished by personal proprieties, and inward actions which they have
toward themselves. The propriety of the Father to beget, and to be of none.
The propriety of the Son, to be begotten of the Father. The propriety of the
Holy Ghost, to proceed from the Father and the Son. Where we must observe, that
we may not say the Godhead begets, or is begotten, or proceeds; but the
person. The Son and the Holy Ghost being of themselves, as they are God: of
the Father as persons: The essence of the Son and Holy Ghost wanting beginning:
their persons having the Father for their beginning from everlasting. For the
Essence of the Deity is to be distinguished from the manner of subsisting in
the same.

If any shall desire to know what is the meaning of the generation of the
Son, and proceeding of the Holy Ghost, and how they differ: let this suffice
to the sober; that by generation and proceeding, is meant a receiving of an
Essence from another: yet with two cautions. First, that we conceive no
superiority or inferiority, between that which gives and that which
receives. Secondly, that we think of no priority or posteriority in time or
dignity between that which is begotten, and that which proceeds. And for the
distinguishing of these, I know no other Art but this, that the Son is
begotten and proceeds not, and the Holy Ghost proceeds, and is not begotten:
For that which is not written, is not to be spoken or thought. There is a
difference between them, but I am not able to unfold it, faith Saint
Augustine, because both the generation of the Son, and the procession of the
Holy Ghost are ineffable. And yet the same S. Augustine goes thus far,
saying, that that which is begotten, proceeds, but that which proceeds, is
not begotten: The first part of which speech, being understood of the inward
works (as they are called) of the Deity, I dare not auow; because these are
special proprieties of persons, admitting no such communication. To conclude
this whole point, let us hear Nazianzene, who being pressed of one, to show
the difference between proceeding and being begotten. Do thou tell me (says
Nazianzene) what is Generation, and I will tell thee what is Procession, that
we may both run mad, in searching into the unrevealed secrets of God.

Use. Would thou understand these high and reverend Mysteries? Repent then of
thy sins, Wisd. 1.4.
For such wisdom enters not into a defiled soul, and sin blinds the
eyes of ye Seer: John 9.39. Ioh. 12.40
Straggle not out of the bounds of the Word, for that is given to be thy Rule.
Galat. 6.16.
Desire not to know that which is not revealed, neither be inquisitiue after
such things, Acts 1.7.
for that is dangerous, vanity, and pride. Bring to the study of this Mystery,
and humble, and a teachable mind: Psalm. 25.9.
for such shall understand the secrets of God. Captiuate thy reason, 2. Cor.
10.5.
and advance thy Faith, for here Reason is dazeled with the brightness, which
Faith apprehends. Hebt. 11.3.
Use frequent and fervent prayer, for prayer is the key of heaven, and such
receive the Spirit, which teaches, Luke 11.13
and leads unto all truth. John 16.13
Observe these things, and thou shall understand and find the knowledge of
God. Prou. 2.5.
The Lord give us understanding in all things which it is our duty to know,
and without the knowledge whereof we cannot be saved. Amen.

Thus much of the Relations of Persons, where of the doctrine of the Trinity;
now follows the consideration of the Actions ascribed to God, and first of
general Creation and Providence.

Quest. What is Creation?

Ans. Creation is a work proper only to God, Genesis 1. Job. 9.8. Psa. 146.6.
Mat. 2.10. 1. Cor. 8.6. 1. Cor. 8.6. Heb. 1.2. John 1.3. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2.
Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 33.6. Ps. 104.30. Genesis 1.1. Genesis 1. Ex. 20.11. Prou. 8.24. Romans
4.17. Heb. 11.3. Genesis 2.1. Ex. 20.11. Col. 1.16. Pro. 16.4. Ps. 8.6.7.8.
vndiuidedly common to the Father, the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, whereby,
in the beginning, and in the space of six days, God made of nothing, the
heavens and earth, and all the Host of them visible, and invisible, to the
glory of his Name, and the use of Man.

Explication. The work of Creation is common to the three Persons, as is
proved, though ascribed to the Father in our Creed, as to the Fountain, and
Beginning, Original, (not Temporal) of the Deity: And this Creation is
twofold. Simple, viz. Aproducing of things out of Nothing, negatiuely taken,
or in Respect: viz. A producing of things out of matter prae-existent
undisposed. So that these words, Of Nothing, signify both order, as if we
should say when there was nothing; after, whatsoever it was made: and also a
simple denying of the habitude and fitness of the material cause. If any
shall say, as of old some Heathen, that of Nothing, Nothing is made: we may
answer thus; It is true, of a Physical, and Natural generation and working:
not true of a Divine Creation.

Use 1. The work of the Creation, is a manifest conviction of the Athiest,
Romans 1.20. Act. 14.17.
the creatures being lively, representations, glasses, and witnesses, of the
infinite wisdom and power of God. The greatness of the world shows his
power: The form and beautiful disposition wherein one creature is subordinate
to another, his Wisdom: In the use his Goodness: In the form and constant
order, his Truth is manifest. The heavens declare his glory, the firmament
shows his handy-worke: So does the earth also, which is full of his
Goodness, and the wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both
small and great beasts. Consider (not only Behemoth but) the smallest Fly:
(not only the tall Cedars, but) the lowest Shrub, and smallest hearhe or
flower; yea thine own body (the Epitome of all) with David, Ps. 139.14.
and thou shall find, that all these with one voice proclaim, and say: It is
He, Psa. 100.3.
is it He, which has made us: Even as the work argues the workman; so the
creatures the Creator. Do thou say, who saw God? Thou Fool: who ever saw the
wind? yet thou hear the noise of it, and feel it. So the Innisible God
is manifest in his visible works; whom acknowledge, least thou feel the
stormy wind and tempest of his wrath.

Use 2. Consider seriously the work of the Creation, that thou may learn,
both the better to know God, and to celebrate his Goodness, Wisdom, and
Power. There is not the least Fly, but if ye fashion, nimble actiuity, etc. nor
ye most conte^ptible herb, but if ye color, ye qualities, etc. might give us
plentiful occasion of praises to our God the Creator. Verily, the negligence
of the most part of Christians, is this way most apparent and fearful. For God
has so made his marvelous works that they ought to be had in remembrance,
which are sought out of them that love them. Psalm. 111.2.4.
Yea whereas ye Lord could have made ye world in an instant, it pleased him to
take six days to finish the heaven and the earth, with all ye host of the^,
to this end (we may well suppose) that we should take good notice of the same.
For this, was ye Saboath ordained, that we might preserve ye memory of the
Creation, and praise the Lord: though now a greater work be added, which is
Redemption by the blood of Jesus. This has been the practice of ye Saints,
Psalm. 26.7. Psalm. 8. and 104. etc.
as may appear in the example of David. Surely he is unworthy of his creation
and being, which finds nothing in, or out of himself, whereby he may stir up
his dullness to praise God. Alas, for the most part we consider in the
creatures nothing, but that which serves for our backs and bellies; whereas
the right use consists not only in ye maintaing of life, but also in teaching
us the invisible things of God. If a cunning Painter should bring us into his
shop, to behold his curious pictures, beautifully set forth with much Art,
would he not be offended if we should not vouchsafe them the looking on, nor
commend his Art? So persuade thy self, whosoever thou art, that read these
things, that the mighty Creator is offended with thee, when all his works,
even insensible creatures praise him, if thou beeest dumb: how much more when
they declare his glory, if thou by thy wickedness bring dishonor to his
name?

Q. The History of the Creation is set down in the first of Genesis; but I
find no mention there of the Creation of Angels: what think you of that?

Ans. I verily believe, that both good and evil Angels were in those six
days created of nothing: all good at the first; but changeable: Spiritual
substances, of singular wisdom, power and nimblenesse; Genesis 2.^1. Col. 1.16.
Psa. 103.20
but the very day and time exactly of their creation I know not, neither is it
revealed.

Q. What are the good Angels?

Ans. They are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes
which are heirs to salvation. Heb. 1.14.


Q. What are the evil Angels?

Ans. They are spiritual substances, which being created good in the
beginning, stood not in the truth, John 8.44. Jude 6.
but of their own will fell from their happiness. These we call Devils: but
of the number of them that fell, and their sin, what certainly it was, and of
the exact time of their fall, I profess ignorance.

Expl. The Angels are the most noble of all the creatures; of whom many things
are curiously enquired, of their degrees, language, knowledge, power, number,
etc. But this shall suffice, that we know they were created of singular power,
knowledge and wisdom, yet finite: neither knowing all things; no not the
heart of man, neither able to do all things: for these are proper to God. We
may confess order amongst them; but it were rashness to take upon us to
declare it. This is certain, they which abide in their goodness, have it from
the grace of their Creator, needing Christ as a Mediator to conserve them in
their happiness, though not to redeem them. Also we are not to be ignorant,
that though God needs not their ministry, yet it pleases him to employ them
for the punishment of sinners; chiefly for the good of his children: And yet
not so, that every one has assigned him at his birth, one good, and an other
evil Angel, as some have without warrant affirmed. And as for evil Angels,
besides that which has been spoken, we are to remember, that they are, in
regard of their substances, the creatures of God, of whom we may acknowledge
one chief, because the Scripture speaks of the Prince of Devils, and of the
Devil and his Angels. That they are of wonderful knowledge and power, though
limited: And that they are of exceeding malice toward Christ, his Gospel, Job
1.12 Math. 8.31
and his Church, as every where is manifest in the word, and by daily
experience.

Use 1. Not to invoke or worship good Angels, for they are creatures: Judge.
13.16 Math. 4.10 Col. 2.18. Reu. 19.10 and 22.9.
yet we deny not, but they ought to be honored, by thinking reverently and
rightly of them, by loving them, initating them, and praising God for honoring
us sinful men with the guard attendance, and ministry of his holy Angels.

Use 2. That we walk soberly, and in the fear of God, because of the Angels,
who as they note our behavior, Luke 15.10
so they reiuice at the conversion of sinners.

Use 3. For evil Angels, remember first, to hate all sin, in as much as the
Devil is an accuser of us, 2 Pet. 2.4.9 2.
and a deadly enemy of our salvation, seeking as a roaring Lion to devour us,
endeavoring by all means, as Cyprian says, being lost himself to make
others the children of perdition: to put on the whole Armor of God, and to
resist him; and to keep watch and ward against so subtle, malicious,
watchful, powerful, and unwearied enemy: and this with so much ye more
assurance, because the whole power of darkness is overcome and vanquished, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever Amen.

Quest. Well, you say the world was created in six days, with all that
therein is. What did God create the first day?

Ans. In the first day were created the Earth, Waters, and the Light.

Explic. Genes. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.
These three God created the first day; and that by his word: not a word
spoken, or sounding: but by his commandment, or by his essential word. The
Earth was without form, and void, that is, not as it is now, dry, solid,
appearing, fruitful; distinguished by hills, valleys, rivers, etc. The absence
of these, is understood by those words, without form and void: Yea, it had
not the name of Earth: for that name it had the third day, here so called by
anticipation. It was not only empty and void, but drowned, as it were, in a
most deep gulf of waters, and swimming in the same; being like unto a slimy
or muddie substance; not appearing, until by the power of God it was compacted
into a solid mass, and drawn out of the depth; and received the form of the
earth, which was the third day.

And darkness was upon the face of the deep. Then God said, Let there be
Light, and it was so, etc. This darkness understand not a substance created of
God: but a privative quality of the rude mass of earth, and water commingled:
that is, a defect of light, or rather a mere negation, and nothing. And
whereas the Scripture says that God creates darkness, it is to be
understood, by accident, because he takes away the light. Esaias 42.16 and 45.7.
This darkness was upon the face of that watery and muddy body, and began
with the same.

The light spoken of, I think to be meant, not a thing altogether immateriall,
or subsisting without a subject: but a lightsome quality sparsed over the face
of the deep, whereby it was so illustrated, that it wholly might be discerned.
The time of this first darkness, and the first continuance of the light
following, made the first natural day: The darkness being called Night, and
the Light, Day: which Light went and returned by the wonderful appointment of
God, till the fourth day; when the order of day and night was to be disposed by
the Sun.

Use 1. First here, as in all other works of the Creation, (to note it once
for all) the wonderful power, wisdom, and goodness of God is to be
magnified, that of nothing has made al these things.

Use 2. Here consider that of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 4.6.
God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. Whereby we may note, that the work of Grace in our hearts,
whereby we know and behold God, in the amiable face of Jesus Christ, is a work
equal to the first creation of light: and that, as the earth was without form
and void, partly in respect of the want of light: So a conscience wanting the
light of Grace, and the illumination of the spirit, is most miserable and
wretched: And as the light is precious, and it is comfortable to the eyes to
behold the Sun: Eccl. 11.7.
So the comfort of comforts is this, when the conscience seeeth, and by faith
discerns the countenance of God appeased and favorable in Jesus Christ.

Quest. What did God create the second day?

Ans. I believe that on the second day, God made the Heavens, and divided the
waters which were under the firmament, from the waters which are above the
firmament. Genesis 1.6.7.8.


Expli. God (not of water) but of nothing, made the heavens, with their motion,
together with that wonderful space from the fact of the earth to the utmost
Heavens, called a spreading over: Esaias 40.22 and 42.5. Psalm. 104.2.
called also the Firmament, not as though it were hard or solid, but being of
a most pure matter, because of the constant and enduring firmness of it, by
the which it is not worn through the continual motion, but remains such as
it was framed of God in the beginning: Which Heavens are by Philosophers
curiously distinguished: In Scripture we read of three heavens; The lowest,
which is the air. The second, which are the Celestial Orbs, or the Aspectable
Heavens. The third, the Heaven of the blessed; the Heaven of heavens; Paradise,
into the which Paul was rapt, and Christ ascended: The House and Throne of God:
his seat and habitation, not that God dwells there, and is contained
therein, as in a house: but because he ineffably shines there in majesty and
glory, and communicates himself to the blessed Angels, and men. Understand
then, that these highest heavens are called the seat of God, by the
manifesting of his glory: of Angels and men, by the comprehension of their
natures.

The waters above the firmament, are the clouds over our heads, in the middle
Region of the Air, which God divided from the waters which covered the face of
the earth, that it might be a preparation for the Appearance of the Earth the
third day. God divided these waters, not by their Center, as if one divide an
Apple into two equal parts: but in the midst, or between the midst of the
waters, orbicularly, or round about the whole compass of the same, as in a
ball of four couers, if one should take the two outmost round about, and
stretching them to a larger concauity and hollownesse, should so divide them.
So God did divide, or make thin and spread abroad the outmost half of the
waters, that part of them should be above the firmament: that is, not above all
the heavens, but above that part of it, which is from the face of the earth,
and sea unto the clouds, which is called Heaven, Verse 20.

Use. Let all the Inhabitants of the Earth serve God, and fear before him, who
is able every moment to let fall the clouds upon us, to drown the world: For
if these waters which hang over our heads, were not by the mighty commandment
of God holden up and surely bound in the clouds, they must needs drown up
all, as in Noah's flood; which clouds he causes at his pleasure to power forth
water, either for punishment or mercy, Job 36.31. and 37.13.
either to judge the people, or to give meat abundantly, as Elihu says.

Quest. What did God create the third day?

Ans. The third day God gathered the waters under the firmament into one place,
which he called Sea, and made the Earth to appear, and dried the same, Gene.
1.9, 10, 11, 12, 13
and made all kinds of herbs, and trees upon the face of the Earth.

Expli. God purposing to create many beasts, and man also, now makes ready the
place where they must be, by commannding the waters which still covered the
face of the Earth, to gather together into one place, Psalm. 33.7.
dilating the poares and pass ages of the earth, to receive the same: that the
Earth might be uncovered and appear, and together with the sea make one round
body. Also in this commandment is to be understood the continual abiding of
the Sea in the place it is, with the ebbing and flowing, and motions of the
same. Whereas therefore the Philosophers ascribe the motion of the Sea, to the
motion of the Heavens, or to the Influence of the Moon: though I deny not, but
the quantity of the waters moving, may be ruled by these causes; yet the motion
it self is only from the commandment of God, Job. 38.8.11. Ier. 5.22. Psalm.
114.9
who caused the waters to ebb and flow before the Moon was made.

The waters being thus gathered, and the dry land appearing, the Lord by his
commandment clotheth it with all manner of herbs, flowers, trees, fruits, and
seeds, not only to cover the nakedness of it, but also to serve the use of
man and beasts after to be made. The Lord commanded the earth to bring forth
these herbs, etc. out of it self; not as out of the matter, but as out of the
original place of them. Now whereas there be only 3 kinds of plants named: the
Budde, the Herb, the Tree: yet under these, all whatsoever are contained:
Yea, it is very agreeable to think, that the very hurtful and poisonous
herbs were then created, though before the sin of man they were not hurtful,
neither should have been: even as he created venomous beasts, as the serpents,
which began to be hurtful only after the fall.

Here further we are under the commandment of God, to understand, the
continual fructifying of the Earth, by Root or Seed, or otherwise, whereby
there is a kind of Immortality of the kinds of all Herbs, Plants, and
Trees, etc.

Use 1. Nothing is more fading, then flowers and herbs; yet God has given
such lively seeds unto them, that they come up again, and are conserved in
their kind: Hence note (even by the direction of the Holy Ghost) first our
Mortality, who flourish to day, and to morrow are in ye grave Secondly, Esaias
40.6. Psalm. 90.6. Ioh. 12.24 1. Cor. 15.36.
the resurrection of our bodies: for thus is both the resurrection of Christ,
and our resurrection shadowed forth. While life lasts, be humbled in
remembrance of thy mortality: when life passes, be comforred in hope of
immortality.

Use 2. Every plant brings forth fruit according to his kind. Consider this,
and be ashamed: faith, fear, love, obedience, patience, sobriety, etc. are the
fruits that thou according to thy kind should bring forth, both in regard
of thy first and second creation. Ephesians. 2 10
What then is Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Blasphemy, Pride, Covetousness, etc.
what fruits are these? Does the Vine bring forth Thistles? No, it is not his
kind: even so thou art contrary to kind when thou sinnest, and bring not
forth good fruits, Ioh. 15.8.
etc.

Q. What did God create on the fourth day?

Ans. On the fourth day God created of nothing, the Sun, the Moon and the
Stars; appointing them to these ends: First, to separate the day and the
night. Secondly, Genesis 1.14.15.16.17.18.19. Psalm. 33.6.
to be for signs, seasons, days and years. Thirdly, to enlighten the earth
day and night.

Expl. What Ptolomie, and our latter Astronomers and Mathematitians observe,
concerning the motions, aspects, conjunctions, oppositions, influences,
bigness and quantity of the Stars both fixed and wandering, is wonderful:
as namely, that the least fixed star, (which are distinguished into six
magnitudes) should be eighteen times bigger then the whole compass of ye
earth and sea (whose globe is holden to be at the least twenty thousand miles
about) and only three of the Planets to be lesser, which are the Moon, Venus
and Mercury. And of the Sun (which God created to be the Chariot of light,
one of his most wonderful works) they write that it is of a most marvelous
(yea almost incredible) bigness, not only in regard of his influences and
effect, and lights, from whom the rest of the Stars receive their chiefest;
but also in regard of his quantity and bigness: namely, that it is about an
hundred and three score times bigger then the whole compass of the earth and
sea, though to our sense it appear not so. These things ye learned know very
well, and Saint Ambrose, a very learned Father, Li. 4. Hexam. cap. 6.
by evident reason demonstrateth the general truth hereof: which I thought
good to touch briefly, that all men understanding of these things, might be
astonished with admiration of his greatness, which has created them. But
concerning the uses of these beautiful creatures, they were ordained,

First, to divide the day and the night by their rising and setting: the Sun
to rule the day, the Moon and Stars to govern the night.

Secondly, they were ordained for signs, (I understand not in regard of their
situation, as to make the signs in and out of the Zodiaque) but in regard of
their use, portending and signifying many things by the divine ordinance, which
are necessary for the life of man. The signification of the stars (otherwise
called Prognostication) by their rising, setting, etc. as by causes or signs,
are threefold: First Natural, as of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon,
Earthquakes, Wind, Rain, Drought, etc. Secondly Civil, as the opportunity
of many civil actions: as of fit time of Navigations for Mariners, plowing and
sowing for Husbandmen, hiring and letting of ground for householders, etc.
Thirdly Spiritual, Eccles. 3.
by their natural and preternaturall affections: as of changes in
Commonwealths, Wars, etc. which diverse times are by Ecclipses,
Blazing-starres, etc. foreshowne: Which though they have, for the most part,
and cause in Nature; yet by the will and appointment of God, do fore-signifie
such things, as Forerunners of the wrath of God, as experience has observed,
as the signs in the air which Josephus mentions, immediately foregoing the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the horible signs foregoing the general
Judgment. We acknowledge that the stars have great and strong influences on
the inferior things: not on all; but only on such which by the ordinary course
of nature move without deliberation: in which number, and account, are not to
be reckoned the minds and wills of men, and the actions proceeding from these
beginnings. Therefore that part of Astrology concerning the calculations of
men's Natiuities, and the Judgment and Divination of things to come, which are
contingent, as the Nature, Qualities, Fortune, (as they call it) Success,
Marriage, Children, with their Inclinations, kind, and time of death of men and
women; we condemn as blasphemous: The Lord having not ordained ye Stars to
this use, Deuteronomy. 18.10.14. Esaias 8.18. Esaias 19.3.12. and 44.25 Ier. 10.2. and
27.9. and 29.8. Esa. 47.13.
as may appear by diverse Scriptures, where such practice is reproved. The
devils themselves, who pass all men in such knowledge, cannot certainly thus
foretell, muchlesse Astrologers, and cunning-me^, as they are called. And so
understood ye Fathers and professed, and the Imperial Laws: Astronomy is not,
nor Mathematics condemned, but this curious and damnable Astrology. The Stars
were also ordained for times, days, and years: that is, that by their motion
they should be the measure of time: according to whose motions time running
should be reckoned and distinguished into certain parts: That one should be
Time Past; another, Time Present; another time to come: one Time a Year,
another a Month, another a Week, another a Day, another an Hour, etc. Which
we could neither understand, nor distinguish, without the motion of these
Celestial Bodies: whereby, (as also by the two former uses) appears most
singularly, the necessity of such Motions, but chiefly the wisdom and
goodness of God; who has not only given to man the knowledge, and faculty of
numbering: but also has set such marks in the heavens, whereby man should
measure Time, and the continuance of his life, and of other things; without the
which, we should be like unto children, which know not their age; or like to
them which sleep, which know not how Time passes, because they number not.

Lastly, they were ordained to give light to the earth, and to the creatures
therein; without the which they could not divide the day and the night, nor be
for signs and seasons, etc.

Use 1. Hereby are condemned, not only al such which practice Astrology,
concerning divining of things to come, and telling of things lost, as before
spoken of, but also all such which resort to such for counsel, or help, as by
the Scriptures in the exposition appears.

Use 2. God appointed the Stars for the dividing of the day and night: and
this appointment cease not: Hence comfort thy self thus: If God be constant
and true in this, why not then in all his other promises? though Reason seem
to see, Sense to feel, and the whole world say the contrary, as the Lord
himself testifies. Ier. 31.35.36.


Quest. What did God create on the fifth day?

Ans. On the fifth day, God created all manner of Fishes, and all manner of
Birds; even all creatures that live, and move in the Air, and in the Waters,
and appointed the Fishes to fill the waters, and the Birds to multiply
themselves on the Earth. Genesis 1.20.21.22.23.


Expl. God on the fifth day, (whereas before there was not so much as a Fly)
created (not of water, but) of nothing; the Fishes and Birds of all sorts and
kind; and also appointed this Order, and gave them this Faculty, that they
should bring forth their Like, for the continuance of their several kinds, as
we see by daily experience: but the Fishes in greater abundance the^ ye
Fowls; as ye word to the Fishes (Fill the water) and to the Birds only
(Multiply ye) does show.

Use. That we provoke our selves to obedience by the nature of Birds: Ier. 8.7.
and by remembering that the Water, a brute creature, obeyed the voice of God:
how much more should man hear and obey, which is endued with Sense and Reason?

Quest. What did God Create on the sixth day?

Ans. On the sixth day, God created, of Nothing, all Cattle and creeping
things, and the beasts of the earth, according to their Kings: also he made
man of the dust of the earth. Genesis 1.24. to the end.


Expl. First, of the Creation of the beasts of ye Earth: They are here
distinguished, into 3. ranks or sorts. First, Cattle, whereby we understand
all tame Beasts, and Domestical, which are familiar and conversant with man:
as Horse, Kine, Sheep, Dogs, Cats, etc. Secondly creeping things, whereby are
understood, those that have no feet, as Serpents; or those which have, but
very short, as Worms, Ants, etc. Thirdly, Beasts, whereby are understood all
wild Beasts: As Lions, Bears, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Hares, and all such
which are of wild Nature. The least of which creatures; either Fishes, Fowls,
or Beasts of the earth, is so great a work; that all the world is not able to
make the like: no not a Fly, not a Louse. Ex. 8.18.


Use 1. If God abase himself to make and preserve the smallest living
creatures, much more will he provide for them which fear him. Mat. 6.26.


Use 2. The Lord made all things good, and so approved of them; but through the
sin of man, many creatures are become hurtful, as Toads, Snakes, etc. As one
says: They were created Good, Eucherius.
but to them that are evil they are become a scourge: Learn then by the
rebellion of the creatures to thee, and the danger and fear thou art in by
them, to be humbled for thy finne the cause thereof.

Quest. You said that on the sixth day, God also created Man, What think you
of Man's Creation?

Ans. I believe that on the sixth day, God made Man, Male and Female, according
to his Image and Likeness; The Body of the Man, of the dust of the earth, and
his Soul of nothing; the Body of the woman of the rib of the Man, Genesis
1.26.27. and 2.7.21.22.
and her Soul also of Nothing.

Expl. It is a great folly, and oversight, for a man to take upon him to know
other things, and to be ignorant of himself; in whose Body and Soul there
are such evident marks of Gods wisdom, power, and goodness; that even
Heathen Philosophers have called Man: A little World; or a Map of the whole
world.

Man consists of a body and a Soul: we will speak first of his Body, noting
briefly, only that which thereof is said in ye Text. When God had finished all
his other works, then he made Man: In whose Creation, he says not as before,
Let there be Man, or Let the earth bring forth Man; but as with Counsel, Let
us make Man: Hereby noting more clearly the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, in
man's Creation, then in the creation of other things. Concerning Man's body; we
may consider either the matter, or the Figure of it: The matter was the dust of
the earth: other things were made of nothing; only Man, and Woman's body of
matter praeexistent; thoough of it self having no disposition to such an
effect: as what likeness, has dust or red earth, to the flesh, blood and
bones of man's body? Now for the Figure of it, it is wonderful, as David
observes: Ps. 139.14.15.
God not only giving the outward shape, and beautiful color of the skin,
and outwardly distinguishing, and compacting in singular order and comeliness,
the parts and lineaments of the body; but framing and giving within, Bowels,
Veins, Arteries, Nerves, Muskles, and Bones, etc. most wonderfully. Now
whether Jesus Christ, by whom we believe all things were made, did in the shape
of man (as he often so appeared to the Fathers) with his hands, frame and
fashion the body of man, as some affirm, I leave it as uncertain.

Use. Did not God make man's body of nothing? nor of gold, or some heavenly and
precious matter, but of dust? Remember then thy beginning and be humble, in as
much as thou, nay Kings, and Queens are framed of no better stuff then the
dust and dirt of ye earth; which themselves, nay even brute beasts tread under
their feet: yea, we are below the beasts in this, that they were but brought
out of ye earth, as out of their original place: Man made of the earth, as of
a base and brittle matter. Why art ye proud of a piece of dirt? and so prankest
up thy painted sheath? Let thine own bosom teach thee humility, for thou art
dust: and let it also teach thee thy frailty, that thou must die: Genesis 3.19.
for to dust thou shall return.

Quest. What is the Soul of man, which you spoke of?

Ans. The Soul of man is a Spiritual substance, Ecc. 12.7. Heb. 12.7. Mat.
10.28. Psa. 103.2. Zach. 12.1. Genesis 2.7. 1. Cor. 15.45.
Immortal; endued with Understanding, Memory, Conscience, and Will: Created in
the Humane Body, to make the Person of Man, and to enable Man to know, and
worship his Creator.

Expl. Every man has a Soul, the original whereof is of nothing; and it is
the better part of man, without the which, the body is a dead lump of the
earth, the Immortality whereof is to be believed against all Epicures, or else
all Religion and Piety vanishes. Though therefore the body die, yet the Soul
existeth, being dissolved from the body, being so far from death, that it
never falls a sleep, Mat. 10.28 Mat. 22.32.33. Luke 16.29 Phil. 1.23. etc.
which is the image of death. The immortality of the Soul might be made
manifest by reason: but Scriptures to prove it (for I write to Christians.) are

When Moses speaks of the creation of the Soul, and the infusing of it into
the body, he says: God breathed into his face the breath of life: Which must
not be understood, as though God had any mouth to breath, but that God by his
omnipotent power made the man to breath, and yet hereby we may perceive, that
that which was thus created is a Spirit, not drawn out of the matter, but
immediately proceeding, as out of the mouth of God. Psa. 33.15. Zach. 12.1. Job.
33.4. Ezech. 12.7. Heb. 12.9.
And if any shall ask how our souls are now created, and whether we receive
them as our bodies, from our parents or no? The answer is, that we receive
only our bodies from our parents, our souls still immediately from God. God
is called the Father of the Spirits of men; because, though he be the Author
of their bodies also: yet of these by means; of them immediately. And whereas
some might think that hereby God might be in danger to be made guilty of the
sin of man, when he puts a soul into the body begotten by unlawful
copulation: It is answered, that God is no more hereby guilty, then he is
pertaker of the fault of the Thief, when he causes stolen corn to grow, as
well as that which is truly bought. These things being to be considered not
Morally, but Naturally in regard of their Being. And because the guiltiness
we received from Adam, may seem to approve that our Souls come from Adam
also: else how should they be guilty? We are to understand, that the sin
and guiltiness is not in the Soul alone, or in the Body alone, but in the
whole Man, consisting of Body and Soul; so the Soul is infused of God void
of sin: Though even then, when it is put into the Body, it be guilty of
owing, though not of doing: even as the debt of the Father is to be paid by
the Heir, and he liable thereunto. Thus is the Soul subject to guilt, so
also is it faulty; not as it is created of God, for so it is pure; nor as it is
reasonable, but as it is joined to the Body, making the person of a Man, who
has not the Image of GOD which he should have, but the corrupt image of Adam,
which he should not have. This Soul is the form of Man, by the which we
Understand, Remember, Will, Discourse; by the which we differ from the beasts;
being wonderfully joined to the body: A Spiritual Essence to a Bodily, without
any thing to hold the same, but the only commandment of God: Being, not in
one part of the body in regard of the Essence, and in another in regard of the
Faculties; but being after a wonderful manner, wholly in every part: yea, all
the Faculties of the Soul being wholly in every part, in regard of their
original, though not in regard of their proper subject.

Use 1. Thou have a Soul, which is endued with Understanding and Will; the
proper object of thy Understanding is Truth; of thy Will, Goodness: If you
be a man, then all thy labor should be to increase in ye knowledge of the
Truth: and in the approbation, election, and practice of that which is Good.

Use. 2. Remember thou have an immortal part, which is thy Soul, be careful
then so to adorn it with grace and virtue that thou may live immortally in
joy and happiness, and not in misery and pain. Many will say they have Souls
to save, so have they Souls given them to know God, and to worship him
according to his Word: But as the most part have no care to glorify God, in
and with their Souls: so (whatsoever they say) they show by their lives, they
have Souls to be damned rather then saved: For as salvation is promised to
them which believe and obey God; so to them which do not, is damnation
denounced by the word of God.

Quest. You said that Conscience is a Faculty of the Soul, declare further
what Conscience is.

Ans. Conscience is a Faculty of the Soul, taking notice of all that is in
Man, Eccl. 7.24. 1. Cor. 2.11 Romans 2.15.
or that passes through his whole life, and so determining thereof, accusing
or excusing before God.

Ex. All men have Conscience, which is proper to every reasonable creatures:
yea, every several man or woman, has his, or her, own several Conscience
within them; which is a Natural Faculty, or Created Quality in the Mind,
borne with us: And whereas we use to say, that some are men of no Conscience,
or have no Conscience; the meaning is not, that they have no conscience at all,
but no good Conscience.

Conscience is diversely distinguished: In regard of the light whereby it is
informed, it is either a Natural Conscience, which has only the light of
Nature for direction; or it is a Christian Conscience, and better enlightened
(as you may call it) which besides Nature, has the Holy Scriptures, more
largely and distinctly, guiding and directing it.

In regard of this direction: Conscience is either informed, or discerning; or
not informed and blind: and this according to two degrees thereof, is either a
Doubting Conscience; when, for want of evident light to direct, we cannot
resolve: or an Erring Conscience; when a man mistakes through ignorance, good
for evil, or evil for good: or when out of known principles and true, we
conclude and infer erroniously.

Again, Conscience is in regard of the quality thereof, either Good, or Bad:
the Good Conscience, is that which is sprinkled with the blood of Christ, and
regenerate: and is according to a twofold estate thereof; either a good quiet
Conscience, when upon good grounds we truly believe, and unfeignedly repent,
enjoying peace, and confidence, and boldness before God: or a good troubled
conscience; when, though we believe and repent, yet through some sin that we
have committed, or through our inbred infidelity, we are troubled and in
doubt: and this is called Good; not because it is troubled, but because of the
true grace whereby it is renewed, with the which true grace, may and is
oftentimes, yea for the most part, and that in the best men and women, trouble
joined: as David's heart fainting him, and Paul's crying out: O wretched man! Bad
conscience is that which is not renewed: for every man till he be in Christ,
has a bad conscience: and this also, according to a twofold estate thereof,
is either an evil quiet conscience, whereof there are two degrees: first, a
slumbring conscience, that stirs not but when death comes, or in some
grievous affliction: Genesis 42.21
as the brethren of Joseph. Secondly, a seared conscience, which has no more
sense and feeling then a stone, no not in death, as may appear by ye example
of Nabal. 1. Sam. 25.37.
Or an evil troubled conscience, which is twofold: either a large conscience,
that makes no bones of small sins (as they are called) but stirs or sticks
only at monstrous sins: as which trembles at murder, but makes nothing of
anger, reuiling and revenging, so it be not in blood. Such is the conscience
also, which refraines from bloody oaths; but as for Faith and Troth, Bread,
Drink, the light that shines, etc. never feels or checkes for them: or a
narrow conscience: and this is, when the conscience feels not greater sins,
and yet is very sensible of small things, or trifles: as the Pharisaicall
conscience, making great conscience of tithing Mint and Annice, Mat. 23.24
but neglecting Mercy, Faith and Judgment: or as the Popish conscience,
streyning at a little flesh on a Friday, but swallowing blasphemies,
whooredomes, and other grievous sins, without any trouble.

That faculty of our soul, which takeeth knowledge, and determines of all our
actions, is called Conscience, either because it is a partner with another in
the knowledge of a secret (which Another is God) or because it is joined with
certain Principles and Rules of the Law, in the mind, and with memory; using
the help of these in the execution of the office thereof.

The office of Conscience is twofold: First, to know all things in a man, or
done, and omitted by man: all thoughts, words, deeds, affections, and the
omitting of all duties: the soul by conscience seeking it self, as by a
reflection. As for instance: The Soul by science knows a thing; the
Conscience, it knows that it knows such a thing. The Heart thinks a thought,
good or evil: by conscience the heart knows that it thinks such a thought.
By Faith the heart believes: by Conscience, the heart knows it does believe.
By affectious the Soul grieves, or joys: by conscience we know we do so. Romans
9.1.
And hence the conscience is called a Register, or Notary.

The second office of conscience is to determine of the thoughts, words and
deeds of men: which things as they are diverse, in regard of time, so is the
action of conscience diverse concerning them. The actions (to insist only of
them) are either past, or to come: Of actions past, conscience determines two
ways: according to double consideration, or question, of such actions. As
first, whether they were done or not done: secondly, whether they were well or
euilly done.

For the first question, whether an action were done or no, Conscience within
most certainly certifieth: As in Caine, when his Tongue said, I know not where
my brother is, his Conscience said, Thou know wherere he is: for thou have
killed him. So in David, when he was accused as a Traitor against Saul: his
conscience said, that he was no Traitor, nor had conspired against him. So in
Job, when his friends said, he was an Hypocrite: his conscience witnessed
within him before God, that he was none. And hence is conscience called a
witness: yea, a thousand witnesses.

For the second question, whether a thing be well or ill done: Conscience, with
the help of certain Principles in the Mind, judges in evil things, as a
Witness accusing, and as a Judge condemning: In things well done, as a
Witness excusing, and as a Judge acquiting: And both these, after the manner
of Practical Reasoning, as Paul shows. Romans 2.15.
Of evil things thus: In the example of Caine, He that killes his Brother
sins grievously (says the Principle in the mind.) But thou Caine have
killed thy Brother, (says Conscience as a Witness by the help of Memory)
therefore thou have sinned grievously, says Conscience an Accuser. Again,
murderers must be damned (says the Principle of the mind) by the Law. But
thou Caine art a murderer (says conscience as an Accuser:) therefore thou
shall be damned, says Conscience as a Judge condemning. And from these actions
of conscience come more or less, fear, grief, sadness, desperation, and
other fearful consequents. Of good things thus: in ye example of Manasses, or
Mary Magdalen. He that sorroweth truly for sin, and leaves it, and follows
righteousness, repents (says the Principle, or Rule in the mind.) But thou
M. or M. M. do so, (says conscience as a witness,) therefore thou repentest
(says conscience excusing) Again, he that repents shall be saved (says the
rule.) But thou M. or M. M. repentest (says conscience excusing:) therefore ye
shall be saved (says conscience acquiting) And hence come peace of conscience,
Joy, boldness to come into the presence of God, etc.

The actions to come, of which Conscience determines, are either good or had:
The conscience, in regard of her Judgment of good actions, may be called
aspurring or provoking conscience: As thus, if the question be concerning
keeping of the Sabbath: the commandment of God must be kept, says the Rule;
but to keep the Sabbath is a commandment of God, says the Judgment of
Reason, therefore keep the Sabbath, says Conscience. In regard of had things,
the conscience may be called a brideling, or a restraining Conscience: as, if
question be, whether the Sabbath may be broken: thus, The commandment of God
may not be broken: but to break the Sabbath is to break the commandment of
God, therefore break it not says conscience. Thus by experience we feel
within us, before we do a thing, a certain power pushing us back, or egging
us forward: or we seem to hear a voice in our breasts, bidding, or forbidding
us. And when we do contrary to the motion and monishing of conscience, we are
said to wound, and to sin against our consciences, which is grievous. Now
remember how the Conscience determines of Actions: So also of Thoughts and
Words.

Use 1. Look well to thy conscience, and examine it: for a good conscience is
not of Nature, but of Grace, by Faith, Romans 5.1.
through the blood of Christ. For it is the blood of Jesus applied by Faith,
Heb. 9.14.
which purges the conscience both from the guiltiness and filthiness
thereof. Content not thy self then, though thy conscience be quiet, and
trouble thee not: for it may so be, and yet be stark naught. Be sure that the
quietness thereof be grounded on the righteousness of Christ, and the
assurance of the pardon of thy sins: Else when it stirs and awakeeth, it
will be like a Lion, ready even to rend out thy throat. Call therefore thy
conscience to her office here, which if she discharge, and being rightly
informed, excuse thee, thou may truly have boldness before God: Otherwise,
even as a man that has the gout, is not healed, because for a little time he
feels it not beat and fret: so neither does the quietness of conscience
argue the health and goodness thereof, unless it be quieted by the blood of
Jesus. Better thy conscience accuse here then in the day of Judgment, when
(though it sleep now) it will, unless it be prevented, most certainly accuse
and confound. For the nature of it is always to take Gods part, though it be
against it self. Make then thy concience thy friend against that day; when a
good conscience will be more worth then a whole world: The remembrance of
which time, made Paul endeavor to have a clear conscience before God and men.
Acts 24.16


Use 2. If thou once gettest a good conscience, keep it with all diligence:
For as a good conscience is a continual feast: Prou. 4.23 Pro. 15.15. 2. Cor.
1.12
Yea, a very heaven upon earth; so an evil and guilty conscience is an
unspeakable torment, yea a very hell, for a wounded spirit who can bear? If a
man have a good conscience, Pro. 14.
he cannot want comfort in the midst of the fire: But if a man were in
Paradise, as Adam, with an evil conscience, he must needs want comfort: for
as the shadow follows the body, so does an evil conscience follow the
unrepentant sinner, always dogging him; and crying fearfully against him.
Thou have sinned: thou shall be damned: driving into most fearful agonies and
passions, even unto final desperation, as in Judas, if the mouth be not
stopped by the merits of Christ. The Heathen thought, that those who lived
ill, were haunted with furies, and fiends: Surely, this is the fiend, even thy
evil conscience; gnawing upon thy heart, and stinging as a Scorpion, neither
can thou avoid it, but only by faith in Christ. Keep therefore thy good
conscience (if thou have it) as the chiefest Jewel: which thou shall do, if
thou observe these Rules. First, cherish Faith: for it is the root of a good
conscience: Secondly, avoid all sin, for as a moat in the eye, so sin
troubles the peace of conscience: and as water queucheth fire, so sin
puts out the goodness thereof. And therefore when Abigaile would persuade
David from bloody revenge, she uses an argument from preserving the peace of
conscience, and persuades him: Thirdly, walk in the continual practice of
righteousness: which, that we may be able to do, namely both to avoid sin,
Heb. 13.18
and to live honestly: A fourth thing must be done, which is the right
enforming of the conscience, that it be able to discern good from evil, and
mistake not one for an other: for as an unskillful Pilote, that knows not the
coast, easily makes shippewracke: and as a bad guide soon brings into
danger, so a conscience not instructed in the truth. For if thou doubtest, and
do doubtingly, thou sinnest: though the action be lawful in it self, yet
not to thee: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14.23
If thy conscience err, taking that to be good which is evil, thou can not
but sin: for if thou do according to thy erring conscience, thou sinnest in
doing contrary to the commandment of God. If thou do it not, thou sinnest
also, because thou do against conscience, and there is no way to help out of
these briers, but to inform the conscience in the truth; which is by the word
of God, the rule of conscience: by which it appears, that all such which
neglect the word of God, 1. Corin. 14 24, 25.
must needs have corrupt and dangerous consciences.

Use 3. Never sin in hope of secrecy, for thou can not lie hid; though
thou could conceal thy faults from al men, yea from the devil, yet there is
a bird in thy breast, which will tell tales, and bewray all: the conscience is
a thousand witnesses; happy is he which has it to witness for him before God.

Quest. What mean you when you say that man was created in the Image and
likeness of God?

Ans. I mean that near likeness wheby Adam resembled God; which consisted,
partly in the immortality of his soul, partly in his dominion over the
creatures, but principally in the gifts of his mind, Colos. 3.10 Ephe. 4.24
knowledge, holiness, and righteousness.

Expli. Herein consists the chief happiness of man, to be like his Creator:
for God made not man like other things made, but like himself; like I say,
having some sparks of excellency, as representations of the Divine Nature;
though this likeness be such that there remains an unspeakable distance
between God and man, even in his greatest perfection.

Though the feature of the body be most beautiful, yet herein we place no
part of the Image of God: though we confess, that even as the lantern is
illustrated by the candle within it: even so the body is made, in some sort,
resplendent, by the brightness of the Soul within, in which the Image of GOD
chiefly resideth. And yet to speak properly, we say not, that the Soul, but
that the whole man was made according to Gods Image.

This Image (not to say any thing, of the spiritual Essence, and Immortality
of the Soul) was partly in the dominion granted over the Creatures: which
dominion was not direct: (for God is only the sovereign Lord;) but
profitable: consisting in his dwelling, and the use and benefit of the
Creatures: yet the extent of this, only to the inferior creatures, as the
earth, sea, air, and the creatures living in the same. Partly also was the
Image, in the excellent Graces of Knowledge, Holiness, righteousness, and Truth,
wherewith man was endowed; so that as the former resembled Gods imperious
majesty, so this his infinite purity and Holiness. And this also we are to
remember, that the woman was made as well as the man, accorcording to the Image
of God: though in regard of the subjection of the woman to the man, it more
excellently, in that, 1. Cor. 11.8.
appears in the man.

Use. Labor for knowledge, and grace to live godlily, whereby thou resemblest
God himself: and this is commanded; Be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord:
1 Pet. 1.16.
For though thou have a body beautiful, and a soul endued with much
understanding and wit; yet without wisdom and righteousness, without knowledge
of heavenly and spiritual things, and the practice of piety and dolines; thou
art not like unto God, John 8.44. 1. John 3.8
but like unto the devil himself.

Thus much of the first general work the Creation: now of the other, which is
the preservation of the Creature called Providence.

Quest. What is the Providence of God?

Ans. The Providence of God, is that way or manner, Hebr. 4.13 Psalm. 36.6. and
104. Hebr. 1.3. Iere. 10.23 John 5.17 Acts 17.28
whereby I verily believe that God knows, preserves, governs, and to their
certain ends directs, all and singular the things, with their actions which
he has created.

Explic. As nothing could have been unless it had received a being of God, so
nothing can continue, unless it be still preserved by him: Which preservation
of the Creature, is either general, or special. The general is that whereby
he continues the order, which he gave the creature at the first; as the
seasons and tunes of the years, that the Sun should give light, the fire
burn, the earth yield fruit, bread nourish, etc. for this could not continue
without the providence of God; as appears in bread. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
The special is whereby he ouerruleth all second causes, and the course of
things, so often as he pleases: as making the Sun to stand still, and dividing
the Sea, etc. and also preserves, and cares for, not only the kinds of
things, but also the particulars of every kind, not only of the more noble
creatures, as of Man (of whom more hereafter in the doctrine of Predestination)
but of the least and most contemptible, with all their actions and events:
Psalm. 147.8 9, 16, 17, 18, Mat. 10.29, 30.
not any wind rises, not a cloud stirs, not any rain, snow etc. falls,
not a sparrow or little bird dies, or comes into the tallons of the Kite, or
into the net of the Fowler, but by him, who works all things according to
the: cunsell of his will: yea our very hairs are numbered.

So that we believe the providence of God, to extend it self, even to the
basest worm, and least fly, as well as to the Angels in heaven, and that it
is as large as his knowledge; equally containing all things, (though not giving
equal things to all) vniuersalls, singulars: things necessary, things
contingent; natural, voluntary, good, evil, little, great; and that it
orders and governs all things, and actions, as he himself has decreed.
Neither is this to flatter God, to say that he cares for every particular
worm, fly etc. as if so be God cared only for multitudes,, and not for every
each one: when our Savior says one Sparrow. He is as well able to know
them, and to provide for them, as to make them, and give them life, and the
pain is all alike to him, to care for every one, as for a multitude; neither
does it derogate from his greatness, or goodness, but rather amplify the
same, when he neglects nothing which he has made. Surely if it did not
impeach his Majesty to make them, neither to preserve them.

Quest. But do you believe that Gods providence, extends it self to all
actions of men, even to decree, order, and govern evil actions?

Ans. Yes indeed, Ibeleeue that even the evil actions of men, are not only ly
foreknowne, Gene. 45.5 2. Sa. 16.10 Acts 4.28
but also decreed by God.

Expli. We need not fear to attribute evil actions to the decree of God,
because the Scripture so speaks; only we must soberly and wisely understand
it: namely, that Pharaohs cruelty, Sheme is cursing, Absolons uncleanness, Judas
his betraying of Christ; are not by his revealed will approved, but forbidden:
and yet that by his good pleasure he will permit the same. Which permission we
may not understand to be the cessation of his care and providence, or an idle
wincking at the matter; but joined with an active power, not of infusing evil
into men: but first of taking away or denying his grace, and of delivering of
them most justly to Satan, and to the lusts of their own hearts. And also of
bounding their wills, purposes, and actions, and directing them to a good end.
For God is so good that he would never suffer evil to be, if he could not
bring good out of evil; Even as the skillful Apothecary, knows how to use
poison well, and to the good of the patient. And surely, this is amost pregnant
proof of the powerful providence of God herein, when those actions which are
done by wicked men contrary to his will, yet are brought to serve and fulfill
his holy will and purpose. For even as in an Army one fights for praise, an
other for lucre of the spoil, an other is egged forward by desire of revenge;
yet all for the victory, and for their Prince: and as in a ship, some weigh
up Ankers, others stand at the pumpe, others at the stern, and all by several
works labor for the safety of the ship: so, whatsoever the wicked propound to
themselves, yet the Lord ordreth all to his good pleasure, will they, nill
they: so that as an arrow flies to the mark which the shooter aymeth at,
without any sense whither it goes: So the Lord serves himself by the wicked
though they think not so much. Esaias 10.5, 6, 7.
Hence is it that though the decree of Gods providence (as has been said) is
concerning those evil actions; yet neither is God guilty, nor man guiltless,
God is not guilty, because he puts no evil into men, but uses them as he
finds them, and so makes them to serve his glory, who may use what creatures
he will, and cannot use them, though they be evil, but well, because he is
infinitely good. Neither is man guiltless, notwithstanding the Decree: for
sinners are not excusable, because there is no force used toward them, but
they follow their sins with great pleasure, and a very willing mind, and
casting away the care of virtue, do, of their own accord, yield themselves to
their own lusts, respecting in their evil deeds only the satisfying of their
own wills, and not the fulfilling of the will of God. The Jews did what the
hand and will of God had determined before to be done to CHRIST; but they
considered not that, but were led unto that sin by the malice and
covetousness of their own wicked and envious hearts, which were the true
causes thereof. So that, (as Saint Augustine says) In one and the self same
thing, GOD is just, and Man is most unjust, because in that one thing which
they do, there is not one cause for the which they do the same.

Here further it is to be marked, that the Decree of God (in respect whereof
all things are necessary) does not take away contingency; which is, when a
thing, when it is, had a cause whereby it might have been otherwise. As the
bones of Christ must be unbroken in regard of Gods Decree, and yet they might
have been broken in regard of their own nature, and the freedom of the
minds of the Soldiers. Neither may any think, that hereby are frustrated,
deliberations, prudence and use of means: for as God decrees the being of
things, so also the means whereby such things shall be. As in regard of Gods
Decree, Lot cannot be burut in Sodom; but then he must escape, and hie him
away out of the City. David must overcome Goliath, but then he must take his
Sling, with the smooth Stones, with him. Manasses must be saved, because God
has so decreed, but then he must repent and believe, which are the means of
salvation appointed and decreed by God.

Use 1. Labor soundly to understand, and with all thy wit to maintain this
doctrine: for to deny the Providence is all one as to deny God: Psalm. 14.1.
Psalm. 10.4.11. Psa. 14.1.2
and this indeed is a maine cause of the profaneness of vile men.

Wherefore, denying a fatal destiny, whereby all things, even God himself,
should be tied to the nature of second causes, and abhorring all conceit of
fortune and mere chance (which are words fitter for Heathens then Christians,
which believe there is a GOD) let us hold fast this Doctrine, that all things
whatsoever are governed by an Ocular Providence: Psalm. 58.11 Heb. 11.6.
Yea, if any thing fall out, which we might think to be by chance, because
we see not the cause of it, yet to be persuaded that so it was foreseen, and
fore-appointed and decreed of GOD, as that place of Numbers 35.22. compared
with that of Exodus 21.13. does most plainly show.

Use 2. This Doctrine also comfort many ways: First if we (as we ought)
carefully observe the experiences of Gods providence toward us, in the often
unexpected success of our affairs, we must needs both be confirmed in our
Faith, the more steadfastly to depend and trust on GOD, and also be hereby
occasioned often to give thanks.

Secondly, if Affliction come, it teaches, that it comes not out of the
dust, but by the wise and just appointment of GOD; And this breeds patience.

Thirdly, whereas the Church, and such as fear GOD, have many enemies, this
teaches that they can do nothing but as GOD pleases: yea, the very Devils
themselves can neither hurt Job, nor enter into the Swine, but as they are
licenced by GOD, and when he pleases to license either Satan, or evil Men,
or other Creatures, to hurt his Children, or Servants, he both boundeth them,
beyond which they cannot go, and also in the end turns all things to the
best. Romans 8.28. Psalm. 25.10


Fourthly, neglect not lawful means for the accomplishing of thy lawful
desires: for this were to tempt GOD: And yet trust not in the means, though
never so likely: for that were to sacrifice to thy worth, and to commit a kind
of Idolatry. Have thou Bread? Then that is a good means of Nourishing: But God
can break the staff of it, and make it as a stone to thee: For man lives not
by bread only, but by the word of Promise annexed thereto. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
In the use therefore of all means concerning either Corporal or Spiritual
things, look up unto heaven, and pray for a blessing, or else thou watchest in
vain, thou labourest in vain, Ps. 127.1.2.
in vain thou use any means: yea, in the midst of many difficulties, though
thou then see no means, yet trust in God, Genesis 22.8.
for God will provide, as Abraham said: Wherefore go on cheerfully in thy
calling, serving God, and casting thy care upon him, Psalm. 55.22. 1. Pet. 5.7.
for he cares for thee: Nay commit thy very Soul unto him in weldoing, as
unto a most faithful Creator. For if God cloatheth the Grass, 1. Pet. 4.19.
regards a Sparrow, and numbreth thy superfluities, even the hairs of thy
head, how much more will he keep, and provide for thy Soul, if thou fear
and obeyest him, I say Him; who regards all as one, and one, as if he were
alone; who is neither detained about the care of one, nor distracted about ye
care of more: to whom nothing is hard because Almighty, nor multitude of
business can ouerwhelme, because infinitely Wise, to whom be praise for ever.
Amen.

Thus much of the general works by which God is described: Creation, and
Providence, which extend to all things. Now of the more Special, which
concern the Church, which are Redemption, Sanctification.

Quest. You said that God is the Redeemer of his Church: What is Redemption?

Ans. Redemption is a work of God, whereby he has fully delivered his Elect,
from sin, the curse of the Law, Eternal Death, and the power of the Devil,
1. Cor. 1.30 Col. 1.14. Tit. 2.14.
by IEVS CHRIST to the praise and glory of his Name.

Expl. The delivery of Mankind from sin and death is, significantly, by the
Holy Ghost called Redemption: which signifies, a purchasing, or buying again,
or a Ransoming at a price (as life for life) of them which are in bondage.
Therefore is Christ called, a Price, Mat. 20.28 1. Tim. 2.6. Act. 20.28.
a Counter-ransome: The Flock of Christ is said to be purchased with Gods
own Blood: and Ye are bought with a price. 1. Cor. 6.20


We were in bondage, even to the very Devil of hell, the great enemy of
Mankind; and therefore ungodly men and women, 2. Tim. 2.26.
are said to be taken alive, in the snare of the Devil, at his will. Also we
were in bondage to sin, the curse of the Law, and to eternal condemnation,
from all which Christ has delivered us, Heb. 2.14. Gal. 3.13. Tit. 2.14.
by a Price, even Himself.

But here we must know that Christ ransoming us out of the claws of the
devil, by a Price, paies not this Price to the devil, but to God: who
delivers sinners to the devil, as to his executioner to be tormented: And
when this work of Redemption is spoken only, of taking us from satan, it
notes that we are delivered by power and force, not by a price: Therefore in
the Gospel, Christ in comparison of Satan, is called ye Stronger, who
ouer-commeth him and divides his spoils. Luke 11.22. Col. 1.13.
We are said to be delivered foin the power of darkness; where the word
signifies by fine force, to deliver or pluck away. Even as David pulled the
Lamb out of the Bears mouth, so has Christ by his Almighty power, reskued us
out of the mouth of the Roaring Lion: So also he has destroyed the devil,
Heb. 2.14.
not by abolishing his substance, but by weakening his power, as the word there
imports: Christ then pays his Blood as a price to his Father, and so,
forcibly delivers us from the devil: Who has the power of death, as the
Hangman has the power of the Gallows; not absolute, but by commission from
God, for the tormenting of the wicked.

This Redemption we speak of, is so the work of God, that we exclude all
creatures from any power, or possibility of redeeming us. Psalm. 49.7.
And we acknowledge it to be the work of the whole Trinity delivering us in
the person of the Son, who redeemeth us by his Merit, and by his Efficacy:
by his Merit, deserving Redemption for us: by his Efficacy, effectually
applying it unto us by his Spirit through Faith.

Use. First, here we may see the wonderful misery, in the which we are all,
till we have our part, in the Eternal Redemption, purchased for us by Jesus
Christ: For first, we are under the power of sin, and the tyranny of the
devil: very Bond-slaues; more miserable then ever were the poor Iraelites in
Egypt, or now are the poor Christians under the Turk: for the bondage of
these is only bodily: ours more: bodily and spiritual also: our bodies and
very Spirits being subject to obey his filthy will in all things. Ephe. 2.2.


Secondly, we are all our life time in fear of death; even as is the case of
one condemned to the Gallows, he always trembles and quakes at the approach
and remembrance of the hour of his execution: So we, if God make us sensible
of our estate, in regard of sin, are always haunted with the terrors of an
evil conscience, as with Furies and Fiends of hell: as Caine, Saul, Judas.

Thurdly, we are firebrarnds of hell, subject to eternal condemnation, for
our sins, etc. This is our misery, which who so understands not, nor
considers, he never esteems this wonderful mercy of God in redeeming of
us, as he ought: For as he that supposes himself to be mortally sick,
highly reckons of the Physician which cures him, and he which is troubled
but with some light infirmity not so: Even so, to him, to him only is the
tidings of the Gospel welcome, the Promise sweet, the Blood of Christ
invaluable, the Love of God unspeakable, yea, without measure, and passing all
knowledge: which sees his misery, and seeleth his heart wrung with the fetters
and bolts of sin, and which considers of those eternal torments due to the
same.

Use 2. Here we ought also to consider, of the Price whereby we are ransomed,
and of the exceeding Love of God. For the Price, it was neither gold nor
silver, nor any corruptible thing, but the precious Blood of the Lamb
unspotted Jesus Christ. Mark thou which read: 1. Pet. 1.18 19.
It cost the very Heart Blood of Jesus the Son of God, who was without sin,
to save thee a vile wretch, from eternal damnation which thou deseruest by thy
sins. The Love of God herein appeared to be most wonderful, in that he
spared not his own Son, but gave him to death, even for us and in our stead,
who were, not his friends, but his very enemies: See what love the Father has
showed; Romans 6.7.8.
that thou an Imp of the devil by sin, should have the Blood of Gods own
Son shed to make thee his son or daughter. Let me speak unto thee in ye
words of Ezra, Ez. 9.13.14.
which words he spoke from the occasion of a meaner deliverance. Seeing God
has kept thee from being beneath for thine iniquities, and has granted thee
such deliverance, should thou continue in sin? should thou rebel, and
return to break the Commandment of such, so merciful a God? by
drunkenness, blasphemy, lying, pride, whoredom; or any profaneness?
Should, thou despise the Saboaths, Word, Sacraments, Blood of such a
Savior? Should thou refuse to sacrifice thy Body and Soul to his glory,
that refused not to sacrifice his precious life for thy Salvation? Should
thou be a Niggard of thy duty to him, yea of thy best blood, who was prodigal
to expend and shed his Blood to redeem thee? Now God forbid. Luke 1.74.75.
Tit. 2.14.15. etc.
Nay this, inexcusably binds us all, to all thankfulness, and true
obedience.

Quest. But you said that Man was created according to the Image of God, in a
most holy and happy estate: how then comes be to stand in need of a Redeemer?

Ans. I believe that Adam and Eve being created by God, according to his Image,
in singular happiness, and placed in Paradise; did notwithstanding willingly,
and by the enticement of the devil, fall away, transgressing Gods commandment
given unto them; and so made themselves, and their posterity; Genesis chap. 2.
and 3.
subject both to sin and death, the wages of the same.

Expli. Though it be far better to endeavor to come out of the misery we are
in, then curiously to inquire, how we came into the same: yet because many
necessary points depend on this; and we never seek the heavenly Physician
till we understand and feel our disease, and the danger; Therefore it is
necessary that we should have some good measure of knowledge hereof. Which we
shall attain, if we consider these two things: First, what Adams state was in
his Innocence, and upon what conditions it did stand. Secondly, the manner of
his fall: We will here entreat of his happiness, Genes. 3.
and the conditions thereof. The happiness of our first parents may be referred
to these heads. First, that they were created in the Image of God, together
with the manner of their creation; but of this before.

Secondly, that they were placed in the Garden of Eden, translated, by the
Septuagint, Paradise, and commonly so called, because it was a place of
singular delight and pleasure: Gene. 2.9. to 15.
a most pleasant place, in regard both of the variety of all pleasant fruits,
(the Trees also of knowledge and life in the midst thereof) and also in
regard of the precious rivers watering the same: Unto this our Savior alludeth
when he says to the Thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: not
that Paradise wherein Adam was put, which was defaced in the flood: but Heaven,
so called, for the happiness, joy, and rivers of pleasure which are there for
evermore.

Thirdly, the happiness of our first parents is set down, from their freedom
from all things which might hurt their bodies, or disturb their minds. They
were both naked and were not ashamed. Genesis 2.25.
They were naked; Hereby is signified, that their bodies had a kind of
Impassibilitie; so that though they were neither hairy nor woolly as other
beasts, nor clad in apparel, as now; but of a soft and smooth skin, and
naked: yet they were not subject to the injuries of the wether, as rain, wind,
heat, cold, etc. They were not ashamed. Not as though any indecent thing were
spoken of them, (as now he is accounted a beast that is not ashamed of his
nakedness) but first, to show, that inwardly in their minds, did shine the
Image of God; that is, Innocence, sanctity, and Integrity, etc. in which if
they had continued, they should not have needed their figge-leaues, nor any
apparel: Secondly, that outwardly in their bodies, there was exceeding
beauty, and perfection of all parts, so that there was no uncomeliness, no
not in those members, which after sin, natural shame, for their deformity,
and vnseemlinesse, teaches us to cover. Thirdly, that in the inferior parts
of the mind and body, there was no inordinat motion or appetite; all members
of the body, and inferior desires, being ruled and governed by the Inward
grace of the mind: So that if we meditate of these things, we can not but
conceive, that the happiness of our first parents was very great.

Now we are to consider of the conditions, on which this happiness did stand;
for they were created thus; but mutable, and changeable, and this state to
continue, and in the end to be translated to a celestial life, Ge. 2.16.17
if they kept the Commandment of God; otherwise not.

The Commandment was about one of the Trees which were in the midst of the
Garden, namely the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil; which was so called,
not of the effect, as though it had a quality to sharpen the wit, but of the
event, being a Sacrament of trial and admonition to them, that if they did
eat of it, then they should have woeful experience, of the good they had lost,
and of the evil they had gotten, they having before a speculatiue knowledge, but
not a practical experience hereof. The other tree was called the tree of Life,
both because it had a power or virtue to preserve life and health, and also
more principally because it was to our first parents a Sacrament of the
continuance of their life in Paradise, and after, of their translating unto a
heavenly life, if they continued in obedience.

The Commandment concerning the Tree of Knowledge contained a Prohibition,
which was this: Verse 17.
Of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat. This
Commandment God inforceth by two reasons: The first from the liberty God gave
them to all the rest of the Trees of the Garden. Therefore he might well
abstain from this one. Verse 16.
The other reason, from the danger ensuing, if he did eat; Thou shall die the
death. Verse 17.
that is, Thou shall certainly die, temporally here, in the separation of the
soul from the body; and spiritually in loosing the graces before spoken of,
and eternally in the separation of Body and Soul from God. This was man's
happiness: and it stood on this condition, if he observed the Positive Law
given him of God.

Use 1. Death, to speak properly, is not natural, namely according to the
nature of man in his Creation: Romans 5.12.
but against nature, coming in by sin. Adam being created to immortality,
that is in such an estate, that if he had never sinned, he should never have
died. For although Adams body was mortal in it self, and could die; yet it
had a power not to die, through the gift of the Creator, namely, if he
continued in his integrity. So Adam in his state of innocence was both mortal,
and immortal, in diverse respects: Immortal, having not an impossibility of
dying, but a possibilitiy of not dying, which possibility he lost by his sin,
and instead thereof received a necessity of dying; Thou shall die the death.
He was mortal, not because he should have actually died, if he had not
sinned; but because, if he sinned, it was possible he should, or he might
die. Death then comes not from Nature, but from Sin.

Use 2. The remembrance of this happiness of our first parents, which they
lost to themselves, and to us, by their fall, should move us, even with tears
of blood (if it were possible) to bewail our present misery in which we are;
which is (...) far from that happiness, as the Earth, nay as Hell is from
Heaven. Then Man was the Cedar of Paradise, the Picture of Heaven, the Glory of
the Earth, the Ruler of the World, and Gods own delight. But now he is the
Firebrand of Hell, the Picture of the Devil, more base then the basest
creatures on the earth: clothed with no less dishonor and shame, then he was
before crowned with honor and glory: Not only, as Nebuchadnezzar,
trans-formed into a beast; but being made of the Temple of God, a Cage of
unclean Spirits: yea, the very habitation of the Devil. Wherefore let us all
take up a grievous lamentation, when we look back to our first glory, and to
Paradise, our ancient right. And if there be any spark of Heavenly courage and
wisedme in our breasts, let us endeavor to recover that by Christ, which we
have lost in Adam: Nay, God offers, in his beloved Son, more glory, better
happiness: let us not be so besotted, as to suffer Satan to deceive, and
deprive us of the Recovery of Gods favor, by our continuance in sin, which
first he made us loose by committing sin, etc.

Use 3. Man in Paradise, in the time of his Innocence, might not be idle,, nor
without a positive law, for obedience: so that neither lobour in dressing the
Garden, nor to be tied to special duty by the law, was any impeachment of his
happiness: Those therefore which place any pleasure or happiness in idleness, or
in desiring to live as they list, and to be lawless, do exceedingly manifest
ye vile corruption of their hearts: for idleness, and lawless liberty was not
permitted to Adam in Paradise.

Q. I something conceive the happiness of man in his creation, and the
conditions of the same: Now I pray you show me, what was the manner of his
fall?

Ans. The fall of our first parents, was their voluntary transgression of the
commandment of God, in eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree; caused by
the subtle malice of the Devil, and their own infidelity, Genesis 3. through
the whole chapter.

Expli. Out of the third chapter of Genesis, which is called of some, The
Patriarchs Catechism, we are taught of the fall and sin of man, of the anger
of God, of the punishment of sin, and of the beginning of man's misery, unto
the which he was not created; but into the which he fell, by the justice of
God, through his sin: points hidden from the wise, and revealed by the word,
by which we come to know the cause of all the miseries which follow our nature;
which miseries the Philosophers saw, and confessed: but the wisest of them
could never conceive the cause thereof, which is sin. In this 3d chapter is
also contained a most excellent (even the first) promise of Christ. But we are
briefly to consider of his fall, which is set down in the fix first verses:
the rest of the chapter showing the consequence of the fall.

The Devil, being fallen irrecouerably, comes into the Garden, and in the
form of a Serpent, I mean speaking in, and by a true Serpent, out of a cruel
envy of Man's happiness, and an insatiable desire of doing hurt, tempts the
first Woman, and by the Woman, Man to sin, and preuailes: He boords the Woman
thus: Yea? Has God said, ye shall not eat? Verse 1.
etc. As if he should have said; It is alikely matter, that God cares what ye
eat: What? do you think that God stands upon an Apple? It is not to be
believed: Has he created all things for you, and would he not let you use all
things? This is the first assault: which the Woman weakly resists, beginning
even at the first to yield, Verse 2.3.
as appears by rehearsing the commination, or threatening, falsely: For whereas
God said; Genesis 2.17.
Thou shall dye the death, nothing the certainty of it; the speaks
doubtfully: Lest ye dye. As if she began to think, that it might be they
should dye, if they did eat, it might be not.

The Devil perceiving the Woman to stagger, and the wall of her faith to
shake, plies all his ordinance to the battry. For the word was no sooner out of
her mouth, Lest ye dye: Verse 4.
but he replieth: Ye shall not dye at all. As if he should have said: What?
Dye? with eating so fair in Apple? Can there be any hurt in this? Silly Woman!
Ye shall not dye at all. God affirmed, Ye shall dye certainly. The Woman
doubts, Lest ye dye. The Devil, that old Liar, denies; Ye shall not dye
at all. Then (not giving the Woman any respite to bethink her, or to reply) he
accuses God of envy, Verse 5.
and promises Divinity unto them. O (says he) God knows, etc. As if he
should have said, God enuies your hahpinesse, and I cannot but tell you of it.
For he knows well enough, that if you should eat of that tree, you should see
that you never saw: (O subtle deceiuer!) and that ye shall be as Gods.
Impudent liar! when as by this means both they and their (...) became like
unto him. Behold O woman (says he) what a goodly Tree this is! how pleasant
to the eye, delicate to the taste, divine for use. Can it do you any hurt?
would any but fools abstain? go to, eat and fear not, I Will warrant you: And
then the woman yeeldeb, and seeing that it was good for meat, pleasant to the
eyes, and a Tree to be desired to get Knowledge; she took of it, and did
eat, and by these same reasons persuaded her husband, and gave him, and he
did eat. Ah! and Alas! Verse 6.
whose heart is not moved to ruth, who mournes not that considers the fall of
the Mighty? Oh! How were the Mighty overthrown in the midst of Paradise by the
subtilty of the Serpent? Even holy Adam by the enticement of his Wife! Tell it
in the gates of the Cities, Preach it on the house tops, and publish it in the
ears of all the world, till the Inhabitants of the earth mourn for the misery
that is come upon them, even till the Elect and Beloved be delivered and
renewed by the strong Arm, and Grace, of their Restorer and Savior JESUS
CHRIST.

This is the fall, of our first Parents even their most grieuoussinne: which is
not to be measured by the price of the Apple, but by the Person, whose
Commandment is broken; together, with the great reason they had to keep it,
and the easines of performing the same. It is thought of some to be the
greatest sin pardonable, that ever was committed: and surely it was most
heinous, and injurious to God our Creator; being called the Fall, because it is
not one sin but many: as, First, Doubting: Secondly, Infidelity: Thirdly,
Security: Fourthly, Curiosity, seeking wisdom beside the Word: Fifthly,
Pride: Sixthly, Idolatry, preferring the devil and his lies, before God and
his Truth: Seventhly, horrible Unthankfulness: Eighthly, contempt of God:
Ninthly, murder both of themselves and of their Posterity, etc.

The consequents of this fall, follows in the seventh verse, to the end of the
chapter, viz. when they had both thus eaten, then their eyes were opened, and
they saw that that were naked; and they were ashamed, and fled from God, etc.
Their eyes were opened: Not that they saw not at all before, but to see that
which they saw not before, to wit, their own misery and shame: In the act of
their sin their eyes (that of their understanding) were shut by the
Witchcraft of the Devil: After their sin, they are opened; their
consciences accuse them of guiltiness, they sensibly feel their nakedness;
that is, the corruption their nature, the loss of the Image of God; And are
ashamed: Then they seek fig leaves to cover the nakedness of their bodies,
fly from God, deny the fact, and most impudently excuse themselves: the woman
laying the blame upon the serpent, the man upon God. Then God sentenceth them
to all manner of miseries for their transgression: and yet in mercy propounds
a Savior, which is ye seed of ye woman, Jesus Christ, by whom they might be
saved through faith and repentance*

Use 1. If Adam and Eve, having the Image of God shining in them, and being in
Paradise, were not out of the gunshot of Satan, but were tempted and
overcome: What person or place can then be free? yea, who can prevail? but
only such which obtain sufficient grace, continually pray for strength, 1.
Pet. 5.8. Epe. 6.10.11.12. 2. Cor. 12.9. etc.
and watch against this devouring enemy, putting on the whole armor of God.

Use 2. In as much as Satan does not at first plainly tempt Eve, to disobey
God, but first cunningly, begins to breed a doubt in her mind of the
certainety of Gods Word, we are taught two singular things: First to observe
the order of the devils proceeding in temptation, for look how he dealt with
Eve, so he deals with us, drawing us, not bluntly and at the first dash, into
evil, but by degrees: As when he would keep men from Repentance, that they
might be damned with him; he will not at first say, Ye need not repent at all:
but thus, (much like as he dealt with Eve) Yea? begin so soon to be
precise? What? a young Saint? Loose your best time? The flower of your age?
Wither your body with grief, care, study, and melancholy? Bury your self
quick? Tush: give your self liberty; you are young, you shall have time enough
afterward, you need not repent as yet. Thus does the serpent hiss: But yield
in this, and defer thy Repentance, and then he will rore out boldly; Thou
needst not repent at all, etc. Secondly, hence we are taught, that if we would
be preserved in the time of temptation; then one singular means is to hold
fast the word of God, and to believe it: which was the weapon wherewith Christ
repelled and foiled the devil in the Wilderness: Mat. 4.10.
when he brought Eve to doubt of this, she was easily overcome: so if he can
bring us to neglect, contemn, or speak evil of the Word, or but to doubt of
the truth of it, he makes reckoning we are his own: This is, as if we should
yield our weapons into our enemies hands, to cut our own throats, for then we
must needs be overcome, etc.

Use 3. From the guiltiness of conscience, corruption, shame, and other
miseries, issuing from the disobedience of our first Parents; we learn what it
is to sin: namely, to bring our selves under the danger of all the curses and
plagues of God. The devil promises pleasure and profit, if we sin,
fulfilling our own lusts, believe him if thou will: he that tempts thee now,
will, if thou be ruled by him, torment thee for it afterward. Remember how
he promised a kind of Divinity to our first Parents, and tremble. Labor what
thou can to resist him, and repent.

Use 4. When we see our nakedness, bodily, or spiritual, or feel any cold or
heat hurtful; sickness, want, pain, etc. we should call to mind the
original of all these our sins, and be humbled, etc.

Quest. What if Adam and Eve thus offended, what is that to us?

Ans. Yes very much; for though Adam actually transgressed, yet because he was
not, as a private, but as a public person, representing, and the very root
of all Mankind: receiving, and loosing, not only for himself, but for all
his Posterity, the Grace which he had: Therefore his fall made both Himself,
Romans 5.12. Romans 5.18. Romans 5.19. Genesis 5.3. Psalm. 51.5.
and all Mankind also, Culpable, Guilty, and Corrupt, etc.

Expl. In Adams sin, three things concurred: First, the Actual
Transgression: Secondly, the Legal Guilt: Thirdly, the Natural Prauity, or
Corruption. These three are conveyed to all Posterity (the Virgin Mary not
excepted) which are by Natural Generation descended of Adam; and that, three
ways. The fault by participation, For as Leui was in Abraham's Loins, so were
we in Adams: Therefore the Apostle says: Romans 5.12.
That in Adam all sinned. The guilt, by imputation; as the son of a Traitor,
loses the honor his father lost by his Treason: Therefore Paul says; Romans
5.18.
By the offense of one the guilt came on all men to condemnation, and this is
meant when we say the sin of Adam is imputed to us. The Corruption by
Generation; therefore it is said: By one Man's disobedience, Romans 5.19.
we are made sinners: So Adam begat Seth, not according to ye image in which
he was first created, but in his Image as he then was, corrupt; that is, a
corrupt father, begat a corrupt son. Genesis 5.3. Ioh. 3.6.
As that which is borne of the Flesh is Flesh: As a serpent engenders a
serpent, so sinful men begets sinful men, according to the Rule: That
which is begotten follows the nature of that which does beget. Neither does
this hinder, because some are regenerated and their sins pardoned; for men
beget not children, as they are regenerate, but as they are men: even as a
circumcised father begets an uncircumcised son: and as clean seed-Corne
comes up with straw and chafe, and other wrecke: so men, though they have
obtained grace, beget children which are borne and conceived in sin.

Use 1. Hence we learn, that children are corrupt, not only by imitation, but
also by nature: not as it was at first created, but as it is now corrupted:
none partaking thereof (Christ only excepted) but being culpable, guilty, and
corrupt thereby.

Use 2. This also admonishes parents, with all care to endeavor to bring up
their children in the instruction and information of the Lord; that as they are
Instruments of their generation, and also of their corruption and guiltiness,
conceived by the same: so they become instruments, by their good Education and
Discipline, of their regeneration by the Spirit of God. Surely these parents
which beget and bring forth children, and care not to teach them the fear of
God, and to instruct them in holiness, both by doctrine and example, bring
forth Children (as much as in them lies) fort the Devil, and not for God, etc.

Q. Tell me more plainly, what is that corruption that you say is conveyed unto
us from Adam?

Ans. It is that which is called Original sin: which is the disorder of the
whole man, and the guiltiness of Adams transgression, Genesis 6.5. Romans 7.18
Psalm. 51.7. Romans 8.7. 1. Cor. 2.14 Iam. 1.14.15. Mat. 15.19
brought upon all mankind by the fall of Adam; whereby they want the
righteousness which ought to be in them, and have that unrighteousness which
ought not to be in them, which makes them inclinable to actual sin, being
the fountain thereof.

Expl. This corruption of Nature is called Original sin, or of beginning;
because it was from the beginning, as soon as ever the fall of Adam was: and
also, because it is one of the first things which is with the child in the
conception: And further, because it is the beginning of all actual sin.
Generally and more largely taken, it signifies the sin of Adam, the guilt
following, and the corruption: but more strictly, it is usually taken, only
for the corruption of nature, which implies the loss of the Image of God; and
in the stead thereof, in the mind, blindness and vanity; in yt will,
stubbornness and rebellion; and in the affections, senses, and the whole body,
grievous disorder, contrary to that that should be, and inclinable to all
evil: Yea, we may not think, that the substance of body and soul, or any
faculties, are impaired; but as in a poisoned Fountain, there is the water,
and the running, only the wholesomnesse is taken away: so only the soundness
of these is lost, and in the room thereof, all unsoundness has taken place.
This corruption, which we thus speak of, has truly the nature of sin, and
makes subject to the wrath of God, as is manifest in Infants, which die,
though they have committed no actual transgression, Romans 5.14
as Paul reasons. And this is further to be remembered, that it is not so
derived unto us, that one has one part of original sin, and another another
part; but it is wholly in every one, and is the Seed and Spawne of all sin,
even of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Use 1. Hence we see, that we are corrupt and guilty of Hell, even in our
mothers womb: being conceived in sin: Psalm. 51.5.
so that a child of a day old is not innocent, though we call them so, in
regard of any actual rebellion in their own persons performed: for there is
in them Sin, or concupiscence, in ye first act, as they say, even as
rauenousnesse in the Lions, or Wolves Whelpe; which also afterward will break
out into the second act in time to come. Even as therefore, we kill an old
Wolf, or Snake, for the hurt it has done, or is ready now to do, and also all
the young ones for the hurtful nature they have, which in time will show it
self: So God may justly cast, even Infants, into Hell, for the corruption of
their nature, and will, all such of them, which he has not, by election of
grace, ordained to eternal life.

Use 2. Seeing there is in every one, an inclination, through corruption, unto
all sin, even that unpardonable one: then, if thou have received grace and
power to master thy corruptions, acknowledge him who has discerned thee: and
when thou see a Drunkard, or any other sinner wallowing in his sin, praise
God; for thou art of the same Mould and Metal, and if thou do not the
like, it is not the goodness of thy nature; but the mercy of God, restraining,
or sanctifying thy corrupt heart. Also, let it teach thee, not to despair of
thy neighbor, or rashly to condemn him, that yet has not obtained grace: For
as thou being, by nature, in the same condemnation, have obtained mercy: so
what know thou, how God will deal with him? Rather pray for him, and
endeavor to bring him to the partaking of that grace which thou have received;
which is indeed a property of true grace.

Use 3. This also teaches a singular point of Wisdom: namely, in the
practice of repentance, to strike at the root, to crucify the flesh, and the
affections, and to destroy the body of Sin: As Physicians, which in the
curing of a disease, remove the cause: or as a man that would destroy Weeds,
pluckes them up Root and Rind; bend all thy force, study and sorrow in
repentance first this way. For from whence are Drunkenness, Whooredome,
Idolatry, Blasphemy, Lying? etc. even from this bitter root, this unclean
fountain of Original sin. 2. Reg. 2.21
As therefore Elisha healed the bitter Waters, by seasoning them at the Spring:
So he that would have a sound and holy life, must labor to be sound within,
and that his heart be truly seasoned with grace: else all is to no purpose.
And here is the difference between Hypocrites, and such as are truly renewed:
they cut off the branches, these the root: they reform the action, these the
affection of sin. Therefore as Sara will have Ismael put away, and the
Bondwoman his mother also: so are we also, to put from us all evil actions,
and to mortify even the affection of sinning, if we would soundly repent.

Q. You speak of Actual and Original sin: what is sin?

Ans. Sin is the transgression of the Law. 1. Ioh. 3.4


Q. What is the Law you speak of?

Ans. The Law which I mean, is the eternal Rule of Righteousness in God,
manifested to man, first in the Creation, afterward repeated by the voice of
God, and written in two Tables of stone by the finger of God, containing divine
precepts what we should be, do, and leave undone, requiring perfect obedience
under the hope of life, Esaias 8.20. Exo. 20.1. etc. Psalm. 19.11 and 119.105
Leui. 18.5 Deu. 27.27
and punishing the least disobedience with eternal death.

Exp. The law is taken sundry ways in the Scripture, here we take it for the
Moral law, contained in the ten Commandments: we call it an eternal Rule of
righteousness in God: because it is a bright beam issuing from the Father of
Lights, containing the sum of his will, concerning his worshiip, and the duty
of man unto him, and to his neighbor. For Gods will is the rule of all
righteousness; the Law the Copy of it: Math. 6.10 and 7.21.
therefore obedience of works, is called diverse times, doing of Gods will, in
his word.

This Law is an eternal rule, because it was always in God, and shall for
ever continue, even unto all eternity, perfectly to be kept in heaven; and also
to distinguish it from the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, which are
abrogated. The Ceremonial in regard of Use and Observation; and the Judicial,
in regard of Obligation: So that, as we may, at no hand, bring into use the
Leuiticall Ceremonies, so we are not bound to the same form of Laws
Political, which were given to the Commonwealth of the Jews. And yet the
general equity of both remains; of the Iudicialls, that sin is to be
punished by the Magistrate: of the Ceremonialls, that God is to be worshipped
in the comeliness himself has commanded: besides the substance of these
Ceremonies, which remains for ever, Jesus Christ.

This Law was at the first printed in Adams heart; the knowledge and love
thereof, being a part of the Image of God in him. A glimmering whereof God, in
his singular wisdom, continued in the heart of man after the fall: namely, so
much as might serve for the continuing of fellowship and society amongst men,
Romans 1.19.2.15.
and which might leave them without excuse. This remnant we usually call the
Law of Nature, not that man's nature is the Author of it, but because it is
imprinted in the same. Afterward the Lord repeated that Law on Mount Sinai, and
writ it in two tables of stone, to convince the stony hearts of men.

Quest. What are the words of this Law?

Ans. The words of this Law are these; Then God spoke all these words, and
said, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee, etc. as it follows in Exodus
chap. 20. from the beginning of the first verse to the end of the sixteenth.

Expli. These ten Laws, or Law Sentences, are the ground and rule of all
righteousness, with the which whatsoever agrees, is good. Whatsoever
disagreeth, is evil: containing the general heads of al duties to God and man
which can be required. Divided into two Tables, the first containing our duty
to God, the sum where of is: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. The second, our duty to our neighbor, the sum whereof is,
Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Also it is divided into ten
Precepts. The manner of giving this law was very solemn and terrible: Deuteronomy.
10.4. Exodus 19.
worthy to be often read, and marked of all. For the meaning of these
Commandments, these general Rules are to be observed: First, they are to be
understood as the Prophets and Apostles have expounded and taught them.
Secondly, In all affirmative Precepts the negative, and in all negative, the
affirmative are to be understood. Thirdly, the manner of speech is to be
observed, as first concerning persons, by, Thou shall, and shall not; is meant
every one; none are exempted: Secondly, concerning things forbidden or
commanded; under one particular named; all of that nature, and kind, with the
signs, causes, and effects, are understood. Fourthly, the Law is spiritual,
not only brideling the hands, but the heart and first motions thereof. Fifthly,
No creature can fully see into the depth of the doctrine, and particulars
contained in it. Sixthly, None can dispense against this Law, but God only,
either in whole, or in part.

Use 1. First, we are to praise God for giving the Law, without the which we
could never attain to the knowledge of sin, and so of our wretchedness
thereby; for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin. Of the which, Romans
3.20.7.7.8.
so long as we are ignorant, we never seek for remedy by Jesus Christ: even
as that man never seeks the Physician, which knows not that he is sick:
Many think as well of themselves, as the Pharise, till the Law come: and then
they appear as black as hell. Therefore when the pride of thine heart
discovers it self, by any vain conceit of thy own worthiness: Look thy
self in the true glass of the law, that thou may be humbled.

Use 2. With all reverence hear, and with all care obey this Law: for if the
gining of it were so terrible; how terrible shall the revenging of the
transgressions thereof be; think you?

Use 3. From the number of the Precepts, being ten, we may profitably
remember, that as they are not many, but few; not confused, but orderly; and
distinct; not long and tedious, but exceeding short: that we should in no wise
be ignorant of them, the Lord having framed them so: that they may be carried
in mind, as readily as the number of our fingers and toes.

Use 4. In as much as the Lord forbids all transgressions, under the names of
the greatest sins of that kind, as all oppression under the name of Murder:
all deceit under the name of Theft; etc. We are carefully to avoid all, even
the least sins, even sinful thoughts: for (whatsoever we think) no sin is
little, but in the account of God; even unjust anger is murder. Extenuate not
therefore, nor minse thy sins, saying; Oh this is a trifle. I would no body
did do worse. I hope I am neither whore nor thief, etc. for all unchaste and
wanton looks, speeches, etc. is whoredom, all covetousness, deceit, and
griping in bargaining, etc. is theft in the sight of God: But rather be humbled
for them by true repentance, that they may be forgiven. For the least evil
thought shall damn a man, without Christ, according to the tenor of this law;
Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in the Law to
do them.

Quest. But is not this Moral Law abrogated by Christ?

Ans. Not, as it is a rule of our life, for so it is eternal, not to be
abolished either here, or in the life to come; Math. 5.17 18.
but in regard of the appurtenances of it: as the Threatenings, and Curse, Romans
6.15. and 7.6. Galat. 3.13 and 4.5.
and the severe exaction of obedience in our persons, unto Justification, it is
abolished to the children of God.

Explic. There are three voices of the law: The first is, Thou shall do this,
and avoid that: This is never to be at an end: but the law this way, as it is
a doctrine commanding good, and forbidding evil, shall by us be most
perfectly fulfilled in heaven, where we shall most perfectly love God and our
neighbor, which is the whole law: and Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.8.
That love never is to be abolished. The 2d voice of the lawis, if thou do
this in thine own person, thou shall live. The third: If thou do it not, or
do the coutrary, thou art accursed: Now the Moral law is abrogated, and
the mouth thereof stopped to the children of God in these two last respects:
The Gospel teaching life and salvation by another, which is Christ; who also
has for us, and in our stead, borne the curse of the law: but of the ungodly
the law still exacteth their personal obedience, and thundreth out the plagues
and judgments of God against them for the want thereof.

Use 1. Christ has purchased thee liberty, but not of the flesh; that thou
should live as thou list, without a law: but only from the necessity of
Justification by the law: and from the curse thereof. But to the obedience thou
art bound to do thy utmost endeavor, more then before, even for the Redemption
sake, which thou have obtained, etc.

Use 2. Hereby also we perceive that Redemption from the Law is a benefit not
to be valued by Gold: We fear satan, and sin, as we have great cause:
But, neither satan without sin, nor sin without the Law, can any way harm
us, for the sting of death is sin, 1. Cor. 15.55.
and the strength of sin is the Law. Whether the Law require perfect
obedience in our own persons, or threaten damnation for the least
disobedience; the voice of it is more unpleasant, then the croking of the Frogs
and Toads in Egypt: more terrible then the noise of thunder, yea then the
roaring of the devils: For even the Iustest men (how much more the wicked and
profane) even the Iustest men, I say, are guilty of many sins, and if there be
no means to quiet the Law, they must needs be subject to the terrors of an
accusing Conscience in this life (which are the very flashings of hel-fire,
alas! who can bear them) and be everlastingly damned in ye world to come. And
besides, in as much as the Law requires perfect obedience, of parts and
degrees even to a hairs breadth: What peace can the best man or woman in the
world have in any thing they do? for they must needs meet with the curse, even
in their best actions: in as much as the best are imperfect, and that which is
imperfect is cursed by the Law. No marvel then that the Papists, and our
Ignorants so do upon the Law, seeking to be justified thereby: Surely, if there
were no other way to Justification, but by the Law, we should all be damned:
but there is another way, which is the obedience of I ESUS CHRIST apprehended
by faith, etc.

Use 3. If thou comfortably seek the benefit of Redemption from the Law in
thy conscience, labor to preserve it, by Faith, Obedience, Repentance, Prayer,
and other holy exercises, and carefully beware of all sin, least thou come
within the dynt of the Law: for sin subjects us unto it: as therefore the
burnt child dreads the fire; and even the Bird that has been once shaken in
the Net, is not easily taken again; so if thou be free, keep thy self so:
Sin brings into bondage. As therefore we read how the Romans. in
detestation of the name of proud Tarquine, who tyrannized over them, banished a
good Citizen, only because hehad that name; even so, if thou truly know
what a precious thing thy Redemption is, it will make thee hate the very
mention (much more the practice) of sin, which frustrateth the same, etc.

Quest. What is then the use of the Law?

Ans. The use of the Law is threefold: First, to restrain corruption from
breaking forth into external transgression: Gal. 3.19. Romans 7.7.8.9.10.11.
Ezech. 20.19. Psalm. 19. and 119.
Secondly, to discover, make worse, and condemn sin: Thirdly, to instruct
us, in the true worship of God, and to rule our lives.

Expl. If a man know not the use of that which he possesses, or have a Jewel,
and know not what it is good for, it is unprofitable to him. So, the Law is
good to him which knows how to use it: 1. Tim. 1.8
And a man may so use it, that it may be most hurtful unto him: as namely, if
he seek Justification by it, which is only by faith in Christ: It may not be
used as a healing Plaster, for it has no such nature; but as a Corrasiue,
that the dead flesh of our proud hearts being eaten out by the sharpness of
the Law; we may be fit to be healed by the Blood of Christ.

First therefore the Law serves, by the threats of it, to restrain us from
sin, and to keep and contain us in obedience: and this is the use which the
Pharisees and Hypocrites, make only of it: being indeed proper to the
unregenerate, and therefore also dealing with the believers, so far as they
are unregenerate: For otherwise, as they are spiritual, they are a Law to
themselves, and the Law not put for them: they doing of themselves, by the
gift of Sanctification, willingly, that which the Law enioynes under the
penalty of the curse; and would also do it, though the Law threatened not: Even
as a mother loves her child of her olune accord, though the Law also require
the same.

Secondly, it serves to discover sin, and to provoke it, and to damn it: The
first and last of these three, being natural to the Law, the second the effect
of the law, not of it self, but through our corrupt nature, which takes
occasion by the Law, which is good, and forbids evil, to be the worse: Now in
these respects the Law is said to work anger, Romans 4.15. 1. Cor. 3.7.
and to be the ministry of death.

Thirdly, the Law serves for a doctrine, to instruct us; not what to do to be
justified; but to show us wherein stands our duty to God and man, and what to
do to show our selves thankful for our Justification by Jesus Christ.

Use 1. Here we may take knowledge of the vileness of our Nature; which is
the worse for that, for which it should be the better, turning that into death
which was ordained for life: For even as a corrupt stomach, turns good meat
into the nature of the disease; so till grace come by Christ, we are the worse
for the Law, longing after that which is forbidden. Even as there was but one
Tree forbidden, and that must Eve have or none: So is it with us, our
corruption judging stolen waters sweeter then those of our Fountain. For as a
River, when the course of it is stopped, it rises and swells against the
impediment: So does our vile nature against the Law, being so much the more
evil, by how much the more the Law commands us to be good. This should serve
exceedingly to humble us, and to seek for the renouation of the Spirit, that
we may love the Law and obey it: For here is the weakness of the Law, it
shows that which is good, but gives no power to do it: But the Gospel
(teaching us better then the Law) learnes us over the same lesson again, and
gives power also to do the same.

Use 2. Here also we see how necessary the Preaching of the Law is to prepare
men for Christ; though it have no skill or power to apply him: Even as the
Needle is necessary, to make a way for the thread whereby the rent is sown up;
though it be the third that fastheth the piece together, not the Needle, and
without the Needle the Third cannot do it: Even so it is the Gospel which
blesses the Conscience with Peace; but first the Law must make way for the
same. For even as the Land is not fit to receive the Seed, till it be torn
up with the Plough: So neither are we fit to receive Grace unto Life, till we,
being humbled by the Law, be made to see what need we have of a Redeemer. Of
this use of the Law we have example in David. 2. Sam. 12.1.15. Act. 2.37.
Examine then how thou came by the persuasion thou have of grace by Christ,
if thou were never under the hammer of the law, and bruised by it, thou art not
healed by Christ: but if thou came by thy comfort this way, after an
unfeigned humiliation by the law, and now thou endeuourest, and have respect to
all the commandments thereof, then thou may have assurance of the goodness
of thy estate, otherwise thou may justly doubt of it.

Q. Can you perfectly keep the law?

Ans. I confess that no man living is able to perform that perfect obedience
which the law requires. James 3.2. Psa. 143.2.


Expl. Adam in his innocence was able to have performed perfect obedience to
the law, both in regard of perfection of parts, and also of degrees; which in
the state of corruption is impossible, even to the regenerate, in their own
persons, in this life, though in the life to come, they shall most perfectly
fulfill the same in their own persons, when the Image of CHRIST shall
perfectly be renewed in them.

Now if any should say, that it is unmeet to think, that God should punish for
the breach of that law which is impossible to be kept: It is answered, that the
law was possible to man, as God made him; though it be impossible, as man made
himself. As justly then, as a man may require his debt of him, who through his
own unthriftiness, has made himself unable to pay it: Even so may God most
justly require that of us, unto the which he did enable us, though we wantonly
have dis-inabled our selves. Wherefore, if at any time we read, that ye Saints
are said to be perfect, and to keep the law: it is not to be understood of
perfection, or obedience legally taken, according to the strict rigor of the
law; but Euangellically, or according to the mitigation of the Gospel: which
is, first, when the party obeying is in Christ; in whom all our imperfections
are expiated, and our spiritual sacrifices accepted. 1. Pet. 2.5.
Secondly, when the heart is upright, and sincerely affected to all the
Commandments of GOD. Thirdly, in comparison of others: as Noah, a perfect and
just man: not simply, but in his generation: as Judah calls Thamar more
righteous, though sinful enough. Fourthly, when we aim at perfection, the
Lord in mercy accounting us, not as we are, according to the strict rule of his
justice, but as we would be through the work of his Spirit in our hearts.

If any shall object, that the works of the Saints are the works of the
Spirit; therefore perfect: It is safely answered, that if they were the works
of the Spirit alone, it were true: but they are so the works of the Spirit,
that they are our works also, and savor of our corruption: as pure water is
soyled by passing through a filthy channel; and good Wine (as it were) tainted
by the fustinesse of the Caske: And further, our actions are to be reputed
such, as are the next natural beginnings in us from whence they proceed: which
are an understanding, but in part enlightened; and will, and affections, but in
part sanctified by the Spirit.

Use 1. Trust not in thine own works: for though they may be in some respect
good, yet in other respect they have evil mingled withal: so that thou have
much cause, or more, when thou have done thy best, to ask pardon for that is
wanting, then to boast of that thou have performed, etc.

Use 2. Persuade thy heart to endeavor to please him with thy best service, who
so graciously is content through Christ, to accept of thy weak obedience, etc.

Q. None then can keep the law: what do they deserve which break it?

Ans. They which in the least manner break that holy Law, deserve the wrath
and curse of God: Deu. 27.26 Gal. 3.10. Romans 2.9. and 6.23.
that is, all plagues, and judgments of body and soul, in this world, and in
the world to come.

Use 1. If one sin deserve Hell, then what have thou just cause to fear, who
art guilty of innumerable sins? How shall thou escape under many sins, when
the least sin is so heavy and heinous, that it cannot be pardoned without
the heart blood of Jesus Christ? etc.

Use 2. Hate sin, which brings with it the curse, yea all curses: and if thy
vile nature takes pleasure in any sin, lay the momentany pleasure thereof
with ye eternal pain that follows it, and consider wisely: Is sin sweet?
But Death and the Curse are bitter. Covetousness, Usury, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Revenge, may please the flesh; but know thou not, that they
will be bitter in the end? Will thou rather separate thy self forever from
God, and be accursed, then leave thy sins, and walk in the commandments of
God? Who can dwell with continual burnings, and endure that fire? etc.

Q. We are all sinners, and deserve the curse, what means is there to be
freed from it?

Ans. Whosoever are justified in the sight of God, by the obedience of Christ,
Romans 5.1.2.3.4.5. Romans 8.1. Gal. 3.13.
through Faith, are sure to escape the curse of the Law.

Q. What is justification in the sight of God?

Ans. Justification is the sentence of God; whereby, as a Judge, for the
righteousness of another, that is of Christ, he freely forgiueth the sins of
the believing sinner, Romans 3.21.22.23.24.25.26.
and imputes the righteousness of Christ unto him, for his own glory, and
the sinners eternal salvation.

Expl. For the understanding of this wonderful point, it must be very well
observed, that Justification, or to Justify, signifies not to make Just, by
expelling the evil quality in us, and infusing that which is good: but always
in this matter it is taken iudicially, being a term, or word taken from the
bench of the Judge, and signifies by way of sentence, to pronounce a person
arraigned, to be clear, quit and guiltless, as appears: He that iustifies
the wicked, Pro. 17.15.
and condemns the just: both these are an abhominatio^ to the Lord. Here, by
the opposition of Justifying and Condemning, Psalm. 14 3.2 Romans 8.33 etc.
it is manifest, that Justification is iudicially taken: for it is no
abomination to make an evil man good: so also is the word taken.

For the understanding then of the answers to the two last questions, conceive
thus. Thou have broken the Law, and art a grievous sinner; Thou must answer it
before the judgment seat of God, the sentence of the Law is: Thou must be
damned for thy sins: Thy Conscience asks how thou shall escape? The answer
is: There is no way, unless the Judges favor may be obtained to justify
thee, that is, to absolve thee by his sentence. Which Judge (who is God, from
whose sentence there is no appeal) if he shall justify thee, that is,
pronounce thee to be guiltless and Just, and so acquit thee, then thy
Conscience has Peace.

Use 1: Diligently study this point, which is the chief Tower (as it were) of
Christian Religion, against all Gentilisme, and Superstitions: Which if it be
not rightly understood, it is not possible to preserve the purity of doctrine
in other points: Yea, some Papists have confessed (and it is most true) that
this doctrine, Pighius.
razeth the very foundation of all Popery: their Idolatrous Sacrifice of the
Mass, their groundless Purgatory, their superstitious praying to Saints, and
for the dead, etc. Being no more able to stand before this doctrine, sincerely
taught and understood, then the Dagon of the Philistines was able to stand
before the holy Arc of Israel. This is the sum of the Bible, the ground of
our peace and assurance. It were therefore a very gross thing, that any
Christians of the years of discretion, should be ignorant hereof.

Use 2. It is the greatest and hardest matter in ye world, for a sinner to be
justified in the sight of God. Many think it to be a slight and easy thing:
and therefore they neither fear him, nor seriously seek forgiveness. But
consider thou, that thou must be arraigned, and tried, before the judgment
seat of that God, who is a consuming fire: in whose sight the Heavens are
unclean, who will not favor iniquity, who cannot be deluded, or deceived; who
cannot retract, and reuerse the sentence of condemnation manifest in the law,
without satisfaction: for the law accusing shows that sentence already
written with the finger of God: and thy conscience confesses all: Consider
this, and then tell me what it is to be Justified: How shall thou escape? Even
David, a man beloved of God, and after his own heart, when he considers
this, cries out, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy
fight shall no flesh be justified. And again, If thou shall mark iniquities,
who shall stand? namely, in judgment. What then can thou say, why thou
should not be damnned? What shall thy conscience plead? Guilty thou art, and
God must deal justly. To whom will thou go? We will go even to Jesus Christ,
our Lamb, slain from the beginning of the world: Jehovah our righteousness,
our surety, who has perfectly fulfilled the Law for us, and fully paid, and
patiently suffered all things which can be exacted of us, or were to be
suffered by us. Whose righteousness is ours (if we believe) even as
effectually, as if it had been done in our own persons: and for this only is
a sinner justified, that is pronounced to be just before God, This if thou know
it, happy art thou if thou feel it, etc.

Quest. You said that we are instified by the righteousness of another; How
can that be? Can I live by another man's Soul? or be learned by the learning
that is in an other?

Ans. I verily believe, that the righteousness, for the which I am justified
in the sight of God, is not in me, Iere. 23.6. 1. Cor. 1.30 2. Cor. 5.21 Phil.
3.9.
but in Jesus Christ my Redeemer and Surety.

Explic. Those things, though they seem hard, yet are easy enough to him
which is willing to learn and believe the Scriptures, and does not desire to
make his faith subject to his reason. We must then know that Christ is our
Surety: Hebr. 7.2^
and look; as the debtor is discharged by the payment performed by the Surety,
and such payment made, is imputed to tho Debtor, and reckoned as if he had
paid it himself: So God in sentence giving, imputes unto us that which our
Surety has done or suffered for us, and (whatsoever we are in our selves)
respects us as if it had been done by us, and so discharges us.

If any shall object, and say; How can I be righteous by another
Righteousness? Suppose Christ's? Why may I not as well be said to live by the
humane Soul of Christ, as to be instified by his Righteousness. The answer
is ready: That those two things are not like, as they are supposed to be:
Because the humane Soul of Christ was not given him, or appointed to this end
to enliue, and inform my body: but the Righteousness of Christ was appointed
by God to this end, that I thereby should be accounted righteous before him:
For the quality, property, or nature of any thing, whereby it is apt and fit
unto this, or unto that, is from, and depends upon the appointment of God, the
GOD of Nature: the affection of the Creature, whereby it naturally produces
any effect, being the effect or creation of God: So that if you ask, Why does
the Sun shine: the Fire burn? etc. I answer; Because GOD has appointed
them so to do: which appointment of his is their very nature: As then it is
natural for the Sun to shine, and the fire to burn, and that I should be
warmed by the heat, which is in the fire, because God has so appointed: So
also it is as natural an effect, for the righteousness of Christ to justify
Believers, Because God has appointed it to that end and purpose. For it falls
not out at adventure, that Christ's Righteousness should be ours; but God in his
Eternal Counsel, appointed Christ to be our Surety, and for his
righteousness sake, to accept of us, as if we had been perfitly righteous in
our selves: Romans 3.25 26.
Therefore we may be bold to trust to this, in as much as the Scriptures
teach, that Christ was appointed, and his righteousness given to Believers to
this very end; that in, and by it, their sins might be forgiven, and they
pronounced righteous in him. 1. Cor. 1.30


Moreover, we believe that Christ dyed: What was that which made him according
to the counsel of his Father subject to death? Even our sins, which were
imputed to him. If therefore we believe that the sins which were in us, and
not subiectiuely in him, did make him die: why should we doubt, but that the
righteousness which is in him, and not subiectiuely in us, should instifie us
before GOD, 2. Cor. 5.21
as is plain. He a sinner by the imputation of our sins, we righteous by
the imputation of his righteousness.

Further, consider this: The first Adam was the root, and in the stead of all
mankind, all of us partaking of his flesh and blood by natural generation.
The second Adam (which is Christ) is the root, the head, and instead of all
the Elect, who are made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, by a
supernatural grace through faith. Ephe. 5.30
If then by the first Adams sin, we be all sinful and guilty, why should not
believers, by the second Adams righteousness be righteous, and acquitted? it
being no less the appointment of God (as has been said) that Christ our
head should supernaturally convey his righteousness to Believers, than it was
his appointment, that Adam naturally should convey his sin and corruption
unto us by generation. Romans 5.12.
This is plain.

Understand then in a word. The guilty sinner is arraigned before Gods
judgment seat: Christ his Advocate, in the behalf of the sinner, pleades his
own (not the sinners) righteousness both active and passive, by the covenant,
agreement, and consent of the Judge: Then the Judge (according to his own
appointment and covenant made) for gives the sinner believing, and imputes
the righteousness of Christ his Surety unto him: And this is the
Justification of a sinner, which is the forgiveness of sins, and the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ, as further appears, Psalm. 32.1,
2. compared with Romans 4.6* 7, 8. If any shall say; How are we justified freely,
when so precious a thing as the righteousness of Christ is paid for it: It is
to be answered that whatsoever it cost Christ (as it cost him full dear) yet
to us Justification is free.

Use Build, and stablish thy Conscience on this Doctrine, in as much as it
shows such a way of justifying sinners, wherein the exalt Justice and
bottomless mercy of God met together, and are declared. God must be just;
therefore our sins must be punished: and he must be merciful, or else we
cannot be saved. If our selves in our selves suffer for our sins, where is his
mercy? if he forgive us without Satisfaction; where is his Justice? Here is
then that mystery, which Reason cannot conceive; the wisdom of man could
never find out; into the which the very Angels desire to look: Gods justice
to the uttermost farthing satisfied in Christ: His mercy unspeakably declared
to us for his sake. Thus the beginning and end of our salvation is in God: who
found out alone, this way so admirable: and who effectually applies it to us
by the Eternal Spirit; to whom be praise for ever, Amen.

Quest. It may be conceived, that there may be such a Righteousnsse, whereby
the Person that works it may be justified, but is it possible, that the
Righteousness of one, should suffice for the Justification of thousands, even
all that shall be saved?

Ans. Yes, it is very possible, if we consider the worthiness of the Person
which wrought it, which is Jesus Christ.

Quest. What manner rf Person then is Jesus Christ? describe this plainly unto
me.

Ans. I believe that Jesus Christ, John 1.14. Hebr. 1.3. John 1.1. Romans 9.5. 1.
Ioh. 5.20 Gene. 3.15 1. Tim. 2.5 Genesis 3.15. John 1.14. Hebr. 1.9. Deu. 18.15
Mat. 13.57 Hebr. 5.5, John 18.36 Matt. 21.5. Luke 1.32. Reu. 17.14. Philip.
2.8, 6.
is the natural and only begotten Son of God. the second Person in the holy
Trinity, very God, and very Man, and that in one person; anointed, to be our
Prophet, Priest, and King. Who was humbled for us to the death of the Cross,
and was exalted for us to the right hand of his Father.

Expli. The true knowledge of Christ consists in the knowledge of these two
points: Of his Person, and of his Office. Of his Person these three things,
must necessarily be believed according to the Scriptures. First, that he is
that only true God.

Secondly, that he is very man, partaking of our flesh and blood, with all
general (not personal) infirmities of our Nature, being in all things like
unto us, yet without sin: Heb 2.14. and 4.15. 1. Pet. 1.19 and 2.22.
And therefore we read that he was hungry, thirsty, weary, etc. And if you
ask how he could partake of our nature, and yet have no sin? you must
remember, that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the virgin
Mary. The Holy Ghost sanctifying a part of the substance of the Virgins Luke 1.
and 2
Body, to be the Body of Christ; so that we believe he was not begotten by man,
by whom corruption and sin is propagated and derived unto us.

Thirdly, that he is God and Man in one Person; figured by the Arc, which was
of Gold and precious Wood that would not rot; noting by ye Gold ye Deity of
Christ, and by the precious Wood, his Humanity without sin: This Personal
union of these two Natures in Christ, was thus. The Son of God, being from
everlasting a Person, subsisting in the Holy and undivided Trinity, did assume,
or take, into the Vnty of his Person, a Humane Nature, consisting of Body and
Soul, so soon as ever it began to be, having no Subsistence out of his
Person, but being destitute of all Personality in it self, so that it becomes
the very Body and Soul of the Son of God; and whatsoever is proper to either
Nature (which are not by this means, either in Essence, or Operations,
confounded) is indifferently and truly spoken of the Person: As to make it
plain to the simple.

In our selves, understanding and knowledge, are effects, and works of the
Soul: eating, sleeping, etc. are works proper to the Body: Neither does the
Soul eat, or sleep, or the Body understand or know: Yet we say well and
truly, that Peter or Paul, consisting of this body and soul, understand,
know, eat, steep, etc. because these two Natures, the body and soul are
united in their person: And for this cause, look what is well, or ill done, by
the body, or any part of it; or by the soul, or any part of it, is accounted
to the whole Person, making the Person guilty or not guilty, good or bad: As if
the Tongue blasphemeth, it is said the Person blasphemeth: or if there be evil
motions in the mind, yet the whole Person is guilty. So (in some sort) is it
in this Personal Union of these two Natures of Christ. As: To know all things,
to be present every where, are Proprieties of his Divine Nature: To keep the
Law, to die, and to bleed, are Proprieties of the Humane Nature of Christ. Now
we may not say that the Humane Nature of Christ knows all things, is
omnipotent, etc. Nor that the Divine Nature is obedient, bleedeth, dies, etc.
And yet in regard of the Personal Union of these two Natures in Christ: we say
that the Person which has these two Natures (which is Christ the Son of God)
knows all things, is present every where, bleedeth, dies, etc. and look
what is done, or suffered, by either of the Natures, is truly done (and so
accomited) by the whole Person: So that if you (...) who fulfilled the Law, who
dyed for us? we may say, the second Person in the Trinity, even God; though not
according to his Divine, but Humane Nature, as speaks the Holy Ghost notably.
Act. 20.28.
God by his Own Blood, purchased the Flock of his Elect. Whereby I believe,
and that most infallibly and truly, that whatsoever Christ did for my
salvation, is Gods own deed, even the immediate work of the second Person in
the Trinity.

Yet here one thing must be remembered; that though the body and soul of
Peter, make the person of Peter, yet the Humane and Divine Nature of Christ
make not his Person: for he was a Person from everlasting, and cannot be a
Humane Person, but is still a Divine Person; though he could not be a Mediator,
or execute that Office without the Humane Nature so assumed. This is that
wonderful Mystery of our Savior JESUS CHRIST'S Incarnation: Wherein concurred
(propounded to our Faith, not to our Reason) three the greatest Miracles that
ever were. First, that a Virgin conceived and brought forth a Child,
remainings Virgin. Secondly, that Adams flesh, and Adams sin were parted.
Thirdly, and principally, this unsearchable Mystery of the Personal Union of
the Godhead and Manhood of Christ.

Quest. But was it necessary, that our Mediator should be God and Man: and that
in one Person, as you have declared?

Ans. Yes verily, for by this means, he could die for us, and overcome death,
and deserve for us by his obedience, the pardon of our sins, and eternal
life.

Expli. Two things necessarily required that our Mediator should be God:
First, the greatness of the evil, to the which we were subject: Secondly, the
greatness of the good that we stood in need of. Our evil was foure-folde.
First, the heinousness of sin. Secondly, the anger of God. Thirdly, the
power of death. Fourthly, the tyranny of the Devil. Our good which we wanted
Four fold also. First, the restoring of the Image of God. Secondly, the
pardon of sin. Thirdly, deliverance from Death and Satan. Fourthly, eternal
life. But to take away the Evil, Mark 2.7 Hos. 13.14. Revel. 1.18 Zach 3.2.
To. 16.20 Psalm. 51.10 Romans 6.23. etc. To. 5.17, 18 Hebr. 2.14
and bestow the Good, none is able to do but God. Therefore it was necessary
that our Mediator should be God. Two Reasons also there are why he must
necessarily be man; first, the Justice of God required, that in that nature
which offended, satisfaction should be made: secondly, that he might have
something to offer, which could not be his Godhead: therefore he must be Man:
Every high Priest must offer somewhat: therefore a Body was ordained him: Hebr.
8.3. Heb. 10.5. Hebr. 9.26
that he might offer himself.

Two reasons also may be alleged why he must be God and Man in one person:
First, that he might be a fit Mediator between God and Man; as it were,
indifferent, and equally affected to either side: for an Vmpiere, or Wards-man
may not be partial. If he had been only God, we might have thought, that he
would not enough have respected our misery: If he had been only Man, not
enough the justice of God. Therefore he is to be God and Man: dear unto both,
and accounting both dear unto him: careful that Gods justice be not
impeached, and that our misery be relieved. Secondly, that the works performed
in the flesh of the Son of God, might be of an infinite price to satisfy for
our sins, by which an infinite Majesty was offended: which could not be, if
the Person undertaking our Redemption, had not been God and Man in one Person.
He was Man, that he might have somewhat to offer: God in the same person, that
such offering might be sufficient. For the work of our Redemption was performed
by the Manhood, but the virtue and merit was from the Godhead.

And here we have found out the Reason why the Righteousness of Christ should
be of merit sufficient, and effectual for thousand thousands, even all the
Elect; because it is the righteousness, and obedience, not of a mere Man, but
of God and Man in one person: even of God himself, whose goodness and
righteousness must needs be as himself, of infinite merit, forre and virtue.
The righteousness then of Christ, has this aptitude, or nature, to make all
believing sinners righteous; because it was so appointed of God. It has power
and sufficienty is to do, because it is the righteousness of God.

Use 1. To give thanks unto God for the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and our redemption by him: and to take delight to grow in the knowledge of it,
according to the Scriptures: For indeed, how can he be a Christian, or Godly,
who knows not his Savior, nor the great mystery of Godliness concerning
him, 1. Tim. 3.16. Ioh. 8.24. 1. Ioh. 5.10 Ibid. 11.12
as it is called. Nay, wholly to be ignorant thereof, or to deny it, is to deny
our sins, make God a liar, and to loose eternal life.

Use 2. Is Christ God? Then tremble all ye profane wretches, which despise
his Word and Sacraments: yea, let all such tremble, who tear his Body, Blood
and Passion by their blasphemous oaths: for he is God; yea, a jealous and
revenging God: yea, a consuming fire. But let all such as fear him, and trust
in him, be comforted; yea, let them be merry, and joyful: for he is God, most
true, and able to perform all his precious promises of salvation: And though
shame, disgrace, rebukes of men, and cruel persecutions follow the profession
of his Name, and Gospel, shrink not, neither be ashamed: he is able, and will
both bear thee out, assist thee, and reward thee in his Kingdom. Remember
Paul; 2. Tim. 1.12
For the Gospel (says he) I suffer, but I am not ashamed: for I know in whom
I have believed; and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him unto that day. Is Christ man? Then be comforted thou
which art afflicted in body, or mind, which beleeuest: For we have a high
Priest, which is touched with our infirmities, Heb. 2.17.18. and 4.15.16.
and is full of compassion, who was afflicted, who suffered, and was tempted,
that he might be able to succor them which are tempted. Is Christ God and Man
in one Person? Then let thy soul by Faith rest on his obedience, as
sufficient; yea, of infinite price for thy Redemption, etc.

Qu. I conceive in some measure (I thank God) the exceeding worthiness of the
person of Christ, and that his righteousness is of a sufficient merit for all
the Elect: yea, (if it had so pleased God) for a thousand worlds, but what is
this Righteousness of Christ for the which we are justified?

Ans. It is (to speak properly) his actual obedience, whereby he fulfilled
the will of his Father, both in perfect keeping of the Law, and in voluntary
suffering the punishment due to our finnes. Romans 5.19 Phil. 2.8.


Explic. The Righteousness of Christ is two fold, uncreated, essential to
the Godhead, which is incommunicable and cannot be imputed: and created, being
either the holiness of his nature (which improperly I would not deny to be
imputed) or, Hebr. 7.26
of his actions, which is the actual obedience spoken of in the Answer; which
properly is imputed; and comprehends his holy life and whole humiliation,
under diverse heads delivered in the Creed. Of the which I will not in
particular inquire, because there are diverse Expositions of these things in
every man's hand, so plentiful and excellent, that the Authors seem to have
left nothing further to be spoken therein.

Use. It is the righteousness of Christ, for the which only we are justified in
the sight of God: not for our own inherent righteousness, either in whole, or
in part; because it is imperfect, and will not endure the rigor of the Law, nor
is proportionable to the justice of God, which is to be satisfied: yea, the
maintaining of Justification by works, ouer-turneth the foundation of
Religion, which whosoever obstinately and finally holds, cannot possibly be
saved.

Q. How shall I be made partaker of this righteousness of Christ?

Ans. We are made partakers of the righteousness of Christ by faith only.
Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 20.28. Act. 26.18. Romans 3.22 28. and 4.6. Gal. 2.16. etc.


Expl. As the righteousness of our own works is not that for the which we
are justified: so neither is it, or the sacrifice of the Mass, the Instrument
of applying the obedience of Christ unto us, but only Faith: And faith is that
instrument, not for any inward dignity or merit of it, neither as it is a
quality, or good work; nor because it has Charity joined with it, but because
it receives and embraces Christ. Ioh. 1.12. Romans 1.17
And therefore we are justified by Faith, or through Faith, but not for Faith.
When therefore we say, Faith justifies, it is meant Correlatiuely, or in
regard of the object which it apprehends; the Righteousness of Christ being
hence called, the Righteousness of Faith. Even as it is the Treasure which
makes rich, the hand only receives it: even so our Faith receives the
Treasure of the Righteousness of Christ, whereby we are justified, and
enriched to eternal life. And because Faith only has this property, and
power, to receive the righteousness of Christ, therefore we say, that we are
justified by Faith only: not so to be understood, as that we exclude Love, and
good Works from Faith, but from the act of justifying and receiving the
promise: for though Faith and good Works agree together in the conversion, and
renouation, and obedience of a Christian, as the life, and the actions of life,
the Tree and the Fruit, the Cause and the Effect: Yet in the particular of
justification, they are as contrary as fire and water, Romans 10.3 and 11.6.
and destroy one another.

The manner of our Justification by Faith, is thus: God in the promise of the
Gospel, offers the Righteousness of Christ, and withal in the hearts of
his children by his Spirit, works a power whereby they receive it, which is
Faith, not only believing the truth of the promise in general, but in
particular, applying to themselves; which Faith, by the sentence of God is then
imputed to us for Righteousness to Justification.

Use. We are here admonished specially to labor for this same Faith; without
which, Christ dyed indeed, and was righteous, but not for us. The excellency of
Faith cannot sufficiently be expressed: By this the Word and Sacraments are
profitable unto us, our Prayers available by this: By this our obedience is
acceptable, we please God, we stand, we overcome the world, resist the Devil;
and through this we are made partakers of the righteousness of Christ, and are
kept to the salvation promised. No marvel then, if it be called, 1 Pet. 1.7.
More precious then gold: For the invaluable righteousness of Jesus Christ,
which is not attained by silver and gold, or precious pearls, is made ours by
faith: How therefore should we prize it when we have it? When we want it, how
should we seek it? It is wrought by hearing the word, confirmed by prayer,
the use of the Sacraments, and true obedience.

Q. Tell me then what is Faith?

Ans. Faith is the gift of God, wrought by his Holy Spirit in the hearts of the
elect, by the Ministry of the Word ordinarily, whereby they take knowledge of
the doctrine of salvation, Ioh. 3.8. Ephesians. 2.8. Tit. 1.1. Romans 10.9
are persuaded it is true, and that it belongs to them in particular, and
wholly rely thereon:

Expli. As all other good gifts, so Faith is of God: Iam. 1.17.
In which we are to consider three things: First, Knowledge: Secondly, Consent.
Thirdly, Confidence: Which three are requisite to this Justifying Faith. The
first may be without the second: the first and second without the third: but
the third cannot be without the first and second. A man may know that which he
belieues not to be true: and a man may believe a thing to be true, which yet
he may be persuaded belongs not to himself, and therefore relies not upon it.
Diverse wicked men know many things in the Scriptures, which they (like
wretches) believe not to be true: and many believe that to be true, which they
make not their own by application; even as many Hypocrites, and the Devils
themselves, for they go thus far; but Gods children go further: they know
the promise, believe it to be true, and upon good grounds are persuaded it
belongs to themselves: from whence comes confidence. If the Devil could do
this: or if Judas could have done this, they might be saved.

There are then to be observed, three kinds of Faith: First, Historical: to
know and acknowledge the truth of the Bible: Secondly, Temporary: when there is
also a persuasion (but not grounded) that the promise belongs to us. The third,
True Justifying Faith: when unto our knowledge is joined acknowledgement, and
to this good and warrantable persuasion, from whence comes confidence.

And this last kind of faith has three properties: First, it is certain:
Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 11.1. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
yet there may be, and are doubts: as the man in the Gospel, Lord I believe,
help my unbelief: but doubt comes from the flesh: certainty from faith,
which in the end ouer-cometh. Secondly, Luke 22.32 Romans 11.29. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
it continues; yet it may be ecclipsed, as it were, raked up in the ashes, and
wonderfully shaken, but not totally and finally extinguished and lost. Romans
5.1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.8. Gal. 5.6. Iam. 2.17. 1. Tim. 1.6
Thirdly, it is lively and working: inwardly and out wardly.

Use 1. Deceive not thy self thou may be learned in the History of the
Bible, in the grounds of Religion, in Controversies, and yet thou may foward
true Faith: for so far do the Devils go, which are irrecouerably dammed: The
Devils believe and tremble. Iam. 2.19.
And therefore, whatsoever Papists, or (...) object, hold thou it to be no
presumption to go beyond the Devil and Reprobates in believing, if thou
would be saved.

Use 2. Here is comfort to those of poor estate, if they believe.
Justification is by Faith only; and Faith is the gift of God, on the which the
poorest is as (...) as the richest: yea, and in the bestowing of it, there is
no respect of persons with God: The spirit blows wherein (...) And many times
the Lord passes by Rich, Noble and Mighty, and honors the poor and
despised. In the things of this world, he that is rich, has all, (she poor
has the least, or no part: but it is Faith that obtains favor with God. A
King not prefected to have part in the righteousness of Christ, because a
King, if he want faith; nor a Beggar rejected because a Beggar, if he have
faith, etc.

Use 3. True faith iustifies thee before God by the righteousness of Christ:
see that thou justify thy Faith to be true, by the works of righteousness
and true obedience before men, and to thy own conscience, etc.

Quest. You said that Christ was anointed to be our Prophet, Priest, and King:
What meant you by it?

Ans. I meant the three Offices of Christ: First, the Office of his
Prophetship, whereby he has plainly opened to us the counsel of his Father,
Deu. 18.18 Esa. 61.1. Mat. 17.5.
concerning our salvation. 2d. The Office of his Priesthood, whereby he has
fully satisfied the Justice of God for us, and makes intercession at the right
hand of his Father; Psa. 110.4. Heb. 7.5.
3d. his Kingly Office, whereby he gives us his Spirit, and by the same
gouernes us, protecteth us from our enemies, Psalm. 2.6.
and brings us to Eternal Life.

Expl. In the times of the old Testament, three sorts of persons were
Anointed, Prophets, Kings, and Priests: 1. Reg. 19.16. Ex. 30.30.
Which was a Type or Figure of the anointing of Christ, which title,
signifies Anointed, and is a name of his Person of Mediatorship, Dan. 9.25.26.
not of either of his Natures. He was called so, not ye he was anointed with
material Mile; but as Prophets, Priests, and Kings, were by ye anointing,
deputed to such Offices, and fitted for the same: So Christ, took not those
Offices by intrusion, but was anointed, that is appointed, and also of his
Father by the Spirit fitted for the same.

When you read that he is called, A Shepe-heard, The Preacher of Peace, A
Witness; these note his Prophet-ship: when he is called Jesus, Savior,
Redeemer, Mediator, Lamb, Sacrificer, Intercessor, Advocate, etc. these note
his Priesthood: And when he is called, Lord, King of Righteousness, King of
Kings: These note his Kingly Office.

His Prophet-ship is in the teaching of his people, in his own Person, while
he lived on the earth, and in the continuance of the heavenly doctrine to his
Church by the Ministry ordaind, to the end of the world. His Priesthood
implies two things: First, The satisfaction performed to his Father, by his
obedience: even to the death of the Cross: Secondly, his Intercession, making
request for us at the right hand of his Father; Romans 8.33. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24.
not by bowing his Body, but by appearing before his Father for us, presenting
the Merit of his Obedience, and willing that it may always be effectual for
the reconciliation of his Elect. The Authority of his Kingly Office may be
either universally considered, by which all creatures are subject to his Rule
even the devils: or specially, whereby he effectually calls his Elect,
delivers them from the devil, justifies them, continues them in grace,
confounds their enemies, in the last day glorifieth them, and whereby he will
condemn the Devils and Reprobates.

Use 1. Is Christ our Prophet? Mat. 17.5.
then Here him, Rest in the doctrine he has delivered; respect not
Revelations, or Traditions, or any thing that agrees not therewith: Yea, Gal.
1.8.
if an Angel from heaven teach otherwise let him be accursed.

Is Christ, our Priest, who has taken upon to satisfy for thee, and to make
intercession for thee in heaven? Then trust neither to Saint, Angel, or thy
self: but trust perfectly on his Grace, 1. Pet. 1.13.
and be of good comfort, for he is a High Priest which is full of compassion,
and it is his Office, and he is able perfectly to save thee, seeing he lives
for ever to make intercession for thee. Heb. 7.25.


Is Christ the King of his Church? Yes of heaven and earth: then let the (...)
of the earth be confounded. For Christ is King, who shall stay all (...) before
(...) face, Luke 19.27.
that refuse to be (...) his Word and Spirit: (...) in her King for evermore,
(...).

Use 2, Learn here why thou art called a Christian: Thou art called so of
Christ, because all the Elert tereme of his Annoynting; that is of his Spirit:
Heb. 1.9.
He was anointed with the Oil of Gladness, above his Fellows: Ioh. 3.34.
For he received the Spirit not by measures and to this end, Ioh. 1.16.
that we of his Fullness might receive Grace for Grace. So that as the
ointment powered upon the head of Aaron, ran down to the skirts of his
clothing; so we (...) of the (...) of Christ, and of him are called
Christians* by the which is meant, that we are made Priests and Kings to God;
therefore called a Royal Priest hood. Reu. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.9.
If this were well understood, and men would examine their Christianity by
this, it would soon appear, that many are not true Christians which glory in
the Name. If thou be a Christian, then where is thy knowledge, whereby thou
art as a Prophet to thy self, and to others. Gross Ignorance cannot stand
with this Title: If thou be a Christian, then thou art a Priest, and a King:
If a Priest; then thou must offer Sacrifice, Prayers, Alines, yea thy Body and
Soul to the service of God. If a King; then thou must rule and govern thy
passions, affections, thy self, according to the rule of the Word: If thou
do not thus: if thou never, or seldomo prayest; if thou art without
compassion toward the needy; if thou be profane in thy life, not sanctifying
thy body and soul by Faith and Obedience to God but by drunkenness, swearing,
filthiness, cruelty, pride, lying, etc. to the devil: If thou mournest not
for thy corruptions, and resists them; but yeeldest cowardly to the wicked
motions of thine own vile mind, being a very slave to sin and the devil;
then thou must needs conclude against thy self, that thou art no Priest and
King to God, and so no good Christian in very deed, whatsoever thou esteemest
of thy self?

Quest. Is there nothing else necessary to be known concerning Christ?

Ans. Yes, as namely, his Resurrection, Ascension, Sitting at the right hand of
his Father, and his coming to Judgment, which things may well be referred to
the Kingly Office of Christ.

Expl. Christ teaches us as a Prophet, saves us by his Merit as a Priest,
and makes his heavenly Doctrine and Obedience Effectual, as he is a King and
to this his Efficacy are those seuerals in the answer to be referred: of the
which there are plentiful expositions extant; and therefore I spare the
particular opening of them.

Thus much of the first special work of God toward his Church, which is
Redemption. Now follows the second called Sanctification.

Quest. What is Sanctification?

Ans. It is the work of God by his Holy Spirit, Deuteronomy. 30.8 Ier. 31.18. and
32.39. Job. 6.44. Act. 5.31. and 11.18.
whereby the Image of God is renewed in the Elect: called also Conversion,
Regeneration, Repentance, etc.

Expl. There are two principal benefits which we obtain in this life by
Christ, Justification by Faith, and Sanctification by the Spirit; Who is called
the Holy Spirit, both Essentially and Effectually: because as he is God holy in
himself; so he makes holy whom he pleases, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1. Pet. 1.2.
which work is therefore called the sanctification of the Spirit.

This work is wrought in the mind, will, and affections, yea in the whole
man: not by altering the substance of body or mind; or abolishing any natural
Faculty or Affection, as Understanding, Love, Hate, Joy, etc. but by putting
away, and purging out the evil quality in these and the like, and by creating
a new holy quality in them, acceptable to God, and agreeable to his word, that
now the understanding should be capable of good things, and the stream of our
affections turned to the right object, as to hate evil, to love goodness, and
to rejoice in it.

We are to understand also that this (in nature) is after Justification, as
Paul recites them: Whom he justifies, Romans 8.31.
he glorifieth, that is, he gloriously renews, which is begun here,
perfected in the life to come: and yet I confess ye repentance is sometimes
put before remission of sins: not that in Nature, but because in our sense,
and feeling it is first: For first we feel the burden of our sins, Mark
1.13 Acts 5.31
and then we are eased and refreshed by the mercy of God. And also repentance
is named in the first place, because it is first to be taught, that we may
desire the mercy of God. Yet in nature, Faith (which purifieth the heart) is
first: though in time there be no difference: For our Union with Christ, and
our partaking of his merit to Justification, and of his Spirit to
Sanctification, are wrought at the same time, even as the Sun and his beams.

Use 1. As the Sun is declared by his light, the tree by his fruits; so by
thy sanctification, demonstrate thy justification, etc.

Use 2. Boast not of thy heart, while thy life is profane, neither content thy
self with an outward show of holiness, having an evil conscience: Romans 12.2. 2.
Cor. 7.1, etc.
for Sanctification is the renewing of the mind: yea of the whole man: and
therefore, labor to grow up into a full holiness of the flesh, and of the
spirit.

Quest. Is Sanctification, Conversion, or Repentance, so the work of God, that
we can not of our selves, by the power of our free will, (...) or repent?

Ans. Iverely believe, that since the fall of Adam, 1. Cor. 2.14 2. Cor. 3.5.
Romans 8.7 John 15.5.
there is no free will in man unto things Spiritual and pleasing to God.

Expl. For the understanding of this, we are to consider of Man, as he was
before his fall, or as he is now, since the fall. Free will you may call, a
faculty or power of the Soul, whereby it does freely, without compulsion and
force choose or refuse the object shown by the understanding: yet so, that we
hold not this free will to be independent, but that, as the wills of all
creatures, it depends on God, to be inclined and moved, either immediately by
him, or mediately by good or evil instruments as he please: Neither does this
dependencie hurt or diminish the free dome of the will: because God inclines
the will, so that the will does by the Judgment of its own reason freely and
willingly move it self: so that to do a thing freely in the Creature, is not
to be free from the government of another: but to do that which it does,
willingly, voluntarily, and deliberately, though it be ruled by another.

Before the fall this was in Adam, both to good and evil, that he might, if he
would either stand or fall (the dependencie before spoken of still reserved.)
Since the fall, the case is altered, according to the saying of Augustine; That
man abusing his free will, lost both himself and that: whereby, as also when
we say that man has no free will, we do not understand that the faculty is
lost, but the goodness; whereby it was able freely and willingly to choose that
which is good. For man lost no essential part or faculty of his nature by his
fall: even the unregenerate having a power freely to will or nill the object
shown by Reason, though they have not power to will and choose spiritual good
things: both because their will is wholly depraved and turned from good, and
inclinable only to evil: and also because Reason, being blind, does not show
to the will the spiritual good, or if it do: it is not under the likeness of
good, but under the likeness of evil. For the natural man understands not
the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14
but accounts them foolishnes.

Wherefore we confess, that man has still free will in civil and outward
things, and unto evil: but not unto good: And this freedom unto civil things
must be so understood, that he has power to choose or refuse the object: but
to do this well he has no power. Also he has free will unto evil, not that
he can will or nill evil at his pleasure; but that without any violence, he
only chooses evil: so that as it may be called free will, because it is free
from coaction, so also bond will, because it freely wills only that which is
evil. And hence it is, that the reprobate sin necessarily and yet freely;
necessarily, because they have no power to goodness: freely, because they chose
evil without compulsion: Yea by how much the more necessarily they sin: by
so much the more voluntarily they do it: in as much as their will has brought
upon them this necessity.

Now when this work of Sanctification or Repentance, or Conversion is wrought;
then we have free will both to good and evil: to good as far as we are
regenerate by the Spirit: to evil as far as we are unregenerate and flesh. And
in the state of Glorification, our will shall be free only to good immutably:
as the will of the damned shall be immutably free unto evil, as Augustine says:
The first Will was to have power not to sin, the last shall be to have no
power to sin.

Then for our purpose this is to be holden, that till the spirit work new
grace, we have no power of our selves; being unto the work of conversion mere
patients; though in the work, when the Spirit has changed and inclined us, we
are co-workers with the Spirit. Before conversion we resist: In conversion the
Spirit inclines our wills; and of unwilling makes them willing to be
converted, and to repent: God not working in us as in stocks or stones, but as
in reasonable creatures.

Use 1. If thou be truly converted, ascribe all the glory of it to God: for as
soon can an Ethiop change his skin, Iere. 13.23 etc.
or a Leopard his spots, as we do that is good, till we be changed and
enabled by the Spirit.

Use 2. Beware thou neglect not the present means of grace offered to thee, as
though thou could repent and do well when thou would: No, no, it is the
mere gift of God. For if thou can not make one hair of thy head white or
black, much less can thou change thy vile and corrupt heart. But thou will
say: Does not GOD promise, that at what time soever a sinner does repent, he
will be merciful? Yes; the Lord most comfortably (blessed be his name) says
so: but he says not that a sinner can repent when he list: or that he will
give repentance, whenever a sinner shall but whistle for it: As Augustine
excellently; He that has promised to all repentants, pardon, has not promised
to all delinquents, repentance, etc.

Quest. What are the parts of this Sanctification or Repentance?

Ans. The parts are two: First, Mortification of the old man, or Hatred of sin,
and turning from evil: Secondly, Vivification, or Quickening of the new man;
or love of goodness and Turning to God.

Quest. What mean you by Mortification of the old man?

Ans. I mean that grace whereby there is wrought in us, by little and little, a
detestation of sin, and an extinguishing and weakening of corruption in us,
that it should not bring forth fruit unto death.

Quest. What mean you by the new man*

Ans. I mean that Grace, whereby, by little and little we are raised to a new
and spiritual life, to be able (in some measure) to live in knowledge,
holiness, and righteousness. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.5.8, 10, 11.
The sum of all these answers proved by Romans 6. from the first verse to the
twelfth.

Explic. When we read that the old man, or the body of sin, or our earthly
members (by which and the like names, the corruption of our nature is called)
are are to be mortified, that is, made to die. We are not to understand it of
the life of our bodies, but of the life of sin in our bodies. So when our
Savior says, If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, etc. he means not
that we should maime our bodies, but that by all means we should purge out
corruption, which manifests it self in such members; yea then as we esteem
our corrupt affections as dear as our eyes. These two parts of repentance are
also called, putting off the old man, and putting on the new man, etc. whereby
is signified, that as willingly as a man puts off his old filthy rags, to be
clad in sweet and rich attire, so should we willingly put away sin whereby we
are deformed, and labor to follow righteousness, which is a part of our Beauty
in the sight of God.

Whereas some make three parts of repentance; first, Contrition; secondly,
Confession; thirdly, Satisfaction: they deceive the simple. For a man may have
all these, and yet be damned, as is manifest in Judas; who grieved, confessed
his sin, Matthew. 27.3, 3.
and brought again the thirty pieces of silver, and yet was a reprobate. These
may be necessary parts of Discipline enjoined to sinners, to testify their
repentance, as in ancient times; but the essential parts of repentance, are
perpetually mortification of the old man, and vivification of the new.

If you shall desire to know the manner how God works repentance, understand,
that first by preaching of the Law, and sometimes by crosses, punishments, etc.
the conscience is terrified for sin, and is sorrowful, but in a worldly
manner for fear of wrath; for the Law can work no otherwise: Then, by the
promise of the Gospel, the conscience is cheered through the gift of GOD, in
assurance of mercy: the sense whereof breeds an other sorrow, different from
that wrought by the Law, called godly Sorrow; which is, when we are grieved for
sin, not so much because of the wrath following, as because thereby we have
offended so gracious a father: and then follows repentance, which is a
changing of the heart and purpose unto a continual care and endeavor to hate
all evil, 2. Cor. 7.10
and to avoid it: to love all goodness, and to follow it. So that repentance
properly is the effect of the Gospel, not of the Law, though the Law be
necessary to prepare us thereunto. And hence we say it is an effect of Faith,
which purifies the heart. Concerning the practice of repentance, See the Book
called the Nature and Practice of Repentance written by our worthy Master
Perkins.

Use 1. Beware of a wonderful subtilty of the Devil, whereby he carries
multitudes to hell; which is, when men and women are persuaded, that if they
can sigh, sorrow, and weep for their sins, that then they truly repent. When
Ahab and Judas did thus much and yet fry in hell. There is a sorrow caused by
the Law, which may be in a Reprobate, whose sorrow is like unto the sorrow of
a thief, and whose tears are whoorish tears: for as these being taken in the
manner, many times, hang down their heads, and weep and wail for fear of the
present punishment, which when it is over, they return to their former
courses, their hearts not being changed; so many grieve by the preaching of the
Law, and yet their hearts remain as corrupt, and as willing, (if it were not
for the Law) to sin, as ever before; whereas the Godly Sorrow, which comes
from the Gospel, changes the very inclination and purpose of the heart, to
hate sin, and love goodness, and to continue increasing in such grace, though
there were no Law to condemn, nor hell to torment. 2. Cor. 7.11 etc.
Examine then thy repentance hereby, and by the notes.

Use 2. Remember that the sum of of a Christians duty, is to Eschew evil,
Psalm. 34.14 Esa. 1.16.17
and to do good: and deceive not thy self with those same half Christians,
whose furthest obedience is to keep themselves (not unspotted, for they regard
not spots) but vndetected of gross evils, such for the which men are carried
to the Iayle: who, though they abound with small faults (as they term them)
having profane hearts, and destitute of love to the truth, and do no good,
think themselves among the forwardest of such who shall be saved. But soft:
the first step to heaven, in the practice of obedience, is to depart from
evil: but he that sets but one step, (and that an ill-fauoured one too) is
never like to come there: mend that step, and depart from all evil, and step
again, doing the good, and so walk on; and then the reward is thine. If thou
hold not up thy hands to any strange God, but if thou worshippest not the
true God, thou can not be saved. If thou plowest not, and go not to cart
on the Sabbath day, it is well; but if thou do not the duties of the Sabbath
in the public and private worship of God, thou may be damned. As therefore
we do not content our selves that no weeds be in our Gardens, unless there
be good Herbs and Flowers: so we must not only be void of evil, but filled
also with the fruits of righteousness; Phil. 3.11.
being not privative only, but positive Christians. But alas! what then
shall become of them, which have not yet learned to set the first step, to
leave their Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Whooredome: how far are these from
true Christians? How far from Heaven? How near to Hell? etc.

Use 3. Note, that Repentance, and true conversion is a work of great
difficulty: for sin cleaues so fast unto us, sitting as close as our skin,
and is so familiar to our nature, that till God persuade the heart by the work
of his Spirit, it is as easy a matter to persuade a man to leave his sins,
as to get him to endure his eyes to be plucked out of his head, and his limbs
to be torn from his body. Therefore called Mortification, and crucifying the
flesh with the lusts, etc. It is not a sigh and away, and now and then a few
sorrowful words will serve the turn. No, sin is impudent, and will never
out till it be killed, and cast out. If thou make account that Repentance is an
easy work, thou have not yet repented as thou should do. Go to: Remember
thou must mortify sin, and destroy it: It is a Serpent in thy bosom; kill,
or be killed: if thou kilst not it, it will kill thee; even thy Soul, etc.

Q. What is the measure of sanctification which we attain to in this life?

Ans. This grace is not perfectly finished in this life, Romans 7.18 19. 1. Cor.
13.9.12. Phil. 3.13.
but here it is only in part.

Expl. There are two sorts of benefits which we receive by Christ: One, of
such which are out of our selves; as Redemption, Justification. Another of such
which are in us, as Sanctification, Conversion. The first sort are perfected in
this life: as, Now we are the sons of God. So now we are elected, 1. Ioh.
3.1.2
justified, redeemed. The second are not perfected in all their degrees, but
only begun: We are perfectly redeemed, (understand in regard of the price,
for we look for the redemption of our bodies:) We are perfectly justified (in
regard of Christ's righteousness, and the sentence, for we pray for more
feeling of it; and these shall be more fully declared at the last day.) We are
imperfectly sanctified; there remaining even in the best, a great deal of
corruption, which lusts against the Spirit, and often makes them bitterly to
mourn: as in the example of Paul.

Use 1. Our sanctification cannot justify us, Romans 7.
because imperfect.

Use 2. The life of a godly man is a continual repenting to his dying day. As
a man that buys an old house is always mending: so ye true Christian, because
he discouers always new corruptions, is always mourning, repairing and
mending somewhat. Do with thy conscience as women do in dressing up their
houses: they sweep, and rub, and brush every day, because every thing
gathers dust: and ever and anon, they are renewing, and strewing new Herbs
and Flowers in their Windows: even so, because we always are gathering soil,
through the corruption that is in the World, we must always he washing,
cleansing, and purging our hearts, and ever and anon, be adding new graces unto
our former received. He that gives over this practice and care, as if he were
holy enough, gives a shrewd testimony, that he has no true holiness in him:
for the nature of true grace is to be increasing, and true Christians are like
the morning light, which is brighter and brighter unto perfect day. Pro. 4.18.


Q. What helps then should a man use to hold out, and increase in
sanctification?

Ans. There are two principal means of furthering us this way: 1. Pet. 2.2.
Psa. 68.29. Luke 11.13. Romans 10.12 James 1.6.
The conscionable using of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and devout
prayer.

Q. What is Prayer?

Ans. Prayer is a worship of God, 2. Chron. 6.21. Ioh. 4.21. Romans 8 26. Mat. 21
22. Ioh. 16.23. Psalm. 50.15 Math. 7.7. Coloss. 4.2.
whereby, through the Spirit, in the name of Christ, believing, we ask of God
only things needful, and also give thanks for that which we have received.

Expl. I shall not need to be long in this, of the which, so many have so
worthily written: Only remember, that not only the voice, Exo. 14.15
but the affection of the heart is prayer: yea, without this, the other is not
praying, Math. 15.8
but babbling, a dead sacrifice not acceptable, For God specially requires the
heart: Pro. 23.26 Romans 8.15. Math. 4.10 Ioh. 16.23.
Concerning which, know that: First, it is a gift of the Spirit: Secondly, that
God only is to be prayed to: Thirdly, and that in the name of Christ. As
Incense might be offered only on the golden Altar: so it is Christ only
which sanctifies, and makes acceptable our prayers: Romans 10.14
Fourthly, that we beleene: Fifthly, that we wisely consider the things, and
persons, we are to pray for: Persons, For all men, 1. Tim. 2.1.
while they are living, and till we know they have sinned the sin unto death:
Things, 1. Ioh. 6.15.
are either Gods glory, our own salvation, or only things belonging to this
life and the body: The two first must be begged absolutely: the other, under
condition of Gods will, and (because they are transitory) transitorily:
Sixthly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.18.
that we also be thankful.

Use 1. Pray neither to, nor by Saints, or Angels, nor for the dead: who either
are in heaven, and so thy prayer is needelesse; or in hell, and then impossible
they should be delivered: When therefore thou have occasion to mention thy
friends, or any departed: say not, God have mercy on their souls, or God be
with them; For though I confess that the words be very good, yet they are
herein abused, as is the Name of God which is good, abused by too much wicked
swearing: And it sauors of gross Ignorance, and Wil-wrship: because we have
neither commandment nor promise, for so doing: also it wants charity toward
the dead, to whom we would seem therein to be very charitable: For when we
pray that God would have mercy on them, etc. it shows, that we think (if we
know what we say) that they want the mercy of God: Better a great deal to say,
Who is, I trust, with the Lord, or such like, then to pray for them.

Use 2. Because Prayer is an acceptable sacrifice to God. Remember the
commandment, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Psalm. 14.4.
and pray often, publickely, privately: It is an evident note of one very
profane, not to use prayer: And the plagues of God follow such: Psalm. 70.6.
Ier. 10.25.
There are six things necessary to prayer, beware thou want none of them:
First, Faith: for thy help herein, remember the commandment and the promise,
and believe: Secondly, Reverence, for thy help this way consider the great
Glory to which thou prayest: Thirdly, Humility, for to such God gives grace,
help thy self here, by looking into thine own bosom, and considering thine
own corruptions and sins: Fourthly, Holy Affections, here help thy self
with the practice of Repentance, hate sin, which dulleth our prayers, and
quenches the heat of them, as water quenches fire, Psalm. 26.6. 1. Ioh. 3.22.
and keep a good conscience: Fithly, Feruency: Here thou have two notable
helps: first, the sense of thy own misery, in regard of sin, the punishment
of it, and the malice of the devil, which if we consider, will make us cry
aloud, as prisoners cry to the Judge for mercy: secondly, the consideration of
the great good thou receiuest by prayer: For the Spirit is given by prayer:
Luke 11.13.
by prayer deliverance, increase of Sanctification, glorious inward feelings,
even all good things. As Moses face shone when he had been with God in the
Mount, Act. 10.9.
and as Peter was wrapped in prayer: So if ever we shine in grace, and are
ravished with inward feelings, it is in prayer: Lastly, 1 Thessalonians. 17 18. Col.
4.2.
Be Thankful: when we are in necessity, we have many words, and have never
done; but when we have received, as full Vessels, we have scarce a word to say:
We go to God, as men go to the River always to fetch, and as when we have
filled our vessels we turn our backs; so when we are blessed with our
desires, we turn our backs with those Lepers, Luke 17.17.
scarce one of ten returns to give thanks: We pray oftener then we give
thanks, because we are more affected with the sense of our wants, then of the
Glory of God, and of that we have received. Here help thy self: First, by
considering the greatness of the benefits which thou enioyest, as if it be
but thy Sleep, or Sight, or such like; thou think, it may be, these are
but small things: Ask him that's blind, him whose eyes God holds open but
three or four nights together, then shall thou see the greatness of a gift by
the want of it: Secondly, by remembering the Commandment: Thirdly, because
thanked for grace increases; thanks for one good turn, is a good
introduction for another: Fourthly, Psa. 50.23.5.
God highly esteems of it: Fifthly, It shall be our special practice in
heaven, inure thy self therefore unto it even in this life, etc.

Quest. What if we obtain this Grace of Sanctification, and continue in it?

Ans. Then we shall be sure to have Eternal Life. Math. 5.8. Heb. 12.14.
Romans 6.22.


Expl. There is nothing more ordinary in the Scriptures, then that such shall
be blessed, which endeavor to holiness: which must not be so understood, as
though we could merit thereby Eternal life, but we must understand it as a
condition, necessarily required in such (being of discretion) which shall be
saved. By which speeches is not meant to show why a man is saved, but who they
are which shall be saved.

When therefore eternal life is called a Reward, it is not meant, as though we
could deserve it by our good works; no not by our faith; but by reward is
meant a free gift, or a gift due by covenant, or promise. For there is a double
reward: Due, or undue and free: the first properly, the second improperly so
called. That which is due, by order of justice, for the dignity of the work,
is properly a debt, or due Reward: That also is so called, which is due by
favor, and by promise. To our good works is eternal life as a reward due:
not the first, but the second way: For God has made himself our debtor, not
by receiving from us, but by promising to us.

So that if you take debt, or reward, properly, we affirm, that nothing is due
to our best works: for there are four things necessary to make a work
meritorious in the first acception of debt: First, that the grace whereby we do
it, be our own: for if we receive it from another, it is against reason, that
he that gives, should thereby be indebted to give more: 1. Cor. 4.7.
But we have no grace, but we have received it. Secondly, it must not be due,
or duty to perform it: for that is contrary to merit; but all that we are able
to do, if it were more, is due, in regard of Creation, and Redemption. Luke
17.10
Thirdly, it must be profitable to him, to whom it is done: But God is not
benefited by us. Psalm. 16.2. and 50.11.12 13. Romans 8.18.
Fourthly, it must be proportionable to the reward: but so are not our best
works. Therefore it is well called of the Apostle, A free gift of God. Romans
6.23.


This further remember, that we teach good works to be necessary to salvation:
but not as causes thereof, but as the way thereto: as Bernard said.

Q. What is eternal life?

Ans. Eternal life is that glorious and most happy estate, Mat. 25.46 Ioh.
17.22.23.24. Romans 2.10 1. Cor. 2.9. Ioh. 10.28. Heb. 13.14 1. Ioh. 2.25
in which the souls of the elect are, in heaven after this life, and in which
their bodies and souls shall be at the day of judgment: the contrary whereof
is eternal death.

Q What is eternal death?

Ans. Eternal death is the most horrible condition in which the Reprobate
shall be for ever in Hell, Luke 16.22.23. Mat. 25.41 2. Tess. 1.4.
with the Devil and his Angels: in their souls presently after their bodily
death, and in body and soul together in the day of Judgment.

Expli. There are three kinds of life: First, Natural of the body, in the
union of body and soul. Secondly, Spiritual of the soul, in the union of it
with God, and Christ; Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 2.17.
whereby Christ is said to live in us. Thirdly, Eternal of body and soul,
whereby the elect live and reign for evermore in the kingdom of Heaven. The
first is common to the Reprobates, with the Elect: the other two are proper to
the Elect. Eternal death is also threefold: First, natural of the body, in
the separation of body and soul: called natural, not that it does properly
proceed from nature: for it is the effect of sin; but because it is according
to corrupt nature, by the justice of God. Secondly, spiritual, in the
separation of the soul from God, whereby sin lives and reigns in the
wicked, being said also to be dead in sin. Thirdly, Eternal, whereby body
and soul shall be for ever separated from God and Christ, and live with the
Devil in eternal torments; which kind of life is called death, because it
were ten thousand times better not to live at all, in respect of themselves,
then in such endless, easlesse, and remediless misery.

For eternal life may be considered, either in respect of the creature, as it
is, and continues by the power of the Creator, and so the wicked shall live
eternally in hell: or in respect of ye adjuncts of life, or the affection which
the creature shall have toward the Creator, and the favor of God in Christ; and
so the Elect shall only live for ever.

In a word, the happiness of the one estate, and the misery of the other, is
such, as no tongue is able to express, no heart able to conceive: All the glory
and splendour of this life, being scarce a shadow of the glory to be revealed:
the first fruits whereof are in this life, in the peace and joy of a good
conscience: Romans 14.17.
which though it be unspeakable, and as a Heaven upon Earth, yet is no more,
nor so much to that which shall be, then a handful of corn is to a field of a
thousand acres. 1. Ioh. 3.1.2.
So also the torments which we can any ways devise to be inflicted upon man
in this world, being but a flea-biting to Hell, and a spark of that flame
which the damned there shall endure: and yet when wicked men feel the
flashings of it in their consciences, in the midst of all their worldly
pleasures, they are horribly confounded, as in the example of Caine, Saul,
Balthazar, Judas, Pro. 18.14
and as Solomon signifies.

As there are but two Estates, so but two places, Heaven and Hell: As for a
third place, called Purgatory, neither does the Scripture mention it, neither
can the Deuisers, and first Founders of it, the Papists, tell what to make of
it: and therefore we acknowledge it not.

Use 1. Seeing such torments remain for them in Hell which repent not of their
sins, use all possible care that thou come not there: Help thy self against
sin, and all damnable security in it, by thinking of the torment following. In
regard of thy self, it had been better thou had never been borne, then to
have thy abiding with those ugly Fiends in that same everlasting Fire and
Brimstone: Let not therefore the bitter pleasures of sin deceive thee:
Know thou not it will be bitterness in the end: The end of thy
Drunkenness, Whooredome, Lying, Pride, Sabaoth-breaking, Negligence in the
service of God, Contempt of the Gospel, etc. will be more bitter then
Worme-wood or Gall, when the very Dregs of the Wine of the fierce wrath of
God shall be powered out against thee for those thy sins. Is sin sweet? But
death is bitter: remember it: Thy sin, and the pleasure of it, is short: but
the shame and torment following is without end: and that in Hell: where one
minute of torment shall swallow up the very memory of all fore-past pleasures:
Labor to think often of Hell, it will be some means to keep thee from
thence, etc.

Use 2. Is life Eternal such a happiness? then live godly, 1. Tim. 4.8 Romans
2.7.
for that is the way to it. It is our duty to live godly, though no reward were
propounded; but when our endeavors (which yet are weak) shall be so beyond
all proportion, rewarded with such an eternal weight of glory; how should it
whet on our care, and spur us forward to please such a God, who is so rich to
them which fear him? How should it provoke us to labor to be entertained into
his service, whose servants after a little obedience here performed, are made
Kings and Queens in Heaven for evermore? Who would not be willing through fire
and water, and all the miseries of this life, to go to that Heavenly
Jerusalem, the City of Saints, to have eternal fellowship with the Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all our dear friends, which have
believed: yea with Jesus Christ our Princely Redeemer, in the glory of the
Father? If thou have profanely said, or thought, what profit shall I have if
I serve God? See here, and be ashamed: for such as serve God, shall partake of
the sweetness of Abraham's bosom, of the delights of Paradise, of the melody
of their Fathers house, of their Masters Joy, that fullness of Joy, of the
Rivers of pleasure for ever, of an Inheritance that never fades, but is
immortal in the Heavens: where whatsoever we can love, we shall have, and we
shall desire nothing which we have not; where there is so much happiness, as
neither the eye has seen, nor heart can think. What may thou think of
thy self, which live so, as if heaven and the joys thereof, were not worth
the while? Do not thou love and labor for this transitory and miserable
life? Why not then much more for that which is permanent in happiness
inconceivable? Oh! if thou knew ye good that follows piety, and the
terror of that death that follows sin, it would make thee willing to redeem
that life, though it were with a thousand years torment even in Hell; which
now is offered to thee by a short continuance in holy obedience. Thou see the
way of life and death: There is great difference between Heaven and Hell,
between endless joys, and endless torments; between the fellowship of
Christ and his holy Angels, and the society of the damned and the Devils: Be
wise, and choose the way of life, etc.

Quest. But do you think indeed that there shall be such a day of general
Ludgement which you seem to speak of?

Ans. Yes, I verily believe that God has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has appointed, that is,
by Jesus Christ, who shall separate the Elect from the Reprobate, Act. 17.31 2.
Cor. 5.10 To. 14.10 12. Hebr. 9.27 Iud. 14.15.
adiudging them to eternal life, these to eternal death.

Explic. As the Scriptures do infallibly teach, that there shall be such a day
of Judgment, wherein the Church shall be crowned with eternal and full
glory: and the Devils and wicked men sentenced unto eternal condemnation, so
also by an invincible Argument, drawn from the Justice of God, the same may be
concluded. It is just ye the promise of God should be made good to the
righteous, and his threatening to the ungodly: which because it is not here,
must needs even for the justice and truth of God be executed in another
world: Doubtless there is a reward laid up for the righteous; Psalm. 58.11
Doubtless there is a GOD which judges the earth.

The Judge shall be the whole Trinity, in regard of the decree and authority;
but Jesus Christ the Mediator, in regard of the visible act, promulgation, and
execution of the Sentence, who shall come from heaven in majesty and great
glory, attended upon with innumerable Saints and Angels, and in his Humane
Nature wherein he suffered, perform the same; pronouncing the definitive
sentence according to Saint Mathews Gospel: John 5.22, 27. Mat. 25.34 41.
The effect of which two Sentences are even now to be discerned in the Court of
Conscience: for the godly do receive here absolution and certainety, and the
wicked have their mortal sentence even in their own breasts: but this is
secret, and the equity of it appears not, Tit. 3.11.
and the profane think themselves wronged: but then the mouth of all
wickedness shall be stopped: and it shall be openly manifested, that the Elect
are justly saved, and the wicked justly damned, their works being scanned by
the Books, and their faith and infidelity thereby appearing.

The persons to be judged are all mankind, small and great, who by the
dreadful sound of a Trumpet, Jude 15. (...) 12 14 Rom 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.10
shall be summoned to appear, neither is it possible not to appear; yea the
very Devils are reserved in cheines unto the Judgment of this great Day. The
matters to be tried are Deeds, Words, yea Thoughts: whatsoouer we have done
in our bodies, good or ill: And for a preparation, the heaven and earth shall
be consumed with fire: the heavens passing away as a scrole, 2. Pet. 3.7, 10.
the elements melting with fervent heat, and thearth burning with the works
that are therein: whereby is not meant that the substance of the heaven and
earth shall be annihilated, but only the figure changed, and the vanity purged
out. The coming of the Judge shall be sudden. The signs of his coming many.
The particular day and time not known, nor to be inquired: Romans 8.21. 1. Cor.
7.31 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. Mat. 24.20. Mat 24.36 Acts 1.7. John 6.39, 40.
But the day wherein this shall be, shall be the last day.

Use 1. This is a singular comfort to the Elect, that there shall be a day
wherein they shall have righteous Judgment: though here they be despised and
condemned before men. Then also shall appear, to the confusion of the wicked,
their labor has not been in vain. And certainly, what can be more
comfortable, then to be judged by him, who is our Advocate, and has redeemed
us by his blood? Let us therefore lift up our heads, with trust in him, because
our redemption draws near; Let us love, look for, and haste to his
appearing, saying, and praying with the Church; Reu. 22.20
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Use 2. This is a terrible and black day to the wicked, who have not repented,
for they must appear before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, there to
answer for all their sins, even such which the eye of man could never
discern: all shall be laid open then, and they shall smart for all. Knowing
the terror of this day, we should be persuaded. Surely, whom the remembrance
of that day, of that fire, and of that wrath, which shall be thrown upon the
wicked, will not move, nothing will move. The day of Sodom was a grievous day,
but nothing to this day, which shall be grievous to drunkards, usurers,
whoremongers, etc. but specially to contemners, and enemies of the Gospel. 2.
These. 1.8
If thou have been such a one, how will thou endure the countenance of the
Judge, which is even he whose blood, word, sacraments, ordinances, thou have
despised, deriding the professors of his Gospel? O let not this day take thee
unawares. Prevent the wrath which shall be then revealed. Then it will be too
late to cry for mercy, for that is a time of Judgment. Now is the day of
Salvation: If thou beet sensible of those terrors, and the hellish torments
following, make good use of it.

Quest. But if the Souls of the Elect go presently after their death to
heaven, and the Souls of the Reprobate to hell, what need a general
Judgment?

Ans. There must be a general Judgment notwithstanding, both that the
justness of such particular Judgment may be made more manifest to the glory
of God, and that the whole man, consisting of body and soul, may receive the
du reward. 2. Cor. 5.10


Quest. Do you then think, that the bodies of man shall be restored at the
day of judgment?

Ans. Yes verily, I believe the resurrection of the body according to the
Scriptures. Act. 24.15. 1. Cori. 15.12, etc.


Expli. We are firmly to hold the general resurrection both of good and bad;
for the good shall not only rise, though they shall rise only to eternal
life: in which regard they are said to be the children of the Resurrection.
Luke 20.36
The wicked shall also rise, but because they shall rise to receive their full
torments, they are not so called. Both shall rise, but in a double difference:
first, of the efficient cause; for the good shall rise by the power of Christ
their head. The wicked by the power of Christ, as Judge of quick and dead, and
by the virtue of that Sentence: Gene. 2.17
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death: secondly, of the end:
for the righteous shall rise to glory, the wicked to shame and perpetual
contempt.

And note this carefully, that those very bodies, in which both just and unjust
lived here, Dan. 12.2. Ioh. 10.27. John 5.28. Mar. 10.28 2. Cor. 5.10 1. Corin.
15 53.
shall be raised and restored, as appears by the Scripture: This corruptible
shall put on incorruption: This, that is, This same in number, as if he had
clapped himself on the breast: Now though this seem impossible to reason, yet
it is not so to our Faith: whereby, considering the power of God, we know, that
he is able to restore the body, though burnt to ashes, devoured by wild beasts,
or turned to dust, as he was able to create them, and all the world of nothing
in the beginning: And this the Justice of GOD requires; namely, that that body
which sinned, should be punished, and not another, and that that body which
has been tortured here for the profession of his Name, should be crowned with
glory at the last day.

The bodies shall rise the same in substance: but the bodies of the Just shall
be Immortal, Incorruptible, Spiritual: not in substance, but in quality or
condition; not needing means of bodily nouriture, not subject to infirmities,
but powerful, firm, strong, and impassible, nimble to move as well vp-wards,
as downe-wards, void of all deformity, and uncomeliness; glorious, of perfect
stature; without the use, though not without the difference, of Sex. Mat.
13.43 Mat. 22.30 1. Cor. 15.
The bodies of the unjust shall rise Immortal also, and Incorruptible, but
passible, to endure the due punishment inflicted upon them.

The manner of the Resurrection, conceive to be thus: On the last day Christ
shall suddenly come in the clouds, in that visible form in which He Ascended,
and shall send his Angel with a Trumpet, Mat. 24.31 1. Cor. 15.31. 1 Thessalonians.
4.15.16.
at the sound whereof, first they which are dead shall be raised, and then
those which are living, shall be in the twinkling of an eye changed.

Use 1. If in this life only we had hope, we were of all men the most
miserable; but we look for a day, when our vile bodies shall gloriously rise,
and be made like the Glorious Body of our Lord Jesus Christ; 1. Cor. 15.19.
Phil. 3.21. Job 19.25.26.27.
comfort thy self against thy calamities with this: This vpheld Job in the day
of his sore trouble: So in the troubles of the Jews under Antiochus Epiphanes,
Many were racked and would not be delivered, because they looked for a better
Resurrection. Act. 11.35.
Let this also comfort against the loathsomeness of the grave, in as much, as
though our bodies be laid down for a time in the dust, they shall yet after
be restored to Life and Glory.

Use 2. Remember that even that body which thou have used as a Weapon and
Instrument, to Lying, Murder, Uncleanness, Theft, Pride, and all manner of
unrighteousness, shall rise again: and as thou have done in the same that
which thou should not; so shall thou receive in the very same, that which
thou would not: And if thou be a Believer, remember that that very body of
thine, which has been unto thy soul, an instrument of Righteousness, and
which for righteousness sake, has endured Grief, Smart, or Contempt, etc. as
it has taken part with the soul in Mortification, and in the affliction, so
shall it also partake in the blessed Consolation to be revealed in the last
day.

Quest. You said that God was the Redeemer and Sanctifier of his Church: Do you
not believe that the Redemption, Justification, and Sanctification, which you
have spoken of, are universal, and belonging to all?

Ans. No: Ephesians. 5.25. etc.
I verily believe that those Graces belong only to the Church.

Quest. What is the Church?

Ans. By Church, I mean the Holy Catholic Church, 1. Cor. 12.12.13. Ephesians.
3.15.16.17.18.19 Ephesians. 4.15.16. Reu. 21.27. Heb. 12.21 22. Cant. 6.8.
which is the whole Company, of them which are from everlasting Predestined
to Eternal Life, and which, in time, are called by the Word, and sanctified by
the Blood and Spirit of JESUS, and this is but one: part whereof is Triumphant
in heaven, and part Militant on earth.

Expl. As in our usual Creed we are taught to believe, the Holy Catholic
Church, to be the company of Saints, which have Communion, or Fellowship, in
the grace of Remission of sins, and Resurrection to Eternal life: So it is
manifest that such only are the Catholic Church, and that such graces are
proper and peculiar unto them: As the Scriptures do every where restrain these
benefits, to Believers only, and to the Church: To Believers, Ioh. 3.16. and
5.24. and 6.40.47. Act. 10.43. Ioh. 12.46. Romans 3.22. Gal. 3.22. To the Church:
Mat. 1.21. Ioh. 10.15. and 15.13. and 17.9.19. Now whereas in diverse places,
the Scripture speaks with a general note: That Christ dyed for all, and that
God loved the world, and such like: Such places must be understood, some of
the sufficiency of Christ's death for all, not of the Efficacy, which is only
to Believers: Some of a Precept universal, whereby all are commanded to
believe: Some of the public Ministry of the Word, whereby grace is offered
to all: Some collectiuely to signify that the benefit of Redemption extends
it self, to Gentiles as well as to Jews: or distributiuely, signifying that
some of all Nations, Conditions, Ages, Sexes, have that benefit, not that
every singular of all kinds, but the kinds of all singulars, are made partakers
thereof, So then, not the world. that is, not every man and woman in the world,
have interest in the blessing of Christ, Romans 11.7.
but only the Elect of God.

This Church is called Holy, partly because it is clothed with the
righteousness of Christ imputed, and partly because it is governed by the Spirit
of Christ, by the which every member thereof is quicknes; and made able in some
measure, in truth, to hate sin, and to love, and follow that which is good:
It is called Catholic, that is Universal; because all the Saints and Elect,
of all times and places, (...) unto it, as to one Body: And this we profess to
be One, because there is the Head, which is Christ, one Body, one Spirit, one
Faith, one Hope, Ephe. 4.4.
one Love, etc. Part whereof is now in heaven Triumphing, which are the Souls
of the Saints departed; and part fighting and Militant here on earth, in the
Spiritual we face, against the world, the flesh and the devil.

Use 1. All happy making promises are made only to the Church; All shall not
be saved: labor to be of that number, whose are the promises, if thou would
be saved.

Use 2. It Is a great comfort, that of all sorts of men, some are of this
Church, which is washed with the Blocd of Jesus, the Geatile, as well as the
Jew, the Servant as well as the Master, the Poor as well as the Rich: For
there is no respect of persons with God, but in all Nations, such as fear him
are accepted, be they one or other: Act. 10.34.35.
As God respects none for their riches or great place, so he reiects none
because they are poor and base: Indeed in this world the poor have the least
part; but in Christ benefits, the Beggar (believing) has as large and good
right as the King: For we are Citizens of a Kingdom which is not of this
world: God is not only the God of the Mountains, Ioh. 18.36.
but of the Valleys also: And the Spirit blows where it lists. Yea, many
times God breaths Life and Grace, on a pooer contemptible wretch (as the
world accounts) as on Lazarus, and passes by such as go in velvet coats, as
Dives. Memember, Christ is not thine, because thou art rich, or great, or
beautiful, but because thou Beleeuest. It is faith makes the poor Beggar as
rich in Christ, as thy self: For God has chosen the poor also, to make them
rich in faith, and pertakers of his Kingdom. Art thou rich? James 2.5.
despise not the Beggar or poorest Believer, who if thou beleeuest not, is
better then thy self: and though in the things of this life, (according to
Gods ordinance) thou have the start of him, yet in Christ he is thy equal, for
in Christ, there is neither Circumsion, nor Uncircumcision, Bond, nor Free,
Col. 3.11.
etc. Art thou rich? Labor to be rich in faith, rather then in gold, for thou
and thy money may perish, but by faith thou shall be saved. Art thou poor?
Comfort thy self: Thou have a right in a heavenly inheritance, where thou
shall equally share with the greatest King, and let it provoke thee to so much
the more care to please him in all things, who has chosen thee so base, and
called thee so unworthy.

Use 3. The Church of Christ is a Holy Church: Mark then. If thou be not
holy, in heart and affections, in life and conversation, but a profane wretch,
thou art also a damned wretch, if thou so continuest; thou art no part of this
Church, for Christ has chosen us that we should be holy, Ephe. 1.4. 2. Tim.
1.9.
and he has called us with a holy, making calling: Examine therefore thy
self. Cant. 4.12.13.
The Church, by Solomon, is called a Garden enclosed, full of the sweetest
Flowers and Plants: Now if thou be a Blasphemer, a Liar, a Backe-biter, etc.
If these be the Flowers which grow in thy Garden, thou art the Devils
Dunghill, thou art none of the Church: The Church is called, a Dove undefiled:
If thou be filthy, Cant. 5.2.
unclean, a Fornicator, a Strumpet, an Usurer, an Oppressor, Covetous,
Cruel, Unmerciful, etc. Thou may be a member of the Kite, Vulture, or
ravenous Cormorant, but not of Christ's spotless Dove, which is his Church. The
Church is the Body of Christ; If thou be a Drunkard, Ryotous, a breaker of
the Saboath, a contemner of Religion, and such as do profess it, etc. thou
art a limb of the devil, not a Member of Christ, unless thou would make
the Body of Christ a monstrous body, like the Image of Nebuchadonoser, which
was part of Gold and Silver, part of Iron and Clay. Remember then, Christ is
the Head of his Church, if thou receiuest not not Grace from him to
Sanctification, thou art none of his. Christ is the King of his Church, out of
ye Church the devil reigns: If thou obeyest not Christ, but the devil, how
art thou Christ's? Nay, how art thou not the devils?

Quest. You say that the Church is a company of such which are Predestined to
Eternal Life: What mean you by Predestination?

Ans. By Predestination of men, I mean the Eternal purpose of God concerning
Mankind fallen and corrupted; whereby, for the setting forth of his glory, he
appointed some to Salvation, with the means whereby they should obtain the
same, which is called Election; and some to damnation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
which is called Reprobation, Romans 9. throughout the chapter.

Quest. What is Election?

Ans. Election is the most free and Eternal Counsel of God, Luke 10.20. Romans
8.30 and 9.11. and 11.5.2. Pet. 1.10. Ephesians. 1.2.3.4.
whereby he chooses some, which were fallen in Adam, and Predestinateth them
to Grace and Glory by Jesus Christ.

Quest. What is Reprobation?

Ans. It is the most free Counsel of God, whereby he determined, not to
choose, Romans 9.21.22.2. Pet. 2.8. Jude 4.
but to pass by some, fallen in Adam, and to leave them in their guiltiness
and corruption, and in the end to condemn them for their sins.

Q Do you then think that men were ordained to life or death before they were
borne?

Ans. Yes verily that I do.

Quest. Does not this bring in a neglect of all godliness, Romans 9.11.
and make for them which say: If I be predestined to life, I shall be saved
whatsoever I do, if to death, I shall be damned in like manner, therefore I
will live as I list?

Ans. God forbid: For we teach that men are not only predestined to the
end, but also to the means. They which are ordained to Life, being also
ordained to Grace, whereby they obtain it: and they that are ordained to
death, being also ordained to be left in their corruption that they may be
damned. Ephe. 1.4.


Expl. That there is Predestination, which is an ordaining of a thing, to this
or that, before it be extant: appears in the doctrine of the Providence of
God. And that it is to be referred to men in the two branches of it, Election
and Reprobation, is manifest in the like Answers. To deny it, were to deny
that Wisdom in God, which we attribute to wise men; who think of nothing,
but to some ends, which they have before propounded in themselves: Much more
does God determine aforehand, what he will do, and why, appointing every thing
the fit use to which it shall serve, and the certain end to which it shall
attain, with the means leading thereto.

This doctrine is to be taught in the Church soberly, and discreatly according
(not to the curious inventions of men) but the Scripture, in as much as the
wisdom of God has revealed it, and then we are bound to take knowledge of
it. And because it is the very foundation, Deu. 29.29
and groundwork of all our certainty, and assurance, in Christ, concerning
heavenly things: The order of Predestination I take to be this. First, that God
first purposes his own Glory, which is the utmost end of all things, then for
the effecting hereof, that he purposes to create the world, and in it man,
whom he purposes to create perfect, but mutable; to suffer him to fall, and
all Mankind in him; and then out of Mankind fallen, to choose some in Jesus
Christ, to manifest the glory of his mercy in them, and not to choose the rest,
but to leave them in their guiltiness and corruption, to manifest in them the
glory of his Justice; for as it is Mercy to be elected in Christ, and so saved:
So it is Justice to be reprobated and forsaken. Here remember, that though we
cannot speak, write, or conceive of the Will of God herein, but by setting
down one thing after another; yet there is no such thing in God; but after an
incomprehensible manner, he does will all these things at once.

We say that Election and Reprobation, are the free Counsel and Purpose of
God, etc. Because we are steadfastly to acknowledge, that the Will of God is ye
first and principal moving cause of all things. For nothing can be, but God
willing it to be, either by effecting it, or suffering it.

I make the Subject of Predestination, in Election and Reprobation, to be
Mankind fallen, and corrupted: which I suppose, in the uttermost of my weak
understanding, to be the safest and plainest way in this intricate, and weighty
Point. With mine Opnion, I will be bold to set down, and to prove, as briefly,
and plainly as I can, willingly, and with all (...) respect, submitting my
self in this, and in all the rest, to the censure and judgment of the
Learned, according to the Scriptures: I conceive then that in (...), first God
wills a thing to be, before he ordains it to this or that end: I do not say
that a thing must be extant before God determine of it, but that God wills it
to be extant, else Gods decree should be of nothing, in as much as till God
will it, there is not, nor can be any shing. Then I would argue thus: When God
considered Mankind in Election or Reprobation, he considered him, either (...)
in his created Perfection, or fallen from it: Not standing: Therefore fallen.

First for ye Proposition, if any shall find fault with it, as not sufficient,
and add a (...) estate of man to be considered, neither standing, nor fallen:
Then, I think, they must prove that there was such an estate of man; (but I am
sure there never was any such) unless they make a double purpose of God in
creating of man: One, whereby he purposed to create him: another, whereby he
purposed to create him according to his Image; which I suppose to be too
curious, because at that instant that man was, he was according to the Image of
God: and so God considered him only and always, because he never was
otherwise (unless we would say, that the inward act of Gods purpose is
different from the outward, which I think is not to be granted:) And likewise
so Moses brings in the Trinity consulting, as it were: Let us make Man
according to our Image; noting, as I think, one undivided act of the purpose
of God, when he considered the Creation of Man. I would not therefore say, that
the naked Mass is the subject of Predestination: nor that God passes by men,
only as they are men, and not as they are corrupt: For this were to make the
subject of Gods Predestination to be ameere notion, or a conceit only of the
mind; because that man was never but in an estate of holiness, or corruption:
Neither does the similitude of the Potter prove it as far as I can conceive.
Romans 9.21
The meaning of which place I take to be this: The Apostle thereby stops the
murmuring and cauilling mouth of the Reprobate, who presumptudusly say, Why are
we aproued? and why does God complain of us for breaking his will? If he
would have given us grace, we would also have (...). Who has resisted this his
will? To this the Apostle answers, by a similitude taken from the Potter, by a
comparison from the less to the greater, thus: Who art thou that disputest
with God? If the Potter have power of the same naked lamp to make a vessel to
honor, another to dishonor: shall not God much more have power, of a
corrupted lump of mankind, to make vessels of wrath? Which (in my simple
understanding) does better take away all reasoning from the Reprobate, and
stop their mouths, then to expound it of Gods absolute Right: For
similitudes are not to be pressed too far: it is brought against the
Reprobate, and there is no correspondency and likeness between the Potters
naked mass, and the naked mass of mankind; because the Potters mass, though
naked, is a thing really, and indeed extant by it self, though the Potter make
never a Pot of it: So is not the naked mass of mankind extant really, but
only in imagination. And therefore I would not press a similitude in that
wherein there is us likeness.

If any shall object and say: Has not God absolute right, authority,
sovereignty and power over his creature? I answer, Yes: and he may do with his
own, what he will; who shall let him? Neither does any thing I have said,
infer the contrary. And yet that God does, or will use an absolute right
toward the creature (as to cast it away without any desert of it) I see not yet
by the Scriptures. This I see, that what God may do, I may not dispute: but
what he will do, I must enquire and believe according to his word, knowing that
he can do the same.

If any shall say further, God makes vessels of wrath, but if he should
consider man fallen, he should find them made: I deny the consequence: for a
man fallen in Adam, is then said to be made a vessel of wrath, when God for
his sin decrees his rejecting and punishment.

Beside, to hold the corrupted mass is agreeable to that received doctrine of
the Ancients, that God forsakes none penally, but such as forsake him. This
also best stops the mouth of Reprobates, and takes away all reasoning from
them, (as was said) when they must acknowledge that there was matter in them
(...) reprobation by ye fall of Adam. So does this best set forth the rich
grace of God to the Elect, the vessels of Mercy, then they shall consider, that
there was (...) in them deserving Reprobation. And me thinks, when I consider,
that (...) are elected in Christ, it must needs follow, that they are to be
considered salin: for Christ presupposes sin, which Christ was to satisfy
for the elect.

For the second Proposition, that God considered not man good, is plain;
because all promises of Gods eternal favor, both before the fall, and after
the same, are made in the Scriptures to them which are good (either by
Creation, or Regeneration) and which continue in the same.

To conclude, Election, and Reprobation may be considered either absolutely, as
that God elected or reprobated these: or that he elected or reprobated these,
and not these. If you ask why God elected these: I answer, that his sole will,
without any the least respect in the Creature, was the cause of it: If you ask
why God elected these, and not those, as Jacob, and not Esau: I answer after
the same manner. If you ask why God reprobateth these rather then these: I
answer as before, that there is no cause thereof in the Creature, but only in
him, which is his will. If also you shall ask why did God reprobate these: I
answer, that his will also is the only cause thereof in this sense, namely,
that it was in Gods free power notwithstanding sin, to elect, or not elect,
to reprobate or not reprobate: For God was not compelled by the sin he
considered in man to reprobate him, for he might have elected the same man in
Jesus Christ, if he had pleased. And yet this we add, that in reprobation of
these, God had respect to man's sin (not actual infidelity or sin, but
original) not as a principal efficient, or as a cause first moving, for God
might have not reprobated, if he had so pleased: but as a cause deserving
reprobatio^, or as a necessary condition in the object, without which GOD will
not reprobate any. For neither does God in time deny his grace to any, but to
those who deserve to be denied: neither decrees he before time to deny it, but
unto such. And whereas some will say, An universal cause brings forth an
universal effect: If then sin be universal, why is not Reprobation? I
answer, that an universal cause brings forth such effect actually, if it be
not hindered by a superior ouer-ruling cause. And so I yield that it is the
natrue of sin to deprive all of Grace and Glory; Romans 3.23
and would have this effect upon all mankind, if God should show no mercy: and
the reason it has not, is, because God is pleased out of his botomlesse mercy
to accept of some, and to elect them in Christ.

Use 1. Beware of searching too far into this deep, without the light of the
Word: The plain way is the safest, and in as much as the Scripture has more
sparingly spoken of Reprobation then Election: Do thou labor more to make thy
election sure upon good grounds, then to conceive every quiddity of men
concerning Reprobation.

Use 2. If thou find upon good grounds, that thou art elected: for ever
acknowledge the rich mercy of God unto thee: who were deep enough in Adams
transgression to be damned; if God had not of his free love discerned thee:
therefore let it bind thee to all humility (seeing thou have received all) and
all thankfulness to him that has showed thee such mercy.

Use 3. Beware of that damnable speech of profane men, who say: If I be
predestined, and Gods decree must take effect, then I may do what I will:
for if I be appointed to salvation, I shall be saved: and if to damnation, I
shall be damned, whatsoever I do. Which is all one, as if one should say, God
has decreed that I shall live or die; If he has appointed life, I shall live,
though I eat not at all, or though I eat poison, if he has appointed death,
it is not eating or not eating will save me: therefore I will either not eat at
all, or I will eat poison: then which collection there can be nothing more
sottish.

If a man be reprobate, he shall certainly be damned, do what he can: It Is most
true. But yet remember, such an one, can (nay will) do nothing, but that which
shall more and more bring his damnation upon him: For the horrible disease of
finne, not being healed by Christ (as it is only in the Elect) must needs bring
forth fruit unto death. Indeed if a Reprobate, had power to do good and to
repent, and yet for all that, and doing so, he should be damned by the
necessity of Gods will, there might be some color: but to reprobate is to be
left in original sin, which is the fountain of all transgressions: and the
persons so left, are justly so left, because they are left guilty in Adam: and
can do no good unless God did give them new grace, which he is not bound to
do, and they have deserved not to receive. Likewise, if a man be elected, he
must needs be saved, not that God has elected to save any absolutely without
grace; but whomsoever he has elected to save, he has elected also to believe
and repent, that they may be capable thereof. For God did as well decree the
means whereby we should be saved, as that we should be saved: which means are
the merit of Christ, effectual calling, Justification, Faith, Repentance,
etc. which whosoever attaineth may certainly conclude that he is elected, and
shall be saved, as he that wants them to the end, may certainly conclude,
that he shall not be saved, and therefore never was elected. Wherefore, by the
works of Sanctification, make thy Election sure, as Peter advises thee: 2.
Pet. 1.10 Phil. 2.12. etc.
And make an end of thy Salvation with fear and trembling, as Paul councelleth
thee.

Qu. Are then all which are in the Church of God on Earth, predestined to
life eternal and effectually sanctified?

Ans. No: only those are predestined to life, Mat. 13.24 25. Mat. 22.10
and effectualy sanctified, which are of th'inuisible church, many are in the
visible which are hypocrites and profane.

Quest. Are there then two Churches, one which can not be seen, and an other
visible, which may be seen.

Ans. No: there is but one Church, which in diverse respects is said to be
Invisible or Visible. Mat. 22.18 Romans 2.28, 29. and 9.7.


Expli. Whosoever are of the Invisible Church, are holy; not all that are of
the visible Church: which two terms of Visible and Invisible, are in diverse
respects given to the Church, which is but one: even as if you should say, the
same man to be invisible in regard of his soul, and visible in regard of his
Apparel, and outward shape. Thus the Church on Earth is said to be Invisible,
in regard of the inward essential form, which is sanctity, which cannot be
seen with man's eye: Hebr. 12.14 1. Ioh. 2.19. 2. Tim. 2.19 Romans 2.29.
or Visible, either in regard of the particular companies professing Christ, or
in regard of the outward form, which is the ministry of the Word and
Sacraments; by the which it is visible, becauss these, being the means whereby
it is gathered and governed, are visible.

Use. Examine how thou stand in the visible Church; for many are called, but
few are chosen; and many are in the visible, which are not of the invisible, as
the Lees are in the Vessel, which are not wine, nor of the wine. It is not
enough to be in Gods field, unless we be good corn: not enough that we be in
the body, unless we be members: For if we be wennes and spots, we must be
purged and scowred off: not enough to be in Gods floor, unless we be good
Corn: For he will gather the Corn into his Barn, but the Chafe he will
burn with unquenchable fire: so, not enough that thou art among the Saints,
unless thou be a Saint. For Cham was in the Arc, Saul among the Prophets,
Judas among the Apostles, and yet these are damned: So thou may be baptized,
and joined to the visible company of the faithful: yet if thou want the
Spirit, which quickens all the true members of Christ's body, to holiness and
righteousness of life: thou art but a withered branch, to be cut off and cast
into the fire: Look therefore to thy standing.

Question. What call you the Invisible Church?

Ans. It is the university of the Elect and Regenerate, Romans 2.29.
which do at any time, or in any place, profess and truly have faith and
conversion to God.

Quest. What is the visible Church?

Ans. It is a company embracing and enjoying the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, Mat. 28.19 Ephesians. 4, 11
and professing the Gospel.

Quest. What are the true notes of a true visible Church?

Ans. The true, proper, and essential notes of a true Church, are two, namely,
The pure and incorrupt Ministry and profession of the Word: and, Mat. 28.19
Act. 2.42, 46. Ephe. 5.25 26.
The lawful Administration of the Sacraments: to the which some add
Discipline.

Explic. Unto those Scriptures in the answer, which show that the lawful use
of the Word and Sacraments, are the two genuine notes of a true Church: because
the Primitive Church is so in them described. You may add concerning the Word,
these; John 8.31. and 10.27. and 14.23. 1. Corint. 4.15. Ephesians. 2.20. 1. Tim.
3.15. And of the Sacraments, these; 1. Corin. 20.16. and 12.13. So that
wheresoever there is a Company preaching and professing, that Jesus Christ the
Son of Marie is the Son of GOD: Christ the Lord, by whom only and alone
they seek to be saved: that Company is a true visible Church, though there be
many corruptions in the same. Simon Magus was by Baptism received into the
Visible Church, Acts 8.13.
for an outward profession of Christ in word. And the Corinthians were a true
church, even then when they abounded with gross corruptions: as Paul denies
not in his Epistles written unto them.

These notes have their degrees: the more pure they are, the more pure is the
Church which has them: the less pure they are, the less pure is a Church to
be accounted: and where they are not all, or wholely adulterated, there,
either is no Church, or a very corrupt one: Now though Discipline be allowed,
and necessarily required to the well being of a Church: yet a Company holding
Christ, and maintaining the Scriptures, though they should want Discipline, are
a true, though a defective Church. It is the duty of the Church, to use
Discipline: but as a wife cease not to be a true wife, for the neglect of
household government, so long as she keeps the marriage oath to herhusband
unbroken: so a Church cease not to be a true Church for some saults, or
neglects, so long as she acknowledges her head Christ according to the Word.

Use. Withdraw not thy self from the fellowship of the Churches of God: and if
thou have depraved the Church of England, and separated from it: repent of thy
rash and uncharitable censures: Remember what great things God has done for
the Church thou despisest: and spit not in her face that has brought thee
forth to Christ. Remember that God has always preserved a seed of Christ in
our land ever since the first conversion thereof from Heathenisme: which, as a
little leaven, lay a long time hid in three peckes of meal, as our Savior
speaks: till at the last, by the hand of a King, Henry 8.
it began to sour the whole lump. And after him, remember how God raised him
up a Josias to finish his fathers beginnings. Afterward, Edward 6.
how it was watered with the blood of as famous Martyrs as ever the world saw.
Then think how God miraculously preserved, and gave a Queen to nurse this
Church, laboring, Queen Elizabeth.
and almost fainting under afflictions: yea such a Queen as he never
stablished in the Throne of any Kingdom, since the day of Adams Creation. And
then consider, how that when we reckoned that all our happiness had been
ended, and expected nothing but dissipation, fire, sword, blood, and the ruin
of Church and Commonwealth: even then the Lord, beyond all expectation, sent
amongst us, a most tender Father, our most gracious Sovereign King JAMES (whom
God long preserve) unmatchable for mildness of Government, Vigilance, care for
the good of all his subjects, deepnesse of judgment, soundness of Religion,
and (together with many other blessings, whereby we are blessed in him) for
incomparable learning; having, to the admiration of the world, with his Own
Pen, defended and advanced the truth. And if thou stand upon a right
constitution, remember that the replanters of the Gospel here, were Kings and
Princes, and not without the preaching of the word. Remember that the people of
the land were not converted from Heathenisme by them, as such which had no
knowledge of Christ, but from Papisme, under which they had some knowledge of
him. Remember that if the Church were not rightly constituted by Queen
Elizabeth, neither was it by King Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth,
and so thou wrongest the ashes of the Martyrs, as if they were not Martyrs of
Christ, but of Antichrist: And say that there was something wanting in the
first constitution: cannot God forgive it? Nay, has he not forgiven it? How
dare thou say the contrary? Remember these things, and stay thy tongue from
reuiling Israel, and thy foot from withdrawing thy self from the people of
God. If thou would have Discipline, we are not without it, though without
that of thy devising. If thou would have the preaching of the Word, we have
it, I may boldly say, as soundly and powerfully in all the chiefest Cities and
Towns, and in many other places, as any Church in Europe, whereby thousands
are taught the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, are confirmed in the faith, and
continued in holy obedience, living and dying in most heavenly and certain
assurance of Gods favor, and of eternal life. Despise not then that Church,
which by the Word and Sacraments, and the Discipline she has, brings forth,
nurseth, and brings up, even to their seating in the Land of Canaan,
thousands, and that not once in twenty years, extraordinarily, but daily and
ordinarily through the great blessing of God, etc.

Q. Tell me what is the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments you speak of?

Ans. The Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is an office ordained by the
Holy Trinity, 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.11. Mat. 28.19 20. 1. Cor.
13.9.10. 1. Cor. 14.34. 1. Tim. 3.2 etc. Tit. 1.6.7.8. 1. Tim. 3.2. 2. Tim.
2.15.24. To. 10.14. Heb. 5.4 5 Mat. 28.19
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be in the Church to the end of
the world: whereby men of unblameable conversation, able and apt to teach,
being lawfully called, do administer holy things in public Prayer, and
thanksgiving, dispensing the Word and Sacraments.

Expli. The Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is not an Invention of man,
hut of God himself, for the salvation of man most necessary, not in regard of
God, who is able without it, to effect his purpose: but of us, who ordinarily
without it cannot be saved, in as much as God has once ordained by the
foolishnes of Preaching to save then which believe, called foolishness, when
indeed it is the wisdom of God, because ignorant and evil men so account of
it.

This calling is either Inward or Outward. The Inward is the good testimony of
our hearts, that not through ambition, or covetousness, etc. we seek and
accept of such office, but only through a sincere desire in the fear of God,
to edify and build up Gods Church. And this calling must be in all who would
approve their Ministry to God. The outward is that which is according to the
comely order of the Church, and it is Ordinary, or Extraordinary. 1. Tim. 3.
Titus. 1.
The Ordinary is that calling which by men is administered, according to such a
comely order which is agreeable to the word.

Extraordinary calling is that which is immediately from God, without the
ministry of man before spoken of, as the calling of John Baptist, And this is
not to be expected, or pretended in an established Church: But when the state
of a Church is wholly decayed, or interrupted: God does extraordinarily stir
up, and endue with answerable gifts, some to restore the same. There are four
rules to be observed in the examining of such a Calling: The first is
concerning the time and place; whether it be there and then: where, and when,
there is no use or possibility of lawful ordinary calling: Secondly,
concerning the life and doctrine of such: Ioh. 5.39. Mat. 7.20.
that they be in more then ordinary manner answerable to the Word: Thirdly,
concerning their gifts; as Knowledge, Wisdom, Utterance, vndantable Courage,
that these be manifestly extraordinary in them: Fourthly, for the success,
effect, and continuance: that it bring an incredible and unexpected blessing,
in Reformation and Conversion; notwithstanding any opposition made by the whole
world, and the devil himself. Where there is an extraordinary calling
pretended, and not according to these Rules, it is to be accounted a deceit and
wicked imposture, and such which pretend the same to be of the number of those
of whom Paul speaks. Romans 16.18


Use 1. Art thou, a Minister, enabled with gifts? Presume not, though into the
Office of the Ministry, without the calling of the Church: As Esaias goes not
till he be sent, Esaias 6.6.
and John stays his Preaching till the appointed time, And our Savior Christ
till he was Baptized, etc.

Use 2. Art thou enadled with gifts, Luke 1.80.
and lawfully called? Look well to the Ministration thou have received of the
Lord: stir up the gift that is in thee, be diligent and faithful, cast of
all impediments, as too much worldliness, the practice of other Callings, as
Physic, Surgery, etc. for this Calling requires a whole man, and who is
sufficient for it? The reward of the faithful is great; the punishment of the
slothful great also: Preach, but not thy self, or thy own devices, but the
sincere Word of God; and let thy life be an example to thy Flock, that they
may reverence thee, as well, when they see thee, as when they hear thee, if
thou would do good, and have comfort of thy labors, etc.

Use 3. Reverence the Ministry of the Word as the ordinance of God, and
receive the Ministers in all love and respect for their works sake, and the
doctrine they deliver, according to the Scriptures, as the word of man, but as
it is indeed, the Word of the living God: Phil. 2.29. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. and
5.12.13.
Speak not evil of the Ministry of the Word, neither account it as a base or
bootlesse thing, for without it ordinarily thou can not have faith: neither
can thou be begotten unto Christ, Romans 10.17 James 1.18 1. Cor. 4.15 1. Cor.
1.21. etc.
nor finally be saved: For God has pleased by the foolishness of Preaching to
save them which believe, etc.

Quest. What are the Sacraments?

Ans. The Sacraments are visible and outward Signs and Seals instituted, and
ordained of God, whereby he confirms to the Elect the free promise of the
Gospel, Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.7.10.11. 1. Cor. 11.23.
and also binds them to the performance of duty to himself.

Quest. How many Sacraments has the Church of God now?

Ans. Only two, 1. Cor. 12.13. Act. 2.38.41.
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Quest. What is Baptism?

Ans. It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, instituted by Christ, in the
which the confecrated water represents the Blood of Christ, sealing to all
that are sprinkled therewith, into the name of the Father, the Soune, and the
Holy Ghost, the merit of Christ, remission of finnes, Romans 4.11. Col. 2.12.
Romans 6.3.4.5. 1. Pet. 3.21.
and Eternal Life, and testifying our grafting into Christ, and Regeneration,
with the repromission of our obedience.

Expl. God is the Author of Sacraments, and none can add any to the Word but
God: Now God added them to the Word, not that the Word was not sufficient
without them, but for a help to our weakness, that we might have, as it
were, lively pawnes before our eyes, of those things which we hear with our
ears (as even Adam had Sacraments in Paradise) and these he ordained to be
Seals of the covenant of Grace, which was not needful on Gods part, who is
always better then his word; but it was needful for us, to succor whose
weakness (who in regard of our unworthiness, are prone to doubting) the Lord
has added them to give us greater assurance; even as a Seal to a Writing
makes it more Authentical.

The Essential parts of a Sacrament, are either outward, or inward: The
outward has the sign, with the Ceremony ordained, and the Word: As in
Baptism, the outward sign is Water, the Ceremony is the sprinkling: The word
is the word of Institution and Promise: Baptize them, etc. Whosoever believes,
and is Baptized, shall be saved. Mat. 28.19 Mark. 16.16.
And the distinct pronouncing in the Mother Tongue of this form: I Baptize
thee in, or into, the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. The meaning whereof is thus much: That, (the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being called upon) the Person Baptized, is, through
forgiveness of sins, received into the favor of God, who is Father, Soune,
and Holy Ghost; and Adopted, Received, Sealed, Initiated, and Consecrated, into
the proper Goods, Right, Family, Covenant, Grace, Worship, Religion, Faith, and
Fellowship, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God, one in Essence, three in
Persons, to live wholly according to his Will.

The inward matter is the thing signified: which is both the Blood and Spirit
of Christ, and our Incision, and Grafting, and Incorporation into him by the
Holy Ghost, with all benefits following; As imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Remission of sins, Adoption, Receiving into the Communion of
Saints, Regeneration, etc. For as the Water washes the filthiness of the
body, so the Blood of Christ washes away our spiritual filthiness, through
the Spirit: which Spirit, makes us fruitful in good works, and abateth our
defires of earthly things; even as water makes things fruitful, and quenches
bodily thirst. And this so surely, in regard of the true and Mystical union,
of the Sign, and Things signified, by the bond of Faith; that for our
assurance the work of the Spirit is often attributed to the Sign (as Baptism
regenerateth and saves) because such is the relation and union of the Sign,
and the grace signified thereby, in regard of the truth of God, on the one side
offering, and faith on the other side receiving; that whosoever believes may
as verily be assured of receiving the thing signified in his soul, as he is
made partaker of the sign in his body.

Use 1. In as much as the Sacraments are Significations, and Seals, of such
excellent things, they are with all reverence to be handled and esteemed, even
as means which exhibit to us and confirm the best blessings of God: In
regard therefore of their use by institution, they are things invaluable:
though in regard of that which is subject to the eye they be of little price.

Esteem then, not according to their outward value, but according to the
blessing annexed in their lawful use, and look more unto the gift, then the
means or manner of giving: For God measures our contempt, or irreuerence in
the Sacraments, not according to the worth of the Elements; but according to
the benefit offered in and by them: As the thing wherein Adam transgressed was
but an Apple, but the manner of sinning, even in that Apple, was most heinous.

As therefore men esteem of their Evidences, not according to the value of the
Paper and Wax, but according to their use: So are we to consider of the
Sacraments.

The Water in Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, are but
small matters: Yet no Bread or Wine in the world, none, the most precious water
that is, or can be distilled, though a drop were worth a Kingdom, may be
compared unto these, but in the like use. Adamah and Pharphar, Rivers of
Damascus, fairer then Jordan, yet cannot cleanse the leprosy: So there are many
waters which comfort the heart; but none but this cleanses the soul and
saves it. Wherefore all Ministers, Parents, and People, are reverently to carry
themselves, in, or at the administration of the holy Sacrament of Baptism: and
if they slightly reckon thereof (as in too many places is used) they are to be
reproved, as heinously guilty before God.

Use 2. Thankefully receive the holy things of God, for the confirmation of thy
faith: for though not in themselves, yet by Institution they have singular
virtue hereunto: I am persuaded we often want comfort, because we do not wisely
use the Sacraments to their use for the which they were appointed: Wherefore,
doubtest thou, or want thou comfort? Remember thy Baptism, as David when he
went to fight against Goliath, encouraged himself by his Circumcision: and go
with confidence to the Lords Table, the Lord will be present with his own
Ordinance; he is able to make them effectual, and cannot fail by them to
convey comfort and assurance to thee; if thou can do him this honor, as to
believe that he is able and true to fulfill all his Word: For God is faithful
and all his promises are sure; and as Bernard said: Neither does his Word
differ from his Meaning, because he is all Truth, nor his Deed from his Word,
because he is all Power and Strength, etc.

Use 3. Art thou baptized? then know, that thou art bound over to all manner of
obedience to God, and to the continual practice of Repentance, which if thou
do not, Romans 2.25, 26.
thy baptism is void. God promises in Baptism to be our God: but not so to
be, though we live as we list; but we for our parts promise also, to renounce
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and to serve him. Keep thou thy part, and
be sure the Lord will not fail to keep all his covenants on his part. But
wholely break thou thy promise, and thou shall never taste of the good
blessings of GOD promised to thee.

There is nothing more profitable then Baptism, yet it profited not Simon
Magus, because he wanted the invisible washing of the Spirit: therefore, if
thou would make the best profit of thy baptism, walk then in all holy
obedience, and unfeignedly repent of thy sins; yea thou art bound unto it:
Even as the Soldier by his preast money to serve in the wars: so thou by
this holy mark and character, which thou have received of God, art bound to
his service.

Thou have solemnly before God, his holy Angels and Saints, protested as much,
so as thou must needs be guilty of treacherous falsehood if thou performest it
not. Men think their words binds them to men; and Herod seems to make
conscience of an unlawful oath: make thou conscience much more of thy oath to
God, the breaking whereof brings upon thy soul an eternal guilt. Shall thou
by thy sins blot out the stamp of God which thou have received? Shall thou
vow service to GOD, and be the Devils slave? Have thou Gods mark in thy
forehead, and the devils in thy heart and life? Do thou receive the badge of
a Christian, and live like an Infidel? Thy Baptism shall not save thee, but
condemn thee rather: for thy sins are the greater, even as Balthasars
drunken feastings were the more abominable, for the abuse of the holy
Vessels: Even as the holy water of trial was to the suspected wife, if she
were faulty, mortal and deadly: but if not, it was a blessing: Number. 5.11
Even so the holy water of Baptism, to such as keep their promise in
sincerity brings a blessing, when to such as live profanely, and fear not
God, it is even a water of bitterness unto death.

Qu. What is the Sacrament af the Lords Supper?

Ans. The Supper of the Lord, is a Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted
by Christ, wherein by the taking and eating of the bread blessed, and broken,
and by drinking the wine being blessed, is signified and sealed to us the
Communion of the body of Christ crucified, Matthew. 28.26, 27, 28. Luke 22.19,
20. 1. Corint. 10.16. and 11.24, 25.
and his blood shed for us upon the Cross for remission of sins: and that
being incorporated into Christ by his Spirit, we might be more and more
strengthened in assurance of eternal life.

Explic. The Supper of the Lord is that other honorable Seal of Gods covenant
in Christ, by whom it was instituted: wherein are, as in all Sacraments, two
things: First, the visible Element, or outward sign: Second, the word. For as
Augustine says; The Word being added to the Element makes a Sacrament. The
Element or Sign is Bread blessed, broken, distributed, and eaten: and the Wine
blessed, distributed and drunk of the Church, or company present. Both those
are the outward sign: which though they be two materially (as they say) yet in
regard of the end and form, they are but one. Our Savior Christ intending
the nouriture of the Soul, by a similitude of the bodies nourishment, which
consists in bread and drink.

The word is the Promise added to the Sign in these words; This is my Body
which is given for you; This is my blood which etc. together with the
commandment in these words; Do this, etc. The element does represent the
invisible grace of the which the word speaks, and the Word declares what the
invisible grace is, which is represented and sealed by the Element. The outward
Sign then in this Sacrament, is the Bread and Wine as I have spoken. The
inward Grace, is the Body and Blood of Christ given, and shead for our sins;
and the Spiritual eating and drinking of them, whereby is signified our Union
with Christ by faith, by the which we draw from him Righteousness, Joy, and
eternal life, according to an excellent Analogy in this Sacrament.

Now these two, the Sign, and the thing signified, are united by the Word in
the lawful use of this Sacrament: which Union is only Sacramental, and
relative, whereby the sign is not changed into the thing signified; nor the
thing signified contained, in, under, or in the place of the Sign: but by the
Sign the thing signified is represented, offered, and sealed in the lawful use
to Believers. For Grace is not so tied to the Sacrament, that whosoever
partakes of the Sign, should also of the thing signified; or as none could
partake of the thing signified, without the Sign: For the unbelievers may have
the Lords Bread in their mouths, which never have Christ in their hearts; as
Believers may taste of the sweetness of the Lord in their souls, which (where
it can not be had) partake not of the Bread and Wine, which are the outward
Sign.

Quest. What is required that we may so partake of this Sacrament at the Lords
Table. that we may be partakers of the inward Grace of the Sacrament?

Ans. Whosoever would come worthily to this Sacrament, and to his benefit,
must first examine himself, 1. Cor. 11.28
and so eat and drink.

Explic. To be worthy, and to come worthily to the Lords Table, are two diverse
things: none are worthy of so great mercy; yet we come worthily when we try our
selves. Which trial is of our faith, and repentance. Concerning Faith, first,
whether we have a competent knowledge of the doctrine of the Sacrament, and why
it was instituted: secondly, whether we believe the pardon of our sins by
Jesus Christ. Concerning repentance, whether we have heretofore, or do now
unfeignedly repent of our sins, purposing to lead a new life: He which comes
to the Lords Table without Faith and Repentance, comes unworthily: and he which
finds them in himself, even in their beginnings, true, Math. 9.12. and 11.28.
though small and weak, comes worthily; for such Christ inuites.

Question. How often would you advise a Christian to receive the holy
Communion?

Ans. So often as there is occasion offered, and liberty granted lawfully to
receive the same. 1. cor. 11.25


Explic. Baptism is but once administered, as being the sacrament of our new
Birth; even as we are but once borne. But as being borne, we often eat to be
nourished, and to grow: so we are often to communicate and to come to the Lords
Table: first, that we may grow in Faith: secondly, that we may have occasion to
stir up our dullness, both to consider of, and to be thankful for the death
of Christ: thirdly, that we may testify our Remembrance of Christ: fourthly,
that we may keep Unity, and nourish Charity: fifthly, that we may immitate the
Apostolical church, who seldom came together without the word, prayer,
breaking of bread, and almesgiuing. Neither will this holy Sacrament grow into
contempt through the often use to the godly, Acts 2.42.
as we see in the frequent use of the word, and even of our daily bread.

Use 1. Prepare thy self often to come to the Lords Table, if occasion fitly be
offered: that thou tempt not GOD by neglecting his ordinance appointed for the
confirmation of thy Faith: And that thou may perform his commandment, who
says: Do this often in remembrance of me. And that thou may show forth the
Lords death till he come. Consider then, is once or twice a year enough for
thy discharge herein? Can thou so neglect the remembrance of his torments,
who was bruised for thy sins, and which bore thine iniquities? who has
delivered thee from Hell, and purchased Heaven for thee by his blood? Thy
Savior passing out of this world by a most bitter passion for thee, commends
himself to thee, and commands thee to remember him; and to testify this, and
thy thankfulness for his death, to come often to his Table: How then do
thou not show thy self ungrateful, and forgetful, which when occasion is
offered, churlishly turnest thy back? etc.

Use 2. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment
to himself. Beware therefore how thou presumest to come to the Lords Table
without thy wedding garment, without preparation. Holy things require holy
usage: first labor for faith, both to understand what the Mystery is, that
thou may discern the Lords body, and also to receive the grace that is
offered therein: which without faith thou receiuest not. He that believes has
benefit unspeakable by the ordinances of God: but without faith all is to us
in vain. Even as ye evidences of another man's land, are nothing available to
me, but to the Landholder they are of singular use: So the Sacraments are part
of the evidences of a believers hope, and seal to him Gods favor; but to
unbelievers they seal nothing, but their greater condemnation, if they repent
not. Even as if an unlearned man open a book, he sees the letters, but is
never the better, and cannot attain the meaning; but a man that is learned,
reads, and is instructed: So an vnbeleener sees the Bread and Wine, and
eats the sign; but the believer only has the benefit of the thing
signified, through his faith: For the spiritual grace is present, not to the
sign, but to the person believing. Even as Pharoh had a dream, but not the
interpretation, and as the noble man of Samaria saw the plenty, but tasted not
of it: Even se unbelievers, ignorants, unthankful for the death of Christ,
have the shell, but not the kyrnell; have that which goes into the body, not
that which blesses the soul. First therefore get faith.

Secondly, repent of thy sins, having an unfeigned and steadfast purpose always
hereafted to live godlily. If thou come with a hungring desire of the
righteousness of Christ, with a broken heart for that which is past, and with
a holy purpose for the time to come: then thou art welcome to thy Savior, and
shall without fail, taste of his sweetness; but if thou have been, and yet
art, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, Unclean, Proud, Covetous, Contentious, etc, and
have not unfeignedly repented, or at least do not begin to repent: For this
cause thou art guilty of the body and blood of Christ; being more fit to be at
the meetings of Turks and Infidels, then of such as profess Jesus Christ. Get
therefore Repentance also. And testify this thy repentance not only by a show
of sorrow and sobriety the day thou come to the Lords Table, but all the
days of thy life after. Many have I seen, which on that day have gone softly,
spoken patiently, looked sorrowfully, behaved themselves gravely; which within
a day or two, have with the swine returned to the wallowing in the mire; and,
with the dog, to the vomit of their former evil courses. But understand
thou, that even as when a man has escaped the danger of some great distemper
of surfeit, it is not enough for him to keep a good diet a day or two: So it
is not a days obedience, or two, nor such fits of devotion, which vanish as a
flash of lightning, that will approve our faith, repentance, and profession;
but it is perseverance in these holy duties, when the savor of the Sacrament
remains with us all the days of our life. Therefore even as Daniel was the
fairer and better favored by his diet of Pulse: so it is required, and the
Lord erpects, that if thou eat and drink at his table, thou should be the
fairer by it, and the better reformed in thy conversation: And if thou be
notwithstanding ill-fauoured, that is, without Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Obedience, Patience, Temperance, Charity, etc. it is a manifest argument that
thou have a foul and corrupted conscience, that thou have received unworthily,
and so art in danger of the wrath of God.

Qu. You said, that some think Discipline to be a note of the true Church:
What is that Discipline?

Ans. It is that power in the Church, by the consent and approbation of the
Christian Magistrate; whereby, by persons fit and lawfully called,
Constitutions are made, 1. Cor. 5.3.4. and 14.40.
both for comeliness and order in the worship of God, and for the censuring of
profane livers.

Expl. Though a true Church may be without this power of Discipline, yet be
well without it, it cannot; both that the ministry of the holy things may with
the greatest reverence and profit be performed; and also that the Church may
be holy, and a maintainer thereof: First then, because without order things
cannot well proceed, or continue, and God is the God of order, the hold that
ye Church has power to make Canons and Constitutions: but with a threefold
restraint: First, that they be only about matters Ecclesiastical: Every man
is to keep within the compass of his calling. Secondly, that as concerning
the worship of God, they be determinations of circumstances, necessary and
profitable, as concerning time, place, order, meetings, manner of reading
Scriptures, etc. In all which, comeliness, order, edification of the Church,
and avoiding of offense are to be respected: and such determinations in their
own nature to remain mutable, and to be altered, as the Magistrate shall see
it make for the good of ye Church. Thirdly, that if there be a Christian
Magistrate, they be with his consent and authority: because the authority of
making and confirming laws, concerning both the civil and Ecclesiastical
good of the subjects, is principally in ye chief civil Magistrate. This order
being observed, ye Ecclesiastical things, as dispensation of the Word and
Sacraments, and execution of Discipline be handled; not by lay persons, but by
Ecclesiastical persons only, by the authority of God and the Prince.

For the other part, which concerns Ecclesiastical censures, this is to be
remembered, that properly they are not executed by mulcts, fines, hodily smart,
imprisonment, death, and such like, which are proper to the power of a civil
Magistrate; but by admonition, Mat. 20.25 26. 1. Pet. 5.3.
reproof, suspension, and excommunication. The highest degree of
Ecclesiastical censures, is excommunication, when notorious and stubborn
offenders are cast out of the Church, the parties deserving this censure, being
notorioufly profane, and there being extreme danger of offense, and of the
infection of others by their society. In the execution whereof, proceeding must
be, as in the body, in the cutting of a member; which is, when no means will
recover it, and least it should procure decay to the whole body, then to cut it
off, though it be with grief.

Also, excommunication is not absolutely to be executed, but on the contumacy
of the delinquent: for the party, as a lost sheep is both carefully to be
sought up, and if he repent, to be with all rejoicing and love, received again
into the fellowship of the Church: for the end of excommunication must be:
first, that holy things be not given to dogs. Secondly, Math. 7.7.
that the Church may free herself from an evil fame, of suffering them which
dishonor God. Thirdly, 1. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 5.6.
lest others be infected. Fourthly, that such as offend may be ashamed, and
come to repentance, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 1. Cor. 5.5.
that their Spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord.

And this order of censuring offenders, and excommunication, ought to be
perpetual in the Church; because the causes thereof are universal and
perpetual, which are those four before mentioned, together with the
commandment of Christ: 1. Cor. 5.4.
and Paul testifies, that the incestious person ought to be excommunicated in
the name of Christ, that is, by his authority, and according to his
commandment: yea, and this to be in force in all Churches, even which are
under Christian Magistrates: for otherwise does the civil Magistrate punish,
otherwise ye Church. The Church aims at the repentance of ye offender: the
civil Magistrate at ye execution of justice. The Church proceeds not to
excommunication, where ye delinquent repents and obeys. The civil
Magistrate, notwithstanding the repentance of the party, executes the law, as
Joshua, notwithstanding the confession of Achan, Joshua 7.
caused him to be destroyed.

Use. 1. All such whom it concerns to deal in Ecclesiastical censures, ought
to beware of all filthy lucre, and faithfully discharge yt which is committed
unto the^, and to censure them which are profane accordingly, for the glory of
God, the good of the Church, the repentance of them which offend, and the
furthering of their own accounts at the last day.

Use 2. Art thou profane? a drunkard, a blasphemer, an usurer, a breaker of
the sabbath, etc. and deseruest thou to be stricken with ye thunderbolt of
excommunication, and yet escapest by thy purse, or otherways? yet know thou,
whatsoever thou art, that although either through the corruption of them which
excecute the same Discipline, thou continuest in the fellowship of the Church,
yet in the account of ye Lord, thou art excluded from all spiritual privileges
of the Church, till thou repent, not being worthy to sit among the dogs of ye
flock, (as one may say) and the less thou answerest for here, through the
silence of ye laws, the more thou have to answer before Jesus Christ at the
day of Judgment.

Q. You seem to say, that where there is a Christian civil Magistrate, there
the Church ought to expect his consent, and by his authority make
Constitutions, and Canons: Do you then think that the Clergy, or Churchmen,
are subject to the Civil Magistrate?

Ans. Yes verily do I: and so God plainly teaches in his word: Romans 13.1 Tit.
3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13 14.15.
Let every soul be subject, etc. Whether Apostle, Prophet or Bishop.

Q. What is the civil Magistracy, or Government?

Ans. It is an ordinance of God for the good of men, whereby they are governed
by good laws, both Divine and humane, that public peace may be preserved,
Romans 13.4. Pro. 8.15. Dan. 2.21. Ioh. 19.11.
the good maintained, the evil punished, the worship and glory of God set
forth?

Q. What is the office of the civil Magistrate?

Ans. The office of the supreme Magistrate is to keep and maintain both the
Tables of the moral law: Deu. 17.18 19. 2. Chro. 19 6.
and to minister right, judgment and justice to his subjects.

Q. What is the power of the superior Magistrate?

Ans. In things divine, it is limited by the word: but in humane things, and
civil, it is wonderful large: as namely, to command all his subjects in
matters concerning the public good of all, or the private good of some: To
compel all orders Ecclesiastical or Civil, to do their duties, and to punish
the stubborn. To command the bodies and goods of his subjects in matters
lawful. To exact Tribute, Custom, Subsidies, Taxes, Tenthes, etc. for the
maintaining of his honor and magnificence, and for the bearing of the public
charge. To make and confirm laws for the civil policy of his Jurisdiction,
Job. 34.18. Eccles. 8.3 4. Dan. 5.19.
and to define all matters and causes by the same. And in a word, the Civil
supreme Magistrate is in all causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, supreme Governor, next under Christ: 1. Sam. 15.14.
as also in the examples of the good Kings of Judah appears.

Q. What is the duty of Subjects?

Ans. The duty of subjects may be referrred to these heads: 1. Pet. 2.18. Romans
13.1. Tit. 3.1, 1. Tim. 2.1. 2. Ier. 29.7. Pro. 24.21.22. Romans 13.6.
1. Reverence, 2. Obedience. 3. Piety. 4. Faithfulness. 5. Thankfulness.

Expl. One of the greatest blessings which God has given to men, is Order, and
Government, without which through confusion, all things would soon come to
ruin: For as a Ship without a Pilot, so is a Company, or Society, of men,
without a King, or other lawful Magistrate: Therefore it was well said of
Tacitus; That it is better to have an evil Prince then none: And of S.
Chrysostom; It is better to have a Tyrant, then no Governor: And ye Scripture
makes mention, that the state of the people of Israel was never worse (while
they were a free people) then when they were without continual Governors: Yea
Nature, even in reasonlesse and brute creatures, acknowledges Order and
Government, as in ye Bees, etc. This great benefit came from the Lord, as all
other good things.

The prime care of the Sovereign Magistrate must be to maintain the first
Table of the Law: Kissing the Son, and doing homage unto Christ: and
therefore to maintain the true worship of God, and to forbid, and utterly to
extirpate, the contrary: And yet this so to be understood, ye through ye
necessity of dangerous times, he may suffer such as are superstitious, and do
err; that some Commonwealth and Religion may be had, rather then none at all.
It belongs to the Prince, to see ye the true Doctrine be taught; but to
administer the same, and teach it in public, it belongs to Ministers and
Ecclesiastical persons: It belongs to his Authority to appoint ordinary
judgments Ecclesiastical, to maintain Schools, Universities, etc. whereby
fit Bishops and Ministers may beset over ye Flock of Christ, and to make laws,
whereby such Pastors and Teachers, may be directed, corrected, suspended,
deprived, as matters shall require. It is his Authority which may call and
moderate, Prouincionall. National, General Syneds, appoint Fasts, etc. Yea,
he ought to punish Heretics, Idolaters, Blasphemers, etc. as well as
Murderers, Thieves, etc. and to do all things which may further ye Spiritual
good of his Subjects, and to take away the contrary: Romans 13.4.
For he bears not the Sword in vain. So Moses appointed the worship of God,
and prescribed it to Aaron; David disposed the Ministry of ye Tabernacle,
called a Convocation, or Synod, for the bringing of the Arc: Solomon
dedicated the Temple, deposed Abiathar: Iehoshaphat commanded the Priests and
Elders to visit the Churches, and to restore ye worship of God: As also did
other good Kings of Judah, as appears in their Stories, which they did not
only of Piety, but even of Office: So also have Christian Emperors, called
Ccuncels, moderated Controversies of Religion; advanced good Bishops, repressed
bad, and made Laws concerning Bishops, Ministers, and holy things for the
welfare of the Church, and the glory of God: For the Magistrate is the Father
of the Commonwealth; yea Esaias says: Esa. 49.23.
That Kings and Queens are nursing Fathers and Mothers of the Church:
Constantine the Great, said: ye the Bishops were Ouer-seers in the Church, and
He a Bishop or Ouer-seer out of the Church.

For the Duty, or Office, of the chief Magistrate, in the maintaining the
second Table, I need not say any thing, for none is so ignorant, as not to
know, that the procuring of the civil good of men belongs to the Supreme
Governor.

For the power of Magistrates, See ye Scriptures, in the Answer unto ye
Question, and for this they are called Gods, the Sons of the most High, not
by Nature, but by Office and Dignity; being the Images of God, and his Deputies
Royal on earth: The Ministers also of God, etc. Whose Power it is better, and
fitter, for Subjects to fear and obey, then to dispute or determine. Eccl.
8.3.4.


Concerning the duties of Subjects: The first is, Reverence, which is a godly
subjection in Heart, Word, and Deed: Thinking and Judging honorably of the
Magistrate, even of the lowest: Looking not to his person, whether good or bad,
but the Person he represents which is GOD. Speaking reverently, Ex. 22.28.
Act. 23.5. 1. Reg. 1.23.31.
Using all lowly Gestures: Yea this requires, that Subjects interpret the
sayings and doings of the Magistrate to the best, and to conceal and cover
their faults, giving fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor belongs.

The second Duty is Obedience, Eccl. 8.2.
to be performed by all persons, and in all things possible (the contrary
whereof God commands not) though hard and unequal, not examining what it is
which is commanded, but being content with this, Mat. 22.21.
that it is commanded: And this obedience must be to all Governors, to the
King as Superior, and to the rest appointed by him, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
and to these, whether Christian or Heathen, Good or Bad, Merciful or Cruel,
for there is no power but of God. Romans 13.1.


The third is Piety, that Subjects pray for their Governors: Yea, 1. Tim. 2.1.
Ier. 29.7.
though they were Infidels, or Wicked: Thus did Daniel, Thus did the Ancient
Christians for the Heathen Emperors, for their long life and safety, for their
Issue and Offspring, for their quiet Government; that their Council might be
Wise and Faithful, their Arms Victorious, their People Loyal, etc.

The fourth is Faithfulness, which requires that Subjects be quiet and
peaceable, and true-hearted in all Loyal Allegiance: that they be not
Traiterous or Seditious, raising, or consenting to Tumults, Insurrections,
Mutynies, etc. but that they reveal such things speedily, and that what they
can, by all good, possible, and lawful means, they do defend and keep safe,
the Health, Life, Person, Cause, Crown, Dignity, and Family of the Supreme
Magistrate, against all Opposites whatsoever; 2. Sam. 16.9. and 20.22. and
21.16.17 2. Reg. 11.2.4. 1. Ioh. 3.16.
yea, with the loss of their own best blood: For if we must lay down our
lives for our Brethren, much more for our Fathers.

The fifth is Thankfulness, which is a ready and cheerfulloue, which is to be
showed in a willing paying of tribute, and bearing such charges as are imposed
by the King or superior magistrate: in as much as the treasure of the King is
the sinew of the common wealth, and because he watches and cares for all, To.
13.6.7.
and defends all: So Joseph and Mary travel willingly to be taxed. Yea our
Savior Christ, Mat. 17.27.
and Peter pay tribute; none are exempt, for if Christ and Peter, then why not
their successors? And all these things, Subjects are to do cheerfully and
willingly, even to wicked princes; not only for fear, but for conscience
toward God, 1. Pet. 2.18 Romans 13.5.
who accounts himself neglected, resisted, and opposed, when his deputies are
resisted, opposed, Romans 13.
or neglected.

Use 1. First, it is the duty of Ministers, well to instruct, and to put their
hearers in remembrance of these things, that they may know their duty to
their Governors, and perform allegiance accordingly, wherein is a great part
of the welfare of the Common wealth. Tit. 3.1.


Use 2. Hence it appears that the Pope with his limbs are the great rebels
of the world; for not only pulling their necks, as Ecclesiastical persons
from the yoke of the Emperor and their Sovereigns; but specially for seeking
to ouerrule, depose, and destroy, the kings, and kingdoms of the earth.

Use 3. Learn thy duty. Thy calling is to be subject. Pray for the prosperity
of the King, his children, and dominions: Speak not evil: Jude 8.
but reverence in word and deed the chief and all vnder-magistrates; yea,
think not an evil thought: Eccles. 10.20, etc.
Beware of Sedition, by the example of Corah, Absolon, Sheba etc. Obey for
conscience. Quarrel not, neither murmr at the commandment, though unequal
and hard, if not impious to be done: yea, if it be doubtful, examine it not,
but obey. Pay all subsidies, taxes, customs, etc. willingly, yea though it go
hard with thee, and thine, and thou be feign to borrow it. Do it of conscience,
and thou shall be the more blessed in thy substance. Remember Christ had it not
when it was due, and he willingly paid: and surely, if we must willingly pay
to a Heathen, much more to a Christian, religious, merciful, and renowned
king. Draw not thy neeke out of the yoke, and being able, go not about to be
eased of that which is thy duty in conscience to pay. It is no part of a good
subject, or of one that loves his Prince or Common wealth, to seek to be free,
or to be eased oboue his Equals, in a common burden, the benefit whereof
comes to himself. It is a thing too much practiced in these days, to the
great hindrance and damage of the Kings excellent Majesty, the Country, and
many particular men.

Use 4. Praise God, for establishing so worthy, religious, peaceable, learned,
and famous a King over us, through whom we enjoy, peace, liberty, plenty, hope
of succession, and the sweet comfort of our Souls, the holy Gospel. And let
all true hearted subjects pray, for the safety and preservation, of the person,
life, crown, and dignity of our most gracious King, James by the grace of God,
King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and
in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, within
these his dominions, next and immediately under Jesus Christ, supreme Governor,
who is ye very breath of our nostrils: that God would bless our most virtuous
Q. Anne his wife; our hopeful Prince Charles; the Lady Elizabeth her
Highness, with her renowned Husband: That God would direct with wisdom and
piety, all the Honorable of his Majesty's Privy Council; bless all the
reverend Fathers of the Church; that he would endue all the Nobles and Gentry
of ye Kings dominions, with fortitude, courage, and loyalty; and all the grave
and Honorable Judges; right worshipful Justices, and other inferior
Magistrates, with the knowledge and conscience of Equity, Justice, and Right;
all the Ministers of the Word with ability of gifts, and conscionable care,
and diligence in the Lords harvest; and all the Commons with peaceable, loyal,
and religious minds, and affections: that God would hold back the Judgments
we have deserved; and continue and increase upon us and our posterity his
undeserved mercies, bodily and spiritual, to his own glory, and the temporal
and eternal comfort of us all, through our princely Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

So be it.

Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be
honor, 1. Tim. 1.17
and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

