A CONFERENCE ABOUT THE NEXT SVCCESSION TO THE CROWN OF INGLAND, DIVIDED IN TO
TWO PARTS.

VVHERE-OF THE FIRST CONTEYNETH THE discourse of a civil Lawyer, how and in
what manner propinquity of blood is to be preferred. And the second the speech
of a Temporal Lawyer, about the particular titles of all such as do or may
pretend within Ingland or without, to the next succession.

Where unto is also added a new and perfect arbor or genealogy of the
discents of all the kings and princes of Ingland, from the conquest unto this
day, whereby each man's pretense is made more plain.

DIRECTED TO THE RIGHT HOnorable the earl of ESSEX of her Majesty's privy
council, and of the noble order of the Garter.

Published by R. DOLEMAN.

Imprinted at N. with License.

M. D. XCIIII.

THE SUM OF BOTH PARTS MORE IN PARTICVLER.
THe first declares by many proofs and arguments that the next propinquitie
or ancetry of blood alone, though it were certainly known, yet that it is not
sufficient to be admitted to a crown, without other conditions and
circumstances requisite be found also in the person prete^dent.

THe second examineth the titles and pretentions of al such as may have claim
or action to the crown of Ingland at this day, what may be said for them, and
what against them, and in the end, though he leave the matter extreme doubtful
as touching the best right, yet he gives certain conjectures about some
persons that are lykest to prevail.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF ESSEX, OF HER MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCEL.
VVo principal causes among others (right honorable) are wo^t to inuit me^ to
dedicate any book or treatise to a person in authority, the one private duty
and obligation, the other publiquevtility, in respect that the matter may
concearne that person for the common good. And to confess the truth, both of
these jointly, have moved me at this time, to present unto your honor above
others, the two books ensuing, which conteyne a conference had in Holland not
long since, about the pretenses and pretenders to the crown of Ingland, as
your honor shall perceive by the preface of each book, and therefore hereof I
shall need say no more, but only declare the fore said two causes of this
dedication.

First then I say, that my particular obligation toward your honors person,
rises partly of good turns and benefits received by some friends of mine at
your Lordships hands, in your last voyage and exploits in France, but
principally of far greater favors received from your noble ancestors, I mean
not only your father whose untimely death was to England no small wound, but
of your gra^dfather also, that worthy Knight Sir Walter Deuorax who though he
lived not to come to those titles of honor, whereunto he was borne; yet left he
behind him so rare a memory for his excellent parts of lerning, wit, feuter
of body, courtesy, and other such noble comme^dations, as none in Ingland
perhapps the like in our time, wherein also has lived your honors great
grandfather Sir Henry Deuorax visconde Ferys well remembered yet by diverse of my
said friends obliged unto him, as also recorded by our Inglish histories, as
well for his merits and worthiness, as in like manner for his match with the
heir of the most famous and noble house of the Bourchers earls of Essex,
whereof also your honor Polyd in vita H. s.
is known to be disce^ded, and to hold at this day as well their nobility of
blood as dignity of title, and this shall serve in this place for my
particular obligation, whereof perhapps here-after upon other occasion, I may
give further relation and testimony to the world, in token of my gratitude.

But for the second point of public utility, I thought no man more fit
then your honor to dedicate these two books unto, which treat of the
succession to the crown of Ingland, for that no man is in more high and
eminent place or dignity at this day in our realm, then your self, whether
we respect your nobility, or calling, or favor with your prince, or high
liking of the people, and consequently no man like to have a greater part or
sway in deciding of this great affair (when time shall come for that
determination) then your honor, and those that will assist you and are likest
to follow your fame and fortune.

And for that it is not convenient for your honor to be unskillful in a
matter which concerns your person and the whole realm, so much as this does,
and finding this conference had by two learned Lawyers, to handle the question
very, pithely and exactly, and yet with much modestye, and without offense of
any, and with particular affection and devotion to her Majesty, and with
special care of her safetye: I thought not expedient to let it lie vnpublished,
as also I judged that no hands were fitter to receive the same, nor any
protection more secure or plausible, then that of your honor, whom God long
preserve in all true honor and felicity, to the comfort of your Lordships
faithful servants and clyents, and to the public benefit of your country:
from my chamber in Amsterdame this last of December. 1593.

Your honors most affectionate R. DOLEMAN.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
THE preface containing the occasion of this treatise, with the subject,
purpose, and parts thereof.

That succession to government by neernes of blood is not by Law of nature, or
divine, but only by humane and positive Laws of every particular common
wealth, and consequently, may upon just causes be altered by the same, Cap. 1.
fol. 1.

Of the particular form of Monarchies and kingdoms, and the different Laws
whereby they are to be obtained, holden, and governed in diverse countries,
according as each common wealth has chosen and established. Cap. 2. fol. 15.

Of the great reverence and respect dew to kings, and yet how diverse of them,
have bine lawfully chastised by their common wealths for their misgouerment,
and of the good and prosperous suecesse that god commonly has given to the
same; and much more to the putting back of an unworthy pretender. Cap. 3. fol.
37.

VVherin consists principally the lawfulnes of proceeding against Princes,
which in the former chapter is mentioned, what interest Princes have in their
subjects goods or lives: how oaths do by nde or may be broken by subjects
toward their Princes: and finally the difference between a good king and a
Tyrant. Cap. 4. fol. 63.

Of the Coronation of Princes, and manner of their admitting to their
authority, and the oaths which they do make in the same, unto the common
wealth, for their good government. Cap. 5. fol. 82.

What is dew to only succession by birth, and what interest or right an heir
apparent has to the crown, before he is crowned or admitted by the common
wealth, and how justly he may be put back, if he have not the parts requisite.
Cap. 6. fol. 121.

How the next in succession by propinquity of blood, have oftentimes bin put
back by the common wealth, and others further of admitted in their places, even
in those kingdoms where succession prevails, with many examples of the
kingdoms of Israel and Spain. Cap. 7. fol. 140.

Of diverse other examples out of the states of France and Ingland, for proof
that the next in blood are sometimes put back from succession, and how god has
approved the same with good success. Cap. 8. fol. 164.

What are the principal points which a commonwealth ought to respect in
admitting or excluding any Prince, wherein is handled largly also of the
diversity, of religions, and other such Causes. Cap. 9. fol. 197.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK.
THe preface with the intention and protestation of the Lawyer to treat this
matter without the hurt or prejudice of any.

Of diverse books and treatises that have bin written heretofore about the
titles of such as pretend the crown of Ingland, and what they do conteyne in
favor or disfavor of diverse pretendors. Cap. 1. fol. 1.

Of the succession of the crown of Ingland from the conquest unto the time of
king Edward the third, with the beginning of three principal linages of the
Inglish blood royal, dispersed into the houses of Britanie Lancaster and York.
Cap. 2. fol. 12.

Of the succession of Inglish kings from king Edward the third unto our days,
with the particular causes of dissension between the families of York and
Lancaster more largly declared. Cap. 3. fol. 37.

Of the great and general controversy and contention between the said two
houses royal of Lancaster and York, and which of them may seem to have had
the beteer right to the crown, by way of succession. Cap. 4. fol. 56.

Of five principal and particular houses or linages that do or may pretend the
crown of Ingland at this day, which are the houses of Scotland, of Suffolck,
of Clarence, of Britanie, and of Portugal, and first of all the house of
Scorland, which conteyneth the pretentions of the king of Scotts,and of the
Lady Arbella. Cap. 5. fol. 107.

Of the house of Suffolk containing the claymes as well of the countess of
Darby and of her children as also of the children of the earl of Hartfort.
Cap. 6. fol. 130.

Of the houses of Clarence and Britany, which conteyneth the claymes of the
carle of Huntington, and of the Lady Infanta of Spain and others of these two
families. Cap. 7. fol. 141.

Of the house of Portugal which conteyneth the claymes as well of the king and
Prince of Spain to the succession of Ingland, as also of the dukes of Parma
and Bragansa by the house of Lancaster. Cap. 8. fol. 160.

Whether it be better to be under a foreign or homborne Prince, and whether
under a great and mightic monarch, or under a little Prince or king. Cap. 9.
fol. 193.

Of certain other secondary or collateral lines and how extreme doubtful at
the pretenses be, and which of all thease pretenders are most like by
probability to prevail in the end,and to get the crown of Ingland. Cap. 10.
fol. 233.

THE PREFACE, CONTAINING THE OCCASION OF THIS TREATIS, with the subject,
purpose, and parts thereof.
THERE chanced not long ago (I mean in the months of April and May of this
last year 93.) to mete in Amsterdam in Holland certain Gentlemen of diverse
nations, qualities and affections, as well in religion as otherwise: (yet the
most part Inglish and Irish) and they had bine in diverse countries, studied
different arts, and followed unlike professions: some of souldiars, Occasions
of meeting.
some of lawyers both temporal and civil, others of mere trauelors to learn
experience and policy: And for that the aduises which daily came from Ingland
at that time, (the parliament being then in hand) gave occasion to discourse of
Inglish affairs, they fell into diverse points concerning the same: but yet
none was treated so largly or so seriously, as was the matter of succession The
matter of succession discussed.
and competitors to the crown, for that it was presumed a great while, that
some thing would be determined thereof in that parliament, though one or two of
the wisest of that company, held ever the contrary opinion. But when at lenght
news was brought, that nothing at al had bin done therein, but rather that one
or two (as was reported) had bin checked or committed for M. Bromely M. V
Ve^rvvorth.
speaking in the same: then came it in question among these Gentlemen, what
should be the causes of such proceeding in a matter so weighty and so necessary
for all Inglish men to know?

But two Gentlemen Lawyers of the company, one Two lavvers.
of the common law, and the other a Ciuilian, alleged so many reasons for
justifying the Queens Majesty's doings in this behalf, as al did seem
satisfied: for that it was made plain, that it could not stand with the
safety either of her Majesty, or of the realm, or of the party himself who
should be preferred, that any declaration of heir apparent should be made,
during the life of her Majesty that now is, how dangerons soever the delay
thereof may be esteemed for the time to come.

And so the end of this speech, brought in presently the beginning of an other,
to wit, what wear like to be these dangers, and who might be likest of the
pretendors to prevail after her Majesty, about which matter, there was much
discoursed by diverse parties, but the conclusion of al, was, that both these
points remained very doubtful, but much more the second, who should prevail,
of the competitors, which they said, did make the former point less doubtful
of the multitude of dangers, that thereby did hang over the common wealth of
Ingland, though it wanted not doubt also in particular, what and where they
should fall, for (said they) whersoeuer many pretenders of the blood royal are
known to be competitors to a crown, there cannot choose but many perilles also
must be imminent to the realm.

To this, one of the company said, that he did not see how there could be either
so many pretenders to the crown as the day before had bin spoken of in that
place (for the common lawyer before named newly come Many pre tendors to the
crown of England.
out of Ingland, had told them that he had hard of some 9. or 10. or more
plotts that were debated within the realm, for so many pretenders) or if there
were any such great number descended of the blood royal, yet their titles
could not be so doubtful, seeing it was an easy matter to discern, who was
next in descent of blood, and who not.

Not so easy, quoth this Gentleman lawyer, for that although it cannot be
denied, but that there is among al such as may pretend at this day: a certain
known order and degree of neernes in blood to some king or Queen that has
possessed the crown before them: and in this descent it is known also
commonly, who descends of the elder house, and who of the younger, and other
such like vulgar circumstances: yet notwithstanding for that there be many other
points considerable in this affair, as the right of the first stock,
Succession doubtful and why.
whereof each part does spring, the disabling of the same stock afterward by
attainders or otherwise: the bastardies or other particular impedime^ts that
may have fallen upon each descent or branch thereof: al these things (said he)
may alter the course of common supposed right, in him or her, that is taken to
be next in blood, as proving them not to be truly and lawfully the nerest,
though they be the next in degree.

As for example (said he) the whole multitude of Three or four principal
heads of praetendors.
competitors or pretenders which I conceive may come in consideration, or have
action or claim to the crown after her Majesty that now is, may be reduced to
three or four first heads or principal stocks, to wit, to the house of
Lancaster a part, as descendcd of John of Gant Duke of Lancaster by his first
wife Blanch, sole heir of the Duchy of Lancaster. And of this branch or
stock the most known offspring in these our days are 1. Lancaster.
those Princes that are lineally descended of Don Iuan the first surnamed de boa
memoria, tenth king of Portugal, who married with Philip the eldest daughter of
the said John of Gant by his first wife Blanch: and these Princes are king
Phillip of Spain now king also of Portugal, and the Dukes of Parma and
Braganza, who descended of the same race, as also the Duke of Sauoy one degree
after them.

The second stock is of the house of york a part, 2. York.
descending of George the Duke of Clarence second brother to king Edward the
fourth, who being put to death by the kings order in Cales left a daughter by
whom are descended the Earl of Huntington with his brothers, which also have
children, and the offspring of Geffrey Pole and Sir Thomas Barrington who
married the other sister of her that was married to the Hastings.

The third stock was in king Henry the seuenthe who being himself of the house
of lancaster and 3. The two houses joined.
warying the eldest daughter of Edward the fourth of the house of york, is
presumed to have joined these two houses together, and from this man by his two
daughters (for of his son who was king Henry the eight there remains only
the Queeue that now is) there has proceeded the house of Scotland divided into
the famylies of the king of Scots and Arbella, as also the progeny of the two
Earls yet living of Hartford and Darby. Unto these three heads, which are
commonly known to al men, some of ourdayes do add also a fourth, which may
seem more ancient then either of al these three, to wit by the Dukes of
Brytaine, who are descended diverse ways of the blood royal of Ingland as may
easily be declared, whose heir at this day by lineal descent is the Enfanta of
Spain named Dona Ysabella Clara Eugenia daughter to king Philipp. So that
heerby we come to discover, no less then ten or eleven famylies that may
pretend, and have al of them friends in Ingland, and else where (as yesterday I
told you) who do not fail in secret to negotiat and lay plotts for them, for
that there are none of these, so far of, but to their friends it seems (the
times standing as they do) that reasons may be given for their preferment, and
good hope conceived of preualying.

You do well to add (said a Captain there present) Circumstances of the time
present.
the times standing as they do, or at least wise as they are like to stand,
when this matter must come to trial, at what time, I believe, not you lawyers,
but we souldiars must determyne this title, and then (no doubt) if there were
not only these tenn by you named, but twenty moore also of the blood royal, that
would pretend, and had friends and money to stand by them, we should admit their
causes to examination and perhapps give sentence for him, that by your laws
would sonest be excluded, for when matters come to snatching, it is hard to say
who shall have the bet ter part.

I do not ad this circumstance of the time (said the lawyer) as though it were
the only or principal point which makes doubtful the matter of succession,
though I confess that it helps thereunto greatly, in respect of the great
variety of men's affections, at this day in religion, which do incline them
commonly to judge for him, whom they best love: but besides this I do say, that
were the times never so quiet, and religion never so uniform: yet are there
great doubts in many men's heads, about the lawfulnes of diverse pretentions of
the famylies before named: but if you add unto this, the said wonderful
diversity in matters of religion also, which this time yealdeth: you shall find
the event much more doubtful, and consequently it is no marvel though many
may remain in hope to prevail, seeing that where many are admitted to stand for
a preferment, there diverse may have probality also of speeding.

An example you may take, (said the Ciuilia^ lawyer) in the Roman Conclaue, at
the popes election, where, The Roman conclaue.
among three or sower score Cardinales that enter in for electors, few there
are, that have not hope also to be elected, not for that they see themselves,
all as well qualified, as others: but because oftentimes when diverse that are
more forward by, likely hode cannot be agreed upon: it falls to the lot of
hun that is fardest of, and so it may among your pretender's (quoth he) in
Ingland.

Your example (said the temporal lawyer confirms somewhat of that I mean
though it be not al together in like matter, or manner for that the pope is
made by election, and here we talk of a king by succession.

Your succession, said the Ciuilian, includes also an election or approbation
of the common wealth and so Succession includes also some kind of election.
does the succession of al kings in Christendom besides, as well appears by
the manner of their new admission at their coronations, where the people are
demanded again, if they be content to accept such a man for their King:
though his title of neernes by Of this more afterward Cap 4. and 5.
blood, be never so clear. And therefore much more it is like to be in this
case of Inglish pretenders now, where their lawful neernes in blood is so
doubtful as you have signified, and so I do come to confirm your former
proposition, of the doubtfulnes of the next successor in Ingland with an other
reason besides that which you have alleged of the ambiguity of their true
propoinquity in blood: for I say further, that albeit the neernes of each man's
succession in blood, were evidently known, yet were it very uncertain (as
things now stand in Ingland and in the rest of Christendom rownd about) who
should prevail, for that it is not enough for a man to be next only in blood,
thereby to pretend a crown, but that other circumstances also must concur,
which if they want, the bare propinquity or ancetrie of blood may justly be
rejected, and he that is second, Neernes only in blood not sufficient.
third, fourth, fifth or last, may lawfully be preferred before the first, and
this by all law both divine and humane and by all reason, conscience, and custom
of al nations, christian.

To this said the temporal lawyer, you go further (Sir) then I had meant to do
or did conceive of the matter, for my meaning only was to show how many
pretenders there be to the Inglish crown at this day, and how doubtful the
pretentions of diverse of the chief of them be, in respect of the many
exclusions, stoppes and bars that their adversaries or fellow competitors do
lay against them: and now you do add further, that albeit these stoppes were
taken away, and their propinquity in blood were manifest, yet for other
considerations the course of their next succession by birth may be justly
altered, upon such considerations as you insinuate, that the Inglish may have
in the admission of their next king or Queen, after her Majesty that now is,
which in deed (if it be true) makes the matter of succession much more
doubtful, then I pretended, which I confess I have not so much studied or
thought of, for that our common law goes no further ordinarily, then to the
next successor in blood, to consider whether he be lawfully descended or no,
thereby to give him the crown.

I confess (said the Ciuilian) that ordinarily nether your law, nor ours does
go any further, especially in those realms where the government goes by
succession More to be considered besides succession in the pretendors.
of blood, which I think to be the best of al other ways, but yet there may
happen out such extraordinary cases some times, against this ordinary rule, as
your common law must needs take also consideration of them except it will be
contrary to al other law and reason both divine and humane, as for example, if
it should fall out, that the next in blood should be a natural fool or a madd
man: if he should be taken by Turks or Moors in his infancy and brought up in
their religion and would maintain the same in your country, with all his
forces; and other like urgent cases, wherein it is not probable, but that your
common law must needs have further consideration, then of the bare propinquity
of blood only, for that otherwise it should be a very imperfect law, that has
not provided for accidents so weighty and important, as these are, for saving
and conseruing of your common wealth.

At this speech, the residew of the company began to smile, to see the two
lawyers grow into some heat and comparison of their professions. But yet for
that both their asseuerations, did tendc to prove one thing, which was the
first proposition set down, to wit, that the next successor of Ingland must
needs be very doubtful: they requested them both with very great instance, that
each one would be content to prove his Two principal points handled in this
book.
assertion a part, to wit, the temporal lawyer to show that the titles and
pretensions of al those ten or eleven familyes of the Inglish blood royal,
which remain at this day, are ambiguous and doubtful, according to the common
laws of Ingland: and the ciuilian to declare that albeit their titles by
successiou were clear, yet that as things stand now in that realm, and other
countries near adjoining, there may be a great doubt which of them shall
prevail.

This I say, was the request of the whole company, and the lawyers were content
to take it upon them, and according to these two points it was agreed that the
whole speech or conference, should be divided into two parts, and that the
civil lawyer, should begin first, for Two parts of this conference.
that it seemed, that his assertion, being well declared and proved, would give
much light to the other, and so he promised to do, and to be as brief, clear
and perspicuous as he might, and to reduce all that he would say to certain
principal heads and chapters thereby the better to be understood and remembered,
and so he began in manner and form following.

THAT SVCCESSION TO GOVERNMENT BY NEERNES OF BLOOD IS NOT by law of nature or
divine, but only by humane and positive laws of every particular common wealth
and consequentely may upon just causes be altered by the same.
CAP. I.
THE examples before alleged (said the ciuilian lawyer) of a madd or furious
heir apparent, or of one that were by education a Turk or Moore in religion,
or by nature deprived of his wit, or senses, do plainly prove that
propinquity of birth or blood alone, without other circumstances, is not
sufficient to be preferred to a crown: for that no reason or law, religion or
wisdom in the world, can admit such persons to the gouerme^t of a common
wealth by whom, no good, but destruction may be expected to the same, seeing
that government was ordained for the benefit of the weal public and not
otherwise.

And albeit some one or two in these our days have affirmed the contrary, and
published the Bellay apollog. pro reg. cap. 20.
same in writing for the defense, flatery, or advancement of some Prince whom
they favor, affirming that even a fool, madd or furious man, or otherwise so
wicked as he would endeavor to destroy the commonwealth, were to be admitted to
the seat royal, without further consideration, if he be next in blood yet this
is so manifestly against al reason, and conscience, and against the very first
end and purpose of institution of common wealths, and magestrates, as it shall
not need to be refuted in this place, albeit afterward there vvil not want
place and commodity for the same.

Hereof it does ensew, that some other conditions also must needs be requisite,
for coming Not only succession sufficient.
to government by succession, besides the only propinquity or prioryty in blood,
and that these conditions must be assigned and limited out by some higher
authority then is that of the Prince himself, who is bound and limited
thereby, and yet it seems evident they are not prescribed by any law of nature
or divine, for that then they should be both immutable and the self same in all
countries, (as God and nature are one, and the same to al, without chainge)
where nothwithstanding we see, that these conditions and circumstances of
succeding by birth, are diverse or different in different countries, as also
they are subject to changes according to the diversity of kingdoms, realms,
and people, as after shall be showed more in particular, whereby we are forced to
conclude that every particular country and common wealth has prescribed these
conditions to it self and has authority to do the same.

For better proof whereof, it is first of al, to be supposed, that albeit
sociability or inclination That no particular form of gouerme^t is of natu re.
to live together in company, man with man, (whereof ensues both city and
common wealth as Aristotle gathers in his first book of politiques) be of
nature, and consequently also of God, that is author of nature: though
government in like manner and jurisdiction of magestrats which does follow
necessarily upon this living to gether, in company: be also of nature; yet the
particular form or manner of this or that government, in this or that fashion,
as to have many governors, few, or one, and those either Kings, Dukes Earls,
or the like: or that they should have this or that authority more or less, for
longer or shorter time, or be taken by succession or election, themselves and
their children, or next in blood: al these things (I say) are not by law either
natural or divine, (for then as has bine said they should be al one in all
countries and nations, seeing God and nature is one to al) but they are ordained
by particular positive laws of every country as afterward more largely
shall be proved. To live in company, is natural to man and the ground of al com
mo^ wealths.


But now that sociability in mankind, or inclination to live in company, is by
nature, and consequently ordained by God, for the common benefit of al: is an
easy thing, to prove, seeing that al ground of realms and common wealths
depends of this point, as of there first principle, for that a common wealth
is nothing else but the good government, of a multitude gathered together, to
live in one, and therefore al old philosophers, law makers, and wise men, that
have treated of government or common wealths, as Plato in his ten most
excellent books, which he wrote of this matter intituling them of the commou
wealth, and Marcus Plato de repub. Cicero de repub. Aristotle? polit.
Cicero that famous councelor in other six books that he writ of the same
matter, under the same title. And Aristotle that perhaps excels them both,
in eight books which he called his pollitiques, al these I say do make their
entrance to treat of there common wealth affairs, from this first principle, to
wit, that man by nature is sociable, and inclined to live in company, whereof do
proceed first, al private houses, then villages, then towns, then cities,
then kingdoms, and common wealths.

This ground and principle then do they prove Diverse praefes.
by diverse evident reasons, as first, for that in all nations, never so wild or
barborous, we fee by experience that by one way or other, they 1. Inclination
universal. Pompon. Mesa. lib. 3. cap. 3. 4 Tacit. l. 8.
endeavor to live together, either in cities, towns, villages, caves, woods,
tents, or other like manner, according to the custom of each country, which
universal instinct could never be in all, but by impression of nature it self.

Secondly they prove the same, by that the 2. Aristot. l. 1. pol. c. 1. 2. 3. 4.
use of speech is given to man for this end and purpose; for that little
auaylable were this privilege of speaking if men should live alone and
converse with none.

Thirdly not only Aristotle but Theophrastus also Plutarch, and others do
confirm the same, Imbecilility of man. Theoph. lib. de Plaut. Plu tarch. co^de
fortuna, and lib. de pietatem in parent.
by the poor estate and condition, wherein man is borne, more infirm then any
other creature, though by creation he be lord and governor of all the rest: for
where as each other creature is borne in a certain sort armed and defended in
it self, as the bull with his horns, the bore with his tuske, the bear and
wolf, with their teath, the bird with her feathers against cold and with her
wings to fly away, the heart and hare with their swiftnes and the like: only
man is borne feeble and naked, not able to provide or defend himself in many
years, but only by the healp of others, which is a token that he is borne to
live in company and to be helped by others, and this not only for his necessity
and help at his beginning whiles he is in this imbecility, but also for his more
comodious living in the rest of his days afterward, seeing no man of himself
is sufficient for himself, and he that lives alone can have no benefit of
others, or do any to others, wherefore wittely said Aristotle in the Note this
saying of Aristotle.
second chapter of his first book of politiques, that he which flies to live
in society is either Deus aut Bellua, a God or a beft: for that either he does it
because he has no need, of any which is proper to God, or else for that he will
do good to none, and feels not that natural instinct, which man has to live
in conversation, which is a sign rather of a beast then of a man.

Cicero does add an other reason for this 4. The use of justice and Fre^ship.
purpose, to wit, the use of certain principal virtues given unto man, but
principally justice and frenship, which should be utterly in vain, and to no
vtilitye, if man should not live in company of others, for seeing the office of
justice is to distribut to every one his own: where no number is, there no
distribution can be used, as also neither any act of frenship, which yet in the
society of man is so necessary and usual (says this excellent man) vt nec
aqua nec igne nec ipso sole pluribus in locis vtamur, quam amicitia, that we
Cicero lib. de amicitia.
use nether water nor fire nor the son it felfe in more places or occasions
then frenship.

And to this effect, of using frenship, love and charity the one toward the
other, do christian The use of charity and helping one an other. August. lib.
de amicitia.
doctors also, and especially S. Augustine in his book of frenship, reduce the
institution of this natural instinct of living in company: which seems also
to be confirmed by God him sell in those words of Gcnesis, Dixit quoque
Dominus Dcus: non est bonum hominem esse solum, facia Genesis 2. v. 18.
mus, ei adiutorium, simile sibi. God said, it is (...) good that man should be
alone, let us (...) unto him, a help or assistante like unto him self, of
which words is deduced that as (...) first society of our first parents, was
of God, and (...) so great purpose as here is set down, the (...) to be
helped by the other: so al other societye in like manner which grow of this
first, stand upon the same ground of Gods ordination for the self same end of
man's vtility.

And I have bin the longer in speaking of this natural instinct to society, for
that it is the first fountain of all the rest, that enseweth in a common
wealth, as has bine said: for of this come familyes, villages, towns,
castles, cities, and common wealths, al which Aristotle in his books before
named, does prove to be of nature, for that this first inclination to live
together (whereof al those other things do spring) is of nature, as has bin
declared.

Out of this, is the second point before mentioned That gouerme^t and
jurisdiction of Magestrats is also of nature.
deduced, to wit, that government also, superiority, and jurisdiction of
magistrates, is likewise of nature, for that it follows of the former, and
saying that it is impossible for men to live together with help and commodity
of the one, to the other, except there be some magestrat or other to keep order
among them, without Necessity.
which order there is nothing else to be hoped for as Job says, but horror and
confusion, as for example, wher-soeuer a multitude is gathered together, Job
10. v. 12.
if there be not some to repress the insolent, to assist the impotent, reward
the virtuous, chasten the outrageous and minister some kind of justice and
equality unto the inhabitants: there living together would be far more hurtful
the^ there living a sunder, for that one would consume and devour the other, and
so we see, that upon living together follows of necessity some kind of
jurisdiction in Magistrates, and for that the former is of nature, the other
also is of nature.

Al which is confitmed also by the consent and use of al nations through-out
the world, which 2. Consent of nations. Cicero li. 1. de natu ra Deoru^.
general consent, Cicero calls, ipsius vocem naturae the voice of nature
herself: for there was never yet nation found either of ancient time or now in
our days, by the discovery of the Indies, or else where, among whom men living
together, had not some kind of Magestrate or superior, to govern them, which
evidently declares 3. The civil law.
that this point of Magestrates is also of nature, and from god that created
nature, which point our civil law does prove in like manner in the very
beginning of our digestes, vvher the second title of the first book is, de
origineiuris ciuilis Lib. 1. digest. tit. 2.
and omnium magestratuum, of the beginning of the civil law and of al
magestrates which beginning is referred to this first principle, of natural
instinct and Gods institution: And last of al, 1. Scripture.
that God did concur also expressly with this instinct of nature, our divines
do prove by clear testimony of holy scripture, as when God says to Solomon,
by me kings do reign, and Prou. 2. Romans 13.
S. Paul to the Romans avouches, that autbority is not but of God and
therefore he which resists authority resists God. Which is to be understood
of authority power or iutisdiction in it self, according to the first
institution, as also when it is lawfully laid upon any person, for otherwise
when it is either wrongfully taken or unjustly used, it may be resisted in
diverse cases as afterward more in particular shall be declared, for then it is
not law full authority.

These two points then are of nature, to wit, the common wealth, and government
of the same by magistrates, but what kind of gouerme^t each common wealth vvil
have, whether Democratia which is popular government by the people Particular
form of gouerme^t is free.
it self, as Athens, Thebes, and many other cities of Greece had in old time,
and as the Cantons of Swizers at this day have: or else Aristocratia which is
the government of some certain chosen number of the best, as the Romans many
years were governed by Consuls and senators, and at this day the states of
this country of Holland do imitate the same, or else Monarchia which is the
regiment of one, and this again either of an Emperor, King, Duke, Earl or the
like: these particular forms of government (I say) are not determined by God or
nature, as the other two points before, (for the^ they should be al one in all
nations as the other are, seeing God and nature are one to al as often has bin
said) but these particular forms are left unto every nation and country to
choose that form of government, which they shall like best, and think most fit
for the natures and conditions of their people, which Aristotle proves Arist.
li. 2. polit.
through out all the second and fourth books of his politiques very largly
laying down diverse kinds of gouerments in his days, as namely in Greece that
of the Milesians, Lacedaemonians Candians, and others, and shevving the causes
of their differences, which he attributes to the diversity of men's natures,
customs, educations and other such causes that made them make choice of such
or such form of government.

And this might be proved also by infinite Diversity of government in diverse
co^tryes and times.
other examples both of times past and present, and in all nations and countries
both christian and otherwise, which have not had only different fassions of
gouerme^ts the one from the other, but even among themselves at one time, one
form of government, and an other at other times: for the Romans first had Kings
and after Rome.
rejecting them for their evil government, they chose (...), which were two
governors for euervycare, whose authority yet they limited by a multitude of
senators, which were of their counsel, and these men's power, was restrained
also by adding tribunes, of the people, and some time dictators, and finally
they came to be governed last of al by Emperors.

The like might be said of Carthage in Africa Africa and Greece.
and many cities and common wealths of Greece, which in diverse seasons and
upon diverse causes have taken different forms of government to themselves.

The like we see in Europe at this day, for in Italy.
only Italye what different forms of government have you? Naples has a king
for their sovereign, Rome the pope, and under him one senator in place of so
many as were wont to be in that common wealth. Venice and Genua, have
senators and Dukes, but little authority have there Dukes. Florence, Farara,
Mantua, Parma, Vrbin and Sauoy, have their Dukes only without senators, and
there power is absolut. Milan was once a kingdom but now a Dukedom, the like
is of Burgundy, Lorayne, Bauire Gascony, Dukes for kings and kings for dukes.
and Britayne the lesser, al which once had their distinct kings, and now have
Dukes, for their supreme governors. The like may be said of al Germany that
many years together had one king over al, which now is divided into so many
Dukedomes, Earldomes and other like titles of supreme Princes.

But the contrary is of Castile, Aragon, Portugal, Barcelona, and orher
kingdoms this day in Spain, which were first earldomes only and after
Dukedomes, and then kingdoms, and Spain.
now a gain are al under one Monarchy. The like is of Boeme and Polonia which
were but Boeme. Polonia.
Dukedomes in old time, and now are kingdoms. The like may be said of France
also after the expulsion of the Romans, which was first a monarchy, under
Pharamond their first king, and so continued for many years under Clodion,
Merouys Childrik and Clodouaeus there first christened kings, but after they
divided it into four kingdoms, to wit one of Paris an other of Suessons, the
third of Orleans, and the fourth of Metts, and so it continued for diverse
years, but yet afterward they made it one monarchy again.

England also was first a monarchy under the England.
Britaynes, and then a province under the Romans, and after that divided into
seven kingdoms at once under the Saxons, and now a monarchy again under the
Inglish and all this by Gods permission, and approbation, who in token thereof,
suffered his own peculier people also of Israel to be under diverse manners of
gouerments in diverse times, as first under Patriarques The Jews lib. Genes.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, then under Captains as Moses, Joshua, and the like,
then under judges as Othoniel, Aiod, and Gedion, Lib. Exo. Lib. Job. Lib. Iud.
Lib. 1. Reg.
then under high Priests, as Hely and Samuel, then under kings as Saul, David
and the rest, and then under captains and high priests again as
Zorobabelludas Machabeus, and his brethren, Lib. Machab.
until the government was lastely taken from them, and they brought under the
power of the Romans, and foreign kings appointed by them.

So as of all this, there can be no doubt, but that the common wealth has power
to choose The realm chooses her form of gouerme^t
their own fassion of government, as also to change the same upon reasonable
causes, as we see they have done in all times and countries, and God no doubt
approves what the realm determines in this point, for otherwise nothing
could be certain for that of these changes does depend all that has succeeded
sythens.

In like manner, is it evident, that as the common wealth has this authority
to choose and change her government, so has she also to limite the same with
what laws and conditions she pleases, whereof ensues the great diversity of
authority and power which each The common wealth limiteth the governors
authority.
one of the former gouerments has, as for example, the Consuls of Rome were
but for one year, other officers and Magestrates were for more, or less
time, as their common wealth did alott them: The Dukes of Venice at this day
are for their lives (except in certain cases wherein they may be deposed) and
those of Genua only for two years and their power (as I have said) is very small
and much limited, and their heirs have no claim or pretense at al after them
to that dignity, as the children and next of kin of other Dukes of Italy
have, though in different sort also: for that the Dukedomes of Ferara, Vrbin
and Parma are limited only to heirs male, and for defect thereof to return to
the pope or Sea of Rome, Florence and Mantua for like defects are to return to
the empire and do not pass to the heyrs femal or to the next of kynne as Sauoy
and some others do.

And now if we respect God and nature, as well, might al these gouerments follow
one law, as so different, for that neither God not nature prescribes any of
these particular forms, but concurreth with any that the common wealth it self
appoynteth, and so it is to be believed, that God and nature concurred as well
with Italy when it had but one Prince, as now when it has so many, and the
like with Germany and the like also with Swizerla^d, which once was one common
wealth only under the dukes and Marqueses of Austria and now are divided into
thirtene Cantons or common wealths under populer Magestrates of their own, as
has bin said: so as when men talk of a natural Prince or natural successor
(as many times A Natural Prince.
I have hard the word used) if it be understood of one that is borne within
the same Realm or country and so of our own natural blood, it has some
sense, though he may be both good or badd, (and none has bin worse or more
cruel many times then home borne Princes:) but if it be meant as though any
Prince had his particular government or interest to succeed by institution of
nature, it is rediculous, for that nature gives it not as has bin declared,
but the particular constitution of every common wealth with-in it self, and so
much for this first point which must be the ground to all the rest that I have
to say.

OF THE FORM OF MONARCHIES AND KINGDOMS IN PARTICVLER, AND THE DIF ferent
laws, whereby they are to be obtained holden and governed in diverse countries
according as each common wealth has chosen and established.
CAP. II.
ALL that hitherto has bin spoken, has appertayned to al princely and supreme
government in general, but now for that our matter in question, is concerning
the succession to a kingdom, good reason that we should reduce our speech unto
this form of government in particular.

First of al then, is to be considered, that of al A monarchy the best
government.
other forms of government the monarchy of a king in it self, appears to be
the most excellent and perfect, and so do hold not only Aristotle in his
fornamed books of pollitiques, and namely in his third (with this only
condition that he govern by laws) but Seneca also and Plutarch in his morales
and namely in that special A rist. li. 4. pol. a. c. 9. Seneca. Plutarch.
treatise wher-in he discusseth, an seni sit Respub: tractanda, whether an old
man ought to take upon him the government of a common wealth or no: where he
says that, regnum inter omnes respub: consumatissima and prima est, a kingdom
is the most perfect common wealth, among al other, and the very first: that is
to say, the most perfect for that it has most commodities and least
inconveniences in it selft, of any other government, and it is the fitst of al
other, for that al people commonly made their choice at the beginning of this
kind of government, so as of al other it is most ancient, for so we read that
among the Sytians, Medes, and Persians The antiquity of Monarchy.
their first governors were kings and when the children of Israel did ask a
king at the hands of Samuel, which was a thousand years before the coming
of Christ, they alleged for 1 Reg. 8.
one reason that al nations round about them had kings for their governors,
and at the very same time, the chiefest cities and common vvealths of Greece,
as the lacedaemonians, Athenians, Corinthians, and others, whereof diverse
afterward took other gouerments unto themselves, for the abuses in kingly
gouermet committed, at that time were governed by kings as at large proves
Dyonisius Halicarnasseus, Dionys. Haly l. 5. Cornel. Tacit. l. 3. Cicero l. 1.
Offic.
Cornelius Tacitus, Cicero and others.

The Romans also began with kings as before I have noted, and the reason of
this is, for that as our Christian doctors do gather, (especially S. Hierome
and S. Chrysostom) this kind of government resembles most of all the government
Hierom. l. 2. epist. 12 Chrisost. ho. 23.
of God, that is but one: it represents the excellency of one son that
lightneth all the plannets, of one soul in the body that governs all the
powers and members thereof, and finally they show it also to be most conform
unto nature, by example of the bees which do choose unto themselves a king,
and do live under a monarchy as the most excellentest of al other gouerments,
to which purpose also I have hard alleged somtymes by diverse those words of
S. Peter. Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae 1. Pet. 2.
propter Deum, sieve regi quasi precellenti: sieve ducibus ab eo missis, etc. Be
you subject of every humane creature, for Gods cause, whether it be to a king,
as the most excellent, or to Dukes sent by God for the punishment of evil men
and praise of the good. Out of which words some do note two points, first that
as one the one side the Apostle does plainly teach that the magistrates
authority is from God, by his first institution, Two points to be noted.
in that he says, we must be subject to them for Gods cause, so on the other
side, he calls it a humane creature or a thing created by man, for that by
man's free choice this particular form of government (as al other also) is
appointed in every common wealth, as before has bin declared: and that by man's
election and consent, the same is laid upon some particular man or woman,
according to the laws of every country, al which makes it rightly to be
called both a humane creature, and yet from God.

The second point which diverse do note out of these words, is, that S. Peter
calls a king How S. Peter calls a king most excellent.
most excellent, which though it may be understood in rcspect of the Dukes
authority, whereof immediately there follows mention: yet may it seem also to
be taken and verified of kingly authority in respect of al other gouerments
seeing that at this time when the Apostle wrote this epistle, the chief
governor of the world, was not called king but emperor, and therefore seeing
in such a time S. Peter affirms the state of kingly government to be most
excellent, it may seem he meant it absolutely signifying thereby that this is the
best kind of government among al others, though to confess the truth between
the title of king and Emperor there is little or no difference in substance, but
only in name, for that the authority is equal, every king is an Emperor in his
own kingdom.

And finally the excellency of this government above al other, is not only
proved by the perfection thereof in it self, as for that it is most ancient
simple and conform unto nature, and most resembling the government of God
himself, as has bin said, but by the effects also and vtility that it
brings unto the subjects, with far Vtilites of a kingdom and in
conueniences of other gouermentes.
less, inconveniences then any other form of government what-soeuer if we
compare them together: for in the monarchy of one king, there is more unity,
agreement, and conformity, and thereby also celerity commonly in dispaching of
business, and in defending the common wealth, then vvher many heads be: less
passions also, in one man then in many: as for example in Democratia, vvher the
common people do bear the chief sway, which is bellua multorum capitum as
Cicero wisely said, that is, a beast Cicerol. x offic. Democratia.
of many heads, there is nothing but sedition, trouble, tumults, outrages, and
iniustices committed upon every little occasion, especially vvher crafty and
conning men may be admitted to incense or assuage them with sugared words, such
as were the Orators in Athens, and other cities of Greece, that had this
gouerme^r, and the Tribunes of the people of Rome, and other such populer and
plausible men, who could move the waves, raise up the winds, and inkindle
the fire of the vulgar peoples affections, passions or furies at their
pleasure, by which we see that of al other common wealths, these of populer
government, have soonest come to ruin, which might be shevved not only by old
examples of Greec, Asia, and Africa, but also of many cities in Italy, as
Florence, Bolonia, Siena, Pisa, Arezzo, Spoleto, Perugia, Miseries of populer
government in Italy.
Padua and others, which upon the fall or diminution of the Roman Empire
(under which they were before) took unto themselves populer gouerments,
vvherin they were so tossed with continual sedition, mutines, and ba^ding of
factions, as they could never have end thereof, until after infinite murders
massacres and inundatio^, of blood, they came in the end to be under the
monarchy of some one Prince or other, as at this day they remain: so that of
al other gouerments this is the vvorst.

The second form, which is called Oligarchia or Aristocratia (for that a few
and those presumed to be the best, are joined together in Aristocratia.
authority) as it does participate some thing of both the other gouerme^ts, to
wit, of monarchia and Democratia, or rather tempereth them both: so has it
both good and evil in it; but yet inclines more to the evil, for the disunion
that commonly by man's infirmity and malice, is among those heads, for which
cause the states before named of Venice and Genua, which were wont to have
simply this government of Aristocratia, in that their regiment was by certain
chose senators, were enforced in the end, to choose Dukes also, as heads of
their senates, for avoiding of dissension, and so they have them at this day,
though their authority be but small as has bin said.

We see also by the examples of Carthage and Rome where government of
Aristocratia, took place, that the division and factions among the senators of
Carthage, was the cause why aid and succor was not sent to Hanibal, their
Captain (...). (...). l. 30.
in Italy after his so great and important victory at Cannas which was the very
cause of the saving of the Roman Empire, and the Eutrop. l. 3.
loss of their own. As also afterward the Oros. l. 5. and 6.
emulations, discord, and disunion, of the Roman senators, among themselves in
the affairs and contentions of Marius and Silla, and of Pompey and Caesar, was
the occasion of al their destruction and of their common wealth with them.

Evident then it is, that of al other gouerments the monarchy is the best, and
least subject to the inconueuiences that other gouerments have, and if the
prince that governs alone and has supreme authority to himself, as he
resembles God in this point of sole gouerme^t, The cause why laws be added
to Kings.
so could he resemble him also, in wise, discret, and just government, and in
ruling without passion: no doubt, but that nothing more excellent in the world
could be desired for the prefect filicity of his subjects: but for that a king
or Prince is a man as others be, and thereby not only subject to errors in
judgment, but also, to passionat affections in his will: for this cause, it was
necessary that the common wealth, as it gave him this great power over them,
so it should assign him also the best helps that might be, for directing and
rectifying both his will and judgment, and make him therein as like in government
to God, whom he represents, as man's fraylty can reach unto.

For this consideration they assigned to him first ofal, the assistance and
direction of law, whereby to govern, which law Aristotle says. Est men's
quaedam nullo perturbata affectu, it is a certain Arist. l. 3. pol. c. vlt.
mind disquieted with no disordinate affection, as men's minds commonly be,
for that when a law is made, for the most part, it is made upon dew
consideration and deliberation, and without perturbation of evil affections, as
anger, envy, hatred, rashness, or the like passions, and it is referred to some
good end and commodity of the common wealth, which law, being once made,
remains so still without alteration, or partial affection, being indifferent
to al and partial to none, but tells one tale to every man, and in this it
resembles the perfection as it were of God himself, for the which cause the
said philosopher in the same place, adds a notable wise sayng, to wit, that
he which joins a law to govern with the Prince, A notable saying Arist. l.
3. Pol. c. 12.
joins God to the Prince, but he that joins to the Prince his affection to
govern, joins a beast: for that men's affections and concupiscenses are
common also to beasts: so that a Prince ruling by law is more then a man, or a
man deifyed, and a Prince ruling by affections, is less then a man, or a man
brutified. In an other place also the same philpsopher says that a Prince
that leaves law and rules himself and others by his own appetite and
affections, of al creatures Arist. l. 1. Pol. c. 2.
is the worst and of al beasts is the most furious and dangerous, for that
nothing is so outrageous, as injustice armed, and no armor is so strong, as
wit and authority, whereof the first he has in that he is a man, and the other
in that he is a Prince.

For this cause then al common wealths have Diverse names and propeties of
laws.
prescribed laws unto their Princes, to govern thereby, as by a most
excellent, certain and immutable rule, to which sense Cicero, said leges sunt
inuentae vt omnibus semper vna and (...) Cie. lib. 2. offic.
voce loquerentur, laws were invented to the end, they should speak in one
and the (...) same sense, to al men. For which very reason in like manner these
laws have bin called by Philosophers a rule or square, inflexible, and by
Aristotle in particular a mind without passion, as has bin said, but the
Prophet David who was also a Prince and king, seems to call it by the name of
Discipline, for that as discipline Law is the discipline of a weal pu blique.
does keep all the parts of a man or of a particular house in order, so law
well ministered, keeps all the parts of a common wealth in good order, and to
sheow how severely God exacteth this at al Princes hands, he says these
words. And now learn ye kings and be instructed, Psalm. 2.
you that judge the world: serve God in fear and rejoice in him with
trembling, embrace ye discipline, least he enter into wrath, and so ye perish
from the way of righteousness. Which words being uttered, by a prophet and king
do conteyne diverse points of much consideration, for this purpose: as first,
that kings and Prince are bound to learn law and discipline, and secondly to
observe the same with great humility and fear of Gods wrath, and thirdly that
if they do not, they shall perish from the way of righteousness, as though the
greatest plage of al to a Prince wear to lose the way of righteousness, law,
and reason in his government, and to give himself over to passion, and his own
vvil whereby they are suer to come to shipwreck, and thus much of the first
help.

The second help that common wealths have given to their kings and Princes
especially The Councils of Princes, a great healp.
in later ages, has bin cerrayne councelles and counselors with whom to
consult in matters of most importance, as we see the parlaments of Ingland and
France, the courts in Spain and diets in Germany, without which no matter of
great moment can be concluded, and besides this commonly every king has his
privy council, whom he is bound to hear, and this was done to temper somewhat
the absolute for me of a Monarchy whose danger is by reason of his sole
authority, to fall into tyranny as Aristotle vvisely notes, in his fourth
Arist. l. 4. Pol. c. 10.
book of politiques, showing the inconvenience or dangers of this government:
which is the cause that we have few or no simple monarchies now in the world,
especially among Christians, but al are mixed lightely with diverse points of
the other two forms of government also, and namely in Ingland al three do enter
more The monarchy of Inglad re^pered.
or less, for in that there is one king or Queen, it is a monarchy: in that it
has certain councelles which must be hard: it participateth of Aristocratia,
and in that the commonalty have their voices and burgesses in parliament, it
takes part also of Democratia, or populer government, al which limitations of
the Princes absolute authority, as you see, do come for the common wealth, as
having authority above their Princes for their restraint to the good of the
realm, as more at large shall be proved hereafter.

From like authority and for like considerations The restraints of kingly po
were in all estates.
have come the limitations of other kings and kingly power in all times and
countries, from the beginning, both touching themselves and their posterity and
successors as breefly in this place I shall declare.

And first of al, if we vvil consider the two most renoumed and allowed states
of all the world I mean of the Romans and Grecians, we shall find that both of
them began with kings, but yet with far different laws and restraints, about
their authorityes: for in Rome the kings that succeeded Romulus, their first
Roman Kings.
founder, had as great and absolute authority as ours have now a days, but yet
their children or next in blood succeeded them not of necessity, but new kings
were chosen partly by the senate, and partly by the people, as Titus Liuius
Liu. lib. 1. dec. 1.
testifies, so as of three most excellent kings that ensewed immediately after
Romulus, to wit, Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilsus, and Tarqninus Priscus, none
of them were of the blood royal nor of kyn the one to the other, no nor yet
Romans borne, but chosen rather from among straingers, for their virtue and
valor, and that by election of the senate and consent of the people.

In Greece, and namely among the lacedaemonians Grecian kings.
which was the most emynent kingdom among others at that time, the succession
of children after their fathers was more certain, but yet as Aristotle notes,
there authority and Arist. li. 2. c. 8. polit. Plutarch. in Lycurg.
power was so restrained by certain officers of the people named Ephori (which
commonly were five in number) as they were not only checked and chastined by
them, if occasion served but also deprived and some times put to death: for
which cause the said philosopher did justly mislike this emynent jurisdiction
of the Ephori, over their kings: but yet hereby we see what authority the
common wealth had in this case, and what their meaning was in making laws and
restrayning their kings power, to wit, thereby the more to bind them to do
justice, which Cicero in his offices utters in tbes words. Iustitiae
fruendae causae apud maiores (...) and ise Asia and in Europe been morati
regesolint Cic. lib. 2. (...)
sunt constituti, etc. at cum ius aequabile ab vno viro ^
(...) non consequerentur, inuentae sunt leges. Good kings were appointed in
old time among our ancestors in Asia and Europe to the end thereby to obtain
justice, but when men could not ob. teyne equal justice at one man's hands,
they invented laws.

The same reason yealdeth the same philosopher in another place, not only of
the first institution of kingdoms, but also of the chainge thereof again into
other gouerments, when these were abused. Omnes antiquae gentes regibus Ciclib.
3. de (...)
(...) paruerunt, etc. That is, al old nations did live under kingdoms at the
beginning, which king of government first they gave unto the most just, and
wisest men, which they could find, and also after for love of them, they gave
the same to their posterity ot next in kynne, as now also it remains vvher
kingly government is in use: but other countries which liked not that form of
government, and have shaken of, have done it not that they will not be under any,
but for that they will not be ever under one only.

Thus far Cicero, and he speaks this principally in deferice of his-owne
cornmo^ wealth ^
I mean the Roman, which had cast of that kind of government, as before has
bin said, for the offense they had taken against cessayne kings of there is, and
first of al, against (...) himself their first founder, for (...) at his
pleasure without law, as Titus (...) (...), ^
for which cause the senators at length (...) him, and cut him in small pieces.
And aftervards they were greatly grieved at the entering of Seruius Tullius,
their sixth king, for that he gave the crown by fraud and not by election of
the senate, and special approbation of the people, as he should have done: but
most of al they were exasperated by the proceeding of their seventh king named
Lucius Tarquinas, surnamed the proud, who for that (as Liuius faith) he
neglected ^
the laws of government prescribed no him by the common wealth, as namely in
that he consulted not with the senate in matters of great importance, and for
that he made war and peace of his own head and for that he appointed to
himself a guard as though he had mistrusted the people, and for that he did use
ininstice to diverse particular men, and suffered his children to be insolent, he
was expelled with all his posterity and the government of Rome changed from a
kingdom unto the regiment of consuls, after two hundredth years that the other
had endured.

And thus much for those kingdoms of Italy and Greece: And if likewise we will
look upon other kingdoms of Europe, we shall see Restraints of kingdoms in
Europe.
the very same, to wit, that every kingdom and country has his particular
laws prescribed to their kings by the common wealth, both for their
government, authority, and succession in the same: for if we behold the Roman
Empire it self, as it is at this day annexed to the German electors, though
it be the first in dignity among christian Princes, yet shall we see it so
restrained by particular laws, as the Emperor can do much less in his state,
then other kings in theirs, for he can nether make war nor exact any
contribution of men, or money, thereunto, but by the free leave and consent of
all the states of the Germayne diet or parliament, and for his children or next
in kynn, they have no action, interest or pretense at al to succed in their
fathers dignity, but only by free election, if they shall be thought worthy. Nay
one of the chiefest points that the Emperor must swear at his entrance, as
Sleydan writes, is this, Sleydan lib. 8. An. 1532.
that he shall never go about to make the dignity of the Emperor peculiar or
hereditary to his family, but leave it unto the seven electors free in their
power, to choose his successor, according to the law made by the pope Blond. Di
cad. 2. li. 3 Crant. li. cap. 25.
Gregory the fyfth, and the Emperor Charles the fourth in this behalf.

The kingdoms of Polonia and Boemia do go Kingdoms of polonia and Boemia.
much after the same fashion, both for there restrainte of power, and
succession to their kings. For first touching their authority, they have great
limitation, nether can they do any thing of great moment, without the consent
of certain principal men called Palatines or Castellans, Herbert li. 9. hist.
Polon.
nether may their children or next of blood succeed except they be chosen, as
in the Empire. Cromerus lib. 3. Hist. Polon.


In Spain, France, and Ingland, the privileges of kings are far more eminent
in both these points, for that both their authority is much more absolute, and
their next in blood do ordinarily succeed, but yet in different manner: for as
touching authority it seems that the kings of Spain and France, have greater
then the Kings of Spain France and Ingland.
king of England, for that every ordination of these two kings, is law in it
self, without further approbatio^ of the common wealth, which holds not in
England, where no general law can be made without consent of parliament: but in
the other point of succession, it appears that the restraint is far greater
in those other two countries, then in Ingland, for that in Spain the next in
blood cannot succeed be he never so lawfully descended, but by a new
approbation of the nobility and bishops, and states of the Realm, as it is
expressly set down in the two ancient councelles of Tolledo the fourth Council.
blet. 4. c. 74. and council. s. c. 3.
and fifth. In confirmation whereof we see at this day, that the king of Spaynes
own son, cannot succeed not be called Prince, except he be first sworn by
the said nobility and states in token of their new consent, and so we have
seen it practiced in our days toward three or four of King Philips
children, which have succeeded the one after the other in the title of Princes
of Spain, and at every chainge a new oath required at the subjects hands, for
their admission to the said dignity, which is not used in the kings children of
France or Ingland.

In France the world knows, how women, Peculiar manner of succession.
are not admitted to succed in the crown be they never so near in blood,
nether any of their issue, though it be male. For which cause I doubt not but
you remember how king Edward the third of Ingland though he were son and
heir unto a daughter of France, whose three An. 1340. Paul. Anil. hist. Franc.
l. 2. Gerard. du Hayllan lib. 14 hist. Fra^c.
brethren were kings and left her sole heir to her father king Phillip the
fourth surnamed the fair, yet was he put by the crown, as also was the king
of Nauar, at the same time, who was son and heir unto this woman's eldest
brothers daughter, named Lewis Huttin king of Ftance, (which king of Nauar
thereby seemed also to be before king Edward of Ingland) but yet were they both
put by it, and Philip de Vallois, a brothers son of Phillip the fair, was
preferred to it, by general decree of the states Fran. Belfor llb. 5. cap. 1.
An. 1327.
of France, and by vardit of the whole parliament of Paris, gathered about the
same affayre.

Nether did it avail, that the two kings a fore said alleged, that it was
against reason and conscience and custom of al nations, to exclud Reasons for
succession of women.
women, from the succession of the crown which appartayned unto them by
propinquity of blood, seeing both nature and God has made them capable of such
succession every where, as it appears by example of al other nations, and in
the old testament among the people of god it self, where we see women have bin
admitted, unto kingdoms by succession, but all this (I say) prevailed not,
with the French as it does not also at this day for the admission of Dona
Isabella Eugenia Clara, infanta of Spain unto The infanta of Spain and Prince
of Lorayne.
the said crown of France though by dissent of blood there be no question of
her next propinquity for that she is the eldest child of the last kings eldest
sister.

The like exclusion is made against the Prince of Lorayne that now lives,
though he be a man, and nephew to the last king, for that his title is by a
woman, to wit, his mother, that was younger sister unto the last king Henry of
France.

And albeit the law called Salica, by the Frenchmen, by virtue vvherof they
pretend to Gerard du Haillan Lib. 13. Hist. Fra^c. and Anno 1317. and lib. 14.
An. 1328. and lib. 3. de l'Estat defrunaee.
exclude the succession of women, be no very ancient law, as the French
themselves do confess, and much less made by Pharamond there first king, or in
those ancient times as others without ground do affirm: yet do we se that it
is sufficient, to bynd al Princes and subjects of that realm, to observe the
same, and to alter the course of natural descent, and nearnes of blood as we
have seen, and that the king of Nauarr and some other of his race by virtue of
this only law do pretend at this day to be next in succession to this goodly
crown, though in nearnes of blood they be farther of, by many degrees from the
last king Henry the third, then either the foresaid Enfanta of Spain or the
Prince of Lorrayne that now is, who are children of his own sisters, which
point yet in Ingland were great disorder, and would not be suffered, for that
our laws are otherwise, and who made these laws, but the common wealth it
self.

By all which we see that diverse kingdoms, have diverse laws and customs in
the matter of succession, and that it is not enough (as often I have said) for
a man to allege bare propinquity of blood, thereby to prevail, for that he may
be excluded or put back by diverse other circumstances, and for sundry other
reasons which afterward we shall discuss.

Yea, not only in this point (said he) has the common wealth authority to put
back the next Kings lavvfully possessed may be deprived.
inheritors upon lawful considerations, but also to disposesse them that have
bin lawfully put in possession, if they fulfill not the laws and conditions, by
which and for which, their dignity was given them. Which point as it cannot
serve for wicked me^ to be troblesome unto their governors, for their own
interests or appetits, so yet when it is done upon just and urgent causes and
by public authority of the whole body: the justice thereof is plain, not only
by the grounds and reasons before alleged, but also by those examples of the
Romans and Grecians already mentioned, who lawfully deposed their kings upon
just considerations, and chainged also there monarchy and kingly government,
into other forms of regiment. And it might be proved also, by examples of al
other nations, and this perhapps with a circumstance A markable circumstance.
which I know not, whether every man here have considered the same, to wit,
that God has wonderfully concurred for the most part, with such iuditial
acts of the common wealth against their euel Princes, not only in prospering
the same, but by giving them also commonly some notable successor in place of
the deposed, thereby both to justify the fact, and to remedy the fault of him
that went before.

To this all the company answered, that they had never much thought, nor made
reflection upon any such circumstance, and therefore that it could not be but a
point of much nouelty, to here the same discussed, requesting him to say what
he had observed or read in that behalf.

I am content (said he) but yet with this preface, Against rebellious people
and contemnors of Princes.
that I am far from the opinion of those people of our days, or of old, who
make so little account of their duty toward Princes, as be their title what
it will, yet for every mislike of there own they are ready to band against them
whersoeuer they think they may make their party good, inuenting a thousand
calumniations for there discredit without conscience or reason, whom in deed I
do think to have little conscience or none at al but rather to be those whom
the Apostles S. Peter and S. Jude did speak of when they said. Nouit Dominus
iniquos ^
in diem iudicij reseruare, cruciandos, magis autemeos qui dominationem
contemnunt, audaces, sibi placentes, ^
etc. God knows how to reserve the wicked unto the day of judgment there to be
tormented, but yet much more those which do contemn domination, or government,
and are bold and liking of themselves, thus much there.

Nay further, I am of opinion, that whatsoever ^
a Princes title be, if once he be settled in the crown, and admitted by the
common wealth (for of al other holds I esteem the tenure of a crown) if so
it may be termed (the most irreguler and extraordinary) every man is bound to
setle his conscience to obey the same, in all that lawfully he may command,
and this without examination of his title, or interest, for that (as I have
said) God disposes of kingdoms and works his vvil in Princes affairs as
he pleases, and this by extraordinary means, oftentimes so that if we should
examine the titles at this day, of all the Princes of Christendom, by the
ordinary rule of private men's rightes successions or tenures, we should find
so many knotts and dificulties, as it were hard for any law to make the same
plain, but only the supreme law of gods disposition, which can dispense in
what he lists.

This is my opinion in this behalf for true ^
and quiet obedience, and yet on the other side, as far of am I from the abject
and wicked flatery of such as affirm Princes, to be subject to no law or
limitation at al, either in authority government, life, or succession, but as
though by nature they had bin created kings from the beginning of the world, or
as though the common wealth had bin made for them and not they for the common
wealth, or as though they had begotten or purchased or given life to the
vvealpublique, and not that the vvealpublique had exalted them or given them
their authority honor and dignity: so these flatterers do free them, from al
obligation, dewty reverence or respect unto the whole body whereof they are the
heads, nay expressly they say and affirm that: al men's goods bodies and
lives, are the Princes at their pleasures to dispose of: that they are under no
(...) flateries (...) by Bellay and others.
law or accompt-giuing whatsoever, that they succed by nature and generation
only, and not by any authority admission or approbation of the common wealth,
and that consequently no merit or demerit of there persons is to be respected,
nor any consideration of their natures or qualities, to wit of capacity,
disposition, or other personal circumstances, is to be had or admitted, and do
they what they list, no authority is there under God, to thasten them.

Al these absurd paradoxes, have some men of our days uttered in flatery of
Princes, and namely of late, one Belloy a French man (as before Belloy in
apolog. cath. and apolog. pro rege.
I signified) in two books which he called appologies, the one catholic,
and the other for the king, both which he seems to write in favor of the
king of Nauare, (and as other also call him king of France) but in my opinion,
he deserves small commendation, or revvard to defend a kings title, with such
assertions and propositions, as do destroy al law reason conscience and common
wealth, and do bring al to such absolute tyrany as no realm ever did or could
suffer among civil people, no not under the dominion of the Turk himselse at
this day, vvher yet some proportion of equity is held between the Prince and
the people, both in government and succession, though nothing so much as in
Christian nations.

Wherefore to avoid these two extremes, I shall prove unto you, the mean before
mentioned, The purpose of the next Chapter.
to wit, that as all the duty, reverence, love, and obedience before named, is
to be yealded unto every Prince which the common wealth has once established:
so yet retayneth still the common wealth her authority not only to restrain the
same Prince, if he be exorbitant, but also to chasten and remove him, upon due
and weighty considerations, and that the same has bin done and practiced at
many times in most nations, both Christian and otherwise with right good
success, to the weal public, and this shall be the argument (if you think
good) of our next meeting, for that now it is late, and I would be loath to have
you go away with my tale half told, for that it is a matter of much moment,
as to morrow you shall here.

Al wear content with this resolution, and so departed every man, to his
loging, with purpose to return the next morning somewhat more early then their
accustomed hour to the end the matter might be thoroughly debated.

OF KINGS LAVVFVLLY CHASTISED BY THEIR COMMON WEALTHS FOR THEIR misgouerment,
and of the good and prosperous success that God commonly has given to the
same.
CAP. III.
THE company was no sooner come together the next morning, but they were al at
the ciuilia^ lawyer to perform his promise, and to prosecute the matter he had
propounded the night before: to whom he answered, you require of me (if I be
Two points to be proved.
not deceived) two points jointly to be proved unto you, the first that common
wealths have chastised somtymes lawfully there lawful Princes, though never so
lawfully they wear descended, or otherwise lawfully put in possession of
their crown, and secondly that this has fallen out ever, or for the most
part, commodious to the vvealpublique, and that it may seem that God approved
and prospered the same, by the good success and successors that ensevved
thereof. Which two points, I am content (quoth he) to show unto you, by some
examples for that the reasons hereof have in part bin declared before, and
shall be more in particular hereafter, but yet must I do this with the
protestation, before mentioned, that nothing be taken out of this my spech,
against the sacred authority Nothing hear spoken against dew respect to
Princes.
and dew respect and obedience, that al men do owe, unto Princes both by Gods
law and nature as has bin proved, but only this shall serve to show that as
nothing under God is more honorable, amiable, profitable or sovereign, then a
good Prince: so nothing is more pestelent of brings so general destruction
and desolation as an euel Prince. And therefore as the whole body is of more
authority then the only head, and may cure the head if it be out of tune, so
may the Wealpublique cure or cut of their heads, if they infest the rest,
seeing that a body civil may have diverse heads, by succession, and is not bound
ever to one, as a body natural is, which body natural, if it had the same
ability that when it had an aching or sickly head, it could cut it of and take
an other, I doubt not, but it would so do, and that al men would confess that
it had authority sufficient and reason to do, the same rather then all the other
parts should perish or live in pain and continual tourme^t: but yet much more
clear is the matter that we have in hand for disburdening our selves of
wicked Princes, as now I shall begin to prove unto you.

And for proof of both the points ioyntely Deprivations of kings recounted in
scriptu re.
which you require, I might beginn perhaps with some examples out of the
scripture it self, but that some man may chance to say, that these things
recounted there of the Jews, were not so much to be reputed for acts of the
common wealth, as for particular ordinations of God himself, which yet is not
any thing against me, but rather makes much for our purpose. For that the
matter is more authorized hereby, seeing that what soeuerGod did ordeyne or put
in ure in his common wealth, that may also be practiced by other common
wealths, now having his authority and approbatio^ for the same. Where-fore
(said he) though I do haste^ to examples that are more nearer home, and more
proper to the particulier purpose whereof we treat, yet can I not omit to note
some two or three out of the bible, that do apperteyne to this purpose also,
and these are the deprivation and putting to death of two wicked kings of Judah,
named Saul and Amon, (though both of 1. Reg. 31. 4. Reg. 21. 44.
them vvete lawfully placed in that dignity) and the bringing in of David and
Josias in their rooms, who were the two most excellent Princes that ever that
nation or any other (I think) have had to govern them.

And first king Saul though he were elected by God (as you know) to that royal
throne, yet was he slain by the Philistians by Gods order as it was foretold
him for his disobedience and not fulfillinge the law and limits prescribed
unto him. Amon was lawful king also and that by natural descent and succession
for he was son and heir to king Manasses whom he succeeded and yet was he
slain by his own people, quia non ambulauit in via Domini. for that he walked
not in the way prescribed unto him by God: and unto these two kings so
deprived, God gave two successors, as I have named, the (...) whereof are King
Josias.
not to be found in the whole rank of kings for a thousand years together:
for of Josias it is written, Fecit quod erat rectum in conspectu Domini, and
non declinauit neque ad dextram neque ad sinistra^. 2. Paralip. 34. (...)
he did that which was right in the sight of God, nether did he decline unto
the right hand nor the left. He reigned 31. years, and Hieremias the prophet
that lived in his time, loved so extremely 2. Paralip. 35.
this good king, as he never ceased afterward to lament his death as the
scripture says.

As for king David, it shall not be need-ful to King David.
say any thing, how excellent a king he was, for as many learned men do note,
he was a most perfect pattern for all kings that should follow in the world, not
as king Cyrus whom Xenophon Xenopho^ in Cyropaed.
did paint out more according to his own imagination of a perfect king, that
he wished, then to the truth of the story, but rather as one that passed far in
acts that which is written of him, and this not only in matters of religion,
piety, and devotion: but also of cheualry valor wisdom and policy, nether is
it true which Nicholas Machauel, the Florentyne, and Nich. Machal l. 2. c. 2.
in Tit. Liuius.
some others of his new unchristian schole do affirm, for defacing of
christian virtue, that religion and piety are letts ostentymes to politic and
wise government, and do break or weaken the high spirits of magnanimous men, to
take in hand great enterprises for the common wealth. This (I say) is August.
l. de Gran.
extreme false, for that as divines are wont to say (and it is most true) grace
does not destroy or corrupt but perfecteth nature, so as he which by nature is
valiant, wise, liberal, or politic, shall be the more, if also he be pious and
religious. Which we see euidentlv in king David, who notwithstanding al his
piety, yet omitted he nothing apperteyning to the state and government of a
noble wise and politic Prince. For first of al, he began with reformation of
his own court and realm in matter of good The vvisdome and piety of King
David.
life and service of God, wherein he used the counsel and direction of Gad and
of Nathan the Prophet, as also of Abiathar and Hitam the chief priests, and
of Heman his wise councellor. He reduced the whole clergy into 24. 1. Paralip.
15.
degrees, appointing four thousand singars with diverse sorts of musycal
instruments, under 1. Psalm. 24. and 25.
Asaph, Heman and other principal men that should be heads of the quyre. He
appointed al officers needful both for his court and also the common wealth,
with the arms of the crown, which was a Lion, in remembrance of the Lion
which he had slain with his own hands, Thearmes of King David.
when he was a child: he ordained a mynt with a peculier form of money to be
stamped: took order for distributing relief unto the poor, and other like
acts of a prudent and pious Prince.

After all this he turned him self to his old exercise His valor in chiualry.
of wars, to which he was given from his child hood, being wonderful valiant
of his own person as appears by the Lion and bear that he slew with his
own hands, and the courage vvherwith he took upon him the combat with
Goliath, and as he had showed himself a great vvarier and renowned captain
many years in the service of Saul, against the Philistians, and had gained
many noble victoryes: King Dauides victoires.
so much more did he after he was king himself, for that he conquered not only
the Philistians, but also the Amorits, Idumeans, Moabites, with the kings and
people of Damasco and al Syria, even unto the ruier Euphates, and left al these
countries peace-able to his successor and the scripture recompteth in one 2.
Reg. 8.
only chapter, how that in three or four battles wherein David himself was
present, with Paral. 18 (...)
in the space of two or three years, almost a hundredth thousand horse and
foot slain by him, and that himself slew in his days eight hundredth with
his own hands, and that he made by his example thirty and seven such
Captains 2. Reg. 23 Joseph. l. 7 antiq c. 10
as each one of them was able to lead and govern a whole army, and yet among
al these expenses of vvarres had he care to lay up so much money and treasure as
was sufficient for the buylding of that huge and wonderful temple after him,
which he recommended to his son Salamon, and amiddest all this valor and
couradge of so vvarlyke a king and Captain, 2. Reg. 7.
had he so much humility as to humble himself to Nathan the Prophet when he
came to rebuke him for his fault, and so mnch patience His humi lity charity
and dc uotion.
and charity as to pardon Semei that reuyled him and threw stones at him in the
high way as he went, and among so many and continual busineses, both martial
and civil, and great affairs of the common wealth, he had time to write so
many Psalms as we see, and to sing praises seven times, a day to almighty God,
and to feel that devotion at his death which we read of, and finally he so
lived and so dyed, as never Prince (I think) before him nor perhapps after him
so-ioyned together both valor and virtue courage and humility, wisdom and
piety, government and devotion, nobility and religion. Wherefore though I have
bin somewhat longer then I would in this example, yet has it not bin from the
purpose to note somewhat in particular what two worthy kings were put up by
God in place of two other by him deprived and deposed.

And now if we vvil, leave the Hebrews and return to the Romans, of whom we
spoke Kings pur down among the romans and what successors they had.
before, we shall find diverse things notable in that state also, to the purpose
we have in hand. For before I told you how that Romulus their first king
having by little and little declined into Halicar l. 1.
tyranny, he was stayne and cut in pieces by the senate (which at that time
contained a hundred in number) and in his place was chosen Numa Pompilius the
notablest king that ever they had, who prescribed al their order of religion
and manner of sacrifices, imitating therein and in diverse other points, the
rites and ceremonies of the Jews, as Tertulian and other fathers Tertul. li.
de praescrip. contta haeres. Justin. martyr apolog.
do note he began also the buylding of their Capitol, added the two months of
January and February to the year and did other such notable things for that
common wealth.

Again when Tarquinius the proud there seventh and last king, was expelled by
the same senate, for his euel government, and the whole manner of government
chainged, as before has Tit. liu. li. 1. dec. (...).
bin rouched, we see the success was prosperous, for that not only no hurt
came thereby to Eutrop. l. 1.
the common wealth, but exceeding much good, seeing their government and increase
of Empire was so prospetous under their consuls for many years in such sort,
that whereas at the end of their kings government, they had but fiftene miles
territory without their city, it is known, that when their consuls government
ended and was chainged by Julius Caesar, their territory reached more then
fiftene thousand miles in copasse, for that they had not only al Europe under
there dominion, but the principal parts also of Afia and Africa, so as this
chastisment so justly laid upon their kings was profitable and beneficial to
their common wealth also.

Moreover when Julius Caesar upon particular ambition had broken al law both
humane and divine, and taken al government in to his own hands alone, he was in
revenge hereof, Caesar Au gustus.
slain as the world knows, by senators in the senate house: and Octauianus
Augustus preferred Dion in Caesa.
in his room, who proved afterward Sueton in Caesa.
the most famous Emperor that ever was. I might note here also how Nero sixth
Emperor Nero Vespatian.
of Rome which succeeded lawfully his uncle Claudius in the Empire, and being
afterward deposed and sentenced to death by the senate for his wicked government
(which was the first judicial sentence that ever the senate gave against
Emperor) albeit peace insued not presently, Cornel. Tacit. lib. 20. and 21.
Egesip. l. 5
but that Galba Otho and Vitellius, three great Captains of the Empire made
some little enterludes of tragical killing of one the other, yet with-in few
months the whole Empire by that means fell upon Vespasian and his son
Titus, two of the best governors that those times ever saw.

The like might be noted of the noble rank of five excellent good Emperors, to
wit, Nerua, Traian Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurclius, Eutrop. in vita
Caesa.
that ensued in the empire by the just death of cruel Domitian, which execution
the senate is thought in secret to have procured, (being not able to perform
it openly by justice) which was seen by that, that when the act was do^ne,
the senate did presently by public decree allow of the same, and disanulled
al his barbarous acts for their excceding cruelty, and commanded his arms
and memories to be pulled down every where, and chose for his successor, one
(...) Nerua, an Italian, a man of excellent virtue, by whom they enjoyed not
only the most prosperous time of his government, but of al those other four
before named that ensued him no lessc worthy then him self.

Not long after, the succession of these excellent good Emperors, there came to
the crown Heliogabolus.
by lawful descent of blood, a youth named Antoninus Heliogabolus, son of the
Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, and nephew to the most famous and noble Emperor
Septimius Seuerus that dyed in Ingland. Which youth as he was greatly loved
and honored a great while for so worthy a grand father: so afterward for his
own most beaftly life and foul actions, he was deprived An. Dn^i 124.
and put to death by the souldiars of Rome, at the request and common desire
both of the people and senate, when he had reigned six years, and yet was
but twenty years of age, when he was put down and his death and deprivation
Alius la^p. in vita Heliog.
was approved by public act of the senate, who ordained also in his
detestatio^, that never Emperor after him shonld be called more Antoninus and
so it was observed, though no other name had ever bin more gratful before, to
the world for the remembrance of the good Emperors, that had bin so called.

This man being chastized as is said, there was preferred to the Empire in his
room a goodly Alexander Seuerus.
young man, of his next kynred named Alexander Seuerus, son to Mamonea which
was sister to Heliogabolus his mother, and being admitted by common consent,
both of the senate people Herod. in vit. seven.
and army, he proved one of the most rarest Ptinces for his valor and virtue,
that ever the roman Empire has had, so as the worthiness of Seuerus seemed to
reco^pencefully the wickedness of Heliogabolus.

Imight name, diverse other such examples and among the rest that of Maxentius,
who being Maxe^tiua Constantin.
lawfully possessed of the Empire in Rome, as it seemed (for that he was son
to Maximinianus the Emperor that reigned with Diocletian) yet for his
tyrannous government that was intolerable, it is supposed that the senate (not
being able to match him in open strenght) sent prinily into Ingland and France,
to inuit Constantin to come, and do justice upon him, and so he did, and he
being drowned in the river of Tiber Co^stantin sutnamed afterward the great
succeeded in the Empire, and was the man that al men know, and the first Emperor
that publicly professed him self a Christian and planted our faith over all the world and this of the roman Empire.

And if we will come lower down, and nearer home, we have yet an other
example, more markable perhaps then all the rest, which was the change of the
Empire from the East to the west, for the euel government of Constantin the The
chan ge of the east empy re.
sixth, who was deposed first and his eyes put, out by his own mother Irene,
and the Empire usurped by her, but being not able to rule it in such order as
was needful, for so great a monarchy (though otherwise she were one of the
rarest women for valor and vvisdome that ever the world had) she was deprived
thereof by the sentence of Leo the third, pope of Rome, and Charles the great.
by consent of all the people and senate of that city, and Charles king of
France and of Germany (surnamed aftrrward the great) was crowned Emperor of
the west, and so has that succession An. 800.
remained unto this day, and many worthy men have succeeded therein, and infinite
acts of jurisdiction have bin excersised by this authority which were al
unjust and tyrannical, if this change of the Empire, and deposition of Irene
and her son for there euel government had not bin lawful.

It were to long to run over al other kingdoms, yet some I shall touch in
such points as are most notorious.

The two famous cha^ges that have bin made Two changs in France. Belfor. l. 1
Girard. l. 3 AEmil l. 2 Clem. Baudin. en la chro mique des Roys de France.
of the royal line in France, the first from the race of Pharamond and
Clodoueus to the line of pepin, and the second from the race of Pepin again to
the line of Hugo Capetus, that endures unto this day, vvher on are they
founded, but upon the judicial chastisment and deposition of two euel Princes,
the first of Childeric the third lawful king of France, who after tenn years
that he had reigned was deposed, by Zaccharie the pope at the request of the
whole nobility and clergy of France, or rather his deprivation was by them,
and confirmed by the pope, to whom they alleged this reason for their doing in
that behalf, as Girard puts it down in both his French Cronicles, I mean
the large and the abbreuiation, to wit, that their oath to Childeric was to
honor serve Reasons of deprivation.
obey, maynteyne and defend him against al men, as long as he was just,
religious, valiant, clement, and would resist the enemies of the crown,
punish the wicked and conserve the good, and defend the Christian faith. And
for as much as these promises (said they) were condicional, they ought not to
hold or bind longer, then that they were reciprocally observed, on both
parts, which seeing they were not, on the part of Childric, they would not be
any longer his subjects, and so desired Zacharias to absolve them, from their
oaths, which he did, and by this means Childric was deposed and put into a
monastery, where he dyed, and in his place Pepin was chosen and crowned king
vvhos posterity reigned for many years after him, and were such noble kings as
all the world can testify.

And so continued this race of Pepin in the Hugo (...), anno 988.
royal throne for almost two hundredth years together until Hugo Capetus, who
was put into the same throne by the same authority of the common wealth, and
Charles of Lorayne last of the race of Pepin, for the euel satisfaction which
the French nation had of him was put by it, and kept prisoner during his life
in the castle of Orelance. And thus much do affirm all the French Historyes,
and do attribute to these changes, the prosperity and greatness of their present
kingdom and monarchy, and thus much for France, where many other examples might
be alleged, as of king Lewis the third, surnamed Faineant. For that he was
unprofitable, and of Charles surnamed Le gros, that succeeded him both of them
deposed by the states of France, and other the like, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak afterward, to an other purpose.

But now if you please, let us stepp over the pirenie mountains, and look
into Spain, Examples of Spain
vvher there will not fail us, also diverse examples both before the opression of
that realm by the Council Tolet. 4. cap. 4.
moors, as also after: For that before, to wit about the year of Christ 630.
we read of a Ambros moral. 1. II cap. 17.
lawful king named Flaueo Suintila put down and deprived, both he and his
posterity in the fourth council national of Toledo, and one Sissinando
confirmed in his place, notvvithstanding that Suintila were at the beginning
of his reign a very good king, and much commended by S. Isiodorus Arch bishop
of Siuil, who yet in the said council was the first man that subscribed
Isidor. in (...) hispan.
to his deprivation.

After the entrance of the moors also, when Spain was reduced again, to the
order and government of Spanish kings, we read that about the year of Christ
1282. one Don Alonso the eleventh of that name, king of Castile, and Leon,
Esteuan de Garibay. 1. 13 de la hist. de Espa. c. 15.
succeeded his father Fernando surnamed the saint, and himself obtained the
surname of Sabio and Astrologo that is to say, of wise and of an Astrologer,
for his excellent learning and peculier skill in that art, as may well appear
by the Astronomy tables that at this day go under Tabulae Astron. Alfonsinae.
his name, which are the most prefect and exact that ever were set forth by
judgment of the learned.

This man, for his euel government and espetially for tyranny used toward two
nephews King Don Alonso deposed.
of his, as the spanish Chronicler Garauay writes, was deposed of his
kingdom by a public act of parliament in the town of Valliodolid, after he
had reigned 30. years, and his own son Don Sancho the fourth, was crowned
in his place, who for his valiant acts, was suruamed el brauo, and it turned
to great commodity of the common wealth.

The same common wealth of Spain some years after, to wit abont the year of
Christ 1368. having to their king one Don Pedro, surnamed Don Pedro cruel
deposed.
the cruel, for his injurious proceeding with his subjects, though, otherwise he
were lawfully seized also of the crown, as son and heir to king Don Alonso
the twelfth, and had reigned among them 18. years, yet for his euel government
they resolved to depose him, and so sent for a bastard brother of his, named
Henry that lived in France requesting him that he would come with some force of
french men to Garibay l. 14. c. 40. 41.
assist them, in that act, and take the crown upon him self, which he did,
and by the help of the Spaniards and French souldiars, he drove the said Peter
out of Spain, and himself was crowned. And albeit Edward surnamed the black
Prince of Ingland, by order of his father king Edward the third restored once
again the said Peter, yet was it not durable, for that Henry having the
favor of the Spaniards returned again and deprived Peter the second time, and
slew him in fight hand to hand, which made show of more particular favor of
God in this behalf to Henry, and so he remained king of Spain as does also
his progeny inioye the same unto this day, though by nature he was bastard as
had bin said, and not withstanding that king Peter left two daughters which
were led away into Ingland and there married to great Princes.

And this king Henry so put up in his place was called king Henry the second
of this name and proved a most excellent king, and for his great nobility in
conversation, and prouesse in chiualry, was called by excellency, El cauallero
the kinghtly king, and for his exceeding benignity and liberality, was surnamed
also, el dela mercedes, which is to say, the king that gave many gifts, or the
liberal franck, and bounteful king, which was a great change from the other
surnamed cruel, that king Peter had before; and so you see that always I give
you a good king in place of the bad deposed.

In Portugal also before I go out of Spain, In Portugal.
I will allege you one example more, which is of Don Sancho the second,
surnamed Capelo, fourth king of Portugal, lawful son and heir unto Don
Alonso surnamed el Gardo, who whas third king of Portugal. This Don Sancho,
after he had King Do^ Sancho 2. deposed.
reigned 34. years was deptiued for his defects in government by the universal
consent of al Portugal, and this his first deprivation from al Garibay lib. 4
de hist. Portug. c. 19.
kingly rule and authority (leaving him only the bare name of king) was
approved by a general council in Lions, pope Innocentius the 4. being there
present, who at the petition and insta^ce of the whole realm, of Portugal by
their Ambassadors the Archbishop of Braga, bishop of Comibra and diverse of the
nobility sent to Lions for that purpose, did authorize the said state of
Portugal, to put in supreme government one, Don Alonso brother to the said king
Don Sancho, who was at that time, Earl of bullen in Picardy, by right of his
wife, and so the Portugales did, and further also a little after they deprived
their said king, and did drive him out of his realm into Castilla, where he
lived all the rest of his life in banishment, and dyed in Toledo without ever
returning, and this decree of the council and Pope at Lions, for authorizing
Lib 6. decret tit. 6. de supple^ da cap. Grand. 1.
of this fact, is yet extant in our Canon law, in the sixth book of Decretals
now in prynt. And this king Don Alonso, the third which in this (...) was put
up, against his brother was peaceably and prosperously king, of Portugal, all the days (...) Garibay in hist. de Portug li. 34. cab. 20. and 21.
his life and he was a notable king, and among other great exployres, he was
the first that set Portugal free from al subjection dependence and homage to
the kingdom of Castile, which unto his time it had acknowledged and he left
for his successor his son, and heir, Don (...) Fabricador, to wit the great
buylder, for that (...) builded and founded above forty and (...) great towns
in portugal, and was a most (...) Prince and his offspring rules in Portugal
unto this day.

Infinite other examples could I allege if would examyne the lives and
discentes of (...) and other kingdoms with their Princes, and namely if I
would speak of the Greek Emperors, The Emperors of Greece.
deprived fortheir euel government, not so much by populer mutyny (which often
happened among them) as by consent and grane deliberation of the whole state
and wealpublique, Glicas in Annal. part. 4. Zon. Annal co. 3. in vita Michael
Calapha.
as Michael Calaphates, for that he had trodden the Cross of Christ under his
feet, and was otherwise also a wicked man, as also the Emperor Nicephorus
Botoniates, for his dissolute life and preferring wicked men to authority, and
the like, whereof I might name many, but it would be to long.

What should I name here, the deposition In Polonia.
made of Princes, in our days, by other common wealths, as in Polonia, of
Henry the third that was last king of France, and before that had bin sworn
king of Polonia, of which crown of In literis reip. Polo^. ad Henr. Valesium
page 182. 184.
Polonia, he was deprived by public act of parliament, for his departing
thence without license, and not returning at his day by the said state
appointed and deuounced by public Vidc Gagneum part. I. de rebus Polon.
lettres of peremptory commaundedme^t, which are yet extant.

What should I name the deprivations of Henry late king of Suetia, who being
lawful In Suetia.
successor and lawfully in possession after his father, Gustauus was yet put
down by that common wealth and deprived, and his brother made king in his
place who if you remember was in Ingland in the beginning of this Queens
Poilin. I. 32. histor. de Franc. An. 1568.
reign, and whose son reygneth at this day and is king also of Polonia, and
this fact was not only allowed of at home by all the states of that counttey,
but also a broad, as namely of Maximilian the Emperor, and approved also by the
king of Denmark, and by all the Princes of Germany near about that realm, who
saw the reasonable causes which that common wealth had to proceed as it did.

And a little before that, the like was practiced also in Denmark against
Cisternus there lawful In Denmark.
king if we respect his descent in blood, for he was son to king John that
reigned a fore him, and crowned in his fathers life, but yet afterward for his
intolerable cruelty, he was deprived and driven into banishment, together with
his wife and three children, al which were disinherited and his uncle
Frederik Prince of Sleydan. l. 4. hist. An. 1532. Munst. l. 3 Cosmogra. in
descript. Dauide. Paulus lo uius in viris illust.
Holsatia, was chosen king, whose progeni yet remains in the crown, and the
other, though he were married to the sister of Charles the fifth last Emperor
of that name, and were of kyn also to king Henry the eight of Ingland, yet
could he never get to be restored, but passed his time miserably, partly in
banishment and partly in prison until he dyed.

But it shall be best perhapps to end this narration Examples of England.
with an example or two out of Ingland it self, for that no where else have I
read more markable accidents, touching this point, then in Ingland, and for
breuity sake I shall touch only two or three happened since the conquest, for
that I will go no higher though I might, as appears by the example of K. Edwin
and others nether vvil I begin to stand much upon the example of king John,
though well also I might, King Iho^ deposed.
for that by his euel government he made himself both so odious at home and
contemptible abroad (having lost Normandy Gascony Guyenne, and all the rest in
effect which the crown of Ingland had in France) as first of al he was both
excommunicated and deposed by sentence of the pope at the suit of his own
people, and was enforced to make his peace by resigning his crown into the
hands of Pandulfe the popes legate as Polidor recounteth Polid. hist. Ang. l.
15. An. 1212.
and afterward faling back again to his old defects and naughty government,
albeit by his promise to the pope, to go and make war against the Turks if he
might be quiet at home, and that his kingdom should be perpetually tributary
to the sea of Rome, he procured him to be of his side for a time, and against
the Barons: yet that stayed not them to proceed to his deprivation which they
did effectuate, first at Canterbury and after at London, in the eighteenth and
last year of king John's reign, An. 1216.
and meant also to have disinherited his son Henry, which was afterward
named king Henry the third, and at that time a child of eight years old only:
and all this in punishment of the father, if he had lived, and for that cause
they called into Ingland Lodouick the Prince of France son to king Philip the
second, and father to Saint Lewis the nynth, and chose him for their king and
did swear him fealtye with general consent in London the year of our Lord
1216. And but that the death of king An. 1216.
John that presently ensued, altered the whole course of that designment, and
moved them to turn their purposes and accept of his son Henry before matters
were fully established for king Lodowick: it was most likely that France and
Ingland would have bin joined by these means under one crown.

But in the end as I have said king Henry the King Henry the third.
third was admitted and he proved a very worcester thy king after so euel as had gone
before him, and had bin deposed (which is a circumstance that you must always
note in this narration) and he reigned more years then ever king in Ingland
did before or after him, for he reigned full 53. years, and left his son and
heir Edward the first not inferior to himself in manhood and virtue who
reigned 34. years and left a son King Edward the second deposed.
named. Edward the second, who falling into the same defects of government or
worse, then king John his great grandfather had done, was after 19. years
reign deposed also by act of parliament holden at London the year 1326. and
Polyd. 1. 18. hist. Anglicanae Anuo 1326.
his body adjudged to perpetual prison, in which he was at that present in the
castle of wallingford, vvherher diverse both bishops Lords and knights of the
Parliament were sent Stow. in the life of King Edward the 2.
unto, him to denounce the sentence of the realm against him, to wit, how they
had deptiued him, and chosen Edward his son in his place, for which act of
choosing his son, he thanked them heartily and with many tears, acknowledged
his own vnwoorthines, wheruppon he was digraded, his name of king first taken
from him, and he appointed to be called Edward of Carnaruan from that hour
forward. The man ner of deprimatio^ of a king.
and then his crown and ring were taken away, and the steward of his house
brake the stafe of his office in his presence, and discharged his servants of
their service, and al other people of See Stow. and hollings in this man's life.
there obedience or allegiance toward him: and toward his mayntenance he had
only a hundredth marks a year allowed for his expenses, and then was he
delivered also into the hands of certain particular keepers, who led him
prisoner from thence by diverse other places using him with extreme indignity in
the way, until at last they took his life from him in the castle of Barkley,
and his son Edward the King Edward the third.
third reigned in his place, who if we respect either valor, provvesse, length
of reign, acts of cheualry, or the multitude of famous Princes his children
left behind him, was one of the noblest kings that ever England had, though
he were chosen in the place of a very euel one as you have seen.

But what shall we say? is this worthiness which God gives commonly to the
successors at these changes, perpetual or certain by disce^t? no truly: nor the
example of one Princes punishment makes an other to beware, for the next
successor after this noble Edward which was king Richard the second, though
he were not his son, but his sons son, to wit son and heir to the
excellent and renounced black Prince of wales, this Richard (I say) forgetting
King Richard 2. deposed.
the miserable end of his great grand father for euel government, as also the
felicity, and virtue of his father and grand father: for the contrary, suffered
himself to be abused and misled by euel counselors, to the great hurt and
disquietnes of the realm. For which cause after he had reigned 22. years he
was also deposed, by act of parlama^t holden in London, the year of our Lord
1399. and condemned Polyd. 1. 20. hist. Aug. 1399
to perpetual prison in the castle of Pomfret vvher he was soon after put to
death also and used as the other before had bin, and in this man's place by
free election was chosen for king the noble knight Henry Duke of La^caster who
proved afterward so notable a king as the world knows, and was father to
king Henry the fifth surnamed commonly the Alexander of Ingland, for that as
Alexander the great conquered the most part of Asia in the space of 9. or 10.
years so did this Henry conquer France in less then the like time.

I might recon also in this number of Princes King Henry the 6. deposed.
deposed for defect in gouerme^t (though otherwise he were no euel man in
life) this king Henry the fourths nephew I mean king Henry the sixth who after
almost forty years Polyd. lib. 23. histor. Anglic.
reign was deposed, and imprisoned and put to death also, together with his
son the Prince of wales, by Edward the fourth of the house of york, and the
same was confirmed by the commons and especially by the people of London, and
afterward also by public act of parliament, in respect not only of the title
which king Edward pretended, but also and especially for that king Henry did
suffer himself to be ouerruled by the Queen his wife, and had broken the
articles of agreement, made by the parliament, between him and the Duke of York
and solemnly swore^ on both sides, the 8. of October. in the year 1459. In
punishment vvherof and of his other negligent and euel gouerme^t, (though for
his own particular life he was a good man as has bin said) sentence was
given against him, partly by force and partly by law, and king Edward the
fourth was put in his place, who was no euel king as al Inglish men well know,
but one of the renoumedst for martial acts and justice that has worn the
Inglish crown.

But after this man again, there fell an other King Richard 3. deposed.
accident much more notorious, which was, that Richard Duke of Gloucester, this
king Edwards younger brother, did put to death his two nephews, this man's
children, to wit, king Edward the fifth and his little brother, and made him
self king, and albeit he sinned grievously by taking upon him the crown in
this wicked manner yet when his nephews were once dead, he might in reason
seem to be lawful king, both in respect that he was the next male in blood
after his said brother, as also for that by diverse acts of parliament, both
before and after the death of those infantes, his title was authorized and made
good, and yet no man vvil say (I think) but that he was lawfully also
deposed, again afterward, by the commonwealth, which called out of France,
Henry Earl of An. 1487.
Richmond to chastise him, and to put him down, and fo he did, and took from
him both life and kingdom in the field, and was king himself after him by
the name of king Henry the seventh, and no man I suppose, vvil say but that he
was lawfully king also, which yet cannot be, except the other might lawfully
be deposed, and moreover as I said at the, beginning, I would have you
consider in all these mutations, what men commonly have succeeded in the places of
such as have bin deposed, as namely in Ingland, in the place of those five kings
before A point much to be noted.
named that were deprived, to wit, John, Edward the second, Richard the
second, Henry the sixth, and Richard the third, there have succeeded the three
Henryes, to wit, the third, fourth, and seventh, and two Edwards, the third and
fourth, al most rare and valiant Princes who have done infinite importanr acts
in their common wealths, and among other, have raised many houses to
nobility, put down others, changed states both abroad and at home, distributed
ecclesiastical dignityes, altered the course of descent in the blood royal, and
the like, al which was iniust, and is void at this day if the chainges and
deprivations of the former Princes could not be made, and consequently none of
these that do pretend the crown of Ingland, at this day, can have any title at
al, for that from those men they discende who were put up in place of the
deprived.

And this may be sufficient for proof of the two principal points, which you
required to be discussed in the beginning of this spech, to wit, that lawful
Princes have oftentimes by their common wealths bin lawfully deposed, for
misgouerment, and that God has allowed and assisted the same, with good
success unto the weal public, and if this be so, or might be so, in kings
lawfully set in possession, then much more has the said common wealth power
and authority to alter the succession of such as do but yet pretend to that
dignity, if there be dew reason and causes for the same, which is the head point
that first we began to treat of said the Ciuilian, and with this ended his
speech without saying any more.

VVHER IN CONSISTS PRINCIPALLY THE LAVFVLNES OF PROCEEDING AGAINST Princes
which in the former chapter is mentioned: what interest Princes have in their
subiect's goods or lives, how oaths does bind or may be broken by subjects
toward Princes, and finally the difference between a good king and a Tirant.
CHAP. IIII.
WHEN the Ciuilian had ended his The reply of the temporal lawyer.
speech, the temporal lawyer looked upon the sta^ders by, to see whether any
would reply or no, and perceauing al to hold there peace, he began to say in
this manner: Truly Sir I cannot deny, but the examples are many that you have
alleged, and they seem to prove sufficiently that which you affirmed, at the
beginning, to wit, that the Princes by you named, were deprived, and put down
by their common wealths for there euel government. And good successors commonly
raised up in their places, and that the common wealth had authority also to do
it I do not greatly doubt, at least wise, they did it, de facto, and now to call
these factes in question, were to embroyle and turn vp-side-downe all the states
of Christen. dom, as you have well signified, but yet for that you have added
this word lawfully so many times, in the course of your narration, I would
you took the pain to tell us also, by what law, they did the same, seeing that
Belloy whom you have named before, and some other of his opinion Belloy apolog.
catholic. part. 2.
do affirm, that albeit by nature the common wealth have authority over the
Prince, paragraf. 9. and apol. pro rege. cap. 9.
to choose and appoint him, at the beginning, as you have well proved out of
Aristotle and other vvayes: yet having once made him, and given up al their
authority unto him, he is now no more subject to there cortection, or restraynt,
but remains absolute of himself without respect to any, but only to god
alone. which they prove by the example of every particular man, that has
authority to make his Master or Prince, of his inferior, but not afterward to
put him down again, or to deprive him of the authority which he gave him,
though he should not bear himself well and gratefully, but discourtious
rather and injuriously toward him that gave him first this authority.

To which also they do allege the speech of An objection out of the prophet
Samuel.
the prophet Samuel, in the first book of the kings, vvher the people of
Israel demanded to have a king to govern over them, as other nations round
about them had, and to leave the government of the high Priest under whom at
that day they were. At which demand both God himself and Samuel were
greuiously offended, and Samuel by Gods express order, protested unto them in
this manner, well (quoth be) you will have a king, harken then to this that I will
say. Hoc erit ius regis, qui imperaturus est vobis, this shall be the rlght and
power of the king that shall rule over you, to wit, he shall take from you The
Power of a King or rather of a Tirant.
your children both sons and daughters, your fields and vinyards, your
harvest also and rents, your servants, handmaydes, and herds of catle, and
shall give them to his servants and you shall cry unto God in that day, from the
face of this your king, whom you have chosen, and God shall not hear you, for
that you have demanded a king to govern you, thus far the Prophet.

Out of al which discourse and spech of the Prophet, these men do gather, that
a king is nothing so restrained in his power or limited to law as you have
affirmed, but rather that his law is his own vvil, as by these words of the
Prophet may appear, and much less may the common wealth chastise or deprive
him for exceeding the limits of law, or doing his vvil, seeing that here in this
place, God does foretell that Princes oftentimes shall commit excesses and
injuries, and yet does he not therefore will, them to chasten or depose them, for
the same but rather insinuates that they must take it patiently, fot their
sins, and cry to God for remedy and persevere therein though he do not (...)
the first harken to them, or grant their redress, hitherto the temporal
lawyer.

Whereunto answered the Ciuilian, that he confessed that Belloy and other his
companions that vvrote in flattery of Princes in these our days, did nor only
affirm these things, that the temporal lawyer had alleged, and that Princes
were lawless and subject to no account, reason, or correction, whatsoever they
did, but also (which is yet more absurd and pernicious to al common wealths)
that al goods, chattels, possessions and Belloy apolog.
whatsoever else commodityes temporal, of the common wealth, are properly the
kings, and that their subjects part. 2. pa rag. 7. and Apol. pro rege c. 6. and
24. and 26.
have only the use thereof, without any propriety at al, so as when the king
will, he may take it from them by right, without injustice or injury, which
assertions do over throw wholly the very nature and substance of a common
wealth, it self.

For first to say that a king is subject to no law or limitation at al, but may
do what he Great absurdities and flateries.
will, is against all that I have alleged before of the very institution of a
common wealth, which was to live together in justice and order, and as I
showed out of Cicero speaking of the first kings, Iustitiae fruendae causa been
morati Reges olim sunt constituti. For enjoying of Justice were kings Cic. lib.
2. offic.
appointed in old time that were of good life, but if they be bound to no
justice at al, but must be borne and obeyed, be they never so wicked, then is
this end and butte of the common wealth, and of al royal authority, utterly
frustrat: then may we set up public murderours rauishers thieves and
spoylers to deuowre us in steed of kings, and governors to defend us, for such
in deed are kings that follow no law, but passion and sensuality, and do
commit injustice, by their public authority, and then finally, were al those
kings before mentioned both of the Jews, gentiles, and christians unlawfully
deprived, and there successors unlawfully put up in their places, and
consequently al Princcs living in Christianity at this day, who are descended
of them, are intruders and no lawful Princes.

By the second saying also, that al temporalityes are properly the Princes, and
that subjects An other absurdity.
have only the use thereof without any interest of their own, no less
absurdityes do follow, then of the former assertion, for that first, it is
against the very first principle and foundation of our civil law, which at the
first entrance Institut. imperial l. 2. Tit. 1.
and beginning makes this division of goods, that some are common by nature to
al men, as the air the sea and the like, other are public to al of one city
or country, but yet not common to al in general, as rivers ports and other
such: some are of the community Division of goods by civil law.
of a city or common wealth, but yet not common to every parttculer person of
that city, as common rents, theators, the public house, and the like: some
are of none nor properly of any man's goods, as churches and sacred things, and
some are proper to particular men, as those which every man possesses of his
own, which division, of Justinian the Emperor and his most learned lawyers is
not good, if the Prince be Lord proprietarie of al: nay he that made this
division, being Emperor, did great injury also to himself, in assigning that
to others, which by the opinion of Belloy and his fellows was properly and
truly his own, in that he was Emperor and Lord of the world.

Besides all this, so absurd a saying is this, as it Slaves and freemen.
overthrows the whole nature of a common wealth it self, and makes al
subjects to be but very slaves: For that slaves and bondmen, as Aristotle
says in this do differ from freemen, that slaves have only the use of things
without Arist. lib. 1. polit. c. 4. and 5.
property or interest, and cannot acquire or get to themselves any dominion or
true right in any thing, for that what soever they do get, it accreweth to
their master, and not to themselves, and for that the condition of an ox or an
ass, is the very same in respect of a poor man, that has no slave, for that
the ox or ass gets nothing to himself, but only to his master, and can be
lord of nothing of that for which he laboreth: for this cause wittely also
said Aristotle, that bos aut asinus pauperi agricolae pro seruo Arist. li. 1.
cap. 3.
est. An ox or an ass, is to a poor husba^dman in steed of a bondsman, and so
feing that Belloy will needs have the state and condition of al subjects to be
like unto this in respect of their Prince, and that they have nothing in
propriety, but only the use, and that al dominion Mark this reason.
is properly the Princes: what does the other then make al subjects not only
slaves but also oxen and asses, and pecora campi.

Last of al (for I vvil not ouerlode you with Diverse evident reasons against
Belloy.
reasons in a matter so evident) if al subjects goods be properly the kings,
why then was Achab and Iezabel king and Queen of Israel, so reprehended by
Elias and so punished by god, for taking away Nabothes vineyard? seeing they
took but that which was there own? nay why was not Naboth accused of
iniquity rebellion and treason, for that he did not yeald up presently 3. Reg.
21.
his vineyard, when his Princes, demanded the same, seeing it was not his, but
there is? why do the kings of Ingland France and Spain, ask money of their
subjects in parlaments, if they might take it as there own? why are those
contributions termed by the names of subsidies, helps, beneuolences, lones,
prests, contributions, and the like, if al be dew and not voluntary of the
subjects part? How have parlaments oftentimes denied to their Princes such
helps of money, as they demanded? Why are their judges appointed to determyne
matter, of suits and pleas between the Prince and his subjects, if al be his
and the subject have nothing of his own? And last of al why does the Cannon
Law, which is a part also of my profession, and received in most countries of
the world, so straightly inhibit al Princes upon pain of excommunication,
Cap. inouamusio. de causibus etc. super quibusdam 26. (...). de verborum signif.
to impose new impositions and taxes, upon there people without great
consideration and necessity, and free consent of the giuers, if al be the
Princes and nothing of the subject? nay whybe al Princes generally at this day
prohibited to alienat any thing of their own crown without consent of there
people, if they only be Lords of al, and the people have interest in nothing?

And hereby also we may gather, what the Prophet Samuel meant, when he
threatened The answer to the objection out of the pro phet Samuel.
the Jews with the disorders of kings, that should reign over them, not, that
these disorders were lawful or appertayned to a rightious king, but that seeing
they refused to be under the moderate gouerme^t of their high priests, and
other governors which God had given them hitherto, and required to be ruled by
kings as other heathen nations of Egypt, Babylon, Syria, and Persia were, whose
manner of government, not only Historiographers, but Philosophers also, and
Aristotle among the rest, does note to Arist. 1. 5. pol. c. 11. Joseph. 1. 6
antiq. c. 4.
have bin very tyranical: yet for that the Jews would needs have that
government as a matter of more pomp and glory then that which hitherto they had
had, Samuel did first insinuate unto them, what extorsion and wickedness those
heathen kings did use commonly over there people, in taking their children,
servants, wives, goods, and the like from them, and that many kings of Israel
should do the like, and take it for there right and souerainty, and should
oppress and tyra^nise over them, and enforce them to cry out to God for help,
and they should not find remedy, for that so heddyly they had demanded this
change of government, which highly displeased almighty God, and this is the true
meaning of that place, if it be well considered, and not to authorize herby
injustice or wickedness in any king, seeing the principal points recorded to al
Princes and kings through out the whole course of scripture, are diligere
iudictum and iustitiam, apprehendere disciplinam, and facere veritatem, that is
to say to love judgment and justice to admit discipline and to execute truth,
and this is the instruction that God gave to the Jews in Deutronomy for their
kings when they should have them, which God foretold many Deuteronomy. 17. 3 Reg. 2.
and 10. Psalm. 2.
years before they had any, and this is the admonition that king David left
unto his son and successor Solomon, at his death, and by him to al other
kings and Princcs, and for want of observing these points of judgment, justice,
discipline, and truth we see not only Achab and Iezabel. Before mentioned
greuiously punished, but many other kings also by God himself, as Achaz
Manasses, Ioachim, and the like, which had not bin justice on Gods part so to
punish them if it had bin lawful for them to use that manner of proceeding
toward their people, as these good instructors of Princes in our days, most
fondly and wickedly do affirm, and thus much for that place.

But to the first point which you asked, by what law the common wealths that
are mentioned By what law Princes are punished
in the former chapters, did punish their euel Priuces: I have answered you
before, that it is by all law both divine and humane: divine, for that God does
approve that form of government which every common wealth does choose unto it
self, as also the conditions, statutes and limitations which it self shall
appoint unto her Princes, as largely before has bin declared. And by all
humane law also: for that al law both natural, national, and positive, does
teach us, that Princes are subject to law and order, and that the common
wealth which gave them there authority for the common good of al, may also
restrain or take the same away again, if they abuse it to the common cuel.

And vvheras these men say, that like as if a The difference between a private
man and a common wealth.
private man should make his inferior or equal to be his Prince, he could not
after restrain the same again, and so nether the common wealth having once
delivered away her authority: I answer, first, that the comparison is not
altogether like, for that a private man though he give his voice to make a
Prince, yet he being but one makes not the Prince wholy as the common wealth
does, and therefore no marvel though it lie not in a particular man's hand to
unmake him again, besides this, a private man having given his voice to make
his Prince, remains subject and inferior to the same, but the whole body
though it be governed by the Prince as by the head, yet is in not inferior but
superior to the Prince, nether so gives the common wealth her authority and
power up to any Prince, that she depriueth her self utterly of the same, when
need shall require, to use it for her defense, for which she gave it.

And finally (which is the cheifest reason of al, and the very ground and
foundation in deed of al kings authority among christians) the power and
anthority which the Prince has from the common wealth is in very truth, not
absolute, but potestas vicaria or deligata, as we Ciuilians The Princes autho
rity but subdelegat.
call it, that is to say, a power delegate, or power by commission from the
common wealth, which is given with such restrictions cautels and conditions,
yea, with such plain exceptions, promises, and oaths of both parties, (I
mean between the king and common wealth at the day of his admission or
coronation) as if the same be not kept, but vvilfully broken, on either part,
then is the other not bound to observe his promise nether, though never so
solemly made or sworn, for that in all bargains, agreements and contracts,
where one part is bound mutually and reciprocally to the other, by oath, vow, or
condition, there, if one side go from his promise, the other stands not
obliged to perform his: and this is so notorious by all law, both of nature and
nations, and so co^form to al reason and equity, that it is put among the very
rules of both the Civil and cannon law, vvher it is said, frustra fidem sibi
quis postulat seruari ab eo, cui sidem a se prestitam seruare recusat. In
regulis vtrinque iuris vide in sine sexti Decret. reg. 75. 69.
He does in vain require promise to be kept unto him at an other man's hands,
to whom he refuses to perform that which himself promised, and again. Non
abstringitur quis iuramento ad implendum. quod iur auit, si ab alio part non
impletur, cuius respectu praebuit iur amentum. A man is not bound to perform
that which by oath he promised, if on theother part, that be not performed, in
respect whereof this oath was made: as for example, if two should swear the one
to assist the other upon the way, in all respects, and after falling upon
enimyes that were either kynn or friends to the one of them, and he should take
there part against his fellow, clear it is, that the other were not bound to
keep his oath toward that party, that has so wickedly broken it to him.

Nay not only, in this case, that is so evident, When an oath binds not.
and palpable by nature it self: but in many other also, is it both lawful
honest and conuevient to leave some times the performance of our oath, as namely
when the fulfilling thereof, should conteyne any notable hurt or inconvenience
against religion, piety, justice, honesty, or the weal public, or against
the party himself to whom it was made, as if a man had sworn to restore a
sword to a madd or furious man, where with it were likely he would destroy
himself and others, and other like cases, which Cicero puts down in his
first book Cicero li. 1. offic.
of offices, and deduceth them from the very ground of nature, and reason it
self, and says, that it were contrary to the dewty of a good or honest man,
in such cases to perform his promise.

Our divines also do allege the example of A clear example.
Herod that had sworn to the daughter of Herodias, to give her what she
demanded, who demau^ding the head of S. John Baptist, though Matthew. 24
Herod were sorry for the same, yet says the text, that for his oaths sake he
commanded it to be performed, which yet no man will deny, but that it had bin
far better left unperformed, and the oath better broken then fulfilled,
according to an other rule of the law, which says, In malis Regul. 68. in
fine 6. Decret.
promissis fidem non expedit obseruari, it is not expedient to keep our
promise in things euel promised.

And finally to this purpose, to wit, to determyne how many ways an oath taken
may be lawfully broken, or not kept, there is a whole title in the Cannon law,
containing 36. chapters, wherein are set down many and diverse Decret. Greg. l
2. tit. 24.
most excellent, and evident cases, about the same determined by Gregory the
first, and other ancient Popes and Doctors, and in the second part of the
decretal there is alleged this sentence out of Isidorus, and established for
law. In matis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, Decret.
part. 2. cau sa. 22. quest. 4. c. 5. and qu 5. per totu^.
impi a enim promissio, quae scelere impletur, that is, in euel promises
perform not your word, in an unlawful vow or oath, change your determination,
for it is an impious promise, which cannot be fulfilled, but with wickedness,
and the very same matter is handled in the question following which is the
fyfth through out 23. whole chapters together.

So as, nothing is more largely handled in our law both Civil and Canon, then
this matter of promises, and oaths, how and when, and why, and in what
cases, they hold or bind, and when not. Al which to apply it now unto Two
principal cases when oaths hold not toward a Prince.
our matter of kings, that we have in hand, we are to understand that two
evident cases are touched here as you see, when a subjects oath or promise of
obedience, may be left unperformed toward his Prince: the first when the
Prince observes not at al his promise and oath made to the common wealth, at
his admission or coronation, and the other when it should turn to the notable
damage of the weal public, (for whose only good the Princes office was
ordained, as often before has bin said and proved) if the subject should keep
and perform his oath and promise made unto his Prince.

And both these cases are touched in the deprivation of Childerike the last king
of France, of the first line of Pharamond which was recounted in the former
chapter, for that as Paulus A Enulius, Belforest, Girard, and other French
stories do testify, the bishop of vvirtsburg, that AEmil. l. 2. hist. Fra^c.
Belfor in vita childer Girard. lib. 3
in the name of all the nobility and common wealth of France, made his speech to
Zachary the pope, for his deposition, and for the election of Pepin in his
place, alleged these two reasons saying.

Truth it is, that the French have sworn fidelity The spech of the French
Ambassador for deprivation of their king.
unto Childerick, as to there true and natural king, but yet with condition,
that he on his part, should also perform the points that are incident to his
office, which are, to defend the common wealth, protect the church of christ,
resist the wicked, advance the good and the like: and if he do this, then the
French are ready to co^tinew there obedience and allegiance unto him: but if he
be apt for none of these things, nether fit, either for a Captain in vvare, or
for a head in peace, and if nothing else may be expected whiles he is king, but
detriment to the state, ignominy to the nation, danger to christian religion,
and destruction to the weal public: then it is law full for you no doubt
(most holy father) to deliver the French from this band of their oath, and to
testify that no promise can bynd this nation in particular, to that which may
be hurtful to al christendom ingeneral. Thus far that bishop, and his spech
was allowed and Childerick deposed, and Pepin made king in his place as the
world knows.

By this the^ you see, saic the Ciuilian lawyer, The conclusion, how and when
oaths do not bind subiestes.
the ground whereon depends the rightious and lawful deposition and
chastisment of wicked Princes, to wit there failing in there oath and promises,
which they made at there first entrance, that they would rule and govern
justly, according to law, conscience, equity, and religion, wherein when thev
fail, or wilfully decline, casting behind them al respect of obligation and
dewty to the end for which they were made Princes and advanced in dignity
above the rest, then is the common wealth not only free from al oths made by
her of obedience or allegiance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover
for saving the whole body, to resist chasten and remove such euel heads, if
she be able, for that otherwise al would come to destruction, ruin, and
public desolation.

And here now come in, al those co^sideratio^s which old philosophers,
lawmakers, and such The difrence between a King and a tyrant.
others as have treated of common wealths, are wont to lay down, of the
difference and contrariety between a king and a tyrant, for that a king (as
both Plato and Aristotle do declare Plat. dial. 1. de repub.
) when once he declyneth from his dewty, becomes a tyrant, that is to say,
of the best Arist. li. 2. Pol. c. 5.
and most sovereign thing upon earth, the worst and most hurt-ful creature
under heaven for that as the end and office of a king is to make happy his
common wealth, so the butt of a tyrat is to destroy the same. And finally the
whole difference is reduced to the principal head that before I have mentioned,
to wit, that a king rules according to equity, oath, conscience, justice, and
law prescribed unto him: and the other is enemy to al these conditions, whereof
if you will read many more particulers and signs to know a tyrant by, I will
remit you to a special book set forth of this matter, by one Bartolus father
(as you know) of our Civil law, Bart. li. de tyrannide.
where the matter is handled largely, as also how lawful and commendable it is
to resist any tyrant, and finally he concludes with Cicero in his books de
legibus, vvher he says, vt populo magistratus, ita magistratui presunt leges.
A Cicero. li. 3. de legibus.
good Prince or Magistrate makes his account, that as he is over the people,
so laws are over him, and a ryrant the contrary. And greatly is Cod. l. 1.
tit. (...). (...). digha.
commended the saying of Theodosius and Valentinian, two worthy Emperors,
recorded in our civil law who said: Digna yox est maiestate regna^tis legibus
se alligatum fateri. It is a spech worthy of the majesty of him that reigns,
to confess that he is bound unto the laws, and the contrary saying of the
Tyrant Caius Calignla, is justly detested by all writers, who said unto one as
Suetonius reports. Memento mihi omnia and in omnes licere, remember, that al
things are lawful Suet. c. 23 in Calig.
unto me and against al men without exception. The saying also of the famous
Emperor Traian Zo^. tom. 2 in Traian.
deserves immortal memory and commendation, who when he delivered the sword
to a praetor or governor of Rome, to do justice, he added these words, Take
this sword, and if I do reign justly, use it for me, and if not, then use it
against me. Which in effect and substance are the very same words which our
christian Princes at this day do use at their entrance and coronations, when
they promise and swear to rule justly, and according to the laws statutes,
and ordinances of their country, and upon that condition do take the oaths of
their subjects obedience, protesting there vvith-al, that if they perform not
this, that then their subjects are free Se in the capter fol lovving.
as before from al allegiance, and then may the common wealth as also the very
officers themselves of such a king, use there sword against him, who gave it to
them, for the public good, if need so require, as Traian commanded.

It was truly the word of a noble Prince The speech of a Soldier.
said a certain Captain of the company there present, and rightly deserved he
to be well obeyed, who gave so liberal and just a commission to be disobeyed:
but for that you said, they that are Princes now a days do the like in effect
at their admission to government and at there coronations: I would be glad to
hear what they say or swear at this their entrance, for certain I am that
afterward I find very few Princes, that are contented to have this point put
in excecution, I mean to be disobeyed whatsoever they do, or howsoever they
live: and moreover I say, that what soever you lawyers sit and talk of,
Princes right in your studies, yet I find no way but hanging for a man of my
profession, if he shall disobey the vvorst Prince that lives, and you lawyers
will be the first that shall give sentence against him, if he chance to come
before you in judgment.

True ir is, said the Ciuilian, vvher martial authority takes place, there no
question of right avails to be disputed, and if a lavyver or any other man
else, be in fear or dainger of his own life, he vvil rather give sentence
against an other, then receive it against himself, but we talk not here what
men may be driven to do by fear or force of euel Princes, but what The occa
sion of the next chapter.
in right equity, and good conscience may be done: and this not so much by
private or particular men (who may not be over busy in examining Princes
rights, or vvhe-ther they perform their duetyes or no) as by the common
wealth, upon urgent necessity and dew deliberation had, against euel Princes,
that break openly their oaths and promises made at their first entrance,
which promises for that you are desirous to understand them, I am content to
pass over also unto this point, and so much the rather, for that it makes
much to the purpose we have in hand, or rather it is, the very true ground in
deed both of al lawful government and subjection, among christian people. For
that by this oath, both the Prince and subject do come to know and agree upon
their duetyes and obligations the one toward the other, as also both of the^,
toward god and their native country. But for that this morning seems now
much spent, and my stomach tells me that our dinner cannot be far of, let us
defer this matter if you please until after noone, at what time, we shall crown
a king between us here, with much more facility when we shall have less
occasions of hungar to distract our cogitations.

OF THE CORONATION OF PRINCES AND MANNER OF THEIR ADMISSION to their authority
and the oaths which they do make in the same unto the common wealth, for their
good government.
CAP. V.
DINNER being ended, the Ciuilian lawyer began to prosecure the matter The
first ground of laws and lymits to Princes.
propounded in the end of the former chapter, concerning oaths and promises
made by Princes at their first admission to government, vvherin first he
declared that for as much as not nature, but the election and consent of the
people, had made their first Princes from the beginning of the world, as
largely before and often had bin demonstrated: most certain it appeared, and
conform to al reason, that they were not preferred to this eminent power and
dignity over others, without some conditions and promises made also on their
parts, for using well this supreme authority given unto them: seeing it is not
likely (quoth he) that any people would ever yield to put their lives, goods,
and liberties in the hands of an other, without some promise and assurance of
justice and equity to be used toward them, and here of he said it came to
pass, that both the Romans and Grecians to their ancient kings prescribed
those laws and limits, which before have bin specified.

And in every common wealth the more orderly the Prince comes to his crown
and dignity, the more express and certain have bin ever these conditions and
agrements between him and the people, as on the other side the more violently
the Prince gets his authority or by tyranny and disorder, as those ancient
and first tyrants of Assyria to wit Nemrod, Belus, and the like, that by mere
force and Entrance of tyrants into their government.
guyle gat rule over others, and the old kings of Egypt and Babylon, and those
of the Roman Emperors that by violence of souldiars only gat into the Royal
seat, and al such as at this day do get by force to reign among the Turks.
Among these (I say) it is no marvel, though few conditions of just dealing may
be expected, though I doubt not but yet to there followers and aduancers, these
men also do make large promises of good government, at the beginning, as al
ambitious men are wont to do, though with little intention of performance.

But in all good and well ordered common vveathes where matters pass by reason,
conscience, wisdom and consultation, and espetially since christian religion
has prevailed, and given perfection to that natural light, which The rites of
admitting christian Kings.
moral good men had before in matters of government: since that time (I say)
this point of mutual and reciprocal oaths betvveene Princes and subjects, at
the day of there coronation or admission (for all are not crowned) have bin much
more established, made clear and put in ure. And this form of agreement and
conuention, between the common wealth and their christian head or king, has
bin reduced to a more sacred and religious kind of union and concord, then
before, for that the whole actio^ has bin donn by Bishopes and ecclesiastical
Prelates, and the astipulation and promises made on both sides, have passed and
bin given, received and regestred with great reverence in sacred places, and
with great solemnity of religious ceremonies, which before were not so much
used, though alvvayes there wear some. And therefore our examples at this time
shall be only of christian common wealths, for that they are more peculiarly to
our purpose as you will confess.

First then to begin with the East or Greek Emperors of Constantinople as the
most anicient among other, for that after the Empire once translated from Rome
to Constantinople, The man ner of admitting Greek Emperors at their co
ronation.
by our Constantine the great, and the first Christian Emperor that ever did
publicly show himself for such, these Greek Emperors were the most eminent
Princes of al christianity, among whom I do find that albeit there coming to
the crown were nothing so orderly, for the most part as at this day it is
used, but many times the means thereof were turbule^t and seditious, yet find
I (as I say) that above a thousand years gone, they were wont to have an oath
exacted at their hands, by the patriarck of Constantinople, who was their
chief Prelate, for thus writes Zonaras of the coronation of Anastatius the
first, that succeeded Zeno, about the year of Christ 524. Antequam coronaretur,
Zonar. tom 3.
fidei confessionem scriptam, qua polliceretur, se in dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis
nihil esse nouaturum, ab eo exegit Annal. in vita Anastas.
patriarcha Euphemius vir sanctus and orthodoxus. The Patriarch Euphemius being
a holy and catholic Niceph. l. 16. cap. 29 Euagt. l. 2. cap. 32.
man, required of Anastatius elected Emperor, before he was crowned a
confession in writing, wherein he should promise to change or innouate nothing
in matters perteyning to the doctrine of the church thus much Zonaras, and the
same have Nicephorus Euagrius and others.

And not only this, but diverse other conditions also, does the same author
insinuate, that this Anastatius promised at his corouation, before he could be
crowned, as among other things, the taking away of certain tributs and
impositions, the giving of offices without money, and other like points,
appertayning to reformation and good government, which he performed for a time,
in the beginning of his government, but after fell into the heresies of the
Eutichians, and banished this same good Patriach Euphemius, that had crowned
him, and he thriued thereafter, for that he was slain by a thunder bolt from
heaven, after he had reigned 7. years, and was accounted for a very wicked
man, by all vvriters, for that he had broken (as they said) the conditions, quas
graui iuramento scriptis relato confirmasset. That is to say, the conditions
which he had confirmed and auowed with a grave oath as says Euagrius. Vbi supr.


The like, I read about 300. years after, recorded by the same author of the
Emperor The Grecian Emperors Qth.
Michael the first, in these words. Michael vbi diluxit, magnam ecclesiam
ingressus, a Patriarcha Nicephoro imperatorio diademate est ornatus, postulaio
Zon. To^. 3. in vita Mich.
prius scripto, quo promitteret, se nulla ecclesiae instituta violaturum, neque
christianorum sanguine manus contaminaturum. An. 820.
Which is, Michel new chosen Emperor, came early in the morning into the great
church of Constantinople, and was crowned there with the Emperial crown by the
hands of Nicephorus the Patriach, but yet so, as hs was first required to
swear and promise by writing, that he would not violate the ordinances of the
church, nor contaminat his hands with christian blood, which in effect is as
much to say, as that he should reign godly and justly, and many other such
examples might be alleged, but by this it is easy to see, what was the
fassion of admitting and crowning those gretian Emperors by their Patriarchs, in
the name of all the common wealth, which common wealth was not satisfied with an
oath except, also it were set down in vvriting.

And if we pass to the latin and west empire which about this very time was
restored by Zachary the pope, and by the whole common wealth of Rome (as
before has bin showed and was given to Charles the great and his posterity)
we shall find that this point is more settled and more in-violably kept yet in
this empire, the^ in the other, for albeit that this empire of the west went
by succession for the most part at the beginning, until afterward it was
appointed by Pope Gregory the fifth to pass by the election of certain
Princes in Germany, that now enjoy that privilege to be electors: yet shall
we see always, that they even before this co^stitution, when this dignity
went by succession, were never admitted to the same, without this circumstance
of swearing to conditions of righteous government: the form and manner of which
admission, for that I find it set down more perfectly and particulerly in the
coronation of Otho the first, then of any other Emperor, and that by many
authors, and that this Otho was son and heir unto the famous Emperor Henry
the first of that name, Duke of Saxony, surnamed the faulkner, for Saxo. Gram.
li. 10.
the great delight he had in the flght of faucons, for these causes I mean to
begin with Cranzius lib. 3. metrop. c. 12.
the coronation of this man before any other.

This Otho then son (as I have said) to Henry the first, though being his
eldest son, The crovvning of Oath the first.
he were also his heir, and so named by Henry him self to the inheritance of
the said crown of Germany: yet was he not admitted thereunto until he had made
his oath, and received his new approbation, by the people, for so the story
says that the Archbishop of Moguntia (who is the chief primate of al Germany)
bringing him to the altar where he must swear, said these words unto the
people. Behold I bring you hear Otho, chosen by God and appointed out
VVhitichindus gest. Saxon. lib. 1.
by his father Henry our Lord, and now made king by all the Princes of this
empire, if this election please you, do you signify the same by boulding up
your hands to heaven. Thus far are the words of the historiographer, and
then he adds that al held up their hands, and that theruppon the said
archbishop, turned ahout to the altar vvher lay all the oruaments and ensigns
of the empire, as the sword with the girdle, the cloak with the Ensigns of
the empire.
bracelets, the staf with the scepter, and diadem, every one whereof, the
archbishop put upon the Emperor, telling him the signification of each thing,
and what it did bynd him unto: as for example when he put the svvord about
him he said, accipe hunc gladium quo ijcias omnes Christi aduersarios and malos
christianos, authoritate VVitichin l. 2.
diuina per Episcopos tibi tradita. Which is, take unto thee this svvord
vvherby thou may cast out and drive away all the enemies of Christ, whether
they be barbarous infidels, or euel christians, and this by the authority of
God delivered unto thee by us that are bishops.

And thus he did with al other ornaments and ensigns, telling the
signification and obligation of every one, and taking the Emperors promise to
perform al.

And after al, the historiographer concludes Vbi supra.
thus. Rex perfufus oleo sancto, coronatur diademate aureo, ab Episcopis, and
ab eisdem ad solium regale ducitur and in eo colocatur. That is, the king being
anointed with holy oil was crowned by the bishops, and by the same was
brought to the royal seat and therein placed. This happened about the year of
christ 940. and the ceremony is recounted more amply in this man's coronation,
then in any other, both for that he was a very noble Prince, and the very first
of the Germain nation, that was lawfully and orderly preferred to the imperial
seat, after that it passed from the children of Charles the great, and there be
diverse points worthy the noting in this example, and among other that albeit he
were lawful king and Emperor by succession, as also by appointment of his
father: yet was he chosen Election.
and admitted again by the Princes and people, and that he swore to fulfill al
those points and conditions, which the signification of the Emperial ornaments
did bynd him unto.

After this, about 60. years or more, Pope Gregory the 5. in a synod holden
in Rome, did by the consent of Otho the third Emperor, German Electors.
and nephew unto this other Otho, of whom we have now treated, appoint a
certain form of election for the time to come of the German Emperor, to wit,
that he should be chosen by six Princes of Germany, three ecclesiastical which
are the archbishopes of Moguntia, Colen, and Treuires, and three temperal
Lords, to wit, the Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatyne of Blend. decad. 2. li.
3 Crant. l. 4. cap. 25.
Rhene, and the Marquis of Brandeburge, and when these six voices should happen
to be equally divided, then that the Duke of Boemia (for then it was no
kingdom) should have place also to determyne the election. Al which was
determined in the year of Christ 996. in Rome, and approved after ward by all
the Princes of Germany, and allowed by all other Christian Princes, and states
of the world, and so endures unto this day. And among al other points this of
his coronation and his oath to be taken for his well government, was and is most
exactly set down, and recorded by many historiographers of that time, and
since: But I shall allege them only out of John Sleydan, as the Sleyd. li. 1
histor.
most convenient author for this our time and purpose. An. 1519


First of al then he writes, that after any man The man ner of the Emperors
coronatio^ at this day.
is chosen Emperor, he is to be called only Caesar and the king of the Romans,
and not Emperor, until he be crowned, and the conditions which he swears unto
presently after his election, Are, to defend the christian and catholic
religion, to defend the pope and church of Rome, whose aduocat he is, to
minister justice equally to al, to follow peace, to keep and observe al laws
rightes and privileges of the Sleyd. (...) supra.
Empire, not to alienate or engage the possessions of the empire, to condemn
no man without hearing his cause, but to suffer the course of law to have his
place, in all and whatsoever he shall do otherwise, that it be void and of no
Validity at al.

Unto al these articles, he swears first by his legates and then he gives a
copy of his oath in vvriting to every one of the six electors, and after this
he goes to the city of Aquis-gran to be crowned in the great church, vvher
about the middle of the mass, the archbishop of Colen goes unto him in the
presence of all the people, and as keth, whether he be ready to swear and
promise to observe the catholic religion, defend the church, Interrogatories
to the Emperor.
minister justice, protect the widows and fatherles, and yeald dutiful honor
and (...) to the pope of Rome, whereunto he answering that he is ready to do all this, the Archbishop leads him to the high altar where he swears in
express words, al these articles, wwhich being done, the said archbishop
turning himself to the Princes of the empire and people there present does ask
them, whether they be content to swear obedience and fealty unto him, who
answering yea, he is anointed by the said archbishop before the altar, and
then do come the other two Archbishops of Moguntia and Treueris, and do lead
him into the vestery, vvher certain deacons are ready to apparel him in his
robes, and do set him in a chair, upon whom the Archbishop of Colen says
certain prayers, and then delivers him Emperial ornaments.
a sword drawn, and puts a ring upon his finger, and gives him a scepter
in his hand, and then all the three Archbishops together, do put on the crown
upon his head, and leading him so crowned and apparreled unto the high altar
again, he swears the second time, that he will do the part of a good
christian and Catholic Emperor. Which being ended he is brought Second oath.
back and placed in the emperial seat and throne, vvher all the Princes of the
empire do sweat obedience and faith unto him, beginning with the three
Archbishops, and continuing on with the three other electors, and so all the
rest in order which is a notable and magestical manner of admitting and
authorizing of a Prince as you see, and it is to be marked among other things,
that the emperor swears three To be noted.
times, once by his deputies and twice by himself, before his subjects swear
once unto him, and yet will Belloy as you have hard, needs have subjects only
bound to their Princes, and the Prince nothing at al bound to them again.

In Polonia, which being first a Dukedom was made a kingdom, about the same
time The man ner of coronation in Polonia.
that this form of electing of the German Emperor was prescribed, the manner
of coronatio^ of their kings, is in substance the very same, that we have
declared to be of the Emperor. For first of al, the Archibishop of Guesua
metropolita^ of al Polonia, comes to the king standing before the high
altar, and says unto him these words. VVher as you are right noble Prince to
receive at our hands this day who are (though unworthily) Alex Gua guinreru^
Polon.
in place of Christ for execution of this function, the sacred annoynting and
other ceremonies, ensigns, and Tom. I. and Oricho in Chimer. fol. 90. and 106
ornaments apperteyning to the kings of this land, it shaibe well that we
admonish yon in a few words, what the charge imports which you are to take
upon you, etc.

Thus he begins, and after this, he declares unto him for what end he is
made king, what the obligation of that place and dignity byndeth him unto, and
unto what points he must swear, what do signify the sword, the ring, the
sceptor, and the crown that he is to receive, and at the delivery of each of
these things he makes both a short exhortation unto him, and prayer unto God
for him. And the kings oath is in these words. Promitto coram The king of poole
lands oath.
Deo and angelis eius, I do promise and swear before God and his angels, that
I will do law and justice to al, and keep the peace of christ hisChurche and
the vnio^ of his catholic faith, and will do and cause to be done dew and
canonical honor unto the bishops of this land, and to the rest of the clergy,
and if (which God for bid) I should break my oath, I am content that Bodin de
rep. l. 2. c. 9.
the inhabitants of this kingdom, shall owe no duty or obedience unto me as God
shall help me and Gods holy ghospelles.

After this oath made by the king, and received by the subjects, the Lord
Martial general of the whole kingdom, does ask with a loud voice of all the
counselors, nobility, and people there present, whether they be content to
submit themselves unto, this king or no Who answering yea: the archbishop does
end the residue of the ceremonies, and does place him in the royal throne,
where al his subjects do homage unto him, and this for Polonia.

In Spain I do find, that the manner of admitting The admiffio^ of kings in
Spain.
there kings was different, and not the same before and after the destruction
thereof by the Moors, but yet that in both times there kings did swear in
effect the self same points which before have bin mentioned in other
kingdoms. For first, before the entering of the Moors when spain remained yet
one general monatchie, under the Goths, it is recorded in the fourth national
counsel of Toledo which was holden the year of our Lord 633. according to
Ambrosio Morales, the most learned and dilligent Amb. Mo rales li. 11. c. 17.
hist. Hisp. praefat. eiusdem concilij.
historiographer of Spain, (though other do appoint it some few years after)
in this council (I say) it is said, that their new king Sissinandus (who had
expelled Suintila there fotmer king for his euel government). This king
Sissinandus I say coming into the said council The humility of King
Sissinandus.
in the third year of his reign, accompained with a most magnificent number
of nobles, that waighted on him, did fall down prostrate upon the ground,
before the Archbishops, and bishops there gathered together, which were 70. in
number, and desired them with tears to pray for him, and to determine in that
council, that which should be needful and most convenient both for mainteyning
of Gods religion, and also for upholding and prospering the whole common
wealth: wheruppo^ those fathers after matters of religion and reformation of
manners, which they handled in 73. chapters. In the end and last chapter, they
come to handle matters of estate also. And first Council. Tol. 4. c. 74.
of al they do confirm the deposition of king Suintila together with his wife
brother, and children, and al for his great wickedness, which in the council is
recounted, and they do deprive them not only of al title to the crown, but
also of al other goods, and possessions, mouables and immouables, saving only
that which the new kings mercy should bestow upon them, and in this council
was present and subscribed first of al other, S. Isidorus Archbishop of Siuil,
who writing his history of spain dedicated the same unto this king
Sissinandus, and speaks infinite Ambros. Maral. l. 11. cap. 17.
good in the same, of the virtues of king Suintila, that was now deposed and
condemned in this said council, whereby it is to presumed, that he had changed
much his life afterward, and became so wicked a man, as here is reported.

After this, the council confirms the title of Sissinandus, and makes
decrees for the defense thereof, but yet insinuates what points he was bound
unto, and whereunto he had sworn when they said unto him, Te quoque praesentem
Cap. 74.
regem ac futuros aetatum sequentium principes, etc. We do require you, that
are our present king, and al other our Princes that shall follow Conditions of
reigning in Spain.
here after with the humility which is convenient, that you be meek and
moderate toward your subjects, and that you govern your people in justice and
piety, and that none of you do give sentence alone against any man in cause of
life and death, but with the consent of your public council, and with those
that be governors in matters of judgment. And against al kings that are to
come, we do promulgate this sentence, that if any of them shall against the
reverence of our laws, exercise cruel authority with proud domination, and
kingly pomp, only following there own concupiscence in wickedness, that they
are condemned by Christ with the sentence of excommunication, and have their
separation both from him and us to everlasting judgment, and this much of that
council.

But in the next two years after the end of this council, king Sissinandus
being now dead and one Chintilla made king in his place, there were other two
councels gathered in Toledo, the first vvherof was but prouincial, and the
second national, and they are named by the names of the fifth and sixth councels
of Toledo. Ambros. Moral. 1. 11. cap. 23 and 24.
In the which councels, according to the manner of the Goths (who being once
converted, from the Arrian haeresie, were very catholic and devout ever
after, and governed themselves most, by their clergy) and not only matters of
religion were handled, but also of state and of the common wealth, especially
about the succession to the crown, safty of the Prince, Council. 5. cap. 2. 3.
4. 5. and conc. 6. cap. 16. 17. 18.
provision for his children, friends, officers, and favorites after his death,
and against such as without election or approbation of the common wealth, did
aspire to the same, al these points I say were determined in these councels and
among other points a very severe decree was made in the sixth council,
concerning the kings oath at his admission in these words. Consonam vno cord
and ore promulgamus Deo placituram Council. Td. 6. c. 3.
sententiam. We do promulgate with one heart and mouth this sentence agreeable
and pleasing unto God, and do decree the same with the consent and
deliberation of the nobles and peers of this realm, that whosoever in time
to come shall be advanced to the honor and preferment of this kingdom, he shall
not be placed in the royal seat, until among other conditions he have promised
by the Sacrament of The king of Spaines oath at his admission.
an oath, that he vvil suffer no man to break the Catholic faith, etc. Thus
far, that synod or council. By which words especially those ( among other
conditions) is made evident, that those Princes swear not only to keep the
faith, but also such other conditions of good government as were touched before
in the fourth council, and these things were determined while their king
Chintilla was present in Tolledo, as Ambrosio Morales notes. And thus much of
Spain, before Ambros. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 23.
the entrance of the Moors, and before the dividing thereof into many kingdoms
which happened about a hundredth years after The destruction of Spain.
this, to wit in the year of our Savior 713. and 714.

But after the Moors had gained al Spain The beginning of the restitution of
spain.
and divided it between them, into diverse kingdoms, yet God provided that
within four or five years the christians that were left and fledd to the
Mountains of Asturias and Biscay, found a Ambros. Moral. li. 13. c. 1. and 2.
de la Chron. de Esp.
certain young Prince named Don Pelayo of the ancient blood of the Gotish
kings, who was also fled thither and miraculously saved from the enemies,
whom they chose straight ways to be their king, and he began presently the
recovery of Spain, and was called first king of Asturias, and afterward of
Leon, and after his successors gatt to be kings also of Castilia, and then of
Toledo, and then of Aragon, Barcelona, Valentia, Murcia, Cartagena, Iaen,
Cordua, Granade, Kingdoms in Spain.
Siuil, Portugal, and Nauarra, al which were different kingdoms at that time,
so made by the Moors, as has bin said. And al these kingdoms were gained
again, by little and little, in more then 7. hundred years space, which were
lost in less then two years, and they never came again in deed into one
Monarchy as they were under Don Rodrigo there last king that lost the whole,
until the year of our Lord 1582. when Don Philippe now king of Spain
reunited again unto that crown the kingdom of Portugal which was the last
piece, that remained separated and this was almost 900. years after Spain
was first lost.

But now to our purpose, the chronicler of Spain, named Ambrosio Morales does
record in his chronicle a certain law, written in the Gotish tongue, and left
since the time of this The gotish law of Don Pelayo King of Spain.
Don Pelayo the first king, after the vninersal destruction of Spain, and the
title of the law is this. Como se an de leuantar Rey en Espn^a, y como el ha de
Iurar los fueros, that is to say, how men Ambros. Moral. li. (...). cap. 2.
must make there king in Spain, and how he must swear to the privileges and
liberties of that nation: And then he puts the articles of the law, whereof
the first says thus. Before al things it is established for a law, liberty,
and priutledge of Spain, that the king is to be placed by voius and consent
perpetually, and this to the intent that so euel king may enter without consent
of the people, seeing they are to give co him, that which with there blood and
labors they have gained of the Moors. Thus far goes this first article,
which is the Lucas Episcop. Tuyensin histor. Hispan. Lodou. de (...). lib. de
hered.
more to be marked, for that diverse and those most ancient spanish authors do
say, that from this Don Pelayo, the succession of kings descended ever by
propinquity of blood, and yet we see that election was joined there vvithal in
express terms.

The second part of the law conteyneth the manner of ceremonies used in those
old days at the admission of their kings, which is expressed in these words,
let the king be chosen and The old Spanish cerimonyes in making there King.
admitted in the metropolitan city of this kingdom, or at least wise in some
cathedral church, and the night before he is exalted, let him watch al night in
the church, and the next day let him hear mass, and let him offer at mass a
piece of scarlet, and some of his own money, and after let him communicate,
and when they come to lift him up let him step upon a buckler or target and
let the chief and principal men there present hold the target, and so lifting
him up let them and the people cry three times, as hard as they can, Real,
Real, Real. Then let the king comaund some of his own money to be cast among
the people, to the quantity of a hundredth shillings, and to the end he may give
al men to understand, that no man now is above him, let him self tie on his
own sword in the form of a cross, and let no knight or other man, bear a
sword that day, but only the king.

This was the old fashion of making kings in spain, which in effect and
substance remains The present manner of Spain.
still, though the manner thereof be somewhat altered, for that the spanish kings
be not crowned, but have an other ceremony for their admission equal to
coronation, which is performed by the Archbishop of Toledo primat of al spain,
as the other coronations before mentioned are by the Archbishop of Moguntia, to
the Emperor, and by the Archbishop of Guesna to the king of Polonia, and by the
Archbishop of Praga to the king of Boemia, and by the Archbishop of Braga to
the king of Portugal, and by the Archbishop of Canterbury to the king of
Ingland, and by the Archbishop of Rhemes to the king of France, of which realm
of France we may not omit to say somewhat in particular, seeing it is so goodly
a kingdom, and so near to Ingland, not only in situation, but also in Laws
manners and customs, and as the race of Inglish kings have come from them in
diverse manners, since the conquest, so may it be also supposed that the
principal ceremonies and circumstances of this actio^ of coronation, has bine
received in like manner from them.

First then touching the act of coronation The man ner of French coronation.
and admission of the king of France, even as be fore I have said of Spain, so
also in this kingdom do I find two manners of that action, the one more ancient
which the French do say has endured in substance from there first Christian
king named Clodoueus, unto this day, which is about eleue^ hundred years, for
that Clodoueus was christened the year of our Lord 490. in the city of
Rheims by S. Remigius, Bishop of The old ceremonies.
that city, and anointed also and crowned king by the same bishop, which
manner and order of anointing and coronation endured after for about 6. hundred
years, unto the time of Henry the first, and king Phillip the first his son,
both kings of France. At what time (which is about 500. years a gone) both
the Chroniclers and Cosmographers of France do teftifie, that there was a
peculier book in the Belfor. l. 3 c. 20. Theuet. cosmograph. universe. l. 15.
cap. 2. Papir. masson. annal l 3. page 2. 15.
library of the church of Beuais, containing the particular order of this
action, which had endured from Clodoueus unto that time. Which order, for so
much as touches the solemnity of officers in the coronation and other like
circumstances, was far different at that time, from that which is now, for
that in those days there were no peers of France, appointed to assist the same
coronation, which now are the chief and the greatest part of that solemnirie.
Yea Girard du Hailan secretary of France in his third book of the affairs
and state of that Gerand l. 3 del. b. estat fol. 238.
kingdom, says, that the ceremonies of crowning their old kings were much
after the fashion which I have noted a little before, in this very chapter, out
of the law of Don Pelayo first king of Spain, after the Moors, for that they
were lifted up and carried a-bout upon a target by the chief subjects there
present as the spaniards were.

But as touching the principal point of that action which is the substance of
admitting the king unto his royal authority, and oath by him made of governing
well and justly, and of the reciprocal oath of obedience made to him again by
his subjects, it was not much different from that which now is, as shall appear
by the coronation of the foresaid Phillip the first, who was crowned in the
life and presence of his father, king Henry, after the fashion then used in the
year of Christ 1059. and it was in manner following, as Nangis and Tillet,
both authors Francis Belfor. hist. fran. lib. 3. c. 20 in vita Philip. 1.
of great authority among the French, do recount it, and Francis Belforest,
out of them both repeateth the same at large, in these words following.

King Henry the first of this name, seeing himself very old and feeble, made
an assembly of The coronation of King Phillip the first.
all the states of France in the city of Paris in the year of Christ 1059.
where bringing in his young son and heir Philip that was but 9. years of
age, before them al, he said as follows.

Hither to my dear friends and subjects, I have The speech of the father.
bin the head of your nobility, and men at atmes, but now by mine age and
disposition of body, I do well perceive, that ear it be long I must be separated
from you, and therefore I do desire you that if ever you have loved me, you show
it now in giving your consent and approbation that this my son may be
admitted for your king, and apparaled with the royal ornaments of this crown
of France, and that you will swear fealty unto him, and do him homage.

Thus said the king, and then having asked every one of the assistance in
particular for his consent a part, and afterward the whole assembly in
general, whether they would swear obedience to him or no, and fynding al to
promise with a good will, he passed over the feast of the assention with great
joy in Paris, and after went to Rhemes with all the court and train, to
celebrate the coronation upon the feast of vvhit-sonday.

Thus far are the words of William de Nangis Notes upon the kings speeches.
alleged in the story of France by Belforest, and it is to be nored first, how
the king did request the nobility and people to admit his son, and secondly
how he did as ke there consents a part, for that these two points do evidently
confirm that, which I said at the beginning, that only succession is not
sufficient, but that coronation ever requires a new consent, which also
includes a certain election or new approbation of the subjects.

This is proved also most manifestly by the very order of coronation which
insueth in Belforest, taken word for word out of Tillet, in Memoires du
Tillet c. du sacre des Roys. The particular manner of corona tion.
his treatise of Records, in the chapter of anointing the kings of France in
these words.

In the year of grace 1059. and 32. of the reign of king Henry the first of
this name of France, and in the 4. year of the seat and bishopric of Geruays
Archbishop of Rhemes, and in the 23. day of May being whit-sonday, king Phillip
the first was appointed by the said Archbishop Geruays in the great church of
Rhemes, before the altar of our lady, with the order and ceremony that
ensues.

The mass being begone, when it came to the reading of the Epistle, the said
Lord Archbishop turning about to Phillip the Prince, that was there present,
declared unto him what was the Catholic faith, and asked him whether he did
believe it, and whether he would Prosessio^ of faith.
desend it against al persons whatsoever, who affirming that he would, his
oath was brought unto him, whereunto he must swear, which he took and read
with a loud yoyce, and signed it with his own hand, and the words of the oath
were these.

Ie Philippe par le grace de Dieu prochain d'estre ordonne Roy de France,
promets au iour de mon sacre deuant Dieu and ses sanctes. etc. That is in
Inglish, (for I vvil not repeat all the oath in French seeing it is some what
long). I Phillip by the grace of God, near to be ordained king of France, do
promise The oath of the King of France.
in this day of my anointing, before almighty God, and al his saints, that I
will conserve unto you that are ecclesiastical Prelates al canonical privileges,
and al law and justice dew unto every one of you, and I vvil defend you by the
help of God so much as shall lie in my power, and as every king ought to do,
and as by right and equity he is bound to defend every Bishop and church to him
committed within his realm, and further more I shall administer justice unto al
people given me in charge, and shall preserve unto them the defense of laws and
equity appertaining unto them, so far forth as shall lie in my authority, so God
shall help me and his holy Evangelists.

This oath was read by the king, holding his hands between the hands of the
Archbishop of Rhemes, and the bishop of Syen and Bisanson, legates of the pope
standing by, with a very great number of other bishops of the realm. And the
said Archbishop taking the cross of S. Remigius in his hands, he showed first
unto all the audience, the ancient authority which the Archbishops of Rhems had
even from the time of S. Remigius that baptized there first christian king
Clodoueus, to anoint and crown the kings of France, which he said was
confirmed unto them by privilege of the pope Hormisda that lived in the year
of Christ 516. and after also by pope Victor, and this being done, he Belfor.
1. 3 cap. 20.
then (by license first asked of king Henry the father there present) did chose
Phillip for king. Il esleut le dit Philippe son sils, en, and pour Roy de
France, which is word for word, the Archbishop chose the said Phillip king
Henryes son, in and for king of France, which the legates of the pope
presently confirmed, and all the bishops Abbots and clergy, with the nobility
and people in there order, did the like, crying out three times in these words.
Nous le apprououns, nous le voulons, soit The peoples election and admifsio^.
fait nostre Roy, that is, we approve his election, we vvil have him, let him
be made our king, and presently was song. Te Deum laudamus in the quyar, and
the rest of the ceremonies of anointing and coronation were done, according to
the ancient order of this solemnity, used in the time of king Phillips
predecessors kings of France.

Thus far do French stories recount the old and ancient manner of anointing and
crowning there kings of France, which had endured as I have said, for all most
600. years that is to say, from Clodoueus unto this king Phillip the first,
who was crowned in France 7. years before our William conqueror (who also was
present at this coronation, and had the third place among The later order of
coronatio^ in France.
the temporal Princes as Duke of Normandy) entered into Ingland, but after this
time the manner and ceremonies was somewhat altered, and made more maiestical in
outward show, and this especially by king Lewis surnamed the younger, nephew to
the foresaid king Phillip, who leaving the substance of the action as it was
before, caused diverse external additions of honor and majesty, to be adjoined
thereunto, especially for the coronation of his son Phillip the second
surnamed Augustus, whom he caused, also to be crowned in his days, as his
grand father Phillip had bin, and as himself had bin also in his fathers days.

This man among other royal ceremonies ordained the offices of the twelve
peers, of France, 6. Ecclesiastical, and 6. temporal, who are they which ever
since have had the chiefest The 12. peers of France and there offices in the
coronation.
places and offices in this great action, fot that the fore said Archbishop of
Rhemes entitled also Duke of Rhemes, has the first and highest place of al
others, and annoynteth and crowns the king. The bishop and Duke of Laon
bears the glass of sacred oil. The bishop and Duke of Langres the cross:
The Bishop and earl of Beuais the mantel royal, The Bishop and Earl of Noyon
the kings girdle, and last of al, the Bishop and Earl of Chalons, does carry
the ring, and these are the six ecclesiastical peers of France with their
offices in the coronation.

The temporal peers are the Duke of Burgundy, deane of the order, who in
this day of Temperal peers.
coronation holds the crown: the Duke of Gasconie and Guyene the first
banner quartered, the Duke of Normandy the 2. banner quartered, the Earl of
Tholosa the golden spurs, the Earl of Champanie, the banner Royal or
standerd of war, and the Earl of flanders the sword royal, so as thet are 3.
Dukes and 3. Earls in every one of both ranks of spiritual and temporal Lords,
and as Girard notes, the king is apparraled on this day 3. times, and in 3,
several To be no ted
sorts, the first as a priest, the second as a king and Girard du haillan li.
3. de l'estat. page 240. 242. and 258.
vvarryer, the third as a judge, and finally he says that this solemnity of
anointing and crowning the king of France, is the most mag, nificent, gorgious,
and maiestical thing that may be seen in the world, for which he refers us
not only to the particular coronations of these two ancient king Phillipps, the
first and second, but also to the late coronation of Henry the second, father
to the last kings of France which is also in printe, and in deed is a very
goodly and most notable thing to be read, though in deed much more to be seen.

But to say a word or two more of Phillip Augustus before I pass any further,
which The ceremonies used at this day.
happened in the year 1179. and in the 25. of the reign of our king Henry the
2. of Ingland, who as the French stories say was present also at this
coronation, and had his rank among Francis Belf. in vita Augustus.
the peers as Duke of Normandy, and held the kings crown in his hand, and one
of his sons had his rank also as Duke of Gasconie, and the form used in
this coronation was the very same which is used at this day in the admission of
the kings of France, in recounting wher-of I will let pass all the particular
ceremonies Which are largely to be read in Francis Belforest, in the place
before mentioned, and I vvil repeat only the kings oath, which the said author
recounteth in these words.

The Archbishop of Rhemes being vested in The coronation of Phillip. 2. Augustus
his pontifical attire, and come to the altar to begin mass (where the king
also was upon a high seat placed) he turned to him and said these words in the
name of all the clergy and churches of France: Sire that which we require at
your hands this day, is that you promise un to us, that you will keep al
canonical privileges law and justice dew to be keept and defended as a good
king is bound to do in his realm, and to every bishop and church to him
committed: whereunto the king answered. I do promise and auow to every one of
you and to every church to you committed, that I will keep and mainteyne al
canonical privileges law and justice (...) to every man to the uttermost of my
power, and by Gods help shall defend you as a good king is bound to do, in his
realm. This being done the king did swear and make his oath, laying his hands
upon the gospel in these words following. Au nom de Jesus Christ, ie iure The
oath of the French king used at this day.
and promets au peuple christien a moy suiect ces chooses, etc. Which is in
Inglish: In the name of Jesus Christ I do swear and promise to al Christian
people subject unto me these points ensuning: first to (...) that al my subjects
be kept in the union of the church, and I will defend them from al excess,
rapine, extorsion, and iniquity, secondly I will take order that in all judgments
justice shall be kept, with equity and mercy, to the end that God of his mercy
may conserve unto me with you my people his holy grace and mercy. Thirdly I
shall endeavor as much as possibly shall lie in me, to chase and drive out of my
realm and al my dominions, al such as the church has or shall declare for
heretics, as God shall help me and his holy gospels. Thus swereth the king,
and then kysseth the gospels, and mediatly is song. Te Deum laudamus, and after
that are said many particular prayers by the Archbishop, and then is the king
vested, and the ring, scepter, crown, and other kingly ornaments and ensigns
are brought and put upon him, with declaration first what they signify, and
then particular prayers are made to God, that there signification may be by the
king fulfilled.

And after al ended the Archbishop with the Bishops do bless him, and say these
words The archbishopes blessing and spech to the new king.
unto him. God which reigns in heaven and governs al kingdoms bless you,
etc. Be you stable and constant, and hold your place and right, from hence
forth which here is committed and laid upon you by the authority of almighty
God, and by this present tradition and delivery which we the bishops and other
servants of God do make unto you of the same, and remember you in place
convenient, to bear so much more respect and reverence unto the (...). by how
much nearer then other men you have seen (...) to approach to Gods altar, to
the end that Jesus Christ mediator of God and man may confirm and maynteyne
you by the clergy and people, in this your royal seat and throne, who being
lord of Lords and king of kings make you reign with him and his father in the
life and glory everlasting.

Thus says the Archbishop unto him, and after this he is led by him and the
other pears, unto the seat royal, where the crown is put upon his head, and
many other large ceremoneies used which may be read in the author a fore said,
and are to long for this place. And yet have I bin the larger in this matter of
France, for that I do not think it to be improbable which this author and
others do note, to wit, that most nations round about have taken their
particular forms of anointing and crowning their kings, from this ancient
custom of France, The man ner of coronations taken from France.
though the substance thereof, I mean of there sacring and anointing, be deduced
from examples of far more antiquity, to wit, from the very first kings among
the people of Israel, who^ God 1. Reg. 10. and 16.
caused to be anointed by his priests and prophets, 2. Reg. 2.
in token of his election, and as a singular privilege of honor and
pre-eminence unto them, whereof king David made so great account when he said to
the soldier that had killed Saul his enimye in the war, quare non timuisti
mittere manum tuam in Christum Domini, Why 2. Reg. 1.
did thou not fear to lay thy hands upon the anointed of God, and he put
him to death for it, notwithstanding that Saul had bin long before deposed, and
rejected by God, and that himself had lawfully borne arms against him for
many days, so much was that ceremony of anointing esteemed in those days, and
so has it bin ever since among christian people also, for that kings hereby
are made sacred, and do not only perticipate with priests, but also with
Christ himself who has his name of this circumstance of anointing as all the
world knows.

Probable then I say it is, that albeit the substance of this ceremony of
anointing kings be much elder then the christian kingdom of France: yer is
this partic uler and maiestical manner of doing the same by way of coronation,
the most ancient in France above al other kingdoms round about, especialy if
it began with there first christian king Clodouaeus not full 500. years after
Christ, as french authors do hold. At what time also they recount a great
miracle of holy oil sent from heaven The holy oil of Rhemes.
by an angel for anointing Clodouaeus, vvherof they say they have still
remaining for the anointing of their kings at Rhemes, which point I vvil not
stand to treat or discoursein this place, but rather will refer my reader to the
foresaid chapter of Francis Belforest chonicler of France, who alleges
diverse vvriters of almost 500. Belfo. l. 3. cap. 57.
years antiquity that write of the same, but howsoever that be, very probable
it seems that all the ceremoneys of coronation in Germany and Polonia before
recited (which had there beginning long after the reign of Clodouaeus) might be
taken from thence, and so the affinity and likeness of the one to the other does
seem to agree, and Garribay also the chronicler of Spain, and of Nauarra, in
his 22. book talking of this custom Esteuan. Garribay. lib. 22. C 1
of anointing and crowning the kings of Nauarra, says, that this excellent
custom began there (I mean in Nauarra) above 800. years past and was brought
in by certain Earls Kings crowned in nauarra and not in Spain.
of Champayn of France named Theobaldes who coming to attain that crown
brought with them that reverent ceremony of anoyntig and crowning there kings,
according to the use of the French, which custom endures until this day in
that part of Nauarra, that is under the house of Vandome, albeit in the other
that is under the Spaniardes (which is far the greater) it vvasleft of in the
year 1513. When Ferdinande surnamed the Catholic king of spain entered
ther-vppon, for that the Spanish kings are never anointed nor crowned but
otherwise admitted by the common wealth as before I have declared.

But among al other kingdoms it seems that Ingland has most particularly
taken this custom, and ceremony from France, not only for the reason before
alleged that diverse of our Inglish kings have come out of France, as William
Conqueror borne in Normandy, king The Inglish coronation taken from he french.
Stephen son to the Earl of Blois, and Bollen, a French man, and king Henry
the second borne likewise in France, and son to the Earl of Aniou: but also
for that in very deed the thing it self is al one in both nations, and albeit
I have not seen any particular book of this action in Ingland, as in French
there is: yet it is easy to gather Le Sacre des Roys.
by stories what is used in Ingland about this affair.

For first of al, that the Archbishop of Canterbury does ordinarily do these
ceremony in Inland as the Archbishop of Rhemes does it in France, there is no
doubt, and with the same solemnity and honor, according to the condition and
state of our country: and Polidor Virgil in Polid. lib 13. hist.
his story notes that pope Alexander did interdict and suspend the Archbishop
of York, Angliae in vita Henrici.
with his two assistants the bishops of London and Salisbury, for that in the
absence of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, and without his license,
they did crown king Henry the seconds son, named also Henry, at his fathers
perswation, and diverse do attribute the unfortunate success of the said king
Henry the younger that rebelled against his father, to this disorderly and
violent coronation by his fathers appointment: secondly that the first thing
which the said Archbishop requires at the new kings hands at his coronatio^,
is about religion, church matters and the clergy (as in France we have
seen) it appears evidently by these words which the same Archbishop Thomas
(surnamed commonly the martyr) remayninge in banishment vvrote to the same king
Henry the second which are these. Memores sitis confessionis quam fecistis and
posuistis super altar In vita D. Thom. Cantuar. apud sarium in mense Decembris.
apud westmonsterium de seruanda Ecclesiae liberate, quando consecrati
fuistis, and vncti in regem a praedecessore nostro Thebaldo. Which is, do you
call to your remembrance, the confession, which you made and laid upon the
altar at westminster, for keeping and defending the liberty of the church
when you were consecrated and anointed king by Thebaldus our predecessor. By
which words appears, that as the king of Ingland was consecrated and
anointed in those days by the Archbishop of Canterbury, so did he swear and
give up his oath also in vvriting, and for more solemnity and obligation, laid
it down or rather offered it up, with his own hands upon the altar, so
much as was repuired of him by the said Archbishop and clergy, for the
special safety of religion, and these ecclesiastical liberties, which is the
self same point that we have seen before, as well in the oath of the kings of
France, as also of Polonia and Spain, and of the Emperors both Grecian and
German.

The very like admonition in effect I find made by an other Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury, The speech of an other Arch-bushop of Canter bury to the King.
to an other king Henry, to wit by Thomas Arundel to king Henry the fourth,
when in a parliament holden at Couentry, in the year 1404. the king was
tempted by certain temporal men, to take away the temporalityes from the
clergy, Whereunto when the said Archbishop Thomas had answered by diverse
reasons, at last turning to the king he besought him (says Stow) to remember
the oath which he voluntarily made, that he would honor and defend Stow in vita
Henrici 4.
the church and ministers thereof. Wherefore he desired him to permit and suffer
the church to enjoy the privileges and liberties which in time of bis
predecessors it did enjoy, and to fear that king which reygneth in heaucn, and
by whom al other kings do reign morouer he desired him to consider his promise
also to all the realm, which was that he (...) preserve unto every man (...)
and title, so far as in him lay. By which speech of the Archbishop the king
was so tar moved, as he would hear no more of that bil of the layne, but said
that he would leave the church in as good estate, or better then he found it,
and so he did, but yet hereby we come to learn, what oath the kings of Ingland
do make at there coronations touching the Church and clergy.

The other conditions also of good government, Holingsh in his Cro. page 476.
and 1005.
are partly touched in the speech of the Archbishop, and much more exprefly
set down in the king of Inglands oath, recorded by ancient writers, for that he
swears as both Holinshead and others do testify, in there inglish stories, in
these very words, to wit. That he will during his life, bear reverence and
honor The Kings of England.
unto almighty God, and to his Catholic church, and unto his ministers, and
that he will administer law and justice equally to al, and take away al unjust
laws. Which after he had sworn, laying his hands upon the gospels: then
does the Archbishop (turning about to the people) declare what the king has
promised and sworn, and by the mouth of a harold at arms asks there
consents, whether they be content to submit themselves unto this man, as unto
there king or no, under the conditions proposed, whereunto when they have yealded
themselves, then begins the Archbishop to put upon him the regal ornaments
as the sword, the ring, the scepter, and crown, Regal ornaments.
as before in the French coronation you have hard, and namely he gives him the
scepter of S. Eduard the consessor, and then he adds also the same words of
commission and exhottation as the other does, to wit, stand and hold thy place
and keep thy oath, and thereunto adioyneth a great commination or threat, on the
behalf of almighty God, if he should take upon him that dignity, without
firm purpose to observe the things which this day he has sworn, and this is
the sum of the Inglish coronation Which you may read also by piece meal in
John Stow (according as other things in that his brief collection are set
down) but especially Stow in vita (...) 2. in fine.
you shall seit in the admissions as Well of the said king Henry the fourth now
last mentioned, as also of king Edward the fourth, at there first entrances to
the crown, for in the admission of king Henry, Stow shows, how the people
were de maunded thrice, whether they were content to admit him for there king,
and that the Admissio^ and Coronation of King Henry 4.
Archbishop of Canterbury (who was the same Thomas Arundel of whom we spoke
before) did read unto them what this new king was bound by oath unto, and then
he took the ring, vvherwith he was to wed him to the common wealth, (which
wedding imports as you know an oath and mutual obligation on both sides in
every marriadge) and the Earl of Northumberland high Constable of Ingland, for
that day, was willed to show the said ring to the people, that they might
thereby see the band whereby there king was bound unto them. And then it was put
upon his finger, and the king kissed the Constable in sign of accepta^ce, fell
on his knees also to prayer that he might observe his promise, and other like
ceremonies says Stow, were used, and this was done the 13. of October 1359.
and therefore upon good reason might this same Archbishope put him afterward in
mind of this his oath as before I have showed that he did.

At the admission also of king Edward the The coro nation of King Edward 4.
fourth, Stow notes in his Chronicle, that first the peoples consent was
demanded very solemly in S. John's feilde by London, the 29. of February, in
the year 1460. notwithstanding that king Edward had proved his title, by
succession before in the parliament holden at westminster, and now this consent
of the people Stow in vita Her. 6. page 709.
being had, (or he being thus elected as Stowes words are) he went the next day
in procession at paul's, and offered there, and after, Te Deum being song, he
was with great roy alty conveyed to westminster, and there in the haule set in
the kings seat, with S Edwards scepter in his hand, and then the people were
asked again if they would have him king, and they cried yea yea, thus far John
Stow.

And if any would take exception against these of king Henry and king Edward the
4. because they entered and began there reigns upon the deprivation of other
kings then living, there are yet many living in Ingland that have seen the
several coronations of king Edward the 6. Q. Mary and Q. Elizsabeth that now
reigns, and can witness that at al and every of there coronations, the consent
of the people and their acceptance of those Princes is not only demanded by the
public cry of a harolde at arms, which stands on both the sides of the
high scaffolde or stage whero^ the Prince is crowned, and the peoples answer
expected till they cry yea yea: but also that the said Princes gave there,
their corporal oath upon the Evangelists unto the Bishop that crowned them, to
up hold and maynteyne the faith afornamed, with the liberties and privileges
of the church, as also to govern by justice and law, as has bin said: which
oaths no doubt have bine sworn and taken most solemnly by all the kings and
Queens of Ingland, from, the days of king Edward the Confessor at the least,
and he that will see more points of these oaths set down in particular let him
read magna carta, and he will be satisfied.

By all which, and by infinite more that might be said and alleged in this
matter, and to this purpose, it is most evident, (said the Ciuilian lawyer)
that this agreement, bargayne and contract between the king and his common
wealth, The conclusion of this capter.
at his first admission, is as certain and firm (nothwitstanding any pretense
or interest he has or may have by succession) as any contract or marriage in
the world can be, when it is solemnized by words de praesenti (as our law
speaks) between parties espoused before by words de futuro, which is an
act that expresses this other most lively, as afterward more at large I shall
show unto you, and consequently I must needs affirm, to be most absurd base
and impious, that flattery before mentioned of Belloy and his companions, in
their books before cited, where he holds, that only succession of blood, is
the, thing without further approbation, which makes a king, and that the
peoples consent to him that is Absurd aslertions of Bclloy.
next by birth, is nothing at al needful, be he what he will, and that his
admission. inunction or coronation is only a matter of external ceremony,
without any effect at al, for increase or co^firmatio^ of his right; these (I
say) are unlearned, fond and wicked assertions, in flatery of Princes, to the
manifest ruin of common wealths and perverting of al law, order and reason,
which assertio^s albeit they have bin sufficiently (as I suppose) refuted
before, yet mean I to stand a little more upon them in this place for more
evident demonstration of so important a truth, as also to see and examine what
may duly be attributed to bare succession alone, to the end that no man may
think we mean to improve or imbase that which we esteem in so high degree,
and think that the best and surest way of maynteyning kingly government in the
world: is to have it go by succesion, as it does at this day in Ingland, and in
most other states of Europe besides, though yet with the limitations and
conditions due thereunto, whereof I shall now begin to treat more in particular,
but after some little pause if you please, for that this other narration has
well wearied me.

WHAT IS DVE TO ONLY SVCCESSION BY BIRTH, AND WHAT INTErest or right an heir
apparent has to the crown, before he be crowned or admitted by the common
wealth, and how justly he may be put back if he have not the other parts
requisite also.
CHAP. VI.
VERY reasonable it seemed to all the whole assembly that some intermission or
pause should be admitted, as the Ciuilian had required, and this as well for the
commodity of the hearers, who desired to confer together more in particular, of
the points already discussed, as also of the speaker, who whith reason affirmed
A pause.
that he was somewhat weary, seeing he had continued his spech so long together.
And so whith one consent they rose al and went into an orchard adjoining to the
house, and after some hours space, returned again, for that every man seemed
very desirous to hear this other matter debated, of the interest of Princes
before there coronation, for that they said, it touched the very point it
self, now in question in Ingland, and that which is like to be in action also,
ere it be long, Wherefore they desired the Ciuilian to begin his discourse,
and first of all to set down the very words of Belloy about this matter, as
also the places where he writes the same, for that his assertions appeared to
them very strainge and opposite to al reason of state and practice of the
world, as also contrary to all that which hitherro had bin said and treated.

Wher-to the Ciuilia^ answered, true it is, that they are so, and more plain
and (...) flatteries then ever I have read uttered by any man to any prince or
tyrant what soever, albeit most of them (as you know) have not failed to find
as shameless flatterers, as themselves were Gross flatery.
either vain or wicked princes, and for my part I am of opinion, that these
propositions of Belloy vvil rather hurt and hinder, then profit the prince for
whom and in vvhos favor he is thought to have written them, which is the
king of Nauarra whom hereby he would advance (as he seems) and have admitted
to the crown of France, vvhithout al consent or admission of the realm. But I
for my part, as I doubt not greatly of his title by propinquity of blood,
according to the law Salique; so on the other side, am I of opinion, that these
propositions of Belloy in his behalf, that he should enter by only title of
birth, vvhithout condition consent or approbation of the realm, as also
vvhithout oath annoynting or coronation, yea of necessity, vvhithout restraint
or obligation to fulfill any law, or to observe any privileges to church,
chapel, clergy, or nobility, ot to be checked by the whole realm, if he
rule amiss: these things I say, are rather to terifie, the people and set them
more against his entrance, then to advance his title: and therefore in my poor
judgment, it was nether vvisely written by the one, nor politiquely permitted
by the other. And to the end you may see what reason I have to give this
censure, I shall here The propositions of Belloy apolog. ca. h. part. 2.. 7.
set down his own propositions, touching this matter, as I find them in his
own words, First then he auoutcheth, that al families which enjoy kingdoms
in the world were placed therein by God only, and that he alone can change the
same, which if he refer unto gods universal providence quae attingit a fine
vsque in finem fortiter as the scripture says, and vvhithout which a sparrow
falls not o^ the grownd, as our savior testifies, Matthew. 6.
no man will deny, but al is from God, either by his ordinance or permission, but
if we talk (as we do) of the next and immediate causes of empyres, princes,
and of there cha^ges; clear it is, that men also do and may concure therein,
and that god has left them lawful authority so to do, and to dispose thereof
for the public benefit, as largly before has bin declared, and consequently
to say that god only does these things and leaves nothing to man's judgment
therein is against al reason use and experience of the world.

The second proposition of Belloy is, that where such princes be once placed in
government, and the law of succession by birth established, there the 2. Apolog.
Cathol. part. 1. parag. 7.
princes children or next of k ynne do^ necessarily succeed, by only birth,
whithout any new choice or approbation of the people, nobility, or clergy,
or of the whole common wealth together. And to this assertion he joins an
other as straing as this, which is, that a king never dies for that whensoever
or how-soeuer he cease by any means to gouerue, then enters 3. Apolog. pro
rege. (...). 6. Sc 34.
the successor by birth not as heir to the former, but as law-ful governor of
the realm whithout any admission at al, having his authority only, by the
condition of his birth and not by adoption or choice of any. Which two
propositions albeit they have bin sufficiently refuted, by that which has bin
spoken in the last two chapters going before, yet shall I now again convince
more amply the untruth thereof.

Other two propositions he adds, which pattly have bin touched and answered
before, and yet, I mean to repeat them again in this place for that they
appertain to this purpose, his former is, that a prince once entered to
gouerme^t, 4. Apolog. Cathol. part. 2. parag. 7. and pro rege cap. 9.
and so placed as has bin said is under no law or restraincte at al, of his
authority, but that himself only is the quick and living law, and that no
limitation can be given unto him by any power under heaven, except it be by his
own will, and that no nation or common wealth can appoint or prescribe how they
will obey or how their prince shall govern them, but must leave his authority
free from al bands of law, and this either willingly or by violence, is to be
procured. By which words it seems that he paynteth out a perfect pattern of
a tyranical government, which how it may further the king of Nauarres pretense,
in the case he stands in presently in France, I do not see.

His other proposition is, That albeit the heir apparent which is next by
birth to any crown, should 5. Apolog. pro rege cap. 20.
be never so impotent, or unfit to govern, as if (for examples sake) he should
be deprived of his senses, madd, furious, lunatique, a fool or the like, or
that he should be known o^ the other side to be most malicious, wicked,
vicious or abominable, or should degenerat into a very beast, yea if it were
known that he should go about to destroy the common wealth, and drown the
shipp which he had to guide, yet (says this man) he must be sacred and holy
unto us, and admitted whithout condradiction to his inheritance, which God and
nature has laid upon him, and his direction restaint or punishment must only
be remitted to God alone, for that no man or co^mun wealth, may reform or
restrain him. Thus says Belloy, which I doubt not vvil feme unto you rather
belly and base doctrine, then to come from the head of any learned or discreet
man, that regards the end why common wealths and kingdoms and al
gouerments were ordained by God and nature, and not the flattering or adoring
of any one miserable man that shall stand over them to distroy the whole.

But now to the particular matter that we are to treat, which is, what is
to be attributed to this succession or propinquity of birth alone, I am of
opinion, as before I signified, that albeit there want not reasons on both
sides among learned men, what kind of providing Succession of princes by
birth better the^ ineere election and why?
governors to common wealths is best, either by simple and free election
only, or by succession of birth: my opinion (I say) is, that succession is much
to be preferred, not for that it wants al difficulties and inconveniences
(which al temporal things upon earth have) but like as before I have showed
of the particular government of a monarchy in respect of other forms of
regiment, to wit, that it wanted not al, but had fewer inconveniences then
other forms of regiment have, so say I also of this, that albeit some
inconveniences want not in succession; yet are they commonly far less and
fewer, then would follow by mere election, which is subject to great and
continual dangers 2. reason.
of ambition, emulation, division, sedition, and contention, which do bring
with them evident peril of universal destruction and desoiation of the whole
body, and this at every change of the Prince, which change on the other side,
is much assured by succession, for that great occasions of strife and
contention are there by cut of.

2.
And besides this, the Prince who is in present possession knowing that his
son or next of kynn, is to be his heir, has more care to leave the realm
in good order, as we see that the husband man has to til and manure that
ground, which is his own, and to remain to his posterity.

3.
A third commodity also there is, for that less mutations and alterations are
seen in the common wealth, where succession preuayleth, for that the son
following his father, does commonly retain the same friends, councellers,
officiers, and servants, which his father had before him: pursues the same
actions and intentions, with the same manner of proceeding for the most part;
vvher as he that enters by election, being an allien to him that went before
him, and never lightly his friend, does change alter and turn vpsidowne, al
things.

4.
Further more (which may be also a fourth reason) he that enters by
succession, for that he is either borne a Prince, or has bin much respected
still for his title to the crown, brings with him less passions of hatred,
emulation, anger, envy, or revenge against particular men (for that no man
durst offend him) then does he which enters by only election, for that he
having bin a subject and equal to others before his advancement, and thereby
holden contention with many, especially at this election, must needs have
matter of quarrel with many, which he vvil seek easily to revenge when he is
in authority, as on the other side also such as were his equales before will
bear him less respect and more unwillingly be under him, then if by birth he
had bin there sovereign.

These and diuets other are the commodities 5. The preheminene of primogenitura.
of succession, whereunto we may also ad the pre-eminence and priuilegde of
primogenitura, and auncetrie of birth, so much respected and commended by holy
writ, not only in men, but in all other creatures also, whose first borne Genes.
15 and 49
were dedicated to God himself, and one notable Deuteronomy. 21. and 15.
example among other occurreth to my 2. Patalip. 21. and 3.
mind of the two sons of Isaac, of the which two albeit God had ordained to
choose the Exodus 3. and 2.
younger before he was borne, at S. Paul testifies, Romans 9. and 13.
and to reject the elder, that is to say, that Jacob should inherit the
benediction and not Genes. 28 and 27.
Esau: Yet would God have this younger to procure the said privilege of elder
ship from Esau by diverse means as first by bargain, and after by guile
according to the story we read in Genes. Out of which story two points may be
ponde Two points to be noted.
red much to our purpose, first that primogenitura or elder ship of birth (as I
have said) was greatly respected by God, and according to that, all the discents
and successions of kings were commonly among that people, for that ordinarily
the eldest son ever succeeded his father in the crown of Jury. And the second
point is, that God would show even in this beginning, that yet this privilege
was not so inviolable, but that upon just causes it might be broken, as it was
by this his choice of Jacob the yo^ger, and rejecting Esau the Elder: and many
times after in matter of government the same was practiced by God him self, as
when Judah the fourth tribe and not Ruben the first and eldest Genes. 29 and 49.
was appointed by God to enjoy the scepter and Exodus 1.
crown of the Jews, as also when king David dyed, not his first second or
third son, but his tenth in order, to wit, Solomon who was also the 2. Reg. 5.
fourth that he had by Bersabee, was appointed 1. Paral. 3.
for his successor.

So that in very deed we have here both out Two cases resolved.
two cases, that were propounded in the beginning, ouerruled and determined by
authority and example of holy writ it self, namely and first of al, that
priority and propinquity of blood in succession, is greatly to be honored
regarded and preferred in all affairs of dignity and principallity, and yet
(which is the second point) are we not so absolutely and peremptorily bound
thereunto always, but that upon just and urgent occasions that course may be
altered and broken.

Which license or liberty is indeed, the only The remede of inconveniences by
succession.
(or at least wise) the most principal remedy for such inconveniences as do or
may ensew of the course of succession, which inconveniences as before I showed
to be far less and fewer then are wont to follow of bare election alone, yet
did I confess also, that some did or might fall out, as namely that the person
who by succession of blood is next, may be unable or unfit or pernicious to
govern, in which cases the remedy is (as before has bin declared) either to
help and assist; him by laws directions and wise counsels, if he be capable
thereunto or else to remove him and take in another of the same blood royal
(though further of in degree or propinquity) in his place.

And this is and has bin the custom and practice of al kingdoms and common
wealths from the beginning, since succession has bin established among them,
as afterward I shall demo^strate unto you by great store of evident examples
and presidentes, and by this means we come to remedy the difficulties and
inconveniences of both kinds of making our kings and princes, which are
election, and succession, as has bin said: for by succession we do remedy the
inconveniences and dangers before mentioned of bare election, to wit of
Election and succession do help the (...) thothen
strife, banding, ambition, and the like: and by this other mean of adding
also election consent and approbation of the realm to succession, we remedy
the inconveniences of bare succession alone, which inconveniences are
principaly, that some vn-apt impotent or euel prince may be offered some times
to enter by priority of blood, vvherof the realm may deliver it self, by this
other means of not admitting him, so as election by succession, and succession
again by election is salued, and the one made a preservative and treacle to
the other: and this is the vvisdome and high policy left by God and nature, to
every common wealth, for there own conservation and maintenance, and every man
that is of reason and judgment, and void of passion will not only allow, but
also highly commend the same.

Now then to answer in particular to the two questions made at the beginning
of this Answer to the (...) principal questions
speech, to wit, what is to be attributed to succession alone, and secondly
what interest a prince has ther-by to any crown, before he be crowned or
admitted by theo^ cmon vveath: To the first I say, that to succession alone or
(...) to be (...)
priority of blood only, great honor, reverence, and respect ought to be borne,
as before has bin declared, for that it is the principal circumstance and
condition which leads us to the next succession of the crown infalibly, and
without al strife: if his propinquity be clear and evident, and that other
necessary circumstances and conditions do concur also in the same person,
which conditions were appointed and set down at the same time, and by the
same authority that this law of succession was established, for that both the
one and the other of these two points, were ordained by the common wealth, to
wit that the elder and first in blood should succeed, and that he should be
such a person as can and vvil govern to the public weal of al, as often
and largely before has bin avouched and proved.

To the second question I answer, that an heir apparent to a crown before
his coronation What an heir apparent is before (...) coronatio^
and admission by the realm, if he have the conditions before required, has
the same interest to the kingdom, which the king of Romans, or Caesar has to
the Germane empire after his election and before he be crowned: or to use a
more familier example to Inglish men, as the Mayor of London has to the
mairalrie, after he is chosen and before he be admitted, or have taken his oath.
For as this man in (...) is not truly mayor, nor has not his jurisdiction
before his oath and admission, nor the other is properly Emperor before he be
crowned, so is not an heyte apparent, truly king though his predecessor be
dead, and he next in succession, until he be crowned or admitted by the common
wealth.

An other example is there in marriage also Examples of tnatiage.
vvherby our matter is made more plain, for in this contract go both the
betrothing and actual joining together of the parties in wedlock, the first is
do^ne by words de futuro or for the time to come, and is not properly marriage,
but espousal only, the other is by words de presenti that is by mutual present
consent given of both parties, and this second is only and properly true
marriage, which two points are expressly represented in the state of an heir
apparent and of a crowned king, for that the heir apparent by propinquity of
blood, is only espoused or betrothed to the common wealth, for the time to
come, and is married afterward by present mutual consent, of both parties, in
the contract and knitting up of the matter, at his coronation, by the oaths
which either part makes the one to take the other, and by putting on the ring
and other wedding garments before mentioned in there coronations, by all which
the heir apparent, (which before was but espouse,) is made now the true king
and husband of the common wealth, which before he was not, by only
succession, but only a betrothed spouse or designed king, as has bin declared.

Wherefore it follows also, that the common What respect is dew to an heir
apparent
wealth owes no allegiance or subjection unto the heir apparent in rigor of
justice, until he be crowned or admitted, though his predecessor be dead, for
that in very deed until that time, he is not there true king and sovereign,
though for better keeping of order and avoiding of tumults, al common wealths
lightly that have there princes by succession, have ordained in these later ages,
that from the death of the former princes, al matters of government shall pass
in the name of his next successor (if his succession be clear) and this (as I
say) for avoiding of garboyles, and under supposal of confirmation and
approbation afterward of the common wealth, at his coronatio^, for which cause
also, and for better account of years, it Why Princes do co^pt there years
from the: death of there predecessors.
was ordained that the beginning of the successors reign, should be reconed
from the day of the death of his predecessor, and not from the day of his
coronation, as otherwise in rigor it ought to be, and as in old time it was
accustomed to be as Girard secretary and chronicler of France, does wisely
note, in his third book of Girard de Haillan l. 3. de l'estate page 241.
the estate and affairs of France, to wit, that kings in old time were vvotit
to account the years of there reigns from the day only of there annoynting and
coronation.

This point also that heirs apparent are not No heir apparent K. before his
coronation.
true kings until there coronatiou, how just soever thet title of succession
otherwise be, and though there predecessors be dead; it might be confirmed by
many other arguments, but especially and above al others, for that the realm
is asked again three times at their coronatio^, whether they will have such a
ma^to be king, or no, as An evident Argument.
before has bin showed, which thing were in vain to ask if he were truly
king, as Belloy says, before his coronation.

Again we see in all the forms and different manners of coronations, before
recited, that after the prince has sworn diverse times to govern well and
justly, then do the subjects take other oaths of obedience and allegiance and
not before, which argues that before they were not bound unto him by
allegiance, and as for the princes of Ingland, it is expressly noted by Inglish
historiographers in there coronatio^s, how that no allegiance is dew unto the^
before they be crowned, and that only it happened to Henry the fifth, among al
other kings A rare example of King Henry V.
his predecessors to have this preuilege, and this for his exceeding
to-wardlynes, and for the great affection of the people toward him, that he
had homage done unto him before his coronation, and oath taken. Whereof Polidor
writes in these words: Princeps Henricus facto patris funere, concilium
principum apud VVestmonasterium conuocandum Polydor. virg. lib. 22. hittor.
Angliae in vita Henrici V.
curat, in quo dum de rege creando more maiorum (...), esse ubi, continuo
aliquot Principes vltro in eius verba mirare coeperunt, quod beneuolentiae
officium nulli antea priusquam rex renu nciatus esset, praestitum constat, a
(...) Henricus ab ineunte aetate spem omnibus optimae inaolis fecit. Which in
Inglish is this, Prince Henry after he had finished his fathers funetals,
caused a parliament to be gathered at Westminster, where vvhiles consultation
was had, according to the ancient custom of Ingland, about creating a new
king, behold upon the sudden certain of the nobility of there own free
vvilles. began to swear obedience and leyaltie unto him, which demonstration
of love and Good vvil, is well known, that is was never showed to any Prince
before, until he was declared king: so great was the hope that men had of the
towardlynes of this Prince Henry, even from his tender age, thus far Polidor in
his story of England. And the very same thing expresses John Stow also in his
chonicle in these words. To this noble Prince by Stow in the beginning of the
life of king Henry V.
assent of the parliament all the states of the realm after three days offered
to do fealtte before he was crowned, or had solemnized hu oath well and justly to
govern the common wealth, which offer before was never found to be made to any
Irince of Ingland, thus much Stow. in whose narration as also in that of
Polidor it may be noted: that king Henry the fifth was not called king until
after his coronation, but onlv Prince, though his fathe king Henry the fourth
had bin dead now almost a month before, Notes of this act. 2.
and secondly that the parliament consulted de Rege creando more maiorum, (as
Polidor his words, are) that is, of making a new king according to the ancient
custom of there ancestors, which argues that he was not yet king, though
his father were dead, nor that the manner of our old Inglish ancestors, was to
account him so, before his admission.

3.
Thirdly that this demonstration of good will of the nobility to acknowledge him
for king before his coronation, and oath solemnized well and justly to govern
the realm, was very extraordinary and of mere good will. 4.
And last of al, that this was never done to any Prince before king Henry the
fifth, al which points do demonstrate, that it is the coronation and admission,
that makes a perfect and true king, whatsoever the title by succession be
otherwise, and that except the admission of the common wealth be joined to
succession, it is not sufficient to make a lawful king, and of the two, the
second is of far more importance, to wit the consent and admission of the
realm, then nearnes of blood by succession a-loue.

This I might prove by many examples in Admissio^ of more importan ce then
succession.
Ingland it self where admission has prevailed against right of succession, as
in William Rufus that suceeded the Conqueror, and in king Henry the first his
brother, In king Stephen, king John and others, who by only admission of the
realm were kings, against the order of succession, as after more at large I
shall show you in a particular spech which of this point, I shall make unto you,
and very specially it may be seen, in the two examples before mentioned of the
admission of the two kings Henry and Edward, both surnamed the fourth, vvhos
entrances to the crown, if a man dovvel consider, he shall find that both of
them, founded the best part and most surest of their titles, upon the election
consent, and good will of the people: yea both of them at their dying days
having some remorse of conscience (as it seemed) See there lastvvords to there
friends in Sir Tho Moore and Stow.
for that they had caused so many men to dye for mayntenance of there several
rightes and titles, had no better way to appease there own mynds, but by
thinking that they were placed in that rome by the voice of the realm, and
consequently might lawfully defend the same, and punish such as went about to
deprive them.

Moreover you shall find, if you look into the doings of Princes in all ages,
that such kings as were most politic, and had any lest doubt Why diuer
kings caused there sons to be crowned in there own days.
or suspicion of trobles about the title, after there deaths, have caused their
sons to be crowned in their own days, trusting more to this, then to their
title by succession, though they were never so lawfully and lineally
descended. And of this I could allege you many examples out of diverse
countries but especially in France, since the last line of Capetus came unto
that crown, for this did Hugh Capetus himself procure to be done, to Robert
his eldest son, in his own days, and the like did king Robert procure for
his younger son Henry the first, as Girard holds, and excluded Hirrd du
Haillan lib. 6. hist.
his elder only by crowning Henry in his own days: Henty also did entreat the
states of Frace an. 1001.
(as before you have hard) to admit and crown An. 1032. An. 1061.
Phillip the first, his eldest son, vvhiles himself reigned, and this man's
son Luys lc Cross, did the same also unto two sons of his: first An. 1131.
to Phillip, and after his death to Luys the younger, both which where crowned
in there fathers life time, and this Luys again the younger, which is the
seventh of that name, for more assuring of his son named Phillip the second,
An. 1180.
entreated the realm to admit and crown him also in his own days, with
that great solemnity, which in the former chapter has bin declared.

And for this very same cause of security, it is not to be doubted, but that
alvvayes the prince of Spain is sworn and admitted by the realm, during his
fathers reign, as before has bin said. The same consideration also moved king
David, to crown his son Solomon in 3. Reg. 1.
his own days, as afterward more in particular shall be declared, and finally
our king Henry also the second of Ingland, considering the alteration that the
realm had made in admitting king Stephen, before him, against the order of
lineal succession by propinquity of blood: Polyd. and Stow in vita Henrici 11.
and fearing that the like might happen also after him, caused his eldest son
named, likewise Henry, to be crowned in his life time, so as ingland had two
king Henry's living at one time, with equal authority, and this was done in
the 16. year of his reign, and in the year of our lord 1170. but his devise
had no good success, for that king Henry the younger made war soore after upon
king Henry the elder, and had both the kings of France and Scotland, and many
nobles of ingland and Normandy, to take his part, for which cause it is
thought, that this thing has never bin put in practice again since that time
in Ingland, but yet heerby it is evident, what the opinion of the world was in
those days, of the force of coronation, and admission of the common wealth,
and how little propinquitie of blood prevails without that.

And for more ample proof heerof and fuller The occasion of the next chapter.
conclusion of all the whole matter, I had thought to have laid down also in
this place, some number of the most nororious examples, that I have read, (for
I have read many) vvherin the common wealth upon just occasions has extended
her authority to alter the natural course of succession by birth, but for that
the thing requires, some little study and loking over some notes, that I have
taken out of stories, for help of memory: I shall deferr it until our next
meeting, at what time I shall by Gods grace make this point very clear, and
so end my whole discourse, for I see that I have bin much longer then at the
beginning I purposed and now I desire much to give place unto our temporal
lawyer, here present, who (I doubt not) has matter to say of more
delectation and pleasure, then this, though you of your courtesies have done me
so much savor as to hear me hitherto with patience and attention. Whereunto
the whole company answered, that not with patience, but with great pleasure
delight and contentation, they had hard him, and so they would do the temporal
lawer also in his turn, but yet they desired him that nothing of this
discourse might be omitted, but wholy finished, for that it gave very great
satisfaction to al, and opened many important points unto them, which they
had never thought of before, and with this they parted for that night every
man unto his loging and habitation.

HOW THE NEXT IN SVCCESSION BY PROPINQVITY OF BLOOD, HAS OFTEN times bin put
back, by the commonwealth, and others further of admitted in their places, even
in those kingdoms where succession prevails, with many examples of the
kingdoms of Israel, and Spain.
CAP. VII.
AT the next meeting the Ciuilian camein very pensive, as though his head had
bin full of study, vvherof being asked the reason, he answered, that he had
reuolued many stories since his departure about the point which he promised
to treat of, and that he had found such store and great variety of matter, as
he knew The Ciuilian cloyed with copy.
not well vvher to begin, and much less where to end: for (quoth he) if I
should begin with the (...) kings before mentioned, it were infinite that
might be alleged, and perhaps some man would say, they were over old, and
far fetched examples, and cannot be presidents Obiectie^s
to us in these ages, and if I lay before you the examples of Roman kings and
emperors put in and out, against the law and right of succession: the same men
perhapps vvil answer, that it was by force, and injury of mutinous souldiars,
whereunto that common wealth was greatly subject. And if I should bring forth
any presidents and examples of holy scriptures, some other might chance to
reply, that this was by particular privilege, vvherin God almighty would deal
and dispose of things against the ordinary course of man's law, as best liked
himself, whose will is more then law, and whose actions are right it self, for
that he is lord of al, and to be limited by no rule, or law of man, but yet
that this is not properly the act of a common wealth as our question
demanndeth.

Thus (I say) it may be, that some man would reply, and therefore having store
enough of plain and evident matter, which has no exception, for that it has
happened in settled common wealths, and those (...) home, where the law of
succession is received and established, to wit, in Spain, France, and
Ingland: I shall retire my self to them aloue: but yet putting The example of
the Jews 3. Reg. 8.
you in mind before I pass any further, that it is a matter much to be marked
how god dealt in this point with the people of Israel, at the beginning, after
he had granted to them, that they should hauve the same government of kings,
that other nations round about the had, vvhos kings did ordinarily reign by
succession as ours do at this day, and as all the kings of the Jews did
afterward, and yet this not-vvith standing, God at the beginning, to wit, at
the very entrance of their first kings, would show plainly that this law of
succeding of the one the other, by birth and propinquity of blood, (though for
the most part, it should prevail) yet that it was not so precisely necessary,
but that upon just causes it might be altered.

For proof whereof, we are to consider, that albeit he made Saul a true and
lawful king over the jews, and consequently also gave him al kingly privileges
benefits and prerogatives belonging to that degree and state, whereof one King
Saul.
principal (as you know) is to have his children succeed after him in the
crown: yet after his death God suffered not any one of his generation to succed
him, though he left behind him many children, and among others Is boseth a
prince of 40. years of age whom Abner the general 2. Reg. 2. and 21.
captain of that nation, with eleue^ tribes followed for a time, as their
lawful lord and master by succession, until God checked them for it, and
induced them to reject him though heir apparent by descent, and to cleave to
David newly elected king, who was a stranget by birthe, and no kynee at al to
the king deceased.

And if you say here that this was for the An objection ansevered.
sin of Saul, whom God had rejected, I do confess it, but yet this is
nothing against our purpose, for that we pretend not that a prince that is
next in blood can justly be put back, except it be for his own defects, or
those of his ancestors. And moreover I would have you consider, that by this
it is evident, that the fault of the father may preiudicate the sons right to
the crown, albeit the son have no part in the fault, as we may se in this
example not only of Isboseth that was punished and deprived for the offense of
Saul his father (not with standing he had bin proclay med king as has bin
said) but also of Ionathas Saules other son, who was so good a man, and so
much praised in holy seripture, and yet he being slain in war, and leaving a
son named Miphiboseth 2. Reg. 9.
he was put back also, though by nearnes of blood he had great interest in the
succession as you see, and much before David.

But David being placed in the crown by King David made by election
election, free consent, and admission of the people of Israel, as the
scripture plainly testifies (though by motion and direction of God himself)
2. Reg. 2. and 5.
we must confess, and no man I think vvil deny, but that he had given unto
him there whith, al kingly privileges preheminences and regalities, even in the
highest degree, as was convenient to such a state, and among other, the
scripture expressly names, that in particular it was assured him by God, that
his seed should regine after him: yea and that for ever, but yet Psalm. 131.
we do not find this to be performed to any 2. Paral. 6.
of his elder sons (as by order of succession it should seem to appertain)
no nor to any of their offspring or discents, but only to Salomo^, which was
his younger and tenth son, and the fourth only by Bersabce, as before has
bin touched.

True it is, that the scripture recounteth how Adonias David's elder son, that
was of rare bewty and a very godly young prince, seeing his father Adonias the
elder son relected.
now very old and impotent, and to lie on his death bed, and himself heir
apparent by antiquity of blood, after the death of Absalon, his elder brother
that was slain before, he had determined to have proclaimed himself heir
appare^t in Jerusalem before his father died, and for that purpose had ordained
a great assembly and banquet, had called unto it both the high priest
Abiathar, and diverse of the clergy, as also the general 3. Reg. 1.
captain of all the army of Israel named Ioab. With other of the nobility and
with the^ all the rest of his brethere^; that were sons to king David, saving
only Salomo^, together with many other princes and great men, both spiritual
and temporal of that estate, and had prepared for hem a great feast as I have
said, meaning that very day to proclayme himself heir apparent to the crown,
and to be crowned, as in deed by succession of blood it appertayned unto him:
and this he attempted so much the rather, by The motives of Adonias.
council of his friends, for that he saw the king his father very old and
impotent, and ready to dye, and had taken no order at al for his successor, and
moreover Adonias had understood, how that Bersabee Salomons mother had some
hope to have her son reign after David, upon a certain promise that David
in his youth had made unto her thereof, as also she had in the special favor
and friendship which Nathan the Prophet, and Sadoc the priest (who could do much
with the old king David) did bear unto her son Solomon, above all the rest
of his brethren.

Herevppon (I say) these two that is to say, Queen Bersabee and Nathan the
Propher, coming (...) to King David to make Salomo^ his successor.
together to the old man, as he lay on his bed, and putting him in mind of his
promise, and oath made to Bersabee for the preferment of her son, and showing
besides how that Adonias whithout his order and consent, had gathered an
assembly to make himself king, even that very day (which did put the old king
in very great fear and anger) and further also telling him (which pleased him
well) quod oculs 3. Reg. 1.
totius Isreal in eum respicerent, vt indicaret eis, quis sederet in solio suo
post ipsum: that is, that the eyes of al Israel were upon him to see whom he
would commend unto them, to sit in his seat after him, which was as much to
say, as that the whole common wealth referred it to his choice, which of his
sons should reign after him.

Upon these reasons and persuasions (I say) the good old king was content that
they should The coronation of Solomon.
take Solomon out of hand, and put him upon the kings own mule, and carry him
about the streets of Jerusalem, accompained whith his (...). Reg. 1.
guard and court, and crying whith sound of trumpets Viuat Rex Solomon, and that
Sadoc, the priest should annoint him, and after that he should be brought back,
and placed in the royal throne in the palace, and so in deed he was: at what
time king David himself being not able through impotencie, to rise out of his
bed, did him honor and reverence from the place vvher he lay: for so says
the scriptures aderauit rex in lectulo suo, king David adored his son Solomon
thus crowned, even from his bed, al which no doubt though yt may seem to
have bin wrought by humane means and policy, yet must we confess that it
was principally by the special instinct of God himself, as by the sequel and
success we see, so that hereby also we are taught, that these and like
determinations of the people, magistrates, A point to be noted.
and common wealths, about admitting or refusing of princes to reign or not
to reign over them, when their designements are to good ends, and for just
respects and causes, are allowed also by God, and oftentimes, are his own
special dirftes and dispositions, though they seem to come from man.

Whereof no one thing can give a more evident The manner of admission of the
prince Roboam.
proof, then that which ensued afterward to prince Roboam, the lawful son
and heir of this king Solomon, who after his fathers death coming to Sichem
where all the people of Israel were gathered together, for his coronation, and
admission, according to his right by succession. For until that time we see he
was 3. Reg. 12.
not accounted true king, though his father was dead, and this is to be
noted, the people began to propose unto him certain conditions, for taking
away of some hard and heavy impositions, laid upon them by Solomon his
father, (an evident president of the oath and conditions that princes do swear
unto in these days at their coronation) whereunto when Roboam refused to
yield, ten tribes of the twelve refused to admit him for their king, but chose
rather one Jeroboam Roboams servant, that was a mere stranger and but of poor
parentage, 3. Reg. 11.
and made him there lawful king, and God allowed thereof as the scripture in
express words does testify: and when Roboam that took himself to be openly
iniuried here by, would by arms have pursued his title, and had gathered
together an army of a hundred and four score thousand chosen souldiars (as
the scripture 5. Reg. 12. and 21.
says) to punish these rebels as he called the^, and to reduce these 10 tribes
to their due obedience of there natural prince: God appeered unto one Semeia a
holy man, and bad him go to the camp of Roboam, and tell them plainly that he
would not have them to fight against there brethern, that had chosen an other
king, but that every man should go home to his house, and live quietly under
the king, which each party had, and so they did, and this was the end of that
tumult, which God for the sins of Solomon had permitted and allowed of. And
thus much by the way I thought good to touch out of holy scripture, concerning
the Jewish commonwealth, even at the beginning, for that it may give light to
all the rest which after I am to create of, for if God permitted and allowed
this in his own common wealth, that was to be the example and pattern of al
others, that should ensew: no doubt but that he approves also the same in
other realms when just occasions are offered, either for his service, the good
of the people and realm, or else for punishment of the sins and wickedness of
some princes, that the ordinary line of succession be altered.

Now then to pass on further, and to begin with the kingdoms of Spain,
supposing Four races of Spanish Kings.
ever this ground of Gods ordenance, as has bin declared: first I say, that
Spain has had three or four races or discents of kings, as France also and
Ingland have had, and the first race was from the Goths, which began their
reign in Spain after the expulsion of the Ambros. moral. Lib. 11. (...). c.
12.
Romans, about the year of Christ 416. to who^ the Spaniard refers al his
old nobility, as the french man does to the German Franckes, and the Inglish to
the Saxons, which entered France and Ingland in the very same age, that the
other did Spain, and the race of Gothysh kings endured by the space of 300.
years until Spain was lost unto the Moors.

The second race is from Don Pelayo that was chosen first king of Asturias, and
of the mountain 2. Race.
country of Spain, after the destruction thereof by the Mootes, about the
year of Christ (...). as before has bin touched, which race Ambros. moral.
lib. 13. c. 3
contynewed and increased, and added kingdom unto kingdom for the space of
other three hundred years, to wit until the year of Christ 1034. when Don
Sancho may or king of Nauarra Moral. lib. 37. e. 42. 43. 44.
at unto his power, the Earldome also of Aragon and Castilia, and made them
kingdoms, and divided them among his children, and to his second son, named
Don Fernando, surnamed afterward the great he gave not only the said Earldome
of Castilia with title of kingdom, but by mariynge also of the sister of Don
Dermudo king of Leon, and Asturias, he joined al those kingdoms together, and
so began from that day forward the third race of the kings of 3. Race.
Nauar to reign in Castle, and so endured for syuehundred years until the
year of Christ 1540. when the house of Austria entered to reign there, by
marriage of the daughter and heir of Garibay lib 20. c. (...)
Don Ferdinando surnamed the Catholic, and this was the fourth race of
Spanish kings after the Romans, which endures until this day. 4. (...)


And albeit in all these four races and ranckes Examples of the first race.
of royal discents, diverse examples might be alleged for manifest proof of my
purpose: yet will I not deal whith the first race, for that it is evident by
the councels of Toledo before alleged (which were holden in that very time)
that in those days express election, was joined with succession, as by the
deposition of king Suintila and putting back of al his children: as also by the
election and approbation of king Sisinando that was further of by succession,
has bin insinuated before, and in the fyft council of that age in Toledo, it
is decreed expressly in these words: Si quis talia meditatus fuerit (talking of
pretending to be king) quem nec electio omnium Council. Tol. 3. c. 3.
perficit, nec Gothicae gentis nobilitas ad hunc honoris apicem trahit: sit
consortio Catholicorum priuatus, and diuino anathemate condemnatus. If any man
shall imagine (said these fathers) or go about to aspire to the kingdom, whom the
election and choice of all the (...), does not make perfect, not the nobility of
the Gotish nation, does draw to the height of this dignity: let him be deprived
of al Catholic society, and damned by the curse of almighty God, by which
words is insinuated, that not only the nobility of Gotish blood, or neernes by
succession was required for the making of there king, but much more the choice
or admission of all the realm, wherein this council puts the perfection of
his title.

The like determination was made in an other council at the same place, before
this that I have alleged, and the words are these. Nullus Conc. tol. 4. cap.
74.
apud nos presumptione regnum arripiat, sed defuncto in pace principe,
optimates gentis cum sacerdotibus successorem regni communi concilio
constituant. Which in Inglish is thus, let no man with us snatche the kingdom
by presumption, but the former Prince being dead in peace, let the nobility of
the nation, together with the Priests and clergy, appoint the successor of
the kingdom, by common council, which is, as much to say as if he had said,
let no man enter upon the kingdom by presumption of succession alone, but let
the Lords temporal and spiritual, by common voice, see what is best for the
weal public.

Now then, according to these ancient decrees, albeit in the second race of Don
Pelayo, the Examples of the 2. race.
law of succession by propinquity of blood, was renewed, and much more
established then before, as the ancient bishop of Tuys and Molina, Episcop.
Tuyens l. 1. histoin. Ludou. de Molin. li. de hared.
and other spanish vvriters do testify: yet that the next in blood was
oftentimes put back by the common wealth upon just causes, these examples
following shall testify, as breefly recou^ted as I can possibly.

Don Pelayo died in the year of our Lord 737. King Don Pelayo.
and left a son named Don Fauila, who was king after his father, and reigned
two years only. After whose death, none of his children were admited for king,
though he left diverse, as al writers do testify. But as Don Lucas the Bishop
of Tuy a very ancient author vvriteth, Aldefonsus Catholicus ab vniuer so
populo Gothorum Ambros Mor 1. 13. cap. 6. 9. 10.
eligitur, that is (as the chronicler Moralis does translat in spanish) Don
Alonso surnamed the Catholic, was chosen to be king by all voices of the
Gotish nation. This Don Alonso was son in law to the former king Fauila, as
Morales says, for that he had his daughter Erneenesenda in marriage, and he
was preferred before the kings own sons, only for that they were young and
vn-able to govern, as the said historiographer restifyeth. And how well this
fell out for the common wealth and how excellent a king this Don Alonso proved,
Morales shows at large, from the tenth chapter of his thirteenth book until
the 17. and Sebastianus Bishop of Salamanca, Sebast. Epise- Salam in hift. Hisp.
that lived in the same time, writes that of his valiant acts he was surnamed
the great.

To this famons Don Alonso, succeeded his son Don Fruela the first of that
name, who was a K. Don Alonso y Do fruela.
noble king for 10. years space, and had diverse excellent victories against
the Moors, but afterward declining to tyranny, he became hate full to his
subjects, and for that he put to death wrongfully his own brother Don
Vimerano, a Prince of excellent parts and rarely beloved of the Spaniards, he
was him self put down, and Moral. li 13. cap. 17 An. 768.
put to death by them in the year of Christ 768. And albeit this king left two
goodly children behind him, which were lawfully begotten upon his Queen Dona
Munia, the one of them a son called Don Alonso, and the other a daughter
called Dona Ximea: yet for the hatred Many breaches of succession.
conceived against there father, neither of them was admitted by the realm to
succeed him, but rather his cosen german, named Don Aurelio brothers son to
Don Alonso the catholic, was Moral. e. 21. King Don Aurelio.
preferred, and reigned peacably six years, and then dying without issue, for
that the hatred of the spaniards, was not yet ended against the memory of king
Fruela, they would not yet admit any of his generation, but rather excluded
them again the second time, and admitted a brother in law of his, named Don
Silo, that was married to his sister Dona Adosinda daughter to King Don Sile.
the fore said noble king catholic Alonso. So that here we see twice the
right heirs of king Don Fruela for his euel government were put back.

But Don Silo being dead without issue, as also King Don Alonso the chaste.
Don Aurelio was before him, and the Spaniards anger against king Fruela being
now well assuaged, they admitted to the kingdone his fore said son, Don
Alonso the younger, surnamed afterward the chaste, whom now twice before they had
put back, as you have seen, but now they admitted him, though hisreigne at the
first endured very little, for that a certain bastard uncle of his, named Don
Mauregato by help of Mor I 15. cap. 25.
the moors put him out, and reigned by force 6. years, and in the end dying
with out issue, the matter came in deliberation again, whether the king Don
Alonso the chaste that yet lived, and had bin hidden in a monastary of Galitia,
during the time of the tyra^t, should return again to govern, or rather that
his cosen A strange deliberation.
german Don vermudo son to his uncle, the Prince Vimerano (whom we showed
before to have been slain by this man's father king Fruela) should be elected in
his place. And the realm of Spain determined the second, to wit, that Don
Vermudo though he were much further of, by propiuquity of blood, and with in
ecclesiastical order also (for that he had bin made deacon) should be admitted,
partly for that he was judged for the more valiant and able Prince, then the
other, who seemed to be made more acquainted now with the life of Great
authority of common wealth.
monks, and religious men, then of a king, having first bin brought up among
them for 10. or 12. years space, vvhiles Don Aurelio and Don Silo reigned
after the death of his father king Fruela, and secondly again other six
years, during the reign of the tyrant Mauregato, for which cause, they
esteemed the other to be fitter, as also for the different memories of there
two fathers king Fruela and prince Vimerano, whereof the first was hateful,
and the other most dear, as before has bin declared, nether do any of the
four ancient Bishops historiographers of Spain, to wit, that of Toledo, Besa,
Salamanca or Ture, that lived al about those days and wrote the story,
reprehend this fact of the realm of spain, or put any doubt whether it were
lawful or no for the causes before recited.

True it is, that after three years reign, this king Vermudo being weary of
kingly life, and K. Alonso the chaste reyneth the second time.
feeling some scruple of conscience, that being deacon, he had forsaken the
life ecclesiastical, and married (though by dispensation of the pope as Morales
says) and entangled himself with the affairs of a kingdom, he resigned
Moral e. 28. and 29. An. 791.
willingly the government unto his said Cosen, Don Alonso the chaste, and
himself lived after a private life for diverse years, but this Don Alonso who
now the fourth time, had bin deprived of his succession, as you have seen,
deceived the expectation of the spaniards, that accou^pted him a monk, for he
proved the most valiant and excellent king that ever that nation had, both for
his virtue, valor, victories, against the moors, buylding of towns, castells,
churches, Monasteries, and other such works, of Christianity, as Morales
recounteth: and be reigned after this his last admission, one and fyftie
years, and had great friendship with king Charles the great of France, who
lived in the same time with him. And this man among other most noble exploites
so tamed the Moors of his country, as during his days, he never paid Moral.
li. 13. cap. 45 46. Anno 842.
that cruel and horrible tribute which before and after was paid by the
christians to the Moors, which was a hundred young maidens and fifty sons of
Ge^tlemen, every year to be brought A horible tribute.
up in the religion of Mahomet, among those infidel tyrants. And finally this
man after so much affliction came to be one of the most renoumed Princes of the
world.

After this Don Alonso, who left no children, for that he would never marry,
but lived al his life in chastitye, there succeeded to him by election, his
nephew named Don Ramiro son to the former said king Don Vermudo the deacon,
that King Do^ Ramiro. 1 by election.
gave this man the crown, as you have hard, of whose election morales writes
these words. Muerto el Rey Don Alonso el casto, fue eligido por los Moral e.
51.
(...) y grandes del reyno, el Rey Don Ramiro primero deste nombre, hyio del
Rey Don vermudo el diaeono. That is, the king Don Alo^so the chaste being dead,
there was chosen king by the Prelates and nobility of the realm, Don Ramiro
the first of this name, son of king Vermudo the deacon, who resigned his
crown to Don Alonso, and it is to be noted, that albeit this Don Ramiro was
next in blood to the succession, after the death of his uncle Don Alonso
without children, yet was he chosen by the states as here it is said in
express words.

Moreover it is to be noted, that albeit this author Ambrosio Morales and other
spanish writers do say that in the time of this king Ramiro, the law of
succession by propinquity in blood was so revived and strongly confirmed, that
as the kingdom of Spain was made as Maiorasgo The kingdom of Spain a
Maiorasgo.
as he terms it, which is, an inheritance so intayled and tied only to the
next in blood, as there is no possibility to alter the same, and that from this
time forward the king always caused his eldest son to be named king or
Prince, and so ever to be sworn, by the realm and nobility, yet shall we
find this ordinance and succession oftentimes to have been broken upon several
considerations, as this author himself in that very chapter, confesses.

As for example, after four discents from this man, which were Don Ordonio
the first, this man's son, and Don Alonso the third, Don Garzia and Don
Ordonio the second, al four kings by orderly succession, it happened that in
the year K. Don Ordonio. An. 924.
of christ 924. Don Ordonio the second, dying, left four sons and one
daughter lawfully begotten, and yet the state of spain displaced them al, and
gave the kingdom to there uncle Don Fruela second brother to there father Don
Ordonio, and morales says that there appears Moral. 1. 16. cap. 1. An. 924.
no other reason heerof, but only for that these sons of the king disceased
were young, and not so apt to govern well the realm as there uncle was.

But after a years reign, this king Fruelae dyed also, and left diverse
children at man's estate, and then did the spaniards as much against them, as
they had done for him before, against the children of his elder brother. For
they put them al by the crown, and chose for their king, Don Alonso the fourth
which was eldest son Don Alonso 4.
to Don Ordonio the second, before named, that had bin last king saving one,
and this man also (I mean Don Alonso the fourth) leaving afterward his
kingdom and betaking him self to a religious habit, offered to the common
wealth of spain, his eldest son lawfully begotten named Do^ Ordonio to be
there king, but they refused him, and took his brother (I mean this kings
brother) and uncle to the young Prince, Don Ramiro Moral. lib. 19 cap. 20. An.
930.
named Don Ramiro, who reigned 19. years, and was a most excellent king, and
gained Madrid from the Moors, though noted of cruelty, for imprisoning and
pulling out the eyes afterward of this king Don Alonso the 4. and al his
children and nephews, for that he would have left his habit, and returned to
be king again. But this fact, my author Morales excuses, saying that it was
requisire for peace and safty of the realm, so as here you see two most
manifest alteratio^s of lineal succession together by order of the common
wealth.

Furthermore, after this noble king Do^ Ramiro the second, succeeded as heir
apparent to the crown his elder son, Don Ordonio the third, Don Ordonio 3.
An. 950.
of this name, in the year of our Savior 950. but this succession endured no
longer then unto his own death, which was after 7. years, for then albeit he
left a son named el enfante Don Vermudo, yet he was not admitted, but rather
his brother, Don Sancho the first of this name, surnamed el Gordo, who was
uncle to the young Don Sancho 1.
Prince, and the reason of this alteration. Morales gives in these words: el
succeder en el regno, al hermano, fue por la racon ordinaria de ser el Moral.
l. 16. cap. 29 An. 950.
enfante, Don Vermudo ni^no y no bastante para el gouierno y difenca de la
terra. Which is, the cause why the kings brother and not his son succeeded in
the crown, was for the ordinary reason (so often before alleged) for that
the infant or young Prince Vermudo, was a little child, and not sufficient for
government and defense of the country.

Truth it is, that after this Don Sancho had reigned, and his son and heir
named Don Ramiro the third, after him, for the space of 30. years in all, then
was this youth Don Vermudo Mor. l. 17. c. 1. 2. 3. 4.
(that is now put back) called by the realm to the succession of the crown,
and made king by the name of king Vermudo the second, who left after him Don
Alonso, the 5. and he again his son Don Vermudo the third, who marying his
sister Dona Sancha (that was his heir) unto Don Fernando, first earl, and
then king of Castile, (who was second son to Don Sancho Mayor king of Nauarr
as before has bin said) he joined by these means the kingdoms of Leon and
Castile together, which were seperat before, The end of the race of Don Pelayo.
and so ended the line of Don Pelayo, first Christian king of Spain, after the
entrance of the Moors, which had endured now three hundredth years, and the
blood of Nauarr entered as you see, and so continued therein until the entrance
of those of Austria, as before has bin said, which was almost 5. hundredth
years together.

And thus much I thought good to note out Of the disceues follovving.
of the stories of Spain, for this first descent of the spanish kings, after
the entrance of the Moors, nether mean I to pass much further, both for that
it would be over long, as also for that mine author, Morales, who is the most
diligent that has written the chronicles of that nation, ends here his story
with king Vermudo the third and last of the Gotish blood.

Notwithstanding if I would go on further, there would not want diverse evident
examples Spanish examples in the second descent.
also to the same purpose, which Stephen Garabay an other chonicler of Spain,
does touch in the continuation of this story, vvherof for examples sake only I
will name two or three among the rest.

And first about the year of Christ 1201. there (...). 1201
was a marriage made by king John of England for Dona Blancha his niece, that is
to say, the daughter of his sister Dame Elinor, and of Don Alonso the 9. of
that name king and Queen of spain, which Blancha was to mary the Prince of
France, named Luys, son and heir to king Phillip surnamed Augustus, which
Luys was after-ward Carib. li. 11. cap. 12 and 37.
king of France by the name of Luys the 8. and was father to Luys the 9.
surnamed the saint.

This lady Blancha was niece as I have said, unto king John and to king
Richard, the first of England, for that her mother lady Elenor, was there
sister, and daughter to king Henry the second, and king John made this marriage,
there by to make peace with the French, and was content to give for her dowrey
(for that he Lady Elenor an Inglish woman. Q. of Spain.
could not tell how to recover them again) al those towns and countres which
the said king Phillip had taken upon the Inglish, by this kings euel government
in Normandy and Gasconie, and more over, promise was made, that if the Prince
Henry of spain (that was the only brother to the said Lady Bla^ch) should dye
without issue (as after he did) then this lady should succeed in the crown of
Spain also, but yet afterward the state of Spain would not perform this, but
rather admitted her younger sister Dona Berenguela, married to the Prince of
Leon, and excluded both Blanch and her son the king S. Luys of France,
against the evident right of succession, and propinquity of Garib. l. 13. cap.
10 An 1207.
blood, and the only reason they yealded hereof was not to admit strangers to
the crown, as Garabay testifies.

This happened then, and I do note by the way, that this Dona Berenguela second
daughter of Queen Elenor the Inglish woman, was married (as has bin said) to
the Prince of Leon, and had by him Don Fernando the third of that name, king of
Castilia, surnamed also the saint, so as the two daughters of an Inglish
Queen, had An Inglish Qgra^d mother to two king saints at once.
two kings saints for there sons at one time, the elder of France and the
younger of Spain.

After this again, about threescore years the Prince of Spain named Don
Alonso, surnamed de la cerda, for that he was borne with a great An other brech
of succession.
gristle hear on his breast called cerda in spanish, which Don Alonso, was
nephew to the king Fernando the saint, and married with the daughter of saint
Luys king of France, named also Blantha as her grand mother was, and had by her
two sons called Alonso and Hernando de la cerda as the Prince their father
was named, which father of there is dying before the king, the grand father left
them commended to the realm as lawful heirs apparent to the crown, yet for
that a certain uncle of there is named Don Sancho younger brother to their father
which Do Sancho was surnamed afterward, el brauo for his valor and was a great
warrier, and more like to manage well the matters of war then they: he was
mad heir apparent of Spain and they put back in there grand fathers time,
and by his and the realms consent, (there father as I have said being dead) and
this was done in a general parliament holden at Segouia, in the year 1276. and
The Cerdas put bark from the crown 1276.
after this, Don Sancho was made king in the year 1284. and the two Princes
put into prison, but afterward at the sure of there uncle king Phillip the
third of France, they were let out again and endued with certain lands, and
so they remain unto this day, and of these do come the Dukes of Medina Celi,
and all the rest of the house of Cerda, which are of much nobility in Spain at
this time, and king Phillip that reyneth comes of Don Sancho the younger
brother.

Not long after this again, when Don Pedro surnamed the cruel king of Castile,
was driven out, and his bastard brother Henry the second set up in his place,
as before has bin mentioned: the Duke of Lancaster John of Gant, having
Garabay l. 15. c. 1. an. 1363.
married Dona Constantia the said king peter's daughter and heir, pretended by
succession the said crown of Castile, as in deed it appertayned unto him; but
yet the state of spain denied it flatly, and defended it by atmes, and they
prevailed against John of Gant, as did also the race Many alterations of lineal
descent.
of Henry the bastard, against his lawful brother, and the race of Don Sancho
the uncle, against his lawful nephews, as has been showed, and that of Dona
Berenguela against her elder sister, al which races do reign unto this day,
and these three changes of the true live, happened with in two ages, and in the
third and principal descent of the Spanish kings, when this matter of
succession was most assuredly and perfectly established, and yet who will deny
but that the kings of Spain who hold by the later titles at this day, be true
and lawful kings.

Well, one example will I give you more out of the kingdom of Portugal, and so
will I make an end with these countries. This king Henry the bastard last
named king of Spain, had a son that succeeded him in the crown of Spain,
named John the first, who married the daughter and heir named Dona Beatrix, of
king Fernando the first of Portugal, but yet after the death of the said King
Fernando, the states of Portugal would never agree to admit him for there king,
for not subiecting themselves by that means to the Castilians, and for that
cause they rather took for there king, a bastard Do^ John the first a bastard
made king of Portugal.
brother of the said late king Don Fernando, whose name was Don Iuan, a youth of
20. years old who had bin master of a militare order in Portugal named de
Auis, and so they excluded Garib. l. 15 cap 22. and li. 34. c. 39.
Dona Beatrix Queen of Castile that was their lawful heir, and chose this
young man, and married him afterward to the lady Phillippe daughter of John of
Gant Duke of Lancaster, by his first wife blanch, Duchess and heir of
La^caster, in whose right the kings of Portugal and there discendents do pretend
unto this day a cerrayne interest to the house of Lancaster, which I leave to
our temporal lawyer, to discuss but hereby we see what an ordinary matter it
has bin in Spain and Portugal, to alter the line of next succession, upon
any reasonable consideration, which they imagined to be for there weal public,
and the like we shall find in France and Ingland, which even now I will begin to
treat of.

DIVERSE OTHER EXAM'PLES OVT OF THE STATES OF FRANCE AND INGLAND, FOR proof
that the next in blood are some times put back from succession, and how God
had approved the same with good success.
CAP. VIII.
AS concerning the state of France, I have Of the state of france.
noted before, that albeit since the entrance of there first king Pharamond,
with his Frankes, out of Germany, which was about the year of Christ 419.
they have never had any stranger An. 419.
come to were there crown, which they attribute to the benefit of there law
Salike, that for bids women to reign, yet among themselves have they
changed twyse there whole race and lineage of kings, once in the entrance of
king Pepin, that put out the line of Pharamond, about the year 751. and again
in the An. 751.
promotion of king Hugo Capetus. that put out the line of Pepin, in the year
988 so as they An. 988.
have had three discents and races of kings, as well as the spaniards, the first
of Pharamond, the 2. of Pepin, and the 3. of Capetus, which indureth unto this
present, if it be not altered now by the exclusion that diverse pretend to make
of the king of Nauarr, and other Princes of the blood royal of the house of
Burbon.

Wherefore as I did before in the spaniards, so I will here let pass the first
rank of al of the french kings, for that some men may say perhaps, that the
common wealth and law of Examples of the 2. rank of French Kings.
succession, was not so well settled in those days, as it has bin afterward, in
time of king Pepin Charles the great and there discendantes, as also for that
it were in very deed over tedious to examine and pervse al three ranks of
kings in France, as you will say when you shall see what store I have to allege,
out of the second rank only, which began with the exclusion and deposition of
their lawful King Childerike the third, and election of king Pepin, as before
you have heard at large declared in the third chapter of this discourse, and it
shall not be need full to repeat the same again in this place.

Pepin then surnamed, le brefe, or the little, for his small stature (though he
were a giant in deeds) being made king of France, by mere King Pepin by
election An. 751.
election, in the year of Christ 751. after 22. kings that had reigned of the
first line of Pharamond for the space of more then three hundredth years, and
being so famous and worthy a king as all the world knows, reigned 18. years,
and then left his states and kingdoms by succession unto his eldest son
Charles surnamed afterward the great, for his famous and heroical acts. And
albeit the whole kingdom of France appertayned unto him alone, by the law of
succession, as has bin said, his father K. Charles by election.
being king and he his eldest son: yet would the realm of France show there
authority in his admission, which Girard sets down in these words, Estant
Pepin decede, les Francois esleurent Girard du Haillan l. 3. an. 768.
Rois, Charles and Carlomon, ses fills, ala charge, qu'ils partageroient enter
eux, egalement, le royaume. Which is, king Pipin being dead, the french men
chose for there kings his two sons, Charles and Carlomon, with condition, that
they should part equally between them, the realm. Wherein is to be noted, not
only the election of the common wealth, besides succession, but also the heavy
condition laid upon the heir to part half of his kingdom with his younger
brother, and the very same words has Eginard an ancient French writer,
Eginard Belfor. li, 2. cap. 5.
in the life of this Charles the great, to wit, that the French state in a
public assembly, did chose two Princes to be their kings, with express
condition to divide the realm equally, as Francis Belforest cites his words,
which two French authors (I mean Girard and Belforest) I shall use principally
hereafter in the rest of my citations.

After three years, that these two brethere^ had reigned together, king
Carlomon the younger died, and left many sons, the elder whereof The uncle
preferred before the nephew.
was named Adalgise, but Belforest says, that the Lords ecclesiastical and
temporal of France swore fidelity and obedience to Charles, without any
respect or regard at al of the children of Carlomon who yet by right of
succession, should have bin preferred, and Paulus Emilius a latin writer,
says, proceres regni ad Carolum vltro venientes, regem eum totius Galliae
salutarunt: Paul. mili hist. Franc.
that is, the nobility of the realm coming of there own accord, unto charles
saluted him king of al France, whereby is showed, that this exclusion of the
children of Carlomon, was not by force or tyranny, but by free deliberation of
the realm.

After Charles the great, reigned by succession King Luys de bonnaire. An. 814.
his only sonue, Luys the first, surnamed de bonnaire of his curtesye, who
entering to reign in the year 817. with great applause of al men, for the
exceeding grateful memory of his father, was yet afterward at the poursuite
principally of his own three sons, by his first wife; Girard l. 5 An. 834.
(which were Lothair, pepin, and Luys) deposed; first in a council at Lions,
and then again at Compeigne, and put into a monastery, though afterward he
came to reign again, and his An. 840
fourth son by his second wife, (which son was named Gharles le chauue,
for that he was bald) succeeded him, in the states of France, though after many
battles against his eldest brother Lothaire, to whom by succession the same
appertayned.

After Charles the balde, succeeded Luys the second, surnamed le begue, for his
stuttering, who was not eldest, but third son, unto his father, for the
second dyed before his father, An. 878.
and the eldest was put by his succession, for his euel demeanure, this Luys
also was like to have bin deprived by the states at his first entrance, for
the hatred conceived against his father Charles Baudin en la Chroni que, page
119.
the bald, but that he calling a solemn parliament at Compeigne, as Girard
says, he made the people, clergy, and nobility many fair Girard l. 1 An.
879.
promises, to have their good vvilles. This Luys the stuttering, left two
bastard sons, by a co^cubine, Two bastards pre ferred.
who were called Luys and Carlomo^, as also he left a little infant, newly
borne of his lawful wife, Adeltrude daughter to king Alfred of Ingland, which
infant was king of France afterward, by the name of Charles the simple,
albeit not immediately after the death of his father, for that the nobles of
France said, that they had need of a man to be king, and not a child, as
Girard reports, and therefore the whole state of France, chose for their
kings the two foresaid bastards, Luys the third, and Carlomon the first of
that name, jointly and they were crowned most solemnly and divided the whole
realm between them, in the year of Christ An. 881.
881. and Queen Adeltrude with her child true heir of France, fled into
Ingland to her father, and there brought him up for diverse years, in which time
she saw four or five kings reign in his place in France, one after the
other, for breflv thus it passed.

Of these two bastard kings the elder named Luys reigned but four years, and
died without issue, the second that is Carlomon lived but one year after him,
and left a son called also Luys, which succeeded in the kingdom by the name
of Luys the fifth, and surnamed Faineant Luys faineant K. of France An. 886.
for his idle and sloth full life. For which as also for his vicious behaueour,
and in particular for taking out and marying a No^ne of the Abbey of S. Baudour
at Chells, by Partis, he was deprived and made a monk in the Abbey of S.
Denis, vvher he died, and in his place was chosen king of France, and crowned
with great solemnity, Gharles the 4. Emperor of Rome surnamed le gros, for
that he was fat and corpule^t, Charles 4 le Gros. King of France.
he was nephew to Charles the bald, before mentioned, and therefore the French
stories say, that he came to the crown of France partly by Girard. li. 5. An.
888
succession, and partly by election, but for succession, we see that it was
nothing worth, for so much as Charles the simple the right heir, was a live
in Ingland, whom it seems that the french men had quite forgotten, seeing that
now they had not only excluded him three times already, as you have hard, but
afterward also again, when this gross Charles was for his euel gouerme^t, by
them deposed and deprived, not only of the kingdom of France but also of his
Empire, which he had before he was king, and was brought into such miserable
penury, as diverse write, that he perished for want. At this time I say the
states of France would not yet admit Charles the simple (though hither to his
simplicity did not appear, but he seemed a goodly Prince) but rather they
chose for king one Odo Earl of Paris and Duke of Angiers, and caused him to be
crowned. Odo a king and after Duke of whom came Hugo Capetus.


But yet after a few years, being weary of this man's government, and moved
also some what with compassion toward the youth that was in Ingland, they
resolved to depose Odo, and so they did vvhiles he was absent in Gascony, and
called Charles the simple out of Ingland, to Paris, and restored him to the
kingdom of France, leaving only to Odo for recompense, the state of Aquitaine,
with title of a Duke: wherewith in fine, he contented himself, seeing that he
could get no more. But yet his posterity by virtue of this election, pretended
ever after a title to the crown of France, and never left it of, until at
length by Hugo Capetus they gat it, for Hugh descended of this king and Duke
Odo.

This king Charles then surnamed the simple, an Inglish vvomans son, as you
have hard, being thus admitted to the crown of France, he took to wife an
Inglish woman, named Elgina or Ogin, daughter of king Edward the elder, by
whom he had a son named Lewys, and himself being a simple man, as has bin
said, was allured to go to the castle, of peronne in Picardie, vvher he was
made ptisoner, and forced to resign his kingdom unto Rafe Rafe 1. King of
France. An. 927.
king of Burgundye, and soon after he dyed through misery in the same castle,
and his Queen Ogin fled into Ingland with her little son Luys unto her uncle
king Adelstan, as Queen Adeltrude had done before with her son unto king
Alfred, and one of the chief in this action for putting down of the simple,
was Count Hugh surnamed the great. Earl of Paris, father unto Hugo Capetus
which after was king.

But this new king Rafe, lived but three years after, and then the states of
France considering the right title of Luys the lawful child of king Charles the
simple, which Luys was commonly called now in France by the name of
d'Outremer, that is be-yond the sea, for that he had bin brought up in Ingland:
the said states being also greatly and continually solicited heerunto by the
Ambassadors of king Adelstan of Ingland, and by William Duke of Normandy,
surnamed long speer, great grand father to An. 929:
William the conqueror, who by the king of Ingland was gained also to be of
the young princes part: for these considerations (I say) they resolved to call
him into France out of Ingland, as his father had bin before him, and to admit
and crown him king, and so they did, and he reigned 27. years and was a good
Prince, and died peaceably in his bed the year of Christ, 945.

This king Luys d'Outremer left two sons behind him, the eldest was called
Lothaire the Luys 4. d'Outremer.
first, who succeeded him in the crown of France, and the second was named
Charles whom he made Duke of Lorayne. Lothaire dying left one only son named
Luys as his grand father The true geyre of France excluded.
was who was king of France, by the name of Luys the 5. and dying without
issue after two years that he had reigned, the crown was to have gone by
lyneal succession unto his uncle Charles the duke of Lorayne, seco^nd son to
Luys d'Outremer, as is evident, but the states of France did put him by it for
mislike they had of his person, and did chose Hugo Capetus Earl of Paris, and
so ended the second line of Pepin and of Charles the great, and entered the race
of Hugo Capetus, which endurcth until this day, and the French stories do say,
that this surname Hugh Capet otherwise Snatch cappe 988
Capet, was given to him when he was a boy for that he was wont to snatch
away his fellows cappes from their heads, vvherof he was termed Snatch
cappe, which some do interpret to be an abodement that he should snatch also
a crown from the true owners head in time, as afterward we see it fell out,
though yet he had it by election and approbation of the common wealth as I
have said.

And in this respect all the french chroniclers who otherwise are most earnest
defenders of there law of succession, do justify t^is title of Hugo Capetus
against Charles, for which cause Frances Belforest does allege the saying of
William Nangis, an ancient and diligent Belfor. li. 3. cap 1. An. 988.
chronicler of the Abbey of S. Denis in France, who defends king Capetus in
these words. We may not grant in any case that Hugh Capet may Defense of
Hugh Capetus title.
be esteemed an inuador or usurper of the crown of France, seeing the Lords
Prelates princes and governors of the realm did call him to this dignity, and
chose him for their king and Sovereign Lord, thus much Nangis: upon which
words Belforest says as follows, I have laid before you the words and
censure of this good religious man for that they seem to me to touch the
quick, for in very truth we cannot by any other means defend the title of Hugh
Capet from Usurpation and fellonie, then to justify his coming to the crown
by the consent and will of the common wealth, and in this I may well excuse me
from inconstancy and contradiction to my self, that have so earnestly
defended succession before, for he that will consider how and with what
conditions I defended that, shall easily see also that I am not here contrary
to the same, thus much Belforest.

I Think it not a miss also to put down here some part of the oration or
speech which the Ambassador that was sent at that time, The embassage of the
states of France unto Char les of Loraine.
from the state of France unto Charles of Loraine, after their election of Hugh
Capet, and Charles exclusion, did use unto him in there names, which spech
Girard does recount in these words.

Every man knows (Lord Charles) that the succession of the crown and realm
of Girard 1. 6 an. 988.
France according to the ordinary Laws and rights of the same, belongs unto
you, and not unto Hugh Capet now our king, but yet the very same laws which
do give unto you this right of succession, do judge you also unworthy of the
same, for that you have not endeavored hitherto to frame your life and manners
according to the prescript of those laws, nor according to the use and custom
of your coumtrey of France, but rather have allied your self with the German
nation, our old enemies, and have acquainted your self with their vile and
base manners. Wherefore seeing you have forsaken and abandoned the ancient virtue
sweetness and amity of the french, we have also abandoned and left you, and
have chosen Hugh Capet for our king, and have put you back, and this without
any scruple or prejudice of our consciences at al, esteeming it far better and
more just to live under Hugh Capet the present posessor of the crown, with
enjoying the ancient use of our laws, customs, privileges and liberties, then
under you the inheritor by neernes of blood, in oppression, strange customs,
and cruelty For even as those which are to make a Note this comparison.
voyage in a ship upon a dangerous sea, do not so much respect, whether the
pilot which is to guyd the stern, be owner of the ship or no, but rather
whether he be skilful, valiant, and like to bring them in safety to there ways
end, or to drown them among the waves: even so our principal care is, that we
have a good Prince to lead and guyd us happily in this way of civil and
politic life, which is the end why princes were appointed, for that this man
is fitter to be our king.

This message did the states of France send to Charles of Lorayne in defense of
their doings, and with this he lost his succession for ever, and afterward his
life also in prison, and the French men thought themselves secure in conscience
as you see, for doing the same, which God has also since seemed to confirm,
with the succession and happy success of so many noble and most christian
kings as have issued out of this line of Hugo Capetus unto this day.

And this spoken now of the second line of France, I take to be sufficient for
proof Examples out of the third time of France.
of our purpose, without going any further, for that if we do but number these
kings already named that have reigned in this second race, from king Pepin
downwards unto Hugh Capet, (which are about 17. or 18. kings in 238. years)
we shall find that not some few, but the most part of them did both enter and
enjoy there crowns and dignities contrary to the law of lyneal descent, and of
next succession by blood. Whereof also there would not want diverse examples in
the third and last descent, since Hugo Capetus time, if we would pass further
to examine the stories ther-of. For not to go further down then to the very
next descent after Hugh which was king Robert his son, Girard Girard li. 6.
an. 1032
affirms in his story, that of his two sons which he had named Robert and
Henry, Robert the elder was put back, and his younger brother Henry made king
of France, and reyned many years by the name of Henry the first, and K. Henry
(...). preferred before his elder brother.
this he says happened partly for that Robert was but a simple man in
respect of Henry, and partly also for that Henry was greatly favored and
assisted in this pretense, by Duke Robert of Normandy father to our William the
conqueror, William conqueror how he came to be duke of Normandy.
and in recompense hereof, this king Henry afterward assisted the said William
bastard son to Robert for the attayning of the Dukdome of Normandy, after
the death of the said Duke Robert his father, notwithstanding that Duke Robert
had two lawful brothers a live at that time, whose names were Manger Archbishop
of Girard 1. 6. Anno 1032. and 1037.
Roan, and William Earl of Argues, in Normandy, who pretended by succession
to be preferred But the states of Normandy at the request of Duke Robert,
when he went to the holy land (in which journey he died) as also for avoiding
of dissension and wars that other wise might ensue, were content to exclude
the uncles and admit the bastard son, who was also assisted by the forces
of the king of France as has bin said, so as no scruple it seemed there was in
those days, either to prefer king Henry to the crown of France before his
elder brother, or Duke William the bastard son to the Duchy of Normandy
before his lawful uncles upon such dow considerations, as those states may be
presumed to have had for their doings.

I read also, that some years after, to wit in Sons excluded for the
fathers offenses.
the year 1110. when Phillip the first of France son and heir to this king
Henry of whose solemn coronation you have hard before in the sene^th chapter,
was deceased, the people of France were so offended with his euel life and
government, as diverse were of opinion to disinherite Girard. lib. 7. An. 1110.
his son Lewis the sixth, surnamed le Gros, for his sake, and so was he like
to have bin indeed, as may appear by the chronicle Belfor. l. 4 c. 1. and. l.
5
of France, if some of his party had not caused him to be crowned in have, and
out of order, in Orleans, for preventing the matter.

The like does Phillip Cominaeus in his story Co^mzus in comen tar. l. 1. in
vita Ludouic. 11.
of king Luys the eleventh declare, how that the state of France had once
determined, to have disinherited his son Charles, named after the eight, and
to put him back from his succession for their hatred to his father, if the said
father had not died while the other was very young, as I noted before also,
that it happened in king Henry the third of Ingland, who was once condemned
by the Barons to be disinherited, for the fault of king John his father, and
Lewys the princo of France chosen in his place, but that the death of king John
did alter that course intended by the Inglish nobility, so as this matter is
nether new not unaccustomed in all foraine countries, and now will I pass also a
little to our Inglish stories, to see whether the like may be found in them or
no.

And first of all that the realm of England has had as great variety,
changes, and diversity, in Examples of the realm of Ingland.
the races of their kings, as any one realm in the world, it seems evident,
for that first of al, after the Britains, it had Romans for their governors
for many years, and then of them and their roman blood they had kings again
of there own, as appears by that valiant king Aurelius Ambrosius. Who resisted
so manfully and prudently the saxons, for a time, after this they Diverse races
of Inglish Kings.
had kings of the saxon and Inglish blood, and after them of the Danes, and
then of the Normanes, and after them again of the French, and last of al, it
seems to have returned to the Britains again, in king Henry the 7. for that
his father came of that race, and now you know there be pretendors of diverse
nations, I mean both of Scottish, Spanish, and Italian blood, so that England
is like to participate with all their neybours round about them, and I for my
part do feel my self much of the French opinion before alleged, that so the
ship be well and happily guyded, I esteem it not much important of what race or
nation the pilote be, but now to our purpose.

I mean to pass over the first and ancient rancks of kings, as well of the
British and Roman, as also of the Saxon races, until king Egbert the Thename of
Ingland and Inglish.
first of this name, king of the west Saxons, and almost of all the rest of
Ingland bisides, who therefore is said to be properly the first monarch of the
Saxon blood, and he that first of al, commanded that realm to be called
Ingland, which ever since has bin observed.

This man Egbert being a young gentleman King Egbert the first monarch of
England.
of a noble house in the west parts of Ingland, was had in ielosie by his king
Britricus (who was the 16. King from Cerdicius, first king of the west
Saxons, as he was also the last of his blood. And for that he suspected, that
this Egbert, for his great prowess, might come in time to be chosen king, he
banished him into France, vvher he lived diverse years, and was a captain
under the famous king Pepin that was father to Charles the great, and hearing
afterward that king Britricus was dead, he returned into Ingland vvher
Polidor says, omnium consensu Polidor hist. aug. li. 4. in fine.
rex creatur: that he was created or chosen king, by consent and voice of al
men, though yet he were not next by propinquity of blood royal, as is most
evident, and yet he proved the most excellent king that ever the saxons had
before or perhapps after, and his election happened in the year of Christ 8.
hundredth and two, when King Pepin the first of An. soz.
that race, reigned (as has bin said) in france, so as this monarchy of Egbert
and that of Pepin (whereof we have alleged so many examples King Pepin of
France.
in the former chapter, began as it were together, and both of them (I mean
both Pepin and Egbert) came to their crowns by election of the people as here
you see.

This king Egbert or Egbrich as others do write him, left a lawful son behind
him named king Adel wolf. An. 829.
Elthel wolf or Adeluulfe, or Edolph, (for all is one) who succeeded him in the
kingdom, and was as worthy a man as his father, and this Adeluulfe again, had
four lawful sons, who al in their turns succeeded by just and lawful order
in the crown, to wit Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred, for that none
of the former three had any children, and all the later three were most
excellent princes, especially Alfred or Alured, the last of al four, whose
acts are wonderful, and who among other his reuoumed King Alfred. 872.
gestes, drove Rollo that famous captain of the danes from the borders of
Ingland, with all his company into France, where he gat the country or province
named then Neustria, and now Normandy, and was the first Duke of that
province and nation, and from whom our William Conqueror came afterward in the
sixth descent. This man erected also the university of Oxford, being very
learned himself, builded diverse goodly monasteries and churches, and dying
left as famous a son behind him, as King Edward elder. An. 900.
himself, which was Edward the first surnamed the senior or elder.

This king Edward dying left two sons, lawfully begotten of his wife, Edgina,
the one named Prince Edmund, and the other Eldred, and a third illegitimate
whose name was Adelstan, whom he had by a concubine. But yet for that this man
was esteemed to be of more valor then the other, he was preferred to the
crown, King Aleston the Bastard (...). An. 924.
before the two other Princes legittimate, for so restifieth Polidor in these
words, Adelstanus ex concubina Edwardi films, rex a populo consalutatur atque
ad king stonum opidum more maiorum ab Athelmo Polid. 1. 5. hist. Angl.
Cautuariensi Archiepiscopo coronatur, which is, Adelstan the son of king
Edward by a concubine, was made king by the people, and was crowned according
to the old custom, by Athelme Archbishop of Caterbury at the town of
kingston. Thus far polidor, and Stow adds further these words: His coronation
was celebrated in the market place, upon a stage, erected on high Stow page
130. An. 924.
that the king might better be seen of the multitude, he was a Prince of
worthy memory, valiant and wife, in all his acts. and brought this land into
one perfect monarchy, for he expelled utterly the danes, and quieted the
welchme. Thus much Stow, of the success of choosing this king bastard to
reign. To whose acts might be added that he conquered Scotland and brought
Constantine their king to do him homage, and restored Luys d'Outremer, his
sisters son to the kingdom of France, as before has bin signified.

This man dying without issue, his lawful brother Edmond, put back before, was
admitted King Edmond. r. An. 940.
to the crown, who being of excellent expectation, died after 6. years, and
left two lawful sons, but yet for that they were young, they The uncle
preferred before the nephevvs 946. Polid. 1. 6.
were both put back by the realm, and their uncle Eldred was preferred before
them, so faith Polidor, Genuit Edmondus ex Egilda vxore Fduinum and Edgarum,
qui cum etate pueri essent, post Eldredum deinde regnarunt. King Edmond begat
of his wife Egilda two sons named Edwin and Edgar, who for that they were but
children in years, were put back, and reigned afterward after there uncle
Eldred. The like says Stow and yealdeth the same reason in these words. Eldred
succeeded Edmond his brother for that his sons Edwin, Stow in his chronicles.
and Edgar, were thought to young to take so great a charge upon them.

This Eldred though he entered as you see against the right of the nephews, yet
says Polidor and Stow, that he had al men's good will, and was crowned as his
brother had bin, at kingston, by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, and reigned 9.
years with great good will and praise of al men. He dyed at last without issue,
and so his elder nephew Edwin was admitted to the crown, but yet after four
years he was deposed again, for his leude and vicious life, and his younger
brother Edgar admitted in his place in the year of Christ 959.

This king Edgar that entered by deposition of his brother, was one of the
rarest princes, that Edgar a famous king.
the world had in his time, both for peace and war, justice, pietye, and
valor. Stow says he kept a navy of three thousand and 6. hundredth ships,
distributed in diverse parts for defense of the realm. Also that he buylt and
restored 47. monasteries at his own charges, and did other many such acts: he
was father to king Edward the martyr, and grand father to king Edward the
confessor, though by two different wives, for by his first wife named Egilfred
he had Edward after martirized, and by his second King Edward Martirized.
wife Alfred he had Etheldred father to Edward the confessor, and to the end
that Etheldred might reign, his mother Alfred caused King Edward the sonue of
Egilfred to be stayne after king Edgar her husband was dead.

After this so shameful murder of king K. Etheldred 978.
Edward, many good men of the realm, were of opinion, not to admit the
succession of Etheldred his half brother, both in respect of the murder, of
king Edward his elder brother, committed for his sake, as also for that he
seemed a man not fir to govern, and of this opinion among others, was the holy
man Dunston archbishop of Canterbury, as Polidor says, who Polid. 1. 7. hist.
Ang.
at length in flat words denied to consecrate him, but seeing the most part of
the realm, bent on Etheldreds side, he foretold them, that it would repent
them after, and that in this ma^s life the realm should be destroyed as in
deed it was, and he rann away to Normandy, and left Sweno and his danes in
possession of the realm, though afterward Sweno being dead, he returned again
and dyed in London.

This Etheldred had two wives, the first Ethelgina an Inglish woman, by whom he
had prince Edmund surnamed Ironside, for his great K. Edme^d (...).
strength and valor, who suceeded his father in the crown of Ingland, for a
year, and at his death left two sons which after shall be named, and besides
this, Etheldred had by his first wife other two sons Edwin and Adelston, and
one daughter named Edgina, al which were either slain by the danes, or dyed
without issue.

The second wife of Etheldred was called Emma, sister to Richard Duke of
Normandy, who Quere Emma mother to King Edward the (...).
was grand father to William the conqueror, to wit, father to Duke Robert,
that was father to William, so as Emma was great aunt to this William, and
she bare unto king Etheldred two sons, the first Edward, who was afterward
named king Edward the Confessor, and Alerud who was slain traitorously by the
Earl of kent, as presently we shall show.

After the death also of king Etheldred, Queen Fmma was married to the Dane
king Canutus the first of that name, surnamed the great, that was king of
Ingland after Etheldred, and Edmond Ironside his son, and to him she bare a
son named Hardicanutus, who reigned also in Ingland, before king Edward the
Confessor.

New then to come to our purpose, he that will consider the passing of the
crown of Ingland, Many breches of lineal succestio^.
from the death of Edmonde Ironside, elder son of king Eltheldred, until the
possession thereof gotten by William Duke of Normandy, to wit for the space of
50. years, shall easily see what authority the common wealth has in such
affairs, to alter titles of succession, according as public necessity or
vtility shall require, for thus briefly the matter passed.

King Eltheldred seeing himself to vveake for Sweno the king of Danes, that
was entered the land, fled with his wife Emma and her two children Edward and
Alerud, unto her brother Duke Richard of Normandy, and there remained until the
death of Sweno, and he being dead, Etheldred returned into Ingland, made a
certain agreement and division of the realm, between him and Canutus the
son of Sweno, and so dyed, leaving his eldest son Edmond Ironside, to
succed him, who soon after dying also, left the whole realm to the said
Canutus, and that by plain covenant as Canutus pretended, that the longest
liver should have al: wheruppon the said Canutus took the two children of
king Edmond Ironside named Edmond and Edward, and sent them over into Sweuela^d
(which at that time was subject also Sons of King Edmond Ironside.
unto him) and caused them to be brought up honorably, of which two, the elder
named Edmond dyed without issue, but Edward was married and had diverse children
as after shall be touched.

Etheldred and his son Edmond being King Canutus the first (...).
dead, Canutus the Dane was admitted for king of England by the whole
parliament and consent (...) side, as has bin said, and this the third breach
of lineal descent.

But this notwithstanding, Alerud being slain, King Edward the confessor made
K. against right of succession.
prince Edward was made king, tanta publica laetitia (says Polidor) vt
certatim pro eius faelici principatu, cuncti vota facercnt. That is, he was
made king with such universal joy and contentment of al men, as every man
contended, who should pray and make most vows to God for his happy reygne,
and according to this was the success, for he was a most excellent prince,
and almost miraculously he reigned with great peace and void of al war at home
and a broad, for the space of almost 20. years after so infinite broils as had
bin before him, and insued after him, and yet his title by succession can not
be justified, as you see, for that his eldest brothers son was the alive, to
wit prince Edward surnamed the outlaw, who in this kings reygne came into
Ingland and brought his wife and Prince Edward the out law and his children
put back.
three lawful children with him, to wit Edgar, Margaret, and Christian, but yet
was not this good king Edward so scrupulous, as to give over his kingdom to
any of them, or to doubt of the right of his own title, which he had by
election of the common wealth, against the order of succession.

This king Edward being dead without issue, Polidor says that the states made
a great consultation, whom they should make king, and first of al it seems
they excluded him, that was only next by propinquity in blood, which was
Edgar Adelin, fonne to the said prince Edward the outlaw now departed, and
nephew to king Edmond Ironside, and the reason of this exclusion is alleged by
Polidor in these words, is puet id aetatis nondum regno gubernando maturus
Polyd l 8.
erat: That is, he bing a child of so small years, was not ripe enough to
govern the kingdom, Harald second K. by election. 1066.
and then he says that Harald. son of Earl Goodwin, by the daughter of
Canutus, the first, proclaimed himself king, and more over he adds, Non
displicait omnino id factum populo, qui plurimum spei in Haraldi virtute
habebat, itaque Polid. vbi sup.
more maiorum sacratus est, which is, this fact of Harald displeased not at all the people of Ingland, for that they had great hope in the virtue of this
Harald, and so was he anointed and crowned according to the fassion of the
ancient kings of Ingland, by which words we may fee, that Harald had also
the approbation of the realm to be king, notwith standing that little Edgar
was present as has bin said, so as this was the fourth breach of succession
at this time.

But in the mean space, William Duke of William Duke of Normandy King of
Ingland An. 1066. by election.
Normandy pretended that he was chosen before by king Edward the Confessor,
and that the realm had given their consent thereunto, and that king Edward left
the same testified in his last will and testament, and albert none of our
Inglish authors do auow the same clearly, yet do many other forrayne writers
hold it, and it seems very probable that some such thing had past, both for
that duke William had many in Ingland that did favor his pretense at his
entrance, as also as Girard in his French story says, that at his first
coming to London, he punished diverse by name, for that they had broken their
oaths and promises in that behalf: And moreover it appears that by alleging
Girard. li. 6. an. 1065
this title of election, he moved diverse princes abroad to favor him in that
action, as in a just quarrel, which is not like they should have done, if he
had pretended only a conquest, or his title of consanguinity, which could be
of no importance in the world, for that effect, seeing it was no other but that
his grand father and king Edwards mother, were brother and sister, which could
give him no pretense at al to the succession of the crown, by blood, and yet
we see that diverse princes did assist him, and among others the French
chronicler Girard, so often named before, vvriteth that Alexander the second
pope of Rome, Chron. Cassin. l. 3. cap. 34.
(vvhos holiness was so much esteemed in those days as one Constantinus Afer,
wrote a book of his miracles) being informed by Duke William of the iustnes of
his pretense, did send him his benediction and a precious ring of gold, with a
hallowed banner, by which he got the victory, thus writes Girard, in his
French chronicles, and Antoninus Archbishop of Florence surnamed Saint,
vvriting of this matter in his Antoninus part. z. chron. tit 16. cap. 5. 9. 1.
chronicles speaks great good of William Co^queror, and commends his
enterprise. But howsoever this was the victory we se he gat, and God prospered
his pretense, and has confirmed his of spring in the crown of Ingland more
then 500. years together, so as now accounting from the death of king Edmond
Ironside, unto this man, we shall find (as before I have said) in less then
50. years, that 5. or 6. kings were made in Ingland one after another, by
only authority and approbation of the common wealth, contrary to the ordinary
course of lineal succession by propinquitie of blood.

And all this is before the conquest, but if we should pass any further down,
we should find more examples then before. For first the Examples after the
conquest.
two sons of the Conqueror himself, that succeeded after him, to wit william
Rufus and Henry the first, were they not both younger brothers to Robert Duke of
Normandy, to whom the most part of the realm was inclined (as Polydor says)
to have given the kingdom presently after the Conquerors death, as dew Polyd.
in vita Gul. Conq.
to him by succession, notwithstanding that William for particular displeasure
against his elder son, had ordained the contrary in his testament. But that
Robert being absent in the war of Jerusalem, the holy and learned man Lanfranke
(as he was accounted then). Archbishop of Canterbury being deceived with
vain hope of William Rufus good nature, William Rufus King An. 1087.
persuaded them the contrary, who was at that day of high estemation, and
authority in Ingland, and so might induce the realm to do what he liked.

By like means gat Henry his younger brother Henry 1. An. 1100
the same crown afterward, to wit by fair promises to the people, and by
help principally of Henry Newborow Earl of warwick, that dealt with the
nobility for him, and Maurice bishop of London with the clergy, for that
Anselme Archbishop of Cantetbury was in banishment. Besides this also it did
greatly healpe his cause, that his elder brother Robert, (to whom the crown
by right apperteyned) was absent again this second time in the war of
Jerusalem, and so lost thereby his kingdom, as before: Henry having no other
title in the world unto it, but by election and admission of the people, which
yet he so defended afterward against his said brother Robert, that came to
claim it by the sword, and god did so prosper him ther-in, as he took his
said elder brother prisoner, and so kept him for many years, until he dyed in
prison most pitifully.

But this king Henry dying, left a daughter Mathild. the empress.
behind him named Mawde or Mathilde, which being married first to the Emperor
Henry the fifth, he dyed without issue, and then was she married again the
second time to Geffry Plantagenet Earl of Anjow in France, to whom she bare a
son named Henry, which this king Henry his grand father, caused to be
declared for heir apparent to the crown in his days, but yet after his
disceasse, for that Stephen Earl of Bollogne, borne of Adela daughter to
William King Stephen entered against successie^ 1135.
the Conqueror, was thought by the state of Ingland to be more fit to govern,
and to defend the land (for that he was at man's age) then was prince Henry a
child, or Maude his mother, he was admitted, and Henry put back, and this
chiefly at the persuasion of Henry bishop of winchester, brother to the said
Stephen, as also by the solicitation of the Abbot of Glastenbury and others,
who thought be like they might do the same, with good conscience for the good
of the realm, though the event proved not so well, for that it drew al Ingland
into factions and divisions, for avoiding and ending whereof, the states some
years after, in a parliament at Wallingford made an agreement, An act of
parlame^t about successie^ 1153.
that Stephen should be lavvful king, during his life only, and that Henry and
his offspring should succeed him, and that prince William king Stephens son
should be dcpriued of his succession to the crown, and made only Earl of
Norfolcke, thus did the state dispose of the crown at that time, which was
in the year of Christ 1153.

To this Henry succeeded by order his eldest son then living, named Richard,
and surnamed King Richard and king John 1190.
Cordelyon, for his Valor, but after him again, the succession was broken.
For that John king Henry's youngest son, to wit yo^ger brother to Richard,
whom his father the king had left so unprovided as in jest he was called by
the french Iean sens terre, as if you would say Sir John lacke-land: this man
I say, was after the death of his brother, admitted and crowned by the states
of Ingland, and Arthur Duke of Britain, son and heir to Geffery (that was
elder brother to John) was against the ordinary course of succession
excluded. And albeit this Arthur did seek to remedy the Prince Ar tur put back.
matter, by war, yet it seemed that god did more defend this election of the
common wealth, then the right title of Arthur by succession, for that Arthur
was overcome, and taken by king John, though he had the king of France on
his side, and he dyed pitifully in prison, or rather as most authors do hold,
he was put to death by king John his uncles own hands in the castle of Roan,
thereby to make his title of succession more clear, which yet could not be, for
that as well Stow in his Chronicle, as also Matthew of westminster and others
before him, do write, that Geffrey besides this son, left two daughters also
by the lady Co^stance his wife, Countess and heir of Britain, Two sisters
of prince Artur Duke of Britain.
which by the law of Ingland should have succeeded before John, but of this,
small account seemed to be made at that day.

Some years after, when the Barons and states of Ingland misliked utterly the
government K. John and his son rejected 1216.
and proceeding of this king John, they rejected him again, and chose Luys the
prince of France to be there king, and did swear fealty to him in London, as
before has bin said, and they deprived also the young prince Henry his son,
that was at that time, but of 8. years old, but upon the death of his father
king John, that shortly after insued, they recalled again that sentence, and
admitted this Henry to the crown by the name of king Henry the third, and
disanulled the oath and allegiance made unto Luys Prince of France, and so king
Henry reigned for the space of 53. years afterward, the lo^gest reygne (as I
think that any before or after him has had in Ingland.

Moreover you know that from this king The titles of york and La^caster.
Henry the third, do take their first beginning the two branches of York and
La^caster which after fell to so great contention about the crown: Into which
if we would enter, we should see plainly as before has bin noted, that the
best of al their titles after the depositio^ of king Richard the second,
depended of this authority of the common wealth, for that as the people were
affected and the greater part prevailed, so were their titles either allowed
confirmed altered or disa nulled by parlaments, and yet may not we well affirm,
but that either part when they were in possession and confirmed therein by these
parlaments, were lawful kings, and that God concurred with them as with true
princes for gouerme^t of their people, for if we should deny this point, as
before has bin noted, great inconveniences would follow, and we should shake
the states of most princes in the world at this day, as by examples which
already I have alleged in part may appear.

And with this also I mean to conclude and end this discourse in like manner,
affirming that as on the one side propinquity of blood is The con clusion of
this-chapter.
a great pre-eminence toward the atteyning of any crown, so yet does is not
ever bind the common wealth to yeald thereunto, if waightier reasons should
urge them to the contrary, nether is the common wealth bound always to shutt
her eyes, and to admit at hap-hazard, or of necessity every one that is next by
succession of blood, as Belloy falsely and fondly affirms, but rather she is
bound to consider well and maturely the person that is to enter, whether he be
like to perform his duty and charge committed unto him or no, for that
otherwise to admit him, that is an enimye or unfit, is but to destroy the
common wealth, and him together. This is my opinion, and this seems to me to
be conform to al reason, law, religion, piety, vvisdome, and policy, and to
the use and custom of al well governed common wealths in the world, nether
do I mean hereby to prejudice any princes pretense or succession to any
crown or dignity in the world, but rather do hold that he ought to enjoy his
pre-eminence, but yet so, that he be not preiudical thereby to the whole body,
which is ever to be respected more then any one person, whatsoever Belloy or
other of his opinion do say to the contrary.

Thus said the Ciuilian, and being called upon and drawn to a new matter by
the question that ensues, he made his last discourse and conclusion of the
whole matter, in manner following.

WHAT ARE THE PRINCIPAL POINTS WHICH A COMMONWEALTH OUGHT to respect in
admitting or excluding of any prince, that pretends to succeed: wherein is
handlid largely also of the diversity of religions and other such causes.
CAP. IX.
AFTER the Ciuilian had alleged al these examples of succession altered or
rejected by public authority of common wealths, and of the allowance and
approbation and good success which for the most part god seems to have given
unto the same, one of the company brake forth and said, that this point
appeared so evident unto him, as no doubt in the world could be made thereof, I
mean, whether this thing in it self be lawful or no, to alter sometimes the
course of succession, seeing that al common wealths of Christendom, had done
it Causes of excluding Princes.
so often, Only he said, that it remained somewhat doubful unto him, whether
the causes alleged in these mutations, and chainges before mentioned, were
always sufficient or no, for that sometimes they seemed to him but weak and
slender, as when (for example) the uncle was preferred before the nephews, for
that he was a man and the other children, which cause and reason has
oftentimes been alleged in the former examples, both of Spain, France, and
Ingland, as also when the younger or bastard brother is admitted, and the elder
and legitimate excluded, for that the one is a warrier, and the other not, and
other such like causes are yealded (said he) in the exclusions before
rehearsed, which yet seem not some-tymes vvaighty enough for so great an
affair.

To this answered the Ciuilian, that according to their law, both civil and
canon (which thing also he affirmed to be founded in great reason) it is a
matter most certain, that he who is judge and has to give the sentence in
the thing, it self, is also to judge of the cause, for thereof is he called
judge, and if he have authority in the one, good reason he should also have
power to discern the other, so as, if we VVhe must judge of the lavvful
causes of exclusio^s.
grant according to the form and proofs, that the realm or common wealth
has power to admit or put back the prince or pretender to the crown, then
must we also confess that the same common wealth, has authority to judge of
the lawfulnes of the causes, and considering further that it is in there own
affair, and in a matter that has his whole beginning, continuance and
substance from them alone, I mean from the common wealth, for that no man is
king or prince by institution of nature, as before has bin declared, but every
king and kings son, has his dignity and prehemine^ce above other men, by
authority only of the common wealth: who can affirm the contrary said the
Ciuilian? but that god does allow for a just and sufficient cause in this
behalf, the only vvil and judgment of the weal public it self, supposing
always (as in reason we may) that a whole realm will never agree by orderly
way of judgment (for of this only I mean and not of any particular faction of
private men against there heir appate^t) to exclude or put back the next heir
in blood and succession without a reasonable cause, in their sight and censure.
And seeing that they only are to be judges of this case, (as now I have said)
we are to presume that what they determyne, is just and lawful for the time,
and if at one time they should determine one thing, and the contrary at an
other, (as they did often in Ingland during the contention between York and
Lancaster and in other like occasions) what can a private man judge otherwise,
but that they had different reasons and motions to lead them at different
times, and they being properly lords and owners of the whole business,
committed unto them, it is enough for every particular man to subject himself
to that which his common wealth does in this behalf, and to obey simply
without any further inquisition, except he should see that open injustice were
done therein or God manifestly offended, and the fealme endangered.

Open injustice I call (said he) when not the Open injustice to be resisted.
true common wealth, but some faction of wicked me^ should offer to determine
this matter, without lawful authority of the realm committed to them, and I
call manifest offense of God, and danger of the realm, when such a man is
preferred to the crown, as is evident that he will do what lies in him to the
prejudice of them both, I mean both of Gods glory and the public wealth, as
for example, if a Turk or Moore (as before I have said) or some other
notorious wicked man, or tyrant, should be offered by succession or otherwise
to govern among Christians, in which cases every man (no doubt) is bound to
resist what he can, for that the very end and intent for which al gouerme^t
was first ordained, is herein manifestly impugned.

Thus the Ciuilian discoursed, and the whole company seemed to like very well
thereof, for that they said his opinion appeared both prudent and pious, and by
this occasion it came also What are the cheete points to be regarded in a
princes ad mission.
presently in question, what were the true causes and principal points, which
ought to be chiefly regarded, as well by the common wealth as by every
particular man, in this great action of furthering or hindering any Prince
toward a crown. And they said unto the Ciuilian, that if he would discuss
in like manner this point unto them, it would be a very apt and good
conclusion to al his former speech and discourses, which having bin of the
authority that weal publiques have over princes titles, this other of the
causes and considerations that ought to lead them for use and exercise of the
same authority, would fall very fit and necessary for the up short of al.

Heerunto the Ciuilian answered, that he well saw the fitnes and importance of
the matter, and therefore that he was content to speak a word or two more
thereof, notwithstanding that much had bin said already therein, to wit, in all
those points which had bin disputed about the end of government, and why it
was appointed, which end (said he) seeing it is (as largely has bin proved
before) to defend, preserve, and benifite the common wealth, here hence, that
is, Whence the reasons of admitting or re iecting a prince are to be taken.
from this consideration, of the weal public, are to be deduced al other
considerations of most importance, for discerning a good or enel prince. For
that whosoever is most likely to defend, preserve, and benifite most his realm
and subjects, he is most to be allowed and desired, as most conform to the end
for which government was ordained.

And on the contrary side, he that is least like to do this, deserves least to
be preferred, and here (quoth he) you see does enter also that consideration
mentioned by you before, which diverse common wealths had in putting back
oftentimes children and impote^t people (though otherwise next in blood) from
succession, and pteferring more able men though further of by descent, for that
they were more like to defend well there realm and subjects then the others
were.

But to proceed (said he) more distinctly and more perspicuously in this
matter, I would have you call to mind one point among others which I alleged
before, out of Girard the french author, to wit, that the king of france in his
coronation Girard li. 3. de l'Estar page 242.
is new apparaled three times in one day, once as a priest, and then as a
judge, and last as a king armed. Thereby to signify three things committed to
his charge, first religion, then Three principal points to be considered.
justice, then manhood and chiualry, for the defense of the realm.

This division seems to me very good and fit (quoth he) and to comprehend all that a wealpublique has need of, for her happy state and felicity, both in
soul and body, and for her end, both supernatural and natural. For by the
first which is religion, her subjects do attain unto their end spiritual and
supernatural, which is the salvation of their souls, and by the second and
third, which are justice and defense, they enjoy their felicity temporal, which
is to live in peace among them selves, and safety from their enimyes, for which
cause it seems that these are the three points which most are to be regarded
in every Prince, that comes to government, and much more in him that is not
yet admitted thereunto, but offreth himself to the common wealth for the same
purpose.

And for that the later two of these three points Why he resolves to treat of
religion principally.
which are justice and manhood, has bin often had in consideration, in the
examples of changes before mentioned, and the first point which is religion,
has rarely or never at al been talked of, for that in former times the prince
and the people were alwaves of one and the same religion, and scarce ever any
question or doubt fell in that behalf (which yet in our days is the principal
difference and chiefest difficulty of al other) for these causes (I say) shall I
accommodate my self to the circumstance of the time, wherein we live, and to
the present case which is in question betwixt us about the succession of
Ingland, and leaving a side those other two considerations of justice and
chiualry in a king, which are far less important, then the other (though yet
so highly regarded by ancient common wealths as you have hard) I shall treat
principally of religion, in this place, as of the first and highest, and most
necessary point of al other, to be considered in the admission of any prince,
for the profit of his subjects: for that without this, he destroys al, and
with this, albeit he should have defects in the other two points of justice
and manhood, yet may it be helped, or his defect or negligence may be supplied
much by others, as after I shall show more in particular, but if he want fear
of God, or care of religion, or be peruersly persuaded therein, the damage of
the weal public is inestimable. First of al then, for better understanding
of this point, we are to suppose, The cheef end of a common wealth
supernatural.
that the first cheifest, and highest end that God and nature appointed to
every common wealth, was not so much the temporal felicity of the body, as the
supernatural and everlasting of the soul, and this was not only revealed to
the Jews by holy scripture, but also unto the gentiles and heathens by the
instinct and light of nature it self. For by this light of natural reason, the
learned sort of them came to understand the immortality of the soul, and that
her felicity perfection and full contentme^t, which they called her final end
and summum bonum, could not be in this life, nor in any thing created under
heaven, but must needs be in the life to come, and that by atteyning to enjoy
some infinite endless and immortal object, which could fully satisfy the
appetite of our soul, and this could be no other then God, the maker of al
himself. And that consequently al other things of this transitory life, and of
this humane common wealth, subject to man's eyes, are ordained to serve and be
subordinate and directed to the other higher end, and that al man's actions in
this world, are first of al, and in the highest degree, to be employed to the
recognizing, serving, and honoring of this great Lord that governs the whole,
as author and end of al. Philosophers and law makers what end they had of
there doings.


To this light I say, came the heathens even by the instinct and direction of
nature, whereof insued that there was never yet pagan Philosopher that wrote of
framing a good common wealth as Socrates, Plato, Plutarch, Cicero, and others,
nether lawmaker among them that left ordinances for the same purpose, as
Deucalion, Minos, Zaleucus, Licurgus, Solo^, Ion, Numa, or the like, which
besides the temporal end of directing things well for the body, had not
especial care also, of matters apperteyning to the mind, to wit, of
nourishing, honoring, and revvarding of virtue, and for restrayning and
punishing of vice, and wickedness, vvherby is evident that their end and butt
was to make their cytizens good and virtuous, which was a higher end, then to
have a bare consideration of temporal and bodily benifits only, as many
governors of our days (though Christians in name) seem to have, who pretend
no higher end in there government then bodily wealth, and a certain temporal
king of peace and justice among there subjects, which diverse beasts also do
reach unto, in there congregations and common The com mon wealth of beasts.
wealths, as is to be seem among emetts and bees, cranes, lions, and other
such creatures, that by instinct of nature are sociable, and do live in
company, and consequently also do maynteyne so mnch order and policy in there
common wealth, as is needful for their preservation and continuance.

But nature taught man a far higher The natu ral end of man's common wealth.
and more excellent end in his common wealth, which was not only to provide
for those bodily benefits that are common also to creatures without reason, but
much more for those of the mind, and above al for the serving of that high and
supreme God, that is the beginning and end of all the rest. For whose service
also they learned by the same instinct and instirutio^ of nature, that the
chiefest and supremest honor that could be done unto him in this life by man,
was the honor of sacrifice and oblations, which we see was begun and
practiced even Sacrifices and oblations by nature.
in those first beginnings of the law of nature, before the leuitical law, and
the particular forms of this same law, were prescribed by Moses. For so we
read in Genesis of Noe, that he made an alter and offered sacrifices to God
upon the same, of all the beasts and birds that he had in the arc,
odoratusque est Dominus odorem Gen 8.
suauitatis, and God received the smell, of these sacrifices, as a sweet smell.
Which is to say, that God was highly pleased therewith, and the like we read
of Job that was a gentile, and lived before Moses, Sanctificabat filios
consurgensque diluculo offerebat holocausta per dies singulos. Job. 1.
He did sanctify his children, and rising early in the morning did offer for
them holocastes or burnt sacrifices every day.

This men used in those days, and this they were taught by law of nature, I
mean both to honor God above al things, and to honor him by this particular
way of sacrifices, which is proved also evidently by that which at this day is
found and seen in the Indians, vvher never any notice of Moses law came, and
yet no nation has ever bin found among them, that acknowlegeth not some kind
of God, and offers not some kind of sacrifise unto him.

And albeit in the particular means of honoring this God, as also in
distinguishing between false Gods and the true God, these people of the Indias
have fallen into most gross and infinite errors, as also the gentiles of
Europe, Asia, and Africa did, by the craft and subtilty of the devil, which
abusing their ignorance, did thrust him self into the place of God, and
derived and drew those sacrifises and supreme honors unto himself, which
were dew to God alone, yet is it evident heerby (and this is sufficient for
our purpose) that by God and nature, the highest and chiefest end of every
common wealth, is The chife end of a common wealth and magestrates is
religion.
Cultus Dei, the service of God, and religion, and consequently that the
principal care and charge of a prince and magestrate even by nature it self,
is, to look thereunto, whereof al antiquity both among Jews and Gentiles, were
wont to have so great regard, as for many years and ages their kings and
chief magestrates were also priests: and diverse learned men do hold, that the
privilege and pre-eminence of primogenitura or the first borne children,
Genebrard. l 1. Chronolde 1 aetate Genes. 25. and 20. Deuteronomy. 21. 2. Paral. (...)
so much esteemed in the law of nature (as before we have seen) co^sisted
principally in this, that the eldest sons were priests and had the charge
and dignity of this greatest action of al other upon earth, which our
temporal Magistrates so little regard now.

And this respect and reverence toward religion Regard of religion among
gentiles.
was so greatly planted in the breasts of al nations by nature herself, as
Cicero pronounsed, this general sentence in his time. Nulla est gens tam fera,
nulla tam immanis, cuius Cicero li. 1. quest. tusc. and de natura deorum lib. 1.
mentem non imbuerit deorum colendorum religio. There is no nation so fearce or
barbarous, whose minds are not endued with some religion of worshipping Gods.

And Plutarch writing against a certain Atheist Plutarch aduersus Colotem.
of his time says thus: If you travail far countries, you may chance (...)
find some cities, without lerning, without kings, without riches, without
money, but a city without temples, and without Gods and sacrifises, no man yet
has ever seen. And finally Aristotle in his politiques having numbered diverse
things, necessary to a common wealth, adds Aristo. l 7 politi. c. 8.
these words. Quintum and primum. Circa rem diuinam cultus, quod sacerdotium
sacrificiumque vocant. In the fifth place (which in deed onght to be the first
of al other) is necessary to a common wealth, the honor and service dew unto
God, which men commonly do comprehend by the words of preest-hode and
sacrifice.

All this I have alleged to confute even by the principles of nature herself,
the absurd The absurd Athisemo of our time in politiques.
opinions of diverse atheistes of our time, that will seem to be gteat
politiques, who affirm that religion ought not to be so greatly respected in a
prince, or by a prince, as though it were his chiefest care or the matter of
most importance in his government, which you see how false and impious it is,
even among the gentiles themselves, but much more among christians, who have so
much the greater obligation to take to heart this matter of religion, by how
much greater light and knowledge they have of God, and therefore we see that in all the princes oaths which before you have hard recited to be made and taken by
them at their admission and coronation, the first and principal point of al
other, is about religion and maintenance thereof, See before the oaths made by
princes at their coronations in the 4. chapter.
and according to this oath also of supreme princes, not only to defend and
maynteyne religion by themselves in all there states, but also by their
lieftenaunts and under governors, we have in our civil law a very solemn
form of an oath which Justinian the Emperor, above a thousand and 50. years
gone, was wont to give to al his governors of countries, cities and other
places, before they could be admitted to their charges, and for that it is very
effectual, and that you may see thereby what care there was of this matter at
that time: and what manner of solemn and religious protestations, as also
imprecations they did use therein, it shall not be amiss perhapps to repeat the
same in his own words which are these following.

The title in the Civil law is: iuramentum quod The oath to governors for
defense of religion.
Praestatur, ijs qui administrationes accipiunt, the oath which is given to
them that receive gouerments, and then the oath begins thus.

Iuro per Deum omnipotentem and filium eius vnigenita^ Collat, 2. Nouella
constit. Iuflin, (...). (...). (...).
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum and Spiritum sanctum, and per sanctam gloriosam
Dei genitricem and semper virginem Mariam, and per quatuor euangelia quae in
manibus meis teneo, and per sanctos archangelos Michaelem and Gabrielem, puram
conscientiam germanumque seruitium me seruaturum sacratissimis nostris Dominis
Justiniano and Theodosiae coniugi eius, occasion traditae mihi ab eoru^
pietate administrationis. Et quod co^municator sum sanctissima Dei Catholicae
and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, and nullo modo vel tempore aduersaborei, nec alium
quo^cunque permittam qua^tum possibilitate^ habeam, and si vero non haec omnia
seruauero, recipiam omnia incomoda hic and in futuro seculo in terribili
iuditio magni Domini Dei and saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi, and habebo paerte^
cum Judah and cu^ lepra Giezi, and cum tremore Cain, in super and paenis quae
lege eorum pietatis continentur ero subiectus. Which in Inglish is thus, Note
the form of this oath vvryten. An Dn^i 560.
I do swear by almighty God, and by his holy son our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by the holy ghost, and by the holy glorious mother of God, the perpetual virgin
Marie, and by the four holy ghospells which I do hold in my hand, and by the
holy archangels S. Michel and S. Gabriel, that I will keep a pure conscience,
and perform true service unto the sacred persons of our Lords and princes
Justinian and Theodosia his wife, in all occasions of this government, by their
benignity committed unto me. Moreover I do swear that I am communicant and
member of the most holy Catholic and Apostolic church of God, and that I
shall never at any time hereafter be contrary to the same, nor suffer any other
to be, as much as shallye in my possibility to let. And if I should break this
oath or not observe any point thereof, I am content to receive any punisment both
in this world as also in the world to comme, in that last and most terrible
judgment of our great Lord and saueour Jesus Christ, and to have my part with
Judas, as also with the leptosye of Giezi and with the fear and trembling of
damned Cain: and besides all this I shall be subject to al punishments that are
ordained in the laws of their Maiestyes, concerning this affair.

This oath did all the governors of christian countries take in old time, when
christian Emperors did flourish, and it has remained for a law and president
ever since to al posterity. And if we join this with the other oaths before
set down in the fifth chapter, which Emperors and kings did make themselves
(unto their ecclesiastical Prelates, at their first admissio^) about this
point: we should see nothing was so much respected in admission of a prince,
or Governor (nor ought to be) as religion, for that (as I have said before)
this is the chiefest, greatest, and highest end, of every common wealth,
intended both by God and nature, to assist their subjects to the atteyning of
their supernatural end, by honoring and serving God in this life, and by
living virtuously, for that otherwise God should draw no other srute or
commodity out of humane common wealths, then of an assembly of brutish
creatures, maynteyned only and governed for to eat drink and live in peace, as
before has bin declared.

But the end of man being far higher then this: it follows that what-soeuer
prince of How great a defect is want of religion in a Magestrate.
magestrate does not attend with care to assist and help his subjects to this
end, omitteth the first and principal part of his charge, and commits high
treason against his lord and master, in whose place he is, and consequently is
not fit for that charge and dignity, though he should perform the other two
parts, never so well, of temporal justice and valor in his person, which two
other points do apperteyne principally to the humane felicity and baser end
of man's weal public, and much more of a christian.

Heerof it insueth also that nothing in the Lack of religion the chefest cause
to exclud a pretendor.
world can so justly exclude an heir apparent from his succession, as want of
religion, nor any cause what so-euer justify and clear the conscience of the
common wealth, or of particular men, that in this case should resist his
entrance, as if they judge him faulty in this point, which is the head of all the rest, and for which all the rest do serve.

You do remember that before I compared an heir apparent unto a spouse,
betrothed only and not yet married, to the common Vide Digest. li. 23. fit 1
leg. 8 and 10.
wealth. Which espousal or betrothing, according to allaw both divine and
humane, may be broken and made void much easier and upon far lesser causes
then an actual perfect marying may, of which our savior himself said. Quos
Deus coniunxit homo non seperat, whom God has joined let to man separate,
Math. 14. Marc. 10.
and yet saint Paul to the Corinthians determines plainly, that if two
gentiles married together in there gentility, (which 1. Cor. 7.
none denies to be true marriage for so much as concerns the civil contract)
and afterward the one of the^ being made a christian the other vvil not live
with him or her, or if he do, yet not without blaspheming of God and tempting
him to sin: in this case (I say) the Apostle teaches, and out of him the
canon law sets it down for a decree, that this is sufficient to break and
dissolve utterly this heathen marriage, Lib. 4. decret. Greg. tit. 19. c. 7.
although co^summate between these two parties, and that the christian may mary
again, and this only for the want of religion in the other party, which being
so in actual marriage already made and co^summate, how much more may it serve to
undo a bare betrothing, which is the case of a (...) only to a crown, as
before has bin showed.

But you may say perhaps, that saint Whether (...) in religion be infidelity.
Paul speaks of an infidel or heathen, that denies Christ plainly, and
with whom the other party cannot live, without danger of sin and leesing
his faith, which is not the case of a christian Prince though he be somevvhat
different from me in religion, to which is answered, that supposing there is but
one only religion that can be true among christians, as both reason and
Athanasius his Creed, does plainly teatch us: and moreover seeing, that to me
there can be no other faith or religion auaylable for my salvation then only
that which I my self do beleene, for that my own Act 23. 1. Cor. 8. 2. Cor.
5. 3. Pet. 3.
conscience must testify for me, or against me: certain it is, that unto me
and my conscience he which in any point believes otherwise then I do, and
stands vvilfully in the same, is an infidel, for that he believes not that
which in my faith and conscience, is the only and sole truth, vvherby he must
be saved. And if our savior Christ himself in his gospel, does Math. 18.
vvil certain men to be held for heat hens, not so much for difference in
faith and religion, as for lack of humility and obedience to the church: how
much more may I hold him so, that in my opinion is an enimye to the truth, and
conse quently so long as I have this opinion of him, albeit his religion were
never so true, yet so long (I say) as I have this contrary persuasion of him, I
shall do against my conscience and sin damnably in the sight of God, to
prefer him to a charge where he may draw many other to his own error and
perdition, vvherin I do persuade my self that he remains. How he that does
against his own conscience sins.


This doctrine (which is common among all divines) is founded upon that
discourse of S. Paul to the Romans and Corinthians, against such christians as
being invited to the Romans 14. 1. Cor. 8. and 10.
banquetts and tables of gentiles and finding meats offered to Idols (which
themselves do judge to be unlawful to eat) did yet eat the same, both to the
scandal of other infirm men there present, as also against their own judgment
and conscience, which the Apostel says was a damnable sin, and this not for
that the thing in it self was euel or unlawful, as he (...) but for that they
did judge it so, and yet did the contrary. Qui discernit si manducauerit,
damnatus est, says the Apostle. He that discerns or makes a difference
between this meat and others, as judging this to be unlawful and and yet
eats the same, he is damned, that is to sav he sins damnably or mortally.
Whereof the same Apostle yealdeth presently this reason. Quiae non ex fide, for
that he eats not according to his faith or belief, bnt rather contrary, for
that he believing it to be euel and unlawful, does notwithstanding eat the
same, and here upon S. Paul infers this universal proposition, Omne autem
quod non est ex fide peccatum est, all that is not of faith or according to a
man's See upon this place of S. Paul. S. Chrisost. hom. 36. in (...) epistola^.
Orig. l. to Theodor. in hune locum.
own belief, is sin to him, for that it is against his own conscience,
judgment and belief, believing one thing, and doing an other, and seeing our
own conscience must be our witness at the last day, to condemn or deliver us,
as before I have said, he must needs sin grievously (or damnably as the
Apostle here says) who commits any thing against his own conscience,
though otherwise the thing were not only indifferent, but very good also in it
self, for that of the doers part there wants no malice or will to sin,
seeing he does that which he apprehends to be naught, though in it self it be
not.

And now to apply all this to our purpose for Ingland, and for the matter we
have in hand, I How da^grous to favor a pretender of a contrary religion.
affirm and hold, that for any man to give his help, consent or assistance
toward the making of a king, whom he judges or believes to be faulty in
religion, and consequently would advance either no religion, or the wrong, if
he were in authority, is a most grievous and damnable sin to him that does it,
of what side soever the truth be, or how good or bad so ever the party be, that
is preferred. For if S. Paul have pronounced so absolutely and plainly in the
place before alleged, that even in eating of a piece of meat, it is damnable
for a man to discern and yet to eat: what may we think will it be in so great
and important a matter, as the making of a king is, for a man to dissemble or
do against his own conscience, and judgment, that is to say, to discern and
judge that he is an infidel, or heritique, or wicked man, or A theist or
erronens in religion, and yet to further his advancement and government over
christians, where he shall be able to pervert infinite, and to pull down al honor
and service dew unto God, and whether he do this euel afterward or not yet
shall I be guyltie of all this, for that knowing and persuading my self, that he
is like, or in disposition to do it, yet for fear, flattery carelesnes,
kindred, emulation against others, vain pretense of title, lack of zeal to
gods cause, or for other the like passions or temporal respects, I do favor
further or sooth him in his prete^ces, or do not resist him, when it lies in
my power, by all which I do justly make my felfe guyltie of all the evils,
hurts, miseries and calamities both temporal and spiritual, which afterward by
his euel government do or may ensew, for that I knowing him to be such a one,
did notwithstanding assist his promotion.

And thus much now for matter of conscience, but if we consider reason of state
also, and Against wisdom and policy to prefer (...) prince of a contrary
religie^.
wordly policy, it can not be but great folly and oversight for a man of what
religion soever he be, to promote to a kingdom in which himself must live,
one of a contrary religion to himself; for let the bargains and agreements be
what they will, and fair promises and vain hopes never so great, yet seeing
the prince once made and settled, must needs proceed according to the
principles of his own religion, it follows also that he must come quickly to
break with the other party, though before he loved him never so well, (which
yet perhapps is very hard if not impossible for two of different religions to
love sincerly) but if it were so, yet so many ielosies, suspicions,
accusations, calumniations and other auersions must needs light upon the
party that is of different religion from the state and Prince, under whom he
lives, as not only he cannot be capable of such preferments, honors, charges,
gouerments, and the like which men may deserve and desyer in their common
wealths, but also he shall be in continual danger and subject to a thousand
molestations and injuries, which are incident to the condition and state of
him, that is not current whith the course of his prince and realm in matters
of religion, and so before he beware, he becomes to be accounted an enimye or
backward man, which to remedy he must either dissemble deeply, and against his
own conscience make show to favor and set forward that which in his heart he
does detest (which is the greatest calamity and misery of al other, though
yet many times not sufficient to deliver him from suspicion) or else to avoid
this everlasting perdition, he must break withal the temporal commodityes of
this life, and leave the benifits which his country and realm might yield him,
and this is the ordinary end of al such men, how soft and sweet soever the
beginnings be.

And therefore to conclude at length, all this tedious speech (vvherwith I fear
me I have The conclusion of the whole speech.
wearied you against my will) seeing there be so great inconveniences and dangers
both temporal and eternal, and in respect both of God and man, of body and
soul, as has bin declared, to advance a prince of contrary religion, to the
crown, and considering that in Ingland there is so great diversity of
religions, as the world knows, between these parties and factions, that have
to pretend or admit the next prince after her Majesty that now is: calling
to mind also the great liberty, scope, and authority which the common wealth
has in admitting or rejecting the pretenders upon dew considerations be there
right of succession never so plain or clear, as before has bin showed: and
laying finally before our eyes the manifold and different acts, of christiam
realms, before mentioned in this affair, al these things (I say) being laid
together, you may see whether I had reason at the beginning, to think and
affirm, that it was a doubtful case who should be our next prince after the
Queens Majesty that now sits at the stern, and if beyond and above all this that I have said, our friend the common lawyer here present, shall prove
also (as at the first entrance he promised) that among such as do or may
pretend of the blood royal at this day, their true succession and next
propinquity by birth is also incertayne and disputable, then is the matter made
ther-by much more ambigious, and God only knowhwho shall prevail, and to him
only is the matter to be commended, as far, as I see, and with this I make an
end, thanking you most harrely for your patience, and craving pardon for that
I have bin over long, or for any other fault that in this speech I have
committed.

FINIS.
THE PREFACE OF THE SECOND PART.
THE Ciuilian had no sooner ended his discourse, but all the company being most
desirous to here what the temporal lawyer had prepared to say, about the
several titles of the present pretendors to the crown of Ingland, began with
one accord to request him earnestly for the performance of his promised speech
in that behalf, who showing himself nether unwilling nor unready for the
same, told them, that he was content to yeald to their desyers, but yet with
one condition, which was, that he would take in hand this matter with the same
asseueration and protestation, with the Ciuilian in some occasions had used
before him, and it liked A protestation of the lawyer.
him well, to wit, that having to speak in this discourse of many princes,
peers, and nobles of the royal blood of Ingland (to al which by law of nature
equity and reason he said that he bare reverent honor and respect) and to
discuss their several pretentions rightes, interestes and titles to the
crown, he said, that his meaning was, to offend, hunt, or prejudice none: nor
to determyne any thing (...) in (...) or hinderance of any of their pretenses
or claymes, of what side, family, faction, religion, or other party soever he
or she were, but rather plainly and indifferently without hatred or partial
affection, to or against any, to lay down sincerly what he had hard or read,
or of himself conceived, that might justly be alleged in favor or disfavor
of every tytler.

And so much the rather he said that he would do this, for that in very truth
the Ciuiltans speech had put him in a great indiffere^cy concerning matter of
succession, and had taken out of his head many scrupulosites about nyse points
of Why the vvil not determyne of any one title.
neernes in blood, by the many examples and reasons that he had alleged of the
proceeding of Christian common wealths in this affayre, preferring oftentimes
him that was further of in blood, upon other co^sideratio^s of more weight and
importance, which point seemed to him to have bin so evidently proved, as no
man can deny it, and much less co^de^ne the same, without the inco^uenie^ces
before alleged and mentioned, of calling al in doubt that now is established
in the world, considering that not only foraine countries, but England also it
self so often has used the same putting back the next in blood.

Wherefore he said, that for as much as common wealths, and the consent, will,
and desire of each realm was proved to have high and sovereign authority in
this affayre, and that as on the one side, nerenes of blood was to be respected
so on the other, there wa^ted not sundry considerations and circumstances of as
great moment as this, or rather greater, for that oftentimes these
considerations had bin preferred before neernes of blood, as has been declared,
I do not know quoth he, who of the pretenders may next obtain the garland,
what soever his right by propinquity be, so he have some (as I think al have
that do pretend) and therefore I mean not to stand upon the justification or
impugning of any one title, but rather to leave la to God and to them, that
must one day try and judge the same in England to whom I suppose this speech
of mine, can not be but grateful and commodious, for the better understanding
and discerning of those matters, whereof of necessity er it be long they must
be judges and vmpires, when God shall appoint, and consequently for them to be
ignorant or unacquainted with the same (as men say that commonly most in Ingland
at this day are) cannot be but very inconvenient and dangerous.

In this manner he spoke, and after this he began his discourse, setting down
first of all the sundry books and treatises which he understood had bin made or
written hitherto of this affair.

OF THE DIVERSE BOOKS AND TREATISES THAT HAVE BIN WRITTEN heretofore about the
titles of such as pretend to the crown of Ingland, and what they do conteyne
in favor or disfavor of sundry pretendors.
CAP. I.
ACCORDING to the variety of men's judgments and affections in this behalf, so
said the lawyer, that diverse had written diversely in sundry books and
treatises that had come to light, and went among men from hand to hand though
al were not printed. And first of al he said, that not long after her majesty's
coming to the crown, there appeered a certain book written in the favor of
the house of Suffolk, and especially of the children of the Earl of Hartford
by the Lady Catherin Gray, which book offended highly the Queen and The book
of Hales and Sir Nicholas Bacon.
nobles of Ingland and was afterward found to be written by one Hales
surnamed of the clubb foot, who was clarke of the hamper, and Sir Nicholas
Bacon then Lord keeper was presumed also to have had a principal part in the
same, for which he was like to have lost his office, if Sir Antony Brown
that had bin cheef judge of the common pleas in Queen Mary's time would have
accepted thereof, when her Majesty offered the same unto him, and my Lord of
Lecester earnestly exhorted him to take it, but he refused it for that he was
of different religion from the state, and so Sir Nicholas Baco^ remained with
the same at the great instance of Sir William Cecill now Lord Treasorer, who
though he were thought to be privy also to the said book, yet was the matter
so vvisely laid upon Hales and Bacon, as Sir William was kept free, thereby to
have the more authority and grace to procure the others pardon, as he did.

The bent and butt of this book, was (as I have said) to prefer the title of
the Lady Catherin The but of Hales book.
Gray daughter of the Lady frauncis Duches of Suffolk which Frauncis was
daughter to Mary the younger daughter of King Henry the seventh, before the
title of the Queen of Scotts then living and of her son, which were
descended of Lady Margeret eldest daughter of the said king Henry. And the
reasons which this book did allege for the same were principally two, the
first, that the laws of Ingland did not First reason.
admit any sttainger or allien to inherit in Ingland, to wit, any such as
were borne out of the allegiance of our realm (for so are the words of the
law) and for that the Queen of Scotts and her son are known to be so borne,
therefore they could not succeed, and consequently that the house of Suffolck
descended of the second daughter, must enter in there place.

The second reason is, for that there is given authority to king Henry the eight
by two several 2. Reasun
acts of parliament in the 28. and 36. year of his reign to dispose of the
succession by his last will and testament, as he should think best, among those
of his kindred that did pretend after his children, and that the said king
according to his commission, did ordeyne that if his own children did dye
without issue, then the offspring of his younger sister Mary that were borne
in Ingland should be preferred before the issue of the elder that was Margaret
married into Scotland, and this was the effect of this first book.

Against this book were vvryten two other soon after, the first by one Morgan
a divine (if The book of M. Morgan and judge Brown
I remember well) some-tymes fellow of Oriel College in Oxford, a man of good
account for learning among those that knew him, and he was thought be have
written the said book, by the advice and assistance of the forsaide Judge
Brown, which thing is made the more credible, by the many authorites of our
common law which therein are alleged, and the parts of this book (if I
forget not) were three, or rather they were three books of one treatise, the
first whereof did take upon it to clear the said Queen of Scotts for the
murder of the lord Darly her husband, which by many was laid against her. And
the second did handle her title to the crown of Ingland: and the third did
answer the book of Ihon Knox the Scott, entitled, against the monstrous
government of women. Of al which three points, for that the second that
conserneth the title, is that which properly appertains to out purpose, and
for that the same is handled again and more largely in the second book set
out not long after by Ihon lesley lord bishope of Rosse in Scotland, who at
that time was Ambassador for the said Queen of Scotts in Ingland, and
handled the same matter more abundantly which M. Morgan had done before him,
I shall say no more of this book of M. Morgan; but shall pass over to that of
the bishope, which in this point of succession conteyneth also what soever
the other has, so as by declaring the contents of the one we shall come also
to see what is in the other.

The intent then of this book of the bishope of Rosse, is to refute the other
book of Hales and Bacon, and that especially in the two points before
mentioned, which they alleged for their principles, to wit, about forrayne
birth, and king Henry's testament. And against the first of these two points
the bishop alleges Answer to the 1. reason.
many proofs that there is no such maxima in the common laws of Ingland to
disherit a prince borne out of the land from his or her right of succession,
that they have by blood. And this first, for that the statute made for barring
of alliens to inherit in Ingland (which was in the 25. year of the reign of
king Edward the third) is only to be understood of particular men's inheritance,
and no ways to be extended to the succession of the crown, as by comparison
of many other like cases is declared: and secondly for that there is express
exception in the same statute of the kings children and of spring: and thirdly
for that the practice has always bin contrary both before and after the
conquest, to wit that diverse princes borne out of the realm have succeeded.

The other principle also concerning king Henryes testament, the bishop
impugneth, first To the 2. reason.
by diverse reasons and incongruities vvherby it may be presumed that king Henry
never made any such testament, and if he did, yet could it not hold in law. And
secondly also by witness of the Lord Paget that was of the privy council in
those days, and of Sir Edward Montague lord chief justice, and of one
William Clark that set the kings stamp to the writing, al which anowed before
the council and parliament in Queen Maryes time, that the said testament was
signed after the king was past sense and memory.

And finally the said bishop concludes that the line of Scotland is the next
every way, both in respect of the house of Lancaster, and also of York, for
that they are next heirs to K. Henry the eight, who by his father was heir to
the house of Lancaster, and by his mother to the house of york.

But after these three books, was written a Heghingtons book.
fourth, by one Robart Highinton secretary in time past to the Earl of
Northumberland, a man well read in stories and especially of our country, who
is said to be dead some years past in Paris. This man impugneth al three
formet books in diverse principal points and draws the crown from both their
pretendors, I mean as well from the house of Scotland as from that of Suffolk,
and first against the book of Hales and Sir Nicholas Bacon, written (as has
bin said) in favor of the house of Suffolk Heghington holds with the Bishop
and Morgan that these two principles laid by the other, of forayne birth, and of
king Henry's restament against the Scottish line, are of no Validity, as nether
there reasons for legitrimating of the Earl of Hartfords children, which
afterward shall be handled.

And secondly he is against both Morgan and the Bishop of Rosse also in diverse
important points, and in the very principal of al, for that this man (I mean
Highington) makes the king of Spain to be the next and most righful pretender
by the house of Lancaster, for proof vvherof he holds first that king Henry
the 7. had no title in deed to the crown by La^caster; but only by the house
of York, that is to say; by his marriage of Queen Elizabeth elder daughter to
king Edward the fourth, for that albeit himself were descended by his mother
from John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, yet this was but by his third wife
Catherin Swynford, and that the true heirs of Blanch his first wife duches
and heir of La^caster (to whom says he apperteyned only the succession after
the death of king Henry the sixth, and his son, with whom ended the line male
of that house) remained only in Portugal by the marriage of Lady Phillip,
daughter of the foresaid Blanch, to king Ihon the first of Portugal, and that
for as much as king Phillip of Spain says this man, has now succeeded to all the right of the kings of Portugal, to him appertains also, the only right
succession of the house of Lancaster, and that all the other discendents of king
Henry the 7. are to pretend only by the title of York, I mean as well the line
of Scotland as also of Suffolk and Huntington, for that in the house of
Lancaster king Phillip is evidently before them al.

Thus holds Heghington, alleaginge diverse stories arguments and probabilities
for the same, and then adioyneth two other propositions, which do importe most
of al, to wit, that the title of the house of Lancaster was far better, then
that of York, not for that Edmond Crokback first founder of the house of
Lancaster, who was son to king Henry the third and brother to king Edward
the first, was eldest to the said Edward and iniurioufly put back for his
deformity in body, as both the said bishop of Rosse and George Lylly, do falsely
George Lilly in fine Epitchronic. Anglic.
hold, and this man refuteth by many good arguments, but for that lohn of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster being the eldest son that King Edward the third had a live
when he dyed, should in right have succeeded in the crown as this man holds,
and should have bin preferred before Richard the second that was the black
princes son, who was a degree further of from king Edward the third his
grandfather, then was lohn of Gaunt, to whom king Edward was father, and by
this occasion this man comes to discuss at large the opinions of the lawyers,
whether the uncle or the nephew should be preferred in the succession of a
crown, to wit, whether the younger brother or the elder brothers son, if
his father be dead without being seized of the same (which is a point that in
the civil law has great disputation and many great authors on each side as
this man shows) and the matter also wants not examples on both pattes in
the succession of diuets Inglish kings, as our friend the civil lawyer did
signify also in his discourse, and we may chance to have occasion to handle
the same again, and more largely hereafter.

These points touches Highinto^ though diverse other he leave untouched,
which are of much importance for the resolusion, as whether after the line
extinguished of king Henry the 4. which was the eldest son of Ihon of
Gant, there should have entered the line of lady Philippe the eldest daughter
lawfully begotten of Blanch first wife of Ihon of Gant, or Sundry importag
points.
else the race of Ihon Earl of Somersett younger son by his third wife, which
then was base borne, but legetimated by parliament, for of Phillip do come the
kings of Portugal, and of Ihon came king Henry the seventh. And again these
points had been to be disputed as well touching the succession to the dukedom
of Lancaster alone, as also to the crown ioyncely, all which articles shall
severally afterward be handled in there places, and thus much of this book.

More then these four books, I have not Diverse other notes and pampletes.
seen vvitten of his affair, though I have hard of one made in Flanders in
the behalf of the Duke of Parma, that is now, who by his mother disceudeth of
the same line of Portugal, that the king of Spain does, and as this book
pretends (if we respect the ordinary course of Inglish laws in particular
men's inheritances) he is to be preferred before the said king, or any other of
the house of Portugal for that his mother descended of the younger son, and
the king of the elder daughter, of the king of Portugal: and albeit according
to the law of Portugal the king was adiuged next heir to that crown, yet say
they by our laws of Ingland he cannot be, which after must be examined.

Thus says that book, and he alleges many reasons for the same, as it has
bin told me (for as I said I never came to have a view of the whole book)
but diverse of his arguments I have seen laid together, which I shall afterward
in place convenient allege unto you, with the answers censures and replies
that the contrary parties do make thereunto.

Diverse other papers notes and memories I have seen also (said he) as well
touching the succession of those whom I have named as of others, for that Sir
Richard Shelly who dyed some years a gone in Venice, by the name of Lord Sir
Richard Shelly.
prior of S. John's of Ingland, had gathered diverse points touching these
affairs: and many more then he had M. Francis Peto that dyed in Millan, and
was a very curious and well readen Franc. Peto.
man in genealogies, as may appear by sundry papers that I have seen of his.
Their want not also diverse in England who have travailed much in this business,
and I have had the perusing of some of their labors, though I dare not discover
there names lest thereby I should hurt them, which were not convenient. But one
great trouble find I in them al, that every man seeks to draw the whole
water unto his own mill, and to make that title always most clear, whom he
most favors, and this with so great probability of reason and authority many
times, as it is hard to retain a ma^s consent from that which is said, until
he have read the reasons of the other party, and this also is a great proof,
of the wonderful ambibiguity and doubtfulnes which in this most important
affair is to be found.

And by the way also I had almost forgotten A treatise in the behalf of the
Infa^ta of spain.
to tell you, how that of late I have lighted upon a certain new discourse and
treatise, made in the behalf of the king of Spaines eldest daughter, whom he
had by his wife, Isabel the eldest sister of the last king of France, which
Isabel and her daughter the infanta of Spain called also Isabel, are presumed
to be the lawful heirs to the state of Britany, and to al other states that by
that means of Britany or otherwise by women have come to France, or have or
may fall upon a woman of the house of France, as the states of Ingland and
other states thereunto annexed may, for that they follow not the law salique of
France, and so this treatise proves that by diverse vvayes and for sundry
considerations, this princess of Spain is also of the blood royal of Ingland,
and may among others be entitled to that crown, by a particular title of her
own, beside the pretense which her father the king or her brother the prince
of Spain have for them selves, by the house of Portugal, al which reasons and
consideratio^s I shall allege afterward in there place and time, or at
leastwise the chief and principal of them.

And to the end they may be understood the better, as also the clearnes and
pretentions of all the rest that have interest in this affayre, I shall first of
al for a beginning and foundation to all the rest that shall or may be spoken
hereafter, set down by way of historical narration, all the discents of our
Inglish kings and pretenders that may important to this our purpose, from the
conquest unto our time, which being compared with the tree it self of
genealogies that shall be added in the end of this conference, vvil make the
matter more plain and pleasant to the reader.

OF THE SVCCESSION OF THE CROWN OF INGLAND FROM THE CONQVEST UNTO the time of
king Edward the third, with the beginning of three principallinages of the
English blood royal, dispersed into the houses of Britanie Lancaster and York.
CAP. II.
NO man is ignorant said the lawyer how Descent of V Villiam the Conqueror.
William the Conqueror came to the crown of Ingland, which was in deed by
dynt of sword, though he pretended that he was chosen by the will and
testament of king Edward the confessor. But howsoever this wear, his posterity
has endured until this day and two and twenty princes of his race have worn
the Inglish crown after him, for the space of more then 5. hundredth years,
and how many more may yet do the same, God only knows; but if we follow
probability, we cannot want of them, seeing his blood is so dipersed over the
world at this day, as by this declaration ensewing vvil appear.

This king William according to Polidor The children of the conqueror.
and other chronicles of Ingland, had by his vvyf Mathilda daughter of Baldwin
Earl of Flanders, four sons, and five daughters, his eldest son was
Robert whom he left duke Polid. 1. 2. in fine Stow in vita Guliel
of Normandy, who was afterward deprived of that dukedom by his younger and
fowerth brother Henry, when he came to be king of Ingland. His second son
was Richard that dyed in his youth, his third was William, surnamed Rufus, for
that he was of redd hear, and the fowerth was Henrv, which two last sons,
were both kings of England one after the other, as the world knows, by the
names of William the second, and Henry the first.

The Conquerors daughters were first Cecilie that was a Nonne, and the second
Constantia that was married to Alayn, surnamed fergant duke of Britanie, and
the third was Adela or Alis married to Stephen county Palatine of Bloys,
Champagne, and Chartres in France, and the other two Polidor says, dyed before
they were married, and so their names were not recorded.

These are the children of king William the Conqueror, among whom after his
death there The miseries of Duke Robert and his son.
was much strife about the succession. For first his eldest son duke Robert,
who by order of ancestrie by birthe should have succeeded him in all his
estares, was put back, first from the kingdom of Ingland, by his third brother
William Rufus, upon a pretense of the Conquerors vvil and testament, for
particular affection that he had to this his said third son William, though
as Stow writes, almost all the nobility of Inglande were against Willia^s
Stow in vit Gul. Conquest.
entrance. But in the end agreement was made between the two brothers, withdraw
condition that if William should dye without issue, then that Robert should
succed him, and to this accord, both the princes themselves, and twelve
principal peers of each side were sworn, but yet after when William dyed
without issue, this was not observed, but Henry the fourth son entered, and
deprived Robert, not only of this his succession to Ingland, but also of his
dukedom of Normandy, that he had enjoyed peaceably before, all the time of his
brother Rufus, and moreover he took him prisoner and so carried him into
Ingland, and there kept him until his death, which happened in the castle of
Cardif in the year 1134.

And whereas this Duke Robert had a William soune of Duke Robett.
goodly prince to this son named William, who was duke of Normandy by his
father, and earl of Flanders in the right of his grand mother, that was the
Co^querors wife, and daughter of Baldwin Earl of Flanders as has bin said,
and was established in both these states by the help of Lewys the 6. surnamed
le gros king of France, and admitted to do homage to him for the said states,
his uncle king Henry of England was so violent against him, as first he drove
him out of the state of Normandy, and secondly he set up and maynteyned a
competitor or two against him in Flanders, by whom finally he was slain in
the year of Christ 1128. before the town of Alost, by an arrow, after he had
Belfor. 1. 3. cap. 42. An. 1128.
gotten the vppet hand in the field, and so ended the race of the first son
of king William the Conqueror, to wit of duke Robert, which Robert lived after
the death of his said son and heir duke William, six years in prison in
the castle of Cardife and pyned away with sorrow and misery, as both the
French and Inglishe histories do agree.

The second son of the Conqueror named Richard, dyed as before has bin
said, in his fathers time, and left no issue at al, as did neither the third
son, William Rufus, though he reigned 13. years after his father the
Conqueror, in King William Rufus.
which time he established the succession of the crown by consent of the
stares of Ingland to his elder brother duke Roberts issue, as has bin said,
though afterward it was not observed.

This King Rufus came to the crown principally by the help and favor of
Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury, who greatly repented himself afterward of
the error which in that point he had committed, upon hope of his good
government which proved extreme euel.

But this king William Rufus being slain afterward by the error of a crosbow,
in newforest as is well known, and this at such time as the foresaid duke
Robert his elder brother (to whom the crown by succession apparteyned) was
absent in the war of the holy land, vvher (according as most authors do
writ) he was chosen king of Jerusalem, but refused it upon hope of the
kingdom of Ingland. (...) l. 2 del hist. del mondo.
But he returning home, found that his fowerth brother Henry, partly by fair
promises, and partly by force had invaded the crown, in the K. Henry.
year 1100. and so he reigned 35. years, and had issue diverse sons and
daughters, but al were either drowned in the seas coming out of Normandy, or
else dyed otherwise before Polydor. in vita Henrici 1.
their father, except only Mathildis who was first married to Henry the
Emperor, fifth of that name, and after his death without issue, to Geffrey
Platagenet duke of Anjow, Tourayne, and Main in France, by whom she had Henry
which reigned after king Stephen, by the name of Henry the second, and thus
much of the sons of William the Conqueror.

Of his two daughters that lived to be married and had issue, the elder named
Constance The house of Britany by the elder daughter of the Conqueror Belfor.
l. 3 Page 423.
was married to Alayn fergat duke of Britanie, who was son to Hoel earl of
Nantes, and was made duke of Britanie by William Co^querors means, in manner
following.

Duke Robert of Normandy father to the Conqueror, when he went in pilgrimage
unto the holy land (in which voyage he dyed) left for governor of Normandy,
under the protection of king Henry the first of france, duke Alayne the first
of Britanie, which Allayn had issue Conan the first, who being a stirringe
prince of about 24. years old when duke William began to treat of passing
over into Ingland, he showed himself not to favor much that enterprise, which
duke William fearing, caused him to be poisoned with a Conan Duke of Britanie
poysened by William Con queror.
pair of perfumed gloves, as the French stories do report, and caused to be
set up in his place and made duke, one Hoel earl of Nantes, who to gratify
William sent his son Alaine surnamed Fergant with 5000. souldiars to pass
over into Ingland with him, and so he did, and William afterward in
recompense heer-of gave him his eldest daughter Constantia in marriage with the
earldome of Richmond, by whom he had issue Conan the second, surnamed le gros
who had issue a son and a daughter. The son was called Hoel, as his grand
father was, and the daughters name was Bertha married to Eudo Earl of (...) in
Normandy, and for that this duke Conan, liked better his Belfor. l. 3 cap. 12.
An. 1065. ex chronic dionis.
daughter and his son in law her husband then he did Hoel his own son, he
disauowed him in his death bed, and made his said daughter his heir: who had
by the said Eudo, a son named Conan surnamed the younger, which was the third
duke of that name, and this man had one only daughter and heir named Lady
Constance who whas married to the third son of king Henry the second named
Geffrey and elder brother to king Ihon that after came to rain and by this
Lord Geffrey she had issue Arthur the second duke of Britanie, whom king John
his uncle put back from the crown of Ingland, and caused to be put to death,
as after shall be showed, and he dying without issue, his mother Constance
duchess and heir of Britanie, married again with a prince of her own
house, whom after we shall name in the prosecution of this line, and by him
she had issue that has endured until this day, the last vvherof hitherto is
the lady Isabella infanta of Spain, and that other of Sauoy her sister, whom
by this means we se The daughters of spain are of the blood royal of Ingland.
to have descended from king William the Co^queror, by his eldest daughter
lady Co^stance as also by diverse other participations of the blood royal of
Ingland, as afterward vvil appear.

Now then to come to the second daughter of king William the Conqueror, or
rather the The houses of Aloys.
third (for that the first of al was a Nonne as before has been noted) her
name was Adela or Alis as has bin said, and she was married in France to
Stephen count Palatin of Champagne Charters and Bloys, by whom she had a son
called also Stephen, who by his grand mother was earl also of Bollayne in
Picardie, and after the death of his uncle king Henry of Ingland, was by the
favor of the Inglish nobility, and especially by the help of his own brother
the Lord Henry of Bloys, that was Bishop of Winchester and jointly Abbot of
Glastenbury, made king of England, and this both in respect that Mathilda
daughter of king Henry the first was a woman, and her son Why Stephen was
admitted king of
Henry duke of Anjou, a very child, and one degree farther of from the
Conqueror and from kings Rufus then Stephen was, as also for that this king
Henry the first (as has bin signified before) was judged by many to have
entered wrongfully unto the crown, and thereby to have made both himself and
his posterity incapable of succession by the violence which he used against
both his elder brother Robart, and his nephew duke William, that was son
and heyte to Robert who by nature and law were both of them held for
soueraintes to John, by those that favored them and their pretentions.

But yet howsoever this were, we see that the duke of Britany, that lived at
that day, should Girard. l. 6 Belfor. l. 3
evidently have succeeded before Stephen, for that he was descended of the elder
daughter, of the Conqueror, and Stephen of the younger, though Stephen by the
commodity he had of the neernes of his port and haven of Bullayne unto
Ingland, as the French stories do say (for Calys was of no importance at that
time) and by the friendship and familiarity he had gotten in Ingland during the
reign of his two uncles king Rufus and king Henry, and especially by the help
of his brother the Bishop and Abbot as has bin said, he gat the start of all the rest, and the states of Ingland admitted him.

This man although he had two sons namely The issue of king Stephen.
Eustachius duke of Normandy, and William earl of Norfolk, yet left they no
issue? And his daughter Marie was married to matthew of Fladers of whom if any
issue remains, it fell afterward upon the house of Austria, that succeeded in
those states.

To king Stephen who left no issue succeeded by compositio^ after much war
Henry duke K. Henry the 2.
of Aniou, son and heir to Mathilda before named, daughter of Henry the
first, which Henry named afterward the second, took to wife Elenor daughter
and heir of William duke of Aquitaine, and earl of Poytiers, which Belfor.
l. 3 cap. 50. An. 1151. Gerard. l. 8. page 549
Elenor had bin married before to the king of France Lewis the 7. and bare him
two daughters, but upon dislike conceived by the one against the other, they
were deuorced, under pretense of being within the fowerth degree of
consanguinitye, and so by second marriage Elenor was wife to this said Henry
who afterward was king of Ingland by name of K. Henry the feco^d, that procured
the death of Thomas Becket archebishope of Canterbury, and was both before
and after the greatest enimye, that ever Lewis the king of France had in the
world, and much the greater for his marriage, by which Henry was made far
stronger, for by this woman he came to be duke of al Aquitaine, that is of
Gascony and Guyene, and earl of all the country of Poytiers, whereas beforealso
by his fathers inheritance, he was duke both of Anjou, Tourayne, and Main,
and by his mother Mathilda king Henry's daughter of Ingland he came to be king
of Ingland, and duke of Normandy, and by his own industry, he gat also to be
lord of Ireland, as also to bring Scotland under his homage, so as he enlarged
the kingdom of Ingland most of any other king before or after him.

This king Henry the second as Stow reconteth, K. Henry the 2. his issue Stow
in vita Henci.
had by Lady Elenor five sons and three daughters. His eldest son was
named William that dyed young, his second was Henry whom he caused to be
crowned in his own life time, vvherby he received much trouble, but in the end
this son died before his father without issue. His third son was Richard
surnamed for his valor Cor de leon, who reigned after his father, by the name
of Richard the King RIchard.
first, and died without issue in the year of Christ 1199.

His fovverth son named Geffrey, married Duke Geffrey.
lady Constance daughter and heir of Britanie, as before has bin said, and
dying left a son by her named Arthur, which was duke of Britanie after him,
and pretended also to be king of Ingland, but was put by it by his uncle John,
that took him also prisoner, and kept him so in the castle first of fallaise
in Normandy, and then in Roan, until he caused him to be put to death, or slew
him with his own hands as French stories write, in the year 1204.

This duke Arthur left behind him two sisters Paradyn apud Belforest.
as Stow writes in his chronicles, but others write that it was but one, and
at least wise, I find but one named by the french stories, which was Elenor,
whom they say king John also caused to be muthered in Ingland a Belfor. l. 3
cap. 71. An. 1203.
a little before her brother the duke was put to death in Normandy, and this
was the end of the issue of Geffrey, whose wife Constance duchess of Britanie
married again after this murder of her children, unto one Guy Vicond of
Touars, and had by him two daughters, Belfor. l. 4 cap. 4.
whereof the eldest named Alis was duchefse of Britanie, by whom the race has
bin continued unto our time.

The fifth son of king Henry the second was named John, who after the death of
his K. John and his issue.
brother Richard by help of his mother Elenor, and of Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, drawn thereunto by his said mother, gat to be king, and put back
his nephew Arthur, whom king Richard before his departure to the war of the
holy land had caused to be declared heir apparent, but John prevailed and made
away both nephew and Niece, as before has bin said, for which fact he was
detested of many in the world abroad, and in France by act of parliament
deprived of all the states he had in those parts. Soon after also the pope
gave sentence of deprivation against him, and his Miseries that fell upon king
John.
own barons took arms to execute the sentence, and finally they deposed both
him and his young son Henry being then but a child of 8. years old, and this
in the 18. year of his reign, and in the year of Christ 1215. and Lewis the
8. of that name prince at that time but Polid. Hol lings and Stow. in vitae
Iohannis.
afterward king of France, was chosen king of Ingland, and sworn in London and
placed in the Tower, though soon after by the sudden death of king John that
course was altered again, and Henry his son admitted for king.

And thus much of the sons of king Henry the second, but of his daughters by
the same The issue of king Henry the 2. his daughters.
lady Elenor heir of Gascony, Belforest in his story of France has these
words following. King Henry had four daughters by Elenor of Aquiraine, the
eldest vvherof was married to Belfor. l. 3 cap. 49. An. 1152.
Alonso the 9. of that name king of Castile, of which marryage issued Queen
Blanch mother to S. Lewis king of France. The second of these two daughters
was espoused to Alexis Emperor of Constantinople. The third was married to
the duke of Saxony, and the fourth was given to the earl of Tholosa, thus
being the french stories of these daughters.

Of the marriage of the eldest daughter of these four (whose name was Elenor
also as her mothers was) with king Alonso the 9. of Castile The issue of Lady
Eleanor Queen of spain.
there proceeded many children, but only one son that lived, whose name was
Henry, who was king of Castile after his father, by the name of Henry the
first, and dyed quickly without issue, and besides this Henry, two daughters
also were borne of the same marriage of which the eldest and heir named
Blanch, was married by intercession of her uncle king John of Ingland, with
the foresaid Prince Lewis of France, with this express condition, as both
Polidor in his Inglish story and Polidor. l. 15. in vit Johan, Stephen Garib
li. 22. cap. 31
Garibay the chronicler of Spain do affirm, that she should have for her
dowry all the states that king John had lost in France, which were almost all that he had there, and this to the end, he might not seem to have lost them by
force, but to have given them with the marriage of his Niece, and so this
marriage was made, and her husband Lewis was afterward chosen also king of
Ingland by the Barons, and sworn in London, as before has bin said, and
hereby also the Infanta of Spain before mentioned, that is descended lineally
from both these princes, I mean as well from Queen Blanch as from Lewys, is
proved to have her pretense fortified to the interest of Ingland, as afterward
shall be declared more at large in dew place.

The second daughter of king Alonso the 9. by Queen Elenor, was named
Berenguela, and Queen Berenguela.
was married to the prince of Leon in Spain, and had by him a son named
Fernando, who afterward when king Henry her brother was dead, was admitted
by the Castilians for their king, by the name of Fernando the fourth, as before
the Ciuilian has noted, and Blanch with her son S. Lewis though she were
the elder, was put by the crown against al right of succession, as Garibay
the Spaniard Chronicler Garibay li. 12. c. 52
notes and confesses.

Heerby then some do gather, that as the first Pretenses of the Infanta of
spain to Inglish and French states.
interest which the crown of Ingland had to the states of Gascony Guyne and
Poyters, came by a woman: so also did it come to France by the right of this
foresaid Blanch, whereof the favorers of the Infanta of Spain do say, that
she being now first and next in blood of that house, ought to inherit al these
and such like states, as are inheritable by women, or came by women, as the
former states of Gascony and Guvne did to king Henry the second, by Queen
Elenor his wife, and Normandy by Mathilda his mother, and both of them to
France by this former interest of Blanch, and more they say, that his lady
Blanch mother to King S. Lewis, whose heir at this day the infanta of spain
is, should by right have inherited the kingdom of Ingland also, after the
murder of Duke Arthur and his sister Elenor, for that she was the next of
kynne unto them, at that time, which could be capable to succeed them, for
that king John himself was incapable of their succession whom he had
murdered, and his son Henry was not then borne, nor in diverse years after,
and if he had bin, yet could he receive no interest thereunto by his father,
who had none himself: of al which points there will be more particular
occasion to speak hereafter.

Now then I come to speak of king Henry the third who was son to this king
John, and K. Henry the 3 and his issue.
from whom all the three houses before mentioned of Britanie Lancaster and
York, do seem to issue, as a triple branch out of one tree, albeit the royal
line of Britanie is more ancient, and was divided before even from William
Conquerors time, as has bin showed, yet do they knytt again in this king
Henry, for that of king Henry the third his eldest son, named The meeting of
three houses.
prince Edward the first, descended Edward the second, and of him Edward the
third, from whom properly rises the house of York. And of his second son
Edmond surnamed crooke-backs Prince Edward Duke Edmond.
county Palatine of Lancaster, issued the dukes of Lancaster until in the third
dissent, when the Lady Blanch heir of that house matched with John of Gaunt,
third son of king Edward the third, from which marriage rose afterward the
formal division of these two houses of Lancaster and York, and also two
distinct branches of Lancaster.

Besides these two sons, king Henry the Lad. Beatrix daughter of king Henry 3.
third had a daughter named lady Beatrix, whom he married to John the second of
that name duke of Britanie, who after was stayne at Lions in France, by the
fall of an old wall, in the coronation of pope Clement the 5. of that name, in
the year of Christ 1298. and for that the fre^des of the Infanta of Spain, do
seek to strengthen her title by this her descent also of the royal blood of
Ingland, from Henry the third as afterward shall be declared, I will briefly in
this place continue the pedigree of the house of Britanie from that I left
before, even to our days.

I showed before in this chapter, that Geffrey The pede gree of the dukes of
Britanie.
the third son to king Henry the second, and duke of Britanie by his wife,
being dead, and his two children Arthur and Elenor put to death by their uncle
king John in Ingland, as before has bin said, it fell out that Constance
duchess and heir of Britanie married again to Guy viscond of Touars, and had
by him two daughters, whereof the eldest named. Alis was duchess of Britanie,
and married to Peter Brien earl of Drusse, and by him had John the first of
that name, duke of Britanie, which John the first had issue John the second,
who married lady Beatrix before mentioned, daughter to king Henry the third,
and by her had the second Arthur duke of Britanie to whom succeeded his eldest
son by his first wife, named John the third, who dying without issue, left
the very same trouble and garboyle in Britanie about the succession between
the two noble houses of Bloys and Monford, the one maynteyned by France, and
the other by Ingland, as The great contention betvveene the houses of Mo^ ford
and Bloys in Britanie. Burgundy and Orleance.
soon after upon the very like occasion happened in Ingland, between the
houses of Lancaster and York as after shall be showed. And not long after that
again the like affliction also ensewed in France, (though not for succession
but upon other occasions) between the great and royal houses of Burgundy and
Orleans, vvherby al three common wealths (I mean Ingland Britanie and France)
were like to have come to destruction and utter desolation.

And for that it may serve much to our purpose hereafter, to understand well
this contiousie The controversy betvveene the house of monford and Bloys.
of Britanie, I think it not amiss in few words to declare the same in this
place, thus then it happened.

The foresaid Arthur the second of that name, duke of Britanie, and son of
Lady Beatrix that was daughter (as has bin said) to king Henry the third of
Ingland, had two vviues, the first named Beatrix as his mother was, and by
this he had two sons, John that succeeded him in the state, by the name of
duke John the third, and Guye that dying before his elder brother left a
daughter and heir, named Joan, and surnamed the lame, for that she halted, who
was married to the earl of Bloys, that was nephew to Phillip of Valois, king
of France, for that he was borne of his sister.

But besides these two children, the said duke Arthur had by his second wife,
named Ioland countess and heir of the earldome of Monford, an other son
called John Breno, who in the right of his mother was earl of Monford, And
afterward when duke John the third came to die without issue, the question
was, who should succeed him in his dukedom, the uncle or the niece, that is
to say, his third brother John Breno by half blood or else his Niece Joan the
lame, that was daughter and heir to his second brother Guye of whole blood,
A Question about succession betven the uncle and the niece.
that is by father and mother, which lady Joan was married to the earl of
Bloys as has been said. And first this matter was handled in the parliament of
Paris, the king himself sitting in judgment with al his peers, the 30. day
of September. 1341. and adiuged it to the earl of Bloys, both for that his wife
was heir to the elder brother, as also for that duke John by his testament
and consent of the states, had appointed her to be his heir, but yet king
Edward the third and states of Ingland did judge it otherwise, and preferred
John Monford, not knowing that the very like case was to fall out very soon
after in Ingland, I mean, they judged the state to John Breno earl of monford
younger brother to Guye, and they did assist him, and his son after him, with
al their forces for the gayning and holding of that state.

And albeit at the beginning, it seemed that matters went against Monford, for
that himself was taken prisoner in Nantes, and carried captive to Paris
where he dyed in prison, yet his son John by the assistance of the Inglish
The house of Blois over come.
armies gat the dukedom afterward, and slew the earl of Bloys, and was
peaceably duke of Britanie by the name of John the fourth, and his posterity
has endured until this day, as briefly here I will declare.

This duke John the fourth of the house of The suecession of the Monfords in
Britanie.
Monford had issue John the fifth, and he, Francis the first, who dying without
issue, left the dukedom to Peter his brother, and Peter having no children
neither, he left it to his uncle Arthur the third, brother to his father John
the fifth, and this Arthur was earl of Richmond in Ingland, as some of his
ancestors had bin before him, by gifts of the kings of Ingland.

This Arthur dying without issue left the Francis last Duke of Britany.
dukdome unto his nephew, to wit his brothers son Francis the second, who
was the last male child of that race, and was he that had once determined, to
have delivered Henry earl of Richmond, unto his enimye king Edward the fourth,
and after him to king Richard the 3. but that Henry's good fortune reserved him
to come to be king of Ingland.

This duke Francis had a daughter and heir named Anna, married first to
Charles the eight How the dukdome of Britanie was united to france.
king of France, and after his death without issue to his successor Lewis the
12. by whom she had a daughter named Claudia that was heir to Britanie,
though not to the crown of France, by reason of the law Salique, that holds
against women in the kingdom of Frace but not in Britanie, and to the end
this dukdome should not be disunited again from the said crown of France,
this daughter Claudia was married to Francis duke of Angoleme heir apparent
to the crown of France, by whom she had issue Henry, that was afterward king
of France, and was father to the last king of that country, and to Ysabel
mother of the Infanta of Spain, and of her sister the duchess 3.
of Sauoye that now is, by which also some do affirm that the said princess
or Infanta of spain, albeit she be barred from the succession of France, by
their pretended law Salique: yet is her title manifest to the dukdome of
Britanie, that came by a woman as we have showed, and thus much of the house of
Britanie and of the princess of Spain, how she is of the blood royal of
Ingland, from the time of William Conqueror himself by his eldest daughter,
as also by other kings after him: and now we shall return to prosecute the
issue of these two sons of king Henry the third, to wit of Edward and Edmond,
which before we left.

I showed yon before how king Henry the third had two sons, Edward the
prince, that The issue male of king Henry the (...).
was king after his father, by the name of Edward the first, and Edmond
surnamed crokback by some writers, who vvhas the first earl and county
Palatine of Lancaster, and beginner of that house.

And albeit some writers of our time, have affirmed or at least wise much
inclined to favor The Bishop of Rosle in his book of the Q. of Scotts title.
a certain old report, that Edmond should be the elder brother to Edward, and
put back only for his deformity of his body, (whereof Polidor does speak in the
beginning of the George Lilly in fine epitomes chron. Anglic.
reign of king Henry the fourth, and as well the Bishop of Rosse as also
George Lylly do seem to believe it) yet evident it seems that is was but a
fable, as before I have noted and now again I shall briefly prove it by these
reasons following, for that it imports very much for deciding the
controversy between the howses of Lancaster and york.

The first reason then is, for that al ancient historiographers of Ingland and
among them That Edward was the elder.
Matheus Westmonasteriensis that lived at the same time do affirm the
contrary, and do make Matheus west in vit Henrici 3. and bollings. Ibidem page
654.
Edward to be elder then Edmond by six years and two days, for that they
appointe the birth of Prince Edward to have bin upon the 16. day of June in
the year of Christ 1239, and the 24. of the reign of his father king Henry,
and the birth of Lord Edmond to have followed upon the 18. day of the same
month 6. years after, to wit in the year of our lord 1245. and they do name
the godfathers and godmothers of them both together, with the peculier
solemnities and feasts, that were celebrated at there several natiuities, so as
it seems there can be no ertor in this matter.

2.
The 2. reason is, for that we read that this Lord Edmond was a goodly wise and
discreet prince, notwithstanding that some authors call him crokback, and that
he was highly in the favor both of his father king Henry, as also of his
brother king Edward, and employed by them in many great wars, and other
affairs of state, both in France and other where, which argues that there was
no such great defect in him as should move his father and the realm to deprive
him of his succession.

3.
Thirdly we read that king Henry procured by diverse ways and means the
advancement of this L. Edmond, as giving him the earldomes of Lecester and
Darby besides that of Lancaster, Holling head in vit Henrici 3. page 740. and
777.
as also procuring by all means possible and with exceeding great charges to
have him made king of Naples and Sicilie by pope Innocentius which had bin no
policy to have done, if he had bin put back from his inheritance in Ingland,
for that it had bin to have armed him against his brother the king.

4.
Fourthly we see that at the death of his father king Henry the third, this Lord
Edmond was principally left in charge with the realm, his elder brother
prince Edward being scarsly returned from the war of Asia, at what time, he
had good occasion to chale^g his own right to the crown, if he had had any,
seeing he wanted no power theru^to, having three goodly sons at that time
alive, borne of his wife Queen Blanch dowager of Navarre, who had bin married
before to Henry king of Navarre, and contie of Champaine, to whom she had borne
only one daughter, that was married to Phillip le bell king of France.

But we shall never read that either he, or Edmonds line never pretended to
the crown.
any of his children, made any such claim, but that they lived in very good
agreement and high grace with king Edward the first, as his children did also
with king Edward the second, until he began to be misled in government, and
then the two sons of this Lord Edmond I mean both Thomas and Henry, that
successively were earls of Lancaster) made war upon the said Edward the
second, and were the principal doers in his deposition, and in setting up of
his son Edward the third in his place, at what time it is evident that they
might have put in also for themselves, if there title had bin such as this
report makes it.

A fifth reason is, for that if this had bin so, 5. Note this consequent.
that Edmond earl of Lancaster, had bin the elder brother, then had the
controversy between the two houses of York and Lancaster, bin most clear and
without al doubt at al, for then had the house of York had no pretense of
right in the world, and then were it evident, that the heirs general of
Blanch duchess of Lancaster wife of John of Gaunt, to wit, the discendentes
of lady Phillip her daughter, that was married into Portugal, these I say, and
none other, were apparent and true heirs to the crown of Ingland at this day,
and all the other of the house of York usurpers, as well king Henry the 7. as al
his posterity and offspring, for that none of them have (...) of the said Blanch
as is manifest.

And therefore lastly the matter stands (no 6. The elder ship of Edmond a
fiction.
doubt) as Polidor holds in the later end of the life of king Henry the
third, where having mentioned these two sons Edward and Edmond, he adds
these words. There wanted not certain men long time after this, that affirmed
this Edmond to Polyd in fine vitae Hent. 3.
be the elder son to king Henry the third, and to have bin deprived of his
inheritance, for that he was deformed in body, but these things were feyned to
the end that king Henry the fourth that came by his mothers side of this
Edmond, might seem to have come to the kingdom by right, whereas in decd he
gat it by force.

Thus says Polidor in this place, but afterward in the beginning of the life
of the said K. Henry the 4. he says, that some would have had king Henry to
have pretended this title among other reasons, but that the more part
accompting it but a meare fable, it was omitted.

Now then it being clear that of these two sons of king Henry the third,
prince Edward was the elder and lawful heir, it remains only that we set
down, their several discents unto the times of king Edward the third, and his
children, in whose days the dissension and controversy between these royal
houses of York and Lancaster, began to break fourth.

And for the issue of Edward that was king after his father, by the name of
king Edward The issue of king Edward the first.
the first, it is evident that albeit by two several vviues he had a dosen
children, male and femal, yet only his fourth son by his first wife called
also Edward (who was king after him by the name of king Edward the second)
left issue that remained, which Edward the second being afterward for his euel
government deposed, left issue Edward the third, who was made king by election
of the people in his place, and after a long and prosperous reign, left diverse
sons, vvherof after we shall speak, and among them his third son named John
of Gaunt, married lady Blanch daughter and heir of the house of lancaster, and
of the fornamed Lord Edmond Crouchback, by which Blanch, John of Gant became
duke of lancaster: so as the lines of these two brethren Edward and Edmond
did meet and join again in the fourth descent, as now shall appear by
declaration of the issue of the foresaid L. Edmond.

Edmond then the second son of K. Henry the third, being made county palatine
of Lancaster, The issue of Edmond Crockback.
as also earl of Lecester and of Darby, by his father king Henry, as has bin
said: had issue three sons, to wit, Thomas Henry and John, among whom he
divided his three states, making Thomas his eldest son, county palatine of
Lancaster, Henry earl of Lecester, and John earl of Darby. But Thomas the
eldest and John the youngest dying without issue, al three states fell again
upon Henry the second son, which Henry had issue one fonne and three
daughters, his son was named Henry the second of that name, earl of
Lancaster, and made duke of Lancaster, by king Edward the third, and he had one
only daughter and heir named Blanch, who was married unto John of Gant as
before has bin said. But Duke Henry's three sisters named Joan Mary and
Elenor, were al married to diverse principal men of the realm, for that Joan
was married to John L. Maubery of whom are descended Collateral lines of
La^castez.
the Howards of the house of Norfolk at this day, and Mary was married to
Henry lord Pearcy, from whom comes the house of the Earls of Northumberland,
and Elenor was married to Richard earl of Arundel, whence is issued also by
his mothers side the Earl of Arundel that now is, so as of this ancient line
of Lancaster there want not noble houses with in the realm at this day,
issued thence before the co^ttouersie fell out between york and this family,
of which controversy how it rose and how it was continued, I shall now begin
to make more particular declaration, taking my beginning from the children of
king Edward the third, who were the causers of this fatal dissension.

OE THE SVCCESSION OF INGLISH KINGS FROM KING EDVARD THE THIRD UNTO OUR days,
with the particular causes of dissension, between the families of york and
Lancaster more largly declared.
CAP. III.
KING Edward the third surnamed by the Five sons of K. Edward 3.
English the victorious, though he had many children, whereof some dyed without
issue, which appertain not to us to treat of, yet had he five sons, that
lest issue behind them, to wit Edward the eldest that was prince of Wales
surnamed the black Prince: Leonel duke of Clarence which was the 2. son,
John of Gant so called for that he was borne in that city, that was the
third son, and by his wife was duke of Lancaster, and fourthly Edmond
surnamed of Langley, for that he was also borne there, and was duke of York,
and last of al Thomas the fifth son surnamed of Woodstocke, for the same
reason of his birth, and was duke of Gloucester.

Al these five dukes, being great princes and sons of one king, left issue
behind them as shall be declared, and for that the discendents of the third and
fourth of these sons, to wit, of the dukes of Lancaster and York, came
afterward to strive who had best title to reign, thereof it came, that the
controversy had his name of these two familes, which for more distinction
sake, and the better to be known, took upon them for their ensigns a rose
of two The redd rose and the white.
different colures, to wit, the white rose, and the redd, as all the world
knows, whereof the white served for York, and the redd for Lancaster.

To begin then to show the issue of al these issue of the black prince.
five princes, it is to be noted, that the two elder of them, to wit, prince
Edward, and his second brother Leonel Duke of Clarence, dyed both of them
before king Edward their father, and left each of them an heir, for that
Prince Edward left a son named Richard, who succeeded in the crown
immediately after his gra^dfather, by the name of king Richard the second, but
afterward for his euel government was deposed, and dyed in prison without
issue, and so was ended in him the succession of the first son of king
Edward.

The second son Leonel, dying also before his father, left behind him one
only daughter The issue of leonel the 2. son.
and heir, named Phillip, who was married to one Edmond mortimer Earl of
march, and he had by her a son and heir named Roger mortimer, which Roger
had issue two sons named Edmond and Roger, which dyed both without children,
and one daughter named Ann mortimer, which was married unto Richard
Plantaginet earl of Cambrige, second son unto Edmond Langly duke of York,
which duke Edmond was fourth son, as has bin said, unto king Edward the
third, and The issue of Edmond the 4 son.
for that this Richard Plantaginet married the said Anne as has bin said,
hereby it came to pass, that the house of York joined two titles in one, to
wit, that of Leonel duke of Clarence, which was the second son of K. Edward
the third, and that of Edmond langly duke of york which was the fourth son:
and albeit this Richard Plantaginet him self never came to be duke of York,
for that he was put to death whiles his elder brother lived, by king Henry the
fifth for a conspiracy discovered in South hampton against the said king, when
he was going over into france with his army: yet he left a son behind him
named also Richard, who afterward came to be duke of York, by the death of
his uncle, which uncle was (...) soon after in the battle of Ege^court in
France: and this Richard began first of al to prosecute openly his quarrel for
the title of the crown, against the house of Lancaster, as a little afterward
more in particular shall be declared, as also shall be showed how that this 2.
Richard duke of York being slame also in the same quariel, left a son named
Edward, earl of march, who after much trooble gat to be king, by the name of
king Edward the 4. by the oppression and putting down of king Henry the 6. of
the house of Lancaster, and was the first king of the house of York, whose
geuealogie we shall lay down more largly afterward in place convenient.

And now it follows in order that we should speak of John of Gau^t the
third son, but for that his descent is great, I shall first show the descent
of the fifth and last son of king Edward who was Thomas of Woodstock duke of
Gloucester and earl of Buckingham, The issue of Thomas the 5. son.
that was put to death afterward or rather murdered wrongfully, by order of
his nephew king Richard the second, and he left only one daughter and heir
named Anna who was married to the L. Stafford whose family afterward in
regard of this marriage came to be dukes of Bucking ha, and were put down by
king Richard the third, and king Henry the eight, albeit some of the blood and
name do remain yet still in Ingland.

And thus having brought to an end the issue of three sons of king Edward, to
wit of the first second and fifth, and touched also, some what of the fourth,
there rests to prosecute more fully the issues and disce^ts of the third and
fourth sons, to wit of John of Gaunt duke of La^caster, and of Edmond Langly
duke of York, which are the heads of these two noble families, which thing I
shall do in this place with al breuity and perspecuity possible, beginning first
with the house of Lancaster.

John of Gaunt third son of king Edward The issue of the 3. son duke of
Lancan.
being duke of Lancaster by his wife, as has bin said, had three wives in all,
and by every one of them had issue, though the bishop of Rosse in his great
Latin arbor of the genealogies of the kings of Ingland, printed in Parris in
the year 1580. assigns but one wife only to this John of Gaunt, and
consequently that al his childen were borne of her, which is a great and
manifest error and causes great confusion in all the rest which in his book of
the Queen of Scots title he buyldeth hereon, for that it being evident, that
only the first wife was daughter and heir of the house of Lancaster, and John
of Gant duke thereof by her, it follows that the children only that were
borne of her, can pretend properly to the inheritance of that house, and not
others borne of John of Gaunt by other wives as all the world vvil confess.

First then (as I have said) this John of Gaunt married Blanch daughter and
heir of Henry The issue by Lady Blanch.
duke of Lancaster, and had by her one son only and two daughters. The son
was called Henry earl first of Darby, and after made duke of Hereford by king
Richard the second, and after that came to be duke also of Lancaster by the
death of his father, and lastely was made king by the deposition of his cosen
german the said king Richard, and reigned 13. years by the name of king
Henry the fourth, and was the first king of the house of La^caster, of the
right of whose title examination shall be made afterward.

The first of the two daughters which John of Gaunt had by Blanch, was named
Phillip, L. Phillip married into Portuga^l and her issue.
who was married to John the first of that name king of Portugal, by whom she
had issue Edward king of Portugal, and he Alfonsus the fifth, and he John the
second and so one after another even unto our days.

The second daughter of John of Gaunt by Lady Elizabeth second daughter.
lady Blanch was named Elizabeth, who was married to John Holland duke of
Excester, and she had issue by him, an other John, duke of Excester, and he had
issue Henry duke of Excester, that dyed without issue male, leaving only one
daughter named Anne, who was married to Sir Thomas Neuill knight, and by him
had issue Raffe Neuill third earl of Westmerland, whose lineal heir is at
this day Lord Charles Neuill earl often Westmerland, that lives banished in
Flanders.

And this is all the issue that John of Gaunt had by lady Blanch his first
wife, saving only The issue of King Henry the 4.
that I had forgotten to prosecute the issue of Henry his first son, surnamed
of Bolenbrok, that was afterward called king Henry the fourth which king had
4. sons and two daughters, his daughters were Blanch and Phillip, the first
married to William duke of Bauaria, and the second to Erick king of Denmark,
and both of them dyed without children.

The four sons were first Henry that reigned after him by the name of Henry
the fifth, and the second was Thomas duke of Clarence, the third was John duke
of Bedford, and the fourth was Humfrey duke of Gloucester, al which three
dukes dyed without issue or were slain in vvarres of the realm, so as only
king Henry the fifth their elder brother had issue one son named Henry also,
that was king, and reigned 40. years by the name of Henry the sixth who had
issue prince Edward and both of them (I mean both father and son) were
murdered by order or permissio^ of Edward duke of York, who afterward took
the crown upon him; by the name of king Edward the fourth, as before has bin
said so as in this king Henry the 6. and his son prince Edward, ended all the
blood royal male of the house of Lancaster, by Blanch the first wife of John of
Gaunt, and the inheritance of the said lady Blanch returned by right of
succession as the favorers of the house of Portugal affirm though others deny
it, unto the heirs of lady Phillip her eldest daughter, married into Portugal,
whose nephew named Alfonsus the fifth king of Portugal lived at that day when
king Henry the 6. and his heir were made away, and this much of John of Gaunts
first marriage.

But after the death of the L. Blanch John of Gaunt married the Lady Constance,
daughter The issue of John of Gant by his 2. wife.
and heir of Peter the first surnamed the cruel king of Castile, who being
driven out of his kingdom by Henry his bastard brother, assisted thereunto by
the french, he fledd to Bordeaux with his wife and two daughters, where he
found prince Edward eldest son to king Edward the third, by whom he was
restored, and for pledge of his fidelity and performance of other conditions
that the said king Peter had promised to the Prince, he left his two daughters
with him, which daughters being sent afterward into England, the eldest of
them, The controversy in Spain betvveene King Peter the cruel and his bastard
brother.
named Constance, was married to John of Gaunt, and by her title he named
himself for diverse years afterward, king of Castile, and went to gain the
same by arms, when Peter her father was stayne by his foresaid bastard
brother, but yet some years after that again, their was an agreement made
between the said John of Gaunt, and John the first of that name, king of
Castile, son and heir of the foresaid Henry the bastard, with condition,
that Catherine the only daughter of John of (...) by lady Co^stance, should
marry with Henry the third prince of Castile, son, and Garibay l. 15 c. 26.
heir of the said king John, and nephew to the bastard Henry the 2. and by
this means was ended that controusie between Ingland and Castile, and the
said L. Catherine had issue by king Henry, John the 2. king of Castile, and he
Isabell that married with Ferdinando the Catholic king of Aragon, and joined
by that marriage both those kingdoms together, and by him she had a daughter
named Joan, that married Phillip duke of Austria and Burgundy, and by him had
Charles the fifth that was Emperor, and father to king Phillip that now
reigns in Spain, who (as we see) is descended two ways from John of Gaunt
duke of Lancaster, to wit by two daughters begotten of two wives, Blanch and
Constance, nether had John of Gaunt any more children by Constance but only
this daughter Catherine, of whom we have spoken, wherefore now we shall
speak of his third wife that was Lady Catherine Swinford. Of Lady Catherin
Svvinford hollings head in vita Richardi 2. page 1088.


This lady Catherin as Inglish histories do note, was borne in Henalt in
Flanders, and was daughter to a knight of that country called Sir Pain de
Ruet, and she was brought up in her youth in the duke of Lancasters house, and
attended upon his first wife lady Blanch, and being fair of personage, grew
in such favor with the duke, as in the time of his second wife Constance, he
kept this Catherin for his concubin, and begat upon her four children, to
wit, three sons, and a daughter, which daughter (whose name was Jane) was
married to Raph earl of Westmerland called commonly in those days Daw Raby,
of whom descended the Earls of Westmerland that insued. His three sons were
John, Thomas, and Henry, and John was first earl and then duke of Sommerset,
Thomas was first marquis Dorset, and then duke of Excester, Henry was Bishop
of Winchester and after Cardinal.

And after John of Gaunt had begotten al these 4. children upon Catherin, he
married her to a knight in Ingland named Swinford, which knight lived not many
years after, and John of Gaunt coming home to Ingland, from Aquitaine, vvher
he had bin for diverse years, and seeing this old concubine of his Catherine, to
be now a widow, and himself also without a wife (for that the lady Co^stance
was dead a little before) for the love that he bore to the children which he
had begotten of her he determined to marry her, and thereby the rather to
legitimate her children, though himself were old now and al his kyndred
utterly against the marriage, and so not full two years before his death, to
wit, in the year of Christ 1396. he married her, and the next The duke of
Lancasters ba stards made legitimate Hollingh in vita Rich. 2. page 1090.
year after in a parliament begun at Westminster, the 22. of January anno
Domini 1397. he caused al his said issue to be legitimated which he had
begotten upon this lady Swinford before she was his wife.

But now to go foreward to declare the issue of these three sons of John of
Gaunt by Catherine Swinford, two of them, that is, Thomas The issue of Catherin
Svvinfords chil dren.
duke of Excester, and Henry Cardinal and Bishop of Winchester, dyed without
issue, John the eldest son that was earl of Somerset had issue two sons,
John and Edmond, John that was duke of Somerset had issue one only daughter,
named Margeret who was married to Edmond Tidder earl of Richmond, by whom he
had a son named K. Henry 7.
Henry, earl also of Richmond, who after was afterward made king, by the
name of Henry the seventh, and was father to K. Henry the eight, and grand
father to the Q. majesty that now is, and this is the issue of John the first
son to the duke of Somerset.

Edmond the second son to John earl of Somerset, was first earl of
Mortaine, and then The dukes of Somerset.
after the death of his brother John (who dyed without issue male as has bin
said) was created by king Henry the sixte duke of Somerset, and both he and
almost al his kyn were slain in the quarrel of the said king Henry the 6. and
for defense of the house of La^caster, against York. For first this Edmond
himself was slain in the battle of S. Albanes, Polidor. hist. Ang. lib. 23.
against Richard duke and first pretender of York, in the year 1456. leaving
behind him three goodly sons, to wit, Henry Edmond and Hollings in vita
Edvvadi 4. pa. 1314 and 1340.
John, vvherof Henry succeeded his father in the duchy of Sommetset, and was
taken and beheaded in the same quarrel at Exham, in the year 1463. dying
without issue. Edmond likewise succeeded his brother Henry in the duchy of
Sommerset, and was taken in the battle of Tewkesbury in the same quarrel, and
there beheaded the 7. of May 1471. leaving no issew, John also the third brother
marquis of Dorset was slain in the same battle of Tewkesbury, and left no
issue, and so in these two noble men ceased utterly all the issue male of the
line of Lancaster, by the children of John of Gaunt, begotten upon lady
Swinford his third wife, so that al which remained of this woman, was only
Margeret Countess of Richmond, mother to king Henry the 7. which king Henry
the 7. and all that do descend from him in Ingland, or out of Inglande, do hold
the right of Lancaster, only by this third marriage What heirs of Lancaster
now roman in
of Catherine Swinford, as has bin showed, and no ways of Blanch the first
wife, or of Constance the second, and this is enough in this place of the
discents of John of Gaunt, and of the house of Lancaster, and therefore I shall
now pass over to show the issue of the house of York.

I Touched breefly before, how Edmond Langley duke of York fourth son of
king The issue of the house of York.
Edward the third, had two sons, Edward earl of Rutland, and duke of
Aumatle, that succeeded his father afterward in the duchy of York, and was
slain without children under king Henry the 5. in the battle of Egencourt
in France, and Richard earl of Cambridge which married lady Anne Mortimer, as
before has bin said, that was heir of the house of Richard Earl of Cambrige
executed.
Clarence, to wit of Leonel duke of Clarence, second son to king Edward the
third, by which marriage he joined together the two titles, of the second and
fourth sons of king Edward, and being himself convinced of a conspiracy
against king Henry the 5. was put to death in Southampton in the year of
Christ 1415. and third of the reygne of king Henry the 5. and fifth day of
August.

This Richard had issue by lady Anne Mortimer a son named Richard, who
succeeded his uncle Edward duke of York in the same duchy, and afterward
finding himself strong, made claim to the crown in the behalf of Richard
duke of York slain.
his mother, and declaring himself chief of the faction of the white rose,
gave occasion of many cruel battles against them of the red rose and house of
Lancaster, and in one of the battles which was given in the year 1460. at
Wakfilde, himself was slain, leaving behind him three sons, Edward George
and Richard, whereof Edward was afteward king of Ingland by the name of Edward
the fourth, George was duke of Clarence, and put to death in Calis in a butte
of secke or malmesie by the commandment of the king his brother, and Richard
was Duke of Gloucester and afterward king by murdering his own two nephews,
and was called king Richard the third.

Edward the eldest of these three brothers, which afterward was king, had issue
two Edward duke of York and King his issue.
sons Edward and Richard, both put to death in the tower of London by there
cruel uncle Richard, he had also five daughters, the last four whereof I do
purposly omit, for that of none of them there remains any issue, but the
eldest of al named Elizabeth was married to king Henry the 7. of the house of
Lancaster, and had by him issue, king Henry the 8. and two daughters, the one
married unto Scotland, vvherof are descended the king of Scots and Arbella, and
the other matryed to Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, vvherof are issued the
children of the earls of Hartford and Darby, as after more at large shall be
handled, and this is the issue of the first brother of the house of York.

The second brother George duke of Clarence had issue by his wife lady Isabel
heir to the earldomes of Warwick and Salisbury, one son named Edward earl
of Warwick, who was put to death afterward in his youth, by King Henry the 7.
and left no issue, this duke George had also one daughter named Margaret
admitted by King Henry the eight (at what time he sent her into wales with the
princess Mary) to be cou^resse of Salisbury, but yet married very meanly to a
knight of wales, named Sir Richard Poole, by whom she had four The line of
the Pooles.
sons, Henry, Arthur Geffrey, and Renald, the lastvvherof was Cardinal, and
the other two Arthur and Geffrey had issue, for Arthur had two daughters Mary
and Margaret, Mary was married to Sir John Stanny, and Margaret to Sir Thomas
fitzharbert, Sir Geffrey Poole, had also issue an other Geffrey Poole, and he
had issue Arthur and Geffrey which yet live.

Now then to return to the first son of the countess of Salisbury named
Henry, that was Lord Montague, and put to death both he and his mother, by
king Henry the 8. this man I say, left two daughters, Catherine and vvenefred,
Catherine was married to Sir Francis Hastings earl of Huntington, by which
The line of the hastings.
marriage issued Sir Henry Hastings now earl of Huntington, and Sir Georg
Hastings his brother, who has diverse children. And Wenefred the younger
daughter was married to Sir The Baringtons.
Thomas Barington knight, who also wants notissue, and this is of the second
brother of the house of York, to wit, of the duke of Clarence.

The third brother Richard duke of Gloucester King Richard 3.
and afterward king, left no issue, so as this is all that is needful to be
spoken of the house of York, in which we see that the first and principal
competitor is the king of Scots, and after him Arbella, and the children of the
earls of Hartford and Darby are also competitors of the same house, as
descended by the daughter of the first brother, Edward duke of York, and king
of England, and then the Earl of Huntington and his generation, as also the
Pooles, Barringtons, and others before named, are or may be titlers of York, as
descended of George duke of Clarence, second son of Richard duke of York,
all which issue yet seem to remain only within the compass of the house of
York, for that by the former pedegre of the house of Lancaster it seems to
the fauorets of this house that none of these other co^petitors are properly of
the line of Lancaster, for that king Henry the 7. coming only of John of Gaunt
by Catherin Swinford his third wife, could have no part in Lady Blanch that
was only inheritour of that house, as to these men seems evident.

Only then it remains for the ending of this chapter, to explane somewhat
more clearly the descent of king Henry the 7. and of his issue. for better
understanding whereof you must consider, that king Henry the 7. being of the
house of Lancaster, in the manner that you have heard, and marrying Elizabeth
the eldest daughter of the contrary house of York, did seem to join both
houses together, and make an end of that bloody controversy, though Issue of
king Henry the 7.
others now will say no, but how soever that was (which after shall be examined)
clear it is, that he had by that marriage one only son, that left issue, and
two daughters, his son was king Henry the 8. who by three several wives,
had three children that have reigned after him, to wit king Edward the 6. by
Queen Jane Seymer, Queen Mary by Queen Catherine of Spain, and Queen
Elizabeth by Queen Anne Bullen, of al which three children no issue has
remained, so as now we must return to consider the issue of his daughters.

The eldest daughter of king Henry the 7. named Margaret was married by her
first marriage, Issue of the lady Mary of Scotland.
to James the fourth king of Scots, who had issue James the 5. and he again
Lady mary, late Queen of Scots, and dowager of France, put to death not long
ago in Ingland, who left issue James the 6. now king of Scots. And by her
second marriage the said Lady Margeret after the death of king James the 4.
took for husband Archebald Duglas, earl of Anguys in Scotland, by whom she
had one only daughter, named Margeret which was married to Matthew Steward,
earl of Lenox, and by him she had two sons, to wit Henry Lord Darly, and
Charles Steward, Henry married the foresaid Lady Mary Queen of Scotland and
was murdered in Edinbrough in the year 1566. as the world knows, and
Charles his brother married Elizabeth the daughter of Sir William Candish in
Ingland, by whom he had one only daughter yet living named Arbella, an other
competitor of the crown of Ingland, by the house of York, and this much of
the first daughter of king Henry the 7. Mary the second daughter of king Henry
the 7. and younger Issue of mary 2. sister to K. Henry.
sister to king Henry the 8. was married first to Lewis the 12. king of France,
by whom she had no issue, and afterward to Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, by
who^ she had two daughters, to wit, Frances and Elenor, the lady Francis was
married first to Henry Gray marquis of Dorset, and after duke of Suffolk,
behedded by Queen mary, and by him she had three daughters, to wit lane,
Catherine, and Mary: the lady Jane eldest of the three, was married to Lady
Francis.
L. Guylford Dudly, son to John Dudly late duke of Northumberland, with whom
(I mean with her husband and father in law) she was beheaded soon after for
being proclaimed Queen, upon the death of king Edward the fixed: the lady
Catherine second daughter married first the lord Henry Herbert earl of
Penbroke, and left by him again she dyed afterward Stow. An. 7. Edward 6.
in the tower, where she was prisoner for having had two children by Edward
Seymer earl of Hartford, without sufficient proof that she was married unto
him, and the two children are yet living, to wit, Henry Seymer, commonly
called lord Beacham, and Edward Seymer his brother. The lady mary the third
sister though she was betrothed to Arthur lord Gray of wilton, and married
after to Martin keys gentleman porter, yet has she left no issue, as far as I
understand.

This then is the end, of the issue of Lady Francis, first of the two daughters
of Queen Mary of France by Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, for albeit the
said lady Francis, after the beheading of the said Henry Lord Gray duke of
Suffolk her first husband, married again one Adrian Stokes her servant, and
had a son by him, yet it lived not, but dyed very soon after.

Now then to speak of the younger daughter of the said French Queen and duke,
named Of Lady Elen or of Suffolk.
Elinor, she was married to Henry Clifford Earl of Comberla^d, who had by her
a daughter named Margaret that was married to Lord Henry Stanley earl of
Darby, by whom she has a plentiful issue, as Ferdinand now earl of Darby
William Stanley, Francis Stanley, and others, and this is all that needs to be
spoken of these discents of our Inglish kings, princes, peers or competitors
to the crown for this place, and therefore now it rests only that we begin
to examine what different pretentions are framed by diverse parties, upon these
dissents and genealogies, which is the principal point of this our discourse.

OF THE GREAT AND GENERAL CONTROVERSY AND CONTENTION BETVVEENE the two houses
royal of Lancaster and York, and which of them may seem to have had the better
right to the crown by way of succession.
CAP. IIII.
AND first of al before I do descend to treat in particular of the different
pretenses of several persons and families, that have issued out of these two
royal linages of Lancaster and York, it shall perhaps not be amiss, to
discuss with some attention, what is, or has, or may be said, on both sides
for the general controversy that lies between them, yet vndescided in many
men's opinions, notwithstanding their has bin so much sturr about the same, and
not only writing and disputing, but also fighting and murdering for many
years. And truly if we look into diverse histories records Variety of
authors opinions about this controversy.
and authors which have written of this matter, we shall find that every one
of them speaks commonly according to the time wherein they lived, for that al
such as wrote in the time of the three Henry's, fourth, fifth, and sixth kings of
the house of Lancaster, they make the title of Lancaster very clear, and
undoubted, but such others as wrote since that time ((...) the house of York
has held the scepter) they have spoken in far different manner, as namely
Polydor that wrote in king Henry the 8. his time, and others that have followed
him since, do take al right from the house of Lancaster, and give the same to
the house of York, Polydor in fine vit. Henr. 3. and initio vit. Henr. 4. and
in vit. Rich. An. 1386.
wherefore the best way I suppose will be, not so much to consider what
historiographers do say according to their affections, or interests, as what
reasons, and profes be alleged of every side, for that by this, we shall more
easily come to judge where the right or wrong does lie.

First therefore, the defendors of the house of York do allege, that their
title is plain and The allegations of the house of york.
evident, for that as in the former chapter has bin declared, Richard duke of
York first pretender of this house, whose father was son to Edmond Langley
duke of York, fourth son of king Edward the third and his mother Anne
Mortimer that was niece once removed, and sole heir to Leonel duke of
Clarence, second son of the said king Edward, this Richard (I say) duke of
York pretended, that for so much as he had two titles joined together in
himself, and was lawful heir as well to duke Leonel the second brother, as
to duke Edmond the fourth, that he was to be preferred in succession of the
crown after the death of king Richard the second, heir of the first son of
king Edward, before the issue of John of Gaunt that was but third son to the
said king Edward, and consequently that Henry Bolenbrook John of Gaunts son
duke of Lancaster, called afterward king Henry the fourth, entered the crown by
tyranny and violence, first for deposing, the true and lawful king Richard, and
secondly for taking the kingdom upon himself, which kingdom after the
death of the foresaid king Richard (which happened in the year 1399) belonged
to Edmond mortimer Earl of march, then living, and after his death to Anne
Mortimer his sister, married to Richard earl of Ca^bridge father to this
Richard pretendent duke of York, as has bin said, for that this Edmond and
Anne Mortimer were children to Roger Mortimer son of Phillip that was
daughter to duke Leonel, which Leonel was elder uncle to king Richard, and
before John of Gaunt the younger brother, whose son took the crown upon
him.

For the better understanding of which pretense and allegation of the house of
York The story of the controversy betvveene Lancaster and York.
against Lancaster, we must note the story following, to wit, that king Edward
the third, seeing in his old age, that prince Edward his eldest son, whom of
al his children he loved most dearly, was dead (though their vvanted not much
doubt in some men's heads as after shall be showed who ought to succeed) yet the
old man for the exceeding affection he bare to the dead prince, would hear
nothing in that behalf, but appointed Richard the said prince Edwards only
son and heir to succed him in the kingdom, and made the same to be
confirmed by act of parliament, and enforced al his children then a live, to
swear to the same, which were John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, his third and
eldest son that then lived, (for Leonel his second son duke of Clarence,
was dead before) and Edmond Langley and Thomas Woodstock earls at that time
but after dukes of York and Gloucester, and so king Richard reigned with good
obedience of his uncles and their children for 20. years together, but in the
end when he grew insolent and had put to death his uncle the duke of Gloucester
together with the earl of Arundel, and banished many others of the nobility,
and among them the Archbishop of Canterbury, as also his own cousin german
Henry duke of Hereford, and after of Lancaster, son and heir of John of
Gaunt, and had made many wicked statutes as well against the church and state
Ecclesiastical, as also to entangle Polydor. in vita Richard. 2. lib. 20.
the realm and nobility with feigned crimes of treason against his regaltie, as
then he termed them, the principal men of the realm seeing a fit occasion
offered by the kings absence in Ireland, called home out of France the foresaid
Henry duke of Lancaster, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, earls of Arundel
and Warwick, and others which were in banishment, and by common consent
gathered upon the sudden such an army to assist them in Ingland, as they
took the king, King Richards de position.
brought him to London, and there in a parliament laying together the
intolerable faults of his government, they deprived him of al regal dignity, as
before they had done to his great grandfather king Edward the second, and then
by universal consent of the parliament and people their present, they chose and
admitted the said Henry duke of Lancaster to be their king, who continewed so
all the days of his life, and left the crown unto his son, and sons son,
after him, by the space of threescore years, until this Richard before named
duke of York, made challenge of the same in manner and form as before has bin
showed.

Now then the story being this, the question is first, whether Richard the
second were justly Chief points of the controversy betvveene Lancaster and
York.
deposed or no, and secondly whether after his deposition the house of York or
house of La^caster should have entered, and thirdly if the house of Lancaster
did commit any wrong or injustice at their first entrance to the crown, yet
whether the continuance of so many years in possession, with so many
approbations and confirmations thereof by the common wealth were not
sufficient to legitimate their right.

Concerning which points many things are alleged by the favorers of both
families, and Three points about king Richards depositio^
in the first point touching the lawfulnes or unlawfulness of king Richards
deposition, three articles especially do seem most considerable, to wit, about
the thing in it self whether a lawful king may be deposed upon just causes,
and secondly about these causes in king Richards deposition, to wit, whether
they were just or sufficient for deposition of the said king, and lastly,
about the manner of doing it, whether the same were good and orderly or not.

And touching the first of these three points, which is, that a king upon
just causes may be That a true K. may be deposed.
deposed I think both parties though never so contrary between themselves,
vvil easily agree, and the Civil lawyer seems to me to have proved it so
evidently before throughout his whole discourse, as I think very little may be
said against the same. For he has declared (if you remember) both by reason
authority and examples of al nations Christian, that this may and has and
ought to be done, when urgent occasions are offered. And first by reason he
shows it, for that al kingly authority is given (...). Reason.
them only by the common wealth, and that with this express condition, that
they shall govern according to law and equity, that this is the cause of their
exaltation above other men, that this is the end of their government, the butt
of their authority, the starr and pole by which they ought to direct their
stern, to wit, the good of the people, by the weal of their subjects, by
the benefit of the realm, which end being taken away or perverted, the king
becomes a tyrant, a Tigar, a fearse Lion, a ravening wolf, a public enemy,
and a bloody murderer, which were against al reason both natural and moral,
that a common wealth could not deliver it self from so eminent a destruction.

By authority also you have heard it proved, of 2. Authority.
al lawmakers, Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines and Governors of common
wealths, who have set down in their statutes and ordonances that kings shall
swear and protest at their entrance to government, that they vvil observe and
perform the conditions their promised, and otherwise to have no interest in
that dignity, and soueraintie.

By examples in like manner of al realms 3. Examples.
christian he declared, how that often-tymes they have deposed their princes
for just causes, and that God has concurred and assisted wonderfully the-same,
sending them commonly very good kings after those that were deprived, and in
no country more then in Ingland it self, yea in the very line and familye of
this king Richard, whose noble grandfather king Edward the third was exalted
to the crown by a most solemn deposition of his predecessor king Edward the
second, wherefore in this point their can be little controversy, and therefore
we shall pass unto the second, which is, whether the causes were good and
just for which this king Richard was esteemed worthy to be deposed.

And in this second point much more difference Whether the causes were
their is betwixt York and Lancaster, and between the white rose and the
redd, for sufficient of King Rich. deposition.
that the house of York seeking to make the other odious, as though they had
entered by tyranny and cruelty, does not stick to avouch, that king Richard
was unjustly deposed, but against this the house of Lancaster alleges first,
that the house of York ca^ not justly say this, for that the chief prince
assistant to the deposing of king Richard, was lord Edmond himself duke of
York and head of that family, together with Edward earl of Rutland and duke
of Aumarle, his eldest son and heir, yea and his younger son also Richard
earl of Cambrige, father to this Richard that now prete^deth, for so do write
both Stow Hollingshead and other chroniclers of Ingland, that those princes of
the house of York, did principally assist Henry duke of Lancaster in getting
the crown, and deposing king Richard, and Polidor The house of York chief
doer in deposing King Richard.
speaking of the wicked government of king Richard, and of the first cogitation
about deposing him when king Henry of Lancaster was yet in France, banished,
and seemed not to think of any such matter, he has these words. Sed Edmundo
Eboracensium duei, ears cum Polyd. lib. 20. histor. Angl.
primis bilem commouit, quod rex omnia iam iura peruerteret, quod antea
parricidio, and postea rapinis se obstrinxisset, etc. That is, this matter of
the wicked government of king Richard, did principally offend his uncle Edmond
duke of York, for that he saw the king now to pervert al law and equity, and
that as before he had defiled himself with parricide, that is, with the
murder of his own Uncle the duke of Gloucester, brother to this Edmond, so now
he entangled himself also with rapine, in that he took by violence the goods
and inheritance of John ofGaunt, late deceased, which did belong to Henry duke
of Lancaster, his cosen german, by which words of Polidor as also for that
the duke of Lancaster coming out of Britayne accompaned only with three Addit
ad Polycromicon.
score persons, (as some stories say) chose first to go into Yorke-shire and
to enter at Rauenspurr at the mouth of Humber, as all the world knows (which
he would never have done if the princes of York had not principally favored
him in that action) all this (I say is an evident argument that these princes of
the house of York were then the chief doers in this deposition, and
consequently cannot allege now with reason that the said Richard was deposed
unjustly.

Secondly the house of Lancaster, alleges for the justifying of this
deposition, the opinions Testimony of stories.
of al historiographers, that ever have written of this matter, whether they
be Inglish French Duch Latin, or of any other nation or language, who al with
one accord do affirm, that king Richards government was intolerable, and he
worthy of deposition, whereof he that will se more let him read Thomas of
Walsingham, and John Frosard in the life of king Richard.

Thirdly they of Lancaster do allege, the The evil gouerme^t of king Richard.
particular outrages and insolences of king Richards government, and first the
suffering himself to be carried away with evil counsel of his favorites and
the^ the perverting of al laws generally under his government, as before you
have hard out of Polidor, the joining with his my nio^s for opressing the
nobility of which Stow has these words. The king being at Bristow Stow in
vit. Rich. 2. page 502 regni 11.
with Robert de Vere duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk,
devised how to take away the duke of Gloucester, the earls of Arundel,
Warwick, Darby and Notingham, and others whose deaths they conspired: thus
says Stow. And soon after they executed the most par of their devises, for
that Thomas of Woodstock duke of Gloucester, was made away without law or
process, the earl of Arundel also was put to death, and Warwick was
banished, and so was also Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, by like
injustice, and the like was done to Henry duke of Hereford, and after of
Lancaster, and among other insolences he suffered Robert Vere to dishonor and
put from him his wife, a noble and goodly young Lady (as Stow says) and borne
of Lady Isabel king Richards aunt, that was daughter to king Edward the third,
and suffered Vere to marry an other openly to her Agreat insole^cy.
disgrace and dishonor of her kynred. And finaly in the last parliament that
ever he held, which was in the 21. year of his reign, commonly called the
euel parliament, he would needs have al authority absolute granted to certain
fauourits of his, which Thomas Walsingham says, were not above 6. or 7. to
determine of all matters with al full authority, as if they only had bin the
whole realm, which was nothing in deed but to take al authority to him
self only, and Stow in his chronicle has these words following. This
parlameut began about the 15. of September in the year 1397. at the beginning
whereof, Edward The euel parlame^t Stow an. 21. regni Richard.
Stafford Bishop of Exceter Lord Chancellor of Ingland made a proposition or
sermon, in which he affirmed that the power of the king, was alone, and perfect
of it self, and those that do impeatch it were worthy to suffer pain of the
law, etc. thus says Stow, by all which is evident, how exorbitant and contrary
to al law and equity this kings government was.

Fourthly and lastly, those of Lancaster do allege for justifying of this
deprivation, that The duke of Laneaster called by common request.
duke Henry was called home by express lettres of the more and better part of
all the realm, and that he came wholy (in a manner) vn-armed considering his
person, for that frosard says he had but three ships only out of Britanie,
and Walsingham says he had but 15. Lances and 400. footmen, and the additions
Frosard. Walsingham.
to Polychronicon as before I noted, do avouch, that when he landed at
Rauenspurt in the county of York, he had but threescore men in all to begin the
reformation of his realm against so potent a tyrant, as King Richard was then
accounted, and yet was the concourse of al people so great and general unto
him, that within few days he achiued the matter, and that without any battle
or bloodshed at al, and thus much for the iustnes of the cause.

But now if we vvil consider the manner and form of this act, they of
Lancaster do affirm Whether the manner of deposing King Richard were good.
also that it could not be executed in better nor more convenient order. First
for that it was done by the choice and inuitation of all the realm or greater
and better part thereof as has bin said. Secondly for that is was done
without slaughter, and thirdly for that the king was deposed by act of
parliament, and himself convinced of his unworthy government, and brought to
confess that he was vvorthely deprived, and that he willingly and freely
resigned the same: nether can their be any more circumstances required (say
these men) for any lavvful deposition of a Prince.

And if any man will yet object and say that notwithstanding all this their was
violence, for that duke Henry was armed and by force of arms brought, this to
pass, they of Lancaster do answer, that this is true, that he brought the
matter to an (...) Roboam for the sins of Solomon his father, 1. Roboam
deposed by his subjects of ten tribes.
and yet spare him also in part for the sake of his grand father David, he
caused a rebellion to be raised against him by Jeroboam his servant, and more
then three parts of four of his people, to rebel against him, and this by
Gods own instinct and motion, and by his express allowance thereof after it
was done, as the scripture avouches, and if Roboam had fought against them,
for this fault (as once he had thought to do and was prepared with a main
army) no doubt but they might have lawfully stayne him, for that now these tenn
tribes that for-sooke him had just authority to depose him, for his euel
government, and for 2. Reg. 11 and 12.
not yealding to their just request made unto him, for easing them of those
grievous tributes laid upon them, as the scripture reports. For 2. Paralip.
cap. 10.
albeit God had a meaning to punish him, for the sins of his father Solomon,
yet suffered he that Roboam also should give just occasion him self for the
people to leave him, as appears by the story, and this is Gods high vvisdome
justice, providence, and sweet disposition in humane affairs.

An other example of punishing and deposing euel Princes by force, they do
allege out of the first book of kings, where God appointed Ioram and his
mother Iesabel deposed by force.
Elizens the Prophet to send the son of an other Prophet to annoint Iehu,
Captain of Ioram, king of Israel, which Ioram was son to the Queen
Iezabel, and to persuade Iehu to take arms against his said king, and against
his mother the Queen, and to deprive them both, not only of their kingdoms
but also of their lives, and so he did, for the scripture says, Coniurauit
ergo Iehu contra Ioram. Iehu did conjure 4. Reg. 9.
and conspite at the persuasion of this Prophet, with the rest of his fellow
Captains, against his king Ioram, and Queen Iezabel the kings mother, to put
them down, and to put them to death with all the ignomy he could devise, and
God allowed thereof, and persuaded the same by so holy a Prophet as Elizeus
was, whereby we may assure our selves that the fact was not only lawful but
also most godly, albeit in it self it might seem abominable.

And in the same book of kings within two chapters after, there is an other
example how 5. Athalia deprived by force.
God moved loiada high priest of Jerusalem to persuade the Captains and
Coronels of that cittye to conspire against Athalia the Queen that had reigned
6. years, and to arm them selves with the armor of the temple, for that 4.
Reg. 11.
purpose, and to beseige the palace where she lay, and to kill al them that
should offer or go about to defend her, and so they did, and having taken her
alive, she was put to death also by sentence of the said high priest, and the
fact was allowed by God, and highly commended in the scripture, and Ioas young
king of the blood royal was crowned in her place, and all this might have bin
done as you see without such trouble of arms, and bloodshed, if God would,
but he appointed this several means for working of his will, and for releeuing
of common wealths oppressed by euel princes. And this seems sufficient
proof to these men, that king Richard of Ingland might be removed by force of
arms, his life and government being so euel and pernicious as before has bin
showed.

It remains then that we pass to the second Whether Lancaster or York
should have entered after king Richard.
principal point proposed in the beginning, which was, that supposing this
deprivation of king Richard was just and lawful, what house by right should
have succeeded him, either that of la^caster as it did, or the other of York.

And first of al it is to be understood, that at that very time when king
Richard was deposed, the house of York had no pretense or little at al to the
crown, for that Edmond Mortimer earl of march, nephew to the lady Phillip,
was then alive, with his sister Anne Mortymer married to Richard earl of
Cambrige, by which Anne the house of York did after make their claim, but
could not do so yet, for that the said Edmond her brother was living, and so
continued many years after, as appears, for that we read that he was
alive 16. years after this, to wit, in the third year of the reign of king
Henry the fifth when his said brother in law, Richard earl of Cambrigs was
put to death, in Southhampton whom this Edmond appeached as after shall be
showed, and that this Edmond was now earl of March when king Richard was
deposed, and not his father Roger (as Polidot mistaketh) is evident, by that
that the said Polidor L. 20. in vit. Richard.
Roger was slain in Ireland, a little before the depositio^ of King Richard,
to wit, in the year 1398. and not many months after he had bin declared
heir apparent by king Richard, and Rogers father named Edmond also, husband of
the lady Phillip, dyed some three years before him, that is, before Roger, as
after will be seen, so as seeing that at the deposition of king Richard, this
Edmond Mortimer elder brother to Anne was yet living, the question cannot be
whether the house of York should have entered to the crown presently after the
deprivation of king Richard, for they had vet no pretense as has bin showed,
but whether this Edmond Mortimer, as heir of Leonel duke of Clarence, or else
Henry the duke of Lancaster heir of John of Gaunt should have entered. For as
for the house of York their was yet no question, as appears also by Stow in
his chronicle, Stow (...) vita Richard. 2.
who sets down how that after the said deposition of Richard, the
Archbishop of Canterbuty asked the people three times, whom they would have to
be their king, whether the duke of York their standing present or not, and
they answered no: and then he asked the seronde time if they would have his
eldest son, the duke of Aumaile, and they said no, he asked the third time,
if they would have his yongest-sonne, Richard earl of cambridge, and they said
no. Thus writes Stow, vvher-by it is evident. that albeit this earl of
Cabridge had married now the sister of Edmond Mortimer, by whom his posterity
claymed afterward, yet could he not pretend at this time, her brother being yet
alive, who after dying without issue, left al his right to her, and by her to
the house of York: for albeit this earl Richard never came to be duke of
York, for that he was beheaded bv king Henry the fifth at Southampton as
before has (...) said, while his elder brother was a live, yet left he a
son named Richard, that after him came to be duke of York, by the death of
his uncle Edmund duke of York that dyed without issue, as on the other side
also by his mother Anne Mortimer, he was earl of March, and was the first of
the house of York that made title to the crown.

So that the question now is, whether after the deposition of king Richard,
Edmond Mortimer Whether the earl of march or duke of Lancaster should have
luc ceded to king Richard.
nephew removed of Leonel (which Leonel was the second son to king Edward)
or else Henry duke of Lancaster, son to John of Gaunt (which John was third
son to king Edward) should by right have succeeded to king Richard, and for
Edmond is alleged, that he was heir of the elder brother, and for Henry is
said, that he was nearer by two degrees to the stem or last king, that is to
say, to king Richard deposed, then Edmond was, for that Henry was son to
king Richards uncle of Lancaster, and Edmond was but nephew removed, that is to
say, daughters sons son, to the said king Richards other uncle of York.
And that in such a case, the next in degree of consanguinitie, to the last
king, is to be preferred (though he be not of the elder line) the favorers of
Lancaster allege many proofs, where of some shall be touched a little after: and
we have seen the same practiced in our days in France, where the Cardinal of
Burbone by the judgment of the most part of that realm, was preferred to the
crown for his propinquity in blood to the dead king, before the king of
Navarre, though he were of the elder line.

Moreover it is alleged for Henry that his title came by a man, and the others
by a woman, The title of York is by a VVoma^.
which is not so much favored either by nature law or reason, and so they
say that the pretenders of this title of lady Phillippe that was daughter of
duke Leonel, never opened their mouths in those days to claim, until some
50. years after the deposition and death of king Richard. Nay more Stow in
vit. Henrici 5 au 3. regni.
over they of Lancaster say, that sixteen years after the deposition of king
Richard, when king Henry the fifth was now in possession of the crown,
cerrayne noble me^, and especially Richard earl of Cambridge, that had married
this Edmond Mortimers sister, offered to have slain king Henry and to have made
the said Edmond Mortymer king, for that he was descended of duke Leonel, but
he refused the matter, thinking it not to be according to equity, and so went
and discovered the whole treason to the king, wheruppo^ they were al put to
death in Southampton, within four or five days after, as before has bin The
earl of Cambrige executed for conspiracy.
noted, and this hapened in the year 1415. and from hence foreward until the
year 1451. and thirreth of the reign of king Henry the sixth, which was 36
years after the execution, done upon these conspirators, no more mention or
pretense was made of this matter, at what time Richard duke of York began to
move troobles about it again.

Thus say those of the house of Lancaster, but now these of York have a great
argument for themselves, as to them it seems, which is, that in the year of
Christ 1385. and 9 year An objection for York that Edmond Mortymer was
declared heir apparent. Polydor l. 20. and Stow. in vit Rich. (...) an. 1385
of the reign of king Richard the second it was declared by act of parliament
(as Polidor writes) that Edmond Mortimer, who had married Phillip daughter
and heir of Leonel duke of Clarence, and was grandfather to the last Edmond by
me named, should be heir apparent to the crown, if the king should chance to
dye without issue.

To which objection those of Lancaster do answer, first, that Polidor does err
in the person, when he says that Edmond husband of lady Philippe was declared
for heir apparent, for that his Edmond Mortimer that married lady Philippe,
dyed peacably in Ireland three years before this parliament was holden, to
wit, in the year of Christ 1382. as both Hollings Hollings-head in vit. Rich.
2. page 1088. Stow. an. 1382.
head Stow and other chroniclets do testify, and therefore Polidor does err
not only in this place about this man, but also in that in an other place he
says, that this Edmond so declared heir apparent, by king Richard, was
slain by the Irish in Ireland 12. years after this declaration made of the
succession, to wit Polydor li. 20. an. 1394.
in the year 1394. which was in deed not this man, but his son Roger
Mortimer, heir to him, and to the Lady Phillip his wife who was declared
heir apparent, in the parliament before said, at the instance of king Richard,
and that for especial hatred and malice (as these men say) vhich he did beat
against his said uncle the duke of Lancaster, and his son Henry, whom he
desired to exclude from the succession.

The cause of this hatred, is said to be, for that The cause of hatred be
rvveeue king Richard and the house of Lancaster.
presently upon the death of prince Edward father to this Richard, which
prince dyed in the year of Christ 1376. and but 10. months before his father
king Edward the third: their vvanted not diverse learned and wise men in
Ingland, that were of opinion that John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster, eldest
son then living of the said king Edward, should have succeeded his father,
iure propinquitatis, before Richard that was but nephew, and one degree
further of then he, but the old king was so extremly affectionate unto his
eldest son, the black prince Edward, newly dead, that he would not hear of
any to succeed him (as Frosard says) but only Richard the said princes son.
Wherefore he called presently John frosard in histo.
a parliament, which was the last that ever he hold, and therein caused his
said nephew Richard to be declared heir apparent, and made his three sons
then living, that were uncles to the youth, to wit John of Gaunt, duke of
Lancaster, and Edmond Langhly duke afterward of York, and Thomas woodstock
duke of Gloucester, to swear fealty unto Richard, as they did. And albeit John
of Gaunt al his life after, for keeping of his oath that he had made unto his
father, never pretended any right to the crown, yet king Richard knowing well
the pretense that he and his might have, was still afraid of him, and sought
infinite means to be rydd of him, first by persuading him to go and make
war in Spain vvher he thought he might miscarry in so dangerous an attempt,
and then offering Polydor. Hollings Stow in vita (...) 2
to give him al Aquitaine if he would leave Ingland to go and live there, as
he did for three years, with extreme peril, for that the people of Aquitaine
would not receive him, but rose against him, and refused his government, and
would not admit him for their Lord, but appealed to the king, who also
allowed thereof, and so when John of Gaunt came home into Ingland again, king
Richard thought no better way to weaken him, then to banish his son, Henry
duke of Herford, and so he did. And besides this, the said king Richard
practiced also by diverse secret drifts, the death of his said uncle the duke of
Lancaster, as Walsingham witnesses, Tho vvassing in vit Richardi 2. page 341.
and 344.
and when the said duke came at lenghte to dye, which was in the 22. year of
king Richards reign he vvrote such joyous letters thereof (as frossard says)
to his father in law the sixth Charles king of France, as though he John Fros
sard in vit. He^ri.
had bin delivered of his chiefest enemy, not immagining that his own
distructio^ was so near at hand, and much accelerated by the death of the said
duke, as it was.

And these were the causes, say the favorers of the house of Lancaster, why
king Richard caused this act of parliament to pass in favor of Roger
Mortimer, and in prejudice of the house of Lancaster, and not for Why To ger
Mortimer was declared heir apparent.
that the right of earl Mortimer, was better then that of the duke of
Lancaster. And this they say is no new thing for princes often times to procure
partial laws to pass in parliament, for matter of succession, according to
their own affections, for the like (say they) did Edward the third procure in
the favor of this Richard, as before I have shevved in the last parliament,
before his death, and afterward again king Richard the third with much more
open (...), caused an act of parliament to pass in his days, vvherby his
nephew John de la pole earl of Lincoln, son to his sister Elizabeth
duchess Hollings. in vit. Richard 3. page 1406. and in vit. Edward 6. pa. 1715
of Suffolk, was declared heir apparent to the crown, excluding thereby the
children of his two elder brothers, to wit the daughters of king Edward the
fourth, and the son and daughter of Georg duke of Clarence, which yet by all
order should have gone before their sisters children.

And like facility found king Henry the 8. to get the consent of two
parlaments, to give him authority to appointe what successor he would, of his
own kynred, by which authority afterward he appointed by his testament (as in
an other place shall be showed) that the issue of his younger sister mary, should
be preferred before the issue of his eldest sister Margaret, of Scotland.

A like declaration was that also, of king The declaration of king Edward 6.
in favor of the Lady Jane Gray.
Edward the sixth, of late memory, who appointed, the lady Jane Gray his cosen
germane removed, to be his heir and successor in the crown of Ingland, and
excluded his own two sisters, the lady Mary and the lady Elizabeth from the
same: but these declaratio^s make little to the purpose when right and equity
do repugne, as these men say that it did, in the fore said declaration of Roger
Mortimer, to be heir apparent, for that they hold and auow the house of
Lancaster, to have had the true right to enter, not only after the death of
king Richard the second (as it did) but also before him, that is to say,
immediately upon the death of king Edward the third, for that John of Gaunt
was then the eldest son, which king Edward had living, and nearer to his
father by a degree, then was Richard the nephew. About which point to wit,
whether the uncle or the nephew should be preferred in succession of
kingdoms, it seems that in this age of K. Edward the third there was great
trouble, and controversy in the world abroad, for so testifies Girard du
Haillan Counceler and secretary of France, in his story of the year of Christ
1346. which was about the midst of king Edwards reign, and therefore no
marvel Girard de Haillan l. 15. his Fran. initio.
though king Edward took such care of the sure establishing of his nephew
Richard in succession, as is before related. And much less maruail is it if
king Richard had still great ielosy of his uncle the duke of Lancaster, and of
his offspring, considering how doubtful the question was among the wise and
learned of those days. For more declaration vvher-of I think it not amiss to
allege the very words of the foresaid chronicler with the examples by him
recited, thus then he vvriteth.

About this time (says he) their did arise a great and doubtful question in
the world, whether Whether uncles or nephevves to be preferred in Succession.
uncles or nephews, that is to say, the younger brother, or else the children of
the elder, should succed unto realms and kingdoms, which co^trouersy put al
christianity into great broils and troobles. For first Charles the second king
of Naples begar of Mary his wife Queen and heir of Hungary, diverse children,
but namely three sons, Marrel, Robert, and Phillip, (...) dying before his
father left a son named Charles, which in his grandmothers right was king
also of Hungary, but about the kingdom of Naples the question was, when king
Charles was dead, who should succeed him, either Charles his nephew king of
Hungary, or Robert his second son, but Robert was preferred and reigned in
Naples, and enjoyed the earldome of Province in France also, for the space of
33. years with great renown of valor and wisdom. And this is one example
that (...) recounteth, which example is reported by the famous lawyer (...)
Barthol. in (...) C. (...) and (...). (...).
in his commentaries, touching the succession of the kingdom of Sicilia, and
he says, that this succession of the uncle before the nephew, was auerred
also for rightful by the learend of that time, and confirmed for inst by the
judicial (...) of Pope Boniface, and that for the reasons which afterward
shall be showed, when we shall treat of this question more in particular.

An other example also reports Girard, The (...) of the (...)
which (...) immediately after, in the same place, for that the forsaid king
Robert, having a son named Charles, which dyed before (...) he left a
daughter and heir named Joan, niece unto king Robert, which Joan was married
to Andrew the younger son of the foresaid Charles king of Hungary, but king
Robert being dead; there stepped up one Lewis prince of Tarranto, a place of the
same kingdom of Naples, who was son to Phillip before mentioned, vonger
brother to king Robert, which Lewis pretending his right to be better then
that of Joan for that he was a man, and one degree nearer to king Charles his
grand father then Joan was, (for that he was nephew and she niece once removed)
he prevailed in like manner, and thus far Gerrard historiographes of France.

And no doubt, but if we consider examples, that fell out even in this very age
only, concerning (...). And example of the uncle before the nephew in spain.
Garibay li. 13 cap. 14 and 1276.
this controversy between the uncle and nephew, we shall find store of them:
for in Spain not long before this time, to wit, in the year of Christ 1276.
was that great and famous determination made by Don Alonso the wise, eleventh
king of that name, and of al his realm and nobility in their couites or
parliament of Segouia, mentioned before by the Ciuilian, wherein they
disinherited the children of the prince Don Alonso de la Cerda that dyed (as
our prince Edward did) before his father, and made heir apparent Don Sancho
brauo younger brother to the said Don Alonso, and uncle to his children, the two
young Cerdas. Which sentence stands even unto this day, and king Phillip
enjoys the crown of Spain thereby and the dukes of Medina Celi and their
race that are discendentes of the said two Cerdas, which were put back, are
subjects by that sentence, and not soueraines, as all the world knows.

The like controversy fell out but very little after, to wit in the time of
king Edward the An other example in France and Flanders.
third in france, though not about the kingdom, but about the earldome of
Artoys, but yet it was decided by a solemn sentence of two kings of France,
and of the whole parliament of Paris, in favor of the aunte against her nephew,
which albeit it cost great troubles: yet was it defended, and king Phillip of
Spain holds the county of Artoys by it at this day, Polidor reports the
story in this manner.

Robert earl of Artoys a man famous for his chiualry, had two children,
Phillip a son and Maude a daughter, this maude was married to Otho earl of
Burgundy, and Phillip Polidor l. 25. in vit. (...) 3.
dying before his father, left a son named Robert the second, whose father
Robert the first being dead, the question was who should succeed, either maude
the daughter or Robert the nephew, and the matter being remitted unto Phillip
le Bell king of France, as chief Lord at that time of that state, he adiuged it
to Maude, as to the next in blood, but when Robert repyned at this sentence,
the matter was referred to the parliament of Paris, which confirmed the
sentence of king Phillip, where upon Robert making his way with Phillip de
Valoys that soon after came to be king of France, he assisted the said Phillip
earnestly to bring him to the crown, against king Edward of Ingland that
opposed himself thereunto, and by this hoped that king Phillip would have
revoked the same sentence, but he being once established in the crown
answered, that a sentence of such importance and so maturely given, could not
be revoked. Wheruppon the said Robert fled to the king of Inglands part against
france, thus far Polidor.

The very like sentence recounteth the same An other example of Britanny.
author to have bin given in Ingland at the same time, and in the same
controversy, of the uncle against the nephew, for the succession to the
dukedom of Britany, as before I have related, wherein John Breno earl of
Montford, was preferred before the daughter and heir of his elder brother
Guy, though he were but of the half blood to the last duke, and she of the
whole. For that John the third duke of Britanny, had two brothers, first Guy of
the whole blood, by father and mother, and then John Breno his younger brother
by the fathers side only. Guy dying, left a daughter and heir named Jane,
married to the earl of Bloys, nephew to the king of France, who after the
death of duke John pretended in the right of his wife, as daughter and heir to
Guye the elder brother: but king Edward the third with the state of Ingland,
gave sentence for John Breno, earl of Montford her uncle, as for him that was
next in consanguinity to the dead duke, and with their arms the state of
Ingland did put him in possession who flew the earl of Bloys as before has
bin declared, and ther-by Supra c. 2
gat possession of that realm and held it ever after, and so do his heirs at
this day.

And not long before this again, the like resolution An other example in
Scotland.
prevailed in Scotland, between the house of Balliol and Bruise, who were
competitors to that crown, by this occasion that now I will declare. William
king of Scots had issue two sons Alexander that succeeded in the The
conuentio^ of the houses of Balliol and Bruise in Scotland.
crown, and David earl of Huntington: Alexander had issue an other Alexander,
and a daughter married to the king of Norway, al which issue and line ended
about the year 1290. David younger brother to king William, had issue two
daughters, Margaret and Isabel, Margaret was married to Alaine earl of
Galloway, and had issue by him a daughter that married John Balliol Lord of
Harcourt in Norma^die, who had issue by her this John Balliol founder of
Balliol College in Oxford that now pretended the crown, as descended from the
eldest daughter of David in the third descent.

Isabel the second daughter of David, was married to Robert Bruise, Earl of
Cleueland in Ingland, who had issue by her this Robert Bruise, earl of Carick,
the other competitor. Now then the question between these two co^petitors was,
which of them should succeed, either John Balliol that was nephew to the elder
daughter or Robert Bruise that was son to the younger daughter, and so one
degree more near to the stock or stem then the other. And albeit king Edward
the first of Ingland, whose power was dreadful at that day in Scotland, having
the matter referred to his arbitrament, gave sentence for John Bailliol, and
Robert Bruise obeyed for the time, in respect partly of fear and partly of his
oath that he had made to stand to that judgment: yet was that sentence held to
be unjust in Scotland, and so was the crown restored afterward to Robert
Bruise his son, and his posterity does hold it unto this day.

In Ingland also it self, they allege the examples 8. Examples in England.
of king Henry the first preferred before his nephew William, son and heir
to his elder brother Robert, as also the example of king John preferred before
his nephew Arthur, duke of Britany, for that king Henry the second had four
sons, Henry, Richard, Geffrey, and John, Henry dyed before his father
without issue, Richard reigned after him and dyed also without issue: Geffrey
also dyed before his father, but left a son named Arthur duke of Britanie, by
right of his mother. But after the death of king Richard, the question was
who should succeed, to wit, either Arthur the nephew or John the uncle, but
the matter in Ingland was soon decided: for that John the uncle was preferred
before the nephew Arthur, by reason he was more near to his brother dead, by
a degree then was Arthur. And albeit the king of France and some other princes
abroad opposed themselves for stomach against this succession of king John, yet
say these favorers of the house of Lancaster, that the Inglish inclined still
to acknowledge and admit his right, before his nephew, and so they proclaimed
this king John for king of Ingland, vvhiles he was yet in Normandy, I mean
Hubert Archbishop of (...) head in vit. Regis (...). 142.
Canterbury, Elenor the Queen this mother, Geffrey Fitzpeter chief judge of
Ingland (who knew also what law meant therein) and others the nobles and
Barons of the realm, without making any doubt or scruple of his title to the
succession.

And vvheras those of the house of York do allege, that king Richard in his
life time, How Arthur duke of Britanny was declared (...) apparent.
when he was to go to the holy land, caused his nephew Arthur to be declared
heir apparent to the crown, and thereby did show that his title was the
better, they of Lancaster do answer, first, that this declaration of king
Richard, was not made by act of parliament of England, for that king Richard
was in Normandy when he made this declaration, as plainly appears both by
Polidor and Hollingshead. (...) 1. 14 (...) in vit. Richar. (...). (...). 420.
2.
Secondly, that this declaration was made the sooner by king Richard at that
time, thereby to repress and keep down the ambitious humor of his brother
John, whom he feared least in his absence, if he had bin declared for heir
appare^t, might invade the crown, as in deed without that, he was like to
have done, as may appear by that which happened in his said brothers absence.

3.
Thirdly they show, that this declaration of king Richard was never admitted in
Ingland, neither duke John would suffer it to be admitted, but rather caused
the bishop of Ely that was left governor by king Richard, with consent of
the nobility, to renownce the said declaration of king Richard in favor of
Arthur, and to take a contrary oath to admit the said John, if king Richard his
brother should dye without issue, and the like oath did the said Bishop of Ely
together with the Archbishop of Roan, that was left in equal authority with
Hollingli. in vit. Richar. (...) page 496. and 499.
him, exact and take of the citizens of London, when they gave them their
privileges and liberties of co^munaltie, as Hollingshed records.

4.
And lastly the said Hollingshed vvriteth, how that king Richard being now come
home again from the war of Jerusalem, and void of that ielosy of his
brother, which before I have mentioned: he made his last will and testament,
and ordained in the same, that his brother Hollingshead page 540.
John, should be his successor, and caused all the nobles there present to
swear fealty unto him, as to his next in blood, for which cause Thomas
Walsingham in his story vvriteth these words, Ioannis Filius junior Henrici 2.
Anglorum VValsing. in ypodig. Neustriss.
regis, and Alienorae Ducissae, Aquitaniae, non modo iure propinquitatis, sed
etiam testamento fratris sui, Richardi designatus est successo: post mortem
ipsius. Which is, John younger son of Henry the second king of Ingland, and of
Eleanor duchess of Aquitaine, was declared successor of the crown not only
by law and right of neernes of blood, but also by the will and testament of
Richard his brother. Thus much this ancient chronicler speaks in the
testifying of King John's title.

By all which examples, that fell out almost within one age in diverse nations
ouet the world (letting pass many others which the Ciuilian touched in his
discourse before, for that they are of more ancient times) these favorers of
the house of Lancaster do infer, that the right of the uncle before the
nephew, was no new or strange matter in those days of king Edward the third,
and that if we vvil deny the same now, we must call in question the succession
and right of all the kingdoms and states before mentioned, of Naples, Sicilie,
Spain, Britanie, Flanders, Scotland, and Ingland, whose kings and princes do
evidently hold their crowns at this day by that very title, as has bin showed.

Moreover they say, that touching law in this point, albeit the most famous
Civil lawyers Opinions of lawyers for the nephew and uncle.
of the world, be some what divided in the same matter, some of them favoring
the uncle, and some other the nephew, and that for different reasons. As Baldus
Oldratus, Panormitanus and diverse others alleged by Guillelmus Benedictus in
his repetitions in favor Benedict Cap. Ranutius verb in eodem testam.
of the nephew against the uncle, and on the other side, for the uncle before
the nephew, Bartolus, Alexander, Decius, Altiatus, Cuiatius and many other
their followers, are recompted in the same place by the same man, yet in the
end, Baldus that is held for head of Baldus in lib. vt in test cap. de suis and
leg. hered. and per. li. vnicam pro 20. sui aute^ and nouissimo.
the contrary side, for the nephew, after al reasons weighed to and fro, he
comes to conclude, that seeing rigor of law runs only with the uncle, for
that in deed, he is properly nearest in blood by one degree, and that only
indulgence and custom serves for the nephew, permitting him to represent the
place of his father, which is dead, they resolve (I say) that whensoever the
uncle is borne before the nephew, and the said uncles elder brother dyed before
his father (as it happened in the case of John of Gaunt and of king Richard)
their the uncle by right may be preferred, for that the said elder brother
could not give or transmitt, that thing to his son, which was not (...)
himself before his father dyed, and consequently his son could not represent
that which his father never had, and this for the Civil law.

Touching our common laws, the favorers Touching the common law of Ingland.
of lancaster do say two or three things, first that the right of the crown
and interest thereunto is not decided expressly in our law, not it is a plea
subject to the common rules thereof, but is superior and more eminent, and
therefore that men may not judge of this as of other pleas of particular
persons, nor is the trial like, nor the common maxims or rules always of
force in this thing, as in others, which they prove by diverse particular cases,
as for example, the vvidow of a private man shall have her thirdes of al his
lands for her dowry, but not the Queen of the crown. Again if a private man
have many daughters, and dye Different rules in succession of the crown and
of other inheritances.
seized of any lands in fee simple, without heir male, his said daughters by
law shall have the said lands as coparteners equally divided between them, but
not the daughters of a king, for that the eldest must carry away al, as though
she were heir male. The like also is seen, if a baron match with a femme
that is an inheretrix, and have issue by her, though she dye, yet shall he
enjoy her lands during his life, as tenant by courtesy, but it is not so in
the crown if a man mary with a Queen, as king Phillip did with Queen Marye:
and so finally they say also that albeit in private men's possessions, the
common course of our law is, that if the father dye seized of lands in fee
simple, leaving a younger son and a nephew, that is to say a child of his
elder son, the nephew shall succeed his grandfather, as also he shall do his
uncle, if of three brethren the elder dye without issue, and the second leave
a son: yet in the inheritance and succession of the crown it goes
otherwise, as by all the former eight examples have bin showed, and this is the
first they say about the common law.

The second point which they affirm is, The common law grounded in custom.
that the ground of our common laws, consists principally and almost only,
about this point of the crown, in custom, for so say they we see by
experience, that nothing in effect, is written thereof in the common law, and al
old lawyers do affirm this point, as were Ranulfus de Granuilla in his book
of the laws and customs of Ingland, which he vvrote in the time of king
Henry the second, and Judge Fortescue in his book of the praise of Inglish
laws, which he compiled in the time of king Henry the sixth, and others.
Whereof these men do infer, that seeing there are so many preside^ts and
examples alleged before, of the uncles case preferred before the nephew, not
only in forayne countries, but also in Ingland, for this cause (I say) they do
affirm, that our common laws, cannot but favor also this title, and
consequently must needs like well of the interest of Lancaster, as they avouch
that all the best old lawyers did in those times: and for example they do record
two by name, of the most famous learned men which those ages had, who not only
defended the said title of Lancaster in Ancient lawyers that defended the
house of Lancaster.
those days, but also suffered much for the same. The one was the forenamed
judge Fortescue, Chancellor of Ingland, and named father of the common laws in
that age, who fled out os Ingland with the Queen, wife of king Henry the
sixth, and with the prince her son, and lived in banishment in france, where
it seems also that he vvrote his learned book entitled de laudibus legum
Angliae. And the other Holling. (...) vit. He^ric. 6. page (...) 00.
was, Sir Thomas Thorope chief Baron of the excheker, in the same reign of
the same king Henry the sixth, who being afterward put into the tower by the
Princes of the house of York, for his eger defense of the title of Lancaster,
remained there a long time, and after being delivered, was beheaded at hygate in
a tumulte, in the days of king Edward the fourth.

These then are the allegations which the favorers of the house of La^caster
do lay down The sum of this controversy repeated.
for the iustyfying of that title, affirming first, that John of Gaunt duke of
Lancaster ought to have succeeded his father K. Edward the third, immediately
before king Richard, and that injury 1.
was done unto him in that king Richard was preferred. And secondly that king
Richard (were his right never so good) was justly and 2.
orderly deposed, for his evil government, by lawful authority of the common
wealth. And thirdly that after his deposition, Henry duke 3.
of Lancaster, son and heir of John of Gaunt, was next in succession every
way, both in respect of the right of his father, as also for that he was two
degrees nearer to the king deposed then was Edmond Mortimer descended of
Leonel duke of Clarence, and these are the principal and substancial proofs of
their right and title.

But yet besides these, they do add also these Other arguments of Lancaster.
other arguments and considerations following: first that what soever right or
pretense the house of York had, the princes thereof did forfeit and leese the
same many times, by their co^spiraces, rehellions and attainders, as namely
Richard earl of Cambrige, that married the lady Stow in vita Henrici 5. page
587.
Anne Mortimer, and by her took his pretense to the crown, was convicted of
a conspiracy against king Henry the fifth in Southampton, as before I have said,
and there was put to death The princes of York often attained.
for the same, by judgment of the king, and of al his peers, in the year
1415. the duke of York his elder brother, being one of the jury that condemned
him. This earl Richards son, also named Richard, coming afterward by the
death of his uncle, to be duke of York, first of al made open clay me to the
crown, by the title of York. But yet after many oaths sworn and broken to,
king Henry the sixth, he was attaynted of treason: I mean both he and Edward
his son, then earl of march, which afterward was king, with the rest of
his ofspringe even to the nynth degree (as Stow affirms) in a parliament
holden at Couentry Stow in vita Henrici 6.
in the year 1459. and in the 38. year of the reign of the said king Henry,
and the very next year after the said Richard was slain in the same quarrel:
but the honse of La^caster (say these me^) was never attainted of any such
crime.

Secondly they say, that the house of York did enter only by violence, and by
infinite bloodshedd, and by wilful murdering not only of 2. York entered by
violence.
diverse of the nobility both spiritual and temporal, but also of both king
Henry the sixth him self and of prince Edward his son, and by a certain
populer and mutinous election of a certain few soldiers in Smithfield of
London, Stow in fine vit. (...). 6.
and this was the entrance of the house of York to the crown, vvheras king
Henry the fourth, first king of the house of Lancaster, entered without
bloodshedd as has bin showed, being called home by the requests and letters
of the people and nobility, and his election and admission to the crown, was
orderly, and authorized by general consent of parliament, in the doing thereof.

Thirdly they allege, that king Henry the sixth put down by the house of
York, was a good 3. The house of York put down a holy king.
and holy king, and had reigned peaceably 40, years, and never committed any
act, worthy deposition, vvheras king Richard the second had many ways
deserved the same, as him self came to acknowledge, and there upon made a
personal solemn and public resignation of the said crown unto his cosen
Henry of Lancaster, the which justified much the said Henry's entrance.

Fourthly they allege that the housa of Lancaster had bin in possession of the
crown upon 4. Long pos sessions of the house of Lancaster.
the point of 60. years, before the house of York did raise trouble unto
them for the same, in which time their title was confirmed by many parlaments,
oaths, approbations, and public acts of the common wealth, and by the nobles
peers and people thereof, and by the states both spiritual and temporal, and
with the consent of al foraine nations, so that if there had bin any fault in
their first entrance, yet was this sufficient to authorize the same, as we see
it was in the title of king William the Conqueror, and of his two sons king
William Rufus, and king Henry the first, that entered before their elder
brother, and of king John, that entered before his nephew, and of his son king
Henry the third that entered after his fathers deprivation, and after the
election of prince Lewis of france, as also of Edward the third that entered by
deposition of his own father: of al which titles, yet might there have bin
doubt made at the beginning, but by time and durance of possession, and by
confirmation of the common wealth, they were made lawful, and without
controversy.

Fifthly they say, that if we consider the four king Heuryes that have bin of
the house of 5. The difference of kings of both houses.
Lancaster to wit the 4. 5. 6. and 7. and do compare the^ with the other
four that have bin of the house of York, to wit Edward the fourth, Richard the
third, Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, and al their acts both at home and
abroad, what quietness or troobles have passed, and what the common wealth of
Ingland has gotten or lost under each of them, we shall find, that God has
seemed to prosper and allow much more of those of Lancaster, then of those of
York, for that under those of Lancaster the realm has enjoyed much more
peace, and gained far greater honor, and enlarged more the dominions of the
crown then under those of York, and that it had done also much more if the
seditions, rebellions, and troobles raised and brought in by the princes of the
house of York, had not hindered the same, as say these men, it was evidently
seen in the time of king Henry the sixth, when their contention against the
princes of the house of Lancaster, was the principal cause why all the English
states in France were lost, and what garboiles and troubles at home have
ensued afterward, and how infinite murders and man slaughters with chainge
of nobility have bin caused hereby, and increased afterward under the
government and rule of the princes of York, neadeth not (say these men) to be
declared.

One thing only they note in particular, which I vvil not omit (and let it be
the sixth 6. The princes of York cruel one to the other.
note) and that is, that the princes of York have not only bin rigorous and
very bloody unto their aduersaires, but also among themselves, and to their
own kynred, which these men take to be a just punishment of God upon them:
And for proof heerof, they allege first, the testimony of Polydor, who
albeit he were a great aduocat of the house of York, as before has bin
noted, for that he lived and vvrote his story under king Henry the eight, yet
in one place he breaks forth into these words, of the princes of this
house. Cum non haberent iam inimicos in Polydor virg. hist. Anglie lib. 24.
quos soeuitiam explerent, and saturarent, in semetipsos crudelitatem
exercuerunt, proprioque sanguine suas pollure manus. When these princes now had
brought to destruction al those of the house of Lancaster, so as they had no
more enimyes upon whom to fill and satiat their cruelty, then began they to
exercise their fiersnes upon themselves, and to embrevv their hands with
their own blood, thus far Polidor.

Secondly they do show the same by the Great union and faythfulnes of the
princes of Lancaster.
deeds of both sides, for that the love, union, trust, confidence, faith
fulness, kyndnes, and loyalty of the princes of Lancaster, the one toward
the other, is singular and notorious, as may appear by the acts and studious
endeavors of the lord Henry bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal, and of the lord
Thomas duke of Excester and marquis of Dorset, brothers of king Henry the
fourth, to whom and to his children, they were most faithful friendly and
loyal, as also by the noble proceedings of the lords Thomas duke of Clarence,
John duke of Bedford, and Humfrey duke of Gloucester, sons of the foresaid
Henry the fourth, and brothers of king Henry the fist, (the first of which
three gave his blood in his service, and the other two spent their whole lives
in defense, of the dignity of the Inglish crown, the one as regent of France,
the other as protector of Ingland: by the worthy acts also and renomed faith
fulness of the dukes of Somerset, cosen germans to the said king Henry the
fourth, and to his children, and the proper ancestors of king Henry the
seventh, al which dukes of Somerset, of the house of Lancaster, (being five or
six in number) did not only as Polydor says, assist and help their
sovereign, and the whole realm, Vigilijs curis and pcriculis, that is to say
with watchfulnes, cares, and offering Polyd. lib. 23.
themselves to dangers, but also four of them one after an other, to with
Edmond with his three sons, Henry, Edmond, and John, (whereof two successively
after him were dukes of Somerset, and the other marquis dorset) were al four
(I say) as so many Machabyes, slain in the defense of their country and
family, by the other faction of the house of York, which thing say these men,
showed evidently both a marvelous confidence that these men had in their
quarrel, as also a great blessing of God toward that family, that they had
such love and union among them selves.

But now in the house of York these men endeavor Diffentions in the house of
York.
to show all the contrary, to wit that there was nothing else but suspicion,
hatred, and emulations among themselves, and extreme cruelty of one against
the other, and so we see that as soon almost as Edward duke of York came to
be king, George duke of Clarence his younger brother conspired against him, and
did help to drive him out again, both from the realm and crown. In
recompense vvherof his said elder brother afterward notwithstanding all the
reconciliation and many oaths that King Edward 4. King Richard 3.
passed between them, of new love and union, caused him upon new grudges to
be taken and murdered privily at Calis, as all the world knows. And after
both their deaths, Richard their third brother, murdered the two sons of
his said elder brother, and kept in prison vvhiles he lived, the son and
heir of his second brother, I mean the young earl of Warwick, though he were
but a very child, whom king Henry the seventh afterward put to death.

But king Henry the eight that succeeded them, passed all the rest in cruelty,
toward his King Henry 3. how many he put to death of his own kynred.
own kynred, for he weeded out almost all that ever he could find of the blood
royal of York, and this either for emulation, or causes of mere suspicion
only. For first of al he behedded Edmond de la Pole duke of Suffolk, son of
his own aunt lady Elizabeth, that was sister to king Edward the fourth, which
Edward was grand father to king Henry as is evident. The like destruction king
Henry went about to bring to Richard de la Pole brother to the The de la
pooles.
said Edmond, if he had not escaped his hands by flying the realm, whom yet
he never ceased to pursue, until he was slain in the battle of Pauia in
service of the king of France, by whose death was extinguished the noble house
of the de la Poles.

Again the said king Henry put to death Edward duke of Buckingham, high
constable The house of Buckingam.
of Ingland, the son of his great Aunt, sister to the Queen Elizabeth his
gra^dmother, and thereby ouerthew also that worthy house of Buckingham, and
after again he put to death his cosen german Henry Courtney marquis of
Excester, son of the lady Catherin his Au^t, that was daughter of king
Edward the fourth, The house of Courtneis.
and attainted jointly with him, his wife the lady Gertrude, taking from her
al her goods lands and inheritance, and committed to perpetual prison their
only son and heir lord Edward Courtney, being then but a child of seven
years old, which remained so there, until many years after he was set at
liberty and restored to his living by Queen Mary.

Moreover he put to death the lady (...) Plantagenet, Countess of Salisbury,
daughter The house of Salisbury.
of George duke of Clarence, that was brother of his grandfather king Edward
the fourth, and with her he put to death also her eldest son and heir
Thomas Poole, lord Montague, and committed to perpetual prison (where soon
after also he ended his life) a little infant named Henry Poole his son and
heir, and condemned to death by act of parliament (although absent) Renald Pole
brother to the said lord Montague Cardinal in Rome, whereby he overthrew also
the noble house of Salisbury and warwick: nether need I to go further in this
Seymers put to death.
relation, though these men do note also, how Edward the sixth put to death two
of his own uncles, the Seymers (or at least it was done by his authority) and
how that under her Majesty that now is, the Queen of Scotland, that was next
in (...) of any other living and the chief Queen of Scots.
titler of the honse of York, has also bin put to death.

Lastly they do note, (and I may not omit it) that their is no noble house
standing at this day 7. No old noble house standing in England but such as
took part with La^caster.
in Ingland in the ancient state of calling that it had, and in that dignity
and degree that it was in when the house of York entered to the crown (if it
be above the state of a barony) but only such as defended the right and
interest of the houses of Lancaster, and that al other great houses that took
part with the house of York, and did help to ruin the house of Lancaster,
be either ceased since, or extyrpated and over thrown by the same house of
York it self which they assisted to get the crown, and so at this present
they be either united to the crown by confiscatio^, or transferred to other
Images that are strangers to them who possessed the^ before. As for example,
the ancient houses of England, that remain at this day and were standing when
the house of York began there title, are, the houses of Aro^del, Oxford,
Northumberland, Sieve ancient noble houses.
Westmerland, and Shrewsbery (for all other that are in Ingland at this day,
above the dignity of Barons, have bin advanced since that time) and al these
five houses were these that principally did stick unto the house of Lancaster,
as is evident by all Inglish chronicles. For that the earl of Arondel brought
in king Arondel.
Henry the fourth, first king of the house of Lancaster, and did help to place
him in the dignity royal, coming out of France with him. The earl of Oxford,
and his son the Oxford.
lord Vere, were so earnest in the defense of king Henry the sixth as they were
both slain by king Edward the fourth, and John earl of Oxford was one of the
principal assista^ts of Henry the seventh, to take the crown from Richard the
third. The house of Northumberland also was a principal ayder to Henry the
fourth in getting Northum berland.
the crown, and two earls of that name to wit Henry the second and third,
were slain in the quarrel of king Henry the sixth, one in the battle of S.
Albons, and the other of Saxton, and a third earl named Henry the fourth fled
into Scotland with the said king Henry the sixth. The house of Westmerland also
was chief adua^cer of Henry the fourth to the crown, and the second
Westmerland.
earl of that house, was slain in the party of Henry the sixth in the said
bartaile of Saxton, and John earl of Shrewsbury was likewise slain in
defense of the title of Lancaster in the Shrevvsbury.
bartaile of Northampto^, and I omit many other great services and faithful
endeavors which many Princes of these five noble ancient houses, did in the
defense of the Lancastrian kings, which these men say, that God has revvarded
with continuance of their howses unto this day.

But on the contrary side, these men do note, Houses that fauo red York
deftroyed
that all the old houses that principally assisted. The title of York, are now
extinguished, and that chiefly by the kings themselves of that house, as for
example, the principal peers that assisted the family of York, were Moubray
duke of Norfolk, de la Poole duke of Suffolk, the earl of Salisbury and the
earl of Warwick, of al which the event was this.

John Moubray duke of Norfolk the first confederat of the house of York, dyed
soon The Mon braies.
after the exaltation of Edward the fourth, without ifsue, and so that name of
Moubray ceased, and the title of the dukedom of Norfolk was transferred
afterward by king Richard the third, unto the house of Howards.

John de la Poole duke of Suffolk, that married the sister of king Edward the
fourth, and The de la Pooles.
was his great assistant, though he left three sons, yet al were extinguished
without issue, by help of the house of York, for that Edmond the eldest
son duke of Suffolk was beheaded by king Henry the eight, and his brother
Richard driven out of the realm to his destruction, as before has bin showed,
and John their brother earl of Lincolue, was stayne at Stockfild in service of
king Richard the third, and so ended the line of de la Pooles.

Richard Neuel earl of Salisbury, a chief The house of Salesbury and
VVarvvicke.
enemy to the house of Lancaster, and exalter of York, was taken at the
battle of VVakefild, and there beheaded leaving three sons, Richard, John
and George: Richard was earl both of Salisbuty and Warwick, surnamed the
great earl of Warwick, and was he that placed king Edward the fourth in the
royal seat, by whom yet he was slain afterward at Barnet, and the lands of
these two great earldomes of Salisbury and Warwick, were united to the crown
by his attainder. John his younger brother was Marquis of montague, and after
al assistance given to the said king Edward the fourth of the house of York,
was slain also by him at Barnet, and his lands in like manner confiscate to
the crown, which yet were never restored again: George Neuel their younger
brother was Archbishop of York, and was taken and sent prisoner by the said
king Edward unto Guynes, who shortly after pined away and dyed, and this was
the end of all the principal friends, helpers and aduancers of the house of
York, as these men do allege.

Wherefore they do conclude, that for all these reasons, and many more that might
be alleged, the title of Lancaster must needs seem the better title, which
they do confirm by the general consent of all the realm, at king Henry the
seventh his coming in to recover the crown from the house of York, as from
usurpers, for having had the victory against king Richard, they crowned him
presently in the field King (...) the 7. crowned in the filled in respect of the
house of Lancaster only though his title that way was not great.
in the right of La^caster, before he married with the house of York, which is
a token that they esteemed his title of Lancaster sufficient of it self, to
bear away the crown, albeit for better ending of strife he took to wife
also the lady Elizabeth heir of the house of York, as has bin said, and this
may be sufficient for the present, in this controversy.

OF FIVE PRINCIPAL HOUSES OR LINAGES THAT DOOR MAY PRETEND TO THE CROWN of
Ingland, which are the houses of Scotland, Suffolk, Clarence Britanie, and
Portugal, and first of al, of the house of Scotland, which conteyneth the
pretentions of the king of Scotts and the Lady Arbella.
CAP. V.
HAVING declared in the former chapter, so much as apparteyneth unto the
general controversy between the two principal houses and royal families of
Lancaster and York, it remains now that I lay before you the particular
chalenges, claymes and pretentions, which diverse houses and families descended
(for the most part) of those two, have among themselves, for their titles to
the same.

Al which families, may be reduccd to three or four general heads. For that
some do pretend by the house of Lancaster alone, as those families principally
that do descend of the line A division of the families that do precend.
royal of Portngal: some other do pretend by the house of York only, as those
that are descended, of George duke of Clarence, second brother to K. Edward the
fourth. Some again will seem to pretend from both howses joined together, as
al those that descend from king Henry the seventh, which are the houses of
Scotland and Suffolk, albeit (as before has appeared) others do deny that
these families have any true part in the house of Lancaster, which point shall
afterward be discussed more at large. And fourthly others do pretend, before
the two houses of York and Lancaster were divided, as the Infanta of Spain,
duchess of Sauoy, the prince of Lorayne and such others, as have descended of
the house of Britanny and France, of al which pretenses and pretendors, we
shall speak in order, and consider with indifferency what is said or
alleged of every side, to and fro, beginning first with the house of Scotland,
as with that which in common opinion of vulgar men, is taken to be first and
nearest (though others deny it) for that they are descended of the first and
eldest daughter, of king Henry the seventh, as before in the third chapter has
bin declared.

First then two persons are known to be of Of the house of Scotland.
this house at this day that may have action and claim to the crown of
Ingland, the first is, Lord James the sixth of that name presently king of
Scotland, who descends of Margaret eldest daughter of king Henry the seventh,
that was married by her first marriage to James the fourth king of Scots, and
by him had issue James the fifth, and he again the lady Mary mother to this
king now pretendant.

The second person that may pretend in this house, is the lady Arbella,
descended of the self Arbella.
same Queen Margaret by her second marriage, unto Archibald Douglas earl of
Anguis, by whom she had Margaret that was married to Matthew Steward earl of
Lenox, and by him had Charles her second son earl of Lenox, who by
Elizabeth daughter of Sir William Candish knight in Ingland, had issue this
Arbella now alive.

First then, for the king of Scots, those that do favor his cause, (whereof I
confess that I have In favor of the king of Scots.
not found very many in Ingland) do allege, that he is the first and cheifest
pretendor of al others, and next in succession, for that he is the first person
that is descended (as you see) of the 1.
eldest daughter of king Henry the seventh, and that in this descent there ca^
no bastardy or other lawful impediment be auowed, why he should not succeed
according to the priority of his pretention and birth: And moreover secondly
they do allege that it would be greatly for the honor and profit of Ingland,
for that 2.
hereby the two Realms of Ingland and Scotland, should come to be joined, a
point long sought for, and much to be wished, and finally such as are
affected to his religion do add 3.
that hereby true religion will come to be more settled also and established in
Ingland, which they take to be a matter of no small consequence, and
consideration, and this in effect is that which the favorers of this prince
do allege in his behalf.

But on the other side, there want not many that do account this pretense of
the king of Scots neither good nor just, nor any way expedient Argument
against the king of Scots.
for the state of Ingland, and they do answer largely to all the allegations
before mentioned in his behalf.

And first of al, as concerning his title, by neernes of succession, they make
little account thereof, both for that in it self (they say) it may easily be
overthrown, and proved to be of no validity, as also for that if it were
never so good, yet might it for other considerations be rejected, and made
frustrate, as our friend the Giuil lawyer, has largely and learnedly proved
these days; in our hearing.

To begin then to speak first of the king of Scots title by (...) of blood
these men do affirm that albeit there be not alleged any ba stardy in his
descent from K. Henry the seventh his daughter as there is in her second
marriage against the lady (...) yet are there other reasons enough to (...) and
overthrow this 1. The king of Scots not of the house of Lancaster.
clay me and pretention and first of al, for that he is not (say these men) of
the house of Lancaster by the lady Blanch the only true (...), as before has
in (...) bin showed, and shall be afterward more largely, but only by Catherin
Swinford whose children being un lawfully begotten, and but of the half blood,
whether they may by that legitimation of parliament, that was given them, be
made inheritable unto the crown before the lawful daughter of the whole blood,
shall be discussed afterward in place convenient, when we shall talk of the house
of Portugal: but in the mean space, these men do presume, that the king of
Scots is but only of the house of York, and then affirming further that the
title of the house of Lancaster, is better then that of York, as by many
arguments the favorers of La^caster have endeavored to show in the former
chapter, they do infer that this is sufficient, to make void al claim of the
king of Scots, that he may pretend by neernes of blood, especially seeing
there want not at this day prete^ders enough of the other house of La^caster to
claim their right, so as the house of York shall not need to enter for fault
of true heirs, and this is the first argument which is made against the
Scottish king and all the rest of his lineage, by the favorers and followers of
the said house of Lancaster.

A second Argument is made against the said kings succession not by them of
Lancaster, but 2. The king of Scots foraine botne.
rather by those of his own house of York which is founded upon his
foreign birth, by which they hold that he is excluded, by the common laws of
Ingland from succession to the crown, for that the said laws do bar al
strangers borne out of the realm, to inherit within the land, and this is an
argument handled very largely between the foresaid books of M. Hales, M.
Morgan and my lord of Rosse, and for that the same does concern much the
pretentions and claymes of diverse others, that be strangers also by birth, and
yet do pretend to this succession, as before has bin declared: I shall repeat
breefly in this place, the sum of that which is alleged of both parties in
this behalf.

First then, to the general assertion, that no The controversy about somayne
(...).
stranger at al may inherit any thing, by any means in Ingland, the said
books of M. Morgan and my lord Rosse do answer, that in that universal sense,
it is false, for that it appears plainly by that which is ser down by law
in the seventh and nynth years of king Edward the fourth, and in the eleue^th,
and fourtee^th of K. Henry the fourth, that a stranger may purchase land in
Ingland, as also that he may inherit by his wife if he should marry an
inheritrix.

Secondly they say, that the true maxima or rule against the inheritance of
strangers, is Movv strangers may inherit.
grounded only upon a statute made in the 25. year of king Edward the third,
and is to be restrained unto proper inheritances only, to wit, that no person
borne our of the allegiance of the king of Ingland, whose father and mother
were not of the same allegiance at the time of his birth (for so are the
words of the statute) shall be able to have or demand any heritage with in the
same allegiance, as heir to any person.

Thirdly they say, that this axiom or general Reasons, why the statute
touches not our case.
rule cannot any way touch or be applied to the succession of the crown, first
for that as has bin declared before, no axiom or maxima of our law can touch
or be understood of matters concerning the crown, except express mention be
made thereof, and that the crown is (...) in many points that other private
heritages be not.

And secondly for that the crown cannot properly be called an inheritance of
allegiance or within allegiance, as the words of the said The crown not
holde^ by allegiance.
statute do stand, for that it is not holde^ of any superior nor with
allegiance, but immediately from God. And thirdly for that the statute means
plainly of inheritances by descent (for otherwise as is said an allien may hold
lands by purchase) but the crown is a thing incorporate, and discendeth not
according to the common course of other private inheritances, but rather goes
by succession as other incorporations do, in sign whereof, no king can by law
avoid his letters patents by reason of his nonage, as other common heirs
under age do, but he is ever presumed to be of full age, in respect of his
crown, even as a prior, parson, deane, or other head incorporat, is, which
can never be presumed to be within age, and so, as any such head incorporate
though he be an allien, might inherit or demand lands in (...) this
discourse is set down, and especially by the testimony of the L. Paget, and
Sir Edward Montague, that said the stamp was put unto it after the king was
past sense, yet they of the house of Suffolk are not satisfied with that
answer, for that they say that at least, howsoever that matter of the late
sealing be, yet seeing the king willed it to be done, drawn out and sealed, it
appears hereby that this was the last vvil and judgment of king Henry, and
not revoked by him: which is sufficient (say these men) to answer the intent
and meaning of the realm, and the authority committed to him, by the foresaid
two acts of parliament, for the disposing of the succession, which two acts
(say these men) containing the whole authority of the common wealth, so
seriously and deliberately given, in so weighty an affair, may not in reason
be deluded or over thrown now by the saying of one or two men, who for
pleasing or contenting of the time wherein they spoke, might say or guess that
the kings memory was past, when the stamp was put unto his testament,
which if it were so, yet if he commanded, as has been said, the thing to be
done, while he had memory (as it may appear he did, both by the witnesses
that subscribed, and by the enrolement thereof in the chancery) no man can deny
but that this was the kings last will, which is cnoughe for satisfying the
parlame^ts intention, as these men do affirm.

A fourth argument is made against the king of Scotts succession, by all the
other competitors The king of Scots excluded by the starute of association.
jointly, and it seems to them, to be an argument that has no solution or
reply, for that it is grounded upon a plain fresh statute, made in the
parliament holden in the 27. year (if I err not) of her Majesty that now is,
vvherin is enacted and decreed, that whosoever shall be co^uinced to conspire,
attempt, or procure, the death of the Queen, or to be privy or accessatie to
the same, shall loose al right, title, pretense, clay me or action, that the
same parties or their heyrcs have or may have, to the crown of Ingland. Upon
which statute, seeing that afterward the lady Mary late Queen of Scotland,
mother of this king, was condemned and executed by the authority of the said
parliament, it seems evident, unto these men, that this king who pretends
al his right to the crown of Ingland by his said mother, can have none at al.

And these are the reasons proofs and arguments, which diverse men do allege
against the right of succession, pretended by the king of Other co^sideratio^s
against the King of Scots.
Scots. But now if we leave this point which concerns the very right it
self of his succescession by blood, and will come to examine other reasons and
considerations of state, and those in particular which before I have mentioned
that his favorers do allege, for the vtility and common good that may be
presumed will rise to the realm of Ingland by his admission to our crown, as
also the other point also of establishment of religion by them mentioned, then
I say, these other me^ that are against his entrance do produce many other
reasons and considerations also, of great inconveniences, as to them they
seem, against this point of his admission and their reasons are these that
follow.

First touching the public good of the Inglish common wealth, by the uniting
of both realms of Ingland and Scotland together, these men do say, that it is
very doubtful and disputable whether the state of Ingland shall receive good or
harm thereby, if the said union could be brought to pass. First for that the
state and Joining of England and Scotland together.
condition of Scotland well considered, it seems, that it can bring no other
commodity to Ingland, then increase of subjects, and those rather to
participate the commodities and riches of Ingland, then to impart any from
Scotland. And then secondly, the auersion and natural 1.
alienatio^n of that people, from the Inglish, and their ancient inclination to
join with the French and Irish against us, makes it yery probable, that, that
subjection of theirs to the crown of Ingland, would not loug endure, as by
expetience we have feene, since the time of king Edward the first, when after
the death of their king Alexander the third, without issue, they chose king
Edward to be their king, delivered their towns and fortresses into his hands,
did swear him fealty, received his deputy or viceroy (as Polidor at large
declares). And yet al Polydor. lib. 17. in vit. Edvvardi primi.
this served afterward, to no other effect but only slaughter, bloodshed, and
infinyt losses and charges of Ingland.

3.
Thirdly they say, that if the king of Scots should come to possess the crown
of England, he cannot choose (at least for many years) but to stand in great
ielousy of so many other competitors of the Inglish blood royal, as he shall
find in Ingland, against whom he must needs fortify him self by those other
forayne nations, that may be presumed to be most sure unto him, though most
contrary by natural inclination, and least tolerable in gouerme^t to Inglish
men, as are the Scots of whom he is borne, and Inconveniences of bringing
strangers into Ingland.
danes with whom he is allied, and French of whom he is descended, and of
the uncivil part ofIreland, with whom one great piece of his realm has most
conjunction, the authority and sway of which four nations in Ingland, and over
Inglish-men, what trouble it may work every wise man may easily conjecture.
Besides that; the Scots-men themselves, (specially those of the nobility) do
openly profess, that they desire not this conjunction and subordination unto
Ingland, which in no wise they can bear, both for the auersion they have, to
al Inglish government over them, as also for that their liberties are far
greater, as now they live, then in that case it would be suffered, their king
coming heerby to be of greater power to force them to the form of Inglish
subjection, as no doubt but in time he would.

And seeing the greatest vtility that in this case by reason and probability can
be hoped for by this union, is that the Scottish nation should come to be
advanced in England, and to be made of the nobility both temporal and
spiritual, and of the privy council, and of other like dignities of credit and
confidence (for otherwise no A consideration of importance.
union or amity durable can be hoped for) and considering that the king, both
for his own safety (as before has bin said) as also for gratitude and love
to his own nation, and allied friends, must needs plant them about him, in
chief place of credit, which are most opposite to Inglish natures, and by
little and little through occasion of emulations and of controversies, that vvil
fall out daily betwixt such diversity of nations, he must needs secretly
begin to favor and fortify his own, as we read that William Conqueror did
his Normannes, Polydot. hist. Ang. l. s. and. 9.
and Canutus before him his Danes, to the incredible calamity of the Inglish
nation (though otherwise neither of them was of themselves either an evil
king, or enimye to the Inglish blood (but driven hereunto for their own
saftie) and for that it was impossible to stand neutral in such national
contentions: if all this (I say) fell out so then, as we know it did, and our
ancestors felt it to their extreme ruin, what other effect can be hoped for
now, by this violent union of nations, that are by nature so disunited and
opposite, as are the Inglish, Scottish, Irishe, Danishe, French and other on
them depending, which by this means must needs be planted together in Ingland.

And if we read, that the whole realm of Spain did refuse to admit S.
Lewis king of Example of Spain.
France, to be their king in Spain (to whom yet by law of succession it was
evident, and confessed by the spaniards themselves, as their chronicler Garibay
writes, that the right most Garibay l. 20 c 42. An Dn^i 1207.
clearly did appertain by his mother lady Blanch eldest daughter and heir of
K. Alonso the nynth) and that they did this only for that he was a Frenchman,
and might thereby bring the french to have chief authority in Spain: and if
for this cause they did agree together, to give the kingdom rather to
Ferdinando the third that was son of Lady Berenguela, younger sister to the
said lady Blanch, and if this determination was thought at that time to be
wife and provident (though against al right of lineal succession) and if we
see that it had good success, for that it indureth unto this day: what shall
we say in this case (say these men) where the king in question is not yet a
S. Lewis, nor his title to Ingland so clear, as that other was to spain, and
the auersion betwixt his nation and ours, much greater then was that betwixt
the french and Spanish, thus they do reason.

Again we heard out of the discourse made Example out of Portugal.
by the Ciuilian before, how the states of Portugal after the death of their
king Don Ferdinando Garibay l. 34. c. 38. An. Dn^i 1383.
the first of that name, who left one only daughter and heir named lady
Beatrix married unto John the first king of Castile, to who^ the succession of
Portugal without al controversy did apertaine, they rather determined to
chose for their king a bastard brother, of the said Don Fernando, named John,
then to admit the true inheretor Beatrix with the government of the
Castilians, by whom yet (they being much the richer people) the Portugals
might hope to reap far greater vtility then Inglish men can do by Scotland,
considering it is the poorer country and nation. And this is that in effect
which these men do answer in this behalf, noting also by the way, that the
Romans themselves with al their power, could never bring union or peace
between thease two nations of Ingland and Scotland, nor hold the Scots and
North-Irish in obedience of any authority residing in Ingland, and so in the
end they were enforced to cut them of, and to make Stow. pa. 54. 59. 95. 76.
that famous wall begun by Adrian, and pursued by other Emperors to divide
them from England, and bar them from joining, as all the world knows, and
much less shall any one king living in Ingland now, hold them al in obedience,
let him be of what nation, he vvil, and this for the vtility that may be hoped
by this union.

But now for the other point alleged by the favorers of Scotland, about
establishme^t of true religion, in Ingland, by entrance of this king of Scots,
these other me^ do hold that this is the vvoorst and most dangerous point of
al Of the religion of Scotland.
other, considering what the state of religion is in Scotland at this day, and
how different or rather opposite to that form which in Ingland is mainteyned,
and when the Archbishopes, bishopes, deanes archdeacons, and other such of
ecclesiastical and honorable dignities of Ingland, shall consider that no such
dignity or promotion is left now standing in Scotland, no nor any cathedral or
collegiate church is remained on foot, with the rents and dignities thereunto
apperteyning, and when our nobilytie shall remember how the nobility of
Scotland is subject at this day to a few ordinary and common ministers,
without any head, who in their synodes and assemblies have authority to put
to the horn, and drive out of the realm any noble man whatsoever, without
remedy or redress, except he vvil yeald and humble himself to them, and that
the king himself stands in awe of this exorbitant and populer power of his
ministers, and is content to yield thereunto: it is to be thought (say these men)
that few Inglish be they of what religion or opinion so-euer, vvil show
themselves forvvard to receive such a King, in respect of his religion, that
has no better order in his own at home, and thus much concerning the King of
Scotland.

Now then it remains, that we come to Of the title of lady Arbella.
treat of the lady Arbella, second branch of the house of Scotland, touching
whose title, though much of that which has bin said before, for or against
the king of Scotland, may also be understood to apparteyne unto her, for that
she is of the same house, yet shall I in this place repeat in few words the
principal points that are alleged in her behalf or prejudice.

1.
First of al then, is alleged for her, and by her favorers, that she is
descended of the foresaid lady Margaret, eldest daughter of king Henry the
seventh, by her second marriage with Archibald Duglas earl of Anguys, and
that she is in the third degree only from her, for that she is the daughter of
Charles Steward who was son to Margaret Countess of Lenox, daughter to the
said lady Margaret Queen of Scots, so as this lady Arbella is but niece once
removed, unto the said Queen Margaret, to wit in equal degree of descent
with the king of Scots, which king being excluded (as the favorers of this
woman do affirm) by the causes and arguments before alleged against him, no
reason (say they) but that this lady should enter in his place, as next in
blood unto him.

Secondly is alleged in her behalf, that she as an Inglish woman, borne in
Ingland, and 2. An Inglish woman.
of parents who at the time of her birth were of Inglish allegiance, vvherin
she goes before the king of Scots, as has bin seen, as also in this other
principal point, that by her admission no such inconvenience can be feared of
bringing in strangers, or causing troobles and sedition vvith-in the realm, as
in the pretense of the Scottish king has bin considered, and this in effect is
all that I have heard alleged for her.

But against her, by other competitors and their friends, I have hard diverse
arguments of Against Arbella.
no small importance and consideration produced, vvherof the first is, that
which before has bin alleged against the king of Scotland in like manner, to
wit, that neither of them is properly of the house of Lancaster, as in the
genealogy set down in the third chapter has appeared. And secondly that the
title of La^caster is before the pretense of York, as has bin proved in 1.
Not of the house of Lancaster.
the fourth chapter, whereof is inferred, that neythere the king of Scots nor
Arbella, are next in succession, and for that of these two propositio^s, there
has bin much treated before, I remitte me thereunto, only promising that of the
first of the two, which is how king Henry the seventh was of the house of
Lancaster, touching right of succession, I shall handle more particulerly
afterward when I come to speak of the house of Portugal, vvherby also shall
appear plainly what pretense of succession to the crown or duchy of
Lancaster the discendentes of the said king Henry can justly make.

The second impediment, against the lady 2. The testa meant of king Henry.
Arbella is the aforesaid testament of king Henry the eight and the two acts of
parlaments for authorizing of the same, by all which is pretended that the
house of Suffolk, is preferred before this other of Scotland.

A third argument is, for that there is yet living 3. The coun tesse of darby
nearer by a degree.
one of the house of Suffolk, that is nearer by a degree to the stem, to
wit, to Henry the seventh to whom after the discease of her Majesty that now
is, we must return, then is the lady Arbella or the king of Scots, and this is
the lady Margeret countess of Darby, mother to the present earl of Darby who
was daughter to lady Elenor, daughter of Queen Mary of France, that was
second daughter of king Henry the seventh, so as this lady Margaret countess
of Darby, is but in the third degree from the said Henry, whereas both the king
of Scotland and Arbella are in the fourth, and consequently she is next in
propinquitie of blood, and how greatly this propinquity has bin favored in
such cases, though they were of the yo^ger liine, the examples before alleged
in the fourth chapter do make manifest.

Fourthlie and lastely, and most strongly of Illegitimation by bastardye.
al, they do argue against the title of this lady Arbella, affirming that her
descent is not free from bastardly, which they prove first, for that Queen
Margaret soon after the death of her first husband king James the fourth
married secretly one Steward lord of Annerdale, which Steward, was alive long
after her marriage with Duglas, and consequently this second marriage with
Duglas (Steward being alive) could not be lawful, which they do prove also by
an other mean, for that they say it is most certain, and to be made evident,
that the said Archibald Duglas earl of Anguis had an other wife also alive,
when he married the said Queen, which points they say were so public as
they came to king Henry's ears, vvhervppon he sent into Scotland the lord
William Howard, brother to the old duke of Norfolk, and father to the present
lord Admiral of Ingland, to enquire of these points, and the said lord Howard
found them to be true, The testimony of the lord Vvillian howard.
and so he reported not only to the king, but also afterward many times to
others, and namely to Queen Mary to whom he was lord Chamberlayne, and to
diverse others, of whom many be yet living, which can and will testefy the
same, upon the relation they heard from the-sayd lord Williams own mouth,
vvheruppon king Henry was greatly offended, and would have let the marriage
between his said sister and Duglas, but that they were married in secret, and
had consummate their marriage, before this was known, or that the thing could
be prevented, which is thought, was one especial cause and motive also to the
said king afterward, to put back the issue of his said sister of Scotland, as
by his fornamed testament is pretended, and this touching Arbellas title by
propinquitie of birth.

But besides this, the same men do allege dimers Other reasons of state
against Arbella.
reasons also of inconucnience in respect of the common wealth, for which in
their opinions it should be hurtful to the real me to admit this lady Arbella
for Queen, as first of al for that she is a woman, who ought not to be
preferred, before so many men as at this time do or may stand for the crown:
and that it were much to have three women to reign in Ingland one after the
other, vvher-as in the fpace of a-boue a thousaid years before them, there
has not reigned so many of that sex, nether together nor a sunder, for that
from king Cerdick first king of the west Saxons, unto Egbright the first
monarch of the Inglish name and nation, containing the space of more then 300.
years, no one vvoma^ at al is found to have reigned, and from Egbright to the
Conquest, which is almost other 300. years, the like is to be observed, and
from the conquest Government if women.
downward, which is above 500. years, one only woman was admitted for
inheritrix, which was Maude the Empress, daughter of king Henry the first,
who yet after her fathers death was put back, and king Stephen was admitted
in her place, and she never received by the realm, until her son Henry the
second was of age to govern himself, and then he was received with
express condition, that he should be crowned, and govern by himself, and not
his mother, which very condition Bolyd. l. 12
was put also by the spaniards not long after, at their admitting of the lady
Berenguela younger sister of lady Blauch neese to king Henry the second, vvherof
before often mention has bin made, to wit the condition was, that her son
(...) should govern, and not she, though his title came by her, so as this
circumstance of being a woman, has ever bin of much consideration, especially
where men do pretend also as in our case they do.

An other consideration of these men is, that if this lady, should be advanced
unto the crown, Garibay li. (...). c. 41
though she be of noble blood by her fathers side, yet in respectt of alliance
with the nobility of Ingland she is a mere strainger, for that her kyndred is
only in Scotland, and in England she has only the Candishes by her mothers
side, who being but a mean family, might cause much grudging among the
Inglish nobility, to see them so greatly advanced above the rest, as
necessarily they must be, if this woman of their lineage should come to be
Queen, which how the nobility of Ingland would bear, is hard to say, and
this is as much as I have heard others say of this matter, and of all the house
of Scotland: wherefore with this I shall end, and pass over to treat also of
the other houses that do remain of such as before I named.

OF THE HOUSE OF SVFFOLK CONTAINING THE CLAYMES OF THE COUNTESS OF Darby and
her children, as also of the children of the earl of Hartford.
CAP. VI.
IT has appeared by the genealogy set down before in the third chapter, and
ofte^tymes mentioned since, how that the house of Suffolk is so called, for
that the lady Mary second daughter of king Henry the seventh, being first
married to Lewis the 12. king of France, was afterward married to Charles
Brandon duke of Suffolk, who being sent oner to condole the death of the said
king, gat the good will to marry the widow Queen, though the common fame of al
men was; that the said Charles had a wife living at that day, and diverse
years after, as in this chapter we shall examine more in particular.

By this Chatles Brandon then duke of Suffolk, this Queen Mary of France had
two The issue of Charles Brandon.
daughters, first the lady Francis, married to Sir Henry Gray marquis Dorset,
and afterward in the right of his wife, duke also of Suffolk, who was
afterward be-hedded by Queen Mary, and secondly lady Elenor married to Sir
Henry Clifford earl of Cumberland.

The lady Francis elder daughter of the Issue of lady Fran cis.
Queen and of Charles Brandon, had issue by her husband the said last duke of
Suffolk, three daughters, to wit, Jane, Catherin, and Mary, which Mary the
youngest was betrothed first to Arthur lord Gray of wilton, and after left by
him, she was married to one M. Martin keys of kent, gentleman porter of the
Queens Stow. an. 7. Edon. 6
household, and after she dyed without issue.

And the lady Jane the eldest of the three sisters was married at the same time
to the lord Guylford Dudley, fourth son to Sir John Dudley duke of
Northumberland, and was proclaimed Queen after the death of king Edward, for
which act al three of the^, to wit, both the father, son and daughter in
law, were put to death soon after.

But the L. Catherin the second daughter, The issue of the L. Catherin.
was married first upon the same day that the other two her sisters were,
unto lord Henry Herbert now earl of Penbroke, and upon the fall and misery of
her house, she was left by him, and so she lived a sole woman for diverse
years, until in the beginning of this Queens days, she was found to be with
child, which she affirmed to be by the lord Edward Seymer earl of Hartford,
who at that time was in France, with Sir Nicholas Throgmorton the Ambassador,
and had purpose and license to have travailed into Italy, but being called
home in haste upon this new accident, he confessed that the child was his,
and both he and the lady affirmed that they were man and wife, but for that
they could not prove it by witnesses, and for attempting such a match with one
of the blood royal, without priuity and license of the prince, they were
committed both of them to the tower, where they procured means to meet
again afterward, and had an other child, which both children do yet live,
and the elder of them is called lord Henry Beacham, and the other Edward
Seymer, the mother of whom lived not long after, nether married the earl
again, until of late that he married the lady Francis Howard, sister to the
lady Sheffeild, and this is all the issue of the elder daughter of Charles
Brandon, by lady Mary Queen of France.

The second daughter of duke Charles and The issue of L. Eleanor.
the Queen, named L. Elenor, was married to Henry lord Cliford earl of
Cumbeiland, and had by him a daughter named Margaret, that married Sir Henry
Stanley, lord Strange and after earl of Darby, by whom the said lady (who yet
lives) has had issue Fernande Stanley, now earl of Darby, William and
Francis Stanley, and this is the issue of the house of Suffolk, to wit, this
Countess of Darby, with her children, and these other of the earl of
Hartford, of al whose claymes and titles with their impediments, I shall here
briefly give account and reason.

First of al, both of these families do join together in this one point, to
exclude the house of Scotland both by foraine birth, and by the foresaid
restament of king Henry authorized by two parlaments, and by the other
exclusions which in each of the titles of the king of Scots Allegations of the
houses of Darby and hartford the one against the other.
and of lady Arbella has bin before alleged. But then secondly they come to
vary between themselves, about the priority or propinquitie of their own
succession, for the children of the earl of Hartford, and their friends do
allege, that they do descend of lady Francis the elder sister of lady Elenor,
and so by law and reason are to be preferred, but the other house alleges
against this, two impediments, the one, that the lady Margaret countess of
Darby now living, is nearer by one degree to the stem, that is to king Henry
the seventh, then are the children of the earl of Hartford, and consequently
according to that which in the former Charles Brandon had a wise a live.
fourth chapter has bin declared, she is to be preferred, albeit the children
of the said earl were legitimate.

Secondly they do affirm, that the said children First bastardie against the
issue of hartford.
of the eatle of Hartford by the lady Catherin Gray, many ways are
illegitimate. First for that the said lady Catherin Gray their mother was
lawfully married before to the earl of Penbrok now living, as has bin
touched, and public records do testify, and not lawfully separated nor by
lawful authority, nor for just Stow in vita Edward. An. (...).
causes, but only for temporal and wordly respects, for that the house of
Suffolk was come into misery and disgrace, vvherby she remained still his true
wife in deed and before God, and so could have no lawful children by an other
whiles he lived as yet he does.

Again they prove the illegitimatio^ of these 2. Bastardie.
children of the earl of Hartford, for that it could never be lawfully proved
that the said earl and the lady Catherin were married, but only by their own
assertions, which in law is not holden sufficient, for which occasion the said
pretended marriage was disanulled in the court of arches, by public and
definitive sentence, of Doctor Parker archbishop of Canterbury, and prymate of
Ingland, not long after the birth of the said children.

Further-more they do add yet an other bastardy also, in the birth of lady
Catherin her 3. Bastardie.
self, for that her father lord Henry Gray marquis of Docset, was known to
have a lawful wife alive when he married the lady Francis, daughter and heir
of the Queen of France, and of Charles Brandon duke of Suffolk, and mother of
this lady Catherin, for obteyning of which great marriage, the said marquis,
put away his foresaid lawful wife, which was sister to the L. Henry Fytzallen
earl of Arondel, which disorder was occasion of much unkindness and hatred
between the said marquis and earl ever after. But the power of the marquis
and favor with king Henry in women's matters, was so great at that time, as
the earl could have no remedy, but only that his said sister who lived many
years after, had an annuitye out of the said marquis lands during her life,
and lived some years after the said marquis (afterward made duke) was put
to death in Queen Mary's time.

These then are three ways, by which the family of Darby do argue the issue
of Hartford to be illegitimate, but the other two houses of Scotland and
Clarence, do urge a former bastardy also that is common to them both, to The
fourth be (...) common to both famines of Suffolk.
wit, both against the lady Francis and the lady Eleanor, for that the lord
Charles Brandon also duke of Suffolk had a wife a live, as before has bin
signified, when he married the lady Mary Queen of France, by which former
wife he had issue the lady Powyse (I mean the wife of my lord Powyse of
Poystlandes in Wales) and how long after the new marriage of her husband
Charles Brandon, this former wife did live, I cannot set down distinctly,
though I think it were not hard to take particular information thereof in
Ingland, by the register of the church wherein she was buried, but the fre^des
of the countess of Darby do affirm, that she died before the birth of L.
Eleanor the second daughter, though after the birthe of lady Francis, and
thereby they do seek to clear the family of Darby of this bastardye, and to
lay al four upon the childen of Hartford before mentioned, but this is easy
to be known and verified by the means before signified.

But now the friends of Hartford do answer The answer of those of hartford
to the foresaid bastardies.
to al these bastardies, that for the first two pretended by the marriages of
the two dukes of Suffolk, they say that either the causes might be such, as
their deuorces with their former (...) be lawful, and prove them no marriages,
and so give them place to marry again, or else that the said former wives did
dye before these dukes that had bin their husbands, so as by a post-contract
and second new consent, given between the parties when they were now free,
the said later marriages which were not good at the beginning, might come to
be lawful afterward, according as the law permits, notwithstanding that
children begotten in such pretended marriages where one party is already
bound, are not made legitimat, by subsequent true marriage of their parents,
and this for the first two bastardies.

But as for the third illegitimation, of the contract between the lady
Catherin and the earl of Hartford, by reason of a precontract made between
the said lady Catherin and the earl of Penbroke, that now lives, they say
and affirm, that precontract to have bin dissolved afterward lawfully and
iudicially, in the time of Queen Mary.

There remains then only the fourth obiectro^, about the secret marriage made
between the said lady Catherin and the earl of Hartford, before the birth of
their eldest son, now called L. Beacham, which to say the truth seems Of
the marriage betvveen. the earl of hartford and the L. Catherin Gray.
the hardest point to be answered, for albeit in the sight of God, that
marriage might be good and lawful, if before their carnal knowledge, they gave
mutual consent the one to the other, to be man and wife, and with that mind
and intention had carnal copulation, which thing is also allowed by the late
council of Trent it self, which disanulleth Council. Trid. Sess. 24. cap. 1.
otherwise al clandestine and secret contracts in such states and countries,
vvher the authority of the said council is received, and admitted, yet to
justify these kide of marriages in the face of the church, and to make the
issue thereof legitimate and inheritable to estates and possessions: it is
necessary by all law, and in all nations, that there should be some witness to
testify this consent and contract of the parties before their carnal
knowledge, for that otherwise it should lie in every particular man's hand, to
legitimate any bastard of his, by his only word, to the prejudice of others
that might in equity of succession pretend to be his heirs, and therefore (no
doubt) but that the Archbishop of Canterbury had great reason to pronounce this
contract of the lady Catherin, and the earl of Hartford to be insufficient and
unlawful, though themselves did affirm that they had given mutual consent
before, of being man and wife, and that they came together, animo maritali, as
the law of wedlock requires, but yet for that they were not able to prove
their said former consent, by lawful vvitnesses, their said conjunction was
rightly pronounced unlawful, and so I conclude that the first son of these
two parties, might be legitimate before God, and yet illegitimate before men,
and consequently incapable of al such succession, as otherwise he might pretend
by his said mother.

And this now is for the first begotten of How the second son of the earie
of heart ford mav be legitimate.
these two persons, for as touching the second child, begotten in the tower of
London, diverse learned men are of opinion that he may be freed of this
bastardy, for that both the earl and the lady being examined upon their first
child, did consesse and affirm that they were man and wife, and that they had
meaning so to be, and to continue, which confession is thought to be
sufficient, both for ratifying of their old contract, and also for making of a
new yfthe other had not bin made before. And seeing that in the other former
pretended contract and marriage, their wanted nothing for justifying the same
before men, and for making it good in law, but only external testimony of
witnesses, for proving that they gave such mutual consent of minds before
their carnal knowledge (for the presence of priest or minister is not absolutely
necessary) no man can say that their wanted witnesses for restifying of this
consent, before the second copulation, by which was begotten their second
son, for that both the Queen herself and her council, and as many besides
as examined these parties upon their first act and child birth, are
vvitnesses unto them, that they gave their full consents and approbations, to be
man and wife, which they ratified afterward in the tower by the begetting of
their second child, and so for the reasons aforesaid, he must needs seem to
be legitimate, whatsoever my lord of Canterbury for that time or in respect of
the great offense, taken by the estate against that act, did, or might
determyne to the contrary.

And this is the sum of that which commonly is treated, about these two
families of the house of Suffolk, to wit of Hartford and Allegations of the
house of Darby.
Darby, both which families of Suffolk, the other two opposite houses of
Scotland and Clarence, do seek to exclude by the first bastardy, or unlawful
contract between the Queen ofFrance and duke Charles Brandon, as has bin
seen: of which bastardye the house of (...) does endeavor to avoid it self,
in manner as before has bin declared, and prefers it self in degree of
propinquity not only before the foresaid two houses of Scotland and Clarence,
but also before this other part of the house of Suffolk, I mean the family
of Hartford, though descended of the elder daughter, for that the countess of
Darby does hold her self one degree nearer in descent, then are the other
pretenders of Hartford as has bin showed. And albeit their want not many
objections and reasons of some, against this pretense of the house of Darby,
besides that which I have touched before, yet for that they are for the most
part parsonal impediments, and do not touch the right or substance of the
title, or any other important reason of state concerning the common wealth,
but only the mistike of the persons that pretend, and of their life and
government, I shall omit them in this place, for that as in the beginning I
promised, so shall I observe as much as lies in me, to utter nothing in this
conference of ours that may justly offend, and much less touch the honor or
reputation of any one person of the blood royal of our realm, when the time
of admitting or excluding comes, then vvil the realm consider as well of
their persons as of their rightes, and vvil see, what account and satisfaction
each person has given of his former life and doings, and according to that vvil
proceed, as is to be supposed: but to me in this place, it shall be enough to
treat of the first point, which is of the right and interest pretended by
way of succession, and so with this I shall make an end of these families,
and pass over to others that yet do remain.

OF THE HOUSES OF CLARENCE AND BRITANIE, WHICH CONTEYNE THE CLAYMES OF the
earl of Huntington, with the Pooles, as also of the lady Infanta of Spain,
and others of those families.
CAP. VII.
HAVING declared the claymes, rightes and pretenses, which the two noble houses
of Scotland and Suffolk, descended of the two daughters of king Henry the
seventh, have or may have to the succession of Ingland, with intention
afterward to handle the house of Portugal a part, which pretends to
comprehend in it self the whole body, or at least the first and principal
branch of the ancient house of Lancaster, it shall not be amiss, perhaps by the
way, to treat in this one chapter, so much as appartayneth to the two several
houses of Clarence and Britanie, for that there is less to be said about them
then of the other.

And first of al, I am of opinion, that the earl of Huntington, and such other
pretendors as Why the earl of Huntingto^s house is said to be of the house of
Clarence.
are of the house of York alone, before the conjunction of both houses by king
Henry the seventh, may be named to be of the house of Clarence and so for
distinction sake, I do name them, for not to confound them with the houses of
Scotland and Suffolk, which are termed also by the Lancastrians to be of the
houfe of York alone, for that they deny them to be of the true house of
Lancaster, but principally I do name them to be of the house of Clarence, for
that in deed al their claim and title to the crown, does discende from George
duke of Clarence, as before in the third chapter and other where has bin
declared, which duke George being brother to king Edward the fourth, and put to
death by his order, left issue Edward carle of Warwick and of Salisbury, which
was put to death by king Henry the Issue of the house of Clarence.
seventh in his youth, and Margaret countess of Salisbury, which Margaret had
issue by Sir Richard Poole, Henry Poole lord Montague, afterward behedded, and
he again Catherin, married to Sir Francis Hastings earl of Huntington, by
whom she had Sir Henry Hastings, now earl of Huntington, Sir George Hastings
his brother yet living, and others, so as the earl of Huntington with his
said brethren be in the fourth degree from the said George duke of Clarence,
to wit his nephews twice removed.

The faide Margaret countess of Salisbury had a younger son also, named Sir
Geffrey Issue of S. Geffrey Poole.
Poole, who had issue an other Geffrey, and this Geffrey has two sons that
live at this day in Italy, named Arthur and Geffrey, who be in the same
degree of distance, with the said earl of Huntington, saving that some
allege for them, that they do descend al by male kind from Margaret, and the
earl pretends by a Woman, vvherof we shall speak afterward.

Hereby then it is made manifest, how the earl of Huntingto^ comes to
preteud to the crown of Ingland, by the house of York only, which is no other
in deed, but by the debarring and disabling of al other former prete^dors, The
interest pretense of the earl of Huntington.
not only of Portugal, and of Britanie, as strangers, but also of the houses of
Scotland and Suffolk, that hold likewise of the house of York, and that for
the reasons and arguments which in the former two chapters I have set down in
particular, against every one of them, and shall here-after also again those
that remain, which arguments and objections, or any of them, if they should
not be found sufficient, to exclude the said other houses, then is the claim
of this house of Huntington thereby made void, for that it is (as we see) by
the younger child of the house of York, that is to say, by the second
brother: so as if either the pretense of Lancaster in general be better the^
that of York, or if in the house of York it self, any of the fornamed
pretenders descended from K. Edward the fourth as of the elder brother, may
hold or take place, then holds not this title of Clarence, for that (as I
have said) it coming from the younger brother, must needs be grounded only, or
principally upon the barring and excluding of the rest, that jointly do
pretend: of which bars and exclusions laid by this house of Clarence against
the rest, for that I have spoken sufficiently in the last two chapters, going
tefore, for so much as touches the two houses of Scotland and Suffolk, and
shall do afterward about the other two of Britanie and Portugal, I mean in
this place to omit to say any more therein, and only to consider what the other
competitors do allege against this house of Clarence, and especially against
the pretense Obiectio^ns against the earl of Huntington. 1.
of the earl of Huntington, as chief titler thereof, for to the excluding of
him, do concur not only those other of opposite houses, but also the Pooles of
his own house, as now we shall see.

First then, the contrary houses do allege generally against all this house of
Clarence, that seeing their claim is founded only upon the right of the
daughter of George duke of Clarence, second brother to K. Edward the fourth,
evident it is, that so long as any lawful issue remains of any elder
daughter, of the said king Edward the elder brother (as they say much does and
cannot be denied) no claim or pretense of the younger brothers daughter, can be
admitted, and so by standing upon this, and answering to the objections
alleged before, against the elder houses, they hold this matter for very
clear, and al pretense of this house of Clarence utterly excluded.

Secondly the same opposite houses do allege 2. Attainders in the house of
Huntington.
diverse attainders against the principal heads of the house of Clarence,
vvherby their whole interests were cut of, as namely it is to be showed in
three discents, the one after the other, to wit in duke George himself, the
first head and beginner of this house, that was attainted and executed, and
then in the lady Margaret his daughter and heir, countess of Salisbury, and
in like manner attaynted and executed: thirdly in her son and heir Henry
Poole lord Monrague put also to death, from whose daughters both the earl of
Huntington and his brethren, with the children of Sir Thomas Barrington do
descend, and albeit some may say, that the said house of Clarence has bin
since those attainders, restored in blood, yet reply these men, that except it
can be showed that particular mention was made of reabiliting the same to this
pretense of succession to Restitution may be in blood without restitutio^ of
dignity.
the crown, it vvil not be sufficient, as in like manner they affirm, that
the same restoring in blood (if any such were) has not bin sufficient to
recover the ancient lands and titles of honor, which this house of Clarence
had before these attainders, for that they were forfeited thereby to the crown,
and so say these men was their forfeited thereby in like manner unto the next in
blood not attainted, this prerogative of succeeding to the crown, and cannot
be restored again by any general restoration in blood, except special mention
be made thereof, even as we see, that many houses attainted are restored daily
in blood, without restoreme^t of their titles and dignities, and a present
example we have in the earl of Arundel restored in blood but not to the title
of duke of Norfolk, and this say the opposite houses against this house of
Clarence.

But now thirdly enters in also against the The pretense of the Pooles against
Huntington.
earl of Huntington, the opposition of some of his own house, which is of
the issue of Sir Geffrey Poole, brother to his grand father, who say, that
when the lord Henry Montague was put to death with his mother the countess
of Salisbury, and thereby both their pretenses and titles cut of in them, then
fell al such right as they had or might have, upon the said Sir Geffry Poole,
and not upon his niece the lady Catherin daughter of the lord Henry his elder
brother, and mother of the earl of Huntingto^, and this for three causes.
First for that he was not attainted, and so whether we respect his
grandfather duke George of Clarence, or his great grand father duke Richard of
York, the said right in this respect descended to him, and secondly for that
he was a degree nearer to the said dukes his ancestors, then was at that time
his niece Catherine, which right of nearest propinquitie, say these men, is
made good and lawful by all the reasons, examples, preside^ts, and authorities
alleged before in the fourth chapter of this conference, in favor of uncles
before their nephews, and it shall not need that we speak any thing more of
that matter in this place, but only to remit your remembrance to that which
herein has bin said before.

Fourthly they prove the same in favor of Sir Geffrey, for that the lady
Catherin was a woman, and Sir Geffrey a man, whose privilege is so great in
a matter of succession (as also has bin touched before) that albeit they had
bin in equal degree, and that Sir Greffrey were not a degree before her as he
was, yet seeing neither of the^ nor their fathers were ever in possession of
the thing pretended, Sir Geffrey should be preferred, as has bin showed before
by some presidents, and shall be seen afterward in the case of Portugal, wherein
the king of Spain that now is was preferred to the crown, for that respect
only that his competitors were women, and in equal degree of descent with
him; and he a man. And the very like allegation of propinquitie, I have hard
produced for the lady Wenefred wife of Sir Thomas Barrington (if she be yet
a-liue) to wit, that she is before the earl of Huntington and his brethren, by
this reason of propinquitie in blood, for that she is one degree nearer, to
the stock then they.

Fifthly and lastely, both these and other co^petitors Objection of Religion.
do allege against the earl of Hu^ntington as an important and sufficient
bar against his pretense, the quality of his religion, which is (as they
say) that he has bin ever known to favor those which commonly in Ingland are
called Puritanes, and not favored by the state, but yet this stop is
alleged diversely by competitors of diverse religions: for that such as are
followers and favors of the form of religion received and defended by
public authority of Ingland at this day, whom for distinction sake, men
are wont to call by the name of moderate protestants, these (I say) do urge
this exclusion against the earl of Huntington, not upon any certain law or
statute, extant against the same, but ab aeqno and bono, as men are wont to
say, and by reason of state, showing infinite inconveniences hurts damages and
dangers, that must needs ensew, not only to the state present of religion in
England, but also to the whole realm and body politic, if such a man should
be admitted to govern. And this consideration of state in their opinion is a
more forceable argument for excluding such a man, then any statute or
particular law against him could be, for that this comprehends the very
intention, meaning, and drift of al laws and lawmakers of our realm, whose
inte^sions must needs be presumed to have bin in all times, to have excluded so
great and manifest incoueniences, and thus say they.

But now, those that are of the Roman religion, and contrary both to puritan
and protetestant do urge a great deal further this argument, against the
earl, and do allege many laws, ordinances, decrees, and statutes both of the
Canon and imperial laws, as also out of the old laws of Ingland, which in
their opinion, do debarr all that are not of their religion, and consequently,
they would hereby exclude both the one and the other of these pretende^ts. And
in fine they do conclude, that seeing their wants not also some of their own
religion (called by them the Catholic) in the house of Clarence, they have so
much the less difficulty to exclude the earl of Huntingtons person for his
religion, if one of that house were to be admitted of necessity.

And this is so much as seems needful to be spoken at this time and in this
place, of this house of Clare^ce, and of the pretenders thereof. It rests then
that I treat something also of the house of Britanie and France, which two
The house of Britanie.
houses are joined al in one, for so much as may apperteyne to any inheritance
or pretense to Ingland, or unto any parcel or particular state thereof, at home
or abroad, that may follow the succession or right of women, which the
kingdom of France in it selfdoth not, as is known, and consequently a woman
may be heir to the one without the other, that is to say, she may be heir
to some particular states of France inheritable by women, though not to the
crown it self, and so do pretend to be the two daughters of France, that
were sisters to the late king Henry the third, which daughters were married,
the one to the king of Spain that now is, by whom he had issue, the Infanta of
spain yet unmarried, and her younger sister married to the duke of Sauoy, and
the other to wit the younger daughter of the king of France, was married to
the duke of Loraine, yet living, by whom she had the prince of Lorayne, and
other children that live at this day.

This then being so clear as it is, first, that according to the common course
of succession in Ingland, and other countries, and according to the course of
all common law, the Infanta of The course of inheritan ce in the crown of
France.
Spain, should inherit the whole kingdom of France, and al other states
thereunto belonging, she being the daughter and heir of the eldest daughter of
king Henry the second king of France, whose issue male of the direct line, is
wholy now ended, but yet for that the French, do pretend their law Salik to
exclude women, (which we Inglish have ever denied to be good until now) hereby
comes it to pass, that the king of Nauarr pretends to enter, and to be
preferred before the said Infanta or her sisters children, though male, by a
collateral line. But yet her favorers say, I mean those of the Infanta, that
from the dukedomes of Britanie, Aquitaine, and the like, that came to the
crown of France by women, and are inheritable by women, she cannot be in right
debarred, as neither from any succession or pretense in Ingland, if either by
the blood royal of France, Britanie, Aquitaine or of Ingland it self, it may
be proved that she has any interest thereunto, as her said favorers do affirm
that she has, by these reasons following.

First, for that she is of the ancient blood First pretense of the Infan ta to
Ingland.
royal of Ingland, even from the conquest, by the elder daughter of William the
conqueror married to Allayne Fergant duke of Britanie, as has bin showed
before in the second chapter, and other places of this conference, and of this
1.
point they infer two or three consequences. First that when the sons of
the Conqueror were dead without issue or made incapable of the crown (as it
was presumed at least wife of king Henry the first, last son of the
Conqueror, that he lost his right for the violence used to his elder brother
Robert, and unto William the said Roberts son and heyte) then say these men,
ought the said duchess of Britanie to have entered as eldest sister. 2.
And secondly they say that when duke Robert that both by right of birth and by
express agreement with William Polydor. in vita Guliel. Rufi.
Rufus, and with the Realm of Ingland, should have succeeded next after the
said Rufus, came to dye in prison, the said lady Constance should have succeeded
him, for that his brother Henry being culpable of his death, could not in right
be his heir. 3.
And thirdly they say that at least wise after the death of the said king Henry
the first, she and her son I mean lady Constance and Conan duke of Britanie,
should have entered before king Stephen, who was borne of Adela the younger
daughter, of William Conqueror.

Secondly they do allege, that the Infanta of Second pretense of the Infanta
of Spain.
Spain desce^deth also lineally from lady Eleanor eldest daughter of king
Henry the second, married to king Alonso the nynthe of that name king of
Castile, whose eldest daughter and (...) leesing by this forfeit, al right he
had in the kingdom of Ingland it follows, that the same should have gone to
his said sister, and by her to this lady Blanch her heir, and eldest daughter,
married into france as has bin said, which forfeit also of king John, these
men do confirm by his deprivation by the Pope that soon after ensewed, as
also by an other deprivation made by the Barrons of his realm, as after shall be
touched.

Further more they say that when Arthur 3. Pretense by Arthur duke of Britanie.
duke of Britanie (whom to this effect they do hold to have bin the only true
heir at that time to the kingdom of Ingland) was in prison in the castle of
Roan, suspecting that he should be murthred by his said uncle K. John, he
nominated this lady Blanch his cosen germany, to be his heir, persuading
himself that she by the help of her husband prince Lewis of France, and her
father the king of spain, should be better able to defend and recover his or
her right, to the crown of Ingland then Eleanor his own sister, should be,
who was also in the hands of his said uncle: for that he supposed that she
also should be made away by him shortly after, as in deed the french chronicle
affirms that she was: and howsoever Belforest I. 3. cap. 71 hist. Fran.
this matter of duke Arthurs testament were; yet certain it is, that when he
and his sister were put to death, the next in kynne, that could succeed them
in their right to Ingland, was this lady Blanch, and her mother Queen Elenor,
that was sister to Arthurs father, Geffrey duke of Britanie. For that king John
their uncle was presumed by all men to be incapable of their inheritance, by his
putting of them to death, and child yet he had none, and this is the second
point that these men do deduce for the lady Infanta of Spain, by the title of
Queence Eleanor and her daughter Blanch, to whom the Infanta is next heir.

A third interest also the same men do derive Election of Levvys the 8. to be
King of England.
to the Infanta, by the actual deposition of king John by the Barons and states
of his Realm in the 16. year of his reign, and by the election and actual
admission of Lewis prince of France, husband of the foresaid lady Blanch, whom
they chose with one consent, and admitted and swore him fealtic and obedience
in London, for him and for his heirs and posterity, in the year 1217. and
gave him possession of the said city and Tower of London, and of many other
Polydor. l. 15. hist. Angl. Holling and Stow in vita Ioannis.
chief places of the realm, and albeit afterwatd the most part of the realm
chainged their minds again, upon the sudden death of the said king John,
and chose and admitted his young son Henry the third, a child of nync years
old, yet do the favorers of the Infanta say, that their remains to her as
heir unto the said Lewis, until this day, that interest which by this election
oath and admission of Belfor. li. (...) cap. 67. Girard li. histor. (...).
(...). france.
the realm, remained unto this prince Lewis, which these men affirm to be the
very like case, as was that of Hugo Capetus in France, who came to be king
especially, upon a certain title that one of his ancestors named Odo earl of
Parris, had, by being once elected king of France, and admitted and sworn,
though afterward he were deposed again, and young Charles surnamed the simple
was admitted in his place, as Henry the third was in England after the election
of this Lewis. But yet as the other continued ever his right and claim until
it was restored to Hugo Capetus one of his race, so say these men, may this
Infanta co^tinew and renew now the demand of this right of king Lewis her
ancester, for that titles and interestes to kingdoms, once rightly gotten, do
never dye, but remain ever for the posterity to effectuate when they can, and
thus much of this matter.

But after this again, these men do show, how that the said Infanta of Spain,
does discende Pretense by dissent from Henry the third.
also from Henry the third, son of king John, by the dukes of Britanie, as
before in the second chapter has bin declared, and in the arbor and genealogy
following in the end of this conference shall be seen, for that king Henry
besides his two sons Edward and Edmond, which were the beginners of the two
houses of York and Lancaster, had also a daughter named Lady Beatrix, married
to John the second of that name duke of Britanie, and by him she had Arthur the
second, and so lineally from him have descended the princes of that house,
until their union with the crown of France, and from thence unto this lady
Infanta of Spain, that now is, who takes herself for proper heir of the
said house of Britanie, and heir general of France, as has bin said.

By this third conjunction then, of the house of Britanie with the blood royal
of Ingland, the friends of the Infanta do argue in this manner, that seeing she
discendeth of the sister of these two brothers which were the heads of the two
opposite houses of Lancaster and York, and considering that each of these
houses has oftentimes bin attainted, and excluded from the succession by
sundry acts of parliament, and at this present are opposite, and at contention
among themselves: why may not this right of both houses (say these men) by way
of composition peace and comprimise, at Admissio^ by composition.
least, be passed over to the issue of their sister which rests in the
Infanta.

Again they say that al these three branches of the lines of Inglish kings,
to wit by the lady Constance daughter of king William Conqueror, by the lady
Elenor daughter of king Henry the second, and by the lady Beatrix daughter of
king Henry the third, it is evident, that this lady the infanta of Spain, is
of the true and ancient blood royal of Ingland, and that diverse ways she may
have claim to the same, which being granted, they infer, that seeing matters
are so doubtful at this day, about the next lawful succession, and that diverse
of the pretendores are excluded, some for bastardie, some other for religion,
some for unaptness to govern, and some for other causes, and seeing the common
wealth has such authority to dispose in this affair, as before the Civil
lawyer has declared, why may there not consideration be had among other
pretenders, of this noble princess also (say these men) especially seeing she
is unmarried and may thereby co^modate many matters, and salve many breaches,
and satisfy many hopes, and give contentment to many desires, as the world
knows.

And this is in effect as much as I have hard Obiectio^s against the Infan tas
pretense.
alleged hitherto in favor of the Infanta of Spain, but against this
pretense, others do produce diverse arguments and objections, as first of al,
that these her claymes be very old and worn out, and are but collateral by
sisters. Secondly that she is a stranger, and allien borne. Thirdly that her
religion is contrary to the state. unto al which objections, the favorers
aforesaid do make their answers, and to the first they say, that antiquity
hutteth not the goodness of a title, when occasion is offered to advance the
same, especially in titles apperteyning to kingdoms, which commonly are never
presumed to dye, as has bin said, and nullum tempus occurrit Regi says our
law. And as for collateral lines, they say, that they may lawfully be admitted
to enter when the direct lines do either fail or are to be excluded, for other
just respects, as in our case they hold that it happens. And as for the
second point of foreign birth they say there has bin sufficient answered,
before in treating of the house of Scotland, that in rigor it is no bar, by
intention of any Inglish law, yet whether in reason of state and politic
government, it may be a just impediment or no, it shall after be handled more al
large when we come to treat of the house of Portugal. To the last point of
religion they answer that this impediment is not universal, not admitted in the
judgment of al men, but only of those Inglish that be of different religion
from her. But to some others (and those many as these men do vveene) her
religion vvil rather be a motive to favor her title then to hinder the same,
so that on this ground no certainty can be builded, and this is as much as I
have to say at this time of these two families of Clatence and Britanie.

OF THE HOUSE OF PORTVGAL WHICH CONTEYNETH THE CLAYMES AS WELL OF the king and
prince of Spain to the succession of Ingland, as also of the dukes of Parma
and Bragansa by the house of Lancaster.
CAP. VIII.
IT has bin oftentimes spoken before upon occasions offered, that the princes
of the house of Portugal at this day, do persuade themselves that the only
remaynder of the house of The princes of Portugal are of the house of La^caster.
Lancaster rests among them, as the only true heirs of the lady Blanch
duchess and heir of Lancaster, and first wife of John of Gaunt, which point
of these princes descents from the said duchess of Lancaster, though it be
declared sufficiently before in the third and fourth chapters: yet will I
briefly here also set down and repeat again the reasons thereof, which are
these that follow.

John of Gaunt was duke of Lancaster by the right of his first wife lady
Blanch, and had by her only one son, as also one daughter, of whom we need
here to speak, for that the other has left no issue now living. The son
was king Henry the fourth, who had issue king Henry the fifth, and he again
Henry the sixth, in whom was extinguished all the succession of this son
Henry.

The daughter of John of Gaunt by lady The issue of lady Phillip Queen of
Portugal.
Blanch was called Phillip, who was married to John the first king of that
name of Portugal, who had issue by him king Edward, and he again had issue
king Alfonsus the fifth king of Portugal, and he and his ofspringe had issue
again the one after the other until our times, and so by this marriage of lady
Phillip, to their first king John, these princes of the house of Portugal that
live at this day, do pretend that the inheritance of Lancaster is only in
them, by this lady Phillip, for that the succession of her elder brother king
Henry the fourth, is expired long ago. This is effect is their pretense, but
now we vvil pass on to see what others say, that do pretend also to be of
the house of Lancaster by a latter marriage.

John of Gaunt after the death of his first wife lady Blanch, did marrye
again the lady Issue of John of Gaunt by his later vviues.
Constance daughter of king Peter surnamed the cruel of Castile, and had by her
one daughter only named Catherin, whom he married afterward back to Castile
again, giving her to wife, to king Henry the third of that name, by whom she
had issue king John, and he others, so as lineally king Philippe king of Spain
is descended from her, which king Phillip being at this day king also of
Portugal, and the chief titler of that house unto Ingland, he joins Sce the
arbor in the end of this book.
the inheritance of both the two daughters of John of Gaunt, in one, and so we
shall not need to talk of these two daughters hearafter distinctly but only as
of one, seeing that both their discents do end in this one man.

The only difficulty and dissension is then, The point of difficulty.
about the issue of the third marriage, which was of John of Gaunt with lady
Catherin Swinford, whom he first kept as a Concubine, in the time of his second
wife lady Constance, as before has bin showed in the third chapter, and begat
of her four children, and after that his wife lady Constance was dead, he
took her to wife for the love he bare to his children, a little before his
death, and caused the said children to be legitimated by authority of
parliament, and for that none of these four children of his, have left issue,
but only one, that was John earl of Somerset, we shall speak only of him
ommitting all the rest.

This John then earl of Somerset had issue an other John, which was made duke
of Somerset Issue of Catherin Svvinford.
by king Henry the sixth, who with his three sons, were slain by the
princes of the house of York, in the quarrel of Lancaster, and so left only
one daughter named Margaret, who by her husband Edmond Tydder, earl of
Richmond, was Countess of Richmond, and had by him a son named Henry earl
of Richmond, that was after king, by the name of king Henry the senenth, and
from him al his discendents both of the house of Scotland and Suffolk, do
pretend also to be of the house of Lancaster, which yet can be no otherwise
then now has bin declared, to wit, not from Blanch first wife and heir of the
duchy of Lancastee, but from Catherin Swinford his third wife, vvherin rises
the question whether those men, I mean king The principal question.
Henry the seventh, and his discendents, may properly be said to be of the
true house of Lancaster, or no, whereunto some do answer with a distinction,
to wit, that to the duchy of La^caster, Answer.
whereof the first wife lady Bla^ch was heir; these of the third marriage
cannot be heirs, but only the remaynder of the issue of the said lady Blanch
that rests in the princes of the house of Portugal. But yet to the title of
the crown Duchy of La^caster.
of Inglande, which came by John of Gau^t himself, in that he was third son
of K. Edward the third, and eldest of al his children that lived when the said
king Edward dyed (by which is pretended also that he should have succeeded
immediately after him before king Richard the second, as before in the fourth
chapter has bin declared) to this right (I say) and to this The crown.
interest of the crown, which came by John of Gaunt himself, and not by lady
Bla^ch, or by any other of his wives, the discendents of king Henry the seventh
do say that they may and ought to succeed, for that John earl of Somerset
eldest son of John of Gaunt by lady Catherin Swinford, though he were
begotten out of matrimony, yet being afterward made legitimate, An exam ple of
Edward the sixth and of the prince of spain.
he was to inherit this right of John of Gaunt his father, before the lady
Phillip his sister, for that so we see that king Edward the sixth, though
younger, and but half brother unto the lady Mary and Elizabeth his sisters, yet
he inherited the crown before them, and in like manner is lord Phillippe
prince of Spain at this day to inherit all the states of that crown before
his two sisters; that be elder then he, and so likewise say these men, ought
John of Somerset to have done before Phillippe his eldest sister, if he had
bin alive at that time, when king Henry the sixth was put down and dyed, and
consequently his posterity, which are the discendents of king Henry the
seventh, ought to enjoy the same before the princes of Portugal, that are the
disce^dents of Lady Phillippe his sister, thus say the issue of king Henry the
seventh.

But to this the princes of the house of Portugal do reply, and say, first,
that by this it is Replies of the house of Portugal.
evident at least, that the dukedom of Lancaster vvherof the lady Blanch was
the only heir, must needs apperteyne to them alone, and this without al doubt
or controversy, for that they only remain of her issue after extinguishing of
the posterity of her elder brother K. Henry the fourth, which was extinguished
by the death of king Henry the sixth, and of his only son The duke dome of
La^caster.
prince Edward, and for this they make no question or controversy, assuring
themselves that al law, right and equity, is on their side. The legitimation of
Catherin Svvinfords children not lavvful.


Secondly touching the succession and right to the kingdom, they say, that
John earl of Somerset being borne out of Wedlock, and in adultery, for that
his father had an other wife alive when he begatt him, and he continuing a
bastard so many years, could not be made legitimate afterward by parliament to
that effect of succession to the crown, and to deprive Queen Phillip of
Portugal, and her children borne before the others legitimation, from their
right and succession, without their consents, for that John king of Portugal,
did marry the said lady Phillip, with condition to enjoy al prerogatives that
at that day were due unto her, and that at the time when John of Gaunt did
marry the said lady Catherine Svvinford, and made her children legitimate by
act of parliament (which was in the year of Christ 1396. and 1397.) the said
lady Phillip Queen of Portugal, Stow in vit. Richardi 2.
had now two sons living, named don Alon so, and don Edwardo, which were
borne in the years 1390. and 1391. that is six years Garibay his Portugal. l.
33 cap. 4.
before the legitimation of John earl of Somerset, and his brethren, and
thereby had ius acquisitum, as the law says, which right once acquired and
gotten, could not be taken away by any posterior act of parliament afrervvard,
without consent of the parties interressed, for which they do allege, diverse
places of the canon law, which for that they hold not in Ingland, I do not
cite, but one example they put to show the inconvenience of the thing (if it
should be otherwise determined then they affirm) Note this example. Stow in
vit. Henrici 8.
which is, that if king Henry the eight that had a bastard son, by the lady
Elizabeth Blunt, whom he named Henry fitzroy, and made him both earl of
Notingham, and duke of Richmond and Somerset in the 18. year of his reign, at
what time the said king had a lawful daughter a live, named the princess Mary
by Queen Catherin of Spain; if (I say) the king should have offered to make
this son legitimate by parliament, with intent to have him succeed after him,
in the crown, to the prejudice and open injury of the said lawful daughter,
these men do say that he could not have done it, and if he should have done it
by violence, it would not have held, and much less could John of Gaunt do the
like, being no king. Nor was the act of parliament sufficient for this point,
it being a matter that depended especially (say these men) of the spiritual
court, and of the Canon law which law allows this legitimation no further,
but only as a dispensation, and this so farforth only as it does not prejudice
the right of any other.

Nether helps it any thing in this matter, the matriage of John of Gaunt with
lady Catherin, John of Gauntes marriage with Catherin Svvinford helps not
the legitimation.
for to make better this legitimation, for that as has bin said, their
children were not only naturales but Spurij that is to say begotten in plain
aduoutrie and not in simple fornication only, for that the one party had a
wife a live, and consequently the priuelege that the law gives to the
subsequent marriage of the parties for legitimating such children, as are borne
in simple fornication, that is to say between parties that were single and
none of them married, can not take place here, so as these men conclude, that
albeit this legitimation of parliament, might serve them to other purposes, yet
not to deprive the princes of Portugal of their prerogative to succeed in their
mothers right, which she had when she was married to their father.

And this they affirm to have bin law and right at that time, if the said
Queen Phillip and earl John had bin alive together, when Henry the sixth and
his son was put to death, and that this question had bin then moved at the
death of king Henry the sixth, whether of the two, to wit either the said
Queen Phillip or her younger brother John earl of Somerset by the fathers The
question betvveene lord Phillip and John of Somerset.
side only, should have succeeded in the inheritance of king Henry the sixth, in
which case these men presume for certain, that the said Queen Phillippe
legitimatly borne, and not John made legitimate by parlame^t, should have
succeeded, for that by common course of law, the children legitimated by favor,
albeit their legitimation were good and lawful (as this of these children is
denied to be) yet can they never be made equal, and much less be preferred
before the lawful and legitimate by birth.

But now say these men, the case stands at this present somewhat otherwise,
and more for the advantage of Queen Phillippe, and her offspring, for when
king Henry the sixth, and his son were extinguished, and Edward duke of York
thrust him self in to the crown (which was about the year of Christ 1471)
the foresaid two princes, lady Phillip and earl John, were both dead, as also
their children, and only their nephews were alive, that is to say, their
lived in Portugal king Alfonsus the fifth of that name, son to king Edward,
which Edward was child to Queen Phillip, and the death of king Henry the
sixth of Ingland happened in the 38. year of the reign of the said king
Alfonsus: and in England lived at the same time, lady Margaret Countess of
Richmond, mother of king Henry the seuenthe and niece of the foresaid John
earl of Somerset, to wit the daughter of his son duke John of Somerset, so
as these two competitors of the house of Lancaster, that is to say, king
Alfonsus and lady Margaret, were in equal degree from John of Gaunt, as also
from king Henry the sixth, saving that king Alfonsus was of the whole blood,
as has bin said, and by Queen Phillip that was legitimate, and the countess
of Richmond was but of the half blood, as by John earl of Somerset, that
was a bastard legitimated.

The question then is, which of these two The question betvveene the nephevves.
should have succeeded by right, of the house of Lancaster, immediately after the
death of king Henry the sixth, and the lady Margaret alleges that she was
descended from John earl of Somerset that was a man, and therefore to be
preferred, and king Alfonsus alleged that he being in equal degree of neernes
of blood with the same countess (for that both were nephews) he was to be
preferred before her, for that he was a man, and of the whole blood, to the
last kings of the house of Lancaster, and that she was a woman and but of the
half blood, so that three prerogatives he pretended before her. First that he
was a man and she a woman, and secondly that he descended of the lawful and
elder daughter, and she of the younger brother legitimated, and thirdly that he
was of whole blood, and she but of half, and for better fortifying of this
proof of his title, these men do allege a certain case, determined by the
learned of our days as they say, vvherin for the first of these three causes
only, the succession to a crown was adjudged unto king Phillip of Spain, to
wit the succession to the kingdom of Portugal, which case was in all respects
correspondent to this of ours: for that Emanuel king of Portugal had three
children, for so much as apperteyneth to this affair (for afterward I shall
treat more particulerly of his issue) that is to say, two sons and one
daughter, in this order, John, Elizabeth and Edward, even as John of Gaunt had
Henry, lady Philippe, and John.

Prince John of Portugal first child of king The case of succession to Portugal.
Emanuel, had issue an other John, and he had Sebastian in whom the line of
John the first child was extinguished: but John's sister Elizabeth, was
married to Charles the Emperor, and had issue K. Phillip of Spain that now
lives. Edward also yo^ger brother to Elizabeth or Isabel had issue two
daughters, the one married to the duke of Parma, and the other to the duke of
Bragansa, so as king Phillip was in equal degree with these ladies in respect
of king Emanuel, for that he was son to his eldest daughter, and the two
duchesses were daughters to his younger son, and upon this rested the
question, which of these should succeed, and it was decided that it
apperteyneth unto king Phillip, for that he was a man, and his mother was the
elder sister, though if king Phillips mother and the two duchesses father I
mean lord Edward of Portugal had bin alive together, no doubt but that he
being a man should have borne it away, which these men say, holds not in
our case, but is much more to our advantage, for that it has bin showed
before, that if Queen Phillippe had bin alive with earl John of Somerset at
the death of king Henry the sixth, she should have bin preferred as legitimate,
by birth, and therefore much more ought her nephew king Alfonsus to have bin
preferred afterward in that he was a man, before the niece of the said earl
John of Somerset, that was but a woman, thus far they. The proper interest
of K. Henry the 4. cannot descend to king Henry the 7.


And besides all this, they do add (as often before I have mentioned) that
king Alfonsus was of the whole blood unto all the three king Henry's of the
house of Lancaster, and the countess of Richmond was but of the half blood:
and for more strengthening of this argument, they do say further, that besides
that interest or right to the crown, which king Henry the fourth (that was
the first king of the house of Lancaster) had by his father John of Gaunt, in
that the said John was third son of king Edward the third, the said king
Henry had diverse other interestes also which came of himself only, and not
from his said father, as were (for example) his being called into the realm
by general voice of all the people: his right gotten by arms, upon the evil
government of the former king: the personal resignation and delivery of the
kingdom by solemn instrument made unto him, by king Richard: his election
also by parliament, and coronation by the realm: and finally the quiet
possession of him and his posterity, for almost threescore years, with many
confirmations of the whole realm, by diverse acts of parliament, oaths, and
other assura^ces, as the world knows: so many I mean, and so aute^tical, as
could possibly be devised or given: and besides all this, that when king
Richard was dead, he was next in degree of propinquitie unto him, of any man
living, for that the sons of Roger Mortimer, were two degrees further of
then he, as has bin showed before. Al which particular rightes and
interestes, were peculier to Henry the fourth his person, and were not in his
father John of Gaunt, and therefore cannot possibly descend from him (...) left
by the last duke of Parma, lord Ranutius that is now duke of Parma, and lord
Edward that is Cardinal: and the lady Catherine duchess of Bragansa that yet
lives, has issue diverse goodly princes, as the lord Theodosius, that is now
duke of Bragansa, and three younger brothers, to wit, Edward, Alexander and
Phillip, al young princes of great expectation, and these are the children of
king Emanuel whose particular successions and issues, I shall declare somewhat
more yet in particular.

Prince John of Portugal afterward king, by Issue of K. John the 3. of
Portugal.
name of king John the third, had issue an other John that was prince of
Portugal, but dyed before his father and left a son named Sebastian, who
was king, and slain afterward by the Moors in Barbary, and so ended this
first line.

The second son, and fourth child of king Emanuel, was named lord Lewis,
and dyed also L. Jews father of Don Antonio.
without issue legitimate, as is supposed, for that don Antonio his son,
that afterward was proclaimed king by the people of Lisbone, and now lives in
Ingland, was taken by all men to be unlawful, as presently more at large shall be
showed, so as after the death of king Sebastian, their entered the Cardinal lord
King Hen ry Cardinal.
Henry; which was third son to king Emanuel, and great uncle to king
Sebastian lately disceased, for that he was brother to king John the third,
that was grand father to king Sebastian, and albeit their vvanted not some
(according as the authors write which afterward I shall name) who affirmed
and held, that king Phillip of Spain should have succeeded king Sebastian
before the Cardinal, for that he was nearer in consanguinitie to him then was
the Cardinal, for that besides that king Phillip was son of king Emanuels
eldest daughter, he was brother also to king Sebastians mother, yet the said
Cardinal entered peceably and by consent of al parties, but for that he was
old, and unmarried, and not like to leave any child of his own, there began
presently the contention in his days, who should be his successor.

To which succession, did pretend five princes of the blood royal of
Portugal, besides the lady Catherine Queen mother of France, who The pretense
of the Queen mother in France to Portugal.
pretended by her mothers side to be descended of one lord Raphe, earl of
Bulayne in Picardy, which Raphe was eldest son of Alfonsus the third king
of Portugal; which Alfonsus before he was king, to wit, in the time, of his
elder brother king Sanches of Portugal, was married to the countess and heir
of Bullayn, named Mathildis and had by her this Raphe: but afterward this
Alfonsus coming to be king of Portugal, he married again with the king of
Castiles daughter, and had by her a son called Denyse, who reigned after
him, and his successors, unto this day, al which succession of king Denyse and
his posterity, the said Queen mother would have improued and shevved, that it
apperteyned to her by the said Raphe, and for this cause sent she to Portugal,
one lord Urban bishop of Comince in Gasgonie, to plead her cause, which cause
of hers was quickly rejected, and only the forsaide five princes descended of
king Emanuels children, were admitted to trial for the same, which Five
pretenders of the Grown of Portugal.
were, Don Antonio son of lord Lewis the king Cardinals elder brother, and
king Phillip of Spain son of lady Elizabeth the eldest sisteof t he said
Cardinal, and Philibert duke of Sauoy son of the lady Beatrix the same
Cardinals younger sister, and the two duchesses of Parma and Bragansa, named
Mary and Catherine, daughters of lord Edward younger brother of the said
Cardinal, and youngest child of king Emanuel. And for that the lady Mary
duchess of Parma, which was the elder of the two daughters, was dead
before this controversy fell out, her eldest son lord Ranutio now duke of
Parma, pretended by her right, to the said crown.

And for that this matter was of so great importance The contention about the
succession of Portugal.
every part procured to lay down their reasons, and declared their rightes,
in the best manner they could, and such as could not be present themselves in
Portugal, sent thither their agentes, Ambassadors and Atturneys, to plead their
causes for them. Don Antonio and the duchess of Bragansa, as inhabitants of
that kingdom, were present, and declared their pretenses, namely Don Antonio
by himself, and for himself, and the lady Mary of Bragansa by her husband the
duke, and his learned council.

The prince of Parma sent thither for his part one Ferdinande Farnese, bishop
of Parma. The Atturneyes sent to Portugal.
duke of Sauoy sent Charles of Rouere, afterward made Cardinal. The king of
Spain, as the greatest pretender sent the lord Peter Gyro^ duke of Osuna
afterward Viceroy of Naples, and Sir Christopher de Mora, knight of his chamber
at that time, but since of his priuye council and lately made earl of Castle
Rodrigo in Portugal, of which country he is native, and besides these two, a
great lawyer named Roderigo Vasques, made since (as I hear say) lord
President of Castil, which is as much almost as lord Chancellor with us.

Al these did lay forth before the king Cardinal their several reasons and
pretensions to the succession of the crown of Portugal, for the five persons
before mentioned, whereof two were quickly excluded, to wit, the duke of Sauoy
for that his mother was younger sister to king Phillips mother, and himself
also of less age then the said king. And secondly Don Antonio was also
excluded by public and judicial sentence, of the king Cardinal his uncle, as
illegitimate, and borne out of lawful wedloke, and albeit Do^ Antonio denied
the same, and went about to prove him self legitimat, affirming that his
father the lord Lewis, before his death had married with his mother in secret
and for this brought forth some witnesses, as namely his mothers sister with
her husband, and two others: yet the king Cardinal affirmed, that upon
examination he had found them to be suborned which he said was evident to
him, partly for that they agreed not in their speeches, and partly for that
some of them had confessed the same, to wit, that they were suborned, whom he
cast into prison, and caused them to be punished, and so sitting in judgment,
and sentence of illegitimation against Don Antonio.
accompained with four bishopes, and four lawyers, vvho^ he had called to
assist him in this cause, he pronounced the same Don Antonio to be a bastard,
for which the Authors that I have read about this matter which are principally
two, the first named Hierom Frank, a gentleman of Genua, who wrote ten books
in Italian, of the union of the crown of Portugal to the crown of Castilia,
and the second is VVriters of this co^ trouerfie.
named Ioanes Antonius Viperanus a Sicilian as I take him, who wrote one book
only in latin, de obtenta Portugallia a rege Catholico Phillippo, of Portugal
got by king Phillip the Catholic, both these books (I say) out of whom
principally I have taken the points which here I will touch, do severally set
down, the causes following, why the king Cardinal did reject the pretense of
Don Antonio before al other 1. The (...) why don Antonio was pronounced
illegitimate.
pretenders, and pronounced him a bastard.

First, for that he had been ever so taken all the time of his fathers life, and
no man ever dowted thereof, or called the matter in question, until now that
himself denied the same.

2.
Secondly for that in the time of Julius Tertius the Pope, when certain decres
came out from Rome, against the promotion of bastardes, the same Do^ Antonio
sued to the said Pope, to be dispensed with all in that case, which argues
that then he knew himself not legitimate.

3.
Thirdly that his father the lord Lewis had often times both by word and writing
testified the same, that this Antonye was his bastard, and had signified also
so much in his last vvil and testament.

4.
Fourthly the said Cardinal as of himself, also affirmed, that if his brother
the lord Lewis, had ever do^ne any such thing, as to marry this Woman, who was
but base in birth, and of the Jewish race, as these stories do affirm: that it
is like, that he would have made some of his own friends and kynred acquainted
therewith, as a matter so much important for them to know, but he never did,
though the said Cardinal auowed that himself was present with him at his
death.

5.
Fifthly he said, that if Don Antonio had bin legitimate, how happened that he
did not pretend the succession before the Cardinal himself, next after the
death of king Sebastian, seeing that he was to have gone before the said
Cardinal by as good right, as his other nephew Sebastian did, if he had bin
legitimate, for that he was son also to the Cardinales elder brother, as
has bin said.

6.
Sixthly and lastly, the said king Cardinal auowched against Don Antonio, partly
the disagreeing and partly the open confessing of the vvitnesses, that they
were suborned by him, upon al which causes and considerations, he proceeded
to the judicial sentence before alleged.

Thus passed the matter in the case of Don Antonio, who if he had bin
legitimate, no doubt, but by all right he should have bin preferred before all the other pretenders to the crown of Portugal, and must be at this day,
toward Don Antonio his pretense to Ingland.
the crown of Ingland, before al those that pretend of the house of Portugal,
if we grant him to be legitimate, and much more clearly may he pretend to the
dukedom of Lancaster, as before has bin declared, for that it must descend to
the lawful heir of lady Phillip Queen of Portugal, whereof enseweth also, one
consideration not impertinent to us in Ingland, that seeing we hold him there
for true king of Portugal, I see not how we can deny him his right to the said
dukedom, at least of Lancaster, whereof if we would give him but the
possession with all the appurtenances, as they lie, it were no euel
interteynme^t for him in our country until he could get the possession of the
crown in his own.

After the exclusions of these two pretenders, Three principal pretenderes of
Por tugal.
to wit of the duke of Sauoy, and of Don Antonio, the whole controversy for
Portugal, remained, between the other three, which were the king of Spain
son of lady Isabel eldest daughter of king Emanuel, and the two duchesses of
Parma and Bragansa, daughters of the younger son of the said king Emanuel, to
wit of the lord Edward infant of Portugal.

And first of al, for that the eldest of these two Pretense of the duke of
Parma.
Ladies to wit, Mary duchess of Parma, was now dead, her eldest son lord
Ranutio now duke of Parma, entered in her place, and alleged that he
represented his mother, and she her father lord Edward, which Lord if he had
bin alive, he should (no doubt) have bin preferred before his elder sister,
lady Elizabeth mother of king Phillip, and consequently that the said lord
Edwards issue ought to be preferred before her issue, and this he alleged
against king Phillip.

And against the duchess of Bragansa he alleged, that his said mother was
the elder sister, and for that cause he which now possessed her right and
represented her person, was to be preferred before the said lady Catherine
duchess of Bragansa, so that the foundation of this pretense, of the duke of
Parma was, that he was nephew to the lord Edward, by his eldest daughter, and
that to king Emanuel he was nephew, once removed, by his son, vvheras king
Phillip was nephew but by his daughter only, and that the lady Catherine of
(...) he was of the right discendant line of K. John, and the Cardinal was but
of the collateral or transuersal line, and that al law allows that the right
line shall first be served and preferred, before the collateral shall be admitted,
so that heerby representation is nothing furthered.

This exclusion of representation, did greatly further and advance the pretense
of king Phillip, for the excluding of both these ladies, and K. Phillippes pre
tence to Portugal.
their issues; for that supposing (as this answer avouches) that their is no
representation of father or mother or predecessors to be admitted, but that
every pretender is to be considered only in his own person, then it follows,
(said these men which plead for the king) that king Phillip being in equal
degree of propinquitie of blood, with the two ladies, in respect as well of K.
Henry yet living (for that they were al three children of brother and sister)
it follows that he was to be preferred before them both, as well in respect
that he was a man, and they both Women, as also, for that he was elder in age,
and borne before them both. And albeit the duke of Parma alleged that he was
also a man, yet was it answered that he was one degree further of from the
foresaid kings, then was king Phillip, so as not respecting representation of
their parents, that is to say, not considering at all, that king Phillip
descended of a Woman, and the two duchesses, of a man, but only, respecting
their own persons, as has bin declared, these men avouched, that king
Phillipps person was evidently to be preferred, for that he was a degree nearer
in blood then the duke of Parma, and superior in sex and age, to the lady
Catherine of Bragansa.

Moreover the lawyers of king Phillipps side affirmed, that he was nearer also
in propinquitie of blood to king Sebastian, the last king, then was the very
king Cardinal himself, and much more than any of the other two pretenders, for
that he was brother to the said king Sebastians Diverse allegations for king
Phillip.
mother, and the Cardinal was but brother to his gra^dfather. And besides this,
they alleged, that Portugal did belong to the crown of Castil by diverse other
means of old, as for that it could not be given away by kings of Castil in
marriage of their daughters, as the principal parts thereof had been, as also
for that whe^king John the first, that was a bastard, was made king of
Portugal, by election of the people, the inheritance thereof did evidently
apperteyne to king John of Castil, that had to wife, the lady Beatrix daughter
and heir of Ferdinand king of Portugal, from which inheritance of that crown,
by open iniurye, both she and her posterity (whose right is in king Phillip
at this day) were debarred, by the intrusio^ of the said John, master of Auis,
bastard brother of the foresaid king Ferdinand.

These reasons alleged diverse lawyers in the behalf of king Phillip, and
those not only Spaniards but also of diverse other countries and nations, as my
authors before named do anow, and many books were written of this matter,
Hieron. Fraki, lo Pet. VipeIanus.
and when the contention was at the hotest, then died the king Cardinal,
before he could decide the same controversy, upon which occasion, the king of
Spain, being persuaded that his right was best, and that he being a Monarch
and under no temporal judge, was not bound to expect any other judgment in
this affayre, not to subject himself to any other tribunal, but that he might
by force put himself in possession, of that which he took to be his own, if
otherwise he could not have it delivered unto him (for so write these authors
by me named) seeing also don Antonio to pretend the said kingdom, by only
favor of some populer party, that he had In Lisbone; the said king Phillip
entered upon Portugal by force of arms, as all the world knows, and holds
the same peaceably unto the day.

And I have been the longer in setting down The case of pretece of the hovvle
of Portugal to Ingland.
this contention about the succession to the crown of Portugal, for that it
includes also the very same pretense and contention for the crown of England.
For that al these three princes before named, may in like manner pretend the
succession of that interest to the house of Lancaster, and by that to the
crown of Ingland, which does descend from Queen Phillippe eldest daughter of
John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and sister of king Henry the fourth as has
largely bin declared.

And albeit that some men Will say, that this matter is now decided, which of
these princes of the house of Portugal has the interest to Ingland, for that
king Phillip being now preferred in the succession of Portugal, enters also
thereby to the other right of succession of Ingland, yet others will say no,
for that the laws of succession in Portugal and Ingland be different. For that
in Ingland representation takes place, so as the children of the son An
objection with the answer.
though they be women, shall ever be preferred before the children of the
daughter, though they be men, vvherof these men do infer, that seeing the lady
Phillipps right before mentioned to the dukedom of Lancaster, and thereby also
to the crown of Ingland, is to be preferred according to the laws of Ingland,
and not by the laws of other forrayne countries; it follows, that the self
same right of succession that is pretended at this day by the princes of
Portugal for succeding the said lady Phillippe, should be determined only by
the laws of Ingland, where representation takes place, and not by the laws
of any other nation: Thus say they.

But against this, others do allege, that the question is not here, by what
law this pretense of the blood royal of Portugal to the crown of Ingland, is
to be tried, but rather who is the true and next heir and successor unto K.
John the first, and to his wife Queen lady Phillippe, heir of the house of
Lancaster, which two priuces were king and Queen of Portugal, and their true
heir at this day has the forenamed pretense, to the crown of Ingland, which
true and next heir, being once known, it little imports by what law he
pretends his said right to Ingland, whether by that of England or by this of
Portugal, or by both, though to determine this first and chief point, who is
the next and true heir unto these foresaid king and Queen of Portugal, the
laws of Portugal must needs be judge and not those of Ingland, and so, seeing
that by these laws of Portugal, the king of Spain; is now adjudged for next
heir, to the said princes, and is in possession of their inheritance at this
day, I mean of the crown of Portugal; these me^ say, that he must
consequently inherit also al other rightes dignities and prerogatives
belonging to the foresaid princes, or to their posterity.

And thus you see now how great diversity of arguments and objections, are and
may be alleged, on different sides, about this affayre, whereby also is made
manifest, how doubtful and ambiguous a matter this point of Inglish
succession, is, seeing that in one only branch of the pretenders, which is in
the house of Portugal alone, their are so many difficulties, as here has been
touched.

But now the common objection against al Objections against the pretenders of
Portugal.
these titles and titlers, is, that they are old and out of ure, and not to be
brought in question again now, especially seeing that both king Henry the
seventh and his issue, have enjoyed so long the title of the house of
Lancaster, as it has, and secondly that these titles do apperteyne unto
strangers whose government may be dangerous many ways unto Ingland, and
especially in that which touches the king of Spain, who being so great and
mighty a monarch as he is, may prejudice greatly the Inglish liberty, and
easily bring them into servitude, if his pretense should be favored, as by
some it seems to be.

This is the speech of many men in Ingland, and abroad at this day, whereunto
yet some Answers.
others do answer, that as concerning the first objection of the oldnes of the
pretense, and title, it has bin showed before, that by law no title to a
kingdom dies ever, but may take place whensoever the party to whom it
belongs, is able to avouch it and get possession, and as for this pretense
of the line of Portugal, they say, that it has not such great age, but that
very well it may show it self, and be had in consideracion, especially at this
time, when now the issue male of king Henry the seventh is ended, and that of
necessity, we must return to have consideration of the issue of his
daughters, before which daughters, good reason (say these men) is it, that the
issue of lady Phillippe Queen of Portugal should be admitted, for that albeit
we would have that respect to the issue male of John Earl of Somerset, as to
prefer it, or suffer it to enjoy the crown, before the issue of Queen
Phillippe (and so they say it seems that it was, for that king Henry the
seventh was crowned king, his mother being Note this.
a live, which yet by ordinary course of succession should have gone before
him) yet say they, it is no reason that the issue female of John of Somerset,
or of king Henry the seventh should be preferred before the issue male of the
said Queen Phillippe.

Moreover they say, that the house of Clarence and Huntington do pretend a
title more old and stale at this day, then this of Portugal, for that they
pretend from George duke of Clarence, that never had the crown, and these of
Portugal pretend to be next heir to king Henry the sixth, that did vveere the
crown of Ingland, for 40. years together, after whose death, if king
Alfonsus of Portugal (who was then old and vvearied with euel success of
wars) had bin so able to prefer and follow his title, as some of that house
be at this day, he would never have suffered the house of York to have entered,
nor king Henry the seventh to have enjoyed it after them, by the title of
Lancaster, which title yet of Lancaster (say these men) king Henry the seventh
could not have in himself any way, whether we respect Queen Phillippe, or
John of Somerset, for by Queen Phillippe, they of Portugal were evidently By
what title king Henry the 7. did enter.
before him, and by way of John of Somerset the countess his mother was as
clearly before him, nether could he have any title, as yet, by the house of
York, for that he was not yet married to the daughter of king Edward; so as
his crowning in the field, and whole entrance to the kingdom, was without any
actual title at al, but only the good will of the people, as these men do hold.

To the other objection of foreign princes and About forrayne power in
Ingland.
strange government, that may come to Ingland by these pretenses of the princes
of Portugal: diverse men do answer diversely, for some do grant that it may be
so, that by this means Ingland may come to be under forayne kings, and that
no hurt, or inconvenience at al would ensue thereof to Ingland, but rather much
good and commodity: but other that like not well of this assertion, do say
further, that if these forrayne pretense should take place, yet that al matters
might be so compounded, that albeit the prince himself which is to rule,
should be forrayne borne (which they take to be no inconvenience) yet that his
forces and dependence, should be only of the Inglish, for that he should not
bring in any strainge powers into the land, no more them did king Stephen or
king Henry the second, that were borne in France, or then did king Phillip of
Spain in Queen Maryes days, or as it is thought Monsieur of France should
have done, if he had married her Majesty that now is, as once it was supposed
he should.

To this said one of the company, and is it About forrayne government.
possible, that any man, should be of opinion that forrayne government in what
manner or kind so euerit be, should not be iuconuenient and hurtful to
England, where the people are vvholye bent against it: you remember (quoth he)
as concering the last two examples, that you have alleged, what tumult and
sture their was raised by some kind of men, about the coming in of king
Phillip, and what their was like to have been, about the entrance of Monsieur,
if that purpose had gone for-ward.

I remember well said the Lawyer, and these men that are of this opinion, vvil
say to this, that it was but a populer mutiney without reason or any good
ground at all, and only raised by some crasty heads, that misliked the
religion of the princes that were to enter, and for some other driftes of their
own, but not of any sound reason or argument of state, which these men think
rather to be of their side, and in good sooth they allege so many arguments
for their opinion, that if you should hear them, you would say it wear hard
to judge which opinion had most truth, but they are to long for this place and
so (said he I shall make an end of the matter that I have in hand and leave
this point, for others to discuss.

With this the whole company fhewed marvelous The occa sion of the next
chapter about foraine government.
great desire to know the reasons, that were in both parties, for this matter,
and so much the more, for that it seemed to fall very fit to the purpose, of
these pretenses of forayne princes, for which cause they entreated him very
instantly that before he passed any further, or ended his whole discourse, of
the titles, (which hitherto they said had greatly contented them) he would
stay himself a little also upon this matter, which though for a time he made
great difficulty to do, yet in the end, being so importuned by them he
promised that at their meeting the next day, he would satisfy their desire,
and so for that time they departed very well contented but, yet as they said,
with their heads full of titles and titlers, to the crown.

WHETHER IT BE BETTER TO BE UNDER A FOREIGN OR HOMBORNE PRINCE. and whether
under a great and mighty Monarch, or under a little prince or King.
CAP. IX.
THE company being gathered together the next day, and showing much desire to
hear the point discussed about foreign government, whereof mention had bin
made the day before, the lawyer began to say, that for so much, as they would
needs have him to enter into that matter, which of it self was full of
prejudice, in most men's ears and minds, for that no nation commonly could
abide to hear of being under strange governors and gouerments, he meant to
acquit himself in this their request, as he had done in other matters before
which was to lay down only the opinions and reasons of other men, that had
disputed this affair on both sides before him, and of his own to affirm or
deny nothing.

And first of al against the dominions of strangers, and Forriners he said,
that he might discourse without end, and fill up whole books Reasons against
foreign government.
and volumes with the reasons and arguments, or at least wise with the
dislikes and auersions, that al men commonly had to be under strangers, or to
have any alliens to bear rule or charge over the^, be they of what condition
state or degree soever, and in this he said, that as well philosophers,
lawmakers wise and good men, as others do agree commonly, for that we see both
by their words writings and factes, that they abhor to subject themselves to
strange gouerments, so as in all the eight books of Aristotle's politiques, you
shall still see, that in all the Polit. Arist.
different forms of common wealths, that he sets down, he presupposes
ever that the government shall be by people of the self same nation, and the same
thing do presume in like manner, al those lawmakers that he their me^tioneth,
to wit, Minois Solon, Licurgus, Numa Pompilius, and the rest, and he that shall
read the famous inuectiues of Demosthenes against Demosthenis Philipicae, and
in AEfhines.
the pretentions of king Phillip of Macedonia, that desired to incroch upon
the Athenians, and other states of Greece, as also his orations against
AEschines, his adversary, that was thought secretly to favor the said
forrayne prince, shall see what hatred that noble Orator had against foreign
government, and he that shall read the books of our time either of the Italians
when they spoke of their subjection in times past to the Lo^bardes, German, or
french nations, or to the spaniards at this day, or shall consider what the
french do presently write and inueigh against the power of the house of Guyse
and Lorayne in France, for that they take them to be straingers, shall easily
see how deeply this auersion against strangers, is rooted in their hearts, and
this for testimony of word.

But now if we vvil consider the factes that have ensued about this matter,
and how much Atte^ptes to deliver realms from strangers.
blood has bin shedd, and what desperate attempts have bin taken in hand, by
diverse nations, for avoiding their subjection to strangers, or for delivering
themselves from the same again, if once they have fallen into it, you shall
behold more plainly, the very impression of nature herself in this affair,
for of diverse barbarous nations, realms and cities, we read in stories, that
they rather chose to slay and murder themselves, then to be under the dominion
Quint. Curt. li 5. and 6. de gest. Alex.
of strangers, others have adventured strange attemptes, and bloody stratagems,
as the Sicilians, who in one day and at the self same hour, at the time of
evening song, slew all the frenchmen Vespere Sicilianae, an. 1265. Leand. in
descript. Siciliae.
that were within the Island, whom yet themselves had called and invited
thither not long before, and the like is recorded in our Inglish stories of
killing the danes, by Inglish men, at one time, in most ruful manner, and
Polyd. li. (...) Hollings in vit. Camiti.
the like was oftentimes thought on also by the Inglish against the Normans,
when they oppessed us, and by the French against the Inglish whiles we had
dominion in France, though nether the one nor the other of these latter
desigme^ts, could be effectuated, for want of forces, and commoditye, and by
reason of the watchfulnes of the contrary part. But yet to speak only of
France, the rage and fury of the french was generally so great and implacable,
against the Inglish that governed theare, in the reign of king Henry the sixth,
as both Polidor and other stories do note (at what time, partly by the
dissentions of the houses of York and Lancaster in Ingland, and partly by the
valor of their own new king Charles the seventh, they The rage of the french
against Inglish.
had hope to be ridd of the Inglish dominion) as no persuasion or reason, no
fear of punishment, no force of arms, no promise or threat, no danger, no
pity, no religion, no respect of God nor man, could repres or stay them from
rising and reuolting every where against the Inglish government and governors,
murdering those of the Inglish nation in all parts and corners, whersoeuer
they found them, without remorse or compassion, until they were utterly
delivered, of their dominion.

So as this matter is taught us (say these men) even by nature her self, that
strangers government The conclusion against (...).
is not to be admitted, and moreover the reasons before alleged against the
king of Scotlands pretense, together with the examples and judgments of the
realms of Spain and Portugal, who resolved rather to alter the true order
and course of their succession, then to admit strangers over them, do plainly
confirm the same.

And last of al (say these men) the authority of holy scripture is evident, in
this behalf, for that when God in Deutronomie, did fortell by Authority of
scripture against strangers.
Moses, that the Jews in time would come to change their government, and to
desire a king as other nations round about them had, he added yet this
express condition, that he should be only of their own nation, for he says.
Constitues eum quem Dominus Deus tuus elegerit de numero fratru^ tuorum, non
poteris alterius gentis hominem Deus. 15.
regem facere, qui non sit frater tuus: that is, thou shall make king at that
time, such a one as thy lord God shall choose for that dignity, out of the number
of thy brethren, but thou may not make a king of any other nation, but of
thy own brethren. Thus say these men, against admitting of strangers, and it
seems that their opinion and affection, has many followers, for that
generally we see most men affected and inclined this way.

But yet on the other side there want not other men who appear both wise dis
passionate and The answer in defense of fortaine government.
grave, that vvil seem to consider this matter far otherwise, and do say, that
all this, is but a common vulgar prejudice, of passionate men, against
strangers, rising partly by corruption of nature, vvherby men are inclined to
think evil of others, and to bear them little affection, especially, such as
govern and bear rule over them, and so much the less by how much farther of,
they are from us in kynred and acquaintance, and partly also they say that the
same rises of lack of dew consideration in the most part of men, for that
they weigh not the true reasons, causes, or effects of things, but only the
outward show, and so do run away with the opinion and apprehensio^ of the
populer, which for the most part has no other ground or foundation in it but
only fancy and imagination, orincitation of others, that endeavor to procure
tumults, and so they say it falls out in this point, as upon examination it
shall appear.

And for proof and declaration of this their assertion, they do require first
of al, that this ordinary and common prejudice against strangers or strange
gouerments, be laid a side, so long at least, as the matter is in disputation,
and that only the true effects, of good and profitable government may be
considered, without that other circumstance, whether these fruits do come from
stranger or hom-borne prince, which effects The effect of go uerments to be con
sidered and not the governors.
are peace, rest, justice, defense of the innocent, punishment of the wicked,
wealth, security, and other such benefits, that good government is wont to
bring with it, to the subjects. These things (say these men) are to be weighed
indifferently and without passion, by wisemen, and wheresoever these effects
are more abundantly to be found, their the government is best, and their the
subjects are in best case, whatsoever the governors be, or of what nation or
country, soever they be. And this they show by this example following.

If in two countries or common wealths, An example.
lying nigh together, the subjects of the one, should live in all ease, wealth
and prosperity, under a strainger, as diverse states did under the Romans, and
in the other they should be beaten, whipped, and afflicted under a hom-borne
prince, as we read the Sicilians were under Phalaris and Dionisius their
countrymen tyraunts, clear it is, (say these men) that the stripes and
afflictions would not seem the easyer, for that they come from a natural
prince, but rather the heavier, and the others happy case under the strainger,
must needs seem to be the better, and consequently his government rather to be
wished: for that in very truth the goodness and defect of every government, is to
be measured by the effects there of, that redound unto the subjects, for whose
good it was first ordained, as oftentimes our friend the Civil lawyer has
touched and proved before. And when the subjects do live well, and
prosperously, are defended and maynteyned in peace, saftie, and wealth, when
justice is done equally to al men, the wicked punished, and the good advanced
and rewarded: when God is honored, and true religion mainteyned, and virtue
promoted, this is that which imports the realm and subjects and not where
or in what contrye the prince and his officers were borne, or of what nation
language, or kynred they be. For that, be the prince of what lineage or kynred
soever, Little imports the subject of what country his go uernour is so he be
good.
yet after he is once established in his dignity, the common subject, can have
no more conversation with him, nor receive any more personal benefit of him,
then if he were a mere strainger, except only by those common and public
effects of his government, before mentioned, for that so soon as he is placed
in his dignity, he becomes a stranger to me, and if he govern euel and
afflict me, little avails it to me, whether he be of my blood and country or
no, and I may say as the people of Israel, in like case said unto Roboam, who
for that he was king David's nephew, and of the house of Isai, thought his
ftate assured, for that he was their Lord and natural prince, and so might
press and afflict them at his pleasures but they answered him plainly. Que
nobis parsin David, vel quae haereditas in filio Isai, what part have (...).
Reg. 12
we in David, or what inheritance have we in the son of Isai, and fo they
left him, and rather chose to be under Jeroboam a stranger, and his servant,
then under him.

This then is the first point, which these men do demand, to wit, that we
consider equally and according to reason, wisdom, and truth and without al
partial affection, where and by who^ and by what government we are likest to
receive, and enjoy the good and happy effects a boue mentioned, of prosperity
to the subject: for that without al doubt (say they) that government is to be
deemed best, and that subjection happiest, where those benifites are most
enjoyed, let the prince or governor be of what nation or lineage soever. And on
the other side, Not the country but the good government imports.
that must needs be the vvoorst gouerme^t unto me, where I shall reap fewest
and participat least of those effects, be the prince never so much my country
man or kinsman, and though he were borne in the same city, town, or house,
yea in the same belly with me. As for example those men that lived (say they)
in Spain under king Peter the cruel, or in Ingland under king Richard the
third, commonly called the tyrant, what did it avail them, that those princes
were of their own country or blood, seeing Note these examples.
they did that unto them, which a strainger though never so barbarous, would
scarce have done? As in like manner, al those noble houses before mentioned in
our country, of the dela Pooles, Staffords, Plantagenets, and others destroyed
by king Henry the eight, what auayled them, that the said king was not only
their country man, but also their near kinsman, what profit or commodity was
it unto Thomas of woodstock, duke of Gloucester, that he lived under a king that
was his nephew, to wit, king Richard the second, or to George duke of Clarence,
in king Edward the fourthes time, that the said king was his own brother,
when both of them were pursued, disgraced, and put to death by them, and lost
their lives, lands, dignities, goodly possessions, stately manners, and
gorgeous houses, with their wives, children, and al other felicities of this
world, which perhaps under a strainge prince, they might have enjoyed many a
fair day and year.

This is that then which these men do first require, to wit that al fancy
and fond opinion Who are properly straingers
of the vulgar people, be aparted in this matter, from truth and substance, as
also say they, we ought to desire and determine who are properly straingers,
or forrainers, seeing that some do take for straingers and forayners, al those
that are not of the same dominion and gouermente, though otherwise they be of
the same nation, and language, according as those other men that are enimyes to
straingers, said a little before (if you remember) that the princes of the
house of Guyse, and their kynred are taken for straingers in france, by them
that by that means, would make them odious to the people, for that their
ancestors in times past came out of Lorayne, which is a province joining hard
upon france, of the same nation, language, and manners, but only under an
other prince. And so I my self noted in my traueling through Italy, that the
Flora^tines are hated and called straingers in Siena, where they govern,
albeit the one state be not 30. miles from the other, and both of one nation
language manners and education. And on the contrary side, we shall se, that
some of different language and nation do hold themselves for country men, as
for example, the Biscayns in Spain, do not hold the Castilians for straingers,
but are contented to be ruled by them, as by their own countrymen, albeit
they be a different nation and have different language and manners, and the
same I do note in the Britaynes and Normans toward the French, in the welsh
also toward the Inglish, who are a different people and of different
language, and yet are they governed peaceably by the Inglish, and the Inglish
again do account them for their country me^, as may appear by that, when
king Henry the seventh, came to be king of Ingland, I do not find, any
resistance made against him by the Inglish, for that respect that he was of
that nation, as evidently he was by his fathers side, that was of the Tidders
of wales, so as this point also who be straingers and who be not, seems
to be a thing that depends much of the opinion and affection of each people
and nation, the one toward the other.

And this being so, these men come to treat Diverse manners of being under
strangers.
more particulerly of the purpose in hand, and do say that in two or three
manners a nation may come to be under the government of straingers or
forrayners, first as a province, that is to say as a piece or member of an
other dominion, as Ingland was in times past under the Romans, and as Ireland
is under Ingland at this day and as the Brittons are under France, and as many
states of Italy, be under the crowns of Aragon, and Castile. And this may
come to pass either by Conquest and force of arms, as the Welsh came to be
under the Inglish, and the Inglish to be under the Normans and Danes, and as
Sicilia and Naples came to be under the Spaniards, and as Normandye and
Aquitaine came to be under the French, and as almost all the world in old time
was brought to be under the Romans: or otherwise the same may come to pass by
inheritance, as Aquitaine and Normandy in times past came to Ingland, and as
Flanders with the states thereof came to the house of Austria, and as Britany
to the crown of France, or else thirdly it may happen by mixed means, that is
to say, partly by force and partly by other means of composition, as Milla^
came to Spain, and Ireland to Ingland, according as the Irish do hold, and so
Portugal has in out days come to the king of Spain, for that besides his
pretense and right of inheritance, he used also force of arms for getting the
same.

Of al these three vvayes then evident it is, To be under Strangers by Coquest.
that Conquest is the hardest, and most prejudicial to the subjects, for that
theare, al stands at the will and clemency of the Conqueror, whom either
anger or fear, or ielosie of his assurance, may often drive to hold a hard
hand over the conquered, at least wise for a time, until his estate be better
settled, so that I marvel not though no people or country commonly would
willingly be conquered, but yet pollicye also teaches such a Co^queror,
whatsoever he be, that as on the one side, it behooves him to be watchful and
so to fortyfie himself, as the unquiet can do him no hurt, so on the other
side, is it necessary by the same rule of policy to use al favor and sweet
means to content and gain those that be or may be made quiet, for better
establishing of his state, eue^ as a Physician after a vehement purgation, does
minister lenitiues and sofre medicines, to calm and appease the good humors
left, and to strenghten the whole body again that it may hold out.

This we see to be true, not only by reason of How Co^querors do proceed
toward the Conquered.
state and policy, as has bin said, but also by experience of al countries,
that have bin conquered in Europ or other where, if the continual resisting and
reuolting of those that are conquered, do not cause a contrary course in the
Conqueror, as it did in the conquest of the Danes and Normands upon the
Inglish, and in the conquest of the Inglish upon the British or Welsh, where
the often rising of them that were overcome, enforced the vanquishers to be
much more cruel and rigorouse the^ other wise they would have bin, for all our
stories do testify, that king Sweno the Dane and much more his son, king
Canutus, as also William Polydor Virg. lib. 8 histot. (...).
conqueror, had a great desire after their victories, to have appeased, and
made much of the Inglish nation, but that they were never quiet under them,
and so in like manner the Inglish kings oftentimes gave their daughters in
marriage to the princes of Wales, and many privileges to that people, thereby to
gain them, but that their continual reuolting caused much severity and
bloodshed to be used, and the like severity did it cause oftentimes in the very
Romans toward the said Britaynes conquered.

But where the people vanquished were content Cleme^cie of the Romans.
to be quiet and submit themselves, their the said Romans used al favor and
moderation, so as it is written of them in the first book of Machabeis. Et
audiuit Judas nomen Romanorum, quia sunt potentes viribus, and acquiescunt ad
omnia Lib. 5. Mechab. cap. 8.
quae postulantur ab eis, that is: And Judas Machabeus hard the name and fame
of the Romans, how they were potent in strenght, and yet so gentle, as they
yielded to all that was demanded at their hands.

And finally their government was so just, co^siderat, sweet and modest, upon
al forrayne nations, which they had conquered, as it alured diverse nations to
desire to be under them, and to be ridd of their own natural kings, as of the
subjects of Antiochus, and Methridates kings of Asia and of Pontus, we do
read, and some other princes also thereby to gratify their subjects, did
nominate the Roman Empire, for their successor, as did king Attalus king of
Pergamus, and Ptolomie of Egypt, and others, and it is the common opinion of
learned men that the world was never more happily governed, then under the
Romans, and yet were they strangers to most of their subjects, over which
they governed, and unto whom they were most strangers, that is to say, unto
such as were furthest of from them, to those did they use always most
favors, and gave them most privileges, as both wisdom and reason of state
did require, for that those people had most abillity to rise against them, and
to rebel, so as this circumstance of being strangers, hurted them nothing, but
rather profited them much.

The like rule of policy and of state, have al Strangers most favored to
wise gouerments.
great Monarchies used ever since, that is to say, to show most favor to such
subjects, as be most straingers, and fardest from them, and on the contrary
side, if any be to be pressed more then others, to press and burden them
most, that be most natural and nearest home, and most under and in subjection,
and surest to obey, and this is evidently seen, felt, and practiced by all the
great states this day of the world, so as it cannot be denied. For if we look
but into france, we shall find that the states of Gascony and Guyne, which are
furdest of from the court, and Gascoynes.
were once strangers and gotten by force, from the Inglish, do pay far less
tributes at this day to the French king then those that be of the I Will of
france it self, and are properly french, and in like manner, the Britons,
which came to that Britons.
crown by marriage, and were old enemies, do pay much less yet then the
Gascoyns, and in a manner do pay nothing at al, and the Normans do pay some
what more then any of the two, for that they do lie somewhat nearer to Parris,
and thereby are more in snbiection to the prince, though yet they pay less then
the natural Frenchmen. The Candians also which is Candians
an Island, a part, and stands under the Venetians, do not pay the third part
of the impositions (as by my own information I learned when I trauiled Italy)
that do the natural subjects of the Venetian state in Italy.

What shall I say of the kingdoms and states of Naples, Sicilie, and Millan,
subject to the States of Italy.
king of Spain, and gotten by conquest, as has bin said, and yet pay they no
one penny of that ancient great imposition used in Spain, called the Alcaualla
which is the tenth penny of all that is bought and sold, nor are they subject to
the Inquisition of Spain (at least Naples and Millan) nor to many other duties
tributs and impositions which the natural spaniard is subject unto, nor is
their any law or edict made in Spain that holds in those countries, except
it be allowed ratified and confirmed by those states themselves, nor may any of
their old privileges be infringed, but by their own consents, and when the
king requires any extraordinary subsides in Spain, they bear no part thereof.
Whervppon these men do ask, what it hurts these states, that they are
strangers, or under straingers, or what privilege is it to the spaniard at
home, that he is, only under his hom borne king, if he receive less benifits
by that, then does the strainger.

And is not the like also used by the state of The condition of Irish under the
Inglish.
Ingland toward Ireland, are not the favors and indulgences used toward the
civil Irish that live in peace much more then to the Inglish themselves in
Inglad? For first, their taxes and payments be much less, the laws of Ingland
bynd them not except they be allowed and received by their own parliament in
Ireland. For matters of religion, they are pressed much less then home-borne
subjects, albeit their affections to the Roman religion, be known to be much
more universal, then it is in Ingland. In all criminal affairs and punishing of
delictes, the manner of proceeding against the Irish is much more remiss mild
and gentle, then with the subjects of Ingland, so as their being strangers,
seems rather a privilege then a hindrance unto them.

But in no other country is this thing more Of the states of Flanders.
evidently to be considered, then in the states of Flanders and low countries
which by in herita^ce (as has bin said) came to be under forayne gouerme^t but
so much to their good and advancement (and that in a very few years) as scarce
is credible, except to him that understands their former state, when they
were under their homborne princes, and do compare it with that which after
they came unto, under the house of Austria, united unto the crown of Spain.

For before, for many hundredth years, a man shall read nothing almost, in their
stories, but war, sedition, and blood shed among themselves, and this either,
one state whith an other before they were united together, al under one prince,
or else with the kingdom of France, of whom in those days they depended, or
else (and this most of al) against their own Princes, of whom some have bin so
fearce and cruel unto them, as they have shed infinite quantity of their blood,
and among others, I read of their Count Luys, that in one day, he Girard du
Hailan lib. 18. an. 1381.
put to death, five hundred of them by sentence of justice in Bruxelles, and an
other day within the same year, he caused a bout a thousand to be burned to
death in a churh of the town of Neuel, besides infinite others whom in diverse
battles and skirimshes he slew, so as often times the country lay almost
desolate, through their domestical afflictions.

But now since the time that the states came Prosperity of Flanders under the
house of Austria.
to be under Phillip the first, Archduke of Austria, and after king of Spain,
and so remained under his son Charles the Emperor, and his nephew Phillip the
second, that now lives, until the late troubles and rebellions (which was
about the space of fifty years that they so continued in peace before their
rebellion) it is almost, incredible how those states increased in wealth,
peace, and dignity, so that as Io. Guicciard. nella descrittione delli pasi
bassi.
Guycciardin the Italian historiographer notes, in his description of those
countries, the whole wealth and riches of the world seemed to slow thither, and
I my self can remember to have seen such exceeding abundance in very ordinairy
men of this country, both for their diet, apparel, furniture of house and the
like, as was wonder full, besides that for their nobility they were al great
Princes, for that every one had his province or great town in government, which
they ruled whith that pomp and honor, as if they had bin absolute lords
themselves, by reason of the far distance of their supreme Prince, and so they
were received whith public honor of al cities and towns and their charges
borne wheresoever they passed, as such high estates are wont to be.

And albeit they had ever commonly a strainger The anthority of the Fleminges
at home.
for supreme governor among them under their king, which bare the name to be
above them, yet did he in deed nothing but as they would have him, and this
partly for that his time of government being but short, he always attended
principally to get the good wills of the people, and to hold them contented,
and thereby to be grat-ful to his king at his return home, and partly also for
that if he should attempt to do any thing against their minds and liking, they
made reply by their president and Chancellor and other of their own Councelers,
residing for the Flemish nation in the court of Spain (for this nation has
always a particular council there about the king as al other forayne nations
also have, that are under him) and by this means they obtained lightly what
they would, and brought the governor to what they pleased, so as in effect they
were absolute kings in themselves, and wrought their wills in every thing, and
this in that time while the country was quiet.

But now since their revolt which has endured The indulgence used to offenders
in Flanders.
almose these four or five and twenty years, what has succeeded, surely their
has not a quarter so many bin punished, or put to death in all these years by
order of Justice of their king absent, as before I have showed that there were
in one day, by their own earls and dukes, when they were present, and that
upon far less occasion and cause given, then are these, for if we take away
the two noble men Egmond and Horn, put to death at the beginning of these
Flemish troobles by the duke of Alua (for which some men say also that he had
no thank afterward by the king) no man of importance has bin since executed,
and the cheifest towns that have bin and are against the king in Holland and
Zeland, are suffered until this day, to traffic freely into Spain, and yet we
know that for a little beginning of a certain tumult this last year past in
Spain, it self, to wit in the kingdom of Aragon, many heads have bin
stricken of, and much justice done, where of then rises this difference no
doubt for that the Flemmings are straingers and far of, and the other near at
home and natural borne, so as this circumstance of being a stranger and
dwelling far of does them great pleasure, and gives them privilege above the
homborne subjects.

The like I might show for this matter of punishment in the fore said states of
Italy, The Spaniard punis heth less in Italy the^ (...) home.
where if a man do compare the number of them that were put to death pulled
down, or afflicted by order of Justice, and other wise at the commandment of
the Prince, in time of their own home-borne kings, with that which has bin
since, especially of the nobility, you shall not find one for twenty, and the
reason of this is, for that their own kings were absolute, and had to give
account to no man, of their doings, and for that they were men, and had their
passions and emulations with the nobility, and might put the same in execution
without account or controlment, they pulled down and set up at their pleasure,
and made oftentimes but a jest of noblemens lives and deaths, but now these
that are governors and viceroyes for a foreign prince, first they have not so
great authority or commission, as to touch any such principal persons lives,
whithout giving relation thereof, first unto their king and council, and receive
again particular order for the same, and then they knowing that after Viceryes
do give account of there government.
their three years gouerme^t is ended, they must be private men again, and
stay their 40. days as subjects under the next new governor, to give a
reconning of their doings against all that shall accuse them (which in these
countries they call to make their residence) they take heed what they do, and
whom they offend, so as the condition of nobility, is far different under such
a strainge government, as this is termed, then under a natural Prince of their
own country which oppresses them at his pleasure.

But now to draw near homward, if we will Much slaughter of nobility in Ingland.
examine and considerer what has passed in Ingland in this point of massacring
our nobility, by our domestical Princes, it is a matter lamentable, for it may
seem that they have served oftentimes for our Princes to make disport and to
play whith their heads. And to let pass al those, which in time of wars,
rebellions, and comotions, have bin cut of, which occasions may seem more
justifiable, I do read also in our chronicles that, 2 Sangue freddo, as the
Italian says, that is to say, in time of peace and by execution of justice, at
the Princes appointment, these noblemen following and knyghts by name, were put
to death, with in the space of one five years in king Henry the fourth his
days. The duke of Excester, the duke of Surrey, the Archbis hop of York, the
earls of Salisbury, of Gloucester, of Worcester and of Huntington, The earl
mowbray earl marshal. The Baron of Kinderton S. Roger Clarington, bastard
son of Edward the black Prince. S. Thomas Blunr, S. Barnard Rocas, S. Richard
Vernon. And again soon aftervnder king Edward the fourth, in almost whith in
as little space. The dukes of Somerset, and of Excester, The earls of
Devonshire, of Oxford, and of Keyns. The Lord Rosse, the Lord Molyns, S. Thomas
Tudingham, S. Phillip Wentworth, S. Thomas fyndam, and many others afterward,
(for this was but at the beginning of his reign (which number of nobility if a
man should have seen them alive together with their traynes, before they had
bin put down, he would have said they had bin a very goodly company, and
pitiful that so many of our own nobility should be brought by our own Princes
to such confusion.

But yet this matter may seem perhapps the Execution of nobility by Henry the
eight.
less marvelous, and more excusable, under those two kings, for that troobles
and contentions had passed a little before in the realm, about the succession,
and heervppon so many of the nobility might be cut of, but let us see then what
ensued afterward, when things were established and al doubt of contention
about the succession taken away, as in king Henry the eight his days it was,
and yet do I find registered in our chronicles these persons following either
made away cut of, or put down, by the said king, to wit, two Queens Anne and
Catherin, Three Cardinales put down and disgraced Wolsy, Poole, and fysher,
vvherof the last was behedded, soon after his dignity given him in Rome, and
the first was arrested, the second attaynted of imagined treasons. Three dukes
put down, to wit, the noble dukes of Buckingham, Suffolk and Norfolk, whereof
the last lost his lands dignities and liberty only, the former two both Lands
and lives. A marquis with two earls beheaded, Devonshire, kyldare, and Surray,
two Countesses condemned, to dye, Devonshire and Salisbury, and the latter
executed: Lords many, as the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, the Lord Montagne,
the Lord Leonard Gray, the Lord Dacres of the south, the Lord Cromwell, and six
or seven Abbots. Kinghtes also in great number, as five in one day, with the
Lords Hussy, and Darcy, and five in an other day, with the earl os kildare
whose uncles they were, and besides them, S. Thomas Moore, S. Rice Griffith,
S. Edward Neuel, S. John Neuel, S. Nicholas Carew, S. Adrian fortescue, and
diverse other kinghts of great account and then gentlemen almost without end.

And al these within the space of 20 years, Under King Edward and Queen Mary.
of his reign, and in the time of peace, and if we look upon but four or
five years together of the reign of this man's children, we shall see the like
course continued, for we shall see put to death within the space of four
years, al these following by name, The duke of Somerset, the duke of Suffolk,
the duke of Northumberland, and the L. Admiral of Ingland, S. Miles Partrige,
S. Raphe Vane, S. Michel Stanhope, S. Thomas Arondel, S. John Gates, S. Thomas
Palmer kinghtes, with diverse othet gentlemen of there retinew, and al these by
natural, domestical, and homborne Princes, whereas I dare to adventure, the
greateft wager that I can make that you shall not find so many put to death of
the nobility, by any strainge Prince, state, or common wealth christian, in any
forrayne dominion that they possess, in many ages together, and the reason
thereof is evident, by that I said before, neither were it policy or wisdom,
nor could the causes be so often, nor ordinarily given by the nobility to a
Prince that were absent from them to use such severity, so as by this it may
also appear, that to be under a foreign government even in the woorst kind
thereof, that can be devised, which is to be as a province or piece of an other
kingdom, and to come under it by very conquest it self, is not so dangerous a
matter, as at the first show it may seem, and much less to be under foreign
government, by other sweeter means of succession, or composition, as the
present case of Ingland seems to import, in respect of those foraine Princes
which do pretend to the succession thereof.

And this is not only showed and declared States governed happily by torrayne
Princes.
by the state and condition of Flanders, before their tumultes, but in like
manner it is seen, by the present state of Britanie, Normandy, Aquitaine,
Prouence, and other dukedomes and countries in France, that were wont to have
their own particular Princes, and now are much more commodiously, under the
crown of France. The like is seen by the states of Naples, Millan, Sicilie,
Sardinia and other parts and countries of Italy, which were wont to be under
kings and Princes of their own, and now are under the crowns of Aragon and
Castile, with infinite odds of peace, rest, security, and wealth, then they
were before when they had domestical Princes, and so themselves do confess, I
mean the wise and dis-passionate among them, (for of the vulgar in this case
no account is to be made) and if they should deny it, yet the thing speaks it
self, and the public stories of their countries would convince them, wherein
it is to be read, what Phalaris, what Dionisius, and other homeborne tyrants,
Sicilie (for example) has had and suffered, and what infinite cruelty they and
diverse others of their own governors, have exercised upon them, as also what
continual turmoyles there were in the city of Naples and in all that
kingdom for many years together, after it fell from the government, first of
the Roman Empire, and then of the Grecian, until it came to the crown of
Aragon, I mean between their own domestical kings, now of the blood of
Italians, now of the Normans, now of the Hungarians, and now of the french, Old
afflictions of Naples and Millan.
(for of al these lines, their have reigned among them) and the realm was a
perpetual pray to souldiars, and the very like may be said of Millan, after
their fall from the Roman Empire, (under which they lived quiet and
prosperously) until they came again to be under the crown of Spain, they
passed infinite tribulations, first by the contention of their common people
against their nobility, and then by the bloody falling out of their chief
families, the one against the other, to wit the Furiani, Visconti, Marcelli,
Mirabelli, Castilioni, and Sforzi (which family last of al prevailed) he I say
that shall remember this, and then behold the present state with the quiet
peace, saftie, and riches wherein they now live, will easily confess, that they
have changed for the better, though they be under foreign government, and thus
much of this point.

Their remains to speak a word or two Whether a great or little Prince be
better.
about the second part of the question, before proposed and included partly in
this which already has bin treated, to wit, whether it be better to be under a
little or great king, which question though it may be decided in part by that
which before has bin alleged, about being under a foreign Prince, yet more
particulerly to make the same plain, these men do say, that the reasons be
many and evident to prove, that the subjection to a great and mighty monarch,
is far better: first for that he is best able to defend and protect his
subjects, and secondly for that he has least need ordinarily to pill and pole
them, for that a little king, be he never so mean, yet must he keep the state
of a king, and his subjects must maynteyne the same, and if they be but few,
the greater vvil the burden be of every one in particular, and thirdly, for
that a great and potent Prince, has more to bestow upon his subjects for
reward of virtue and valor; then has a poor Prince, and seeing that every
particular subject, borne within his Princes dominions, is capable of all the
preferments which his Princes state or kingdom do yield, if he be worthy of
the same, it is a great prerogative (say these men) to be borne under a potent
Prince, that has much to give, which they declare by this example follovving.

A man that is borne in the city of Genua An exam ple to show the former
diffete^ce.
or Geneua (for both are cities and states within themselves (let him be of
what ability or worthiness soever, yet can he hope for no more preferment, then
that common wealth and state can give, and if their should be many worthy men
borne their at one time, then were this his condition vvoorse, for then must he
part also with other men, though their were not sufficient for himself, and
the most he could aspire unto, if he were an ecclesiastical man, were the
greatest benefice within that state; and on the other side, if he were a
temporal man, he could not hope for much, for that the state has it not to
bestow, but an other that is borne under a great monarch, as is the king of
France or Spain, in these our days, that has so many great bishoprics (for
example sake) and other spiritual lyuings to (...) upon the clergy, and so
many high gouerments and employments, both of war and peace, to give unto
temporal men that can deserve the same; this man (I say) has a great advantage
of the other, in respect of preferment at this day, but much more was it in old
time, to be borne under the Roman Empire, when it had the preferments of all the
world to bestow, for that every subject thereof, was capable of all the said
preferments, so far fourth as he could make himself worthy, and deserve the
same. For better explication of which point yet, I have thought good to cite
in this place, the words of a certain learned kinght, that in our days has
written the lives of all the Pedro Mexia en vit. de Antonino Pio.
Roman Emperors, and in the life of one of them, that was an excellent
governor, named Antoninus Pius the said kinght has this discourse ensuinge.

Their was in this man's government (said he) great contentment and joy on al
hands, great peace and quietness, and very great justice, and truly it is a
thing worthy in this place to be The felicity of the Roman gouerme^t
considered, what was the humane power and how infinite the forces of the
Roman Empire at this day, and how great was the liberty quietness, security,
wealth and contentment of the subjects that lived under that government, when
good Princes had the menagingetherof, as was this Antoninus and his son
Aurelius, that followed him, and as were Adrian, Traian and diverse others.
What a thing was it to see their courts frequented freely, by all the noble
valiant and learned men of the world, to see the union and friendly dealing of
different nations together, when al served one Prince, so as a man might have
gone over the whole world, or most and best parts thereof, with al
security, and without al fear, al nations and countries being their friends,
neighbors, or subjects, nether was their need at that time of any pasports
or safeconductes, not ofso often change of coin, to travail, as now their
is, nether yet were their new laws every foot, as now be found in different
countries, neither was their danger of enemies, or to be taken prisoners, and
captives, nor could any malefactor do a mischief in one country and fly into
an other, ther-by to be free from punishment, and he that was borne in the very
Orcades or furthest part of Europe was at home though he were in Africa, or
Asia, and as free denizen as if he had bin borne their, merchants also might
pass at that day from country to country, with their merchandise, without
particular licenses or fear of forfeits, and finally the temporal state of a
subject was wonderful happy, at that time.

Thus far discourses that learned knight, and no doubt but that his discourse
and consideration is founded in great reason, and he that vvil leave at this
day, the many commodities, of being under a great and potent Prince, (if it lie
in his own hands to choose) for this only circumstance rhat he is not borne in
the same country with him, is a man of small judgment and capacitye in these
men's opinion, and measures matters of public vtility, with a false weight
of fond affection,

And thus much may be said of the first way of being under strangers and
forayne government, which is that, which vulgar men do most abhor and inueigh
against, to wit, to be under a foreign Prince, that lives absent and rules
by his governors.

But besides this, their is an other manner of being under a foreign Prince,
as when an The seeo^d way of being under a foreign Prince.
allien Prince comes to dwell among us, and this by either of two vvayes, to
wit, that either this Prince comes without forces, as did king Stephen, and
king Henry the second, that were frenchmen, as has bin said, and came to live
and govern in Ingland, but without external forces: and as king Phillip of
Spain, came afterward when by marriage of Queen Mary he became king of
Ingland: and as the last king Henry the third of France went into Polonia, by
the free election and inuitation of that nation, and as his brother Monsieur
Francis duke of Alenson, should have entered afterward to have bin king of
Ingland, if the marriage pretended between her majesty and him had gone
forvvard and taken effect, as many thought once that it should. This I say is
one way, and an other is, that this Prince do bring forces with him, for his
own assurance, and these either present, as the Danish kings Sweno, Canutus,
Haraldus, and Hardicanutus did, and as after them the Norman Princes also used,
I mean not only William Conqueror, himself, but also his two sons William
Rufus, and Henry the first, who either by help of the Normans, al ready in
Ingland, or by others brought in by them afterward, wrought their vvil, or else
that this Prince so entering have foraine forces, so at hand, as he may call and
use them when he vvil, for that they have no sea to pass, which is the case
of the king of Scotts, and of both these ways these men do give their sentence
distinctly.

For as concerning the former way, when a A fortayne Prince without forces
not prejudicial.
foreign Prince enters without any forces atal, and with intention to live
among us, they hold, that their is no danger, nor yet any inconvenience can
justly be feared: for that in this case he subiecteth himself, rather to the
realm, and nation, then they to him, and if he live and marry in Ingland, both
himself and his children, will become Inglish in a little space. And for his
own assurance he must be enforced to favor, and cherish, and make much of the
Inglish nation, and be liberal gentle, and friendly to al, for gaining their
good wills and friendship. And in one very great and important point, his
condition is different, and better for the Inglish, then any Inglish kings can
be, which is, that he enters with indifferent Note this utility (...) a
forayne king.
mind toward al men, has no kynred or alliance within the land, to whom he
is bound, nor enimye against whom he may be enticed to use cruelty, so as
only merit or demerit of each man, must move him to favor or disfavor, which
is a great foundation (say these men) of good and equal government.

Again they say, that in respect of the state present of Ingland, and as now
it stands, and for the public good not only of the common The manner of
forayne Prince more commodious for the present.
subjects, but also of the nobility, and especially and above others, of the
Inglish competitors and pretendors that cannot al speed, no way were so
commodious, as this to avoid bloodshed, to wit, that some external Prince of
this time, should be admitted upon such compositions and agreements, as both
the realm should remain whith her ancient liberties, and perhapps much more
then now it enjoys (for such Princes commonly and upon such occasions of
preferment, would yield to much more in those cases then a homborne Prince
would) and the other pretenders at home also, should remain with more
security then they can well hope to do under any Inglish competitor, if he come
to the crown, who shall be continually egged on by his own kynred, and by the
auerhon emulation and hatred, that he has taken already by contention against
the other opposite houses, to pull them down, and to make them away and so we
have seen it by continual examples, for many years, though no occasion (say
these men) has ever bin offied to suspect the same so much as now, if any one
of the home Inglish blood, be preferred before the rest, and this is so much as
they say to this second kind of being under forrayne Princes. To the third, A
third way of being under foreign government
they confess, that it stands subject to much danger, and inconvenience, to
admit a forayne Prince, to live among us, with forces, either present or so
near, as that without resistance he may call them when he lists, and of this
their needs no more proof (say these men) then the examples before alleged
of the Danes and Normans, and the misery and calamity which for many yearee,
the Inglish passed under them, and further more the reason heerof is evident,
say these men, for first in this third kind of admitting a strainger king, we
are deprived by his dwelling amongst us, of those vtilities before mentioned,
which Ireland, Flanders, Britanie, Naples, and other states, enjoy by living
far of from their Princes, which commodities are, much more liberty, and
freedom, less payments, less punishments, more employments of the nobility
and others in government, and the like. And secondly, by his coming armed unto
us, we cannot expect those commodities, which before I touched in the second
kind of foreign government, but rather all the incommodities and inconveniences
that are to be found either in domestical or foraine gouerments al (I say) do
fall upon this third manner of admitting a stranger, as easily shall be seen.

For first of all the greatest incommodities that can be feared of a domestical
Prince, are, pride, cruelty, partiality, pursuing of factions, and particular
hatred, extraordinary aduansing Dangers of domes tical government.
of his own kynred, pressing, pynching, and over rigorous punishing of his
people, without fear, for that he is ever sure of his party to stand whith
him within the realm, and so has he the less respect to others, and for that
al these inconveniences, and other such like, do grow for the most part, by the
Princes continual presence among his subjects, they are incident also to this
other, though he be a strainger, for that he is also to be present, and to live
among us, and so much the more easily he may fall into them, then a domestical
Prince, for that he shall have both external counsel of a people that hates us,
to prick him forward in it, as also their external power to assist him in the
same, which two motives every domestical Prince has not.

Again they say, that the woorst and greatest incommodities of a foreign
government, that Inconveniences of this go uerment.
may be feared, are, tyranny and bringing into servitude, the people over who^
they govern, and filling of the realm with straingers, and dividing to them,
the dignities, riches and preferments of the same, al which they say, are
incident also by all probability to this third kind of foreign gouerme^t,
where the Prince strainger lives present and has forces at hand to work his
vvil, and this is the case, say they, of the king of Scotts, who only of any
foreign pretender, seems may justly be feared, for these and other reasons
alleged before, when we talked of his pretense to the crown.

To conclude then, these men are of opinion, that of al these three manners of
being under straingers, or admitting foreign gouerments, this third kind
(...) as it were to the king of Scotts case, is to be only feared, and none
else, for as for the second they say that it is not only not to be feared, or
abhorred, but rather much to be desired, for that of al other sorts, it has
the least inconveniences, and most commodities, for which causes, we read
Strange gouer nours desired in some Realines.
and see, that where kings go by election, commonly they take straingers, as
the Romans and Lacedaemonians did often at the beginning, and after the
beginning of the Roman Monarchy, their foreign borne Emperors, were the best
and most famous of all the rest, as Traian and Adrian that were Spaniards,
Septimius Seuerus borne in Africa, Constantine the great natural of Ingland,
and the like, and the very woorst that ever they had, as Caligula, Nero,
Heliogabolus, Commodus, and such other like plagues of the weal public, were
Romans, and in our days, and within a few years, we have seen that the
Polonians, have chosen three kings straingers, one after an other, the first
Stephen Battorius Prince of Transiluania, the second Henry of France, and last
of all the Prince of Swecia, that vet lives, and the state of Venetians by way
of good polliei, have made it for a perpetual Law, that when they have war to
make, and must needs choose a general Captain, and commit their forces into
his hands, he must be a stranger, to wit, some Prince of Italy, that is out
of their own states, heerby to avoid partiality, and to have him the more
indifferent, and equal to them al, which yet so many prudent men would never
agree upon, if there were not great reason of commodities therein, so as this
point is concluded, that such as speak against this second kind of having a
forrayne Prince, speak of passion, or inconsideration, or lack of experience
in matters of state and common wealths.

As for the first manner, of being under foraine government, as a member or
province of an other bigger kingdom, and to be governed by a deputy, viceroy
or strange governor, as Ireland, Flanders, Naples, and other states before
mentioned be, with certain and stable conditions of liberties, and
immunities, and by a form of government agreed upon on both sides, these men
do confess also, that their may be arguments, reasons, and probabilities
alleged on both sides, and for both parties; but yet that al things considered
and the inconveniences, hurtes, and dangers before rehearsed, that subjects do
suffer also oftentimes, at the hands of their own natural Princes, these men
are of opinion, for the causes already declared, that the profittes are more and
far greater, then the damages or dangers of this kind of forrayne gouerme^t
are, and so they do answer, to all the reasons and arguments alleged in the
beginning of this chapter, against (...) government, that either they are to be
understood and verified only of the third kind of foreign government before
declared, (which these men The answer to (...) against forrayne gouerme^t
do confess to be dangerous) or else they are founded for the most part, in
the error and prejudice only of the vulgar sort of men, who being once stirred
up, by the name of stranger, do consider no further what reason or not reason,
there is in the matter, and this say these men, ought to move wise men little,
for as the common people did rise in tumult against the french (for example) in
Sicilia, and against the Inglish in France, and against the Danes in Ingland,
so upon other occasions, would they do also against their own countrymen, and
often times have so done, both in Ingland and other where, when they have bin
offended or when seditious heads have offered themselves to lead them to like
tumults, so that of this they say little argument can be made.

The like in effect they do answer, to the examples Answer to the Grecian
Philosophers and orators.
before alleged of the Grecian Philosophers and orators, that were so earnest
against strangers. And first to Aristotle, they say, that in his politiques he
never handled expressly this our question, and consequently weighed not the
reasons on both sides, and so left it neither decided, nor impugned, and he
that was master to Alexander, that had so many foreign countries under him,
could not well condemn the same: and as for Demosthenes no marvel Demosthenes.
though he were so earnest against king Phillip of Macedonia his entry upon
the cities of Greece, both for that he was well feed on the one side, by the
king of Asia (as al authors do affirm) to the end he should set Athens and
other Grecian cities against king Phillip, as also for that his own common
wealth of Athens was governed by populer government wherein himself held still
the greatest svvaye by force of his tongue with the people, and if any king or
Monarch of what nation soever, should have come to command over them, (as
Phillipps son king Alexander the great did soon after) Demosthenes should
have had less authority, as he had, for that presently he was banished, and so
continued all the time that Alexander lived. But if we do consider how this
state of the Athenians passed afterward under the great monarchy of Alexander
and other his followers, in respect that it did before when it lived in
liberty, and under their own government only, he shall find their state much
more quiet, prosperous, and happy, under the commandment of a strainger, then
under their own, by whom they were continually tossed and turmoyled with
bralles, emulations, and seditions, and oftentimes tirannized, by their own
people as the bluddy contentions The trooblesome state of the Grecian cittyes.
of their Captains Aristides, Themistocles, Alcibiades, Pericles, Nicias, and
others do declare, and as it is evident among other things by their wicked
law of Ostracismus Arist. l. 2. polit. c 1. (...) 2.
which was to banish for ten years, whosoever were eminent or of more
vvisdome, wealth, valor, lerning or authority among them then the rest,
albeit he had committed no crime or fault at al. And finally their having of
thirty most horrible and bloody tyrants at one time in their city of Athens,
in steed of one governor, does evidently declare the same (say these men)
and do make manifest how vain and foolish an imagination it was, that vexed
them how to avoid the government of straingers, seeing that no strainge governor
in the world, would ever have used them as they used themselves, or so
afflict them, as they afflicted themselves.

To the objection out of Deutronomy whet Answer to the objection out of
Deutronomye
God appointed the Jews to choose a king only of their own nation, these men
do answer, that this was at that time, when no nation besides the Jews had
true religion among them, Deuteronomy. 15.
which point of religion, the Ciuilian has well declared before, in his last
discourse, to be the chiefest and highest thing that is to be respected, in the
admission of any magestrate, for that it concerns the true and highest end
of a common wealth, and of al humane society, and for that the Gentiles had
not this ornament of true religion, but were al destitute generally thereof, the
Jews were forbidden (...) only to choose a king of the Gentiles, (...) might
pervert and corrupt them, but also (...) company converse or eat and drink
with them, and this was then: but yet afterward when Christ himself came
into the world, and opened his church both to Jew and gentile, he took away
this restraynte, so as now al Christian nations, are alike, for so much as
apperteyneth unto government. And consequently to a good and wise Christian man,
void of passion and fond affection, it little imports (as often before has
bin said) of what country, nation, or lineage his governor be, so he govern
well, and have the parts before required of piety, religion, justice,
manhood, and other the like requisite to his dignity degree and charge, by
which parts and virtues only, his subjects are to receive benefits, and not by
his country, generation, lineage or kynred, and this is so much as I have to say
at this ryme about this affair.

OF CERTAIN OTHER SECONDARY AND COLLATERAL LINES AND how extreme doubt-ful all
these pretenses be, and which of al these pretendors are most like to prevail
in the end, and to get the crown of Ingland.
CAP. X.
AFter the lawyer had ended his discourse, about foreign government, he seemed
to be somewhat wearied, and said he would pass no further in this affair, for
that he had nothing else to say but only to note unto them that besides these
principal titlers, of the five houses mentioned, of Scotland, Suffolk,
Clarence, Britanie and Portugal, their were other secondary houses and lines
also issued out of the houses of Lancaster and York, as also of Gloucester
Buckingam, and some other, as may Seco^dary Lines.
appear by the genealogies set down before in the 2. and 3. chaptres, of
which lines (said he) their may be perhapps consideration had also by the
common wealth when time shall come of choice or admission, the matter standing
so as the Ciuilian has largly declared and showed before, which is, that upon
such just occasions, as these are, the common wealth may consult what is best
to be done, for her good and preservation, in admittinge this or that
pretender, seeing that this is the end why al government was ordained, to
benefit the public.

And for so much as their is such variety of persons pretende^ts, or that may
pretend, in the five houses already named, as before has been declared, (which
persons at least do make some dosen more or less) and that besides these,
their want not others also of secondary houses, as is evident as well by the
former discourse, as also by the arbor that of these matters is to be seen, the
lawyer turned to affirm again, that the event must needs be exceeding
doubtful, who shall in the end prevail, for that besides the multitude before
named of pretenders, he avouched very seriously, that after all this his speech,
he could not well resolve with him Ambiguite of preuailinge.
self, which of al these titles in true right of succession, was the best,
and much less, which of the tytlers was likest to prevail, and this I
presume the lawyer told them of himself, for that he did easily forsee and
imagine, that after al these arguments, on every side alleged, he should be
requested by the company (as vehemently he was) to put down his opinion what
he thought and judged of all the whole matter hitherto discussed, and of every
man's pretense in particular.

Which in no case he could be brought to do for a long time, but refused the
same utterly and craved pardon, and yielded many reasons why it was not
convenient, and might be odious. But al would not serve to acquiet the
company, which with all earnest importunity urged him to satisfy their
request, and so upon large, and earnest entreaty, he was content in the end
to yield to this only, that he would lay together by way of discourse, the
probabilities of every side, and lastly set down in two or three propositions,
or rather conjectures, his private guess which of them in his judgment was
likest to prevail.

First then he began to say, that the probalities Two grounds of probability
of speeding.
of prevailing or not prevailing of every one of these pretendors in the next
succession, of the crown of Ingland these pretendors, may be considered and
measured either in respect of the party of religion, that was like in Ingland
to favor him, and his pretense, or else in respect of his own particular
family, friends, and allies, both at home and abroad. And for that the party
of religion is like to weigh most, and to bear the greatest swaye, and most
potent suffrage and voice, in this action, and that with reason, according to
that the Ciuilian has proved at large in the last of his discourses: therefore
shall I also (quoth the lawyer) first of al treat of this point of religion in
this my last speech.

It is well known (said he) that in the realm Three religions in Ingland.
of Ingland at this day, there are three different and opposite bodies of
religion, that are of most bulk, and that do carry most sway, and power, which
three bodies, are known commonly in Ingland by the names of Protestants,
Puritanes, and Papists, though the later two, do not acknowledge these names,
and for the same cause would not I use them neither, if it were not only for
cleernes and breuities sake, for that as often I have protested, my meaning is
not to give offense to any side or party.

These three bodies then (quoth he) do comprehend in effect all the force of
Ingland, and do make so general a division and separation, through-out the
whole land, in the hearts and minds of their friends, favorers, and
followers, as if I be not deceived, no one thing is like so much to be
respected, in each pretender, for his advancement or depression, as his
religion or inclination therein, by them that must assist him at that day, and
are of different religions themselves. And more I am of opinion (said he) that
albeit in other changes heertofore in Ingland, as in the entrance of king
Edward and Queen The great importance of religion in this actions.
Mary, and of this Queens Majesty that now is, diverse men of different
religions, did for other respects, concur and join together for these Princes
aduancements, (notwithstanding that afterward many of them repented the same)
which is to be seen, in that for king Edward all the realm without exception
did concur, and for Queen Mary, it is known, that diverse protestants did by
name, and among other points it is also known that Sir Nicholas Throgmorton a
fervent protestant in those days, being of king Edwards privy chamber, did not
only, advise her of the sycknes and decay of king Edward from day to day, but
also was the first that sent an express messenger to advise her of her
brothers death, and what the two dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, did
contriue against her, and that with such celeritye, that king Edward dying but
on thursday night, the tenth of Iuli the Lady Mary was most certainly, advised
thereof, by saturday morning next, and that very early, in kenninghal castle of
Norfolk, 80. miles of, and diverse other protestants did assist her also, in
that her entrey, as in like manner al those of the Roman (...) that day (said
he) and especially if he can conceal for a time, the disceasse of her
Majesty, until he may be able to put his affairs in order, but this is holden
to be either impossible or very hard, for the different judgments and
affections which are not thought to be wanting in the court council, and
Princes chamber it self, whereof we saw the effect, (as before I told you) at
the death of king Edward, which was as much endeavored to be kept sectet, as
ever any was, and as much it imported the concealers, and yet with in not many
hours after, had the Lady Mary, most certain notice thereof, by those that
were opposite to her in religion, as I have showed before, so ardent are men's
minds in such occasions, and so capable of new impressio^s designeme^ts and
desires, are al kind of subjects upon such great changes.

A chief member of the protestant body (as The Clergy.
you know) for wealth and force, is the clergy of Ingland, especially the
bishops and other men in Ecclesiastical dignity, which are like to be a great
back to this party, at that day, though some men think that it be not very
certain, which part of the nobility and council will stick unto them, for
that many in heart are presupposed to favor the Puritan. The Counsel and
nobilitic.
And for the privy counsel in particular, though during the Princes life,
their authority be supreme, yet is it not so afterward, nor have they any
public authority at al, the Prince having once expired, but only as noblemen
or gentlemen according to each man's state and calling in several, and for the
next successor, seeing none is known nor sworn in the life of this Prince,
(nor were it her safety that any should be) clear it is, that after her
Majesty's discease, every man is free until a new be established, by the common
wealth, which establishme^t does not depend upon the appointment or will of any
few, or upon any man's proclayming of himself, (for diverse are like to
proclayme themselves) but upon a general consent of the whole body of the
realm, which how it will be brought to pass, God only knows, and to him we
must commend it.

I do no know, quothe he, of any certain person pretendent, to whom this
protestant Persons designed or favored by the protestant party.
party is particularly devoted, at this day, more then to the rest, though
the house of Hartford was wont to be much favored by them, but of latter
years little spech has bin thereof, but rather of Arbella, whom the Lord
Treasoreris said especially to favor at this present, though for himself it
be held somvvhat doubtful whether he be more fast to the protestant, or to the
puritan, but if the protestant party, should be divided, then their forces
will be the less. The authority of her majesty is that which at this present
over bears al, when that shall fail, no man knows what the event will be,
for that now men's hearts are hardly descerned.

There forrayne friends and allies, are of good number, especially if the king
of France proceed Foraayne friends of the protestants.
well in his affairs, and do not in deed change his religion as he pretends
that he will, but yet if the puritan do stand against them, he is like to pull
much from them, both in France and Holland, and as for Scotland, it must needs
be against them both, and this in respect of his own pretense, except the same
be favored by them, I mean by these two factions in Ingland which is hardly
thought that any of them both will do, for the reasons before alleged, though
some more hope may be that way, of the puritan, then of the protestant, by
reason of the said kings neernes to them in religion.

The puritan is more generally favored Of the party Putitan.
through-out the realm with all those which are not of the Roman religion,
then is the protestant, upon a certain general persuasion, that his
profession is the more perfect, especially in great towns where preachers have
made more impression in the artificers, and burgesses, then in the country
people. And among the protestants, themselves, al those that are less
interessed in Ecclesiastical livings or other preferments, depending of the
state, are more affected commonly to the puritans, or easily are to be induced
to pass that way for the same reason. The person most favored by the puritans
hitherto in common voice and opinion of men, has bin the earl of Huntington,
some speech of late of some diminution therein, and that the Lord Beacham since
his Persons affected by the Puritans.
marriage, has entered more in affection with them. The king of Scotts (no
doubt) if he were not a strainger, and had not the difficulties before
mentioned, were for his religion also very plausible. I do not hear that the
earl of Darby or his mother, is much forward with these or with the
protestant, though of the later sort, some are snpposed to vvish them well.

The friends and allies of the puritan abroad, are the same, that are of the
Protestant, to External friends.
wit, those of Holland and Zealand, and such towns of France as follow the new
king, and jointly have chainged their religion, which are not many, for that
his greatest forces are yet those of the Roman Religion, but yet if the said
king prevail and persevere in his religion (which of late as I have said is
called in doubt by his often protestations to the contrary and open going to
mass) then will he be able to give good assistance, though both these
countries (I mean both Holland and France) are liker in some men's opinions, to
assist the puritan then the protestant, if the matter come in difference
between them, for that in truth they are more conform to the puritan
religion. And as for the German cities, that keep yet and follow the
particular form of Luther (...)
in religion, they are like to do little for either party, both for their
difference from both parties in religion, and for that they are poor, for the
most part, and not active nor provided to give succur abroad, except they be
drawn thereunto by force of money.

The Puritan part at home in Ingland, is The Puritan at home.
thought to be most vigorouse of any other, that is to say, most ardent, quick,
bold resolute, and to have a great part of the best Captains and soldiers on
their side, which is a point of no small moment. Greatly will import among other
points which way inclines the cittye of London, with the tower, whereof the
puritan (as is said) wants not his probability, as neither does he of some
good part (if not more) of the navy, to be at his devotion, which point
perhapps at that day, will be of as great consequence as any thing else, and so
much of him.

The third body of religion, which are those of the Roman, who call themselves
Catholics, Those of the Roman Religion.
is the least in show, at this present, by reason of the laws and tides of the
time, that run against them, but yet are they of no small consideration in
this affair, to him that weighs things indifferently, and this in respect
as well of their party at home, as of their friends abroad, for at home, they
being of two sorts as the world knows, the one more open that discover
themselves, which are the recusants, and the other more close and privy, that
accommodate themselves to al external proceedings of the time, and state, so as
they cannot be known, or at least wise not much touched: we may imagine, that
their number is not small, throughout the realm, and this partly for the reason
I mentioned before, in that the most part of the country people, that live out
of cittyes, and great towns (in which the greatest part of Inglish forces are
wont to consist) are much affected ordinarily to their religion, by reason that
preachers of the contrary religion are not so frequent with them, as in
towns, The Roman party great and why.
and partly also for that with these kind of men, as with them that are most
afflicted and held down, at this time, by the present state, many other do
join (as the manner is) and omnes qui amaro animo sunt, cum illis se
coniungunt, as the 1. Reg. 234
scripture said of those, that followed David's retinew, pursued by Saul and his
forces, which is to say, that all that be offended grieved, or any way
discontented with the present time, be they of what religion soever, do easily
join with these men, according to the old saying Solatium est miseris socios
habere miseriae, besides that, their is ever lightly a certain natural
compassion, that follows in men, toward those that are thought to suffer, or
be pursued, and this oftentimes in the very enimye himself, and then of
compassion springs as you know affection, and of affection, desire to help,
as contrary wise, do rise commonly the contrary effects, to wit, emulation,
envy and indignation, against the prosperity of him, that pursues, and is in
prosperity.

And for that in so great and populous a realm and large a government, as this
of her majesty has been, there cannot want to be many of these kind of
disco^tented me^, asalso for that naturally many are desirous of changes, it
cannot be supposed, but that the number of this sort is great, which makes
this party, far the bigger.

Moreover it is noted, that the much dealing with these men, or rather against
them, and this Effects of pressing an religion.
especially in matters of their religion, for these later years past, has
much stirred them up, (as also the like is to be noted in the puritan) and made
them far more egar in defense of their cause, according to the saying, nitimur
in vetitum semper, and as a little brook or river though it be but shalow and
tun never so quiet of it self, yet if many bars and stoppes be made
therein, it swells and rises to a greater force, even so it seems that it
has happened here, where also the sight and remembrance of so many of their
Seminary preistes, put to death for their religion (as they account it) has
wrought great impression in their hearts, as also the notice they have
received, of so many colleges and Inglish Seminaries remaining yet, and set up
of new, both in Flanders, France, Italy and Spain, for making of other
preistes in place of the executed, does greatly animate them and holds them
in hope of continuing still their cause, and this at home.

As for abroad, it is easy to consider what Friends and allies abroad.
their party and confidence is, or may be, not only by the Inglish that live in
exile, and have their friends and kynred at home, but also principally by the
affection of forrayne Princes and states, to favor their religion, whose
ports, towns, and provinces lie near upon Ingland round about, and for
such a time and purpose, could not want commodity to give succor, which being
weighed together with the known inclination, that way, of Ireland, and the
late declaration made by so many of the Scottish nobility and gentlemen also, to
favor that cause, all these points I say put together, must needs persuade
us, that this body is also great, and strong, and like to bear no small sway
in the decyding of this controversy for the crown, when time shall offer it
self for the same. And so much the more, for that it is not yet known, that
these are determined upon any one person whom they will follow, in that
action, nor as it seems are they much inclined to any one of the pretenders in
particular (wherein it is thought that the other two parties either are, or may
be divided among themselves, and each part also within it self, for that so
different persons of those religions do stand for it) but rather it is thought,
that these other of the Roman religion do remain very indifferent, to follow
any one that shall be set up for their religion, and is lykest to restore and
maintain the same, be he strainger or domestical, which determination and
union in general among themselves, if they hold it still (...) and the earl of
Darby have the difference The Lords Beacham and the earl of Darby.
of titles that before has bin seen, and each one his particular reasons why
he ought to be preferred before the other, and for their other abilities and
possibilities, they are also different, but yet in one thing both Lords seem
to be like, that being both of the blood royal, they are thought to have abased
themselves much by their marriages with the two knights daughters S. Richard
Rogers, and S. Iohin Spenfer, though otherwise both of them very worship full,
but not their matches in respect of their kindred with the crown, yet does the
alliance of S. John Spenser seem to bring many more friends with it, then that
of S. Richard Rogers, by reason of the other daughters of S. John, well married
also, to persons of importance, as namely the one to S. Georg Catey governor
of the he of Wight, who brings in also the Lord Hunsdon his father Captain
of Barwick, two of the most important pieces that Ingland has.

And for that the said Lord Hunsdon, and Alliance of the earl of Darby.
the Lady knowles disceased, were brother and sister, and both of them children
to the Lady Mary Bullen, elder sister to Queen Anne, here of it comes, that
this alliance with S. George Carey, may draw after it also the said house of
knowles, who are many and of much importance, as also it may do the husbands
of the other daughters of S. John Spencer, with their ahd erents and followers,
which are nether, few nor feeble, al which wants in the marriage of the Lord
Beacham.

An other difference also in the ability of Alliance of the Seymers.
these two Lords is, that the house of Seymers in state and title of nobility,
is much younger then the house of Stanleys, for that Edward Seymer late earl of
Hartford, and after duke of Somerset, was the first beginner thereof, who being
cut of together with his brother the Admiral, so soon as they were, could not
so setle the said house, especially in the alliance with the residue of the
nobility, as otherwise they would and might have done. But now as it
remains, I do not remember any alliance of that house, of any great moment,
except it be the children of S. Henry Seimer of Hamshire, and of S. Edward
Seymer of Bery Pomery in Deuonshite, if he have any, and of S. John Smith of
Essex, whose mother was sister to the late duke of Somerset, or finally the
alliance that the late marriage of the earl of Hartford, with the Lady Francis
Haward, may bring with it, which cannot be much, for so great a purpose as we
talk of.

But the earl of Darby on the other side, is very strongly and honorably
allied, both by father Alliance of the Stanleys
and mother, for by his father not to speak of the Stanleys, (which are many
and of good power, and one of them matched in the house of Northumberland) his
said father the old earl had three sisters, al well married, and al have left
children, and heirs of the houses wherein they were married, for the elder was
married first to the Lord Sturton, and after to S. John Arundel, and of both
houses has left heirs male. The second sister was married to the Lord
Morley, by whom she has left the Lord that now is, who in like manner has
mached with the heir of the Lord Montegle who is likewise a Stanley. And
finally the third sister was married to S. Nicholas Poynes of Glocestershire,
and by him had a son and heir that yet lives. And this by his fathers side,
but no less alliance has this earl also by the side of his mother, who
being Allia^ce of the old countess of Darby.
daughter of George Cliford earl of Cumberland, by Lady Eleanor niece of king
Henry the seventh, the said Lord George, had afterward by a second wife, that
was daughter of the Lord Dacres of the North, both the earl of Cumberland that
now is, and the Lady wharton, who hereby are brother and sister of the half
blood, to the said Countess of Darby, and the Dacres are their Uncles.

Besides all this, the states and posfessions of the two forsaide Lords, are
far different, for The states of the Lord Beacham and the earl of Darby.
the purposse pretended, for that the state of the earl of Hartford is far
inferior, both for greatness, situation, wealth multitude of subjects, and the
like: for of that of the Stanleys, does depend the most part of the shires of
Lancaster and Chester, and a good part of the North of Wales, (at least wise
by way of observance and affection) as also the I Will of man, is their own, and
Ireland and Scotland is not far of, where friendship perhapps in such a case
might be offered, and finally in this point of abillity great odds is their
seen between these Lords.

As for their religion, I cannot determyne Religion of these Lords.
what difference their is, or may be between them. The Lord Beacham by
education is presumed to be a protestant, albeit some hold that his father, and
father in law be more inclined toward the Puritans. The earl of Darbyes
religion, is held to be more doubtful, so as some do think him to be of al
three religions, and others of none, and these again are divided in judgments,
about the event heerof, for that some do imagine that this opinion of him, may
do him good, for that al sides heerby may (perhapps) conceive hope of him, but
others do persuade themselves that it vvil do him hurt, for that no side in
deed will esteem or trust him, so as al these matters with their events, and
consequences do remain uncertain.

But now will I pass to speak of the house The earl of Huntington.
of Clarence, the chief persons, whereof, and most emynent at this day, are the
earl of Huntington, and his brethren the Hastings, for that the Pooles and
Barringtons are of far meaner condition and authority, albeit the other also,
I mean the house of Hastings, does not seem to be of any great alliance, for
that albeit the old earl of Huntington, this earls father, had two brethren,
the one S. Thomas Hastings, that married one of the Lord Henry Pooles daughters
named Lord montague, that was put to death, which daughter was sister to this
earls mother, and the other named S. Edward Hastings was made Lord of
Lowghborow, by Queen Mary, to whom he was first master of the horse, and
afterward Lord Chamberland, neither of them having left issue: and this is al I
remember by his fathers side, except it be his own brethren as has bin said
of which S. George Hastings is the cheifest.

By his mothers side, he has only the Pooles, whose power as it is not great,
so what it Allia^ce of the earl of Huntington.
is, is rather like to be against him then with him, partly for their
difference from him in religion, and partly for preferment of their own title,
upon the reasons before alleged.

By his own marriage with the daughter of the late duke of Northumberland, and
sister to the late earls of Lecester and Warwick, he was like to have drawn
a very great and strong alliance if the said two earls had lived, and
especially, S. Phillip Sidney, who was borne of the other sister of the present
Countess of Huntington, and his own sister was married to the earl of
Penbroke that now is, and himself to the daughter of S. Francis Walsingham
chief secretary of the state, by all which means and by all the affection and
power of the party puritan, and much of the protestant, this earl was thought
to be in very great forwardnes. But now these great pillars being failed, and
no issue yet remaining by the said Countess, his wife, no man can assure
himself what the success will be, especially seeing that of the three bodies of
different religions, before described, it is thought that this earl has
incurred deeply the hatred of the one, and perhapps some ielousy and suspicion
of the other, but yet others do say (and no doubt but that it is a matter of
singular importance if it be so) that The power of London.
he is like to have the whole power of London for him, which city did prevail
so much in advancing the title of York, in king Edward the fourth his time, as
it made him king twice, to wit once at the beginning, when he first apprehended
and put down king Henry the sixth, and the second time, when he being driven
out of the kingdom by his brother the Polydor. 24. Hollingshod in vita
Henrici. 6.
duke of Clarence, and Richard earl of Warwick, he returned from Flanders
upon hope of the favor of the Londoners, and was in deed received, favored
and set up again by them especially, and by the helps of kent and other places
adjoining and depending of London, and so it may be that the favorers of this
earl do hope the like success to him in time by this potent city.

For the houses of Britanny and Portugal, I The houses of Britain and Portugal.
shall join them both together, for that they are straingers, and the persons
thereof so nigh linked in kynred affinity and friendship, as both their tittles
forces and favors, may easily be joined together, and imparted the one with
the other, as to themselves shall best appear convenient.

The lady Infanta of Spain pretendent of Infanta of Spain
the house of Britanie, is eldest daughter of king Phillip as all the world
knows, and dearly beloved of him, and that worthily as al men report, that
come from thence, for that she is a princess of rare parts both for bewty,
wisdom and piety. The two young Princes of Duke of Parma.
Parma I mean both the duke and his brother the Cardinal, are ympes in like
manner of great expectation, and diverse ways near of kynn to the said king,
for that by their fathers side they are his nephews that is the childeren of
his sister, and by their mothers side almoost as near, for that they are the
nephews of his uncle Prince Edward Infant of Portugal.

In like neernes of blood are the Duchess The duke of Bragansa.
of Bragansa and her children, unto the said king, which children are many as
has bin showed, and al of that rare virtue and valor and of that singular
affection unto the English nation, as it is wonderful to hear what men write
from those parts, and what others do report that have trauayled Portugal and
seen those Princes and tasted of their magnificente liberality, so as I have
hard diverse rejoice that are affected that way, to understand that their do
remain such noble ofsping yet in forrayne countries of the true and ancient
blood royal of Ingland.

What the powers and possibilities of al these Power of forrayne prete^ders.
Princes of the house of Portugal be, or may be hereafter for pursuyng their
right, shall not need to be declared in this place, for that all the world does
know and see the same, yet al seems to depend of the head and root which is
the king of Spain himself, and the young Prince his son, whose states and
forces how and where they lie, what alliance, friends, subjects or followers
they have or may have, it is easy to consider, but what part or affection of
men they have or may have hereafter in Ingland it self, when time shall come,
for the determyning of this matter, no man can tell at this present, and what
plotts agreements, compartitions, or other conclusions may be made at that day,
time only must teach us, so as now I know not well what to say further in this
affair, but only commend it to Gods high providence, and therefore I pray you
(quoth the Lawyer) let me end with this only that already I have said, and
pardon me of my former promise to put my opinion or guess, about future
matters, and what may be the success of these affairs, for besides that I am,
no prophet or son of prophet, to know things to come, I do see that the very
circumstances of conjecture (which are the only foundation of al prophecy
which in this case can be made) are so many and variable; as it is hard to take
hold of any of them.

Thus he said, and feign would have left of here, but that the whole company
opposed themselves with great vehemency, against it, and said, that he must
needs perform his promise, made at the beginning of this speech, to give his
censure and verdite in the end, what he thought would be the success of al
these matters, whereunto he answered, that seeing no nay would serve, he would
briefly quit himself by these few words following.

First of al (said he) my opinion is, that The 1. Conjecture that their will be
war and why.
this affayre cannot possibly be ended by any possibility moral, without some
war, at least wise, for some time at the beginning, whereof my reasons be
these that do ensew.

1.
This matter cannot be disputed and determined duringe the life of the Queen,
that now is, without evident danger of her person, for the reasons that al me^
do know importinge such perils as are wont to follow like cases, of declaring
heirs apparent, especially her majesty the present possessor growing now to
be old and without hope of issue.

2.
This declaration and determination of the heir apparent to the crown if it
should be made now, would move infinite humors, and affections within the
realm, and it were to sturr coals and to cast fyerbrands over all the
kingdom, and further perhapps also, which now lie raked up and hidden in the
embers.

3.
This determination though it should be made now by parliament, or authority of
the present Prince, would not end or take away the root of the controversy,
for aloeit some that should be passed over or put back in their pretenses,
would hold their peace perhapps for the time present, yet afterward would they
both speak and spurn when occasion is offered.

4.
This declaration now if it were made, would be hurtful and dangerous for him
that should be declared, for on the one side, it would put the Prince regnant
in great (...) and sufpiction of him, and on the other side, would join and
arm all the other pretenders and their favorers against him, and so we read,
that of two or three only, that in all our histories are recounted to have been
declared heyrs apparent to the crown (they being no kings children) none of
them, ever came to reign: as namely duke Arthur of Britany, Roger Mortimer
earl of March, and John de la Poole earl of Lincoln, and Henry marquis of
Exeter as before has bin declared. Sup. c. 4.


5.
Again the multitude of pretenders being such as it is, and their pretentions
so ambiguous, as has bin declared, it is to be presupposed, that none or few
of them vvil presently at the beginning cast away their hope and forgo their
tittles, but will prove at least wise what friends will stand unto them, and how
matters are like to go fot or against them, especially seeing they may do it
without danger, no law being against them, and their rightes and pretenses so
manifest, that no man can say they do it of ambition only, or malice, treason,
or conspiracy against others, and for this assaye or first attempt, arms are
necessary.

More-ouer if any man in process of time, would forgo or give over his title
(as it is to 6. A consideration to be marked.
be imagined that diverse will at length, and many must, for that one only can
speed) yet to the end he be not suddenly oppressed, or laid hands on at the
beginning by his adversary part, or made away as in such cases is wont to
succeed, it is very likely that each pretender for his own safety and
defense, will arm himself and his friends at the beginning, for that better
conditions will be made with armor in hands, then when a man is naked or in the
power of his adversary, and no doubt, but the more pretenders shall stand
together armed, at the beginning the easyer and the surer peace will be made with
him that shall prevail, for that they being many with whom he has to
compounde, he will respect them the more, and yeald to more reasonable and
honorable conditions, then if their were but one, and he weak that should
resist, for that a fault or displeasure is more easily pardoned to a multitude,
and to a potent adversary, then to one or two alone that are of less account.
And on the other side, the peril of these other pretenders, that should not
prevail, being common to them al, would knyt them better together for their
own defense, in living under the person that should prevail and reign, and
he would bear more regard unto them as has bin said: and this both for that
they should be stronger by this union to defend themselves, and he that
reigns should have less cause to suspect and fear them, to work treason
against him, for that they are many, and consequently not so easy to agree
betwcene themselves, who should be preferred, if the other were pulled down,
which to the person regnant, would be also a ground of much securitye.

These are my reasons and conjectures why it is like that arms will be taken at
the beginning in Ingland, before this controversy can be decided.

My second proposition and conjecture is, The second conjecture no mayn
battle probable.
that this matter is not like to come easily to any great or main battle, but
rather to be ended at length, by some composition, and general agreement, and
my reasons for this be these.

First, for that the pretenders be many, and their powers and friends lying in
diverse and different parts of the realm, and if their were but two, then were
it more probable, that they would soon come to a battle, but being many each
one vvil fear the other, and seek to sortifie himself where his own strength
lies and especially toward the ports and sea side, for receiving of
succors, as easily may be done, by reason of the multitude of competitors as
has bin said, which vvil cause that at home the one will not much urge or
press the other, at the beginning, but every part attend rather to strenghthen
it self for the time.

2.
A second reason of this is, for that the forrayne Princes and states round
about us, are like to be much divided in this matter, some as pretendents for
themselves or their kynred and friends, and others as favorers of this or that
party, for religion, so as their will not want presently offers of helps and
succors from abroad, which succors albeit they should be but mean or small
at the beginning, yet will they be of much importance, when the forces at
home be divided, and when their shall be different ports harbors, and holds,
ready within the land, to receive and harbor them, so as I take it to be most
likely, that this affuyre vvil grow somevvhat long and so be ended at lenght
by some composition only, and that either by parliament and general consent of
al parts pretendentes, and of al three bodies of religion meeting together by
their deputes and treat and conclude some form of agreement as we see it
practiced now in France, or else by some other means of commissaries,
commissioners, legates, deputies, or the like, to to make the conclusion with
every party a sunder.

My third and last conjecture is (and for a mere The third conjecture who is
lykest to prevail.
conjecture only, I would have you to hold it) that seeing there be two sorts
of pretenders, which stand for this preferment, the one strangers, the other
Inglish, my opinion is, that of any one forrayne Prince that pretends, the
Infanta of Spain is likest to bear it away, or some other by her title, laid
upon him by her father the kings good will, and on the other side, of any
domestical competitors, the second son of the earl of Hartford, or of the
issue of the countess of Darby, carries much show to be preferred.

My reasons for the former part, about the For the Infanta of Spain
Lady Infanta, are, that she is a woman, and may easily join (if her father
will) the titles of Britany and Portugal together, she is also unmarried, and
by her marriage may make some other composition, either at home or abroad,
that may facillitate the matter, she is a great Princess and fit for some
great state, and other Princes perhapps of Christendom would more willingly
yeald and concur to such a composition, of matters by this Lady, and by
casting all foreign titles of Britanie and Portugal upon her, then that the
king of Spain should pretend for himself, and there by increase his monarchy,
which other Princes his neighbors, in reason of state, would not so well
allow to bear.

In Ingland also it self if any party or person be affected that way, he
would think heerby to have the more reason, and if any be against straingers,
some such moderation as this would take away much of this auersion, as also of
arguments against it: for that heerby it seems that no subjection could be
feared to any forrayne realm, but rather diverse vtilities to the realm of
Ingla^de, as these me^ prete^de by the reasons before alleged in the precede^t
chapter.

I said also, that this Lady Infanta, or some other by her title and her
fathers good vvil, was likest of all straingers to bear it away, for that if
she should either dye or be married in any other country, or otherwise to be
disposed of, as her pretense to Ingland should be disinabled before this
affayre came to be tried, then may her said father and she if they list, cast
their fore said interests and titles (as diverse men think they would) upon
some other Prince of their own house and blood, as for example, either upon
some of the families of Parma or Bragansa before mentioned, or of the house of
Austria, seeing theit wants not many able and worthy Princes of that house,
for whom there would be the same reasons and considerations, to persuade their
admission by the Inglish, that have bin alleged before for the Infanta, and
the same (...) to the realm, and motives to Inglishmen, if such a matter
should come in cousultation, and the same friends and forces would not want
abroad to assist them.

For the second part of my conjecture, touching For the earl of Hartfords
second son.
the earl of Hartfords second son, or one of the countess of Darbyes
children, my reasons be, first for that this second son, seems to be
cleared in our former discourse of that 1. Sup. c. (...).
bastardy that most imports, and nearest of al other lies upon those
children, which is for lack of due proof of their parents marriage, for which
defect they do stand declared for illegitimate by public sentence of the
archbishop of Canterbury, as before has bin declared, from which sentence this
second son is made free, by the arguments before alleged, and therein
preferred before his elder brother.

2.
And secondly for that this younger son is unmarried, for any thing that I do
know to the contrary, which may be a point of no small moment in such an
occasion, as has bin noted diverse times before, for joining or fortefying of
tittles by marriage, and for making of compositions of peace and union with the
opposite parties. 3.
And finally for that this second son, being young, his religion is not yet
much talked of, and consequently every party may have hope to draw him to
their side, especially he being also free as I have said to follow what he shall
think best, or most expedient for his own advancement, without knott or
obligation to follow other men's affections or judgments in that point, as he
would be presumed to be if he were married, or much obliged to any other
family.

I do name also in this second point, the children For the children of the
Countess of Darbie 1.
of the countess of Darby first, for that in truth the probabilities of this
house be very great, both in respect of their descent, which in effect is
holden as it were cleeare from bastardy as before has bin showed, and then
again for their neernes in degree, which by the countess yer living is nearer
to king Henry the seventh by one degree, then any other co^petitor whatsoever.
Secondly I do name this countess children and not her self, for that I see
most me^ that favor this house, very willing and desirous that some of the
said countess children should rather be preferred then she herself, and this
for that she is a woman, and it seems to the^ much to have three women
reign one after the other, as before has bin noted, so as they would have her
title to be cast rather upon one of her children, even as upon like occasion
it has bin showed before, that the Spaniards caused the Lady Berenguela niece
to king Henry the Garibay l. a5. c. 36.
second, to tesigne her title to her son, when she should have succeeded by
neernes of inheritance, and as a little before that, the state of Ingland did
after king Stephen, unto king Henry Polydor in rit Steph.
the first his daughter Maude the Empress, who^ they caused to pass over her
title to her son Henry the second, though her own right should have gone
before him by neernes of succession, as also should have done by orderly course
of succession, the right of Margaret, countess of Richmond, before her son
king Henry the seventh, as before has bin proved, but yet we see that her
son was preferred, and the like would these men have to be observed in the
countess of Darby.

3.
Lastly I do name, the children of this countess in general, and not the earl
of Darby particulerly above the other, though he be the eldest, for two
respects, first, for that his younger brother is unmarried, which is a
circumstance whereof diverse times occasion has bin offered to speak before, and
therefore I need to ad no further therein, and secondly for that diverse men
remain not so fully satisfied and contented with the course of that Lord
hitherto, and do think that they should do much better with his brother if so
be he shall be thought more fit, yet are thease things uncertain, as we see,
but not withstanding such is the nature and fashon of man, to hope ever great
matters of youths, especially Princes, God send al just desires to take place,
and with this I will end, and pass, no further, hoping that I have performed
the effect of my promise made unto you at the beginning.

FINIS.
A (...)rfect and exact Arbor and genea(...)gie of all the Kings Queens and
Prin(...) of the blood royal of England, from the t(...)me of William the
conqueror unto our t(...)e, whereby are to be seen, the grounds o(...) the
pretenders to the same crown, at thy(...)aye, according to the book of M. R.
D(...)man set forth of the said pretenders and their several claymes, this
present year. 1594.

The ancient howses of the blood royal of England are the house of Lancaster
that bears the redd rose, and the house of York that bears the white, and
then the house of Britanie and France joined in one. And out of these are made
five particular howses, which are, the house of Scotland, of Suffolk, of
Clarence, of Britanie and of Portugal, and in these are twelve different
persons that by way of succission do pretend each one of the^ to be next
after her Majesty that now is, as by the book appears.




