A DECLARATION OF THE Variance between the Pope, and the Segniory of VENICE,
With the proceedings and present state thereof.

Whereunto is annexed a Defense of the Venetians, written by an Italian doctor
of Divinity, Against the Censure of Paulus Quintus, Proouing the Nullitie
thereof by Holy Scriptures, Canons, and Catholic Doctors.

ANNO DOM. 1606.

A LETTER FROM VENICE, Setting forth the variance between the Pope and that
State: Declaring the causes, proceedings, and present issue thereof.
SIr, I reckon my self so much in your debt, for your last aduertisements,
concerning matters lately fallen out in England, some in question, some in
action, and all worthy of observation, As that I can do no less, then render
some part of requital, by the return unto you again, of a true Relation
concerning that memorable accident here with us in Venice, so famous in speech,
(as sounding in every ear) so weighty in deed, (as drawing on great
consequences,) and so remarkable in consideration, (as that our English Nation
may make good use thereof) which in this my plainest manner, affecting more
veritatis candorem, then ornamenta artis, I offer to your perusal; praying
as well your pardon, where I do not satisfy your curious eye, as your
acceptance of my good intention, though I come short of your expectation.

I hold it not necessary to discourse of the wealth, power, or amplitude of
this Segniorie, referring you to sundry copious and exact Treatises, written as
it were to the life of this Subject, which describe as in a Map or Table,
every matter obseruable for a requisite knowledge thereof. It may suffice
therefore, for the opening of a convenient entrance into the Narration which I
have undertaken to deliver unto you, That you do conceive thus much: The
Venetian State is at this present, (as also of long continuance) very strong,
and not easily to be shaken, their administration being fuller of Wisdom then
Force, and yet withal of such Force, as (with a Wisdom not over hasty to
provoke others) is well able to defend and maintain their own both honor and
right. Their Territories are large and fertile, though subject to the affront
of more mighty Monarchs; Whereof the meanest (in course of hostility) may well
seem so dangerous, as they are not slightly to be feared. And therefore it
much concerns that State, to stand upon a circumspect carriage of it self,
not exercising acts of enmity with such their near neighbors, or ministering
to any of them any unjust or offensive occasions. It has evermore especially,
and with strictest correspondence, (if not with overmuch addicted obedience)
assured it self unto his Holiness, casting their ancre, as well of their
safety in worldly distresses, as also of their hope of eternal blessedness,
into the deep and deceivable sands of the Romish dissimulation.

This knot of league between the Pope and the Venetians, which oftentimes some
great opposing Potentates endeavored to untie, is now of late (I will not say
upon an accident, but rather upon a very essential injury offered by the Pope)
so cut asunder, as that many stitches, and much labor of the best apted
composers, will not easily fasten or draw it together again. If you ask me,
what miracle-maker has had his hand in the working of this wonder; I must
first answer you seriously, that GOD has his times, and means to bring to
pass his fore-decreed purposes; And uses out of small beginnings, to draw the
thread at length to his own determined conclusion. Next, I will tell you
merrily, That it is both the Popish proposition prohibiting Priests to marry,
and the Popish practice of covering their habit of sin, under their habit
Clericall, that was the Factor of tearing asunder so sure friends. And lastly,
take this for a Maxim, That the superlatiue supremacy of the Popes ouer-awing
power, endures not any touch in the least part of his body Ecclesiastical, no
not in the very heel or little toe.

In the meditation whereof, and before I enter into my promised Declaration, I
cannot contain my self, from pouring out my prayers to GOD, that he will
bless this the Venetians encounter of the Romish pride, with the like
success, which it pleased him to give to the like adventure, in the time of
King H. 8. when he revived the question of the Popes Pontifical decrees, and
did eiect his false and ill-gotten Supremacy; by which one blow so stricken, he
has left upon him the print of his fingers ever since. And surely if this one
Capital point, of his strange, or rather idle Attribute of Power to dispose of
Princes, were truly battered, there would such breaches be made upon him on
every side, as he would easily part with that which he accounts his strongest
hold. You shall see how notoriously his Greatness, or rather unlimited
Absoluteness, of Dixi and elocutus sum, displaying it self in his best robes
and in his Consistoriall power, is now become contemptible, and held as a mere
scorn, by his aggrieued neighbor State, bound by vows to all filial duties,
and nursed up with the milk of Rome, close at his door, in Italy it self,
where he shows forth all his pageants of pomp and glory, And that upon
justifiable occasion, and by proceedings unreprovable.

ABout December last, the said free, absolute, and vndependant State of Venice,
(finding nothing more necessary for continuance, or more estimable for
dignity, then to suppress and punish enormious offenders) did lay the hands
of Justice upon two of their Clergy in Clericall habit, the one an Abbot,
accused of many notorious crimes; The other a Canon of Vicenza, for
dishonouring of a Virgin. The imprisoning and prosecuting against these two,
was the first stimulatory cause of spleen and division, betwixt the Pope and
the Segniorie. The Canonists held the State to stand (ipso facto)
Excommunicate, without any Iuridicall proceeding, for this their presumptuous,
and Irregular usurpation of Authority beyond their bounds over the Delinquent
Clergy, whom they ought (forsooth) to have remitted to the Censure of their
own immediate superiors.

The Clergy thus startled, and all sparkling with heat and indignation,
posteth over their Aduertisements of these supposed wrongs offered the Church,
unto his Holiness; In whose Court, and about whose Person, they wanted not
stirring Instruments to exasperate his anger, by other aggravating suggestions
added to the former. The principal Agent that blowed this Fire, is suspected
to be the Cardinal Delphino, one of their own Nobility, who (either to win
in that Court of Rome the credit of a good Churchman, or to breed the more awe
of himself in his own Country, or being (as he is) Bishop of Vicenza, where
the Canon was apprehended, to hold up his own Jurisdiction, with what
prejudice soever of the State where he was born) holds fast as it seems,
the ear of the Pope to his secret insusurrations. And as it usually comes to
pass, that where there is one hole already made, there every small touch will
make the same vvider and tear it out farther: So fell it out in this breach or
contention: for now are the Venetians further catched at, and looked into, for
former offenses against the Church, to make thereby a broader irruption, and
scandal upon them.

First, they are charged with the retention of Decime due unto the Church; and
for their ill affection toward their Clergy in keeping them down generally
as much as may be.

Secondly, they had passed an Act in the Council of the Pregati, whereby is
directly forbidden the leaving of any land to Holy uses; ordering further any
such Legacy to be immediately sold.

Thirdly, the State having in penurious times taken money of certain Churches
and Hospitals, at use of five or six pro Cento, refuses now to restore the
principal, tending that it has been repayed in the very Interest.

These causes added unto the first, and malignantly urged to his Holiness,
were so distastful, and so distempered his affections, as that shortly after,
(having this grudge lying heavy and undigested) about January, in the time of
Marino Grimani then Prince, he commanded the Venetian Ambassador then resident
at Rome, from his presence, forbidding him further access, while the State
which he served stood in terms of contumacie against the Church; And then
with convenient speed, (the sting of this complaint still egging on his
sharpness) he directed unto the Venetians a Monitoriall Breue, (as they call
it) summoning them to obedience, and in defect thereof, menacing
Excommunication of the whole State.

This admonishing Brief was by the Popes Nuntio not only defended and
justified in public, but with his Oratory further recommended, as full of wise
and loving moderation, Since, by giving unto them both fatherly advise, and
respit of repentance, it was rather an Argument of indulgence in his Master,
then of any furious precipitation.

Hereupon Leonardo Donato (now Prince) at 72. years of his age, was presently
elected to go in quality of extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope, of whom
(being ready to depart) the death of the former Prince made a stay, (not as if
so urgent a business of the State, had given way to his private advancement,
but because this accident did bring with it, a necessary excuse of deferring
their answer to the summons, till they had made choice of another Prince,) all
consultations ceasing in the time of the vacancie. Howbeit (this so solemn
Embassage thus accidentally respited) It being thought fit in the mean while,
to apprehend and employ all reasonable means in Rome, by the friends of this
Rebublique, to remove the Popes indignation with convenient lenities; It
proved all of so little effect, that it rather turned into further
exasperation, partly, through the Popes natural tenacitie, in whatsoever he
has once resolved, (which is a note of him in his Court,) and partly, by the
cunning of the first instigators, (who still kept a watch over him in that
business;) but principally, by the fore-expressed causes themselves, which in
their own nature, and pondered according to the grounds of that religion,
does not admit any dispensation in such an occasion, where no qualifying can
be used, without notorious affront and prejudice to the Popes Authority.

Whereupon, (after it was discerned that these cooling mediations by
interceding friends so slenderly prevailed,) The State of Venice and their new
Prince Leonardo Donato, (who as a private man for many years has had great
credit in that State) elected for Embassage toward Rome, the Caualiere Dodo,
whom they furnished and provided with good reasons for the justification of the
State; Namely, That concerning all those four points, wherein they be so
blotted with disobedience toward the Church of Rome, they have sufficient and
justifiable allegations, out of common reason, National right, and privileges
Authentical.

And specially for the first, which seemed to prick the very master vein, by
restraining and correcting the unclean conversation of their licentious brood
of single fornicatours, and was otherwise most incensiue, as most derogatory to
the Popish challenged exemption and pre-eminence. For which were delivered two
reasons: First that some of the Popes predecessors have granted a power unto
them, to proceed according to the form of their Secular Courts against the
Clergy of their own Dominion, In delictis atrocibus. (of which nature these
must needs be accounted) Secondly, that they did not by any their judicial
attaches, or proceedings, inhibite or impeach the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction:
But seeing that their immediate and competent Judges through favors, negligence,
or conniuence, omitted their duties in such criminal prosecutions; that they
were bound, both for the conservation of their State, and by divine Law, not to
leave malefactors unpunished.

This Dodo, whom as a very choice man of great worth and wisdom, they had (as
their manner is) chosen by their balls, to the composing of this business, was
also further instructed in some circumstantiall cariages, As by fair speech of
their professed zeal unto the Church and his Holiness, to assuage his angry
and ouer-vehement intentions; And to find out and pursue any likely means of
saving the Popes reputation, whom they might perceive to be the more stiff
and intractable, because he had proceeded so far already, as that he could
not hansomly make stop or go back.

And lastly, to pass over that impediment and objection, devised by the
Factors and followers of the Pope, obtruding to the Venetians as a president
what they should do, the State of Genua; (Who has lately in diverse things
satisfied his Holiness,) that therein a difference might be sought out, and
insisted upon, between the case of this Common wealth, and that of Genua,
(showing it self to the Sea of Rome so subject and obsequious) which example
the Venetians much stomacked, and are very sensitive of the comparison with
that president.

The Caualiere Dodo, being in readiness to depart for Rome, it was thought fit
to sound first, whether he should be received with all circumstance, according
to the dignity of the State, being afraid of a public scorn, and meaning to
proceed in this business, from point to point very curiously, as
pretermitting no precise regard, And taking assurance either directly from
Rome, of good acceptance in plain delivered terms, or comfortably
presupposing the same by a construction (which might easily take hold of
minds well inclined) because the Pope had since the Monitoriall, sent to them
a congratulatorie Brief (which perhaps was his complementing with the new
Prince,) which they reckoned as some sign of his relenting. They dispatched
Dodo, with opinion that their just Arguments would be allowed of. He had as
Associate in these affairs, the then Ambassador resident, that with the
concurrence of both their aduises and labors, the desired effect might be the
easier attained unto. Notwithstanding all the diligence and forwardness of
both these Ministers, the Pope like to a shrew, the more earnestly that he was
instanced, the more crossely he gave his answers; And in the end became so
stately, as he would endure no more debatings or entreatings, but with a Papal
sternnesse he proceeded to the publishing of his Excommunication against this
whole State, though in the same he made a reservation of seven and twenty days
for repentance.

The Venetians, after notice taken of this extremity, (finding so small
likelihood of reducing the raging passions of the Pope, to such a pacification
as might stand with their contentment and reputation) began to take unto them
such confidence and comfort, as both the goodness of their cause, (which was
nothing else but the execution of Justice) and the honor of their State,
(which has not used to stoop with base obsequiousness) could worthily
inspire them with. Wherein that you may know how their spirits did presently
sparkle, and were set on fire, by the tidings of these fulminations, they
forthwith published in the chief places of the City by sound of Trumpet, a
Proclamation to this effect, That whosoever has received from Rome any Copy of
a Papal Interdict, published there, as well against the Law of God, as against
the honor of this Commonwealth, shall presently render it unto the Council
of Ten, upon pain of death.

Wherein, I pray you, let me make bold to observe unto you by way of a
Parenthesis, (which I have hitherto spared to interpose for fear of
interrupting the contexture of the Story) that this so grave, judicious, and
most advised Senate, desteineth and defaceth the Pope, even for his spiritual
usurpations, by laying upon him the public note of having erred against the
word of God it self, and that in a Consistoriall and Cathedral conclusion (as
the Schoolmen term it) and that they stick not to reward with death the
publishers of the Popes Bull of Interdiction: Wherein, for that (to my
understanding) they do speak verbatim our English Laws, holding consent with
us by the very directions of Reason, I would have our English Catholics (for
by a Popefashion they will needs usurp that name) to know that the King of
Great BRITAIN, and that Nation, has better cause to denounce and execute
death against Offenders in that kind, then the Venetians, formerly, and at all
times obliged to the Laws and government of that Church of Papal superstition.

But I must go on with their other passages and proceedings, which (to be a
true witness unto them) were all in every circumstance very suitable and
approoueable. In the beginning of May, (after mature deliberation, and constant
resolution to uphold the Rights of their Magistracy, together with their right
proceedings, vnculpable, and not subject to any just exception,) they concluded
in Senate, upon the composing and publishing of a Protestation, in answer of
the Popes cursing, or cursed Bull; Which being conceived, and expressed both for
form, and matter, so exquisite, as that any my interpreting, amplifying, or
abreuiating thereof, might diminish or deface the perfection which in it is
native, I do send herewith unto you, truly copied for your more diligent
perusal.

LEONARDO DONATO BY THE GRACE of God Duke of Venice, etc.
To the most Reverend Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, of all our Dominions of
VENICE, And to all Vicars, Abbots, Priors, Rectors of Parish Churches, and
other Prelates Ecclesiastical, Health.
IT has come to our knowledge that the 17. of April last past, by order of
the most holy Father Pope Paul the fifth, was published and affixed in Rome a
certain Bull thundered out against us, our Senate and Dominion, directed to
you, of such Tenor and Contents as therein appears. Whereupon finding our
selves bound to preserve in peace and Tranquillity the State which God has
given us to govern: and to maintain the Authority of a Prince that in
temporal affairs acknowledges no Superior under the Divine Majesty; We by
these our public letters protest before God, and to all the world, that we
have not failed to use all possible means to make his Hol. capable of our most
strong and insoluble Reasons. First, by our Ambassador Lieger with his Hol
Then by our letters, responsiue to Briefes written by him; and finally by a
special Ambassador sent for this very purpose. But finding his Hol. ears shut
unto us, and seeing the foresaid Bull to have been published against the form
of all reason, and contrary to that which the divine Scriptures, the doctrine
of holy Fathers, and the sacred Canons do teach us in prejudice of the secular
Authority given us from God, and of the liberty of our State, with
disturbance of the quiet possession, which by Gods grace our faithful Subjects
under our government hold of their goods, honors and lives, with universal and
grievous scandal of all: We doubt not a whit to hold the foresaid Bull, not
only for unjust and unlawful, but also for annulled and of no value, and so
without force, frustrated, and unlawfully thundered, De facto nullo Iuris ordine
seruato. Wherefore we have reputed it convenient to use against the same such
remedies as our Ancestors and other Sovereign Princes have used with Popes,
that have extended the power given them by God for edification, beyond their
limitts: Especially being persuaded that by your and other our Loyal Subjects,
and by the whole world it shall be so held and reputed: Assuring our selves,
that as you have hitherto attended to the Cure of souls of our faithful
Subjects, and to the Divine Service, which through your diligence flourishes
in this our State no less then in any other, so you will hereafter continue in
the self same pastoral care. It being our most steadfast Resolution to
continue in the holy Catholic and Apostolic faith, and in the observance of
the Holy Roman Church, even as our Predecessors from the beginning of the
foundation of this City till this present by the grace of God have done. And
we will that these our Letters for the understanding of all men be affixed in
the public places of this our City, and so of all other Subject to our
Dominion, Assuring our selves that so manifest a publication will come to the
ears of all such as have had knowledge of the foresaid Bull; and also to the
notice of his Hol. whom we beseech our Lord GOD to inspire that he may
understand the Nullitie of his Bull, and of other his Attempts against us, and
that he taking knowledge of the Justice of our cause, we may be encouraged to
observe our Reverence to the Holy Sea Apostolic, of the which we and our
forefathers, together with this Commonwealth, have been, and will be ever
most devoted.

Given at our Ducall Palace the sixth of May in the fourth Indiction. 1606.
Giacomo Girardo, Secretary.

THis is to be noted, that before the publication of this Protesta, they called
the Popes Nuntio to the College, and gave him knowledge thereof; where it
being pronounced before him, by a Secretary of State Exscripto (as is usual)
he craved a second view thereof, in the next room: which being granted him,
after he had changed countenance at some things much displeasing him, he took
his Priests cap, and striking himself therewith upon the right thigh, brake
forth into these words, Io so che si (o Papa Paulo 5.) che ti vogliono vbidire.

But for a matter of better note, and more memorable, I commend this unto you,
That in the Protesta (as in all other Acts of the State since the said 17. day
of April) there has been seen such unity, not only of Judgment, but even
in passion among them, that one only ball did fail in the whole Senate, which
yet was not in the negative box, but in a box of a newtrall nature,
suspending the assent of the party.

After the solemn publication of this Protesta, the Ambassadors departed on
both sides; The Nuntio first, and with leave demanded and granted, ciuilly and
easily: but the 'Venetian Resident at Rome, was thence sent away with violence.
For the Pope by a Bishop commanded him to be gone, unless he would remain
there in private quality. The Caualiere Dodo was before returned by order from
the State. Their own moderate proceeding with the Nuntio, matched in
comparison with the harsh, and splenetike discharge of their Ambassador,
makes that sending away of him, to be almost as ill taken, by all degrees of
people in Venice, as the very Excommunication it self.

The State here is so settled and animated, as that on all sides, young and old,
rich and poor, Gentlemen and Artificers, are hitherto fully resolute, to
maintain against the Pope their own actions. They consider not only of their
present detriment, in making any disaduantagious, or dishonorable end, but
also of the future consequencies, if they should give head, and addition of
strength to the Ecclesiastical authority, which already seems ouerswolne
and too big, to all the wiser Princes and States of Italy. And besides they
do readily discern, that in this controversy, the Pope will sustain more
loss and shame then they; As was very gravely set forth in a pretty tale,
very pertinently told by a discreet Gentleman, in a deliberation concerning
this business; Who told them, That by the Popes menaces, he was put in mind
of a nephew which he had, who was wont to draw from his brother (being a tender
father) all his satisfactions, by threatening that otherwise he would turn
Friar, or seek his fortune in some strange Countries, or the like: Till one
day lighting on his father in a wrong humor, and swearing, That unless he
might be presently furnished with a good sum of money, (whereof he
pretended want) he would precipitate himself down the stairs; His father put
it to the trial what he would do: but the youth seeing it was now come to the
question of his own safety, went down the stairs very quietly. So, said he,
will the Pope do, notwithstanding this heat of words, and present
distemperature, when he shall come to consider somewhat cooly, that in
proceeding against us, Ginochera il suo and non il nostro. This opinion of his
was much applauded, as very probable, (if the diuulging had not carried the
matter too far, and past returning to second cogitations.)

The very vulgar sort does discoursingly lay forth and discipher the Popes
inconsiderateness in this so hard a course of his injustice. They commemorate
the many binding benefits of their State collated on the Sea of Rome; And
particularly for instance and demonstrance, how much that Church is to them
obliged, (if there were no other testimony) They do in one notable matter of
the triumph which Pope Alexander the third had in this City over the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, both remember the greatness of their own merit, and
exprobrate the inexcusable ingratitude of that See. In this very place, That
Emperor who had chased the Pope out of Rome, and scant left unto his Holiness
any one hole for the Fox to hide his head in, was himself brought, or rather
wrought to so base a degree of humiliation, as that he was first stouped to the
kissing of the Popes toe, and after, his head and neck was trod upon, by
those unholy presuming feet, whilst in a scorning and insulting glory, his
Holiness made bold of this Text, Super aspides and basiliscos ambulabis, and
conculcabis Leones and Dracones. I trust that that sin of the assistance and
adherencie of this Segniory in that shameful trampling upon Imperial
Majesty, has been pardoned, and remains not in any debet unto this day.
They spare not also to make particular reckoning of the great wealth and vast
sums, which by the color of his Ecclesiastical headship is fetched from
them to the Popes Coffers. But especially, they speak of their continuance
from the beginning of the foundation of their City, in the observance of the
Rites and Religion of the Roman Church. By all which and much more, as every
man's fancy or disposition serves him, they do amplify the ingratitude,
injuries and indiscretion of their holy Father.

This matter has stirred up the industry and sharpness of many that were
idle before: The Politiques, how to contriue, capitulate, excuse, delay,
prevent, or circumuent: The Canonists, how to find distinctions for the
Conflict when it comes to Disputation: The Orators, how to declaime
copiously; and the Historians, to report credibly these extreme wrongs: The
Poets, how they may out of their full pens rain forth showers of wit in this
matter: The Divines, how to be converted to a new Religion, which point was
subdivided into one of these two resolutions; either to force their Priests to
say Mass after Excommunication, (as if either the Pope were Nullus, or his
Sentence a Nullitie) or otherwise to pass to the Greek faith, like unto
displaced or discharged servants or soldiers, that upon their cassiering must
seek a new Master or Captain.

There is a general liberty given for divulging of Discourses and
Translations; amongst which is put in print the judgment of Gerson the
Chancellor of Paris, upon the inualiditie of the Popes Excommunications, and
some such like considerations of Saint Bernard to that purpose. For the more
free publishing of which and the like Treatises, the Inquisition has been
suspended by particular Warrant of the State; And when once the fludgates were
thus set open to all such writers, as heretofore were pent and restrained, to
deliver freely to the world, either defensive matter, in justification of this
cause, or offensive taxings, to blemish and blame the Pope for his temeritie;
It is strange to see what sundry sorts of gybing and biting Pasquils were let
fly abroad in derision of his Holiness. But, amongst the works Apologeticall
sagely and iudiciously written, Friar Paulo has in a set Treatise composed by
him, not only defended the Venetians from this Excommunication and demands,
but also in many points lessened the Authority of the Pope, by sound
allegations, and by the proof of privileges appertaining of right and in
dignity unto the State: whom it is said, that this Commonwealth has rewarded
for his labor with a good pension yearly during life. And I have likewise met
with another intelligence, That there is on the other side made out a secret
process against him, by the Church, for his infidelity and treachery therein.
Nay, a later news has here arrived, That this Friar Paulo has been since
solemnly (by his image or picture) burned at Rome, and reproched also by a
scornful appellation of a mezo Lutherano; Such and so hot a fire of the
Popes wrath, has blazed forth against him. But the Venetians, on the other
side, (to uphold him in comfort, and make him amends in glory,) have out of
their grace and contemplation of his well deserving, dignified him with a
better chosen title of Theologo designato; Expressing thereby the nature of his
merit to have been this, Even the opening unto their darkened understandings,
some necessary trueths in Divinity, tending to the discovery of the false
pretenses of the Romish Supremacy. This high Attribute, from so Judicious and
Illustrious a Senate, is (in the stead of his image reported to have been
consumed with flames) like to a goodly or gilded statue, which shall preserve
his name and memory, in all succeeding times.

It is to be remembered, that the Popes Interdict, did prohibit all the
Religious to celebrate divine Service, or to exercise any Ministerial function
among the Venetians, whilst they persisted in their contumacie. And the Pope
by further order called away the Jesuits, Theatines, and Capuchines, from among
them, as if he meant to fire them all when he had once reserved or preserved
them. The Pope conceived (though in deed he was deceived) that no sooner
should his Papal indignation, and the terrors of his Excommunications be
spread abroad, but that the people would have presently rebelled, and the
Churchmen have straight retired themselves. But the Venetians making a
concurrence of their Fortitude and Wisdom, to maintain the uprightness of
their Justice, and nothing doubting of the blessing and operation of Gods
Spirit, to give thereunto answerable success, Decreed and commmanded sub poena
furcae, as they would answer it at the gallous, that no Ecclesiastical
persons should relinquish or desist from his charge or attendance at the Altar,
or should depart out of the dominions of the Segniory without order or leave.
Whereby in plain truth they tread our steps, by joining unto Principality
the Supremacy over persons Ecclesiastical.

They caused also to appear before them all the Priors of Parishes, and
Superiors of Cloisters, to receive of them their promise of faith. The Friars
of S. George have presented their Reuenew, which is of good value, to the
service of the Prince. Others have answered, That howsoever they have had their
habit from the Pope, their flesh put them in mind of an other duty, and
clapping their hands upon their naked arms, testified that they were disposed
to live and die in the service of S. Mark, and the State of their Country.

The Prior of Saint Martins, hearing the Proclamation before inhibiting the
hanging up of Bulls upon the Church, and commanding the delivery of them to the
Council of Ten, (if may should be found,) said he had rather be
excommunicated twelve years, then hang half an hour. Others have protested,
that seeing they find the difference betwixt the Segniorie and the Pope, to be
for matters only of Jurisdiction, and that the Pope seeks his particular
profit, and not that of JESUS CHRIST, they be resolved to adventure all with
their uttermost powers and constancy, under the obedience of the Common wealth.

Thus you see the unanimous and cheerful resolution, as well of
Ecclesiastical as Secular, and generally of the whole Republike, to employ
their goods and life, to maintain their liberty, and approve their fidelity,
against the unjust, and haughty pretenses of the Pope. And the Segniorie uses
all diligence possible, to keep the people immovable in so godly and blessed
inspirations.

Nevertheless, certain orders of their Churchmen are hence departed, The
Theatines, and Capuchines, by license and voluntary relinquishment. The Jesuits
were the first that did begin to swarm, and seek further for a new hiue, but
they were sent away by course of expulsion, and open banishment out of the
whole dominion, and that by a special decree, not so much for refusing to
continue the sacrifice of the Altar, (which at the first they had given some
hope that they would do notwithstanding the Popes Interdict, unto whom they
profess to be as true and helpful as his very life blood,) as for other
weighty Imputations, And among the rest, for the dangerous abuse of that great
instrument of State, Auricular confession. And although they have been before
banished out of diverse other Countries by Acts of Parliament, (being such, as
wheresoever they come will touch the quick and eat to the core) yet surely,
never were they from any place discarded or thrown out with more resolution
and contumely then from hence. They were suffered to carry with them only
their Quotidian habit and Breuiaries, cum viatico to support their necessities
in their traueile. There was an inuentory taken by an under Secretary and
Commendatore, of the goods left behind them, and seized upon by the State,
rather for curiosities sake, to know what they had gathered, then for any
meaning that the State has ever to be accountable for any part thereof. The
value whereof in certainty of sum, if you expect I should relate, I answer
they met with a concealment, and so it is used, being a reserved secret not
yet made known: but if they have kept their vow of poverty, as regularly as
the rest of their Society does in other places, you may well guess that they
were in that point no more beggars, then in their other rule or vow of
chastity they be over honest.

In which search have bin discovered two memorable things: First a Scrinio (as
they call it here) with partitions of their addresses to and from all parts, As
England, France, Spain, Flaunders, Germany, Poland, Russia, etc. with
subdiuisions also of the Provinces into Towns, as London, Paris, Lions, Rome
etc. And in this Scrinio, they had lest rather through vanity, then have, a
great and incredible heap of the very ashes and tynder of their dispatches.
The other was an artificial furnace, such as the Italian Goldsmithes do use
for the dissoluing of gold and silver, which was brought into the Council of
Ten, and has bred much discourse; the best opinion being, that it was to
melt the chains, rings, and jewels which they got from Gentlewomen, and so
(Mutata specie) to put them away in Bullion.

Now, before their going, one of them reckoning himself the principallest,
would needs also show himself the boldest: for having obtained a private
access unto the Prince, made offer unto him, of interposing his Society, for
the reconcilement of the Pope. Whereunto he received from the Prince this
Noble answer, That the State of Venice had never before used such instruments,
and would not now begin, And therefore he willed him, to forbear the
employment of themselves, either much or little, in this matter, and rather to
spend their time, in considering that they had bin already too busy in the
world.

Me thinks I hear him further tell them, that they might better bestow
themselves in heavenly Meditations, then in Negociations with States, and that
they should rather abound in spiritual contemplation, enclosed in Scrinio
pectoris, then in such entercoursing traffic about secular business,
wherewith their Scrinio of enterchanged aduertisements was so fully fraught.
Lastly, that they should rather have had melting and relenting hearts to power
out fountains of tears for the sins and errors of the people, than those
melting furnaces to convert their fraudulently extorted rings or chains into
wedges of gold: Therefore be packing hence you practisers of iniquity, and
proud Politicians that endeavor the rearing up of your own greatness, with
the ruins of your Country that has fostered you, shall no more claspe about
this flourishing tree to raise and increase your own faction, by pinching and
wronging the stock whereby you be supported.

Since their departure many things have been proposed for their perpetual
exclusion, as the placing of other Religious in their College, the deprivation
and loss of Nobility to him that should ever speak in favor of them, and
lastly, to raze the said College and convert it to civil uses. What course
herein will be held, it is as yet undecided: but on all sides, the State
reckons it self well rid of such pernicious Statists, that be the
Enginers and Pioners for the Pope, working upon, and against all, Princes and
States, with their practicing plots, to bring them to their, either submission
or subversion, and their Master to his supremest exaltation.

Thus have they let the Kytes fly, and I trust they will so destroy their
nests, as that they may sooner make their flights to the furthest Indians,
(there amongst these Savages to practice their extreme savageness, whereof
the said Indians, have already taken a sour taste) then to nestle, or to be
nouseled any more in this Region. And let us English also make hereof this use
and observance, That if the Venetians (clad in the same livery of Religion)
having not any direct and express particularities of their treasonable
complottings to accuse them of, yet have judged their very profession, and the
generality of their dealings, not agreeable or sufferable in a well instituted
Common wealth; How much more are we bound by the Law of Nature and Nations,
with all care and providence to seek to expel, abandon, and keep out such
pernicious instruments, whom we have in all our trials of any Treason, from
time to time, expressly proved to have been the seed-sowers, and the firebrands
of all contrived and intended mischiefs? Therefore Exeat ex vrbe Catilina: For
we fear not so much the Popes open hostility, as we do the ensnarings and
circumuentings by secret practices. He cannot gain from us by any forcible
means, so much as the worst hair upon the body of any Subject; Then let him
not by the conueyance of his poison, (through these Snakes) into the bosoms of
our people, bereave our body Politic of so many worthy members, by alienating
their hearts from their sincere obedience.

But left you may tell me, that my passions make me to forget my passages for
orderly proceeding in this Relation, I return to the declaring of that which
remains, which is the Civil and military provisions of this Segniorie. They
have been here advertised by good intelligence, that the Pope is preparing of
Forces, and seeking confederates, to tame their contemptuous insolences (as he
terms it) purposing, if he cannot bring them to their former subjection, to
bring upon them vnexorable War, and merciless diuastation. Therefore out of
their prudencie, they have also inclined their cares to the like courses of
preparation. Some offers of aid and adherencie have been made unto them, by
their confederate Princes, by the mouth of Ambassadors there resiant, whether
seriously and by Commission, or for fashion and complementally, I think they
can scant tell: But they go on confidently, and with good conceit of their
own strength. There is a General made by Sea, and A Prouiditore de terra
ferma, accompanied with Lieutenants general of the Italian foot and horse.
Into several Towns are assigned the principal leaders of experience under
their pay, especially in such places as frontire Milan, or confine with the
Ferrareszes. Thirty new Governors of Galleyes have been chosen. The
principal Towns and Communities assured by a letter of solemn tenor, drawn
by the Prince himself. A Gentleman and Citizen ballited here in every
contrada, by whom twenty fiuemore are to be chosen against sudden
casualties, that might happen in the night in this seat of their Dominion.
Finally they seem so excited in courage and confidence, as if they even longed
to pull him out of his Chair, whom they have already cast out of their hearts,
and as if they were no less resolute to be revenged of him, then he was
proudly unjust to offend them.

And howsoever in the dependencie of this business, many things have been done
here prouisionally, some by advise, some in distemper, some in earnest, some in
sport, some respectively, some with contempt; yet has nothing hitherto been
discerned to be done in fear: Having carried every circumstance, (if my weak
capacity may presume to censure so grave a State) with most exemplar wisdom
and magnanimity, that we may conceive hope, that GOD will by such beginnings,
open an entrance for his truth to get in to them, that have long slept in
error and ease.

To pass on by following the tract of this business so far as we find the
same to have been driven, I must tell you of another chief Actor that has
stepped on the Stage to show himself in this Scene. It seemed fit to add
encouragement unto his Holiness, and to hold him on in the course of his
former feruencie, whereupon sundry of his Cardinals, and other great Clearkes
attending about him, with much vehemency incited him to an unrelenting
constancy against the uncomfortable Venetians. Among whom Cardinal Baronius, a
principal man, of great name and note in that Court, addressed unto the Pope
his hortatory letters in that behalf: whereof (for that I trust and intend
shortly to send the same unto you) I will forbear to rehearse the particular
and regardable points: Only that you may know it by a true mark wheresoever
you may otherwise fortune to see it, you shall have thereof the first and the
last words; wherein if you do find sound Divinity, and Texts of Scripture
well applied, know that a Cardinal is the Author, who perhaps has a kind of
copartnership with the Pope in that prerogative of never erring. It begins
thus: Duplex est, beat Pater, ministerium Petri; Pascere and occidere. Dixit
enim ad eum Dominus, Pasce oues meas: audiuitque e coelo, Occide and manduca.
The ministry of Peter, holy Father, is of two sorts; To Feed and to Kill. For
the Lord said unto him, Feed my sheep: and he heard from heaven, Kill and
eat. From Occidere, that is, Slaying or killing, etc. he infers the Popes
power of Excommunication: how strangely or streiningly, let the Divines judge:
I promised you only a narration, and therefore will not be bold in any
refutation. It concludes thus, Memor esto te in Ecclesia positum esse in
Petram, in quam omnes qui offendunt, confringentur. Remember thy self to be
placed in the Church as a Rock, against the which whosoever rusheth, shall be
broken to pieces. Howsoever this making of the Pope a Petra, be much beyond
their former titles of deriuation from Petrus, yet that application or rather
amplification, served well for an apt persuasion, to keep the Pope to an
vnfainting resolution.

How far this Letter, or other the like incensings, have carried the Pope in his
inte^tions of holding his hardest hand, or of streyning the strength of his
arm against this Segniorie, it is not readily to be affirmed: but this I can
further advertise you of, that the seven and twentieth day of respite given to
the Venetians for to return into their bonds of obedience, by giving to his
Holiness some satisfaction, expired on Whitsunsunday, and that it was then
expected, that the Pope on the Monday following, would have performed his
black ceremonies belonging to the actual fulmination of his Interdict before
mentioned. But there was Nullus strepitus, and nihil turbarum, no thing was
done in that business, in so much as (the expectation of people being
frustrated by such omission) it occasioned much diversity of voice and rumor,
according to the many sundry conjectures made thereof. Some were of opinion,
that his Holiness (with a kind of faynting) was content to have all to stand at
a stay, till he could have some agreeable means offered, for cleanly avoiding
of the uttermost extremities. Some thought that he would first consider of,
and prepare his helps and advantages, (which might concern him to put in
readiness,) and so back his formalities with substantial provision. Others,
whether to save the Popes credit, or out of their knowledge and experience in
the like causes, affirmed, that any further act on the Popes part was
unnecessary, since the first denunciation or promulgation of the said Interdict,
stands of it self in sufficient force: And that, because the Venetians took
no hold of the favor aforesaid, granted unto them by way of reservation of
the seven and twenty days, they remained now utterly excluded from all grace,
and were actually under the curse.

Thus this present June stands the state of this business, more in
expectation and preparation, then as yet in any hostile action, and without any
on either side, either discernable yielding, or open pursuit, The Venetians
attending in readiness what further storm his Holiness out of the thick and
black cloud of his displeasure will power forth upon them: And the Pope eagerly
looking, that the beasts of the Forest will tremble when the Lion roreth.
Among the other neighbors that be lookers on, some perhaps are setters on, to
increase the controversy; others gazers on, keeping themselves in a direct
neutrality; some it much concerns to stop the course of this contention; some
with hollow intentions may plot on their own drifts; All, though they differ
in their particular affections or cariages, yet concur in admiration of this
accident, with a discerning of the finger of God and his divine providence, not
to be penetrated into by our humane imbecillitie.

But what will be the issue and event of this great stir, it is only known
to him, who is the first stirrer of all causes, and unto whose fore-concluded
ends, all the drifts and actions of men are but subordinate. Yet for that it
is a custom in humane reason to conjecture probably, where it cannot define a
certainty; I will not stick to acquaint you with the Judgments of the wiser
and most experienced men, that by precogitation do discourse the success of
this business. Some think that the Pope will first yield, when he shall find
that he has intricated himsel^e into a trouble, which brings unto him
assured loss, and is not to be pursued without extreme cost. Others, that the
Venetians will be easily persuaded to submit unto the Pope, and return into his
bosom for grace, since they before so effectually labored their reconcilement,
and have not yet disseuered their Judgments in the questions of Religion. Some
are of opinion, that they may be accorded by this middle course, that the Pope
may grant one thing, and they agree to an other, by way of permutation; that so
each of them having in some sort their minds, they may apprehend a satisfaction
in part, to be accepted for the whole. Some argue that the troubles of Hungary
will call the Popes considerations that way, being arrived to a great
desperation and insolency in their rebellious demands. Most men do directly
think, that it will finally resolve into a Schism, because it cannot well be
discerned, how either party can give ground or relent, without disparaging or
abasing of their estimation. Some of more piercing insight, and expert
knowledge of courses usual at such times, do doubt that in conclusion it will
prove nothing but the further in riching of a Popes Nephew, or one of his
brothers, or of some vehement Cardinal, for working of this same feate of
flexibilitie, in the Popes stiff conceit and dislike of the Venetians. Others
do contemplate aforehand the sedulitie and devotion of many well affected,
(though supersticiously zealous) who doubtless will not be wanting with any
their ardencie, to compose this controversy, were it but either for fear,
lest the Turk do take occasion by such dissentions to advantage and advance
himself in Christendom, or for shame, that we whom they account so vilely of,
should rejoice to behold their ruinating contentions among themselves.

If you give me leave to tell what I think, Truly if the Pope should be so
peremptory with the Venetians, as he has been evermore maliciously busy
with us in England (where yet his Authority has so long been out of date)
he would make short work with them. He would give away their Lands and
Territories unto some high Potentate, (that must fight the Popes battles) who
with cruel incursions and Invasions, even by the sword and Conquests, shall
spoil and subdue them, till they fall on their knees for his Fatherly
compassion. And may he not justify his so doing? Be they not Excommunicate?
and so consequently to be executed and prosecuted by the Secular arm, which it
shall please his Holiness to implore or employ? (Wherein certainly as a
Secular prince himself, he is likely to put in also his arm or foot among
them;) Nay, must not then the Leaguers by the oath of Trent combine their whole
powers against the denounced enemies of the Church? If Venice now had been in
his regiment Monarchical, under the rule of one absolute King, He should have
been sure to have had good store of bad practizers, upon his person and against
his life; And perhaps (for ought that I know,) such particular adventurers,
authorized in such Actions by their dismission from obedience, and incitation
to suppress their Sovereign, may draw their warrants from this title of
Seculare brachium, imployable at the Popes call: But where there be so many
Senatoriall governors, they can hardly be at once surprised with such hidden
treacheries, if they can but take warning from us, to prevent the danger of The
vault Treason.

To prosecute this Theme, What the Pope may do in his malice, let us out of
our feeling be still the exemplary instance. Can the Pope in Venice, where his
doctrine is wholly received, and where he has so long been an adored Idol,
make no side or faction to raise among them seditions vprores and
insurrections? England is taught by experience what he can do, where being (I
say not a stranger, but) an anowed enemy, yet has he still enterprised to
make a part, for the stirring of tumults and Commotions; And has all this been
done against us to regaine England so far off? And will he sleep or let slip
any opportunity to recall, recover, or recommand Venice? Well, if his heart or
his means do not serve him, to follow them with enforcements of fierceness,
Do you think that he will not as easily become a Fox to overtake them with
kindness, as he would have played the Lion by terrors and compulsion? Has he
in England (by so many fawnings and deprecations) sought to draw us again into
his Imbracements, that are divided from him by a broad sea of difference in
many points of Religion? And will he not in the cause of Venice, which has so
long been his darling, and as yet but by one parting channel disseuered,
(which may easily be ouerstridden) unbend his brow from his heavy frown, and
turn again his appeased countenance? O that the Honorably minded Venetians
would put him to it, and try his disgestion! That they would hold themselves
to their freedom, and shake off his shakels! If he do but let it be a
question till it be studied and looked into in Venice, it will assuredly breed
more disciples against him in one year, then twenty successiue popes shall be
able to weed out.

I hope it has already even in this course of a Table talk, and by the
defensive proceedings which necessity has constrained, so fastened in his mind
a corrasiue, as (considering the place) he may for ever complain of an Ulcer
in his pretended Monarchy; Then have not I reason to suppose, that he does
already even longingly wish a kind and well formed reconcilement?

The matter is, how to work his purpose handsomely by some cleanly carriage,
As where his own desires importune him to concluding terms, there under hand
to procure himself to be much importuned.

I have very lately heard, that there is a French Cardinal newly come to Rome,
to bestow his labor and love in the according of these variances. What the
success thereof will be, we must expect to hear hereafter: only my conceit
is, that no man of any indifferent discerning, can be so simple as not to
believe, that all this so rough and high blowing contention, will well enough
be on the Popes part quieted and accommodated. Only, it concerns us all, for
the honor and love of the truth, unfeignedly to wish, that the eyes and hearts
of the renowned Venetians, may by the touch of Gods finger be opened wider, to
let in the Lord of glory, bringing in his train his truth and righteousness;
and that their hands and puissance may be so strengthened with an
extraordinary addition of valor, as that they may from that nooke or corner of
Italy, become as it were Gods harbengers to make way for him throughout that
goodly country, to the suppression and demolishing of that so intolerable
usurpation. Which though we may rather wish then hope for; yet respecting his
providence in these beginnings, we may with erected minds attend the
manifestation of his further ordinance, in the event which his wisdom and
Justice shall bring forth.

And to suckle up our hopes herein, with the opinion (at the least) of
possibility, if not of better likelihoods, let England be a comfortable
Instance, to cherish and uphold our thoughts from despairing of a successful
issue to the Venetians also. How many years, or rather ages, was England as it
were in labor of this truth, That the Pope had no right in this kingdom to
order, govern, command, or censure any causes or persons, Civil or
Ecclesiastical? How many perilous throws has she felt in her womb and
bowels to bring forth this child? what, how many, and how mighty practices
have been contrived to have destroyed this child within her belly, that it
might never have seen the light? It is plainly and fully to be proved by many
ancient Records, whereof some are registered in the Courts of Law, (of the which
that learned Knight Sir Edward Coke Attorney general to his Majesty, has made
an exact and most judicial Collection) some be remaining in the Tower, as Acts
and signitures of Princes, or of the high Court of Parliament, some are kept in
Archiuis of our Spiritual Courts, which also affoordeth us some vestigia
pristinae libertatis.

That this Nation almost at all times has in some measure or other sought to
deliver into the world this her conception, (that has lived and grown great
within her) against the Popes encrochings and intrusions into this Kingdom,
with his unwarranted and unlimited Supremacy; If you ask me why, or how the
sight and public appearance of this Truth, (like unto the birth of a child)
was so long deferred and hindered: First, you must know that it is a Lions
whelpe, and nihil magnum subito nascitur: next, the Midwife TIME served not nor
lent not sufficing aid; but chiefly, the great red Dragon, that with his tail
drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, Apoc. 12.
stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, to devour her child
when she had brought it forth. For let this be observed as a probatum est;
This Kingdom did never make or enact any Law so forcible and full against the
Pope or See of Rome touching any such their usurped powers or pretended rights,
whereof the edge and point was not straight broken or blunted, by a Counter-law
made at Rome, That whosoever should prosecute any of those Laws to execution,
should be and remain under the heauiest curse of their greatest
Excommunication. Whereupon, the danger of the souls damnation (whereof those
times of blindness were so sensitive and fearful) prevailed more to
suppress and annihilate all such Statutes giving them no effect, (as if they
had never ben borne) then any other respects of duty, either to the truth or
to our Country, could give them life or strength. But that I may show you
some evidence for the proof of that which I have affirmed, I will (so far as
my memory, wanting at this present my larger notes, can do his office) give
you a discerning taste of this truth, concerning Englands continued claim of
her own Imperial rights, and her many provisions, decrees, and
consultations, tending to the renunciation or abdication of any the Popes
Interest or intermedlings in England.

In the 14. year of K. H. 1. the Popes Authority was so little esteemed in
England, as that it was come to that pass, that no persons were permitted to
appeal to Rome in cases of Controversy. Their Synods and Councels about
Ecclesiastical affairs were kept, without seeking any his license or consent:
And they would not obey such Legates as he sent, nor come to the Conuocations
which they held.

In the 31. year of K. H 3. The Pope understanding that diverse rich beneficed
men in England died Intestate, he ordained a Decree, That the goods of any
Spiritual persons dying Intestate, should remain to the Pope: which Decree
(purporting the Popes oppression in prejudice of this Realm and the suruiuing
friends of the deceased) the King in no sort would suffer to take place: And
the same King by his Letter Inhibitorie did flatly forbid a talage of the
Clergy, which the Pope about that time had required.

In the 30. of E. 1. the Popes Peter Pence, being not his due, but rather the
King of Englands Alms, were denied to the Pope.

In the 17. year of K Edw. 3. the Commons pray the Kings assent, to banish the
Popes power quite out of England. And in the same year upon the Popes
intruding of himself to make a peace between the King, and France, King Ed.
sent him word, That if he would mediate between them as a friend, he would
hear him; but in no sort if he intermeddle as a Judge.

In the 50. of E. 3. the Commons complain, that all the miseries of the
Kingdom come by the Popes usurpation; beseeching the King (this being the 50.
and the Iubile year of his Reign) that he would join with them to cast him
out, for that he does not pasture but pill Gods sheep.

In the times of E. 3. R. 2. H 4. and H. 5. sundry Statutes were made against
then that out of the Court of Rome obtain or pursue any personal Citations
against the King or any of his Subjects, or that procure from thence any
impetrations and provisions of Benefices and offices of holy Church. And for
that (as I before declared) the Pope on the other side, opposed to these
Statutes his Interdicts and sentences of Excommunication against the obseruers
of the same: In the 13. year of R. 2. the said Excommunications also are so
far disauowed, as that for the maintenance of the Liberties of the Kingdom,
and the dignity of the State, it was ordained, That if any did bring or send
within this Realm, any summons, sentence, or excommunication against any
person, for the cause of making motion, assent, or execution of the said
Statute of Prouisors, he shall be arrested, imprisoned, and forfeit all his
Lands and Tenements, goods and cattels for ever: and moreover incur the pain
of life and member: And a Prelate making execution of such summons or sentence,
to forfeit into the Kings hands all his Temporalties. Nevertheless, for a long
space after (whether by reason of our continual civil broils in England,
which scant affourded any leisure of thinking, much less of prosecuting upon
this cause, or for that the superstitious ignorance of those times did entangle
or rather captiuate the consciences of our people) this point of the rights
appertaining and incident unto the Royal power and Majesty of this Imperial
Crown, and of the Popes unlawful oppressions and usurpations within this
Land, lay asleep, was silenced, and suffered open wrong, until the latter
days of K. H. 8. who, instructing himself by the conferences and disputations
of his learnedest Divines, and by the advice and assent of the whole State
assembled in Parliament, fully and finally decided this question, with the
absolute exclusion and extermination for ever out of this Realm and the
Dominions thereof, of any the Popes Authority and Jurisdiction.

Thus has God his prefixed periods for the producing at the last of that
truth which he often suffers his Church to be long in travail of: Then why
should not we likewise retain some comfortable conceits of Gods accomplishing
and bringing to an happy effect of that work in the Venetian State, (though
sensim and gradatim) whereof he has, of his providence and goodness (and by
occasions which for the justice thereof may expect his blessings) begun and
laid so likely groundworkes?

ANd now (my good friend,) for a closing conclusion to this my ouerlong letter,
(as remembering wherefore I ted this tale) Lend me a little more of your gentle
patience, whilst I draw out of the fresh remembrance of this Relation, some
satisfactory use, for the justification of the National Laws of England, and
the Justice of our Magistracy, from the scandalous imputation of cruelty, in
our prosecutions against our professed Adversaries transgressing our Political
and poenall Ordinances. Which I will comprise in a comparison between our
English proceedings, with these of the Venetians: not intending at this time to
sort out for them any other example or presedent, then what I here have already
with my best judgment well observed, knowing, that if I should post through
France, Spain, Italy, and all Germany, to collect proofs and demonstrations
to that purpose, it would be as to me a labor supererogatory, so to them (whom
nothing will satisfy) like a charm to a deaf Adder.

It cannot be obscure to the whole world, That our Royal kingdom has for
many years together, quite expelled the Pope with his Supremacy and
superstition, where the Venetians (for any thing yet of public note) have not
fallen from him in any point of Religion, no not disauowed his governance or
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, but only excepted against his intrusion
into the right of their own Jurisdiction, in causes on their part justifiable
by all humane and Divine rules. Yet have they resolved upon, and pursued
courses, no whit inferior in rigor and extremity, to the sharpest Laws made
with us, in so long a time, and after so manifold and violent occasions. Yea,
though the matter concerned us in the deepest degree, even of (vter esset and
vter imperaret both) our regal and Imperial rights lying at the stake, in
conflict with the Papal usurpations, and our Religion, Peace, Justice and
tranquillity, being continually infested by the positions, oppositions,
practices, and injuries of the Romish faction.

You see the Commands, and prohibitings of the Venetians, to be all accompanied
with the terrors of death, which is vltimum in malis. I do not tax or dislike
this their seeming austeritie: But I infer, that as necessity coacteth them
to be severe, so that our Laws being enforced from us by the like coaction,
have also the like defense of natural reason and primative Justice, in the
righteous directions whereof they and we do agreeingly concur. What do you
think they would do, if they had once made a general revolt or defection
from the Pope, in all the controuersed Articles of difference? Can you imagine,
that beginning thus roundly, they would not against their adverse part, and in
the behalf of the States quietness and preservation, proceed proportionably?
As the business now stands, I make no question, but that in case that any
one Venetian should be found to oppose against the current or stream wherein
they be now carried, he should so be suncke and confounded, as never to see the
Sun again.

In one point I must confess they have stepped further then we, (yet they may
hold it to be Justice too, that the professors of poverty should be forced to
poverty) We have never used against any Subjects such seazures and
confiscations of their goods, neither exiling of them out of their native
Countries, without orderly and iuridicall Trials and Conuictions.
Nevertheless, I condemn it not, that either fear of danger makes them
sensitive, or that appearance of danger be met withal by wise prevention: but
if our Governors should drive the wheels of Justice so furiously, as to
possess and take from every dangerous or suspected Subject his whole Estate,
thereby stripping and clipping him first, and then to send away his body to
seek his heart beyond the Seas, whither himself before had sent it; How
clamorously, and with what horrible yellings would our Enemies cry shame and
vengeance upon us all?

The truth is, That there is no State or Body politic whatsoever, that will
not in very sense of Nature seek their best means against repugnant and
sicknesse-breeding humors, and either to reduce them to amendment, if it may
be, or to rid them away by eiection when that cannot be hoped. And therefore
(howsoever we may embrace rather the sweet and well contenting motions of
mercy, for which princes are blessed) let us give leave to the Venetians (in
imitatio^ of their pattern the ancient Rome) to restrain by provisions, that
such detected and detested enemies of the State, as the Jesuits are, should
live amongst them, and that ad confirmandam audaciam, yea that they should
there, designare oculis ad interitum, or beyond all this, to bring in into
their very bowels a Troiane horse, with his belly full of treasons, murders,
and all villainies, to be vnloden and let loose among them, for their final
ruin and confusion.

In England, for that first the grave aduisednesse of the whole State in their
great Assemblies of Parliament, is but to give support to Justice; And next,
as well the Majesty of our dread Sovereign, who, to his Diadem of Dignity,
unseparably conioyneth the Scepter of his Justice; as also the true Nobility
of so wise and Honorable Counselors, who does make public Justice their
primum in intention: all true hearted Subjects will rest indubitably satisfied
of the integrity, equity, and uprightness of that Government. And for other
carping reproouers, or barking slanderers, let us obfirmare mentes, that whom
we cannot content with honest reason, them we may contemn with a disdaining
confidence.

Here I will end this thread, which I fear I have drawn out in length over
tediously: I do crave your well accepting courtesy to dispense therewith: And
I further promise you, that if you please to vouchsafe the return of some
endeavors on your part concerning the new arising occurrences within your
discovery, you shall not fail to be plied still in this sort with more of my
love and diligence.

THE ANSWER OF AN ITALIAN Dor. of Divinity, unto a Letter written by a friend
of his, concerning the Briefs of Pope Paulus 5. his censure published against
the Venetians; And upon the Nullitie thereof: Drawn out of the Holy
Scriptures, the Fathers, and the Catholic Doctors. Translated out of the
Italian tongue.
MOst reverend Sir, I have read your Letter, and do not a little wonder, that
when I was wont always to receive from you the first aduertisements of all
occurrents (especially when there was cause to ask my opinion in them,) Now
when so many matters of greatest importance are current in your City, you have
been the last man that certified me thereof. And yet you require me to set
down my opinion upon these Briefs published against your Common wealth, and
upon the protestation of the nullitie and inualiditie of the same, made for the
defense and maintenance of their reasons.

Albeit I know well the causes of this your slackenesse, and may attribute it
to the difficulty of the matter: though I know not what scruple sticks most in
your mind; yet I will excuse you by reason of the extraordinary business you
allege, and satisfy you in this as I have been wont to do. And I hope to
do it with that speed which you desire, I being prepared thereunto by the
exact consideration and study which I have bestowed in that matter already.

I say then (if I understand it aright) that your desire is, to know if the
censures published by Pope Paulus Quintus against the Segnior of Venice, be
void and of no force, as is declared in their protestations; that they being
so, you may celebrate the Sacraments, and do your Offices in your Churches, as
you did before the publication of the said censures, without any scruple of
Conscience.

To answer then plainly and in order to these your requests, I will include
whatsoever may be said in that matter, in Eight propositions. The doctrine
whereof as it shall be far from faction, or flattery, so shall it be founded
upon the holy Scriptures, the sayings and expositions of the Fathers, and upon
the strongest force of truth and reason, that no man but upon peevishness
shall dare to contradict it.

The first Proposition.
THe power that Secular Princes have, and the Pope also (as a temporal Prince
over the States and Provinces which he possesses) is granted unto them
immediately from God without any exception.

For the understanding and cleerenesse of this Proposition, it must be
considered, that Lordship and servitude wrs brought in by the Law of Nations.
The command of the Prince and obedience of the Subject, is by four means;
that is, by Election, by Inheritance, by Gift, or by right of War: So that
all Princes which by any of these four means ever have been, or now are
placed in the Throne of Principality, are just and lawful Lords: those, I
say, which have Authority from God to command, to make Laws, to exact
Tribute, to Judge, and to punish Subjects, without any exception.

The Doctrine is not mine, but the Apostle Saint Paul's in the Epistle to the
Romans, Chap. 13. yea it is the holy Ghosts doctrine, which speaks with his
mouth, and writes with his pen, whose words are these, Omnis anima subdita
sit potestatibus sublimioribus, nam nulla potestas, etc. Let every soul submit
it self to the authority of the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God. Saint Chrysostom expounding this place, says, The Apostle does this to
show that Christ brought not in his Laws to overthrow Policy, but to give it
a better institution, showing that this is a commandment to all both Clergy
and Laity, which he declares in the beginning, saying, Omnis anima
potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit, etiamsi Apostolus, Euangelista,
Propheta, aut quisquis tandem fuerit: Let every soul be subject to higher
powers, whether he be Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, or whosoever. And for all
that does not this subjection subvert piety. Whereupon in the old Law,
although the Levites had a high Priest that was Aaron; yet in temporal things,
causes, and judgments, they were subject to Moses their temporal Prince, as
Couuarruuias proves, Cap. 31. quaest. prateca. Nu. 3. And in the Primitive
Church there was no difference of Tribunal or Judgment seat: for Justinian
the Emperor was the first which at the request of the Bishop of Constantinople
granted, that the Clergy in Civil causes might be judged by their own
Prelates, without prejudice notwithstanding to himself. In which case, and in
all criminal faults he left it so that the Clergy should be subject to the
Prince and to the Ministers of the Prince temporal, as is plainly to be read
Novel. Constitu. 85.

Neither because Constantine the Great said to some Ecclesiastical persons
presented unto him, Vos a nemine iudicari potestis, quia ad Dei iudicium
reseruamini, as Gratian writes, Cap. 12. quaest. 1. Can it be gathered that
they be not subject to secular Princes? for this was an excess of that Emperor
to show himself toward the Church benign and deuote. But it was not because
he thought so indeed: for if he had said true, they could not be judged by
Prelates neither, the words being ad Dei iudicium, etc. which would be a
grievous error.

The Clergy then as well as the Laity (de iure diuino) are subject to the
secular Prince. Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit; the reason
is, that as none is excepted from the obedience he owes to God, so he cannot
be excepted from the obedience which is due to the Prince: For as the Apostle
adds, Omnis potestas est a Deo, for which Kings and Secular Princes by the
Prophet David are called Gods. Deus stetit in Synagoga Deorum, in medio autem
Deos dijudicat: for as King Iosaphat declares, Lib. 2. Paralip. Cap. 19. The
Secular Judges, Non hominum, sed Dei iudicia exercent.

The same place Christ cites in Saint John, Cap. 10. and confirms, that the
name of Gods belongs unto them. Si illos dixit Deos ad quos sermo Dei factus
est, as Bellarm. learnedly notes, Cap. 3. Lib. de Laicis.

The Apostle goes forward and says, Qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi
resistit: behold here the Authority that Princes have to make Laws upon every
matter, which shall bind every person according to that which is read in the
Proverbs of Solomon, where God says, Per me Reges regnant and legum conditores
iusta decernunt. Hence is it, that the Christian Emperors, Justinian and
Theodosius in the Code have made many laws concerning Ecclesiastical persons,
their goods, and government, under the titles of Episcop. and Cler. and
Sacrosanct. Ecclesiis.

To these Laws the Apostle commands obedience without resistance, because
they which shall make resistance, Ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt, that is, do
commit mortal sin, wherein if they die, they shall be condemned to the
eternal fire of hell.

Moreover, the Apostle commands to pay to the Prince Tribute of every thing,
Cui vectigal, vectigal; cui tributum, tributum: sunt enim ministri Dei ad
tributa: which place the Angelical Doctor Thomas Aquinas master of Divines the
son of the Cath. school, says, That if the Clergy be free from Tribute,
they have not that Privilege (as some think) Iure diuino, but ex priuilegio
Principum, speaking there of Secular Princes.

Finally, I conclude with Saint Paul for the authority of the Prince, Non enim
sine causa gladium portat, Dei enim minister ad vindictam: behold the
authority of the Secular Prince, Punire poena sanguinis, which the
Ecclesiastical Prelates not having, (after they have disgraded malefactors of
the Clergy, and declared them unfit for Ecclesiastical degree) they can go
no further, but to have them punished by death, deliver them to the Secular
power. And that no man should think, that his words were words of counsel and
not of precept; to make all sure the Apostle affirms, Ideo necessitate
subditi estote non solum propter iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam: So that
we are bound in conscience to obey the Secular Prince in all things abouesaid,
as we are taught by S. Paul.

The second Proposition.
Our Savior Christ, although as the Son of God equal to the Father, is Rex
Regum and Dominus Dominantium: Notwithstanding being clothed with our
mortality, neither before his death, nor after his most holy Resurrection did
he exercise power as a temporal Prince. He had no temporal kingdom, as he
said to Pilat, asking him, Rexestu? he answered, Tu dicis: but though I be a
King, notwithstanding Regnum meum non est de hoc Mundo, that is, a Kingdom
temporal. Whereupon when those people which were miraculously fed by him with
five loaves and two fishes, would have made him a King, aufugit, ne raperent
eum, and facerent ipsum regem. He would judge no man, for he answered to those
which would have had him given sentence in one of their controversies, Quis me
constituit iudicem super vos? yea he acknowledged Pilate the minister of
Caesar for his judge: Non haberes in me potestatem nisi tibi data esset
desuper, as S. Thomas notes in the Epistle to the Romans. Finally, he
commanded that tribute should be paid to the secular Prince Caesar. Reddite
quae sunt Caesaris Caesari.

Some do oppose to this proposition of ours, saying, though Christ paid
tribute to Caesar for himself and Peter, yet he said, that he was not bound to
pay it, Nunquid filij debent soluere tributum? wherein (say they) he took upon
him the right of a temporal Prince, who is exempt from tribute. To this is
answered, that those of the Country (as some Doctors say) called by the name
of Children, were not bound to pay tribute, and he being of the Country, and
S. Peter also, he affirmed that he was not bound.

Others to further contradict this proposition, do allege, that Christ did
cast out the buyers and sellers of the Temple. Which is answered, that he did
this as a Prophet upon zeal: for to the like purpose the Evangelist cites the
verse of David, Zelus domus tuae comedit me. Others say, that when he sent his
Disciples to bring him the Ass and the Colt, he appointed them to say to the
master, Dominus opus habet, that is, The Lord of all the world. But that place
is not understood to draw from thence the authority of a Prince, but to
signify that the Lord of heaven and earth was so poor, that he was feign to
borrow those Cattle (as some Doctors do expound it) the reason is, for that
if he would have taken upon him the Authority of a Prince, he would not have
said, Opus habet, but Dominus ita praecipit, or some other such like.

To conclude, they which judge this proposition of ours hard to be proved,
do say generally that Christ (when he entered triumphantly into Jerusalem, the
day of the Palms) took upon him the Authority of a temporal Prince:
Whereupon the Evangelist alleges the prophecy, Ecce Rex tuus venit tibi
sedens super asinam and super pullum filium asinae: but he that considers
the matter, may perceive that albeit our Savior was the promised King and
Messiah, yet entering into Jerusalem in that base and abject sort, he showed not
to take upon him the Authority of a Prince temporal, but rather as he said
to Pilate, that his Kingdom was not of this world, but spiritual and
eternal: for temporal Kings enter into the Cities of their Kingdoms in an
other manner of Pomp, then Christ did sitting upon an Ass and an Asses Colt.

The third Proposition.
Our Lord Jesus Christ having never used the Authority of a temporal Prince,
it may not be said that he left this Authority to S. Peter and his
successors, which are his Vicars, seeing the Vicar is never more then his
principal. Whereupon Soto treating upon this point, lib. 4. Sententiarum, and
Cardinal Bellarmine de Autoritate Papae, say, that they wonder at the
Canonists, that they durst without any reason or authority of the New
Testament, affirm Quod Papa sit Dominus totius orbis direct in temporalibus:
A doctrine indeed ill founded and scandalous. I know well that some besides
the Canons (which as humane Laws in concurrencie with the Divine can have no
equal Authority) do say that Tho. Aquinas lib. de Regimine Principum, Cap.
10. and 19. affirms the Pope to be Dominus totius Orbis in temporalibus and
inspiritualibus. But that Book is not his, as Cardinal Bellarmine shows, li.
de potestate Papae: For besides other assured conjectures, this is one, That in
that Book lib. 3. cap. 20. he makes mention of the Succession of Adolphus the
Emperor after Rodulphus, and of Albertus after Adolphus, which were, the first
Anno 1292. The second 1299. And Tho. Aquinas died Anno 1274.

They cite moreover an other place of Thom. Aqui. lib. 2. sent. distin. 44.
where he says, Esse in summo pontifice apicem vtriusque potestatis, Temporalis
and Spiritualis: But he that reads the Text may see that Thomas was of a
contray opinion: for having said that in matters Temporal, the Temporal
Prince ought rather to be obeyed then the Spiritual, and in matters merely
Spiritual, rather the Spiritual then the Temporal; he concludes, that if it
were not the Pope, who having in the Provinces subject unto him both
Jurisdictions, he ought of his subjects to be equally obeyed in the one and
the other.

To weaken the force of this our Proposition, some say that Pope Alexander 6.
divided the Indies to the Kings of Spain and of Portugale: Because he as
Christ's Vicar was the natural Temporal Prince thereof, and that Pope Leo 3.
gave the Empire of the West to Charles the great by the same reason: But these
men are very much deceived, since Alexander not as Lord of the Indies, but as
Compromissary Judge elected betwixt the Kings to appease and quench the flames
of Discord, by sentence determined that the seas should be divided, and that
the Armadoes of the one should pass through one of those seas, and the other
through the other, and that whatsoever was gotten or conquered on either side
Iure belli, should be the Conquerers, according to the division made by him, as
the Historians of that time report.

It Is true that Leo 3. being chased from the Sea of Rome, and reestablished by
Charles the great, caused the people to proclaim him Emperor, as Platin
says: which act the Historians do attribute to the people of Rome, who seeing
the Empire evil governed by the Grecians Iure antiquo, did elect an other
Emperor. Now they say that Charles being Patron of the State, bought the title
thereof of Irene and Nicephorus that were Emperors, and that Irene and
Nicephorus were content therewith. In sum, be it as it will, it is certain
that the Pope being driven from his seat, and being possessour of nothing, gave
no Empire to Charles, who already Iure belli was Patron thereof. And that he
gave him the absolute title thereof, it is not a thing certain: and if it
were, yet it may be answered (as well in this case as in others alleged
against our Proposition) that the Pope not having from Christ any authority in
Temporal things, (as has been, and shall be said more clearly in the next
Proposition) if he have taken to him any such authority, or has done it by
consent of the interessed, or for that he has any Temporal power by any of
the four means aforesaid: yet for all this, hence it is not proved that he
has direct authority in Temporal things from our Savior Christ. And
besides, many things are done by many men, whereof if it be sought Quo iure
they do them, it will not easily be found.

The fourth Proposition.
THe authority promised by Christ to Saint Peter under the Metaphor of the
Keys, is merely Spiritual. Tibi dabo claues Regni Coelorum: he says not
Regni terrarum: and reason teaches that which is read in the Hymn of the
Church, Non Eripit mortalia, quia regna dat Coelestia: for the Temporal
kingdom, and the Monarchy was founded from the beginning, (by God the great
Monarch of the world,) in what sort that should be governed. So that Christ
our Savior did not found the Monarchy Temporal. It remains then to say
that he founded the Spiritual, which is plainly seen in Saint Ioh. cap. 20.
where he having said, Omnis potestas data est mihi in Coelo, and in terra: yet
gives he it to the Apostles, and amongst them to Saint Peter limited and with
reservation. Insufflauit in eos and dixit, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum: quorum
remiseritis peccata remittuntur ijs, and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt:
where both by the act that Christ does, and by the words he speaks is
gathered, that the authority of the Pope is Spiritual, and over sin, and
only over souls, according to the words of that prayer of the Church to Saint
Peter, Qui beato Petro potestatem animas ligandi atque soluendi tradidisti: the
which is limited, as is said, yea the authority of Excommunication given to
Saint Peter is conditional, Math. 18. Si frater tuus in te peccauerit, and
Ecclesiam non audiuerit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus. In the which
place our Savior gives authority to Excommunicate, but the sin, and
obstinacy in the sin presupposed.

The fifth Proposition.
THe persons and goods of the Clergy exempted from the power of the Secular
Prince, albeit some (I know not upon what ground) hold that it is done Iure
Diuino: Notwithstanding the contrary opinion (that it is only Iure humano) is
the better, and more conformable to the Divine Scripture, to the holy fathers,
and to the truth of Histories. For (besides that which we have said in the
first Proposition, that Priests in the old Law were subject to the Secular
Prince, besides that Solomon deprived Abiathar of the Office of high Priest
amongst the Hebrews, as is read in the 3. Book of the Kings Cap. 2.) in the
time of the Primitive Church until the time of Justinian the Emperor, it is
not read in the Law, of any privilege of exemptio given to the Clergy. S.
Paul said, Ad tribunal Caesaris sio, Caesarem appello. And to leave infinite
other examples, It is read in the life of Otho the first Christian Emperor,
That he deposed Pope John 22. by his own authority, because he was a most
wicked man. And if the exemptio^ be iure diuino, why would Pope Adrian the
first grant, That Charles the great should have authority to choose the Bishop
of Rome. Cap. Adrianus etc. which also Leo 8. did in favor of Otho the first,
as is written in the same Distinction which is the 63. Canon in Synodo.

This doctrine is not only of S. Paul as I have proved in the first
Proposition, but of S Chrysostom, Tho. Aqui. Soto that excellent Divine.
Distinct. 25. Lib. 4. Senten. of Corrunias an excellent Canonist. Cap. 31.
Pract. quest. who for his own behoof cites Pope Innocentius 3. Alciat.
Ferrarese Medina, and others. And these two doctors Soto and Corrunias in this
particular are much to be esteemed, having both of them written since the
Council of Trent. And their demonstrations are of exceeding efficacy: For
besides the Authority affirmative of S. Paul, Chrysostom and Thomas; and
besides the vsance of the Primative Church, they bring two most forceable
negative Arguments, that is, 1. If the Clergy, and that which belongs unto
them be exempted Iure Diuino; In what book of the New or old Testament, Or in
what Epistle of S. Paul, or in what Gospel are they exempted? 2. The other is,
that no Christian Prince Secular, looking well to the quiet and good government
of his State, regards this at all, but lets the Clergy enjoy what exemptions
he pleases, and what he pleases not, he suffers them not to enjoy.

The sixth Proposition.
WHilst the Prince of Venice (lawful and natural Lord of his State, who
acknowledges no superior in Temporal things but God) makes Laws concerning
goods and possessions Ecclesiastical, which are under his dominion, and
punishes Ecclesiastical persons, in grievous and heinous cases, and does
dispose of such goods, as are not already passed to Ecclesiastical persons by
the Authority which he has immediately from God, whereof he has never been
bereaved, either by Privilege granted away, or by Canon received, but is in
possession thereof by an immemorable custom of many, not years, but ages, He
sins not in so doing. The reason is, for that Qui non facit contra aliquam
Legem non peccat, Much less can it be said, That he sins Qui obseruat Legem.
And moreover, Qui retinet quod suum est non peccat. Neither are we to be
forced to follow the opinion of them which hold, That the exemption is De iure
Diuino: for every Christian is free to follow what opinion he pleases, so it
be a Catholic opinion. Nay rather to follow the opinion of a Doctor grounded
upon reason, against a torrent and forced opinion, doubtless, is not sin; As
Nauarra well proves in his Praeludia. Then shall it be no sin to follow the
opinion of S. Paul, and of so many, and so famous Doctors, alleged in the
first, and the fifth Propositions. Nay to say true, I cannot excuse them which
hold that the Exemption is Iure Diuino, they seeming unto me sometimes ill
grounded, sometimes ill advised, sometimes too bold, sometimes too flattering.

The seventh Proposition.
Whilst the Segniorie of Venice is not culpable, nor commits any sin in
doing that which is spoken of in the precedent Proposition, if it be
excommunicated by Pope Paulus Quintus his Brief published, and if the Churches
and holy places be thereupon interdicted: the Sentence is of no force, not only
by the law positive, because the order prescribed by the Canon, De sent. Excom.
6. is not observed; but also Iure diuino it avails not, because the
authority of Excommunicating is conditionate, Si peccauerit in te frater, etc.
so that where there is no sin, Excommunication has no place; and a Sentence
fulminated against him that sins not, is no Sentence for defect in the matter.

Neither let any man be so gross of understanding to think, that if the
Segniorie (as is proved) has not offended, neither does offend in retinendo
quod suum est, that it does nevertheless offend in not obeying the Pope, and
persisting in their opinion. For constancy in a good opinion is not
obstinacy: and he that offends not, cannot be termed disobedient and
obstinate, since he which observes the Law, does a holy an meritorious work,
and he that obeyes not in those things which cannot be commanded him to do,
commits no sin at all.

The eight Proposition.
IT is true that Pope Gregory says, that the sentence of the Pastor, be it
just or unjust, is to be feared: but this sentence makes nothing to the matter.
For there is great difference betwixt the sentence of an Ecclesiastical Judge
which is unjust, and that which is no sentence at all, as most learnedly
affirms Nauarra de Censuris Ecclesiasticis, Cap. 27. and Soto 4. Sentent.
did. 22. That the unjust censure is to be feared, but the censure that is no
censure is not to be regarded, therefore the Censures published by Pope Paulus
Quintus as is said, being none at all, but like Scrowles formed in the Water
and the Air, that is without foundation, substance or matter; I am of opinion,
that you ought not to observe them, neither that you ought to innouate any
thing in your Churches therefore. For although Nauarra in that place recited,
reasoning upon Excommunication forcelesse and naught, says these words:
Sententia Iudicis Eccleciastici inualida seu nulla, nihil aliud operatur in
fore interiori sieve exteriori, quam quod obligat Execmmunicatum ad seruandam
eam quoad populus sibi persuadeat vel persuadere debeat causas nullitatis
propter scandalum. Notwithstanding this doctrine makes much for me: for the
cause of the nullitie is apparent to all the people of Venice, and if it were
not manifest to all, yet all must needs know it by the Edict which the Prince
has made to let every man understand it: so that the scandal is not only not
to be feared, but I say unto you, that I cannot excuse certain Religious
persons, who whether their error breeds of ignorance, or of some sinister
affect, have made choice rather to depart from the City, then to go forward
to celebrate and Minister the Sacraments as they were ordained to do by the
Prince, both for the good of the Commonwealth and the Religion. Nam ipsi sibi
fuerunt lex, and would not follow the example of the Cathedral Church, and of
all other holy and ancient orders of Religious, nor of all the parishes, unto
whom I will say with Christ, Quod expediret vt suspenderentur molae asinariae
in colla eorum, vt non scandalizarent pusillos meos Besides, to defend the
liberty of the natural Prince, who maintains and conserues amongst the
people peace, liberty, and Religion, is a thing de iure Naturae, that is as
much to say, as Iure diuino, whereas sentences Ecclesiastical are de iure
positiuo, which must yield unto the other, especially when there is question of
the Nullitie of them, whereupon some do deceive themselves which think that
this controversy is about matter of faith, since it is only about manners.

So that Sir, you may go forward to celebrate and communicate, and to do
whatsoever you did in your Church before the publicatio^ of the Censures, not
only because you write to me to be resolved to do it, but also to avoid the
scandale; both because a sentence of no force is not to be observed cum constat
de nullitate, and also that you do not separate your self from your head
(which is the Prince) in controversies of Jurisdiction which have no ground of
Reason.

Nay I am of opinion, that he which shall not hear Mass at least upon the
holy day, shall commit sin, their Sentence being of no force, and it being
celebrated in all places. Nolite agnoscere timorem vbi timor non est, nolite
trepidare, etc. Let it not be said of you which have been always faithful to
your Prince and to the Commonwealth, that Filij matris meae pugnauerunt contra
me: but, obey the Apostles precept, Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus
subdita sit, non solum propter iram, sed propter conscientiam. This I say not,
because I doubt of your constancy (persuaded as I am of your self and all
others of that City, that you are most ready to spend your lives for your
Prince) but because the justice of the cause which is manifest unto you, may be
much more apparent by this my answer.

For a Conclusion let me advertise you, that although the Segniorie of Venice,
have ordained upon pain of life, that all the Religious keep open their
Churches, and proceed to do their duties as they did before, yet have they
not done that for fear: But because that City having bin always Catholic
(and now more then ever professes to conserve it self so,) it will not suffer
that in the exercises of piety there should be any change, or that the
intermission thereof should be occasion of precipitaon unto any; which evil
the Prince is bound by all means to remedy, by the Law of God, for the
interest of the Church.

Many other authorities and reasons I could have adduced in this discourse,
which would have made for me: But for the haste you have made me make, and for
the desire I have to use brevity, I leave them all, reserving my self to
write of this matter at large in a book Of the Supreme authority of a
secular Prince, which shortly I will set forth in the Latin tongue. In the
mean time let me put you in mind that you read the doctrine of that most sound
Doctor Nauarr: who in all that is said before is of our side, as in particular
Cap. Nouit. de iudicijs Notab. 3. and in his Manuel Cap. 27. de Censuris. And
to omit other particularities, that you retire your self to that most secure
Port of that notable doctrine, which teaches that all Ecclesiastical persons,
if they enjoy any exemptions, they enjoy them not de Iure diuino, sed ex
priuilegio principum. Which Privileges do retract, diminish, and enlarge as
pleases them, when new reasons present themselves unto them, to do it to the
profit of the Dominions subject unto them, even as Popes do with the
Privileges of Indulgences, and other things depending upon their Spiritual
authority, the which they sometimes annihilate, sometimes diminish, sometimes
increase at their pleasure. And because the doctrine which I have produced, is
not mine, but all drawn out of the books of deuote and Catholic Doctors; I
will add no more now for the confirmation thereof. Our Lord JESUS give you
Consolation.


