A DISCVSSION OF THE ANSWER OF M. WILLIAM BARLOVV, D. of Divinity, to the
Book entitled: The Judgment of a Catholic Englishman living in banishment
for his Religion etc. CONCERNING The Apology of the new Oath of Allegiance.

WRITTEN By the R. Father, F. Robert Persons of the Society of JESUS.
WHEREUNTO since the said Fathers death, is annexed a general Preface, laying
open the Insufficiency, Railing, Lying, and other Misdemeanour of M. Barlow in
his writing,

JOHN MORRIS.

Ex fructibus (...). Matthew. 7. You shall know them by their fruits. Permissu
Superiorum. M. DC. XII.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS AND PARAGRAPHES CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
THE FIRST PART.
THE Preface to the Reader: In which are laid open some few examples of the
singular Ignorance, Lying, and other bad dealings of M. Barlow, in his Answer
to the Censure of the Apology. Of Points concerning the new Oath of Allegiance,
handled CHAP. I. page 1. About the true Author of the Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance.. 1. page 3. Of the pretended Cause of the new Oath, which is said
to be the Powder Treason.. 2. page 13. How great a pressure the urging of the
new Oath is to Catholics that have a contrary Conscience in Religion.. 3.
page 25. The same argument about the pressure of the Oath is further
discussed.. 4. page 31. What freedom may be said to be permitted to English
Catholics for swearing, or not swearing the new Oath.. 5. page 39. About
recourse made to the Bishop of Rome for decisio^, whether the Oath might
lawfully be taken by English Catholics, or no? Wherein also the present Pope
his person is defended against sundry calumniations.. 6. page 49. CHAP. II.
page 70. Of certain notorious Calumniations used by M. Barlow against his
Adversary, which no ways can be excused from malice, and witting error.. 2.
page 87. M. Barlow makes him. CHAP. III. page 101. CHAP. IIII. page 115.
Touching the exhibitours of the Oath, and of Scandal active and passive.
Wherein M. Barlowes gross. 2. page 128. The answer to an objection: by
occasion whereof it is showed, that P^ss^s^ion and Pres^ription are good
proof^s ^uer in matters of Doctrine. And the contrary is fondly aff^^med by M.
Barlow. CHAP. V. page 141.
THE SECOND PART, About the Br^^^s of Pope Paulus Quintus.
CONCERNING M. Barlow his ^xorbitant Queen Elizabeth's Virtues, and Sanctity.
CHAP. I. page 159. About Queen Elizabeth her Mortifications. And of the nature
of that Virtue.. 2. page 168. Of Queen Elizabeth her Felicities, and
Infelicities. CHAP. II. page 179. Other Points concerning Queen Elizabeth's
Felicities or Infelicities.. 2. page 194. Of Queen Elizabeth's Sickness and
Death, and other things belonging thereunto.. 3. page 209. Of the Flattery and
Sycophancy used by diverse Ministers CHAP. III. page 229. About Toleration or
Liberty of Conscience demanded and Puritans. CHAP. IIII. page 251. M. Barlow
in the rest of his Answer. CHAP. V. page 273. Whether Toby did well or no, in
breaking the commandment of the King of Niniue, concerning the burying of the
dead Jews. And how M. Barlow answers unto the authority of the Fathers, and
overthrows the Kings Supremacy.. 2. page 285. Of another example or instance
out of S. Gregory the Great, about the obeying and publishing a Law of the
Emperor Mauritius, that he misliked: which M. Barlow calls Ecclesiastical..
3. page 303. Arles to Charles the great? CHAP. VI. page 311. England? And
whether the said Pope has power to make new Articles of faith? CHAP. VII. page
323. Of certain other fraudulent, and untrue dealings of M. Barlow, unto the
end of this Paragraph: with a notorious abuse in alleging S. Thomas of Aquine
his Authority.. 2. page 334.
THE THIRD PART Concerning Cardinal Bellarmine his Letter.
OF the occasion of the Letter written by Cardinal Bellarmine unto M. George
Black^well Archpriest. And whether he mistook the state of the question. Also
of the change of Supreme Head, into Supreme Governor. CHAP. I. page 245.
Whether the denying of taking this New Oath, do include the denial of all the
particul^r clauses contained therein?. 2. page 356. Whether the fourth Council
of Toledo did prescribe CHAP. II. page 365. Cardinal Bellarmine is cleared
from a false imputation: and a controversy about certain words and clauses in
the Oath is discussed.. 2. page 386. Whether Princes have just cause to fear
murdering M. Barlowes falsifying of Authors etc. CHAP. III. page 394. About
the death of Henry the third King of France: whether it may be an example of
allowance of such murders? As also about the late Queen of England.. 2. page
414. Of certain contradictions objected to Card. Bellarmine: and what
confidence may be placed in a man's own good works. CHAP. IIII. page 431. Of
three other contradictions imputed unto Card. Bellar. but proved to be no
contradictio^s at all.. 2. page 448. M. Barlow, particulerly concerning
Frederick the second, and his contentions with Popes. CHAP. V. page 461. M.
Barlows more sure and stronger proofs are discovered to be lies: with other
things concerning Frederick the second, and Innocentius the fourth.. 2. page
495. Of the Emperor Frederick the first, whose picture was said to have been
sent to the Sultan by Pope Alexander the third. And of the charge of Alexander
the sixth, touching the death of Zizimus or Gemen, M. Barlowes innocent Turk..
3. page 524. Bellarmine in his Letter to M. Blackwell, and impugned by M.
Barlow. CHAP. VI. page 536.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. IN WHICH are laid open some few examples of the
singular Ignorance, Lying, and other bad dealings of M. Barlow, in his Answer
to the Censure of the Apology.
THREE things (gentle Reader) at the coming forth of this Book may occur
unto thy mind, in which thou may perhaps desire some satisfaction. First the
cause why so idle a work as M. Barlowes Answer is known, and taken to be,
should be answered at all by so grave and learned a man as F. Persons was.
Secondly why this Answer is published so late after his death. And last of all
what opinion is to be had of M. Barlowes talents, learnin^, and method in
answering, or what others here do judge of the same. Three things declared in
this preface for the Readers satisfaction.
And albeit this latter may seem to some to be of least moment for that one
adversary most commonly will hold an others writing in highest contempt, and
therefore from them so much interessed, no sound judgment may be expected: yet
do I think it very necessary to insist most thereon, or rather am forced to
the same, for that M. Barlow is so desirous of honor, as like the Ape he
thinks his own whelp fairest: and himself will needs persuade his Majesty
that he has so answered, as that no sound Reply can ever be made thereunto.
Wherefore as well for thy instruction (good Reader) as also to rectify M.
Barlowes judgment, which in this seems to be very erroneous, and to teach
him to examine his con^cience better before he presume again so far, as either
to promise to a Prince, or put forth in print; I shall set down my opinion,
and worth of his Book, and that upon no other grounds, then I shall produce
out of the Book it self, whereby thou shall have more light to discern in
this affair between us, and M. Barlow less cause to complain of any hard
measure, seeing that against M. Barlow non^ is brought to plead, but M. Barlow
himself.

2. To the first point then, this briefly I answer, that F. Persons having
seen the base manner and method of writing which M. Barlow houldeth through
his whole Book, Why M. Barlowes book was answered by F. Persons.
esteemed the work not worthy of any answer, and so resolved with himself to
be silent therein, and in lieu of refuting this answer to set forth the other
two parts of Resolution, so long before promised by him, and so much desired of
the Catholics in England: which whiles he went about to do, a Copy of this
answer of M. Barlow came to the Inquisitors hands, and was by them sent to the
said Father with order to refute the same, persuading themselves that a book
of that bulk and argument, written by a pretended Prelate, and dedicated to
his Majesty, could not but bear some show of learning, and therefore was, not
to be left unanswered. And that good opinion got M. Barlow by writing in
English: for could these have but understood what was written, and with what
modesty and learning, he may be sure F. Persons should never have been troubled
with the sight thereof, but a shorter course had been taken by casting it into
the fire, the fittest element to purge such unsavory filth, as every where he
belcheth forth in the same against all sorts of men, whereof you shall hardly
find any one page to be void.

3. Now, for the stay which has been made in the setting forth of this work,
The cause of the stay of this edition.
seeing that the said Father dispatched what he wrote in less then 4. mo^ths
it being now more then 4. times as much since his decease, has especially
proceeded upon the manifold other encumbrances and variable disposition of
body, wherewith that party has been troubled to whom the work was committed
to be finished, as himself confesses in the very entrance of the first
Chapter of his Supplement, which he intended to have set forth with this Book:
but growing to so great a bulk by reason of the manifold advantages given by
the Adversary, it was thought better in the end, that it should go forth a
part, as making of it self a just volume with some little enlargement, or
addition annexed thereunto, in answer of some things objected, forged not well
understood, or misalleadged by M. Doctor Andrews, now of Ely, concerning the
matters by him handled in the Supplement, whom together with M. Barlow he
answers with that gravity, judgment, and learning, as will content all, yea
even his Adversaries themselves (if by these means they were to be contented:)
or if that the search of truth were the center of their motion, and chief end
of their endeavors; and not contrarily with neglect and contempt thereof, to
speak placentia, and write that which may pleas^ their humors best, by whom
they hope to gain most, not regarding on which side equity and right does
stand, so they withstand not them, whose pleasure they make the square of their
actions, and whose favor they hold for their highest felicity.

4. But touching the last point, for that I mean to make it the subject of
this Preface, I shall be more long, not for any difficulty which I find in the
thing it self (for who but M. Barlow knows not what a weak written M. Barlow
is, What manner of writer M. Ba^low is.
and in all manner of learning insufficient?) but that the Reader by this
example may see the weight and worth of Protestant writers, and how little
regard is to be had to the bragging and vau^ting of their own learning, and
conquest over their Adversaries: for with such bravery of words, as with
figge-leaues, they would cover their shame and nakedness, whiles full well they
see, and feel the wound which even pierces and pincheth them to the heart
root. And commonly none brag more then those who perform least, or upon other
occasion, then when they are most vanquished and overcome: at least so it
fares often with M. Barlow who thus vauntingly tells his Majesty, that he is
one of a great number, and a continual succession, which are ready for this
cause, and already c^tred ^he combat, and as the courageous Spartans were w^nt
to sing (...), try them when, and wherein you please. And after speaking more
particulerly of this Answer, he says: In handling the main points, I trust
it will appear, that I have neither dallyed with him, nor illuded the Reader,
so that, for any sound Reply thereto, I assure my self security from him. And
is not this very confidently spoken trow you? And is not this Minister well
persuaded of himself, and his own learning, that thus craketh? Audiuimus
superbiam Moab, superbus est valde, Isa. 1^.
sed superbia eius, and arrogantia eius, and indignatio eius plus quam
fortitudo eius. We have heard the pride of Moab (M. Barlow) he is very proud,
but his pride, and arrogance, and wrath is more then his strength.

5. Neither is this swelling humor, and arrogant confidence of knowledge and
learning alone peculiar to M. Barlow, Tertull. d^ praes^rip. cap. 41. Aug.
tract. 45. in Ioa^nem. Bernard. sermon. 65. in Cantica.
but common to all of his rank and calling, yea to all the Heretics of former
times, for so notes old Tertullian when he said: Omnes tument, o^nes scientiam
polli^^ntur^: all are puffed up with pride, all make ostentation of learning:
and S. Bernard: Omnibus vna intentio haereticis semper fuit, captare gloria^ de
singularitate scientiae: All heretics agree in this, to seek glory by the
singularity of knowledge: and therefore no marvel if we hear now and then
one Jewel to challenge the whole Christian world to answer him, one simple
Sut^liffe to set out in print, that it is more easy for him to refute
Bellarmine, then to read him. And not to seek further to hear M. Barlow to
tell his Majesty, M. Barlow in his epistl^ Dedicatory to his Mai^sty.
that F. Persons is to weak to dispute: and again, Verbalize he can, dispute
he cannot; in Stories a great florisher, but a false relator of them etc. And
then of himself as a Cock of the G^me to crow, that he is secure from all
answer, that he is like one of the Spartans, to be tried when his Majesty
lists, with other like phrases of arrogance in the curre^t of his Book, all
breathing forth Luthers spirit, and Lucifers pride, fitter for some Thraso upon
a stage, then a Divine in a printed book. For were not ^hese Spartans he
speaks of both weak in force, and few in number, I think M. Barlow had
never been singled out from amongst them for this co^bat, but want of store in
this urging exigent, made those who employed him, to make much of a little, and
to be behoulding to his small skill, as you know, who are wont to be to the
Knights of the Post, when they can procure no better sureties.

6.. For whosoever shall with due attention and equal judgment, no way
ouerpoysed with favor or disfavor of any part^ read M. B^rlowes book, M.
Barlowes manner of writing.
if he be learned, and can understand how things are discussed, must needs
confess the whole work to be a me^re patchery (as Fa: Persons, cuius memoria
in benedictionibus, was usually wont to term it) of many shreds of latin and
greek sentences, misapplyed proverbs, broken verses, idle and childish
scoffs, injurious calumni^tions, inck-horne terms, exorbitant railing,
incredible ignorance, and lying without measure, no Author lightly ever
sincerely cited, F. Persons words seldom or never truly alleged, no matter
from the beginning to the end with any learning, judgment, or fidelity handled:
his chiefest endeavor is to rail against the Pope, to flatter the Prince, to
iniure Catholics, to disgrace F. Persons: much he is in whores, in Panders, in
strumpets, in horns, in Asses, and spewing dogs, and other like raffe: in
every thing he treats either loathsome, or ridiculous: but for that these two
opinions of this Answer, I mean M. Barlowes, and mine, are so quite repugnant
one to the other, I shall for discharge of my credit exemplify in some special
points of the same: for to handle at length every particular would be too long
for this place, and most of them are discussed in the Treatise it self. I shall
begin with his ignorance, on which I mean most to insist.

7. This fault in M. Barlow is not single, but very manifold and singular, and
that in all manner of learning, in Humanity, Philosophy, History,
Interpretations of Scriptures, M. Barlowes ignorance in Gra^me^ and Humanity.
and Divinity, in each of which I will for a taste allege some ^^w examples,
being loath with any more to weary the Readers patience, or to draw this
Preface to greater prolixity then needs I must, for the ^ull deciphering of
this ignorant Minister, whose skill, albeit it seem to be most in Humanity,
yet in the same it is also very little: Barlow. page 15^.
for in one place he calls the three fatal s^sters, whom he names in his
ma^gent, ^umenides; whereas every Grammar boy can tell him that ^um^nides are
not the three fa^all sisters, but his familiar friends the three furyes. With
like skill he interprets the proverb Omnia sub vnam Myconum, to signify that
one may stand for all: whereas his chief Author Erasmus, out of Strabo, far
otherwise expounds it to be meant only of such, page 295^
as under some particular title handle things of different nature, which can by
no means be applied thereunto, as elsewhere it ^s told him.

8. Besides these mistakings, for more evident demonstration of his rare
talents in construction, I will set down two examples, but very briefly, for
that he shall again hear of them both; of the one in this Treatise, and of
the other by the Author of the Supplement. The first is touching certain
words of Saint Gregory in his Epistle to Theodore the Emperor Mauritius his
Physician, Gregor. lib. 2. Ep. ep. 65.
where Saint Gregory yielding the reason why he sent not his Letters for the
Emperor to his own Legate, but to the said Theodore, says: Nolo eam a
Responsali meo public dari, quia Vos qui ei familiarius seruitis, loqui ei
liberius and ap^rtius potestis etc. That is, I will not that this Letter I send
(to the Emperor) be delivered publicly by my Legate, for that You, who are
more near about him, can speak more freely and plainly unto him. So S.
Gregory.

9. But what sense or construction, think you does M. Barlow make of these
words? Truly such, as if he were a Grammar boy, under some Orbilius, he would
be made to feel the smart of his folly. S. Gregory (says he) writes to
Theodore the ^m^^rours Physician, Barl. page 174.
and intreates him to deal with his Lord and Sovereign about it: the reasons
whereof he had not, yea he would not (says he) a Responsali suo public dare, A
very gros^e Grammatical error.
publicly yield as from his Ch^yre, or Oracle (much less by his Br^ue
int^rdict) but having suggested it privately, he left it to God, and the
^^p^r^urs le^sure and wisdom. So he. And was there ever sentence so
interpreted as this? what chopping, what changing what mistaking is there
here? A letter is turned into reasons, the verb passive into the active, a
Legate into a Chair or Oracle. And is not this man more fit to be set again
to Inspeach, and Grammar rules, then to be employed in writing for defense of
his Majesty? I would feign know where M. Barlow ever read Responsalis, to
signify a Chair or Oracle, more then it does a Pulpit, or Sermon, Lincoln
Church, or Paul's steeple.

10. And to omit other incongruities, by this pitiful construction M. Barlow
his Petrus de Vin^is should be more miraculous, then elsewhere he has made
him, and yet he makes him to write Frederick the second his death a year
after his eyes and brains were out of his head. And then further, of one and
the self same man, he makes two: but by this new Grammatical interpretation
he shall neither write nor read, be one man, or two, but be metamorphosed into
a Chair or Oracle. Fragmentum histori^um in anno 1238. ^omo 1. hist. Germ.
Casarum.
For if he list to read Fragmentum historicum printed in the first tome of the
German History, he shall find what that Author writes of Petrus de Vineis his
going to the Council of Lions: for speaking of the Emperor he says: Q^i non
comparuit, s^d R^sponsales prose transmisit minus sufficientes: Frederick
appeared not in the Council, but sent in his behalf insufficient
Ambassadors, to wit, Petr^s de Vineis, and Thaddaeus Sinuessanus. Will M.
Barlow say, that he sent two Chayres, or Oracles? That truly had been a
strange Embassage. Or will he tell us, that when our King Richard the first his
Ambassadors went to Rome, to withstand the Bishop of Roane, complaining against
him, ^s Nubrigensis writes ( Responsales quoque Regis e vestigio secuti, in
conspectu summi Pontificis in faciem illi restitere. The Ambassadors also of
the King presently following, resisted him to his face before the Pope) that he
sent Chaires or Oracles to Rome? Or were these Chayrs or Oracles so earnest
before the Pope in his defense? I know not whether this thing deserve rather
laughter or compassion: Laughter, for that it is so foolish and ridiculous in
it self: Compassion to see one to bear himself for Bishop of Lincoln so
ignorant, as to translate Responsalis, for a Chair or Oracle, with this
insulting adiection to the same, (much less by his Breue interdict.) But let
us come to the second.

11. The other example of his Grammatical construction is concerning a place
of Bellarmine about the authority of Kings, where the Cardinal refelling an
objection that the exemption of Clergymen from tributes, and appearing at
secular tribunalls, is de iure humano, and so may be repealed by Princes,
answers, that it does not follow, Bellarm. l. 1. de Cler. cap. 28.
both for that not only Kings, but Popes and Councels have given this exemption
to Clergymen: as also for that the whole world has consented to the same,
which has bestowed upon Kings that power which they have. So he. Now let us
hear M. Barlow conster these words: thus then he Englisheth them: Barlow page
342.
Orbis terrae, it is within the compass of the inferior orb, from whence is
given to Kings that power which they have. So he. And let him turn over
again his Grammaticon or Ma^matrecton Cooper, or Calepine, and he shall never
find these two words which himself sets down in latin, to wit, orbis
terrae, to signify, it is within the compass of the inferior orb: A strange
construction of Orbis terrae.
and therefore perhaps his wits were without that compass when he wrote it,
and likewise his honesty was scant at home, when within 3 leaves after, out of
this self same Chapter he cyteth in different letters, and many of them
capitalls, this passage, as the express words of Bellarmine^ The Clergy is
not bound to obey Kings, longer then Kings are THEIR SVPERIOVRS: and that is,
Bellar. l^^ citato.
so long as THE POPE WILL: for whom HE EXEMPTES, they are all FRE: and cites
in the margent de Cler. lib. 1. Cap. 28. ^. Respondeo negando. But let him read
the place that list, and he shall find no such thing. And what then will you say
to such forgery and falsity? But for these two points I refer him to the
Author of the Supplement, where they are more largely discussed. And were not
M. Barlow of a seared conscience, and his cause desperate, he would never use
such legier-de-main, and discredit himself in this base manner. If his Spartans
ready for the combat, can fight no better, it were more for his Maiestys
honor, and their own honesty, that they kept themselves out of the field, and
staid at home to tend gooslinges, then thus to betray their cause, and shame
all. From Grammar let us come to Philosophy.

12. It seems that in this science M. Barlow is very meanly seen, M.
Barlowes ignorance in Philosophy.
and not to have read, or (which I rather think) not to have understood
Porphyries Introduction to the same. For what puny-Sophister is there in
Oxford, or Cambridge, who knows not that, species producatur de pluribus
differentibus numero? But quite contrary M. Barlow tells us, that the
powder plot was not singular from all examples, there having been the like done
by Protestants ( though not in specie, yet in indiuiduo) as at Antwerp etc.
which is as much, as if one should say: Although so gross ignorance as we see
in M. Barlow of Lincoln, cannot be found in any other man, yet is it to be
found in many M. Barlowes: whereas M. Barlow, of whom we speak, is but one
and the self same man, and ignorance may be found in other men as well as in
him, especially if they be Ministers as he is: but of this also he shall see
more in the ensuing Discussion. And does not he deserve to be brought again ad
inferiora subs^llia, and to sit amongst the Sophisters in Cambridge, till he
has learned to speak more like a Philosopher?

13. Again what more sollemne foolery can there be, then so ignorantly to
insult upon his ad^ersary, for saying, that S. Leo in a certain place spoke of
unity of names, as M. Barlow does, for thus he says: Leo ep. 89.
What learning will justify that phrase of speech, An unity of names etc? And
again, that one name imparted to several persons, should be called an unity,
let all the Onomasticks, and Nomenclators, or Mathematicians, or Schoolmen be
searched, and it will not be found. So he. Do you not think that this man has
searched far into the matter, read all books, and seen what all say, that so
resolutly and generally pronounces this sentence? and yet Aristotle could tell
him, that all aequiuoca, vniuoca, analoga, agree in one name: and none but one,
as ignorant as M. Barlow, will deny that the name Father agrees to men and
God, but in different manner; so that it is true to say, that the name of
Father is all one in God and man, though in nature it differ. And what can be
required more to the unity of names? Or can M. Barlow conceive that they have
one name without all unity? Truly as well, as conceive, that a man may be a
fool, without foolery, or as simple as himself, without simplicity.

14. And if this thing in no School man can be found, then must S. Thomas be
blotted out of that ra^ke, whose words are: D. The. lec. 12. in Periber. lit.
F.
Ostenait Aristoteles quod s^li vnitas nominis non sufficit ad vnitatem
enuntiationis. Aristotle shows, that unity of name suffices not for the
unity of a proposition. And in his Quodlibets he expressly proves this unity of
names, which he calls vnitate^ vocis, the unity of appellatio^, for that else
there were no vniuoca. But of this also he will hear more then he would, or
ever will be able to refell by the Author of the Supplement. It suffices me to
detect only his ignorance, which as it is here, both gross and palpable, so
also combyned with singular arrogance and pride, in so resolutly affirming,
that no learning will justify this speech; when as Aristotle, and S. Thomas
the great Philosopher, and most learned of all Deuines, do both teach and
demonstrate the same.

15. Another example in this kind I might here produce, touching his doctrine
of contradictions, and his gross mistaking of the same, but that will come
after in due place to be discussed, where I examine his dispu^ation, about the
first contradiction objected to Bel^armine. Now let us see his ignorance in
historyes. M. Barlows ignorance in histories.
In historyes what greater ignorance can there be committed then to relate
fictions for truth, which have no coherence either in place, time, or persons?
And yet M. Barlow does this so confidently, as he did the former of unity of
names. Barlow page 298.
Let one example suffice for this matter, by which alone the Reader may of
himself conjecture of the rest. Alexander the third is charged to have sent
Frederick the first his picture to the Turk, that he might by the same know
him, and kill him also, if he came into his hands, and that even whiles he was
fighting the Lords battles: which objection M. Barlow says, pincheth the
Pope to the quick. And I must confess, that had the matter been as he does
relate it^ none can deny, but it had been very barbarous indeed. But in the
last chapter of F. Parsons ensuing Discussion, it is showed, and convinced most
evidently, that Alexander was dead at least 7. years before that Frederick
ever thought of going against the Turk, and eight before he came into Armenia.
What ignorance then is there in this Minister, so to write and triumph upon
lies? How shall his Auditory believe what he teaches them out of the pulpit,
that blusheth not to utter such false and injurious slanders in a printed book?

16. I might here most of all insist upon his dealing with Pope Innocentius
the fourth, whom he relates to have done many things against Frederick the
second, Barlow page 292. and deinceps.
upon the credit of Vrspergensis; and yet that very Author says, that they
fell out between Gregory the 9. and Fred^rick, many years before Innocentius
was Pope. And yet such a writer is M. Barlow, as that he will not only ascribe
all unto Innocentius, but also from that supposall, draw this most malicious
inference^ That he went about to poison the said Emperor. What more blind
ignorance, and malicious dealing can be imagined then this? But for that this
is afterward very largely handled in the last Chapter of the ensuing
Discussion, I will here no further treat thereof: nor yet of his telling the
Reader out of Binnius and Cicarella, that Pope Sixtus statua of brass was, for
that he was extremely hated, after his death cast down etc. which all Rome,
Barlow page 245.
and the statua it self yet standing convince to be a lie, and Binnius has no
such word in this Popes life; neither does Cicarella say at all, that it was
cast down. But it delights M. Barlow like a blind horse in the battle,
boldly to adventure upon any thing, be it never so false, fond, or improbable.
page 288.
The like ^ kill he shows in making Conradus a Lichetenau to be a different
writer from Vrspergensis, page 295.
and Petrus a Vin^is to differ from Petrus a Vinea, with other infinite like
ouersights in this kind, which clearly show that to be true of himself,
wherewith he charged his adversary F. Parsons, but could exemplify in no
particular, In stories he is a great florisher, but a false relator of them.

17. Neither is he a more false relator of historyes then an vnkillfull
interpreter of the holy Scriptures; M. Barlowes ignorance in interpreting the
Scriptures.
in which it is strange to see, how he tosseth the text, what sense he
yields, and what Commentaryes he makes thereon, and that either by mistaking
the meaning of the words, or by ridiculous application, or by forcing arguments
from the same, which have no dependence, no coherence, or agreement with the
place he cyteth, yea not sticking ^ometymes to corrupt the very text it self
with ^ome addition of his own thereunto, to make it conclude more forcibly
against us: so saucy he is ^n so sacred a matter. I will give briefly one
example ^n each kind, where the Spouse in the Canticles is commended for all
manner of vertues^ under the allegorical types of Myrh, Frankencense, Barl.
page 53.
and all A^othecaryes dust: what think you, does M. Barlow ^ake of this dust?
Does he interpret it to signify any particular virtue? Nothing less. For he
says, Cant. 3.
it is worldly delights of honor and wealth: for that is p^luis pigmentarius,
says he, the Merchants (he should say Apothecaryes) dust, which tickleth the
eyes, and blindes the sight of the wisest^ and quoteth in the margent the
Canticles, and place where it is to be found. And is not this, trow you, a
great commendation of the Spouse, that she ascends through the desert of this
earth with all worldly delights of honor and wealth, which tickle the eyes, and
blindes the sight of the wisest? What may not be proved by Scriptures, where
such application is allowed? And here to make the best Commentary in M.
Barlowes excuse, there is at least great mistaking of the true sense of the
word dust, which I think in no other Author besides himself, is taken for
worldly delights of honor, and wealth; as neither in any Dictionary that ever
I saw, is pigmentarius taken for a Merchant. But M. Barlow has absolute
authority to gayne-say both Grammar, Scriptures, and all manner of learning.

18. As for ridiculous application, what more fond conceit could he make, then
to compare Gods divine providence unto Rammes-hornes: for thus speaking
thereof, he says: The providence of God in governing of his Church, Barlow
page 43.
is like the ruinating of the walls of Hierico by Rammes-hornes: it is
powerful, not violent; spiritual, but not visible; by means weak in show,
mighty in ^ffect. Iosue 6.
So he. And to omit the ridiculous interpretation, or rather inuersion of
trumpets into Rammes-hornes, whereas they were of metal, as S. Hierome,
Origin, and others affirm, or made of horn, as some later writers, and so to
be called rather Cornets, then Rammes-hornes, with which I think no man can
sound any blast: to omit this foolish error (I say) me thinks M. Barlow in
this Commentary is very forgetful of himself; for in another place he makes
these powerful, spiritual, and mighty Rammes-hornes to be very weak, poor,
and feeble; for thus he speaks of his Maiestyes Apology with contempt to F.
Persons: As if (says he) the Apologers Answer like Hiericoes walls, Page 201.
should presently fall with the blast of a Ramms-horne, and a few turns about
it: Iosue. 6.
and cites the same place as before. So as now the force of the Ramms-hornes
is very feeble: for the ruinating of the walls, by this reason is more to be
ascribed to their own weakness, then to any power of the Rammes-hornes. For in
case they were so powerful, spiritual, and mighty, the resemblance which here
Sir William makes, should be very simple: for I think he will not say that the
Apologers Answer is more powerful then Gods providence, which before he
compared to the Rammes-hornes. Or if he do, I can say no more, but that for
his labor he well deserves to be put to the horn at Edenburrough.

19. In another place going about to prove, that the Right which the Church
has against heretics, either for their conversion or chastisement, is Ius
innatum, bred within it, and inseparable from it; how (think you) does he
prove the same against F. Persons, who said, that is was Ius acquisitum? Very
pithily you may imagine: for thus he writes. Page 60. Genesis 3.
No sooner was there a Church designed, but this right was annexed, Semen
mulieris conteret caput serpentis, as the enmity for contradiction, so the
right for suppression is native. Thus M. Barlow, and no more. And is not this
well proved, think you? The seed of the woman shall bruze the serpents head;
that is, Christ the Son of the Virgin shall overcome the diue^, ergo, it is
Ius innatum, to punish heretics. Me thinks this argument proves M. Barlow
more to be a Natural, then any native right to be in the Church. For what is
there here to signify the Church, to signify heretics, to signify this inbred
right? Truly I see no more coherence between the Scripture and the foresaid
argument, then I see in this which follows; Matthew. 9.
Our Savior cured a man of the palsy: ergo, M. Barlow is troubled with the
gout. But let us go on.

20. Last of all, for adding to the holy text; what more evident example can be
desired then that which he brings out of Deuteronomy, Barlow page 334.
to prove that bloody article of the Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
causes? Bloody I say, for that more effusion of blood of Ecclesiastical men
has been made for that one point enacted by Parliament, then by all the laws
of former times, for the space of a thousand years together, which yet is not
only by all Catholics denied, rejected by Calvin, and the Puritans; but
utterly condemned also by the Lutherans, and all learned Protestants. Against
all which M. Barlow will needs prove by Scripture this usurped authority,
saying: God in his Word has appointed Kings to be Guardians of b^th the
Tables, to command and prohibit, not in civil affairs only, but in matters
also concerning religion says S. Augustine: and cites Deuteron. 17. and 18,
verse. But in our books either Hebrew, Greek, or Latin we find no such
commission given to Kings, nor any one syllable of their being Guardians of
both Tables, or of any command in matters of Religion in this place, as
elsewhere by the Author of the Supplement he is more fully and roundly told.
And so you see, to what desperate attempts this Minister is driven to defend a
falsity.

21. Touching the last point which remained to be treated, of M. Barlowes
ignorance in matters of divinity, for that it is his chief profession, I shall
more enlarge my self therein, M. Barlowes ignorance in matters of Divinity.
and join issue with him in one entire disputation, and that not the meanest,
but rather the chiefest of his whole book: for in no other that I know, does
he use so many terms of art, or make so great vau^t or show of learning,
courage, and confidence, as in the same, to wit his discourse to prove a
contradiction in Bellarmine concerning three Conclusions of his, about
Justification and confidence to be reposed in our good works. But before I
enter this combat, it will not be amiss to let the Reader see some part of
his skill in another matter or two, that thereby he may take a sca^tling of the
rest.

22. First then he must know, that either M. Barlowes choice was so bad, or
judgment so small, that he never almost cyteth the Master of Sentences, S.
Thomas of Aquine, or other Schoolmen, but that he does commonly very
ignorantly mistake them, or maliciously belly them, or some way or other pervert
them. For example he makes S. Thomas to say, Barlow page 188. D. Thom. 2.2. q.
104. ar. 6. ad. 3.
That if an Usurper or Intruder command things unlawful, yet in those
things the subjects must notwithstanding obey, propter vitandum scandalum, aut
periculum, and then adds: Of this Divinity Judge not, it is their own. But I
answer, it is M. Barlowes lie, and not S. Thomas his Divinity; who answering an
argument, that the power of many Kings is usurped, and therefore they not to
be obayed, says: That a man is ^ound to obey, so far forth as the order of
Justice does require, and therefore if they have not lawful principality, but
usurped, or command unjust things; the subjects are not bound to obey them,
unless perhaps per accidens, for avoiding of scandal or danger. So S. Thomas:
and here is no mention of unlawful things commanded, but of unjust, for a
King may command things that are unjust; as that his subjects give him all the
money or goods they have; whereto for fear of danger they may yield, which
they could not do, were the thing of it own nature unlawful: which is S.
Thomas his express doctrine in the next precedent article: neither is there
here ( must notwithstanding obey) but the contrary, that absolutely they are
not bound to obey, unless perhaps it be for some other cause, as of sca^dall or
danger: in which cases they may, to save their lives, or for avoiding the hurt
and offense of others, do those things which are unjustly commanded the^, so
they be not of their own nature unlawful, but only in respect of the
Co^maunder, who either contrary to justice, or by usurped authority does
command the^.

23. Of this nature is that grave resolution of his taken, as he would have it
seem, from S. Thomas his scholar Medina, That to full liberty, is required an
unlimited scope for the judgment to deliberate. (...). page ^7.
Of which he shall hear more afterward: for this unlimited scope for the
judgment, is no other thing, the^ the unlimited ignorance of Sir William, which
passes all bound and measure. Again where he cites S. Thomas, touching
active and passive scandal, page 57
which is refuted in this work at large, and where he says very boldly, but
ignorantly, (...). page 114.
that the said Doctor confineth al proud men within two sorts, one of the^
which advance themselves above others, the other of such which arrogate to
themselves that which is above them, and beyond their pitch: which seems to
be above the pitch of his skill; D. Tho. 2.2. q. 162 ^^. 4. in (...).
for S. Thomas makes 4. sorts of pride, as any may see in the place cited in
the margent, though in the place which M. Barlow cites, I confess there be
not so many sorts specified: for in his 33. question and 5. article he
me^tioneth none at all. So as M. Barlow roues at random, and speaks without
book, and thinks all to be well, so he say somewhat, true, or false, and make
a fond flourish with the citing of schoolmen. Of this very stamp is his other of
fatum, and providence, page 246.
in denying fatum to be providence, retorted upon him by F. Persons in this
Answer. And truly if M. Barlow be wise, he will, if he write again, be more
wary in dealing with Schoolmen, and alleging their authorities, for that kind
of learning far surpasses the compass of his shallow capacity.

24. Another thing may be, to consider what strange Paradoxes he inserts here
and there as positio^s dogmaticall, which who so lists in practice to follow,
shall either have no religion or faith at all; or instead of Christ's Gospel,
the Turks Alcoran. M. Barlowes paradoxes.
For example, what more gross and wicked assertion can there be, then to teach
that Kings even against our conscience are to be obeyed. For thus he replyeth
against F. Persons saying, Barlow page 160.
that Kings were to be obeyed; propter co^scientia^, sed non contra
conscientia^. This (says M. Barlow) is no sound doctrine in the negative part:
for even against a man's Conscience the Prince is to be obeyed. Again: There is
nothing more easy for proof, or evident for d^monstration, then that obedience
is to be enjoined, ^u^n against conscience, if it be erroneous, and leaprous;
and against religion if forged and falsely so called. And is not this a very
learned Axiom? For more evident refutation whereof, let us suppose that for
which we power forth our daily prayers to God, that his Majesty were as all his
Noble Progenetors of both Realms have always been, a Catholic Prince, and as
zealous for the truth thereof as now he is for the Protestant cause, if then he
should propose unto Sir William the Oath of Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, so
clearly out of Scriptures, and all antiquity, proved and euinced to be true,
but yet in the blind eyes and leaprou^ conscience of this Minister thought to
be false; what would he do therein? Will he swear it to be true? But in his
conscience he thinks it to be false, and against the Scriptures. Will he
refuse it? But Kings (says he) even against conscience are to be obeyed.

25. Neither does he help the matter any thing at all by his distinction of
leaprous and erroneous conscience, The Protestants conscience like a cheuerall
point.
for with men of his stamp, conscience is like a cheuerell point, which they
may stretch and loose at their pleasure. For who knows not, that in the time
of Q. Mary they were held to have erroneous and leaprous consciences, even by
the judgment of the greatest deuines in Geneua, who manteyned, that women were
to be obeyed, albeit they were Queens, even in civil and temporal affairs?
But within one year after, this error and leaprosy was so transposed, that
the quite contrary was taught, and they were not only held to have leaprous and
erroneous consciences who denied civil obedience, but were condemned also as
Traitors by Parliament, if they did deny Q. Elizabeth to be the Supreme head or
Gouernesse of the Church of England. So that, it was not only lawful, but
necessary for her to have all Temporal and Ecclesiastical government in her
hands as she was Queen; which yet in Q. Mary to have civil only, even by
reason of her sex, was judged monstrous, unnatural and repugnant to the
Scriptures, and law of God. Many other examples might be produced in this kind,
to show this new Gospel to be as constant as the weathercocke, which never
turns but when the wynd does change, to wit, as often as occasions fall out
that may fit their purpose: for then they will strain all conscience and
honesty also, to conform themselves and become good subjects.

26. Much like unto this of obeying Kings against our conscience, A profane
and barbarous assertion of M. Barlow.
is his other profane and barbarous assertion of the Supremacy of the heathen
Emperors, Nero, Domitian, and the rest over the Christian Church; yea which is
more strange, that the ancient Fathers Justinius Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian
and others acknowledged the same. But you must know, that M. Barlow in cyting
their words for proof of this paradox is very silent, Barlow page 99.
howsoever with all co^fide^ce as a maxim in his new Deuinity vnco^trollable,
he delivers the same, saying: That they acknowledged the Emperors Supremacy
indepe^dant upon any but God. And a little after, that Queen Elizabeth in her
Supremacy was no usurper by Nouell-claime, but accepted what God himself had
annexed to her crown. Out of which I first note, that by this Doctrine, the
Great Turk is supreme Head of the Christian Church in Greece; and that if M.
Barlow were there, for such he would acknowledge him. Secondly, the
Pythagoricall manner of speaking which our Adversaries use in matters of
greatest moment and controversy. For whereas before King H^nry the eight, no
Christian King ever took that title, or usurped any such authority over the
Church; yea for challenging much less, Constantius was called Antichrist both
by S. Athanasius and S. Hilary: Athan. ep. ad solitar^a^ vit^m age^t^s.
Hilarious lib. 1. in Constant. Augustu^ paulo post ^nitium.
these men without all proof, but not without singular impupudency, think it
sufficient to say^ that the King is head of the Church, that he was so
acknowledged by the ancient Fathers, that not only a woman may have the same
authority of Supremacy in all causes Ecclesiastical; but that also the heathen
Emperors had it as annexed to their Crown, and Imperial Dignity, even
against the whole torrent of all writters, the practice of the Christian world,
and evident text of Scripture it self; no Fathers, no history, no monument, no
show, or shadow of proof, or authority in former times being found for the
same, without many strains, violent enforcements, or ridiculous illations made
there-upon, as in the arguments of the Protestants, who have treated this
controversy, is every where to be seen.

27. Lastly the Reader may note, that M. Barlow is so poor a Divine, as either
he knows not what belongs to matters of faith, or else is so wicked, as
against his own knowledge, he will avouch that for true which is checked even
by his own brethren, and convinced by common sense and experience to be most
false, to wit, that the Protestants and the Puritanes in England differ only in
ma^ters cerimoniall, and agree in all ^ss^ntiall and substantial points
concerning religion, in which this Prelate is very cathegoricall ( for
ignorance, as himself elsewhere tells us out of Fathers and Philosophers,
Barlow page 2^2.
though he cite no place or sentence, is the mother of a^dacious assertions and
undertakings) and writteth thus; Barlow pa^^ 142. see supra. page 120.
Feign they would possess the world, that we are at jar among our selves,
about our religion: whereas the quarrel, though it be (indeed) unkind, yet is
it not in this kind sau^ only for cerimonyes external, no points substantial
etc. So he. Which though it be kindly spoken as you see, yet he must give me
leave to believe him at leisure, and in the mean time ^o ask him one
question; to wit, whether the Protestants and Puritans understand their ow^e
differences that are between the^ or not? If not^ then we need not believe M.
Barlow, as speaking of that which he does not understand. If they do, how
comes it to pass that they condemn each other of idolatry, heresy, and false
religion, as any may read in the Survey, and dangerous Positions, set forth by
S^^cliffe, and the last Superintendent of Canterbury for the Protestants; and
Cartwright, Gilby, M^rtin Senior, and others for the Puritans?

28. To this answers M. Barlowes Comicall companion of Ely, D. Andr. Respons.
ad Apol. cap. ^5. page 343.. Porr^ negat.
of whom whiles he was silent many had some opinion of learning, but since all
is resolved to lying, immodest railing, and some few light Terentian and
Plautinian phrases, which as well b^seeme a Divine, writing in matters of such
moment, and in defense of so great a Monarch, to dally withal, as it does a
Bishop to lead a morrice-daunce in his hose and dublet: This man, I say,
answers hereunto, that perhaps so the case stood then, when those Protestants
did write, but that is well near 20. years ago, but now it is otherwise.
Which is as much, as if he had said, that this new belief in England is not
like the old, always one, but is refined and altered with the time, and
therefore no argument can be drawn from a thing done 20. years past, for that
is to great antiquity for so newfangled a faith, which is always in motion,
and has her waynes, changes, quarters, and full, like the Moon. But yet I
must ask him further, how he will prove by any example of the Puritan writers,
this their change and submission to the Protestants, and conformity of doctrine
with the^ more now, then 20. years past? Are they not still in the same degree
of difference and oppositio^ as before? Do they not still deny our Saviors
descent into hell? Do they not disclay me from the English Hierarchy? Will
they acknowledge the Kings Supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, as King
Henry did challenge it? Or will they recall what they have written of their
discipline, that it is an essential mark of the Church, without which there
were no Church, no Faith, no Gospel, and consequently the Protestants to be
no Ghospellers, to be out of the Church, out of the number of the faithful?

29. But for further confutation of both these Superintendents, and more clear
explication of the thing it self, besides what is afterward said in this
book touching this point, it shall not be amiss here to set down the words
of a few Protestant and Puritan late, and yet living writers, what they judge
of each other in this affayre, that our very enemies may be judges of the most
shameful assertion of these two Prelates, That the Protestants and Puritans
differ in matters only cerimoniall, and agree in essential. And the reason
that I produce no more in this kind, is for want of their books, which being
not worth the sending so far, seldom come to our hands. I will begin with the
Protestants.

30. And to omit Thomas Rogers, whose testimony is after to be produced in the
Discussion it self, part. 2. cap. 4.
what other thing does Oliver Ormerod in his discovery of Puritan-Papisme
annexed to his Picture of a Puritan, prove, but that the said Puritans are
Heretics, and have joined themselves with the Pharisees, Apostolickes, Arians,
Pebuzians, Petrobusians, Florinians, C^rinthia^s, Nazarens, Begardines,
Ebionites, Catababdites, E^theusiasts, Donatists, Iouinianists, and Catharists.
Printed anno 160^.
And least any should think, that this conjunction is only in matters
cerimonial, he lays to their charge these ensuing heresies, that there is no
diuers^^y between a Priest and a Bishop: that Bishops have no iu^isdiction:
that all sins be equal: that the Minister is of the essence of baptism,
with the like. And in the second dialogue he makes in plain terms this
objection, that there is no difference in matters fundamental, but
accidental: and then answers the same, that they do differ from the
Protestants in some things that are fundamental and substantial, which he
proves by the article, of Christ's descending into hell. And he might have
proved it further by the above rehearsed articles, for which Iouinian, Aerius,
and others were reputed by the ancient Fathers, and condemned for Heretics.

31. With this Oliver of Cambridge agrees A. N. of Oxford in his
Bible-bearer, toward the midest, for thus he writes: An. 1607.
They refuse to subscribe to the Kings lawful authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, to the article of religion, to the book of Common prayer, and
the orders, rites, and ceremonies of our Church; nay they dissent from us in
things accidental and cerimoniall. So he. By which last antithesis of
accidental and cerimoniall differences, it is most evident, that the former
were essential and fundamental. Neither do I see, how this can be denied by
any: for if the Puritans refuse to subscribe to the articles of Protestant
religion, who sees not, that they approve it not, and consequently differ in
essential points, and that M. Barlow ouerlashed very much, when he wrote, that
their unkind quarrel with Puritans was in another kind, and not in matters of
religion, wherein, forsooth, out of his great kindness he will have them to
agree.

32. And not to stand more for proof hereof from Protestants, D. Couel
cleereth the matter, when he says: D. Couell in his just and temperate defense
ar. 11. page 67.
But least any man should think, that our contentions were but in smaller
points, and the difference not great; both sides have charged the other with
heresies (if not infidelities) nay even such as quite overthrow the principal
foundation of our Christian faith. Thus he. And this I think is another manner
of matter then external ceremonies, or accidental differences: for if this be
not a plain jar amongst Protestants and Puritans in Religion, I would feign
know what M. Barlow will more require thereunto? but I see S. Gregory's words
verified in these men, where he says: li^. 8. in Job. cap. 2.
solent haeretici alia aperte dicere, alia occulte cogitare, the heretics are
wont to speak otherwise openly, then inwardly they think: for when they deal
amongst themselves then are Protestants and Puritans heretics and infidells to
each other: but when they answer us, then all are friends, all good
Christians, all united in doctrine, and divided only in ceremonies and
accidental differences. Puritans acknowledge an essential difference between
them and the Protestants in matters of religion.
This is another manner of equivocation, then any of our schools will allow,
and only fit for such as are his scholars qui in veritate non stetit, sed
mendax fuit ab initio.

33. From Protestants I come to Puritans, who in this case are no less eager,
plain, and resolute then the Protestants, but rather more; for this in
express terms the Author of the Twelve general arguments concludes against
all the Superintendents of England together, An. 160^.
that they are Usurpers, and Tyrants, and execute an usurped power over the
Church: and one reason to prove the same is ex concessis; arg. 10. circa medium.
for that their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is derived from the King, else, say
they, it is a flat denial of his Supremacy, as there they show. And in the
next reason, which is the 4. and last, brought in for proof of their
assumption or minor, thus they conclude: There are no true and sober Christians
but will say, that the Churches of Sco^land France, the Low Countries, and
other places (that renounce such Archbishops and Bishops (as ours are) as
Antichristian and usurping Prelates) are true Churches of God, which they
could not be, if the authority and prerogatives they claim to themselves were
of Christ, and not usurped: for if it were the ordinance of Christ Jesus, that
in every kingdom that receaueth the Gospel, there should be one Archbishop
over the whole kingdom, one Bishop over many hundred Pastors in a kingdom,
and all they invested with that authority and jurisdiction Apostolical, which
they claim iure diuino to be due `vnto them, by the ordinance of Christ;
certainly that Church which should renounce and disclayme such an authority
ordained in the Church, cannot be a true Church, but the Synagogue of Satan:
for they that should renounce, and deny such, must needs therein renounce, and
deny Christ himself. Thus the assumption is cleared. So the Author.

34. To which argument as the Catholics for true Bishops will willingly grant
the sequele^ that the Church of the Puritans is no Church, but a Synagogue of
Satan, for that it wants them so I see not what M^ Barlow and his
Protestants can reply thereunto^ for if Episcopal authority be de iure diuino^
then cell of Rome, condemned the same, together with the Author thereof. So
these Lutherans. But with our beggarly English Protestants all is fish that
comes to the ne^^, and of these outcast rags they must patch up a Church, or
else confess that before Luther, they have none to whom they can accrue.

39. And truly it is a pitiful thing to see what rags some of them are not
ashamed to gather up, what Heretics, I say, they will profess to join
withal in opinions most brutish, and blasphemous, divided amongst themselves,
and discarded by the more learned Protestants, that the Reader may well with
the Po^t demand, quid sequar? aut quem? For M. Symons draws in Petrus
Abilardus, Si nons Upon the Ar^c. page 142. s^e Ba^on. tom. 12 in anno 1140. s^
^^nnius tom. 4. page 1223. and S. Bern. ep. 187. 188. and them ^ps.

P^py^ius Ma^souius l 3. Annal. in Ph^^ppo August. page 268. Bern. ep. 240.

^^^nar. Lu^^en et (...) A^bizen es. (...)


who though he died a repentant Catholic, and a religious Monk of the Abbey
of Cluny in France (which singular grace I find only granted by Almighty God
to no other Sect. Masters, but Berengarius and him) yet whiles he lived in
error he maintained, that Christ took not flesh to redeem mankind, that he
had two persons, that he was not God, and the like. Does not this man stoop
low for help think you? Again he together with M. Fox admits for brethren
the beastly and barbarous Albigenses, who had their beginning, as Massonius
writes, from one Henry Bruis, of whom and whose filthy life S. Bernard makes
mention. And these were so far of from being Ghospellers, as they could not
endure the Gospel it self, which having first most villainously abused, at
the siege of (...), they cast it over the Walls, toward the Catholic Army,
shooting many arrows after it, and crying aloud unto the Soldiers, ecce lex
vestra miseri, behold o miserable men, your law, or as Matthew Paris relates
it, ecce lex vestra, non curamus de ea, vestra sit^ behold your law, we care
not for it, take it to your selves. I omit their execrable blasphemies against
our Bl. Savior himself and S. Mary Magdalen, see Christianus Massaeus l. 17.
Chron. ad an. 1206. Caesa^ius Heiesterb. l. 5. illust. mirac. cap. 21.
not to offend Christian ears therewith, for which our Savior seemed to take
revenge upon them on the feast, and in the Church of the same Saint, where
7000. of them were slain, as says Massaeus, or many more, as Heisterbachius
who then lived. Now what greater discredit can there be to the Protestants, and
their cause, then then to rake Hell, and make Saints of these damned souls,
enemies of all piety, most seditious and rebellious spirits? But to proceed.

40. To these by M. Buckley, Fox, Abbotts, and others, see the Protestants
Apology. page 343.
are adjoined the Waldenses, whom they will have to be but scholars or rather
followers of the former: but this following is only in time and not in
doctrine, if we well consider what most authors write of them both, and M. Fox
is not ashamed to draw into his den fanatical Almericke, making him, for more
credit, of a Priest a Bishop. But M. Jewel with one blast blows away all
these clouted patches of this beggarly Church, saying thus: Of Abilard and
Almerick and certain other your strange names (M. Harding means Apostolicks,
Petrobusians, Wald^nses, Albigenses and Image-breakers) we have no skill, and
they are none of ours. Jewel defense page 48
So he: overthrowing in few words all M. Fox his laborious endeauours to make
them Saints, Martyrs, and true Ghospellers: so well do these men agree among
themsel^es in buylding up the babylonicall tower of their new devised and
confused Synagogue, one denying what another grants; yea one and the self
same man fighting with himself, saying and unsaying, affirming and denying. For
in the very tenth page of that defense, M. Jewel writes: As for John
Wickliff, John Husse, Waldo, and the rest, they were godly men, their greatest
heresy was this, that they complained of the dissolute and vicious lives of the
Clergy etc.

41. Lo here Waldo is a godly man without error in doctrine, and yet of his
followers M. Jewel has no skill, they are none of his. M. Jewel contrary to
himself.
Whereas notwithstanding you may be sure the scholars agreed in all things
with their masters. Which of these two M. Jewel will you believe? Truly as
for the godliness of Waldo I find no great record, so neither will M. Jewel be
able to show wherein he disagreed from the Waldensians, Guido Carmelita in su^ma
cap. 9. de VValdensium harefibus.
who as Guido the Carmelite writes, did hold amongst diverse other things
which I pretermit, that no man might judge another for life and death, because
it is written, nolite iudicare, Judge you not: That Laymen had authority given
them from Almighty God to hear Confessions, and absolve from sins; That all
carnal copulation when men are tempted thereunto is lawful. They contemned the
Apostles Creed, and would have Mass said but once in the year, to wit on
Maunday-Thursday, by saying seven Pater Nosters, and blessing the bread and
wine etc. This and much more was the godly doctrine of M. Jewels Doctor Waldo,
whose learning was equal to his virtue; for he could scant as most Authors
affirm, either write or read. But I mean no further to prosecute this
argument, of which who lists to read more, may peruse what Coccius, the
Author of the Protestants Apology, and F. Persons in the last part of his three
Conuersions, have written hereof, and he will rest satisfied. Now I come to
examine M. Barlowes disputation, and what skill of Divinity he shows in the
same.

42. He enters into the list with great courage, and tells the Reader, Barlow
page 257. M. Barlowes disputation about the first contradiction objected to
Card. Bellarm. discussed at large.
that F. Persons stands over the Cardinal, as if he were gasping for breath,
under the blow he has received for his contradictions, and makes the Father as
a Surgeon of the camp to cure three or four of them: which M. Barlow will
needs lance again, and cut as he thinks to the quick; but uses such dull
instruments and that so weakly, as he does neither cut, nor bruze, though much
he labor to do his best, and after some ten pages spent in idle babbling,
lying, and ignorant disputing, like a victorious conqueror in the end excusing
himself for the length of his discourse, by reason that F. Persons did set up
(says he) his crest, and rest upon it, that if in this, there be any
contradiction, he will yield that the Apologer has not ouerlashed in the
other, page 266.
he concludes triumphantly, saying: Let the impartial trial be the severe
judge either way. Which I also desire, and withal advertise the Reader, that
in some things I am the shorter where much advantage is given, for that the
same is afterward by F. Persons himself handled in due place in the ensuing
discussion.

43. The controversy then in hand, The state of the con^trouersy with M. Barlow.
is about the comfort which our meritorious actions do yield, and what
confidence is to be reposed in them, which the Cardinal delivers in three
Conclusions, the last whereof M. Barlow will have not only to contradict the
two former, but to be opposite to all the ^iue books which are written of that
matter: which because as F. Persons well noted it seemed strange, that five
books should be contradictory to one proposition, M. Barlow tells him he
should rather have thought it to be a very strange conclusion, which in so
small a roomth should have matter to cross a discourse so large. Barl. 257.
This then we shall now discuss; and for better perspicuity I will lay down
together the three conclusions of the Cardinal, Bellar. l. 5. de Iustif. cap.
7.
which M. Barlow will have to be so contradictory; and then examine his proofs
for the same. The confidence of holy men which they repose in God, proce^d^th
not from only faith, but from then good merits, and therefore we are to labor
all we can f^^ merits, that thereby we may have confidence in God. The Some
confidence may be placed in good merits, which are known to be such, so that
pride be avoided. The third. For the uncertainty of our righteousness, and
danger of vain glory, the surest way is to place all our confidence i^ the
only mercy and bounty of God. So Bellarmine^ proving each assertion out of the
Scriptures and ancient Fathers, but beforehand giving this caveat to the
Reader (which clean dasheth a good part of M. Barlowes verbal assault) that
it is not all one to say, that confidence may arise or grow from merits, and
that confidence may be placed in merits, for it may so fall out, that a man may
repose almost no confidence in his merits, for that he knows not certainly
whether he have any true merits or not, and yet he may abound both with true
and great merits: and out of these merits there may proceed in him a great
confidence toward God: by which distinction the whole c^ntrou^rsy may be
decided and diverse authorities of Scriptures and Fathers (which oth^rwis^ may
seem repugnant) be reconciled. Thus the Cardinall^ Now let us see what Sir
William does bring to impugn this doctrine, and to prove it contradictory?

Barl. page 25.

A f^^d division.


44. He begins with a division of vera and per^^c^a iustitia, which he
calls the two principal h^ads, to which all the chief questions of that
con^rouersy in Bellarmine may by reduced. By true justice ^e understands
inherent, and by perfect justice, that which is able to abide the trial of
Gods judgment. But ^ere is much mistaking, for that neither does Bellar. ^n
this sense call our justice perfect, neither can the perfection of a thing
which must needs be intrinsecall ^o the essence, be said properly to depend of
an extrinsecall effect, as is the trial of Gods judgment, or the reward which
is given in respect of our righteousness that proceeds from the inhere^t grace
within us, without any relation or depe^da^ce of the future judgment at al.

45. From this division he comes to a distinction of uncertainty, which he
says, is either rei, or personae, Ibidem M. Barlow understands not the
distinction which he makes.
of righteousness it self, or of the party that has it. This is as wise as the
former: for I would feign know of M. Barlow, how there can be inc^rti^udo rei,
unless it be de futuris contingentibus? for a thing, as it is existent, cannot
be uncertain, but has his being and essence, and therewith his truth and
unity. And in M. Barlowes example, the hypocrite who has no true righteousness,
and consequently not inherent, cannot be said to have incertitudinem r^i, for
that it is certain, as we do suppose, that he has no righteousness at all: and
all the uncertainty depe^ds on the person, who thinks him to have
righteousness when he has it not, and not of the thing it self, which is
determinatae Veritatis, of determinate truth in the affirmative or negative,
and truth (to use M. Barlowes Martial manner of speaking) either of ^ss^nce or
propri^ty cassi^res all uncertainty, the affirmative or negative: so a^ still
M. Barlow stumbleth, and with his subtle distinctions ouerreacheth himself,
and confounds all learning.

46. Well then, this uncertainty being of the person, what says he thereunto?
In this he is somewhat brief, but very confident, and concludes thus: A
strange inference.
If it be of the person, then merit is cut of. And why good Sir? For merit
(says he) raises a confidence, but where there is no comfort there can be no
confidence, Ibid.
and in uncertainty there is no comfort; for relyance on that whereof a man
doubts, causes rath^r a fear to be deceived, then a confidence to be
releiued. So he. Which argument supposes as granted, that our meritorious
works breed confidence, which we deny not, if he mean of that confidence
toward God before mentioned: and then it runs in this form: Where there is
no comfort there is no confidence: but in uncertainty there is no comfort,
ergo, no confidence: and so consequently no merit. That the force of this
syllogism may the better appear, I shall apply it to another matter thus:
Where there is no comfort, there is no confidence: but when our Savior prayed
in the garden, and said, tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem, Matthew. 26. and
27.
and cried ou^ on the Cross, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? there
was no comfort, ergo, no confidence; and then Caluins blasphemous and desperate
illation of our Saviors despairing on the Cross will soon be proved, from
which all learned Protestants no less then Catholics, do worthily disclaim.
But this is the divinity of Sir William.

47. Again, there is great equivocation in the word uncertainty, which M.
Barlow takes in the most general and absolute signification, as excluding all
manner of certainty and knowledge whatsoever; when as in Bellarmyne it is taken
far otherwise: lib. 3. de Iustif. ap. 2.
for in the second Chapter of his third book, having distinguished two sorts
of certaintyes, the one evident, the other obscure. Of this later he makes
three degrees: the first is of the certainty of faith, Three degrees of
certaynty in Bellarmyne.
cui nulla ratione potest subesse falsum; the second of such things as are
believed for humane authority, but so common as it excludes all fear though
not all falsity: for that all men may be false, and either deceive, or be in
such things deceived. Of this sort, he puteth for examples, that Cicero and
Virgil were famous men, that Augustus Caesar was Emperor, that Alexandria is
in Egypt, Constantinople in Thrace, Jerusalem in Palestine, Antioch in Asia;
and then declares the last degree in this manner: Tertium gradum habent illa
quae tot signis and coniecturis nituntur, vt securum hominem reddant, and
anxietatem excludant, non tamen formidinem omnem expellant: a^que haec dicitur
certitudo coniecturalis, and opinionis est po^ius (...) fidei. That is: these
things have the last degree of certainty, which are grounded on so many signs
and conjectures, that they make a man secure, and exclude all anxiety, though
they expel not all fear: and this is called coniecturall certainty, and it is
rather to be termed the certainty of opinion, then the certainty of faith. So
B^llarmyne. And by this coniectura^l certainty I assure my self, that M. Barlow
understands not the thing, whereof now he disputes, but shoo^eth wide of the
mark in mistaking the very terms of the question, and then fighting with his
own fiction, as if it were indeed his adversaries positive assertion; Great
mistaking.
for Bellarmyne disputing against the heretical opinion of these days, which
is, that a man must be certain certitudine fidei, cui non potest subesse
falsum, that he is in the state of grace, still takes the word certainty or
uncertainty in this sense: for so he seteth down the state of the Question in
the end of his second chapter. Status igitur quaestionis etc. Ibidem.
Wherefore the state of the question, if it be set down without deceit, and
amb^guity must be this: whether a man without special r^uelation ought, or may
be certain, with the certainty of faith, which excludes all falsity, that his
sins are forgiven him. So he^ Plainly declaring of what certainty he
speaks, to wit of that, which of all others is the greatest, and most
infallible.

48. Which being supposed, let us examine how well to the purpose M. Barlow
talks of uncertainty when he says, but in uncertainty there is no comfort.
Where if he take the word uncertainty, as it excludes all certainty, it is
true; but then he abuses the Reader, for B^llarmyne takes it not so, but
supposes and proves the contrary: if he take it as it is a denial only of
the certainty of faith, then it is most false; for it may have other certainty
sufficient to yield comfort, though it have not this, yea confidence as it is
hope cannot possibly stand with that absolute certainty. Hope cannot stand with
the absolute certainty of faith.
For who can be said to hope for that which he is certain to have? Or were it
not a ridiculous manner of speech to say, that the souls of the Saints in
heaven hope for the resurrection of their bodies, which infallibly they know
shall be restored, and reunited again unto the^? Or that we hope that God will
judge both the wicked and just, punishing the first with endless torments, and
rewarding the other with everlasting felicity? Well may the Saints be said to
expect their bodies, and we the judgment, but neither the one, nor the other by
reason of their undoubted certainty can be hoped for, as is evident.

49. And whereas M. Barlow says, that relianc^ on that whereof a man ^oubts,
causes rather a fear to be deceived, then a confid^nce to be relieved, is far
from the purpose, and a new changing of the term. For who says, that a man
doubts of his justice or righteousness? Bellarmyme expressly denies it, and
says, that the moral certainty that a man has of his merits or
justification, is so great, Bell. l. 3. de Iustif. cap. 11^ ^. Tertia sententia.
that although it take not away all fear; yet does it exclude all anxiety, and
wavering, yea doubting also, if he may be said to doubt, who assenteth to
neither part. So he. Which may be made more clear by the example of S. Paul,
debet in spe qui arat, arare, he that tilleth the ground, must till it in hope,
1. Cor. 9^
that is, hope that the ground tilled, will bring forth fruit; Moral certainty
sufficient to yield comfort.
and he who thus hops is neither certain that he shall reap the fruit, for
then he would not hope the same, and it may so fall out, as that he may reap
none at all: neither yet is he doubtful whether he shall, or shall not, for he
hops that he shall, and for that he has many reasons, and so assenteth to
the affirmitiue part, or else he would never have sown: as likewise does the
sayler on the seas, for if he were as doubtful of drowning, as ariuing unto
the port he sayleth to, he would never I think adventure to pass them over.
And whether this moral certainty which both sowers and sailors have, be not
sufficient to yield them rather confidence to be relieved, then a fear to be
deceived, needs no other proof then the common practice and custom, which
in the one, and in the other we daily behold. From this argument M. Barlow with
like good fortune proceeds to another thus:

50. This also (says he) crosses the very next precedent proposition, Ibid.
that some confidence may be reposed in our own righteousness and good works,
if men be assured that they be good works. But by this proposition in hand, it
seems none can be assured. If they may, why does he ^al it incertitudine^
iustitiae nostrae, the uncertainty of o^^ righteousness? If they may not, wh^re
then is their c^nfid^nce? or how may they settle it? If some may, and others
not, he should have described, and distinguished them, or else that foregoing
proposition might well have been spared^ which af^oards little use and less
comfort; and in that regard is directly opposite to this last, which is full of
confidence and consolation. Hitherto M. Barlow, fighting like a blind man with
his face turned from his adversary, and then flourishing in the air, where all
his dry blows do but beat against the wynd, and touch not B^llarmine at all^
whose words had he seen and understood, he would never I think have framed
this idle conceit. For what contradiction is there, I pray you between these
two propositions: some confidence may be reposed in our good works, so that by
moral coniecturall certainty we know them to be such, and this other, for that
if we speak of the certaynty of faith, which can be subject to no falsity, we
are uncertain whether our works be meritorious or not; and therefore in
respect thereof as also to avoid pride, is is best to repose all our confidence
in the mercy and bountifulnes of Almighty God. Truly no more, then is in this
other, They that think themselves morally assured of M. Barlows fidelity, may
repose some confidence in him: but because this their assurance is not so
great, but that they may be deceived, as he deceived his master the Earl of
Ess^x, who reposed so much confidence in him, by proclayming out of the pulpit
at Paul's Cross those things which the other before his death, for the
quieting of his conscience had disclosed unto him in secret, therefore it is
best to let him alone, and trust to Almighty God, of whose fidelity no man can
have any cause to fear, or doubt.

51. By which is easily answered the foresaid argument, the force whereof
rests upon these contradictory terms, that, M. Barlow alters Bellarmines
words the better to impugn them.
a man may be assured of his good works, and, none can be assured of their
good works: but neither the one, nor the other is in this place of Bellarmine.
For he says not, that a man may be assured, but, that if he be assured: and in
the second, for the uncertainty of our righteousness, and not, none can be
assured of their righteousness: for so it were a contradiction, if the word
ass^red were taken in the self same sense and signification in both places.
But as the words lie in B^llarm. albeit he should speak of the same certainty
in both places (as he does not;) yet were it not any contradiction at all, for
both parts are true: the first, that men may repo^e confidence in their good
works, if with the certainty of faith (as they may do by divine revelation)
they know them to be such^ the second thus, for the uncertainty of our
righteousness (for without revelation we cannot be sure thereof) it is best to
repose all our confidence in the mercy of Almighty God. Wherein here stands
the contradiction? And M. Barlow shows great ignorance in this matter, when
he says that, by this proposition of Bellarmine, it s^emeth that none can be
assured: if they may, why does he call it incertitudinem iustitiae nostrae, the
uncertainty of our righteousness? This, I say, is very simple stuff: for does
not this Prelate preach^ somtymes to his people of the uncertainty of the hour
of death, and yet God may reveal to any man in particular of his audience,
when he shall dye? Now of these two propo^^^^o^s, i^ a man be certain of the
hour of his death, he needs not to be wa^ned by the Preacher, and for that
men are ordinarily vncertayn^^ therefore it is good that the Preachers put them
often in mind thereof; what Divine, what Philosopher^ yea what man of common
sense and judgment, unless he have as little wit and learning as this Minister,
would say that one part of this argument were contradictory to the other? I
think the man was musing o^ some other matter, when he wrote this patched,
ill-coherent, and ignorant discourse.

52. I pretermit his idle cavil against F. Persons about three questions
worthy of M. Barlows profou^d learning, Ba^low page 259.
and answered after by the Father himself after which he puts down the
three conclusions of the Cardinal before alleged, and then thus like some
Gra^maticall Monte-bank frames this discourse: There cannot be any thing more
violently contradicting, yea totally euerting the very principal question: for
quatenus implye^ that some confidence may be placed in m^rit, but with a
limitation tenus qua: this last admits no confining, but draws our whole
confidence from man's m^rit to Gods mercy alone, page 260.
and carries with it a double contradiction, both subiecti and obiecti, so to
speak. Do not you think that he has spoken well, and much to the purpose?
From these flourishing words let us come to his proof, and discuss in a word
or two what he brings to prove a contradiction in the subject and object. But
first I must her^ tell the reader, that now he shall find M. Barlow ou^ of his
sphere (I mean out of Erasmus proverbs, M. Barlow extraspheram actiuitatis
suae.
Martialls Epigrams, and other Poets) and to handl^ weapons which he knows
not how to use, I mean^ the terms of art, which become him as well to deal^
withal, as to see an ape fight with a sword and buckle^^ for thus he begins.

53. The subject (says he) tota fuducia, Ibidem.
man's whole confidence: this excludes all partitio^ in it self, it must be
entire, take it either as totum quantitatis, M. Barlow understands not the
Authors he alleges.
because confidence may be ^xt^nd^d or r^mitted, be greater or less; or as
totum rationis, as it is defined an hope corroborate and perfect; ^r as totum
potentiale seu virtutis, confid^nce of this or that nature and quality. In
which words are many mistakings, and those also very gross: first confidence
being a spiritual quality inherent in the will or second power of the soul,
cannot be said to have totum quantitatis, n^que per se, n^que per accidens, as
S. Thomas in this very place mentioned by M. Barlow does teach, D. Thom. 1.
part. q. 76. artic. 8. in corpora articuli.
as presently we shall see. Again where he says that confidence may be
extended or remitted, there is an implicancy in the terms, if we speak in the
phrase of schoolmen: for only quantity can be extended and only quality
remitted: and to join them both together, is (to use M. Barlowes phrase) to
couple Moses two b^asts in one yoke, which will not agree: quantity may be
extended or contracted, quality intended or remitted; but to say, that quantity
may be remitted, is as proper a speech, as to say, that the nature of a quality
is to be divided, and of a substance to be intended.

54. Neither was it for nothing that M B^rlow ^yted only the bare name of S.
Thomas in the margent without all refere^ce to any place: for had he but quo^ed
the part, queston, and article, he should have di^ected the Reader, where to
have seen his open ignorance refuted: for S. Thomas disputing how the whole
soul is in every part of the body, Totality threefold in the opinion of S.
Thomas.
shows first how many ways a totality, or wholenes may be taken; and
answers, that a whole thing may be said to be either, totum quod diuiditur in
p^rtes quantitati^^^^ sicut tota linea, vel totum corpus A whole that is
deuid^^ into his quantitatiue parts, as a whole line, or a whol^ body: or a
whole that is divided into essential par^^^ as a thing defined into the parts
or members of the d^finition^ or a potentiall, which is divided into his
vi^tuall or operative parts (not of this, or that nature and quality, as M.
Barlow very ignorantly conceaueth, or rather mistaketh it:) and then says
afterward, tot^litas quantitatiua non potest attribu^ anima, nec per se, n^^
per accidens, and how then can confidence have his totum quantitatiuum? Or how
will M. Barlow measure the same by inches or e^ls, by feet or fathoms? yea how
does he cite S. Thomas for that which so plainly (...) gainsaieth and refuteth?
but ne suitor vltra cr^pidam, M. Barlow, now is beyond Erasm^s Chyliads, and
Ouids Metamorphosis. This triple division of totality being set down by M.
B^rlow, he adioyneth as out of B^llar^mine these words: The WHOLE, s^ith the
Cardinal, whether greater or less, whether weak or strong, wh^th^r one or
other, is WHOLLY to be cast on Gods m^rcy. M. Barlow Wholy mistaken.
And is there no difference in your divinity (good Sir) between these two
speeches, The best course for M. Barlow were to leave his lyin^, and speak
truly; and, M. B^^low is to leave his lying, and speak truly, when as the
first is but exhortatiue, and the later absolute? The Cardinal only says,
that the safest way is to repose our whole confidence in Gods mercy alone, and
never ye^ made this absolute proposition, Our whole confidence is wholly to be
c^st on Gods mercy alone. What wresting, what forging is this? And yet this man
very devoutly in this place preaches unto us of cor contritum, which God will
have, and cor diuisum, which he does hate: but how contrite M. Barlowes heart
is, or whether it be divided or united, I know not; sure I am, that here is
double dealing, much ignorance, and nothing with any learning or sincerity
handled.

55. From the subject he comes to the object. The object also (says he)
affoards a strong contradiction, page 2^1.
sola misericordia, mercy alone etc. the very force of which word put the
tempter to silence, and to flight also, ei soli, him only shall thou serve. Had
the Cardinal said in the first place, man's confidence must, or may be reposed
in his own merits, and afterward subioyned, man's confidence must, or may be
placed in Gods mercy, these had not been contradictory but communicatiue: merit
might have part staked with mercy: but when he adds in mercy ALONE, M. Barlowes
potent word^
merit, Saints, and Angels, and whatsoever beside are abondoned and cassiered:
for solum, alone admits no consort, as says Aquinas. Lo here a short conquest:
one word ALONE cassiering from confidence all merits, all Saints, all Angels,
and whatsoever else, and from M. Barlow himself all learning, all sincerity, all
truth, all honesty: this doubtless is a potent word that contains so great
virtue in it. But let us examine the force of this inference. First I would
demand of M. Barlow what Saints and Angels have to do with the confidence
that rises out of our good wo^kes, that by this word Alone, they should be
abandoned and cassierd? Did ever any affirm, that this confidence of our
merits did depend on them, as upon the object of the same? This is one
notorious foolery.

56. Again, where will he find in all Bellarmyne that solamisericordia, only
mercy, is the entire object of our confidence? Does he no^ say, that some
confidence may be reposed in our works, so we be sure they be me^itorious, and
that we avoid pride? He says in deed, that the securest way is to repose all
our confidence in the only mercy of God, but not, that the mercy of God is the
only object. And M. Barlow whiles he thinks to put his adversary to silence,
as Christ did the Devil with the word Only, M. Barlow makes only in the word
Only.
himself is overcome with temptation of one lie at the least, if he knew what
he wrote, or of ignorance if he knew it not. Moreover where he adds, that had
the Cardinal said in the first place, man's confidence must, or may be reposed
in his own m^rits, and afterward had subioyned, man's confidence must, or may
be placed in Gods mercy, these had not been contradictory, but co^munica^iue;
he both deals falsely, and refuteth himself: falsely, in foysting in the word
must in both propositions, which is not in Bellarmyne, and it clean alters
the sense: for it is not all one to say, one may do such a thing, and a man
must do it: for example, it is a far different thing to say, that M. Barlow
may give the reuenews of his Bishopric of one whole year, if he will, to the
poor people of Lincoln, and M. Barlow must give his renenews of one year to
the said poor people. But without this cobling and cogging in of words M.
Barlow can make no contradi^tio^. He refuteth also himself for omitting the
word must, here thrust in as I said. Bellarmin^ says the self same, to wit,
that confid^nce may be reposed in m^rits, and confi^^nce may be reposed in God.
But the first is subject to error and pride, the second is secure, and
therefore it is best to repose all on the same. Which two propositions even by
M. Barlows confession are not contradictory, and therefore all his preaching and
prattling, as F. Parsons well calls it, se^ueth rather to show himself a false
and ignorant writer, then to prove any contradiction in the Cardinal.

57. After this sorry stuff he begins a Sermon out of S. Augustine upon
these words of the Psalm, Barl. pa. 261.
Memorabor iustitiae tuae solius: saying, that the said Father does insist upon
the same, both with an admiration, Ps. 70.
o solius, and also with a question, rogo vos, I pray you: why should he ad
this word solius? Had it not been enough for him to say, S. Augustine
misunderstood.
I will remember thy righteousness? No, but solius prorsus, it alone,
altogether I will remember: why so? Vbi meam non cogito, for in so saying I
put out of my mind any righteousness which is mine own. So M. Barlow: and
having ended his devotion, he concludes thus: So then totum, whole confidence,
that taks away the particular aliqua, in his former proposition, sola excludes
meritum in both propositions. This is all he has touching the object, and all
wide of the mark, as is most evident.

58. Yea so far is S. Augustine from checking this assertion of the Cardinal,
as he elswere grants the same, saying: vt speret regnum, habeat bonam
conscientiam, credat, and operetur, Aug. in prafat. ad Psalm. 31.
that a man may hope for the kingdom of heaven, let him have a good
conscience, let him believe and labor. So he: and the place here cyted by M.
Barlow has no more coherence with this matter now in controversy, then a poke
full of plums, with the way to London. For our question is of such works, as
be meritorious, and follow, or rather flow from Gods grace inherent within us.
But S. Augustine speaks of that grace which goes before all our good works,
and of that justification which the deuines call the first justification, by
which a sinner is made just and first called unto God from that state, and
says, that this grace or righteousness no works can merit, which all Catholics
admit, and the Cardinal elsewhere at large does prove: Bellarm. l. 6^ de gratia
and lib a^b. c^^ 4. and 5.
and that he means the first, not the second justification, is clear by his
own words following in this explication, which are these: I am enim si superbi
desideramus, v^l fatigati r^deamus etc. C^n 2 in psa^. 70. (...).
For now if we that are proud do desire, or wearied do return, we cannot
return but by grace: grace is freely given, for if it were not a free gift, it
were not grace. Moreover if therefore it be grace, because it is freely given,
nothing of thine went before for which thou must receive it. For if any of thy
good works went before, thou have received a reward, no free gift; the reward
due unto thee is punishment: that therefore we are delivered, comes not from
our merits, but is of his grace; him therefore let us praise to whom we owe all
that we are, to whom we owe our salvation, with which the Prophet concluded,
after he had said many things, saying: memorabor iustitiae tuae solius, I will
remember thy righteousness alone. So S. Augustine. So clearly explicating
himself, and euincing M. Barlows ignorance, as that I shall not need to ad any
further Commentary for confutation of the same. The rest which he adds by way
of antithesis totum, aliqua, sola, meritum, is nothing else but mere foolery,
as shall be afterward showed.

59. From Divinity he comes to Logic, making his entrance with a vaunting
insultation of his Adversaries ignorance, Barlow page 262.
and want of skill about the true nature of a contradiction. In delivering of
which, the poor man is so embroyled, as he knows not what he says, but
clean mistaketh every thing which he speaks of. For first he supposes,
that a con^radiction must be where some general proposition ^ither expressly or
implicatiuely is crossed by a particu^er, M. Barlows embroilme^ts in Logic.
but this is no equal and perfect division, for that ^ contradiction requires
not always a general pro^osition, but may be between two particular, so that
^he subject remain indivisible, to wit, under one, and ^he selfsame respect
under them both. For if I should ^ay, that M. Barlow has skill in Logic
(though it be ^ery little) and M. Barlow has not skill in Logic: ^gaine, M.
Barlow is Bishop of Lincoln; M. Barlow ^s not Bishop of Lincoln etc. I do not
doubt but that ^e would think these propositions, though both par^iculer, to
be truly contradictory, and consequently his ^wne supposition to be false; as
that also is very fond, which for explication of his express and employed
con^radiction he joins, saying: In Logic we find two ma^^er of
contradictions, one expressed, the other employed, and ^oth of equal force: the
first, Logitians call a contradiction ^n negato, the other in opposito or
adiecto: of the first ^ort are these examples, wherein the negative note is
expres^ed, as omnis homo est, aliquis non est; of the second ^ort are such,
wherein the note negative is omitted, and yet ^ne member overthrows another. So
M. Barlow out of Logic. And this as I said is very fond, for that it is not ^f
the nature of a contradiction in adiecto, to be impli^d, but rather the
contrary to be expressed in terms, ^t being all one with that which is called
implicantia ^n terminis, an implicancy, or contradiction in the ^ery terms
themselves. For example: If I should say M. Barlow is a brute beast, the
adiectum or terminus ^rute beast, destroys the subject, to wit M. Barlow,
whose behavior, though it be often times very bru^ish and beastly, yet is he
by nature a man, and that also a very natural one.

60. But the greatest mistaking and ignorance of all the rest, is in the
example which he makes of this his employed contradiction: for having made this
proposition, M. Barlow brings an example of a contradiction which in his own
opinion is no contradiction at all.
Every Bishop of Rome is under Christ the immeatate and sole chief Pastor of
the whole Church in the Christian world, this, says our Philosopher, may be
contradicted two ways: first expressly, Some Bishop o^ Rome is not the
immediate and sole chief pastor etc. Thi^ is a contradictory with the
negative. Secondly it may be crossed by implicatio^, as thus: The patriarch of
Constantinople is under Christ the immediate and sole chief p^stour of the
East^rne Church. This though it be a contradiction in opposito, yet does it as
mainly oppose the former general proposition as if it had a negative no^ etc.
Thus far M. Barlow, as good a Philosopher a^ M. Morton, who though he profess
to have been ^ Reader of Logic, yet shaped us out a syllogism o^ six terms
to prove Equivocation in an oath to b^ unlawful: such great Deuynes are these
men^ as they know not the first elements of this faculty. For ha^ not M. Barlow
been exceeding ignorant of the first rule, and necessary condition of a
contradiction ^ which is, that both parts c^nnot together be eythe^ true of
false; he would never have given this for a^ example, seeing himself, neither
belieueth the Bishop of R^m^ to be head of the whole, or Patriarch of
Constantinople of the Eastern Church. And where the^ is the contradiction? And
is not M. Barlow well seen^ in Philosoph^, who chooses out an example to prove
a contradiction, in which, even in his own opinion there is no contradiction
at all? Truly I may well suspect that he never came to be Bishop ^f Lincoln
for his learning, which every where he ^heweth to be less then mean, and
therefore ouerla^heth without measure, but for some other inferior quality,
little perhaps befitting that calling. Let us to make him conceive his error
the better, exemplify in some more familiar examples. The L. of Canterbu^y is
Primate of all, and every part of England; and ^he L. of York is Primate of
all the North part, is with me no contradiction: for that I hold both
propositions to be false, and neither of them both to have any Primacy at all
in that Church: and as the later will not claim it, so M. Abbots may be sure,
I will not assign it unto him, whom I do as much hold to be Abbot of
W^stminster, as Bishop of Cant^r^ury. And the like must M. Barlow needs say of
his two propositions, for that neither of them in his judgment ^s true, and
therefore are more contrary then contradictory; as are also these, omnis homo
currit, nullus homo currit, and the like.

61. Wherefore if it be (as M. Barlow will needs have it) our very case in
hand, even by the verdict of all skillful Philosophers in the world, the
Cardinal will be quit at least from a contradiction: and it is but childish
babbling, yet very frequent in M. Barlow, to make the oppositio^s of the terms
themselves, saying, that h^re is a double contradictio^ both subiecti and
praedica^i; Mere babbling.
the Patriarch of Constantinople crosses the Bishop of Rome; the East^rn^
Church and the whole world contradict each other implicitly. This I say is but
babbling, for there is as great opposition between the former two propositions
before set down, as in this, Cant^rbury cr^ss^th York; all England the north
parts. And again, omnis cannot stand with nullus, currit with non currit: and
yet he will sooner bring Constantinople to Rome^ and York to Canterbury, then
prove any contradictio^ to be in the same. But let us draw to an end of M.
Barlows dispute.

62. I pass over the rest he adds, concerning this matter, although his
chiefest fraud and cosenage be contained in the same. M. Barlowes bad dealing.
For of an exhortatiue proposition in the Cardinal, he makes an absolute and
necessary, by cogging in the words is, and must, thus: man's confidence is to be
reposed in the alone mercy of God, and, some confidence of man must be placed
in his own merits, which are his own forgeryes, and not the Cardinals
assertions: and then further in falsely charging F. Persons, as though he said
that good works increase confidence in their own nature, page 263.
and therefore will needs have his doctrine to be condemned by Pius V. amongst
other like assertions of a Louain Doctor; but all is forgery: for the Father
speaks not of our works, as alone they proceed from us, but as they proceed
also from Gods grace within us, and for that cause calls them the good works
of a Christian: and it is unchristian dealing in this Prelate to say, that this
proposition was ever condemned by Pius V. or any other Pope or Council, who
only speak of our works as they are done by a Pagan, without grace, or any
other supernatural help; and last of all for maliciously transposing the word
any, to make it signify that which the Father never dreamed of, thereby to
make him contrary to B^llarmine, and contradictory to himself. For he makes
him to say, that a man may place any confidence in his own merits, so he
beware of prid^, which is a notorious untruth. But I will not, as I said,
further stand to refell these falshoodes, for that the Father himself has very
learnedly performed the same, and M. Barlow will never be able with any show of
truth o^ learning to make any reply thereunto.

63. And whereas for the last vpshot of this his dispute, he marshalleth forth
in one rank together, a heap of contradictory speeches, giving us for a
parting blow to make all sure a knocking Lie; I shall with the same conclusion
end also this matter, not entering into any other confutation thereof, then the
bare rehearsal or skoring up the untruths, which he has couched together in
this one number or paragraph, excepting only the last, in which I shallbe
forced to be a little more large.

64. First then he would feign make the Cardinal and F. Persons to disagree, A
cluster of M. Barlowes lies.
by setting down their contrary positions, and the^ the Cardinal to fight
with himself: the first part he proves thus: Our own good works have such an
uncertainty in them, as that our whole confidence must be referred to Gods
mercy says the Cardinal: Barlow page 264. 265.
Our good works in their own nature are such as that they may give hope and
confidence of themselves, says his Champion. So he. And here at the least are
three lies, if not more: for Bellarmine says not, that our works have such an
uncertainty in them, as no confidence can be reposed in them; nether does he
say, that all our confidence must be referred unto Gods mercy: neither does F.
Persons affirm, that our good works IN THEIR OWN NATVRE may give hope and
confidence of themselves, for they require Gods grace and promise of reward to
make them meritorious, and to yield confidence. M. Barlow goes on. Man's WHOLE
confidence is to be placed in the mercy of God alone, says Bellarmine: A man
may willingly repose ANY confidence in his own works, says F^ Pers^n. Both
are gross lies in M. Barlow. For these two proposi^ions are neither found in
Bellarmyne, nor F. Persons, but forged by himself, and are both most false.

65. And truly, no marvel though M. Barlow be very resolute in his refuting
our opinions, when as he frames an adversary in the air, whom he may conquer;
and then telle^h in great sadness the Reader, that he fights with us, which as
you know is no great ma^stery, but misery rather, both to the man and his
cause. For having in this place in four propositions told us five lies, thus
he vaunteth over us, saying: Between them both, they have broached a goodly
doctrine, and v^ry comfortable no doubt. But I have now showed that here is no
broaching of theirs^ but all of M. Barlowes own brewing, M. Barlo^ a bad
Brewer.
and abusing their words and meaning. To his former lying, he adds ignorance,
and would make the Cardinal to contradict himself, saying in his behalf,
That good works of their own nature raise up our con^idence toward God, and
yet a man is uncertain, whether they be good or no. The first part I have
showed to be false, if by their own nature he understand them, as done without
Gods grace inherent in the doer. The second is true, if M. Barlow understood
it: for the word uncertain excludes not all certainty, as before I noted, but
the certainty of faith. Secondly (he says) man must be acertayned that the
works he ^^th be truly good, page 265.
or else he may not trust in them, and yet no man can assure himself that they
are so, unless he have a revelation, says the Cardinal, then which wh^t is
more UNCERTAIN? saepe fallax, semper incerta, are his own words. So M. Barlow.

66. How men may be acertayned of their good works, has been already
declared, and how we may be acertayned of your truth and fidelity, How we^ may
be acertayned of M Barlowes^ fidelity.
if there were no other proof, this one place alone were sufficient to
demonstrate, and euince most plainly, that either your ignorance is
intolerable, or your lying most shameless. The Cardinal shows, that without
revelation, we cannot have absolute certaynty of our being in grace, or
perseverance in the same unto the end, because this certainty being the
certainty of faith, depends upon Gods divine revelation, as her formal
object, which is made clear by the connection of the present and future times in
the Cardinal. For who but God can reveal to a man what shall be his end,
either for bliss or woe? Annunciate quae ventura sunt in futurum, and sci^mus
quia Dij estis vos, Isa. 41.
says the Prophet to the Gods of the Gentiles: and by his own plain words in
another place, where he says, Bell. l. 3. d^ Iustif. cap. 2..

Status igitur and.10.. Respo^deo, haec omnia.


non posse qu^mquam sine peculiari reuelatione certo s^ire certitudine fidei
sibi remissa ^sse peccata. No man without special revelation can certainly
know, with the ce^tainty of faith, that his sins are forgiven him, and
consequently whether he be in state of grace, and Gods favor or no. And is
this revelation trow you so uncertain? Is it saep^ fallax, se^per inc^rta? Or
is Bellarm. so blasphemous, as to auou^h the same? It should seem by M. Barlow,
that he is For he tells the Reader that they are his own word^; M. ^arlow
very gr^sly abuses the Cardinal.
but I must tell him the contrary, that it is M. Barlowes own lie, and that he
does singularly abuse both his Reader, and the Cardinal together by this
imposture, deluding the one, and slandering the other, and most of all
disgracing himself.

67. But least he should seem to impute this Atheistical paradox of the
uncertainty of Gods divine revelation to Bellarmine, without all proof, he
cyteth in the margent for his Readers direction lib. 1. de Verbo Dei cap. 2.
where if he repair to examine this matter, I assure him, he shall not find one
word thereof, but of the fanaticall opinion of the Swenkfeldians, who rejecting
all written authority, as well Scriptures, as Fathers, would have every man to
be directed by their own inward spirits, which Bellarmine says, is often
deceiptfull, always uncertain. For thus he writes: Quare cum sacra Scriptura
regula credendi certissima, tutissimaque sit, sanus profecto non cri^, qui ea
neglecta spiritus interni saepe fallacis, De verb. Dei lib. 1. cap. 2.. Quare
cum.
and semper incerti iudicio se commiscrit: which is; Wherefore seeing the holy
Scripture is the most sure and safest rule of belief, truly he will not be
thought to be well in his wits, who leaving the same shall betake himself to
the judgment of the inward spirit, often deceiptfull, and always uncertain.
By which words he plainly shows, that he is so far from speaking of Gods
divine revelation, as the wicked spirit of these heretics is different from
the spirit of Christ, to wit, as clean opposite as Hell to Heaven, truth to
falsehood, darkness to light. And with what face or forhead the^ can this
Minister turn the masculine gender into the feminine, the Swenckfeldian spirit
into Gods revelation? Yea, with what conscience can he say, that this
revelation may be an illusion? As some superstitious people (says he) take
that fire for a walking spirit which is but ignis fatuus, M. Barlows melancholy
conceit.
an illuding meteor; so Pharisaycall, and melancholic conceits may think
them to be infusions of the holy Ghost which are but speculatiue imaginations
of their own Ghost. Thus M. Barlow very profoundly, as you see, or rather most
profanely, comparing God^ revelation (for of that Bellarmine speaks) which is
always certain and certainly known of him to whom it is made, to his
walking spirit, or ignis fatuus, to Pharisaycall and melancholic conceits; as
though the truth of the said revelation depended on the disposition of the
receauer, and not wholly upon the infallible authority of Almighty God, who
reuealeth the same. I will not say that M. Barlow is either Pharisaycall or
melancholic, but that he is fatuus, or else fanaticus; albeit I say it not,
yet the thing it self will speak, if his malice were not greater then his
folly in this point, which I mean not to discuss.

68. After all these untruths and manifold ignorances, he concludes his
disputation with a Sermon, and is become very devout upon the sudden, and of
a tender conscience, telling us, M. Barlows sudden pang of devotion.
that it is better for the Cardinal to acknowledge an oversight in a long
discourse, then to overthrow one soul redeemed by Christ's blood:
Contradictions in assertions wounds but one opposite member; but unsoundness in
doctrine, concerning salvation, does wound the weak conscience of a Christian.
ibid.
And then runs on in the same descant; which is as much, as if some Harlot
after she had wearied her tongue with railing and lying on her neighbor,
should presently take upon her the person and state of a grave virtuous
Matrone, foris Helena, intus Hecuba, Nazianzen carmine aduersus ^^^lieres
ambitiosius se ornantes.
(to use S. Gregory Nazianz^ns phrase) or a false thief preach of truth and
honesty. For how many falshoodes, ignorances, and forgeryes have been showed to
be in this one dispute of his? How many, and how gross lies have been
detected? whereof his book is so fraught and furnished to the full, as it is
hard to say, whether any one number be free from the same^ For in one only
thing in the compass of little more then one page, in laying down 14.
proofs, he has made at least 15. untruths, whereby the Reader may see, how I
should be ouercloyed, if in laying forth examples of his dealing in this kind,
which now I come to treat of, I should stand upon all particulers. But I will
take a shorter course, and to this disputation adioyne a short examen of some
few lies, and these such only, as concern the person of his Adversary, wherein
as I am sure, that I have left very many vntouched^ so do I also think, that
some of them are more urgent and injurious, then those are which now I shall
produce.

69. The cause wherefore immediately after M. Barlows transpare^^ ignorance I
adioyne his vntruthes^ Why after the proofs of M. Barlowes ignorance fo^low
the examples of his lying.
is for that if it be possible one of them may excuse the other, it being a
received axiom amongst Deuines, that it is a less syn to lie out of ignorance
then of malice^ and the Apostle excused himself by this meane^ when he said.
Qui prius blasph^mus fui, and persecutor, and contum^li^sus, sed misericordiam
Dei consecutus sum, qui^ ignorans feci in in^redulitate. 1 T^n 1.
I who before was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and contumelious; but I have
obtained Gods mercy^ because I did it being ignorant in incredulity. And I wish
from my heart that this mercy, after so many blasphemies, iniuryes done to
Catholics, and most contumelious reproaches against all sorts of men of never
so singular sanctity and learning, powered now forth in the time of his ignorant
incredulity, may fall upon M. Barlow, which is the worst and greatest revenge I
do wish him.

70. This I say I would wish, but such as know the disposition of these me^,
although they find the^ ignorant enough, yet not always to offend of ignorance
as it is a negatio^ of knowledge, but rather of that which of the Deuines is
called ignora^tia prauae dispositionis, because they will follow their
erroneous judgment, and love lies, more then the truth; howsoever to make
fools feign, they cry out against Equivocation, and such as do maintain the
same. Sir Henry Wotton.
For so did also our late wooden Ambassador at Venice, who against the
Jesuits and their doctrine in this point, would be often very free, and as
himself thought very ingenious also, but more free in this art of Lying. For
being at Auspurge, and requested to write some motto, or sentence, with the
subscription of his name thereunto, was not ashamed to profess it to be the
chiefest point of his office, writing the definition of an Ambassador thus:
Vide Serarium in logis Apologet. par. 3. cap. 20.. 16. in fine.
Legatus est virbonus, peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipublicae causa. Domino
Ioanni Fleckhamero in perpetuum amicitiae pignus; Henricus Wottonius
Serenissimi Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hyberniae Regis Orator primus ad
Venetos. Augustae Vindeliciae 16. Augusti, anno Christiano 1604. That is: An
Ambassador is a good man, sent far from home to lie for the good of the
Commonwealth. To M. John Fleckhamer for a perpetual pledge of friendship,
Henry Wotton the first Ambassador of the most Sovereign King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland to the Venetians. At Augusta Vindelica the 16. of
August, in the Christian year 1604.

71. So this witty Gentleman, Barlow page 20^.
defining himself (to use M. Barlowes fantastical phrase) by his essential
and in steed of esse^tiall and specificall.
kindly parts, to with a good man that can lie well. And whether in the last
tumults of Venice betwixt the Sea Apostolic and that Commonwealth he
discharged not thoroughly this part of his charge, and that very essentially and
kindly also, I refer me to them who received his letters, and know what he
wrote. Surely M. Barlow in this book is so copious therein, that if other of
his own rank in our Country, were to be defined by him, The definition of an
English Bishop taken from the Idaea of M. Barlow.
a Protestant English Bishop should be nothing else, but an ignorant
Superintendent that can lie, rail, and flatter notoriously. Of his ignorance
we have already seen some proof, now let us see how well he can lie.

72. In the twelueth page he tells the Reader, that F. Persons having wished
the destruction of the Kings Majesty by the gunpowder-plot, page 12. A
malicious fictio^ against F. Persons
and by hope devoured the same, he came on his journey a good step (as some
report) toward England, that he might have song Te Deum in his native
Country, for the good success of that happy exployt. And this again he
repeats in the 217. page, saying: As if there were no difference between him
that should say, page 217.
F. Persons was almost upon the Sea coast of England, expecting the issue of
the powder plot, and his, that should aver, that he was upon the sea coast, and
shipped for England. So he.

73. This untruth both for the injury done to F. Persons, and for the
improbability of the thing it self, which has not so much as any shadow of
truth, deserves the first place; all Rome knowing the contrary to be most
true, that for the year before and after the powder plot, the said Father was
always in the City, or in the places near adjoining: and at this very time
when M. Barlow would have him to be on the sea coast he was sick in bed, in
which as his weakness would permit either himself to write, or to dictate to
another, he refuted the fifth part of Sir Edward Cooks Reports, which
refutation is unanswered as yet by him, and not answerable by any. Neither can
M. Barlow plead ignorance in this case, seeing that in the arraignment of F.
Garnet, where there was so much forcing and streyning of things to the
uttermost, as well against the said F. Persons in particular, as the whole
Order in general, there was no mention made heerof, nor yet in the printed
books both English and Latin, which since have been set forth of that matter.

74. Was the thing so small, trow you, as that it deserved not a remembrance
at least in that action in which far less presumptions then this were so
tragically exaggerated? Or could there have been imagined a more forcible
proof, or more direct means for the discrediting that Order, then to have
convinced, by this journey, the only Superior of all the English mission, to
have known and approved the same? No M. Barlow, had this happened, all you
Ministers ( genus irritabile vatum) had sounded it out with full mouth, all
pulpits, all books had proclaimed it, all Princes Courts, yea all corns of
Christendom had been cloyed with Embassages, pamphlets, Inuectiues, and
clamors against him: and therefore to set down this fiction in print, well
shows how far your malice ouerwent your wit, Barlow page 360.
howsoever you temper the first place with this parenthesis ( as some report)
for you could not but know that they reported a lie; as you do again with
exceeding impudent malice, when you write, but prove it not, that F Persons had
his heart, hand and head in the powder plot. Aug. l. 2. Confess. cap. 9.
But I see that in you verified, pudet non esse impudentem, you are ashamed
that you are not shamel^s^

75. In the 98. page of his book he makes in a different letter cyting also
the place, page 98.
F. Persons to say: That as some of the Fathers, who to amimate the persecuted
Christians, An untruth joined with forgery.
d^scribed the l^wd life and fearful end of their pers^cutors ( as Nero and
Domitian) so he to comfort the Catholic traitors, must revile and belly that
worthy Queen, the rather for that she was a woman. So he: printing only the
word belly in ordinary letters, as though all the rest had been the words of the
Father. But without any belying M. Barlow, I must tell him, that here are three
lies in two lines: for neither does F. Persons call Catholics Traitors, whom
in most of his books he has defended and cleared from that false imputation;
neither does he say, that he must reuyle Queen Elizabeth, neither that he will
do it the rather, for that she is a woman: and yet M. Barlow presently
replyeth, saying: If F. Persons have no other comfort th^n to cheer them up,
because a woman quelled their insolency; then may the devil be comforted etc.
What ^ill you say to this man? F. Persons says, that Q. Elizabeth was the
first woman christian, or created, that took upon her supreme power in
spiritual or Ecclesiastical matters, and M. Barlow cannot refell the same,
nor does he go about it: but from his own chayr of Oracles, tells us, without
further proof, that she was no usurper by nouell-clayme, and that God had
annexed it to her crown; and instead of proving this, enters into the
commendation of women, as if F. Persons had discommended them: but the truth
is, he saw, that thereby he had more matter for talk, and authority for
proof, then in the barren subject of the feminine Supremacy, of which before
Q. Elizabeth no example can be showed, and therefore he accommodated F. Persons
text to serve to his purpose in that behalf.

76. Again M. Barlow says, See this ly refuted ^n the T^eatise of M^tigation
l page 72.

Quiet and sober Reckoning: page 51.


that F. Persons in his Viro doloso, his Doleman, had renounced his part in our
Sovereign, and pronounced him elsewhere a desperate and forlorn heretic; yea
they are his express words, whosoever shall consent to the succession of a
Protestant, is a most greiuous and d^mnable sinner. So he: and here I must tell
him that this is an express lie, or rather that here be as many lies as lines;
Barlow page 125. and 255.
for neither has F. Persons renounced his part in our Sovereign, neither ever
pronounced him elsewhere a desperate and forlorn heretic, with which none but
some desperate forlorn heretic indeed, like M Barlow, would ever have
charged him: neither are the other F. Persons express words, Dol. p. 1. page
21^ and. p. 2 c^ 5. page 117^
for in that place he neither names, nor means a Protestant, more then a
Puritan, Brownist, or else a Catholic, as in the place by me here cyted is by
himself declared. And does not the^ M. Barlow for his writing deserve a good
reward of a silver ^hetstone? Is this dealing Episcopal, or not rather
Diabolical by such lying and forged fictions to do so open injury to others?
Another in this kind he makes in his Commentary on these words of F. Persons,
as he cyteth them (for in the text they are other) as I shall show. Barlo^ page
13^.
As for Catholics (says he) they accept even the least favor gratefully, as
hoping to have received much greater (as due unto the^) if his Ma^^sty had not
been preu^nt^d by sinister information. So M. Barlow relates his words, by
making a parenthesis at ( as due unto them) and then setting down the other,
as immediately following, if his Mai^sty had not been pr^uented by sinister
information. But let us hear F. Person^ speak in his own words, as they lie
in the Letter, and thereby both the fidelity of M. Barlow in cyting them, and
the truth of his answer in replying against them, will the better appear.
Thus then he says: L^^ter page 41. see before page 36.. 17.
As for Catholics, they accept gratefully whatsoever least favor has been,
or is done unto them; and do not doubt, but that if his Mai^sty had not been
prevented by sinist^r information, and persuasion of others, they had tasted of
much great^r, as due unto them, in that they are natural borne subi^cts of the
r^alme, most Loyal in heart, and affection: and never meaning otherwise but to
live in most ord^rly and duti^ull subjection, and obedi^nce to his Highness, as
to their li^ge Lord and Souer^y^ne etc. So F. P^r^ons. And who could use more
myld and moderate words to express the dutiful minds of Catholics, toward
his Majesty, then he does in these?

77. But let us see M. Barlowes Commentary by which alone will sufficiently
appear with what malignant spirit his mind is possessed. For if hell it self
were let loose, it is hard to say, whether all the Devils together would make
a mo^e false, A most fa^se and malicious collectio^.
more w^^ked^ or more injurious Answer, then he has done. For thus he
writes. H^re Judas is turn^d into Caiphas, and sp^akes a truth as Pr^sident of
the Couns^ll for the POWDER PLOT: page 130. and 131.
the revealing thereof by a letter unexpected, he cunningly calls a sinister
information, which indeed preu^nted his Majesty from feeling the event of that
dreadf^ll ^esigne, and them also of their gr^ater hopes, which here he c^lls
their DVE, as if ALL but THEY were usurpers: for had not the preu^ntion happened,
the greatest places of the land ( which THEY in hope had swallowed) had ^ene
now at their disposal, and this prevention he calls sinister, as unlucky unto
them etc So this lying Minister. For that he does here most loudly and lewdly
lie, needs no other proof then the comparing of F. Persons words, with this
answer of his, which can no more stand together, then fire and water, truth
with falsehood, or (for that he plays the beast so brutishly in this place) to
use his own example, page 268.
no more th^n Moy^es his ox and ass in on^ yoke.

78. For were not his wit very little, and honesty less, he would never show
such fraudulent malignity in facing so heinous a matter without all ground,
proof, or semblable conjecture, especially seeing in F. Persons the favor
mentioned, to be meant only of that which his Majesty showed at his entrance.
For these are his words almost in the next ensuing lines: Ibidem.
If there had b^n^ no p^rse^utio^ before that treason, this might have b^n^
assign^d for some probable cause of the subs^quent tribulation^: but all
England knows, that this is not so, but that his Mai^sties sweet and mild
asp^ct toward Catholics at his first entran^e, was soon by art of their
en^myes, au^rted, long before the conspiracy fell out etc. Which words fully
declare, what he meant by sinister informati^n and persuasion of others, M.
^arlows glo^ has no coherence with the text.
and M. Barlow willing to dazzle the Readers eyes, and imprint in his mind a
suspicion of F. P^rs^ns his acknowledge of the powder plot, first by a hist^ron
proteron, inuerteth his words, cobling in some of his own, and then frames a
gloss, which, notwithstanding all his dealing, agrees not with the text: so
good a writer he is, as he knows not of one thing how to infer another, for
these words, as hoping to have received much gr^ater, cited by M Barlow in a
different letter, are not F. P^rs^ns words; neither does F. Persons shut up (
as due unto them) within a pare^thesis, as immediately following the former
sentence; and the words, if his Majesty had not been prevented by sinister
information, in F. Persons go before the other, as due unto them, and are
there so plainly explicated, as none but some malicious Minister could be
ignorant of his meaning.

79. Yet after all this cutting off, transposition, inuersion, and changing in
so short a sentence, to take it as it pleases M. Barlow to give it, how will
the conclusion drawn thereof, agree with the premises, Catholics had received
at his Majesty's hands greater favors as due unto them, if he had not been
prevented by sinister information? How, I say, will it follow, that by sinister
informatio^ F. Persons meant the revealing of the powder plot by a letter,
which, says he, prevented his Majesty from f^eling the event of that dreadful
design? And again: and this prevention he calls sinister, as unlucky to them:
adding moreover, that the hopes which F. Persons meant to be due to the
Catholics, were those which should have ensued unto them by that treason, which
(says M. Barlow) here he calls their DVE, as if ALL, but THEY, were usurpers.
Are not these good inferences? Is not this Christian and charitable proceeding?
What learning, truth, or modesty will allow this barbarous collection, and th^^
in one who takes upon him to write in defense of a Prince, and would be
reputed in the Church for a Bishop? A notorious ly joined wi^h gross forgery.
But woe be to those sheep, that are fed and led by so perfidious a Pastor.

80. The like perfidiousnes he shows in cyting F. Persons words, where he
makes him in a different letter to say, speaking of the wars which some Popes
have had with the Emperors; Barl. page 237.

Le^t^r page 87.


that either they were not unlawfully done, or else the causes were just, or
(says M. Barlow, which is a pretty passage numb. 28.) the Popes have persuaded
themselves they were just, and therefore as a General in the field pursued them
as open enemies, or as a Judge upon the Bench commanded execution to be done
upon them, as MALEFACTORS. And having set down these words, as if F. Persons
had spoken them, be begins to reply against them with this insulting
entrance. But first who girt the sword to the Popes side? But I may better
retort this interrogation upon M. Barlow, and ask him; But first, who taught
him to ly so loud? For in all the 28. number which he calls a pretty passage,
where will he find these words; And therefore as a General in the field
pursued them as open enemies, or as a Judge upon the bench commanded execution
to be done upon them, as MALEFACTORS? And if these Words be neither there, nor
in any other place of F. Persons, is not this a pretty passage, or rather a
paltry cosenage, and lying liberty in this Minister, to make his adversary to
speak what himself lists, and especially in such an odious manner and
matter, as here he does, printing the words MALEFACTORS, in great capital
letters, as though F. Persons had said, that Popes may command execution to be
done upon Princes, as upon MALEFACTORS, which is nothing else but the capital
lying of M. Barlow?

81. Perhaps the Reader here will ask, No ground for this lying forgery of M.
Barlow in F. Persons book.
upon what ground this charge is made, for it is to be supposed, that he had
some foundation for the same, in the discourse of F. Persons, albeit he
followed not precisely the words, but their sense and meaning, from which it
is to be thought that he has no way swarued: but hereunto I answer, that
neither the words or sense is to be found of this matter in the passage cyted,
and all that can be drawn to this purpose in the 28. number are these very
words of the beginning: And so if s^^^ Popes have had just wars with some
Princes, Kings (...) Emperors, or have persuaded themselves that they we^^
just in respect of some supposed disorders of the said Prince^ (as here is
mentioned the war and other hostile proceeding^ of Pope Gregory the seventh
against the Emperor He^^^ the fourth) this is not contrary to the saying of
Cardi^^^ Bellarmine, that no Pope ever commanded any Prince (...) be
murdered, or allowed thereof, after it was done by (...) other. These are F.
Persons words; for which in his nam^ M. Barlow guieth us these: The Popes have
perswade^ themselves the (wars) were just, and therefore as a General in the
field pursued them as open enemies, or as a Iudg^ upon the bench commanded
execution to be done upon the^^ as MALEFACTORS. A heap of injurious untruths
against F. Persons.
And do you not think^ he has played well his prize? I will end this matter,
where M. Barlow does begin it, to wit with his Ep^^stle Dedicatory, which
although it be written to (...) Majesty, yet he blusheth not in the same to
tell him, that F. Persons has through his whole book discharged his rancor
both against his person and Apology. Again: that he cares not what he writes,
nor whom he reuiles, nor how it is taken. And that, he has in the basest sort
with his scorning ribaldry defiled and b^smeared two sacred Princes
successively reigning. Barlow epistle to h^s Maies^y.
And that, he cannot hold, but must needs regorge (his spirit is so turbule^t
and unquiet:) and as Hierome speaks of Heluidius, maledicere omnibus bonae
co^scientiae signum arbitratur, he thinks his conscience then best discharged
when he has reviled most. And again, if the objection be, that I have not
spared from reproaching him, I deny it not. How could I forbear^, or who can
blame me? None that either has loyal heart to your Majesty, being our
gracious Sovereign, or Christian regard of her (who late was) that ever
blessed Q^eene.

82. And that you may know the task which he has taken by interposing
himself in this answer, between F. Persons and his Majesty, how great it is,
and with what resolution against all adventures he is bent to go through with
the same, M. Barlows courageous adventure.
he sticks not for courage to compare himself to the Roman Curtius, who cast
himself into the stinkng gulf; and for patience to the holy Martyr S.
Sebastian: loco citato.
for so out of S. Ambrose he says: Against me let him empty his whole quiver
of reproaches: Amb. in psalm. 118.
all of them I hope will be like the Roman arrows shot against S. Sebastian,
drawn with bent force, loos'^ with much ease, but received with strong
comfort. So is th^s valiant Captain fenced against all assaults and prepared
with armor of proof for all encounters. But yet even in this very bravery of
his, he cannot forbear his wonted forgery. For S. Ambrose upon the 118. psalm
has nor any mention of S. Sebastia^s arrows, and therefore M. Barlow out of his
good policy cyted not the Octonary, but the whole volume, least if he had made
any direct reference, the Reader had soon espied the deceit. But this is a
small fault in M. Barlow: we must be forced to ouerpasse and pardon much
greater.

83. Having thus set forth himself, and as though he were a Spartan, a
Curti^^, a S. Sebastian, he so contemptibly speake^h of his Adversary, as if in
respect of him he were b^t like a little mouse in the paw of a Lio^, whom a man
(says M. Barlow) can neither avoid without calumny, nor encounter but with
blot of infamy, nor co^^uer with hope of any ma^stery: and ^herefor^ approves
^is Mai^^ties opinion, who a^ h^ sai^^, ^^^^dged a rope the fittest answer for
him: but in my book in this very page here cited I find his Majesty, page 13.
to say, that an hangman is fittest to answer such an historian; alluding
worthily to M. Barlow who was to answer him: for hi^ answer better befitteth
a man of that trade then either a Bishop, or Divine, or one that would be taken
for both, to write and set forth, and yet notwithstanding in the end of his
Epistle he vauntingly promises to himself security from any reply thereunto
from F. Persons: for verbalize, ^e saith^ he can, dispute he cannot: in Stories
he is a great florisher, but a false relator of them who so inioynes him a
modest answer does undo him. Neither his age, nor profession, neither shame
of the world, nor fear of God, nor grace of the spirit, can mortify his
nature, or restrain his tongue. Thus to his M^^^stie: and after in his short
Admonition to the Reader, he adds: The style in respect of my place and
pr^fession may peradventure be adjudged too bitter, but c^^pared with his
person, and reuiling vein against two such Christian Monarchs, no one Jot
thereof, in exact Surui^^^ of better judgment, is either pared off or spared at
all. So M. Barlow.

84. And do you not think that he has her^ described some Cynicall Proteus,
or railing Zoylus, (...) raging Thiestes, whose tongue is so intemperate, and
style so contumelious, as would move even one that can bear all injuries of
other men's tongues, as p^tiently as S. Sebastian did his arrows, to inueigh
against him, and requite him in the same method and man^^^ of speech? And that
none who bears either loyal heart to his Majesty, or Christian regard to M.
Barlows dear deceassed Mistress, can blame him for vsi^^ this sharp reiection
in their defense? Moreover, t^^^ how bi^^^rly soever he speak against his
Aduersar^es, yet compared with his person, and reuiling vein against two
Princes, no io^e was to be pared, and spared, because (forsooth) a modest
answer would undo him, and therefore M. Barlow is forced to be immodest (even
^gains^ his mild disposition you may be sure) and to answer him with such
intemperate scurrilitie as he does, when as yet no modest man would ever be
moved, much less forced thereunto, for that is the special praise of the
virtuous, never to be drawn to d^^ ill by the provocation or bad example of
the wicked.

85. But let us examine the charge it sel^, which how much the greater and more
grievous it is, the more it requires on his behalf plain and evident proof:
M. Barlow very copious in charging his adversary, but very barren in his
proofs.
for none can be free where it suffices only to accuse. Wherefore seeing that
he is so copious in accusing with such variety of phrases and sentences, let us
consider a little, how the thing it self is euicted, what words, what witnesses,
what probable conjectures, inductions, or presumptio^s are brought for the
same: we handle not now a speculatiue question, in which variety of judgments
may breed diversity of opinions, neither talk we of China or Mex^co, and what
is done in them, from whence the length of the way as it may weary the
trauaylers, so also weaken the credit of their reports: our controversy is
about a matter of fact, and that registered, as he will have it, in a printed
book, in which if either M. Barlow or any other for him can find any scorning
ribaldry, any defiling, any besmearing, any r^uiling^ (such are the loathsome
unsavory phrases of this impure Minister) against his Mai^sties person that now
is (as for Q. Elizabeth I remit him to the ensuing Discussion) let M^^^^low be
believed, and me discredited, yea let all his raylying pass for modest reason,
his lying for ^ruth^ (...) for an honest man. But if no such thing be to be
found, as I acertayne the Reader, that it cannot, them let M. Barlow be known
to have made a notoriou^ly to his Majesty in print, and have that credit
hereafter which such shameless dealing does deserve, and thereward also if you
will, which such get who stand for the best game.

89. Truly so far is F. Persons from all reuyling or whatsoever else inciuility
against his Majesty's person, M ^arlows impatience for the praises given his
Majesty by F Persons.
whom he always honored, and whom after the attayning of the Crown of
England, as his dread Lord and Sovereign he most dutifully respected, (...)
that he does not any where speak of him without due regard and honor,
commending his great humanity, royal nature, and noble disposition, with other
parts and talents, wherewithal he is endued; for which this Minister is much
offended (as being loath that any should praise him but himself) calling the
Father Judas, and comparing him to the devil, who confessed CHRIST to be the
Son of God; and then makes his Majesty to answer him; What evil have I
done, vt hic tam nequam de me tam been loqueretur, Barl. page 1^3.

Matthew. 7.


that so bad a fellow as this is, should speak so well of me? Can we gather
grapes of thrones, or figgs of thistles? Is not this that self same Persons,
who (as the Priests witness) labored to excommunicate so long ago his Majesty,
as an obstinate and forlor^e Heretick^?

90 Lo how M. Barlow takes it to the heart that the Father should praise his
Majesty, and how scornfully he speaks of so gra^e and ^eue^^^^ a man. But
such Ru^^ian-like immodes^y we mus^ bea^e with^ll in this vnma^nerly Minister,
whose i^s^icall behavior is such, as well shows what his education has been,
and of what virtuous disposition and judgment, he is. For were I disposed to
encounter with him in this vein, I would say, that mutato nomine, de te fabula
narratur, and his Majesty has more cause to fear the fawning flattery of such
as seek to raise themselves by other men's ruins, and are ready in case their
fortunes should fail them whom now they flatter, to tread on their necks,
defile, and besmeare them all they can in deed then of F. Persons, whose
sincerity, judgment, vertue^ and constancy known to the world was such, as
all the honors and preferments that the earth could yield him, of which he
refused more then ever M^ Barlow can hope to have, were never able to bend him
to this base seruility, as to turn his sails with every wind, praise and
dispraise, now to kiss, and after to kill: which how much it reigns in the
other, for that all do see, I shall for the present forbear to speak.

91. And whereas for confirmation hereof he says, or rather demands, M.
Watson repented at his death that ever he had written against the Fathers of
the Society. See the Copy of his arraignme^t at Winchester, and protestation
at his death.
if this be not that Persons, who, as the Priests wittnes, labored so long ago
to excommunicate his Majesty, as an obstinate and forlorn heretic? I an^were,
that neither the Priests, unless he speak by E^^allage numeri, witness any such
thing, for it was but ^one Watson, and he also by M. Brancrost of Canterbury
^aught in his seely Quodlibets how to lie in print. Neither did the Father ever
attempt any such matter, or use any such terms against his Majesty at all:
and it ^s a sign that M. Barlowes proofs are very beggarly, and his
conscience and capacity not very good wh^^ he stoopeth to gather up these
off^lls, out of that raylatiue lying-libell condemned by all modest men, as
well Catholics, as Protestants, and recalled w^^^ grief by the writer himself
at the hour of his death in the presence of many hundreds, when he asked the
Jesuits forgiveness that he had so slandered them, and much lamented that ever
he had se^ forth any such book, which many think he would never have do^, had
not M. Mortons suggesting devil R C. so much ^e^pted him thereunto; Quiet and
sober Reckoning page 326. 327.
at lea^t he would have for borre from so open untruths, of which I can make
(when need shall be) an evident demonstration, and therefore the testimonies
taken from that infamous libell, are with all wise men of as much credit, as if
they had been cyted out of AEsops fables, or the Acts and Monuments of John Fox.

92. Yet least that the Reader should think M. Barlow so shameless, as without
all color and probability to make so false and injurious a charge of F.
Persons railing against his Majesty: or himself complai^^ of my co^cealing his
arguments, as fearing their force, I shall very briefly touch some two or three
of the^, which are so good and demonstratiue, Example of M Barlow sycophancy.
as that they nee^ no other answer to confute them, then their bare recital.
F. P^rs^ns thinking the Apology to have ben^ written by Thomas Montag^e, as
most did here suppo^^ before the coming forth of the Premonition, put down in
the text T. M. but in the margent answering thereunto, his name at length; how
does M. Barlow, think you, draw an argument from hence to prove that all which
is said against this Minister, was di^ectly spoken against the Kings Majesty by
F. Persons? Strangly without doubt: for thus he writes. By these two letters,
if he will speak without ^quiuocatio^, he meant Tua or Tanta Maiestas. Barlow^
page 5.
Thus he makes F. Persons against his own mind and meaning, to understand by
these letters what likes him to forge; for without this fiction of his, there
were no d^filing, or b^smearing to be found against his Majesty at all, unless I
say, he should turn Thomas Montague, into so great a Majesty. But let us see
another.

9^. F. Persons showing, that in an oath compou^ded of many clauses, if one
amongst them all be false, that the whole cannot be taken as it lies, and that
the refusal of the whole, for that one clause excepted against, cannot infer
the denial of all the rest combined therewithal, which are not liable to that
exception. For cleerer explication hereof he brings forth two examples,
saying^ As if some would say, that Plato was a man borne in Gre^^^, Letter page
75.
of an exellent wit, skillful in the Greek language, most exellent of all
other Philosophers, and would require this to be confirmed by an oath; some
Platonist perhaps would be content to swear it: but if some St^ick, or
Peripat^tick, or Professor of some other Sect in Philosophy, should refuse the
said oath, in respect of the last clause, might a man infer against him in all
the other clauses also, ^^go he denies Plato to be a man? He denies him to be
borne in Greece? He denies him to be of an exellent wit? he denies him to be
skillful in the Greek tongue etc? Were not this a bad kind of arguing?

94. So in like manner, if an Arian, or Pelagian Prince should exact an oath at
his Subjects hands, concerning diverse articles of religion, that were believed
by them both, and in the end, or middle thereof should insert some clauses
sou^ding to the favor of their ow^^ sect, for which the Subject should refuse
the whole body of that Oath as it was conceived; could the other ^^ justice
accuse him, for denying all the several articles ^^ his own religion also
which therein are mentioned? W^^^ sees not the injustice of this manner of
dealing^ S^ far F. Persons. Out of which discourse, what trow yo^ does M.
Barlow infer? Strange inferences
He secretly (says he) girds a his Majesty, for being both a Philosopher
(which is h^^ Maiest^es great glory and our Realms happines^ for true
Philosophy joined to go^ernment, Barlow page 212.
regulates the scepter, to the subjects comfort, and the Kingdoms renown) and
an heretic also; a perfect slander in them both: for by that religion which
they call heresy, he does truly glorify the God of heaven. So he and who can
deny^ but that here is also besmearing as M. Barlow has framed his Co^me^tary?
but I verily think that God is little glorified by such bad glosses, so little
coherent, yea so clean repugnan^ to the text. Let us come to the last, for
hasten to a^ end of this Preface, and mean not to make any longer demurr upon
this kind of sycophancy.

95. The most potent proof of all the rest to euince, that F. Persons wrote
against his Majesty and not T. M. which M. Barlow will have to be
demonstratiue, and therefore sets it out with his Ministerial eloquence and
Episcopal gravity, is taken from these words of the said Father, where having
a^swered the obiectio^s made against the lives of some Pope^ he concludes
thus. Letter page 105.
If a man would go about to discredit Kingly authority, by all the misdeeds of
particular Kings that have been registered by Historiographers, since the time
that Popes began, he should find no doubt abounda^t ma^^er, and such, as could
not be defended by any probability. And yet does this preiudicate nothing to
Princely power or dignity, and much less in our case, where the facts
themselves objected, are either exaggerated, increased, wrested, or^ altogeater
falsified.

96. To this what replyeth M. Barlow? Barlow page 303.
Here first (says he) is verified that speech of Seneca, nemo personam diu
far potest, Art cannot long estrange nature. But as the Apologue d^scrib^s
Venus transformed waiting-mayde, who being trickt up like a Gentlewoma^,
mink'st it a while till she spied a Mouse, M. Barlowes grave proof to show
that F. Persons scorned or reproved his Majesty.
but then made it known she was a Cat: So this Censurer, who all this while
would make the Reader believe that he confuted only one T. M. the younger, and
would seem to take no knowledge, that our Gra^ious Soueraigue had to do in
the Apology: now being exasp^rate with this round canuasin^ of the Pope, and
knowing that it will be descried for the style and vein of more th^n an
ordinary man, he forgets his dissembled aduersary^ and lik^ a perfect Jesuit
retorts upon the King. Thus he. But how is this proved? Hear I pray, and
admire the wisdom of Sir William. For if T. M. (says he) were the tru^
Apolog^r, the recrimination had been more fit both in resp^ct of these
precede^t instances of Popes, and that supp^s^d Author to have made the
comparison between Bishops and Minist^rs. But if I answer him again, that it
was more fitly made between King^ and Popes in respect of their supreme
authority which is not lost by the demerit of their lives, he has nothing to
reply thereunto, page 304.
but that all they who wear the habit, or are invested into holy orders
amongst Protestants (I use his ^wne words) are not free from notorious vices
and scandalous to the world: which I confess, and none I think can with any
reason or truth gainsay the same.

97. By these then, and such like reasons he would prove F. Persons to have
written against hi^ Majesty: whatsoever he said against Thomas Mountague, and
consequently to have railed against him, which although they be very childish,
ridiculous, and impertinent as you have seen, proving nothing but his own
sicophancy, yet as though they were cleerer mathematical demons^rations then
any in Euclide, he builds all his accusation upon them, and says, as you
have heard, M Barlows loyalty.
that he could not without touch of disloyalty forbear from reproach, and
that in respect of F. Persons reuiling vein, nothing at all was to be pared,
or spared; telling his Majesty, that neither the shame of the world, nor fear
of God, nor grace of the spirit, can mortify his nature, or restrain his
tongue, but cites no sentence, word or syllable for the same, but such as you
have heard. With M Barlow, whose railing I mean here to examine, I will deal
more really, and out of his own words show, what fear of God he has, what
shame of the world, what grace of the spirit, what mortified nature, what
mod^st tongue, and then leave it to Readers judgment to determine, whether in
such brutish reuiling, no sparing, or paring were to be used or not.

98. In his Epistle Dedicatory which is not very long, M. Barlows railing in
his epistle dedicatory to his Majesty.
besides the reproaches mentioned of rancour, scorning, ribaldry, defiling,
besmearing, regorging, and the like, he calls F. Persons a debos^ed abject,
and unreformed Hypocrite (belike M. Barlow is a reformed one) a Rakeshame,
Rabshekah, of a prostituted conscience and impudency, whose very name is the
epitome of all contumely being as current in a pro^erb as was once the name of
Daedalus: A Proverb misapplied.
In omni fabula and Daedali execratio: for no libell can come from Rome, but
Persons is presently supposed and noysed to be Author, and the more vile, the
more Persons like, a creature that does rage and snarle etc. Thus much to his
Majesty himself. And is not this think you, fit for a Prince to read, or
pre^e^ded Prelate to write? Is the gravity, learning, modesty, and virtue of
the English Clergy, Vetus Comoedia
for which our Country before this revolt was most famous, so lost, as instead
of answering like Deuines, to see one bearing himself for a Bishop, to renew
the old Comedy, in an epistle to his Sovereign and a Book written in his
defense, which eue^ on the heathen stage was so much misliked and condemned by
all?

99. To this beginning is suitable the whole work which follows, or rather much
worse. For in the very entrance after he has set down what order he will
observe, and repeated some of F. Persons words, but falsely after his accustomed
manner, he calls him a ranging voluntary runnagate, an Hispanized Camelion,
Barlow page 3.
the brat of an Incubus, filius terrae, no true Englishman either in heart or by
birth. This is his first assault, rude and Ruffianlike as you see: and then
afterward he tells of the disgorging the gall of his bitterness, and the
venomous rancour of his cancred heart by his Rabshakeis pen; that he is the
abstract quintessence of all coins, coggeries and forgeries, that lies,
dissembles, equiuocates at every word; this fugitive tenebrio, Persons, Robin
Cowbucke, parasite and traiterous clawbacke, a known incendiary, this serpens
Epidaurius the Devils scholar, his Deuillity reader, Spiritus mendax in ore
omnium Prophetarum, this boutefeaux, he disgorgeth out of his filthy throat by
his devilish pen etc. And is there here no paring, nor sparing to be used in
the judgment of M. Barlows exact Surueyers? Truly either their Suru^y was not
very exact, or their judgment small, or else they were not his friends, that
would permit such scurrility to pass in print, without controlle, to his
everlasting shame and discredit.

100. There were no end, if I would stand on all particulers, for in less then
the compass of one leaffe he uses all these reuiling ^earmes, page 67.68.
A blackm^^thed Shemey, famous for nothing but for capital infamies, a bastard
by birth, a libeller by custom, a factionist in society, an expulst Academian,
rung out with bells, as a carted strumpet with pannes, The grace of M. Barlows
spirit.
for a graceles companion, a Diabolical Machiauellian, a stain of humanity, a
corrupter of all honesty. Again, a Camelion for his profession, a backsliding
Apostata, a perjured intruder, a dissolute Libertine in act, in choice, in
mayntenanee, a fugitive with discontented runnagates, a viperous complotter
against his Country^ a firebrand of treasonable combustious by pen and advice;
and (which of all other is most remarkable) a Jesuit b^ proxye, a votary by
substitution, a Paduan Mountebanke, and Empericall Quack-saluer, a disdainful
scorner of all reproof or counsel, and yet a scorned vassal by all the Pope^
he has served, a dog to snarle etc. this canker of youth^ this spawne of
vipers, this slave of Satan etc. a dead dog being whiles he lives a rotten
carcass of a poisoned cur, infected in his entralls, and infecting with his
favor the ay^^ he breathes, and the land where he had hi^ first breath, a
miching cur, a car^only cur etc. as if he were the porter of Had^s, Carons
Mastiffe, Plutoes Cerberus, he ^arrowe^ Tartar and (I tremble to write it)
feignes with a wish (Q. Elizabeth's) glorified soul in a ghastly ghost to speak
from hell. So he^ And to all this there needs no other answer, the^ Medici
media^ pertundite^ venam. The man is more then half mad.

101. Only this by the way, I must tell him, that here with his immodesty is
conjoined exceeding great malignity, in calumniating the birth and parents of
F. Persons, F. Perso^s^ birth better proved to be free from all stayne of
bastardy then M. Barlow can prove his.

Barl. 89.


which though by some passionate and foolish Watson, in the heat of his
dissension and contradiction against him, without all proof or probability,
was called into question, yet could not M. Barlow but know, that the said
reproachful slander was refuted by the Father himself, in his book of
Apology for the Archpriest, and Manifestation of folly and bad spirit, which
^ater M. Barlow does often cite (and I think in one place, the very page where
this is handled) in which F. Persons proves how free his birth was from all
such suspicion, and his proofs are so plain and pregnant, as M. Barlow, if he
were set to prove his own legitimation, would not, nay could not prove it
better, and perhaps not so well. And it argues little wit, and ^hame in the
man, but much malice and great desire to hurt, in repeating again these
refuted slau^ders, which as well for the falsehood they contain, and injury to
the said Father, he should by the rules of Christian charity and conscience
have forborne; as also for the honor of their own Clergy, in respect of his
brother, who (the more pity) by profession is one of M. Barlowes own rank, I
mean a Protestant Minister, and is as much injured by this infamous lie, as F.
Persons himself.

102. For according to his wonted manner not of modesty but of reproachful
ribaldry, he calls their mother (a very grave Ma^rone) Pasiphae, and he^
husband Actaeon, and Minotaurus: belike his mother married one of her own
sons, for so was Mino^auru^ to Pasiphae. And as for Actaeon, if I would
learn by the example of M. Barlow to be immodest, I could tell him, if report^
may be credited, where per^^^^ nearer home he may find a friend, Where M
Barlow may find Actaeon.
who laying (...) hand on his breast (I will forbear his forehead) may truly
say, Actaeon ego sum: but howsoever that be, s^^rely if from the disposition of
the children a guess may be made of the parents deportment, as from the frui^^
we gather of what nature the tree is that did bear it^ well may we think that
F. Persons mother was modest, wise, grave and virtuous, because himself wa^ so;
and that M. Barlows mother was either some Hecuba, whom the Poets for her
railing feign to have been turned into a dog, or Proserpina that has brought
forth to the world this hellish spirit and serpe^tine tongue, inflamata a
gehenna, Jacob.3.
that always br^aketh forth into such virulent acerbity, lying, detraction,
railing, and all manner of sycophancy, as in every place almost, and passage of
his book we do find.

103. His other example of an expulst Academi^^, rung out with bells, which M.
Barlow adorneth with th^^ comparison well beseeming his Episcopal grauiti^ (
as a carted strumpet with panns) we can eas^^y pardon, as more tending to the
Fathers honor, then any way at all to his disgrace For had not his fervor and
forwardnes toward the Catholic Religion been very singular, The disgraces
done by heretics to F. Persons were his great glory, and so likewise are M.
Barlowes scoldings.
the professed enemies thereof had never showed such extreme spite, malice, and
rancour against him, as they did whose injury done in this behalf is no more
disparageme^t unto him in the sight of God, his Angels, Saints, and all sober
men, the^ it was to the Apostles to be vvhipped by the Jews, S. Fulgentius by
the Arians, or S. Paul to fly from D^masco in a basket by the wall. If the
cause be good, be the penalty never so sharp, base or shameful i^ the sight of
men, yet in the eyes of him who aba^ed himself to death, Philip. 3.
and to the death of the Cross for our sakes, whose followers and disciples we
are, it is most precious, most honorable, most glorious. Wherefore to F.
Persons we may well apply that sentence of S. Hierome, where speaking of his
zeal against heretics he says: Respondebo me numquam haereticis p^percisse,
sed omni egisse studio, vt hosts Ecclesiae mei quoque hosts fie^ent. Hierom.
pro^m. in Dialogos aduersus Felagianos.
I will answer them, that I never spared heretics but have labored by all
means I could, that the enemies of the Church, might also be my enemies. So S.
Hierome: and so F. Persons: and consequently if ^his zeal against them
procured their enmity, and their enmity brake forth into this heretical
insole^cy, I nothing doubt, but that now as well his painful endeauours in his
works and writings against them, as his patient endurance of the wrongs and
iniuryes he received by them, are both crowned in heaven with their due reward
of immortal glory. In which respect we may say to M. Barlow, as S. Bernard in
the ^ike case did to another, Ep. 48.
Quid iustius, quid iucundius, quam vt quem reprehendere intendis plus
commendes, vt praeconijs pro conuitijs vtaris nescius, and volens detrahere,
lauds inuitus? that is; what is more just, what more comfortable then that you
should the more honor him whom you go about to reprove; that unwitting you
should for reproaches use praises, and desiring to detract (F. Persons) that
even against your will you should commend him? But let us return again to the
railing Rhetoric of M. Barlow.

104. Within some two leaves after, as though he were in deuotionis templo,
Templum Deuotionis.
at his prayers, or amongst the Lindians, or Coribantes at their Sacrifices, he
says, that F. Persons is bill'd by the devil, and enrolled in (...) Catalogue
of the damned; page 72.73.
that he has all the marks of (...) r^probate; his brain the forge of
mischief; his face the ^^uile of impudency; What fear of God or shame of the
world is there here?
his heart the minthouse of treasons to (...) Country; a libelling hand restles
and truthles; a railing tong^^ without measure or discretion; his throat an
open sepulcher^ his feet swife for bloodshed, and interiora impietas, his very
entralls the inwards of impiety; in brief the engarbled an^tomy of a damned
wretch, being branded with Cai^ mark, that no man may attach to punish ^ym
here etc. These are the Episcopal terms of M. Barlow, an^ you may imagine
what forces him to this fury. Were the truth on their side, they needed not
defile their pen^s with this filth; but leesers must have leave to talk, and
the ignorant to rave, when they are not able to frame better answers.

105. Many more of these flowers of M. B^^^lowes folly, or rather frenzy, I
might produce, if the Reader were delighted with their noisome savor, whose
most common title of the Father, is Curr, or Do^^ for so you have now heard him
call him, page 93 97. 157. 254.
a dog to sna^^^ a dead dog, a rotten carcass of a poys^ned curr, a mych^^
curr, a carionly curr, Carons mastiffe, Plutoes Cerb^rus, and afterward, a
Curr that snarles, a currish bloudhound, an oppro^rious curr, base bone-gnawer.
And whereas F. Persons made this demand of the Author of the Apology whom he
took to be Thomas Mountagne: Rus^icus es Corido^.
A^^ needs no more, Sir, but this to condemn both ^onfesso^^ and Popes of
conspiring the last Queens death? M. Barlow answers hereunto: Barlow page
250.
There needs no more (CVRR) then that: writing the word CVRR, in great capital
letters, for else the Reader should not have discovered him so well to be a
great capital fool. Moreover he calls him turpissima bestia, a practiced
Equiuocatour, an equiuocating Malepardus. From beasts and dogs, he comes to
the Devil, and compares the Father to him, as he is Diabolus, as he is Satan,
Barl. page 116.
as he is Lucifer: in respect of which, and the precedent terms, these which
follow, that he is an impostume of all corruptions, a Sycophant, the Popes
Scauinger, a misbegotten Catechristicall companion, cogging and shamles
companion, perfidious Hypocrite, and the like, may seem very mild and
moderate, though yet most repugnant to the modesty of any honest or well-minded
man.

106. And albeit this tempestuous storm of M. Barlowes immodest and
unchristianlike railing, do fall specially upon F. Persons, yet he forbeareth
not also others of higher calling, and more eminent degree, who (even by his
own rule) are further from envy, which (as he tells his Majesty in the
beginning of his Epistle) stretches herself no higher then these which are a
man's equals, or somewhat his Superiors: Epist. dedicat. initio.
and in that respect, and even by the rules of common ciuility should have been
spared, had not this Minister after that once he had broken the limits of
modesty, earnestly endeavored to be egregiously impudent, Railing against the
Pope, and Cardinal Bellarmine.
and therefore he forbeareth none, but even this present Pope for his mildnes,
virtue, wisdom, and learning most laudable, he calls out of M. Bluetts
relation (if you will believe him) a rash speaker, and a heady vndertaket, of a
most violent spirit, and impatient of contradiction: page 27. page 31. 173.
and in other places a busy polypragmon, a man wedded to his own will, page
199. page 155.
and newly possessed of Pope Ioanes Chair, the Grandfather of the Romish
^rats, an only Breue-compounder. And as the man is witty, so he interprets
the words of the Apocalypse, Apoc. 12^
sciens quod breue tempus habet, thus^ The (Pope) knowing that his time is but
a Breue. Barl. page 35.

page 231. 305. 236. 316.


Cardinal Bellarmyne he abuses more grossly, for he calls him, a Cardinal
parasite, the lenocinating pander of the whore of Babylon, the whit-lyuerd
red-cap, his roguing trycks, and the like.

107. Besyds these personal reproaches, he has many also more general of the
whole order of Jesuits, Railing against the whole society of Jesuits.
in which live so many men of great nobility of blood, exquisite learning, and
rare virtue, for which amongst all good men they are renowned, and hated
specially of heretics, Infidels, and bad Christians: this man measuring and
describing them all by himself, and his fellow Ministers of England says,
that they are a Society, which like Anniballs army is gathered ex collu^^^
omnium gentium, Ba^l. page 1^0.
of the resuse and malcontents of all nations, cemented into a fraternity as
the walls of Babylon, buylt with the demolished rubbish of Babells tower,
nourished by the Pope as the Ianizaries by the Turk, to be the valiantest
cut-throates of true christians their own native Coutrymen. So in one passage
without interruption: and in another he says, page 349.
that Jesuits are the principal Boutefeaux, and incendiary make-bates through
all Christendom, who laying fuel to fire, with their doctrine kindle, and
with their counsel inflame the mynds of Princes in iealouzies each of other,
and the natural subjects with disloyal co^^ spiracyes against their lawful
Sovereigns. So he. But this rank blast with them shakes no corn, all
Princes and people, with whom they live, seeing with their eyes, and knowing by
their experience the quite contrary. page 201.
But railing and lying with this Minister, to use his own phrase, seem to be
his very kindly and essential parts.

108. Neither is he content with this immodesty against Christ's Vicar, and
other virtuous men, but loosing the raynes of his unbridled tongue, Jacob.3.
as a ship without a stern, is carried where the fury of his passion, like a
strong wind, does transport him, and opens his mouth against heaven it self,
Apoc. 13.
and the Saints therein, by storming or blasphemously speaking of three of
them, to wit, S. Gregory, and S. Leo, M. Barlow raileth against three Saints.

S. Gregory, S Leo, and S. Martyn.


both which are for their rare examples of life, admirable knowledge, and
renowned labors surnamed the Great, and S. Martyn no less eminent in all
manner of sanctity, for which all the learned Fathers since his time have never
spoken of him but with singular reverence, and very special comme^dation. Of
S. Gregory with a solemnelye he tells the Reader, that B^llarmyne makes
their great Sainted- Pope either an hypocryte to give the Emperor a hayle-
Master (whom in heart he contemned, yea accounted a persecutour, says Persons)
or else a temporizing lukewarm Laodicaean, Barl. page 175.
that for fear or constraint would yield to any thing against his conscience,
that the Emperor would command. And can there be any thing more
contumeliously and Lucian-like spoken then this? Neither has the Cardinal any
word or clause, that can be drawn hereunto, without manifold injurious
wresting and perverting of his whole scope, drift, and meaning, as the Reader,
if he list ^o peruse the place will soon confess.

109. Toward S. Leo he is much more exorbitant calling him the eloquent proud
Pope, and saying, page 328.
that he has certain hyperbolycall phrases, M. Barlows scurrility against S.
Leo the Great.
wherewith he sets forth S. Peter's authority, especially that blasphemous speech
of his, that our Lord did take S. Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible
Unity, such an impious and profanely proud assertion, as a Christian heart
would tremble to imagine it, and his hand abhor to write it. So he. And I
think that al^ Christian hearts will more tremble and abhor the impious and
profane proud audacity, and blasphemo^^ villainy of this wicked miscreant, for
his base reuiling so glorious a Saint, then any words used by S. Leo, which by
the author of the Supplement are defended, and proved to contain nothing but
true and Catholic doctrine, consonant to the Scriptures, Counsel, and all
antiquity S. Martyn he calls a sullen surly Prelate, taxing his uncivil
using of the Emperor, and proud thoughts, from which he was so free, as he is
by all writers specially commended for the contrary, and made a rare example
and mirror of humility. But M Barlow has leave as it should seem of his
exact Suru^yours (as once the Clazemonians had of the Sparthians^ indecore
facere, Aelian l. ^. var hist. tit. 15.
to spare none, but to rail, lie, an^ blaspheme the highest and lowest, living
and dead, Gods servants on earth, and his Saints in heaven, with whom, unless
he repent, he will never have any part or portion, 1. Cor. 6.
Quia maledici regnum Dei non possidebunt.

110. There would be no end, if I should unfold all that he has in this kind,
which I forbear to do^ any further as having already laid forth so much as may
cloy the Reader, and clearly show the spirit of the man. For if, as Cassiodorus
writes, speculum cordis hominum verba sunt, Cassiod. var. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Matthew 11.
the words of men are the looking glass of their heart, for from the abundance
of the heart the mouth does speak, we must needs see what a sink of iniquity
lies in the heart of this man, from which so many lies, contumelies, slanders,
blasphemies, and wicked impure words have proceeded; what immodest malice, that
spares none, abuses all; what malicious immodesty, that shameth not to a base
^t self to the most vile and beastly terms which before have been set down,
and are too filthy here to ^e again repeated. Truly whosoever will with
vn^artia^l affection judge hereof, will soon see, and confess that M. Barlow
is more trained and better practiced in his school, who is accusator Fratrum,
Apoc. 12.
or his, qui aperuit os suum in blasp^emias, Apoc. 13.
then our Saviors, whose wisdom as S. James says, is pudica, pacifica etc.
peaceable and modest, of which he shall find this Minister quite deuoid,
without sense or feeling at all.

111. And by this also he may further guess where to find the Devils scholar
indeed, Barl. page 39.
and his D^uillity Reader (to use M. Barlows words) if he list to seek him, for
I report me to all modest men, whether this manner of writing or rather railing
have not more Deuillity, M. Barlow much troubled about the obsession,
circumsession, and possession of Devils.
then Divinity in it, and whether it do not better beseem a Devil thus to
speak, then a Divine to write, unless perhaps such a Divine as for his degree
of Doctorship made his positio^ of the possession of Devils, and in defending
the negative (a strange assertion) was so much in the terms of obsession,
circumsession and possession, answering and distinguishing so ridulously when
the Master of Queens College pressed him, D. Tyndall^
as if he had been some Coniurers boy, that had been to go forth Master of the
black art, and not M^ Barlow to proceed Doctor of Divinity: and as none will
deny but that the argument of possession of Devils did very much fit his
humor, so must I needs say, that Cambridge was a very unfit place for such a
Doctor, when as both the dogmaticall position, and disposition of the man
deserved rather a B^dlam or Bridewell, M. Barlow a Bedlam or Bridwell Doctor.
then any Oxford or Cambridge to be stained withal. For there is neither mad
man in the one, or bad woman in the other, but that may yet learn to rave and
rail of M. Barlow, though he have this special privilege more then they, to
set that out in print to the view of all, which some of them perhaps would be
ashamed to speak privately in their chambers between themselves alone.

112. I could here out of better proof then the infamous Quodlibets, or other
such like Libells which are M. Barlows chiefest Authors and authorityes against
F. Persons, show other examples of his proud and insolent behavior, I mean by
such witnesses as both saw and heard what passed at Lincoln, for that he was
not so honorably received as he did expect, though yet he had much more honor
done him then he did deserve. For preaching in his parish at S. Edwards o^ the
feast of the Circumcision, not so much upon the Gospel and present
solemnity, as against Sir John Cuts there present (for cutting belike some
benefice, or part thereof from him) he was so enraged, as neither the place,
time, Auditory, or the matter he handled could keep him from open reproach, M.
Barlowes de^out sermon of the Circumcision in S. Edwards Church.
but that he must needs tell that out of the pulpit, which s^an^ be fitted an
Alebench, that now every Jack would become a Cutter, with other words to that
effect, which I forbear in this place, as myndfull of my promise not to bring
witness or proof against M. Barlow, but M. Barlow himself. These things with
many other in a more ample process may come forth hereafter, if instead of
answering our books he provoke us again, as here he has done with his
intemperate scurrility. From his railing let us come to his flattery.

Laert. in Diogen.
113. Witty was the answer of the Cynicke, who being asked what beast had
sharpest teeth to byte, ^nswered, that of wyld beasts the Detractor or rayler,
^f tame the Flatterer. And the Fathers well note, that commonly these two vices
combyned togea^her in the same subject. Parasitus (says S. Hierome) ^n
contumelijs gloriatur: Hieron. in Heluidiu^ Chrysostom. ho^. 31. in Act. See
Apolinaris Sidonius lib. 3. epist. ep. 13. in fine.
the Parasite delights in reproa^hes. And S. Chrysostom: Nihil muliebrius
est, quam ^obor in lingua habere, and in conuicijs superbire, sicut Para^^ti
and adulatores etc. Porci magis sunt quam homines, ^uotquot in hoc gloriantur.
There is nothing more effe^inate, then for a man to have his strength in his
ton^ue, to take pride in railing, as Parasites and flatterers use ^o do. As
many as do glory in this are more to be ^steemed swyne then men. So this
Father in this short ^entence, giving a sharp censure of M. Barlowes book ^o
flattering, so raylatiue, as it passes all modesty and measure. Of the later
we have already seen some ex^mples, now you shall see how he can fawn, that
did before so reproachfully byte, but with all breuity, as being loath for some
respects, to touch the most pregnant examples of this Parasite, for fear of
further reproof and check.

114. You have heard him blaspheme three Saints of ours (for none of them was a
Protestant) now you shall hear him make a new Saint of his own. Q. Elizabeth
canonized for a Saint by M. Barlow.
For having spent almost three pages together in extolling or rather belying
Q. Elizabeth far beyond all truth or desert, calling white black, and black
white, making light darkness, and darkness light, after he has made her of all
living creatures the most admirable on earth, with many bo^basting ph^ases,
setting forth her praise, who yet in her life time did nothing or very little
(God wot) that was praise worthy, leaving after 44. years reign, no other
monument in the land of her living in it, but that she had pulled down many
Churches (...) howses, and not so much as buylt or let up one^ or ^rected any
thing for posterity to remain after (...) But as Xenophon in Cyrus did not so
much write (...) life, as in him describe what a good King should be^ so M.
Barlow in his transformed Queen Elizabeth, ^^^leth us not so much what she was
indeed, as what (...) should have been, or as now they would for the cr^dit of
their Gospel wish that she had been: After a^^ these Encomions given of her
life, I say, thus he ad^uaunceth her after her death to heaven, and without
authority will needs canonize her before her time, and to use his own phrase,
make her an eternized Saint^ His words be these^ pa^. 66. 67.
For her reward in heaven, if restraints of liberty, and pursuites of malice
for Gods truth^ inflicted through Jealousy, and endured with singular
pat^^ence; if a release from them unexpected, Flattering foolery.
followed with h^^nours, and blessings, neither interrupted by others (whe^ther
treasons or invasions) nor blemished by herself with vice criminal, or
continued; if life shut up after length (...) days and a full age, with a
courage defying death, with pray^rs imploring mercy, with faith assuring the
prayers, with testimo^ies witnessing her assurance, can be preceding
conjectures, or rather evidences of unspeakable happinesse^ we may safely
conclude, that she which passed through (...) Crown of thorns (borne so
constantly) to a Crow^e of Gold (worn so tryumphantly) has n^w gotten the
thir^ of Glory, to enjoy for everlasting.

115. So M. Barlow, with more to the same effect^ telling how she was an
example of v^rtue for her own to follow, and a loadst irre for other Nations
to admire, co^cluding with this Apostrophe: Now this renowned Queen, this
eternized Saint etc. And not to enter into disput^ of the truth of his words,
nor yet to ask him by what ^ertainty he knows, that she passed from one of
these ^hree Crowns to another, especially from the gold ^o glory, which
requires other proof then this ver^all flourish of a few Rhetorical figures,
and bare imagi^ary conjectures of that courage, prayers, faith, and testimonies
witnessing assurance, which this man sitting in his chamber does faigne, but
she at her death (if we believe eye witnesses of much better credit then
himself) did little feel; to omit this, I say, Two questions proposed to M.
Barlow.
as an idle fancy or fiction rather of this foolish Parasite, two things I
would demand of him: the first that seeing he will needs draw his glorious
Queen into the Calendar of Saints, what title or place she shall have amongst
them in the same, for that in ours there is no Saint of that sex, but is either
Virgin, or Martyr, or both, or else nec Virgo, nec Martyr, as are Wives,
Widows, and repenta^t sinners. M. Barlow shall do well in his next to tell
us, in which of these degrees this his new Sainted Queen Elizabeth is to be
placed: Q. Elizabeth nec virgo nec martyr.
perhaps when he has thought better on the matter, he may find some
perplexity, and be content to let her pass for one that was nec Virgo, nec
Martyr, and thrice happy had it been for her, if she had been indeed a true
repentant sinner.

116. The other thing is to know, what he thinks of the renowned Mother of
his Majesty, Touching his Maiestyes Mother.
whom by this canonizing of Q. Elizabeth, he must needs condemn to hellfire,
for it is impossible that one heaven should hold both these Queens, in life
and belief so quite opposite, the one, with great commendation of virtue,
remaining in the unity of the Catholic faith, in which, and for which she
dyed, to the great admiration and amazement of the whole world, to (...) a
Queen and Mother of a King indeed for religion, (...) under the color of
^reason, Cicero pro D^^otaro.
to which foul spot, as (...) Orator well notes Royal dignity was never
lyabl^ against all law, with all disgrace, ^o l^ose her he^d, (...) an ordinary
malefactor by way of public and co^(...) justice, whiles the other lived in
all ruff, pride, and pleasure, followed the fancyes of new vpstart
Ghospellers, hated and persecuted that faith, wherein notwithstanding until the
fall of her unhappy Father, (...) whole Island from the first Conversion had
remained, (...) in the end shut up a wicked life with a miserable and p^tiful
death if that may be said to be pitiful and miserable which was without all
remorse of conscience for f^^mer sins, all remonstrance of piety in, and
before her agony, all remembrance of her future weal o^ woe in the life to
come, all naming God as of her self, or enduring others that did name him for
her, or put her in mind of him; whatsoever this lying Minister who is true in
nothing, with a few fine phrases chatteth and forgeth to the contrary.

117. And if it would but please his most Excellent Majesty out of his Royal
respect to his most Noble Mother to see, who in her person have always most
honored or dishonored his, he should soon find, that as in her life time the
Catholics had her in highest esteem: so since her death have registered her in
the ra^ke of Martyrs, of whom the glory of this age, Baron. ap^end^^e a^ 5.
tom. in fin^.
Cardinal B^ronius (to name one for all the rest) writes thus: Porro eamd^m
Eccl^siam nobiliss^mam etc. Moreover God in this our age has permitted that
most noble Church ( of Scotland) to be tempted, that it might yield a most
noble example of Christian co^stancy, when as a mo^gst ^ther Martyrs (which no
other Country has hitherto ^ad) it has deserved to have their own Queen the
^^nguler glory and ornament of the Catholic faith, before tried by a long
imprisonment for to be honou^ed with the Crown of Martyrdom. So he. As
con^rariwise in M. Barlows brethrens books both at home and abroad he shall
find the most injurious slanders, ^^ying reports, and reproachful villainies,
powered forth against that innocent Princess, as will make any man's ^ares to
glow and heart to rue, to see so little respect of ^rincely Majesty or such
insufferable liberty in Pro^estant writers, conjoined with singular impudency
and fraudulent malignity in imputing the outrageous ^ttempts of the traiterous
subjects to the Queen her^elf, as though she had been the Author of that
mis^hiefe which in heart she detested, and with many bitter ^eares, the true
tokens of vnfaygned grief most pitti^ully bewailed; Elias Reusne^us part^ 5.
ope^is Genealogi^i in stirpe Scotica in fine.
let one Reusn^rus in his Geneal^gyes be ^eene (whose words I abhore to set
down) and the Reader will not think me too sharp; and I must con^esse, that
in respect of him M. Barlow may seem pardonable, though yet he be well content
to have his Maiestyes Mother to lie in hell, so that he may advance his own
Mistress to heaven.

118. In flattering his Majesty he is more diffuse, M. Barlows flattering of
his Majesty.
taking all occasions to blaze out his praise, and sometimes forcing occasions
where none are offered, and that also on false grounds: in which albeit I will
not say, to use Sir Th^mas Mores phrase, Comfort in tribulation lib 2. cap. 10.
that his Gloria Patri is a ways without a Sicut erat (for who knows not
that there are many great and commendable parts in his Majesty?) yet this I
dare warrant, that in this book of his, and the Relation of the Conference at
Hampton Court, not big for bulk, but rather small (...) respect of many great
volumes written by some of the Jesuits Bellarmine, Suarez, Valentia, Vasquez,
Salm^^^ Tolet, and others, there shall be found more flattery to King James in
this alone, then in all the books (...) theirs together hitherto ^et forth in
print, toward (...) the Popes or Princes under whom they have written, or to
whom they have dedicated their learned labors; so cunning, so careful, and so
copious is th^^ fawning Parasite to creep into credit, and to pray^^ and please
them by whom he may hope for preferme^t^ Examples in this kind do not want,
were it as safe (...) allege them, as it is easy to find them. But I se^
what will be answered by him and others of the same servile spirit, that in
reprehending their flattery (...) show our selves impatient of his Majesty's
glory, and envy at his worthiness; which how far it is from our thoughts, he who
sees all secrets, and searches al^ hearts does know and see. And that I may not
seeme^ to suspect this without cause, I will only produce o^^ passage of his,
which will make both the one and the other most clear.

119. After his 15. proofs and 16. lies in the history of the second
Frederick, this without any coherence with the matter in hand, by a needles
digression he turns his speech to speak of his Majesty: It was hi^ Mai^styes
exceeding humility, Bart. page 297. 298.
that he would grace Bellarmine ( being but a Cardinal) so much, as to
vouchsafe him an answer; it is his eminent commendation, that he can readily
understand all Stories written in this kind or any other, it argues his
singular industry, that after so many hours sp^nt in the higher af^aires of
the Realm, he could take the pains to perus^ th^se which he did; it is his
pregnant dex^erity, that he contrived and abridged the discourse with that
method and sincerity, but it was his admirable iudg^ent and wisdom in
forbearing variety of other Authors which wrote but by hearsay, and
delivered what they wrote upon the second hand, in this example to pitch
principally upon him who lived in that time, and saw and wrote what passed
between the Emperor and the Pope, in every particu^er. True Christians and
well affected to Godward, would rejoice to see so great a Monarch, so learned,
and so expert, considering what the ignorance of Kings has been heretofore:
but this is the Catholic envy and vexation, that not Eldad and Medad, Number. 11.
but Monarchs also can prophecy and discover their weakness; so that whereas
now they cannot (as in former times) enthrall them by superstition, and insult
upon their ignorance, they are enraged against their knowledge, accounting
their learning forgerie, and their truth-^elling malice. So M. Barlow.

120. In which passage, drawn in without occasion, M. Barlow builds the
whole frame of his flattery upon a false ground.
besides that the whole ground thereof is untrue that Petrus de Vineis (for of
him he speaks) li^ed at ^he time (of Frederick his death) and saw and wrote
what pass^d in every particular (for by a whole cloud of witnesses it is
afterward proved, that he was dead a whole year before the Emperor, whom
they will have to be poisoned) the Reader does see what insultation he makes
over ignorant Kings of former times (whom yet this ignorant Minister might
well have spared) and over the Catholics, for their en^y of his Maiestyes
knowledge, of their enthralling men in superstition, accounting their l^arning
forgery, and their truth-telling mali^e: which empty froath of idle words, and
untrue surmises we can well bear at his hands, who must needs say somewhat;
and you see what he will say in case I should produce more examples of his
flattery, which (...) as well to avoid all occasion of such obloquy, as for
that I mean to draw to an end of this Preface do hear forbear further to
recount.

121. There remains after his railing and flattery, M Barlows leuity in
writing.
that we speak a word or two of his leuity (for a lewd tongue and light head
are seldom separated) in his manner of speech and style, which I the rather
no^e, for that it pleased M. Barlow to twyte F. Persons with the inkhorne
terms of euacuating, shifting, and trifeling, Barl. page 310.
which words notwithstanding are very usual i^ our vulgar tongue: and he that
should say, that M. Barlow does nothing else but shift, and tryft, would I
doub^ not, be well understood, albeit he should not speak^ altogether true,
for besides that, he does rail, lie, flatter, forge authorityes, corrupt
histories, and the like. But the words which M. Barlow uses are not only not
usual, but very strange and uncouth, some of the^ being taken from the Latin,
some from the Greek, so^e from the French, others I think from the Irish, for
they are neither Greek, Latin, Fr^nch, or English, not have, as far as I see,
affinity with any other tongues, Out of a great heap I will set down a few.

122. The word Only (says he) does not so much signify an hypocoristicall
alleuiation, as a compendiary limitation. M. Barlowes fine phrases taken from
the Greek, Latin, and French, page 49.
Is not this fine? And in the same page, more e^pedit for euiden^e, a very
per^u^siue forc^. After, Cat^^^guised on holy Thursday; to vindicate his
credit; a mend^cious vanity: and then together: this reliance vnrepe^^^able,
is it not in them thus tied, a vassallage of slavery? and i^ the Pope thus
bynding them (look to himself) an oultrec^i^dance of tyrany? and in respect of
Kings a license for disloyalty in their subjects, and their allumetts of
treason to their ^ersons? So he. And do you not think, that this Ge^tlema^ can
speak French? do not these words well beseem and adorn an English style? In
other places. Porter of Hades; this boutife aux is acquainted; if he renege and
de^y his prof^ssion; no enterparte for exchange; a sarcasti^all ^corne;
pharmatized with ^uch druggs; a coalition of distinct regime^ts; some so wild
that no disciplyne will cicure them; page 195.
many use to robb with the valures; this fal^e atomite; the profi^able
mythologies of poetts fables; insulting pseudo-Apostles; Very pretty.
^ainted affections may mar good orisons; the Apologer had ^hus metaphrased;
neither was her a^thority any thing anoindred or made less; page 207.
treacherous and unnatural cheui^ance; from his didacticall we must follow him
to his historical skill; page 247.
the Popes ouer-awing surquedry; of an oultrecuidant Pope; a diametrall
renouncing; an iteritious Pamphlet. page 277.
These are his foreign phrases, fectht far from home, and therefore fit for
Ladies: let us see some few of his that are more domestical.

123. In the very first page he tells F. Persons that he might have left the
blunting or disloding of the tripled wedge (two pretty metaphors) to him that
wears the triple Crown. M. Barlows new found English phrases.
A little after. An itching arm desires still to be scrubd; to retriue an
Author; Ajax the whipper wreaking his teene upon a ram; as sowters stretch
leather with their teeth, he says, that Christ gave his body to the smy^ers,
his cheeks to the nippers; a burt in his throat; the pudder of different
opinions; they should settle their conscience not startle it; a frapting
discourse; feigned blandishments^ to distinguish upon any hint; the Apostle
advised ^ot to draw in a count^r-ietting yoke with Infidells, in that orbytie
and age to embroider the Popes ingratitude, in this iering scorn^; a Priest and
his recepter; let them garr their wives; more awkward and violent; a pingle of
trifles; a counterscarfe of examples; an Empericall Quack-saluer; rebecke by
oppos^^ prouokes to wrath; to start into circumstances; a strong c^^^tershocke;
to detort or defalke; a scorning flur; a blood gl^s^^, to besm^er with his
glauering balm; the rechaffment to disloyal attempts; frampold dealing; a
decade of reasons to d^s^ the Pope etc. I leave more then I take of these
tear^e^ and yet here are more then I well understand: he shall not do amiss,
if he write again, for the ease of his Reader, to se^ out some dictionary to
the end he may the better know the signification of these new words, or elsse I
verily suppose he will be mistaken in many.

124. I will end all this matter with that which is most usual, M. Barlowes
threefold forgery.
most gross and palpable in M. Barlow, to wit his forgery, and corrupting of
Authors by exchange, addition, or subtraction of their words, inuerting wholly
their sense and meaning: as in others very often, as well ancient as modern,
so for the most part always when in a different character he sets down (as
he would have it seem) the text of his adversary, and then takes occasion
upon his own word^ foysted in, to carpe, rail, and insult over him^ the
occasion of which foul fault in him, I find to be either his own praise, of
which he is very desirous, the disgrace of his adversary, or the relief of his
cause, when by no other way he is else able to shift, and avoid the force of
the authorityes produced against him, in each kind: but very briefly I will
allege an example, without any choice as they shall occur to my hands, for
who so lists to read his book, and examine what he reads, shall hardly in
any place miss of examples.

125. In the Epistle to his Majesty, he says, that against F. Persons railing
he will comfort himself with that conclusion of S. Hierom: Caninam facundiam
seru^s D^mini pariter exp^riatur and vnctas, accounting it my glory (says he)
that the same creature should rage and sn^rle at ME, In his epistle to his
Mai^sty.

M. Barlow amou^teth higher then he should do, by forging a new text.


the Lords unworthy Minister, which has not spared TWO ROYAL MONARCHS the
Lords anointed and amounted. This text is fit as you see, for M. Barlowes
purpose: for none can deny it, to be a great glory to this unworthy Minister,
to be joined with royal Monarchs the Lords anointed and amounted. But in the
Author, I mean S. Hierome himself, there is no mention of any such Minister,
or Monarch; there is no anointing, no amounting; for he only speaks of the
B. Virgin, and Mother of our Savior, saying, or rather concluding his whole
dispute with this sentence. Caninam facundiam seruus Domini pariter experiatur
and matter: I shall with comfort endure his railing, who together with me
reuiles the Mother of our Lord. So he. which full little concerns this
Minister, who with his Mates rather join with Heluidius to dispraise her, then
with S. Hierom and the Cath. Church to defend or commend her, as all the world
does see.

12^. Of abusing F. Persons words, I have spoken before, in relating M.
Barlowes untruths, and upon other occasions: one place more I will here
adioyne, in which wit^ the forgery he shows great malice and other
Ruffia^like misdemeanour, for thus he cites F. Persons words. Barl page 156.

Malicious forgery.


A third thing is an ABUSE offered by his Majesty to the words and meaning of
the Breue, namely that the King should charge the Pope with vndeuinelike
Doctrine, for saying that the Oath contained many things apertly contrary to
faith and salvation, as if thereby the Pope should say or mean that natural
Allegiance to their Sovereign and Kin^, were directly opposite to faith and
salvation of souls. So he printing and noting the words as taken out of F.
Persons book, with different characters, marginall comma's as in the beginning
he promised the Reader to do, saying: Admonion to the Reader.
The Jesuits speeches through this whole book are printed in the smaller
letter always with this mark ^ in the beginning of the line prefixed. And who
then that shall read these words will not think them all to be the words of
F. Persons? and that he had in express terms abused his Majesty, with the
charge of offering ^buse to the Pope? Especially seeing M. Barlow in his Reply
against him to ^harpen his pen, and to dip it deep in gall with this Virulent
answer. The high Priest himself would not have used such a saucy term of
ABUSE as this rightly malepart, that is, misbegotten Catachristical^ c^mpanion
has done, but if it appear that the Popes words imply so much, and that
necessarily, Quid dabitur viro? what shall be done to him that knetcheth this
opprobrious Curr? for what is this uncircumcised Jesuit, that he should in so
base terms scurri^ize so great a King. So he.

127. And none can deny but that here he has showed himself, both a fervent
and furious defender of his Majesty, M. Barlows rage ouerrunneth his wit.
for his rage does ouer-runn his wit, and his words all modesty. But not to
stand upon his immodesty, which is a quality inseparable from the subject, I
would ask him in Christian charity, why he has put down these as the words
of F. Persons, or where they are to be found in his book? Does he ever say^
that his Majesty offered ABUSE? or does he use the terms of vndeuinelike
doctrine? what malice, what forgery, or rather what villainy is this, to make F.
Persons directly to charge his Majesty, as in his own words with offering
abuse, who in his book has no one such word or syllable? All that he has, is
against him, whom he took to be the author of the Apology, whom for the
reasons he alleged in the very beginning of his letter, and for other respects
he could not perswad himself to be his Majesty, as all know who then lived and
conuersed with him, and heard him seriously give his judgment thereof. The true
words of F. Persons which M. Barlow should have cyted are these: Le^ter page 50
Hear now, what abuse is offered to the words and meaning of the Breue, every
simple Reader will see without any explycation from me. For that the Pope does
not prohibit natural obedience in things lawful; nor does say, that such
natural, or civil obedience is opposite to faith or salvation of souls; nor
that the oath is unlawful, for exhibiting such natural or civil obedience:
but for that, besides this exaction of natural obedience, which is lawful, it
conteyneth diverse other points also, concerning matters of Catholic religion
etc. Let the Reader compare them, with those which in the Fathers name M.
Barlow has given us, and he shall soon see how well, when he is disposed to
rail, he can forge a text to befit his argument, and what conscience he makes
to abuse his Reader, or slander his Adversary.

128. Another notorious forgery he uses in cutting away of words when he is so
convinced by them, as he cannot reply. Barl. page 240.
For proof that Henry the fourth Emperor was taken out of his grave the day
after his burial by the Popes commaundment, M. Barl^w will needs bring a clowd
of witnesses, M. Barlows paring away.
which F. Persons has so dispersed, as that all the thunder and lightning will
fall on M. Barlows own head. For the Emperor dying at Liege where he was
besi^ged by the young Emperor his son, and being unburied again the next day
after his burial, how could the Pope procure it to be done? Barl. page 190^
Belike they dispatched M. Barlows Cut-speed the poast who in one night went
from Liege to Rome 800. miles and returned again ere morning. But least that
this should be espied, M. Barlow out of his Authors pareth away the word
pridie, the day before, and then leaves the time indeterminate in them all, as
it may by his cyting the^ as well seem to have been done a year, as a day
before: for which matter I refer him to the discussion it self, where this in
due place is more largely handled.

129. I will end with one place more wherewith the forgery is joined also
incredible impudency, as the Author of the Supplement does more fully handle
and clearly euince against him. You have before heard M. Barlows bold
assertion, touching unity of names about a place objected out of S. Leo,
saying, that S. Peter was assumpted in co^sortium indiuiduae vnitatis, which F.
Persons said was answered long since by M. Harding, to be meant of unity of
Name. page 331.
What says M. Barlow hereunto? Speak in sooth, honest censurer (says he) is
unity of names Hardings own distinction in answer to Bishop Iewel^? Harding
f^l. 174.

Detection. etc.

Intolerable impudency.


Himself denies it; for M. Harding says that Leo mea^t thereby an unity in
Quality an unity in grace, an unity that is proper to Christ himself, and
mention^th no unity of NAME, for though he were a corrupt Doctor, yet was he a
better D^uine then to speak so absurdly as Persons would here make him. Is not
this very confide^tly spoken think you? And yet the Reader must know that in
this very place which M. Barlow himelf cyteth, in the margent, punctually
setting down the leaff, in this very leasse, I say, after the words of M.
Barlow of unity of quallity, unity of grace he adds again and again unity
of name, and never says an unity that is proper to Christ himself. And what
then will you say to the brazen forhead of this shameless man, affirming that D.
Harding mentions no unity ^f Name; yea that himself d^nyeth i^? Again, that
he says an Unity that is proper to Christ hims^l^? Truly I cannot here but
think of a sentence of S. Augustine which he wrote against one, using far
less impudency then this, that if M. Barlow proceed on in this manner, 3. cont
Iuli^n. cap. 13.
puto quod ipsum libri sui atram^ntunm erubescendo conuertetur in minium: I
think the very ink of his book with blushing will become v^rmil^ion. I add
no other examples of this perfidious dealing, yet if M. Barlow list to see them
he shall find good store in the last chapter of the Supplement, to the which I
remit him.

130. By these euictions gentle Reader (that I may here conclude all this
matter) of M. Barlows ignorance, Grammatical, Historical, Scripturall,
Theological, of his lying, sycophancy railing, fooleries and forgeries, of his
bad di^puting, Thrasonicall vau^ting, and other impertinencyes, and
misdemeanour in writing, thou may without further proof be able of thy self
to judge, how unfit a Sparthan he was to enter this combat, and how true the
Censure is which before I gave of him, and of his book: which the more I
consider the more I admire, either how he was chosen to write, being so
vveake, or his writing suffered to pass with so slight suruiew, and with the
Apostle to say, Sic non erat inter vos sapiens etc. 1. Cor. 5.
is your Ministry so bare, and Deuinity so barren, A poor Clergy.
that no more learned man then this ignorant and shameless Superintendent could
be found to defend his Majesty or write in this controversy? Or is your cause
become now so desperate, as that the weakness and wickedness thereof, enforces
you to these hard shifts, and disgraceful attempts? If it be the truth you
seek, why use you so many and so manifest lies? If the controversy y^^ handle
belong to faith, or good life, what needs so fraudule^t, so faithles, and
persidious dealing? If all Authors stand for you, why do you corrupt their
words, pervert their meaning? If the Adversary you answer be so weak as you
make him, at least let him speak in his own words, and then will your
refutation in that respect carry with it the more credit. Say not that which
you cannot prove: meddle not with that which you do not understand: forge not
accusations, and then take the advantage of your own fictions: deal like
Christians, deal like Deuines if you have any Divinity at all amongst you; let
things be handled as their nature require, as it becomes the person of the
writer, as is best for the Readers direction for finding the truth in case the
iniquity of your cause, and weakness of your ability can bear it, and then we
will not complain; but setting aside all personal reproaches (to which this
Minister above his fellows is more subject) insist only upon the cause in
controversy vt res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet.
August. contra Maximin. cap. 14.


131. This course had M. Barlow or could he have holden, we should not have had
so many ouersights, so gross and childish ignorance, such lewd railing, such
sycophancy, so many words, so little matter, so much chafe without all
substance, so huge a heap of untruths, so great brags, so weak proofs; and
is fine we should have found some Divinity besides Erasmus Chiliads, Martialls
Epigrams and other Poets, for of such pedling and pelting stuff is his whole
book composed: we should not have seen such false citations such mistaking,
and corrupting of Authors, such strange and unchristian assertions, and other
misdemeanors of which I have laid forth some examples, but have left many
more then I have taken, and in some of the heads touched more aduantagions also
for the cause it self, then those which I have alleged, as who so lists
with any diligence to confer M. Barlows book with F. Persons Letter, or
examine the passages he cyteth of others, or his own discourse, collections
and inferences, will soon perceive.

132. Wherefore I wish thee, good Reader, upon that which has been said to
weigh first the difference both in the spirit and method of these two men, The
different manner of writing between F. Persons and M. Barlow.
and that by no other balance then their own books, for thereby thou shall
see where truth, where virtue, and learning is: and contrariwise where
falsehood, forgery, and ignorance. The letter is in many men's hands, and so is
M. Barlow his book, do but confront them together and thou shall in the one
find gravity, judgment, learning method in writing, modesty, truth and what
else should be in one that handles a question of that nature; and in the other
neither style, nor order, nor modesty or any gravity, learning, or truth at
all: and for the manner of his writing, it is so harsh, patched together like
a beggars cloak, and like a sick man's dream so ill coherent (unless it be when
he flatters, for then he strives of purpose to be eloquent) as in reading the
same I often thought of that censure of S. Hierome against Iouinian, who was as
fond in his latin phrases as M. Barlow is in his English: Qu^tie^cumque cum
legero, vbi me defecerit Spiritus, ibi est distinctio, totum incipit, totum
pendet ex altero, nescias quid cui cohareat: Hieron. in Iouin lib. 1^ initio.
As often as I read him where my breath shall fail me there is a full point:
the whole begins, the whole depend^ of some what else, that a man knows not
what coherence one thing has with another.

133. Withal thou may observe what strange impudency it was in M. Barlow to
tell his Majesty, that F. Persons railing was such, M. Barlowes impudency in
his epistle to his Majesty.
as neither his age, (...) profession, neither shame of the world, nor fear of
God, nor grace of the spirit, could mortify his nature, or restrain his
tongue: when as out of that Letter which he answers, there is no sentence or
syllable, that can sound of such insolency; but his tongue has so ouerlashed,
as neither age, nor profession, nor shame, nor fear, no^ grace could restrain
it. And if that such intempera^^ and insincere dealing be the grace of
Protestants spirits, there needs no great trial to be made, for discerning
them from what sourg or fountain they proceed, or whether they be g^od or bad.
And whereas he mentions prof^ssion, alluding, as I take it, to the religious
profession of Father Persons, M. Barlow must know that in Catholic doctrine,
the state of a Bishop is of more perfection in it selfe^ then is the state of a
Religious man, and so he taking himself for such a one, should have showed
more modesty then F. Persons, in case he had been immodest, as he was not. But
men gather not grapes from thorns, nor from such religion, such Bishops, What
account is to be made of the Ce^sures which Prote^t^^ts make upon the books of
Catholic ^riters
such spirits, expect any other flowers, or fruit then are wont to grow in
such gardens, to wit, in the barren soil of ignorance, pride, and heretical
peruersity.

134. Again consider I pray you, what regard is to be had to the Censures of
these men, which they pass upon Catholic books, that are set out against
them. For not knowing which way to turn themselves to answer, they think it
no ill policy to make the Reader believe, that they are of no worth, the
authors contemptible, their proofs none at all. This M. Barlow does often; and
M. Andrews also makes his first entrance with the same to his last book. See
M. William Re^nolds^ page 460. of his Refutatio^ of Whitaker.
So likewise before them did M. Whitaker against the Rhemes Testament, and M.
Jewel against Doctor Harding, which shameful shift, they never use so much,
as when they know least what else to reply. For proof whereof, if there were
no other argument, let their own writing against us be seen, especially this
answer of M. Barlow, in which his charges are fierce and frequent; but when
trial is to be made, he falls either to forging of texts, or corrupting of
Authors, or idle and ignorant babbling, or to worse dealing as has been showed.
On the contrary side, we for cleerer evidence and upright dealing, charge him
with no more then we do prove; nor take any other proof, then what is deduced
from his own words, or else plainly expressed by them; and that without any
mutation, addition, chopping, or any manner of wresting them to another sense
and meaning, then they of their own nature do bear, and M. Barlow himself
when he wrote them did intend.

135. Last of all if M. Barlow mislike, that he is not styled with a more
honorable Ty^le, as well in this Preface, as in the Discussion and Supplement,
besides that himself acknowledges it sufficient honor to have the name
Master, which (says he) put to the Surname of any man, is an addition of
worship: so we must tell him, that we give it not, for that we find no ground
or foundation for the same. For which cause neither Harding against Jewel or
Stapleton against Horn, or others against other of the Superintendents have
bestowed other title then Master, as not acknowledging them to be any Bishops
at all. And for mine own part I take M. Barlowes wife, M. Barlow will have the
feminine sex to be predominant.
whether she be his Lady or Mistri^ for the feminine sex (to use his own
words) must predominate which way so^uer inclyned) to be as much Bishop of
Lincoln as he. And albeit M. Barlow say in one place, that sure Master Jewel
was as lawful a Bishop, as M. Bellarmine is a Cardinal, and deserves the
title as well; page 169.

page 326.

Bellarmin more a Cardinal then Jewel a Bishop.


surely I must tell him that he is much mistaken, for so much as of Cardinal
Bellarmins being Cardinal there can be no doubt, seeing he was made by the
Pope, who only can, and ever yet has made Cardinals, such as now we speak
of. But of M. Jewels being Bishop we have not so much certainty, yea we have
no certainty at all. For who I pray you made him? Who gave him his
Jurisdiction? Who imposed hands upon him? What orders had they? What Bishops
were they?

136. True it is, that both He, Sands, Scory, Hor^e, Grindall, The first
ordinatio^ of Protestant Bishops under Q. Elizabeth.

Christo^ho^us a sac^o B^sco lib. d^ ini^sti ^a^da Chri^ti. E^^^^sia cap. ^.
Sir T^^. More.


and others, (if I mistake not their names) in the beginning of the reign of
Q. Elizabeth met at the Horse-head in Cheepside (a fit sign for such a
Sacrament) and being disappointed of the Catholic Bishop of Landaffe, who
should there have come to consecrate them, they used the like art that the
Lollards once did, in another matter, who being desirous to cate flesh on good
friday, and yet fearing the penalties of the laws in such cases appointed,
took a pigge and d^uing him under the water, said down pigge and up pi^^, and
then after constantly avouched that they had eaten no flesh bu^ fi^h: So I say
these grave Prelates assembled as aforesaid, seeing the Bishop whom they
expected came not, to consecrate them, they dealt with S^ory of H^r^ford to do
it, who when they were all on their knees, caused him, who kneeled down John
Jewel, to rise up Bishop of Salisbury, and he that was Robert Horn before, to
rise up Bishop of Winchester, and so forthwith all the rest^ which Horse-head
Ordering, was after confirmed Synodically by Parliament, wherein they were
acknowledged for true Bishops: and it was further enacted, that none should
make any doubt or call in question that ordination.

137. This was the first ordering of M. Jewel and the rest, as I have been
informed by one that heard it from M. Neale Reader of the Hebrw lecture in
Oxford, The like also affirms Sacrobosco in the place cited.
who was there present, and an eye witness of what was done and passed. Perhaps
for a further compleme^t to supply all defects in the matter or form of this
ordering, Q. Elizabeth as Head of the Church, did as a noble Woman is said to
have done near Vienna, of whom Schererius the Lutheran writes: Scherer.
pos^illa de ^a^ctis. conc. 1. de S. Stephano.
Ante paucos annos, non procul hinc mulier quaedam nobilis per impositionem
muliebrium suarum manuum, and lintei quo praecingebatur loco stolae, filiorum
suorum preceptorum ad praedicanticum officium vocauit, ordinauit, and
consecrauit. A few years since, not far from hence, a certain Noble woman
did call the Master of her children, to the office of a Preacher (or Minister)
and did order and consecrate him by the imposition of her hands, A strange
ordinatio^ of a Preacher.
and of her apron which she did use in steed of a stole. Whether any such
imposition of hands, aprons, or kyrtles, were used to these first Prelates by
Q. Elizabeth afterward I know not: but I have been credibly informed, that
Master Whitgift would not be Bishop of Canterbury until he had kneeled down,
and the Queen had laid her hands on his head: by which I suppose, ex opere
operato; he received no grace.

138. To conclude, seeing that against M. Doctor Harding, Harding Confutatio^
of the Apology fol. 57. and Detection fol. 230. and deinceps.
M. Jewel could never prove himself a Bishop^ as the Reader may see at large,
in the place here by (...) cyted, I will not put M. Barlow to prove the same,
f^^ I see the length of his foot, and quid valiant humeri q^^^ far recus^nt,
where M. Jewel failed, to seek M. Barlowes supply were ridiculous; it shall
suffice him to answer for all his own ouersights in this book, to learn to
be modest, Horace.
to take heed how he deals with School men, to write truly, to study to
understand well the controversy whereof he writes, and finally to write as a
Scholar, as a Divine, at least as an honest man (of all which the very easiest
is too hard in my opinion for him to perform) and the^ I dare promise him,
that with all candor, sincerity, and modesty by one or other, he shall be
answered. And if in some things I might seem to have been too sharp: yet in
respect of his base and bitter vein, whatsoever I have said, will seem I
doubt not to be both myld and temperate.

Faults escaped in the Preface
Quate^n. (c) page 1. nu. 10. in margin versus finem. add, Nubrig. l. 5. cap.
21.

Eodem quatern. page 3. lin. 26. nu. 12. species producatur, lege, species
praedicatur.

Quatern. (d) page 3. lin. 24. nu. 22. Judge not, ^ege, I judge not.

Quatern. (f) page 7. lin. 30. number. 45. dele, the affirmative or negative.

Quatern. (k) page 1. l. 6. nu. 73. F. Persons, lege Fathers person.

OF POINTS CONCERNING THE NEW OATH OF ALLEGIANCE, Handled in the Kings
Apology; before the Popes Breues: AND Discussed in my former Letter:
CHAP. I.
FOR as much as good order and method in writing gives always great light and
ease to the Reader, my meaning is in this ensuing Work to insist speci^lly
upon the three parts touc^ed rather then treat^d at large in my Letter against
the Apology: which Letter M. Barlow has in his book pretended to answer^ and
that also in three parts according to the former division of the Epistle, The
division of the whole work.
whereof the first part does contain such points, as the Apology did handle by
way of preface, as it were, before the Popes two Breues, especially concerning
the substance, and circumstances of the new Oath. The second, such other
matters, as by occasion of the said two Breues were brought into dispute by way
either of impugnation, or defense. The third does comprehend Cardinal
Bellarmi^^ his letter to M. Blackwell, together with the view, and examination
of what had been written in the Apology against the same. And albeit it does
grieve me not a little to be forced to leese so much good time, from other more
profitable exercises, as to go over these matters again, especially with so
idle an adversary, as you will find in effect M. Barlow every where to be: yet
shall I endeavor to recompense somewhat to the Reader this loss of time, by
choosing out the principal matters only, and by drawing to light my said
Adversaries volunta^y, and affected obscurity, using also the greatest breuity
that I may, without overmuch prejudice to perspicuity, which I greatly love, as
the lantern or rather looking glass whereby to find out the truth, and for
that cause so carefully fled by my adversary, as in the progress of this our
contention will be discovered. For that as divinely our Savior said: Qui male
agit, odit lucem, and non venit ad lucem, ne arguantur op^ra eius: He that does
evil, hates the light, and will not come at it, least his works be
discovered thereby. But we must draw him hereunto, and for better method we
shall reduce the most chief and principal heads of each part unto certain
Sections or Paragraphes, which may help the memory of the Reader.

ABOUT THE TRVE Author of the Apology for the Oath of Allegiance.. I.
FIRST then, for that it has been sufficiently observed before, and the reader
has been advertised also thereof, that in all my adversaries allegatio^s of my
words (when they are in any number) he commonly falsifieth them, or offers
some other abuse to the same, by altering them to his purpose, or inserting his
own among mine, and yet setting down all in a different letter, as if merely
they were mine; I shall be enforced as occasion is offered, to repeat my own
lines, as they ly in my own Book, that thereby I may be understood, and his
answer to me conceived, which hardly can be, as he hudleth up both the one,
and the other, desiring to walk in a mist of darkness: the event shall show,
whether I speak this upon good grounds, or no. Now to the narration it self.

And so first having received from my friend in England the aforesaid Apology
of triplex Cuneus, concerning the new Oath of Allegiance, now called the Kings,
and perused the same with some attention, I wrote back again to my said
friend, as follows, being the very first lines. Letter p. 1.
I cannot but yield you hearty thanks (my loving friend) for the new book you
sent me over by Guntar, at his last passage: for albeit I have determined with
my self in this my banis^ment to spend my time in other studies more
profitable, then in contention about controversies: Yet must I needs acc^pt
kindly of your good will, in making me partaker of your news there. And more
glad should I have been, if you had advertised me what your, and other men's
opinion, was of the Book in your parts, then that you request me to write our
men's judgment from hence. And yet for so much as you require it so earnestly at
my hands, and that the party is to return presently, I shall say somewhat with
the greatest breuity that I can: albeit I do not doubt, but that the parties
that are principally interessed there^^ ^ill answer the same much more largely.

About the Author of the Apology.
First then, for the Author, for so much as he sets (...) down his name, it
seems not so easy to guess: yet the more general opinion in these parts
is, that as that odious Discovery of Roman do^trine, and practices, which of
late you have seen answered, was cast forth against the Catholics, under the
cyphred name of T. M. with direction (as he said) from Superiors, Thomas
Morton.
the Autho^^ being in deed but an inferior Minister; so diverse think it to
be probable, that this other book also comes from some other T. M. of like
condition, Thomas Montague
t^ough in respect of his office, somewhat nearer to his Mai^sty, to whom
perhaps he might show the same (as the other dedicated his) and thereupon might
presume to set it forth Authoritate Regia, as in the first front of the book
is set down somewhat dif^^rent from other books, and cause it to be printed
by Barker his Mai^sties Printer, and adorned in the second page with the Kings
Arms, and other like devises, wherein our English Ministers do gr^^ now, to be
very bold, and do hope to have in time the hand which Scottish Ministers once
had. But I most certainly do persuade my self, that his Majesty never read
advisedly all, that in this Book is contained. For that, I take him to be of
such judgment, and honor, as ^e would never have let pass sundry things,
that here are published, contrary to them both.

Thus I wrote at that time, of my conjecture about the Author of the said
Apology, alleging also certain reasons in both the foresaid kinds, which
albeit they be ouerlong to be repeated here, yet one or two of each kind,
especially such as Master Barlow pretends to answer, may not be
pretermitted. See Letter page 3.

What his M^^es^i^s great iudg^ment w^^ld have (...).


As for example (said I) his Highness great judgment would presently have
discovered, that the state o^ the q^^stion is twice or thrice changed in this
Apology, and that thin^ proved by allegations of Scriptures^ Fathers^ and
Councels, which the a^uerse part d^ny^th not, as after in due place I shall
show. And again ^e ^ould ^^u^r have let pass so mani^est an oversight, as is
(...) o^ Cardi^all Bell^^mine with ^leuen several pla^es o^ ^^n^^ad^^^^^n to
him^el^e in his works, whereas in the true nature o^ (...), or contrariety no
one of them can be proved, or mantayned, as every man that understands the
latin^on^ue and will but look upon Bellarmine himself, will presen^ly find.

This was one of my reasons, besides diverse other, that I alleged in that
place, all which for so much as it pleases Master Barlow to defer the
answer thereof to another place afterward, and now to satisfy a reason only
of certain contemptuous speech used against the Pope, and Cardinal
Bellarmine, I shall here also make repetition of my words therein. Thus then I
wrote. In like manner whereas his Majesty is known to be a Prince of most
honorable respects in treaty, See Letter page 4.
and usage of others, especially men of honor, and dignity, it is to be
thought, that he would never have consented, if he had but seen the Book with
any attention, that those phrases of contempt not only against the Pope (at
least as a temporal Prince) but neither against the Cardinal, calling him by
the name of Master Bellarmine, should have passed. For so much, What his
Majesty in honor would have misliked.
as both the Emperor and greatest Kings of Christendom, do name that dignity
with honor. And it seems no less dissonant, to call a Cardinal Master, then
if a man should call the chiefest dignities of our Crown by that name, as M.
Chancellor, M. Treasurer, M. Duke, M. Earie, M. Archbishop, M. Bancroft, which
I asure my self, his Majesty would in law of Honor condemn, if any externe
Subject, or Prince should use to men of that Sat in our country, though he
were of different religion. Wherefore, I rest most assured, that this proceeded,
either out of the Ministers lack of modesty, or charity: and that if his
Majesty had had the perusal of the Book, before it came forth, he would
presently have given a dash of his pen over it, with effectual order to remedy
such ouersights of inciuility.

So I then. And if I were deceived in judgment as now it seems I was, for
that it plea^eth his Majesty to take the matter upon himself, and to avouch
that Book to be his, Why the King was not ^amed in the book
yet in reason can it not be taken evil at my hands that followed those
conjectures, and sought rather to deryue upon others the points which in that
book I misliked, then to touch so great a personage as was, and is my Prince.
Yea in all duty and good manners I had obligation to conceal his Majesty's
name, for so much as himself concealed the same: and when any Prince will not
be known to be a doer in action, as in this it seems he would not at that
time, I know not with what dutiful respect any subject might publish the same,
though he did suspect that he had part therein. For that subjects must seem to
know no more in Princes affairs then themselves are willing to have known. And
consequently, when I saw that his Majesty concealed his name, I thought it
rather duty to seek reasons to confirm and cover the same, then by
presu^ption to enter into Princes secrets, and to reveal them.

And having thus rendered a reason of my doings in this behalf, it remains
that we see what Master Barlow has to say against it; for somewhat he must
say, wheresoever he find it, and though never so impertinent to the purpose,
having taken upon him to contradict, and plead against me in all points, and
reaceaued his ^ee before hand, as may appear, by the possession he has gotten
of a rich benefice, and hops for more.

First then he runs to a ridiculous imitation of my former reasons, whereby
to seek out whether Persons the Jesuit were the true author of my Lettter or
no, and from passage to passage does furnish his style with some railing offals
out of M. VVatsons Quodlibets against him, which though the author recalled,
and sore repented at his death, as is publicly known and testified by them
that stood by, and heard him: yet this charitable Prelate will not suffer his
sin to dye with him, but will needs raise, and revive the same again after
his death, and make it his own, by this sinful and unchristian exprobration
thereof. But what makes this to the purpose we have in hand? surely nothing but
to show the malice, and misery of the slaunderer. For let Father Persons be a
ranging voluntary runegate, and Hispanized Camelion, as here he is termed, or
any thing else which an intemperate, loose, or lewd tongue can devise for his
con^umely, what is all this to the matter in hand, that is to say, to the
writing of the former letter, or who was the author thereof? Does not here
malice, and folly strive which of them shall have the upper hand in M. Barlow?

But yet one point he has more of singularity in folly, which I suppose will
go near to make the reader laugh, if he be not in choler with him before for
his malice. For whereas I had professed my self to be persuaded upon the
reasons set down, that his Majesty was not the penner of the Apology, though
it was printed by Barker his Printer, and set forth authoritate Regia, by the
Kings authority, alleging for example, that first of the minister T. M.
known afterward to be Thomas Morton, who published some years gone, his
lying and slanderous Discovery against Catholics, and gave it this
approbatio^, that it was set forth by direction from Superiors (though perhaps
no Superior ever read it) and the like I said, might be suspected that this
other Apology furnished with authoritate Regia, might perhaps prove to be the
work of some other T. M. to wit, Thomas Montague, somewhat near to his
Majesty, by reason of his Ministerial office, which then he held: all which
declaration notwithstanding Master Barlow is so set to have men think, that I
knew and persuaded my self, that it was the Kings book indeed, Barlowe page 5.
and that by those two letters T. M. I meant Tua, or Tanta Maiestas. By those
ciphers (says he) of T. M. if he will speak without equivocation he meant
Tua, or Tanta Maiestas. M. Barlowes sharp wit.
And have you ever heard such a dream, or deliration in one that professes
wit? Mark his sharpenes. I do say, that this second T. M. does signify Thomas
Montague, and do set it down expressly in the margent. I do describe the
person, and office near the king, as being then Deane of his Chapel though I
name it not. I do show probabilities, how he might presume to write, and set
forth that book authoritate Regia, by showing it only to the king. And how
could I then by those two letters of T. M. mean Tua, or Tanta Maiestas? or
what sense of grammar, or coherence of phrase would those latin words make,
for so much as I wrote in English? what shall I say? is not he worthy to pretend
a Bishopric, that has no more wit then this? But let us go forward to
examyne other points.

He stands much upon the exception taken, of calling Cardinal Bellarmine,
About Cardinal Bellarmines title.
Master Bellarmine, and his defense consists in these points, distended
impertinently throughout diverse pages. That his Majesty being so great a King,
might call such an vpstart officer, that knows not where to rake for the
beginning of his sublimity, Master. That Christ our Savior was called Rabbi
by Nicodemus, and Rabboni by Mary Magdalen: Barlow p. 7. and 8.
and that Christ himself acknowleged the title to his disciples John 13. You
call me Lord, and Master, John 7. and 20.
and you do well, for so I am. That S. Cypria^ called Tertullian his Mai^ter,
and Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris was called Master o^ the Sentences, in all
which speeches, says he, the word Master is taken for a name of credit, and
not of reproach. These are his arguments.

Wher^unto I answer first that the greater the Prince is, the more commonly
they do abound in courtesy of honorable speech, and consequently his Majesty's
greatness made rather for my conjecture, then otherwise: that if he had been
the Writer of the book, he would not have used that term of contempt to such
a man: and secondly for so much as concerns the dignity and degree of a
Cardinal in it self, The dignity ^f a Cardinal
so much scorned by M. Barlow, it shall be well, that he do read over the fourth
chapter of Car^inall Bellarmines last book of answer to his Maies^^es ^re^ace,
De comparatione Regis and Cardinalis, where he sh^^l (...) so much raked
together (to use his own phrase of contempt for the dignity, and high
estimation of that state in the Catholic Church, as he will be hardly ^b^e to
di^perse the same in the sight of godly, and w^s^ men, with all the
contumelious speech he can use thereof, esp^c^ally for so much as Cardinal
Bellarmine his worde^ o^ ^^omise are these: Adduca^iudicium, and testimonis
Pa^^^m v^t^rum, qui primis q^^ngentis annis sloruerunt, quos a s^ ^ecipi Rex
ipse supra testatus est. I will bring forth the judgment, and te^timonies
(says he) of the ancient Fathers which flourished in the first five hundred
years after Christ, whom the King before testified, that he does admit, and
receive. So he.

Thirdly where he alleges, that Christ was called Rabbi and Rabboni, and
acknowledged himself to be so, In what sense the word master is a title of
honor.
to wit a Master, and Teacher, helps nothing Master Barlowes purpose at
all. For we grant, that the word Master may signify two things, first the
authority of a teacher, or doctor, and so our Savior in respect of the high,
and most excellent doctrine, that he was to ^each unto the world for salvation
of souls was called Master by ex^ellen^y, yea the only Master, for so does
our Savior expressly aff^^me in S. Matthews gospel, Matt. 23.
Be you not called Masters, for that Christ is only your Master. In which
sense he is also called Doctor by eminency in the Prophet Isay, Isay 30. and 20.
who promised among other things in the behalf of God, to his people; Non
saciet a^ol^re ad tev^^^^ Doctorem tuum. He will not take from you ag^ine your
Doctor, or Master. Iosue also in this sense writes, Iosue 24.1.
that he called together Principes, Iudices, and Magist^os. The Princes,
Judges, and Masters of the people. So as in this sense of teaching, governing,
and directing, the word Master bears a great dignity, and our Savior joined
the same with the word Lord, Joan. 13.
when he said you call me Lord and Master, and you do well therein. And so if
the Ap^loge^ whosoever he were had this intention to hon^ur Card. Bellarmine
with the dignity of Doctor, and teacher, when he called him M. Bellarmine, I
grant that no discourtesy was offered unto him by that title.

But now there is another sense in using this word Ma^^ter, as it is a common
title given to vulgar men, and the lea^t^ and lowest of all other titles of
courtesy accustomed to be given, for that above this is the word Sir, and above
that again Lord, and then Excellency, Grace, Maiest^, and the like. And in
this sense, and common acceptance of the word Master, I said in my Letter,
that it might be taken in contempt, when it was used to any person, to w^om the
title o^ higher dignity by common intendment was due, as i^ a man should say
Maist^r Chancellor, M. Treasurer, M. Earl, M. Archbishop, and the like.

But let us s^e the wily winding of M. Barlow here, for that ^^^ding himself
much p^^ssed with these examples, he ^ound this deui^e to shi^t them of. Such a
digni^y (quoth he) it may be, that Ma^s^^r prefixed before it, may pr^^e a
diminishing term: but if you put it to the Syrname of any man, it is an
addition of ^ors^ip. Barl. p. 8.
Did his Majesty call ^^m Ma^ster Ca^dinall? then ^ad those i^stances some
s^^^l^n^es of fit appli^ation. No ^ut Master Bellarmine. And is this s^^ling
him Master ^e^^^^m^ne, such a ^candalum Magnatum?

W^e^^t^ I answer, that this shi^t is more fond then the former. But let us
come to the practice of this devise, and let a Sut^r at the Court, or Coun^ell
^or gayning the good ^ill, and favor of the Coun^ellours, b^gin with this
addition o^ worship to their S^rnames, M. Barl^w h^^dly pre^ed
saying in^teed o^ Lord Chancellor, M. Fgerton, I have this, or that ^ute,
wherein I crave favor: so also, Mais^er ^ecill in^^e^d of Lord ^reasurer, M.
Howard, M. ^albot, and others in (...) of Honors, and Lordshippes: would
Master B^^low think to obtain more ^auour by this addition of wor^hip to
their Syrnames? or did he use perhaps this manner of speech, when he crouched
to them, and his Majesty ^or gaining the Bishopric, which he now pos^es^^th?
or will he teach this magisteriall doctrine o courtesy to be practiced in the
Court at this day? How many scholle^s and disciples were he like to have
th^rin? but among other examples, one there is wherein gl^dly I would have his
answer. He profes^eth himself a great, and singul^r seruitour of the Queen
past, and if this doctrine o^ Ma^ster do hold in men of never so great honor
for addition of worship, if it be given to the S^rn^me: then b^ like proportion
also, it must hold in the word Mist^^sse, giu^n to the S^rname of women,
t^^ugh neu^r so great, or Honorable. If then Master Barlow, had gone unto the
s^yd Queen in never so good ^ disposition, yea when he had betrayed his
Master the ^arle of Essex for her sake, and had preached against him that
horrible Sermon, which he did after his death, and should have said unto her,
Good Mistres^e Tydder, this and this have I done for your cause, I hope you will
reward me: what reward would you think that she would have bestowed upon him,
for so great a courtesy? And this shall be sufficient to show the vanity of this
evasion, wherein he pleases himself very much, and entertayneth his pen for
diverse pages, as I have said, pretermitting three or four other in^tances of
mine of much more force, for proving my conjecture, that his Majesty himself
penned not the Apology, promising to answer them after in their due place: but
this place had been most due to the matter in hand if the Minister had found
himself ready, and sufficiently fraught with substance to refute them, and
therefore it is to be presupposed, he would not have pretermitted the occasion
for show at least of some furniture in this beginning, for so much as he
hunteth so greedily after all occasions to say somewhat, though nothing to the
purpose at all.

Well then, thus remains the argument of this first Paragraph, about the true
Author of the Apology (which now his Majesty confesses to be his) somewhat
discussed, as you have heard: the rest remaining for the place that M. Barlow
has promised to say more thereof afterward. The sum of all hitherto
treated being, that I and infinite others being strangers to that which was done
in secret, and thinking it not convenient, nor dutiful for any subject of his
Mati^. to ascribe unto so great a Prince, a thing that might be denied
afterward, or called in controversy by many: I did upon the reasons alleged,
persuade my self, that it was the doing of some of his Majesty's Chaplains,
and namely of Master Thomas Montague, as before I have said by some general
license, or approbation of his Highness, rather then to have been penned by his
Majesty himself. And upon this ground, did I frame my Letter and iudg^ment to
my friend in England, with all mod^sty, r^uerence, and due respect unto his
Majesty's person, though sometimes I was forced by the very curre^t of the
matter it self, and by the injurious dealing, as to me it seemed, o^ the
supposed Author to be more quick and earnest with him, then I would have been,
if I had but imagined his Majesty to have been the writer thero^. Whereby also
appears the present iniquity of this other Minister William Barlow, I^iury
done (...).
who in all this Answer of his does peremptorily conioyne himself with the
person of the Prince, whose champion he makes himself to be, reapeating all
the words of the Apologer (whom I took to be no better then himsel^e) as the
words of the King, and my confutation, as a confutation of his Majesty,
wherein he does me open injury: for that Er^or P^rsona mut at casum, say both
Lawyers and Deuines, and he ought to have taken me in the sense, and meaning
that I supposed, whether it were true, or false.

For as, if in an evening when it waxes dark a man should meet one, whom ^e
thinks to be his enemy, and to have greatly abused him, and should use sharp
speech unto him according to his supposed deserts, and that this party should
not be his enemy indeed, but rather his great friend, or Superior; he could
not have an action against him, that uttered these former words out of opinion,
that he was his enemy, and had abused him: so much less here in this mistaking
in so great obscurity of darkness, there being so many probabilities and
coni^ctures to the contrary, as now you have heard. Wherefore I must require at
M. Barlowes hands to lay down this devise, and to r^peate my words throughout
my whole Letter, a^ spo^en to Thomas Montague, or some other of his state and
condition, according to my persuasion, and supposition at that t^me, and not to
his Mai^stie: and as often as he dot^ otherwise, he offers me open injury, as
he does to ^i^ Majesty also; and makes himself ridicul^^^ ^o others. And
with this condition shall we end t^is ^ir^t Paragraph, and pass to the rest.

OF THE PRETENDED Cause of the new Oath, which is said to be the
Powder Treason.. II.
NEXT after the conjectures handled about the Author o^ the Apology, I coming
in my Letter to touch the causes pretended of pres^ure to Catholics by this
new exacted oath, I proposed some of the Apologers words in his Preamble,
concerning the detestatio^ of the Powder Treason, About the powder treason.
in which detestation, though I willingly joined with him, yet complained I of
the iniquity of some that urged continually the hatred thereof against innocent
men, for them that were culpable, contrary to his Majesty's honorable meaning,
as appeared by the words uttered both in his Proclamation, and speech in the
Parliament. To which passage of mine M. Barlow coming to answer, sets down
first my words and discourse in a different letter, as though they were
punctually mine indeed, and nothing perverted or corrupted by him, and then
plays upon them as though this ground had been true and sincere indeed. And
for that this is his perpetual use throughout the whole answer, I shall for
this once, put down his words, and after also my own, whereby you may take a
document now, at the beginning, how to trust him in the rest. Thus then he
begins his first Paragraph number. 18.

The prea^ble (says he) is a Colloquintida unto him, not so much in respect of
the Epithetes given to the powder-t^eason of monstrous, Barlow^ page 10.
rare, nay never heard of, treacherous, famous, and infamous attempt, it
deserves them says he: but first, that it should be singular from all
examples, there having been the like done by Protestants (though not in
specie, yet in indiuiduo) as at Antwerp, the Hage, and in Scotland. Secondly
that it should be Crambe bis posita, so often repeated, the parties being
executed. ^hirdly that the Kings promise, and Proclamation being, that other
Catholics shall not fare the worse for it: yet the innocent for the nocent are
punished, at lea^t oppressed, as by Libells, Inuectiues, and by searching of
houses, with other outward a^^lictions; so, above al, with this new devised
Oath for their inward pressure of soul and conscience. This is Mors in olla,
and makes him dilate his style into dolefully Rhetorical expostulations.

This is his relation of my Discourse, wherein to say nothing of the confused
obscurity thereof, which every ordinary reader will not understand (and therein
consists a great part of his hope) I have no such word in my speech as Crambe
bis posita; and much less do I say, that such like examples of
Powder-treasons, are to be found in Protestants although not in specie, yet in
indiuidu^, for I should speak like a fool in so saying, M. Barlow speaks like
a fool.
and so does M. Barlow in my opinion, or at least like one that understands
not what he says, as presently I shall declare, after that I shall have set
down my own words, as they ly in my Letter, and are these that ensue.

The preamble begins with,

The monstrous, rare nay never heard of treacherous, famous, and infamous
attempt, plotted within these few years here in England (of the
powder treason) infinite in cruelty, singular from all example, crying loudly
for vengeance from heaven etc. Al which Epithetes for due detestation of so
rash, and heinous an attempt, Catholics no less then Prot^stantes do
willingly admit? though for singularity from all examples, if we respect
speci^m, and not indiuiduum, that cannot be like to another in all points,
there be recounted in histories many atte^pts of the same kind, and some also
by Protestants, in our days: as that of them, who in Antwerp placed a whole
bark of Powder in the vaulted great street of that City, where the Prince of
Parma, with his Nobility was to pas^e: and that o^ him in Hage, that would have
blown up the whole Counsel of Holland, upon private revenge: as also that of
Edenborough in Scotland, where the like train of Powder was laid for the
cruel murder of his Majesty's Father, which not succeeding, his death was
achieued by another no less bloody, and barbarous violence.

But why (I pray you) is this woeful attempt of those unfortunate ge^tlemen, so
often brought in again, The odious and often repetition of the Powder treason.
and repeated almost in every corner of this book? Are they not executed, that
were culpable thereof? And are not other Catholics delivered from the guylt
thereof by the long and diligent search of justice made thereabout? The Minister
himself confesses in his very next lines, the equity of his Majesty to be
such, as he professed in his Proclamation, and Parlament-speach, that he would
not use other Catholics the worse for that. Whereof it follows that he held
them for guiltless: and that all those pressures both of conscience, and
external affliction which since that time they have suffered, The powder
treason not so much a cause as an effect of Catholics tribulation.
and do at this present, were designed before that, and begun also to be put
in execution (as indeed they were) and that the powder treason was not a cause
of these afflictions, but an effect rather: that is to say, that those
gentlemen forseeing or knowing the course that was designed to be taken, and
partly also put in practice, resolved upon that miserable medium to their own
destruction, and public calamity.

But alas is there no end of exprobration against the Innocent, for the nocent?
No compassion? No commiseration? If the clemency of his Majesty in his gracious
Proclamation (as here is confessed) gave security, that notwithstanding that
headlong action of those few Catholic gentlemen, none of the profession
should be the worse used for that cause: how comes it to pass, that so many
agri^uances have been heaped upon them ever since, and are daily, both by
infamous libels published against them, as appears by the former ^. M. ^is
slanderous Discovery, and others mentioned in the answer thereunto; as also by
the new Oath devised for the utter overthrow, both in soul, if they take it
against their conscience; In the t^^at^^e of M^tigat^o^ in the prefa^e.
and of body, goods and citim^tion, if they refuse it? How come so many
searches of their houses, spoils o^ their goods, apprehensions of their
persons, af^l^ctions of their te^^^^ts, servants, and friends, so many
citations, attac^ments, vexations and molestations, that daily do ^low upon
them, as if they were the only malefactors of the land?

Thus far in my Letter of this matter. And now gentle Reader, consider
whether his phrases of Crambe bis posita, or mors in olla be mentioned by me or
not. But spec^ally let the judicious Reader note this foul ouerslippe in
perverting, and mistaking my words (about likeness in specie, though not in
indiuiduo) to a quite contrary absurd sense, which he would not do, but either
out of great malice, or extreme ignorance, or both. M. Barlow ignorant in
Logic and Philosophy.
For that my speech was plain, as now you have heard, that whereas the Apologer
said, that the Powder Plot of England was singular from all example, I named
three of the same kind, or species practiced by Protestants of our days
against their Princes, and Governors in Antwerpe, Hage and Edenborough, which
plots though they were not like perhaps, in all particular and individual
qu^lities, and circumstances ^for then as Logic teaches us there should be
identitas, and not similitudo;) yet were they like in specie at lea^t, for that
they were Powder-plotes, and traynes of fire to destroy their Princes: and yet
are not all Protestants continually c^st in teeth with these c^imes, nor all
condemned for some few, nor ought, as by the iniquity of our Ministers, English
Catholics are.

This was my speech and reason, now let us see how this Minister relates, and
peruerteth the same, for he ^uouc^eth me to have written, that the English plot
could not ^e called singular from all examples, there having been the like done
by Protestants, though not in specie, yet in indiuiduo, as at Antwer^, H^ge,
and in Sco^land. Which is the quite c^ntrary ^o that which I said, and meant.
For I said that those three examples were like, if not in indiuid^^ (for that
they might have different individual qualities, and circumstances) yet were
they like in specie, kind, and nature: but he makes me to say, that though
they were not like in specie, yet they were in indi^iduo, which is most absurd,
and ridiculous; for it is as much as if, for examples fake, a man would say,
that an ox and an ass, that agree not in specie or kind, may agree in
indiuiduo: whereas all Philosophy teaches that individual unity and agreement
being the last, presupposes all other unities going before, both specificall,
and generical, Arist. praedicam. c. 3.
and can never be without them: and consequently wheresoever specificall unity,
or agreement is not found, there can be no indiuidual. As for example, if Peter
and Paul agree not in being men (which is the species) they can never agree in
the indiuidual properties of being particular, and singular men, though
contrariwise they may have perfect agreement and likeness in the first, to wit
ion being men, albeit they do differ, and disagree in the later, as having
different individual, and personal proprieties, whereby they are
distinguished, and made several men. And so, to apply all this to our purpose,
those three powder-plots by me mentioned, may well agree in the species, or
genus, of being powder-plots, though they have some particular, and individual
differences, whereby in some parts they disagree, and are distinguished, but
how they may agree in their indiuidual proprieties of being like powder-plotes,
and yet not agree in the specificall, M. Barlow ridiculous.
or genericall nature of powder-plotes, that is to say, without being
powder-plotes at all, I see not how it can be imagined, and I suppose, that M.
Doctor Barlow will be laughed at by all Logitians in Cambridge for setting down
such doctrine, contrary to all rules of Logic.

And so much the more, for that a little before in the very same page, he
vau^teth of his skill in Logic, imputing great want thereof unto me, saying,
That whereas I had divided the Apology into three parts, it was made to my hand
by others, Another folly of M. Barlow.
for he shows not (says he) so much Logic in all his whole censure. A
great piece of Logick^-learning no doubt, to be able to divide a thing into
three parts, that lies before a man's eyes. When the Butler of Trinity-(...)
whereof he was Minister and Chaplain in Cambrige, did divide a loaf into three
parts, what Logic was needful th^^to? Or when upon the way an ho^tler
deuideth a p^^ke o^ oats to three ho^ses, what skill of Logic is required to
that division? Is it not absurd, and ridiculous to call this skill of Logic?
Much more Logic was required in defending the individual and specificall
unities, and difference before mentioned, which M. Barlow cannot do as it
seems: then in dividing so obuious, and material a thing into 3. parts as
my Letter was, and therefore this exprobration of lack of Logic about so
facile a thing, shows to have come of stomach, rather then judgment.

But here perhaps some man will say, that the speech before confuted of likeness
of powder-plots, though not in sp^^ie, yet in indiuiduo are not set down as M.
Barlow his words, but as mine, which I confes^e; but yet do also deny them to
be mine, but rather falsified, and perverted by him, and i^ he refuse them
also, the^ they be nobodies: but indeed he cannot refuse the^, for that in the
very next ensuing page, he has the same in his own name, if not somewhat
altered to the worse, saying, That howsoever the Censurer strains at it, the
English powder plot is both in specie and in indiuiduo singular from all
examples. (...). p^^. ^1. (...). 21.
Whereby he insinuates, that the three examples by me mentioned, Antwe^p,
Hage, and Edenborough, do differ from the London plot, not only numero but also
specie, which we should more easily have understood if he had set down the
definition of a powder treason in general: for then we might have seen,
whether the said Flemish, and Scottish attempts of powder treason had agreed in
substance and nature with that of England, though different in some
circumstances, that are not so essential. But now we shall try the matter
somewhat by his answers to these three instances of mine.

^
To the first then of the powder plot of Antwerp he says, That t^is was done in
open hostility, what time (says he) al actions ^or d^^^^s^ture are lawful
either by fl^ig^t or force. But by his leave, these that did practice this plot
of powder against their Governor the Prince of Parma were his subjects; and
little it imports, whether they were in open or privy rebellion. For suppose
that the other that practiced the powder plot in England had been in public
rebellion also against his Mat^e. for what cause soever, yet had their powder
plot been a powder treason, nor would M. Barlow have durst to defend the
contrary; and consequently, this plot of Antwerp must be granted to have been
of the same nature or species at least, with that of England, albeit they had
some individual differences the one from the other.

To the second fire-plot of Hage, The powder plott of Hage.
he answers, That it was but of one single man, and in revenge upon the
States for giving him coffeehouse, and by the report of some writers he was
distracted, and mad. But all this makes no essential, much less specificall
difference, for whether the treason were complotted by one alone (which is hard
to be imagined against a whole Senate) or by many, and for discontentme^t given
by the States whom he would or have blown up, that he was distracted, as some
will feign, for excusing the matter; certain it is, that it was
Powder Treason, and directed, and intented to the ruin of many, which is
sufficient to make it of the same species at least, with that of Eng^and.

But to the third of Edenborough in Scotland, The powder-plott of Edenborough.
for the ruin of his Majesty's father, when he comes to answer, he is
exceedingly troubled, and entangled how to defend it, and therefore laying
aside reasoning, he falls to open railing; saying: But by his noting of the
last (Powder Plot of Scotland) this Censurer discovers the rancor of his heart
against our Sovereign: for though the execution of Parricides, and murders
upon Princes have est soones alighted upon some of the greatest, and best of
that Royal sort that ever were, and therefore no dishonor to them, nor their
posterity: yet to cast up such a disasterous example in his Majesty's teeth,
proves well, that he is sorry, that his Majesty escaped the like peril, whom
he so earnestly wished to be his Fathers successor in such a fortune.

So he. And who will not think this malicious speech fitter for a Parasite,
then for a pretended Prelate, yea for the Devil of Lincoln, then for any
William Lincoln, making no scruple to condemn me of Parricide, for that I
make only mention o^ so nay ^ous a wick^dnesse practiced against hi^ Mati^s.
Father by Ghospellers of M. Barlowes religion, and companions in conscience;
who is not ashamed here to say, that it is a good inserence, and proves well,
that I was sorry, that (...) Mai^stie escaped the like peril, ^or that I durst
cast up such a disasterous example in his Majesty's teeth. But who sees not
the malicious ^^cophancy o^ this consequence? I did not cast it up (to use his
absurd phrase) into his Majesty's teeth, but only represented it to his ears,
and memory with grief, and detestation of the ^act. My casting it up (if any
were) was in M. Barlow his teeth, o^ whom I doubt not, but if he had been then a
Preacher, he would have been as ready to have allowed, and praised the fact, as
generally most of his ^ellow Ministers, both English and Scottish did at that
time, not only in regard, that the parricide was committed by them, as it was,
and against a young Prince suspected by them in r^l^gio^, and therefore feared:
but also for that his Noble Person, and growing fortunes were in such deep
iealousy with the Queen of England, then regnant, as nothing more.

But to leave this to his Mati^s. prudent consideration, and the obscurity of
his speech to the Readers due observation, I say, that this ^uagation, and
digr^ssion of William of Lincoln does prove nothing the point it should, to
wit, that this Powder Treason of ^d^nborough was not of the same essence,
nature, and species with the other of London, though less heinous, as not
being directed perchance to the personal murders of so many particular men,
but yet to the public ruvne of the State of the Commonweal, as the event
well declared. For that the ruin of the Father brought also consequently the
ruin of his Majesty's Moth^r, wherein that William Barlow himself had not
only a wish, but also a push, so far forth as his wretched forces of tongue,
and pen at that time could do her any hurt, I suppose he would think it a
disgrace to deny it.

But to return to our controversy in hand, whether thi^ Powder Treason of
Edenborough against his Majesty's father were not of the same kind and species,
that was the other d^signed in London against himself, which I affirm, and
the Minister denies: let us see one shif^ of his more, M. Barlowes shift
as idle, and impertinent as the rest, to avoid the force of truth. See (says
he) how malice blinds judgment in this his resembla^^e: the truth is that
his Majesty's Father was not blown up with Gunpowder, but after the
murderers had strangled him in his bed sleeping, he was carried out to the
garden, and then was the house blown up, to make the world believe, that it
was but a casual accident o^ fire: Barl. p. 1^.
and so what semblance o^ comparison is there between the Powder Treason (of
London) and this? VVhereto I answer, that the sembla^ce is very essential, that
both were Powder-treasons, both of them traitorously directed by subjects to
the overthrow of their Princes; and if that of Edenborough was not put in
execution, as M. Barlow says, but after the King was murdered; no more was
that of London, God be thanked, but was disc^uered and defeated, his Majesty
remaining in health, and sa^ety. And how will M. Barlow now defend this
position, that they were not like in specie nor in indi^iduo? Will he not be
ashamed to brag of Logike hearafter? or to exprobrate the want thereof unto me?
But we shall have occasion to handle again this matter in other passages that
are to ensue.

But yet before we pass from this matter of the powder treason let us hear
how he insisteth therein, and triumphs, as to himself he seemth, with all
the most odious exaggerations that his venomous, and virulent tongue,
accustomed to Satanicall maledictions, can utter in spite of Catholics, and
especially of Jesuits, whom (though never so innocent in that behalf) he will
needs have to be authors, and actors in that foul crime. And first of all he
begins his railing with three or four notorious lies at a clap: as namely,
M. Barlowes virulency against Jesuits.
that Hall alias Ouldcorne the Jesuit said of this plot when it was
discovered, that such actions are not commended, ^ut when they are finished. A
thing most earnestly denied by him both at his death, and other times. And here
M. Barlow is bare of alleging any testimony at al for the same.

Secondly he says, that the Jesuits, if the Parlame^t house had burned, would
have song with Nero, the destruction of Troy, and of this, says, he doubts
not, other proofs he alleges none. Thirdly he says, that they would have
graced it with no less Epithetes the^ Sixtus the Pope did the murder of King
Henry the third of France in his Panegyricke, calling it A rare, and memorable
fact; and this also has no other proof, but his malicious conjecture,
together with the known lie of Pope Sixtus Panegyricke, which was never yet
heard of in Rome, as Cardinal Bellarmine testifies in his Book, who made
diligent search to inform himself thereof.

Fourthly he says, that Garnet was the Coryphaeus of that complot, Touching
Father Garnet.
principal privy Counselor, and the like. Whereas notwithstanding the very
acts, and examinatio^s set forth by his Adversaries do check this
ministerial malignity in that behalf, no more being proved therein, but that
full against his will, and unto his ^xceeding great grief he heard thereof only
in Confession not long before the matter brake forth. And albeit Sir William
o^ ^in^olne (for so the man would gladly be called) do jest here at the
obligation of concealing things heard in Confession, calling it, An enammeling
of hideous treasons, with the glorious pretense of Sacramental Confession:
Barl. p. 11.
yet al true Bishops of Lincoln for more then five hundred years before
himself, that went in at the door, and stole not in at the window, were of
another opinion, touching the sacred seal of that Sacrament, M. Barlow a b^d
Cof^^^^ur to the ^a^le o^ (...).
all which must be damned a most pitiful case) if this Sir William can be
saved, that so contemns the said seal of Secresy, and betrayed his Master
and Penitent, that is said to have made his Confession unto him, which though
it were not Sacramental, being made to a mere Layman (as I take Sir William
to be:) yet was he bound by the law of natural secresy, not to have published
the same, without his license, and consent thereunto. But as this Minister got
his Bishopric without Priest hood, so no marvel, though he proceed not
Priestly, but profanely therein.

And finally whereas he scoffeth so malignantly, and in^em^erately at that
innocent man Master Garnet, that loved peace no less then M. Barlow does
broiles, and gave his life for defense of the integrity of his Priestly
function, and obligation, being of as quiet a spirit, as the other is
turbulent: whereas I say the Minister sco^^eth, and scorneth, saying, that his
head and flesh was rotting upon the bridge of London while his face did shine
in a straw for his goaly purity, Touching Father Garnet and his face in the
straw.
I can say no more in this case, then that which all good men have said, and
done in the like, that the looser must have his words: the time will come,
when the Minister is like to pay for all, as other ravenous Persecutors have
done before. The straw we made not, nor invented, and of this can be witness
diverse Noble, and principal persons of contrary religion to Father Garnet, who
saw, and examined the same. But if God gave, or will give any such testimony or
other, in this world, that may tend to the defense of any of his servants that
suffer unjustly, by the malignity of wicked tongues; what fault have we therein
to be carped at by the incredulity or in^idelity of such as believe nothing,
but what themselves list, which commonly is that by which they may gain most.

As for the rotting of his head, and flesh upon London Bridge, there is no
reason, that he should have a privilege above other Servants of God, of whom
the Prophet said in lamenting-wi^e to God himself: They have cast the dead
bodies o^ thy Servants ^or birds o^ the air to feed upon: and the flesh of
thy ^aintes to ^e devoured of beasts. Psalm. 78.2.
If that be sanctity which was wont to be in ancient Divinity consisting in
true Catholic belief, and virtuous, pious and innocent life; Father Garnet is
known to have lived a Saints life indeed, and to have accomplished the same
with a happy death, in dying for the defense of Justice, and equity, that
obliged him to silence, and secresy in the matter, which without sacrilege he
could not reveal, or vtt^r, though never so much detesting the attempt
pretented, and bewayling the knowledge thereof, which sore against his will was
imparted unto him.

There follows another notorious untruth which is the fifth in this rank,
concerning Father Persons being privy, F. Persons falsely and maliciously
accused by M. B^rlow to be priu^ to the powder plot.
and consenting to their powder plot, whereof this Minister both in this place,
and many other makes no sc^uple resolutely to accuse him: whereas in the whole
action ^et forth in print, there is no one such accusation against him, which
is like would not have been omitted, if any lea^t ground had been found for
the same. And moreover he adds another assertion, no less tem^rarious, which
is, Barl. p. 12.
That Father Persons came on his journey a good step toward England, that he
might have song a Te Deum in his natyue country for the good success o^ that
happy exploit. So he. But for that he saw that this might be checked by the
testimony of hundreds of witnesses, that knew, that he never departed from Rome
in all that time, nor long before, nor after, the Calumniator adds this
defensive Caveat in a parenthesis (as some report) and yet would he have it
believed of all; so little conscience has he to cast out false accusatio^s
without ground, as though there were no Judge in heaven, or earth ^or false
Calumniatours of their brethren.

Lastly about this matter of the powder treason he delights himself so
greatly with the often mention, and repetition thereof, as he says, he will
never cease from talking of that matter. Barl. p. 13.
Nor will we (says he) be silent thereof -- rumpantur ilia Romae, so long as
we have pens to write, or tongues to speak, or a generation living, or a
posterity succeeding. Do you see how earne^t the man is? If we should employ
our pens and tongues in the continual repetition of such attempts, by
Prote^tats against their Princes, you see now already we have three for one in
this kind of powder-plots, but many more in others. And let the last attempt in
Scotland of the Gowryes for killing his Majesty, and the first in England of
Gray, Cobham, and R^^le^ for imprisoning his person, give testimony in this
matter, whether they were not all professed Protestants or no? So as in this
there is no place for -- rumpantur ilia Romae, brought in by M. Barlow, with
more gall, then discretion, as many other things are in this place, for
diminishing of the pressures laid upon Catholics for their consciences in
religion: Of Catholics ^a^tyr^d v^der Queen E^izabeth.
amongst which he avouches resolutely that in fi^^y years of two Protestant
Princes, scarce threes^ore persons have been executed, and all these as guilty
of treasonable practices: whereas their own records, and ours also forth in
print, do show above an hundred and thirty Priests, besides laymen to have
been put to death within the space by him mentioned, whereof not one could be
convicted of any other treason, or treasonable practice, then the exercise of
their Priestly function. So as in this both for the number and cause, M. Barlow
is taken with an open known falsity.

HOW GREAT A PRESSVRE the urging of the new Oath is to Catholics that have a
contrary Conscience in Religion.. III.
IT follows by order of M. Barlow his book and mine, that we do examine a
little, how grievous and burdensome the inforceme^t of the new Oath is to a
Catholic conscience, Touching the Oath of Allegiance.
that understands diverse points of his Religion to be denied thereby, and so
much the more grievous is it, by how much more desirous his Majesty's Catholic
people are to give him contentment, and satisfaction in all points of temporal
obedience, belonging to true, and loyal subjects. I do say in my Letter,
Letter p. 8^
that the Apologer, supposed by me to be some Minister, did speak of the Oath,
as of a thing of no pressure, or prejudice at all, for that he having spoken of
the former asseueration of his Majesty, That none of the Catholic profession
should be worse used for that cause, to wit, of the powder-t^eason; he
adioyneth presently: Only, says he, at the next sitting down of Parliament a
form of Oath was framed to be taken by all his Maiesti^s subjects, whereby they
should make their profession of their resolution faithfully to persist in his
Majesty's obedience etc. By which exception of ( only) a man may well perceive,
that the Minister makes little account of taking, or not taking this Oath: for
so much as he supposes Catholic people to have received no hard usage thereby,
though they be brought thereby into such extremities, as either they must sw^are
against their own judgments, and consciences in sundry points p^rtaining to
their religion, or else endure his Majesty's heavy displeasu^^ with los^e of
goods, and lands etc.

These were my words. And now how do you think that M. Barlow will shift of
this important point appert^^ning to conscience in Religion? No doubt, but much
according to the feeling himself has of swearing, or not swearing, if the
Princes favor, or disfavor come between. Do you stand attent then, and you
shall hear as eg^egious tris^ing, as ever you did perhaps in so grave a matter.
The new Oath (says he) of all other is the Phallaris Bull, Barlowe page 17.
the mo^^ g^ieuous vexation. But ^herin stands the agrieuance? is it in the
abstract, because there is an Oath commanded? The highest judge allows it
both by ^is own example, swearing by himself to Abraham and by precept to us.
Thou shall sear the Lord, and swear by his name. Genes. 26. Deuteronomy. 6.
But good Sir, we do not deny the lawfulnes of swearing, either in abstract,
or ^on^ret, but the sin of false swearing, when we take an Oath against our
judgment, and conscience. He goes further. Perhaps then the aggrieuance
(says he) is in the Epithete, because it is a new Oath. Page 18.
No sir. But because it is a fail Oath, when a man thinks the things not
true, that he swears.

He goes forward to prove, that a new Oath may be lawful, when the occasion
thereof is new. But I denied not this, and so M. Doctor bears the air in
vain. Yet will he not leave of, but takes another medium, to prove that this
Oath is not new, but old, concerning the matter thereof. For that it is old
(says he) and has been usual in all nation^ Christian and Heathen, that
subjects should bind their allegiance by Oath ^or their Soueraigns security.
But who denies this? is it not a shame for a Doctor to wander up and down from
the purp^s^e? And yet will he pas^e further therein, for lack of better matter.

It is grounded, says he (he means of taking Oaths of f^delity to Princes)
upon Scripture both in the examples of holy Kings, and the Apostles definition
of an Oath, Hebr. 6. 16. n^mel^, That an Oath is the end of all contr^uersies.
Of which speech I grant the former part, concerning the examples of holy
Kings, that have taken Oaths of their subjects, though as I have said, it be
little, or nothing to ou^ controuersy^ Barl. p. 1^.
Nor can I find Cardinal Bellarmines authority cited in the margent to this
purpose, in his 7. book de Romano Pon^ifice, he having written but five of
that argument. Nor does it import to find it, he saying nothing therein, which
we do not confess. But as for the second part, where M. Barlow brings in
the Apostles definition of an Oath to be the end of all controversies, though I
acknowledge it to be his sentence, and most true: yet not a definition. Nor do
I see, how M. Barlow will be able handsomely to defend the same. For if the
common axiom of Logitians known to every scholar that studieth that art be
true, that Definitio and defini^u^ conuertuntur, Aristot. l. 2. priorum cap. 8.
so as whatsoever is comprehended under the one, is comprehended also under the
other: and contrariwise whatsoever agrees not to the one, agrees not to the
other: then cannot this proposition of the Apostle be a definition of an Oath,
and consequently M. Barlow does err grossly in calling it so.

Now then that this matter is so, and that every Oath cannot end all
controversies, nor that every controversy is ended with an Oath, is evident by
experience. All controversies are not to be ended by swearing.
For how many swearers have you, that will offer to swear twenty Oaths in a
controversy between them and others, if thereby they might end, and gain the
controversy? But the other party admits them not, for that he has not so
much credit of sincerity in their Oath, that they wll swear truly, as to
believe them. And so also on the other side, how many controversies are there
ended daily without Oaths, and many cannot with Oaths. As for example, if M.
Barlow should owe a piece of money, and being urged to pay it, should offer to
forswear it, that were not like to end the controversy, but rather the laying
down of the money: Ergo, all Oaths are not able to end all controversies, nor
all controversies are determinable by Oaths.

You will demand then, what is S. Paul his meaning, when he says, as here M.
Barlow relates him, that an Oath is the end of all controversies? Surely S.
Paul's meaning had been clear enough, i^ M. Barlow had let down all the
Apostles words, as they lie in the text, which are: Homines enim per maiorem
sur iurant, and omnis controuersiae eorum finis ad confirma^^^^ est iuramen^um.
Heb. 6.
For men do swear by a greater then themselves, and the end of all their
controversy for the confirmation, is an oath. The intention of the Apostle is
to strengthen our hope in God, for that he had confirmed his pr^mises to us by
Oath, which is the soundest confirmation that can be in the behalf of the
swearer, for no man can add of his part more to bind, then an Oath. And for
this cause he says, That an Oath is the end of all controversy for
confirmation of truth in the behalf of the swearer, ^or he can pass no
further: but not so in the behalf of the other party that is interessed also
in the co^trouersy: for if he should mistrust the swearers sincerity of
conscience, then would not his Oath be sufficient to end the controversy, as
before we have said, and consequently the speech of S. Paul in this place,
contains no definition of an oath, as fondly M. Barlow dreameth, but
expresses rather the effect of an oath for confirmation of truth in the behalf
of the swearer: which word of confirmation M. Barlow craftily left out, and
thrust in two greek words (...), the end of controversy, most impertine^tly,
without a^y purpose in the world, as otherwise often he does, to enta^gle his
vulgar Reader with oste^tation o^ greek, whereas these words have no special
propriety, emphasis, or different signification in the world, so as he might as
well put in a whole page of greek out of S. Paul's Epistles, as those two
words. But these men, as else where I have advertised, do seek occasions of
darkness and obscurity, to hide the weakness of their cause therein.

But let v^ go forward. For having labored all this while out of the list to
prove the use of Oaths to be lawful, and ancient, which we deny not in
lawful cases; he comes now to set down the co^^rouersy more in particular,
that is, this very case, says he, the Amilogiae, or controversy, whereof is,
Whether any Romish Catholic can bear any true Allegiance in his heart to ^he
Kings Majesty. This Jesuit houldeth the ^ffi^matiue, we by effect, o^ so many
treasonable plots of ^riest^ and Jesuits, do hold the contrary: Yea the
Priests of the same religion are merely contradictory to him etc. And ther^ore
his Majesty has taken this way of the Apostle to try the matter by both.
Barlow p. 18. and 19.
But good Sir, are you not ashamed to trifle in this manner, and to be taken
every foot in false consequences? Where did you learn your Logic? Or where
did you frame your cons^ience? M. Barlow void of conscience and Logic.
If the question be, Whether any Romish Catholic can bear true Allegiance in
his heart to the Kings Majesty, how do you hold the negative upon some
effects of treasonable plottes of Pries^es and Jesuits? If it were true, that
such were sound, does the discovery of some such plotts in some Catholics
infer an impossibility, that no Catholic can bear any true Allegiance? How
say you to the plots of France, Flanders, and Scotland, and other parts, do
they convince, that no Protestant can be trusty?

Furthermore, if it be impossible for any Catholic to bear true allegiance
in his heart, what is his Majesty like to gain by urging them to swear? For
that either they must leave to be Catholics, or else swearing helps the
matter nothing. For while they are Romish Catholics you hold they cannot
bear true Allegiance. And as for the Priests of the same Religion, which you
say do hold the same with you, and do quote in the margent the Quodlibets,
About the Quodlibets.
if any such thing be (for I have not the book, nor do mean to seek for your
allegations) it was not the writing of Priests, but either of some one Priest
in his passion, or rather of your High-Prie^t, whom some of your Puritans have
called the Tail of the Beast, which was the chief Author of that scandalous
Book, published by another. And as for all other Priests their concord, and
unity in true, and Catholic Religion against you is sufficiently known.

There follows yet an impertinency or two more: as first, that the form of
the Oath, to be given tactis Euangeli^s, laying the hands of the swearer upon
the gospel, is no new, or modern invention, but prescribed long since by
Justinian the Emperor, as though we had said the contrary, or that it made any
thing to our controversy. The second imper^^nency is, that w^ are much grieved
with th^^ clause o^ the Oath, Barl. page ^9.
that men mu^t swear, in the tru^^ faith of a Christian, without Equivocation;
for this, he says, is my greatest groan, and complaint, that the Oath
excludes Catholics from all Eq^iuocating: the trial o^ which complaint we
re^erre, says he, to another place, or rat^er (though i^ gr^eue him) to the
elder T. M. that is ^saith he) ^^^us Ma^tix (in that point) F^ther Persons.
Unto both which points, I answer. To the first, that it is most false, that I
did ever groan, or complain of the exclusion of Equiuocatio^ in this Oath,
but have always held the quite contrary in my books against M. Morton, No
Equivocation in matt^rs of religion.
to wit, that no Equivocation was, or is to be admitted in any Oath concerning
Religion or our profession thereof. Let M. Barlow read in my book of Mi^ig^tion
page 277. and be ashamed of his wilful slander in this point. To the second,
whether Master Thomas Morton in the point (of Equivocation) is a Mastix, or
scourge to Father Persons, or the other to him, there needet^ no other trial,
but only the last two books published against M. Morton, the one termed The
Mitigation, the other The quiet, and sober ^eckoning, where there be so many
lashes laid upon him and his credit, as there be unanswerable lies proved, and
convinced against him. And if M. Barl^^ could help out his brother-Minister in
answering some of those lies for him, he should do him no less ease, then if
he had powered both wine and oil upon a man, that has been well whipped
indeed.

There follows immediately after in the same place, an authority of S.
Augustine quoted Epist. 214. ad Alipi^^^, Barl. p. 1^.
where S. Augustine is said to allow, that the use of an Oath is old, and
ancient, and that the swearer ought to swear to the Judges mind, when he
knows the same. But good Reader, shall we entreat M. Barlow once throughout
all his book, to make a good consequence. When did we ever deny, that the use
of an Oath in general is not ancient, but that this Parlament-Oath in England
lately devised, is new both for time (for that M. Barlow does expressly in this
very page, grant that it was procured from his Majesty's prudent cogitation)
and for the form, and contents including matter both of civil Obedience unto
the Temporal Prince, and spiritual Disobedience to the Ecclesiastical
Prelate. And as for the second point of swearing to the intention of the judge,
when he is lawful, and proceeds lawfully, whosoever has or will read any of
the last two Books in Answer and Reply to M. Morton, will see it often, and
often repeated, that no Equivocation at all is admitted in that case: or when
the examination is about religion, and con^equently he will wonder at M. Barlow
his running from the matter so manifestly, to seem to say somewhat.

THE SAME ARGUMENT About the Pressure of the Oath is further discussed.. IIII.
BUT now after long gadding abroad to show, that an Oath in general is not
unlawful, nor the matter of an Oath new, and the like, as you have heard; he
returns home for a while, saying: Barl. p. 19^
And now will we follow him to examine the weight of this pressure. And then,
as if I had spoken to his Majesty, when I spoke to the Apologer T. M. (^or
this injury he offers me at every turn, Injury offered by M. Barlow to the
Author of the Epistle.
to thrust in his Majesty to undergo my speech, meant to a Minister) he says,
that I pick a quarrel about the word Only, used by the Apologer, as a
diminitiue phrase of the pressure laid upon Catholics by this Oath; and he
makes me speak after an ironicall scoffing manner, saying: that the King
^seth the word Only, when he talks of the imposition of this Oath upon
Catholics, as a matter of small, or no pressure, saying, That ( only) an Oath
was devised to try their fidelity: and then he makes me to add these words of
Ironicall Sarcasmus, or bitter jest, as he calls it, and sets it down in
a different letter as my proper words, to wit, that I should say, as, If the
taking of this Oath were so lightly to be esteemed as to be thurst upon
Catholics, with an (only:) whereas I have no such manner of speech, as the
Reader may see in my own words set down at large in the XII. number of the
first Paragraph. And therefore this perpetual custom of falsifying in every
place lightly where he pretends to cite my words, would weary a man to deal
with him. But that I have resolved to have patience with him yet somewhat
further.

My speech then about this word Only, was as you have heard, that whereas, the
Apologer had said that his Majesty's will was, that none of the Catholic
profession should be the worse used for the powder plot, he presently adjoined,
That Only at the next sitting of Parliament a form of an Oath was framed to be
taken by all etc. By which word Only, I said, that the Apologer seemed to make
small account of taking, or not taking this Oath; for so much as he supposed
the Catholic people to have no agrieuance, or pressure thereby, for that
otherwise, it had not been true, that they should not fare the worse for the
said powder treason.

And what will M. Barlow say to this? You shall hear his own words. Who
knows not, says he, that this word Only, does not so much signify an
hypocoristicall alleuiation, as a compendiary limitation? This is very high and
profound stuff, as you see, and most of his Readers I suppose must go to the
greek Lexicon before they pass any further, if they will understand him. But
let us see how he does explicate himself by an example. Barl. p. 20.
He that said to our Savior (says he) Only speak the word, did not thereby
extenuate the power of Christ, Matthew. 8. 8.
as is healing in absence by a speech had been a more easy miracle, then by
aproach to touch the party, but thereby wished a course more easefull to the
body, not less powerful to show the deity of our Savior. But to what end is
all this? Do not we say the very same that the word Only is a diminitiue
phrase in this place, signifying, that whereas our Savior offered to go with
the Centurion for the curing of the sickeman, he answered, that his Only word
was sufficient, excluding the other of bodily going, as not being necessary.
Wherefore the other Commentary annexed ^y M. Barlow, that the Centurion did not
extenuate the power of Christ, is therefore impertinent, for that the
comparison was Only in his bodily going, or curing Only by word in absence, as
he himself also confesses.

If a Noble man should say to his Tenantes, Certain kynred, or friend, of
yours have done me such, and such displeasure, b^t none of you that are
innocent shall fare the worse for that, Only you shall make me a certain
acknowledgement for my better satisfaction: who will deny, but that this word
Only conteyneth a diminution, and imports as much, that this acknowledgement
is no grievous matter, for otherwise it should not agree well with his promise,
that they should not fare the worse for it. And so fares it in our case. But
if that Noble man should demand at their hands a thing that imports their
lives, much more their souls, and life everlasting: then would they justly cry
out, and complain of this word Only, as gu^lefully used unto them. And so much
of this.

About urging Catholics to swear against their consciences, this our Doctor
determines peremptorily, as it were out of his Chair, in this sort: You must
know that a conscience may be misled by error, or sti^ned with pertinacy, and
then the Greek Deuynes will tell you, that vnsoundenes in the judgment, and
obstinacy in the will makes but a nicknamed conscience, Barl. p. 21.
which is rather to be censured^ then tendered. And the^ he cites in the
marge^t Chrysostom, and Oecumenius, without specifiyng any work or place of
theirs, who have written diverse Volumes; and this he observes ordinarily when
he means to follow the wild-goose chase, to use his one phrase, How an
erroneous conscience binds, or no^ binds us to follow it.
and not to be found by his answerer. And not only he practices the same in
his quotation here, but also in his determination of the doubt, for he flies
the proper question, that most imports the Reader to know, which is, whether
a man be bound under sin, to follow an erroneous conscience or not, which
Deuynes do hold that he is, to wit, either bound to follow it, or at least not
to go against it: for in case the error come of invincible ignorance, then is
he bound to follow (...) that he can have no (...) it away: but i^ the
ignorance be vincible (as (...) indeed he is bound to d^pose such a conscie^c^,
(...) yet he can do nothing aga^^t it, as long as such an (...) c^^s^ience
r^mayn^th; for that our will is alwa^^^ ^ound to ^o^^ow, or not to go against
the direction of our reason, whether the said reason do err, or not, ^or that
it cannot be but sin for our will to embrace that which our reason (...) to be
naught. And will M. Barlow deny thi^? Or did he understand it? Why then had he
not decided the question as became a learned man, and a Prelate indeed? And yet
it seems by those words of his repeated (saying that such a conscience is
rather to be censured, then tend^r^d) that an erroneous conscience byndeth not,
and that it is not sin to do against a man's own judgment; wherein he has
not only all school Deuynes against him, that prove the same out of Scripture,
but the ancient Fathers in like manner; especially in their Commentaries upon
Saint Paul's ^pistles to the Romans, where the said Apostle ha^dleth the
matter largely, and concludes: Qui antem discernit, (...) damnatu^ est. (...)
Romans cap. 14.
He that disc^rneth, that he should not ^ate and yet eats (against his
judgment, and conscience) is damned. Upon which words S. Ambrose says (which
(...) serve for all) Verum est, quia qui iudicat non edendum and edit, damnatus
est. (...)
S. Paul says truly, for that, he that judges that he should not eat, and
yet eats is damned. And with Saint Ambrose does agree S. Chrysostom, Origin,
Theophilact, Theodoret, Ans^lmus and others upon the same place. And the some
proves S. Bernard. (...)
And as for Schoolmen after Saint Thomas, and Alexander de Hales, all other
Deuynes do agree upon the same commonly, and I would gladly know how Master
Barlow will answer them?

In the very same page, having set down his Majesty's words, promising, that
^e^ther the Oath, nor penalty thereof was (...) any for their opinion, or
conscience, but only for an ac(...) of their (...) obedi^nce, (...)
he sets down my Answ^^e. ^f it be so ((...) I) the matter is ended, for no
^atholicke (...) obedience that he owes to his Majesty. And there he cutting
or my words, makes a great scanning of the last, to wit, that he owes to his
Majesty, calumniating my meaning therein, as though I meant to lymit this
temporal obedience also. But if the malicious man had set down the words that
do immediately ensue, my meaning had been plain in my Book, for I said this:
Letter. page 8.
I presume no Catholic in England will deny to swear all civil obedience,
that he owes to his Majesty, or that any subject has ever in former
Catholic times sworn to their liege Lords, and Princes, or do in other
Countries at this day. Is not this plain enough? And why then did M. Barlow
cut them of? What plain dealing is there in this? Let us hear how he
prosecuteth his ^alumniation against me. Treason hatched in the heart cannot
conceal it self, says he, from uttering, though in hidden terms. For
observe those words, Page 22.
al obedience that he owes to his Majesty, what is that? or how far extends
it? S. Peter stretches it without limitation; Submit your selves to all manner
of ordinance for the Lords sake. So he. What? all manner of ordinance? 1. Pet.
2.13.
and without limitation at all? and that in a time of Infidel Princes, as was
that of S. Peter, who might, and did ordain many things against the Lord? How
then could the Apostles warrant their answer to the Magistrates of the Jews,
that they were to obey God rather then men, that is to say, to Christ rather
then to them, that were Magistrates?

But I would ask here Master Barlow, that is such a Grecian, and brings in
Greek phrases to no purpose at all, why he had not set down the sentence of
S. Peter in Greek, which is most different from his English? and why he does
translate here, (...) al manner of ordinance, whereas the words do import omni
humanae creaturae: which all the ancient Fathers do understand to be meant of
all humane Princes, as by the context it self is evident. And as it were
absurd to say that we must submit our selves to all humane creatures whatsoever
(the Apostle his discourse being of obedience to Princes): so it is much more
ab^surd, M. Barlow bold with the Scriptures
to translate it, as M. Barlow does, all manner of Ordinance, leaving quite out
the word humane, and turning creature into ordinance. For who does not see that
many unlawful (...) are made by Princes, and especially in S. Peter's time, as
now is said^ and yet (forsooth) will not M. Barlow have any limitation to be
understood in S. Peter's words, nor yet the words themselves translated, as
theyly in the original text: so absolute Masters will these men be, to make
of Scriptures what they list.

There follows immediately upon the former point, an other taken out of the
Apologers speech, saying: T^^^ very many of his Mai^sties subjects that were
Popishly affected, (...) Pri^stes, as Lai^ks, had ^reely taken the same Oath^
whereby they both gave his Mai^stie occasion to think the better of their
fidelity, Apol. p. 4.
and l^kewise ^reed themselves of that heavy slander: and that his Majesty
punishes none for conscience sake. Upon which (...) words I a^ked this
question, Why are then M. Blackwell, M. (...) and others that have taken the
Oath detained still in prison? why (...) Re^usantes punished, and fined for
Recusancy, though they take the Oath o^ Allegiance? is not Recusancy a case of
conscience?

To this last speech of mine, he answers presently, differring the other for
many pages after, and the sum of his answer is, That I would feign be a privy
Counselor to kn^^ the reason of things: and that to answer a scorn is
folly: That he wi^^ not endeavor to resolve this question either by conjecture
or truth: he is not my intelligencer. Let Ma^ster Blackwell answer for himself
AEtatem hab^t: Page 23.
perhaps it is better for them to stay in prison, then (...) be dismissed least
they should be made away by Jesuits, as the Bishop of C^ssano, Cardinal Allen,
Tolle^, yea Pope Sixtus Quintu^ himself, all f^^ged in a trice, for c^^ss^^g,
or at least for not serving the Jesuits humors. So he. And by this kind of
answering the poor man shows of what humor he is himself, What a good
con(...) M. Barlow h^th (...) a Bishop.
having nothing to say, nor conscience to discern what to say, true or false.
For what probability can there be in this conscienceles calumniation, of
fi^ging, and making away so many and great personages, as here are mentioned?
Does this Pre^ate think there is a God? or account to be given of such
en^rmous slanders, especially touching blood? Is he f^t to have care of
souls, that seems to have no soul himself, or care what becomes of other
men's souls? Would any Pagan, if otherwise a moral man be ^o (...), or project
in s^aundering without any semblance, or show of truth, upon mere spite and
malice? Surely among other calamities happened unto our vn^ortunate Coun^^ey in
these days, this may be thought to be one, and very great, that such a ^ellow
should ever be thought worthy of a Bishopric, not only by so judicious a
Prince as ou^s is, who perhaps may be deceived by misinformation to bestow the
place upon him: but that there should be found any Informer, that would not be
ashamed to suggest the promotion of such a Pretender.

But now let us see what he says to the former part of his speech, about such
Catholics, as were said freely to have taken the Oath: which thou^^ M. Barlow
indeauoreth to huddle up, as not willing to be well understood: yet shall I
seek to clear the matter somewhat more particularly: and to that effect,
shall I first set down my own words, upon that case of free swearing. Thus
then I wrote.

And now for so much as it is said here in like manner, that very many of his
Majesty's Subjects, Whether the taking of this Oath by Catholics, be a
blessing from God.
that were Popishly affected, as well Priests, as Laics did Freely take the
same Oath (which he calls a blessed success from God of this godly and wise
intent, in devising, and proposing the some:) I shall be forced also to say
somewhat of this matter, before I pas^e any further. And first of all,
concerning the freedom, whereby it is here said, that Priests and Laics did
^reely take the same; no man, I think, will deny, 1. Statut. 3. Iacobi

Reg. c. 4.


but that the taking of this Oath is proposed by the Statute it self vnde^
pain of the loss of all goods, and lands and perpetual imprisonment to him,
that shall refus^ it; which is the very same freedom, and no other, that a
Merchant has in a tempest, 2. Ethic. c. 2
either to cast out his goods into the sea for lightening his ship, or to be
drowned himself. D. Tho. 1. 2. q. 6. art. 6. and Va^e^tia vasquez etc. in eum
locum.
And though Aristotle in his Ethics do seem to hold it to be simpliciter
inuoluntari^m, simply against the will of the do^r, and Catholic Deuines, that
it is inuolu^tarium secundum quid, in part inuoluntary, and simply voluntary,
for that all circumstances considered, he resolves finally to be the bent to
ca^t out ^is goods and save himself: yet all agree in this, that fredome is
taken away by this constraint of the passion of fear. For that freedom
requires full liberty to ^oth extremes, or obiectes, that are proposed, which
it not in our case. How freely the Oath is taken.
For that the displeasure of the Prince, the loss of goods, and liberty, the
ruin of his family, the terror and persuasion of his friends, are heavy
poises, and do m^ghtely preponderate on the one side: and consequently the
mention of this Freedom might have been pretermitted, for so much as no
constraint of humane will can be greater then this. And yet it is said in the
Oath, that he must do it both willingly, and heartily, and as he belieueth in
conscience. Let the discreet Reader consider what coherence there is in their
tale.

So I wrote at that time. Now what brings Master Barlow to overthrow this
doctrine? First, says he, the Censurer denies not the assertion, that many
Pries^es and Laycks di^ take the Oath, but he sticks at the aduerbe (freely)
God loves Aduerbes, say the Canonists, the Devil does not. Ba^l. p. 36.
Do you see how the man speaks in mysteries? I neither granted, or denied,
that many had taken the Oath: Yea very many, as the words of the Apologer
were, for I know not whether they be true, or false: but that I do stick at
Ad^erbes which God loves, and the Devil loves not, as the Canonists are
affirmed to say, may seem to contain some great mystery, wherein me thinks
he offers injury to the Devil, The Devil in^ure^ by M. Barlow.
in saying he loves no Aduerbes, good or bad, for that bad Aduerbes must
needs be as grateful to him, as good Aduerbes to Almighty God. For as, been
agere, or been operari, to do or work well pleases God: so male agere, and
m^le operari likes the Devil. And this is confirmed by M. Barlow his own
reason in this place, so far as concerns God: For that the Aduerbe, says he,
does make the action commendalle yea denominateth the same, and this is an
axiom both in Divine and Humane learning.

But good S^r, by your leave, neither Divine nor Humane learning dot^ warr^nt
this humane folly which here you do utter, to wit, that the Aduerbe does make
the action commendable: as though no Aduerbe may not be reprehe^sible, which
now I have confuted. It does denominate also the action, M. Barlow a great
friend to Aduerbs.
say you: which I grant: but the denomination is good, or bad, as the quality
requires. It seemed that you blundered at a certain speech of some spiritual
writers though not well understood by you, who ^ay, sometimes, that God loves
rather the Aduerbe, then the Verb; ^or that the Verb implies only the action
it self, but the Aduerbe the quality of the action: and as the good quality
pleases good, so the bad pleases the Devil. So as here it seems to me,
that this Doctor remains much foiled about Aduerbes in general: now let us
see, what he can say about swearing freely in particular.

WHAT FREEDOM MAY be said to be permitted to English Catholics for swearing,
or not swearing the new Oath.. V.
AS concerning this matter, M. Barlow after his former discourse about Aduerbes
comes to handle the point it self of freedom permitted to Catholics in
taking the Oath, beginning thus: Barl^ p. 36.
And is there then (says he) such a disagreement between the pain of a
Statute Law, and the will of a su^iect, that he which obeys the law so
inioyning, shall not be acco^^^d a free subject for his obedience! Then are all
the people of the Christi^n ^o^ld slaves, not freemen: for what nation is there
governed by lawes^ ^ot enjoined by sharp penalties etc? Yea the law of God it
self is imposed with penalties, and yet man's obedience yielded thereunto is not
thraldom, but freedom. So he.

And do you see, how he seeks a hole to run out at? We do not say, that
penal Statutes are unlawful in a Commonwealth, About freedom in taking the
Oath.
or that they do make the subjects no free subjects, and much less that they
do make all the people of the Christian world slaves and not freemen. This
must needs be spoken out of great ignorance, not understanding (...) que^tion:
or ou^ of much ma^^ce, that would daz^e the Readers eyes with imp^r^^nent
speech. The question is, whether the choice be free, when in any deliberation,
t^ere is a heavy predominant poyse of one side, as whether a Merc^ant in a
tempest should cast his goods or no, out of the ship for saving his li^e? or
Catholics in England should take the Oath for avoiding the penaltyes of the
Statute? whether this choice, I say, be absolutely free, or no? And I showed
before both out of Aristotle according to Philosophy, and out of
Schoole-Doctours according to Divinity, that this was not perfect freedom.

For albeit Aristotle says, the Merchant his act in casting out his goods is
simpliciter inuoluntarium, and voluntarium secundum quid, absolute inuoluntary,
and voluntary but in part: and the Scholeme^ on the other side, that it is
simply volu^tary and in part inuoluntary: yet in effect, they say all the same,
in different respects; for that Aristotle calls it simply inuoluntary, in
respect of the object alone, without consideration of the circumstances, that
do accompany the same, in which sense no doubt the act of casting out his goods
is simply inuolu^tary in the Mercha^t. And the Schole Doctors do call it
simply voluntary in respect of the object accompanied, and conjoined with the
circumstances, to wit, present peril of life, and the like; which being
considered, the Merchant does simply and absolutely resolve, that all things
considered, it is better to cast out his goods then to d^taine them: and so in
this sense of the Schole Deuines, it is simpliciter voluntarium, simply
voluntary, and in the other sense of Aristotle simply inuoluntary; for that
simply and absolutely he would not cast out his goods, if it were not for the
peril, and danger of his life, which is a most ponderous circumstance, and
ouerweigheth the balance o^ the whole consultation.

And this is our present case also, about taking the Oath by those very many
Catholics, which the Apologer says took it freely, if they were so many. For
if they were Catholics, and were informed, that there were diverse points
therein contained against their Religion, which must necessarily retain them
from taking the same, and yet on the other side there was loss of liberty, and
goods in refusing the same; then said I, that neither according to Philosophy
or Divinity, was this deliberation of theirs altogether free. The free
accepta^ce of penal laws.
And whereas M. Barlow would infer thereof, that the^ there were no free
subject, for that all Common Wealths do propose laws with penalties: I answer
that there are two sorts of men in a Common wealth, good and bad: the good do
willingly submit themselves to the laws penal, made by the Prince, and Common
wealth, and that for conscience sake, as S. Paul prescribes, without respect
of punishment, where they see no injustice, and offense to God commanded; 1.
Tim. 1.9^
in which sense the said Apostle says, that the law is not given unto the
righteous man (which is repeated here also by M. Barlow) of which sort it is to
be presupposed, that a great part of every Common wealth consists: but to the
wicked.

But now there are others, which being evil men, and slaves to their own
passions, do repyne at good laws, and for these it is necessary, that
punishments and penalties should be appointed to enforce them to obey: and
albeit this choice of theyrs is not altogether free, according to the nature
of freedom before declared; yet is the coactio^ necessary, and profitable to
themselves, nor have they any just reason, but only their disorderly passion to
refuse the same, and consequently it is no reason, that they should have free
choice, and freedom of election permitted unto them, in a matter so
prejudicial to the common wealth, and to themselves.

All which is different in the case of Catholics in taking the oath repugnant
to their consciences. For as evil men do not follow conscience, and
judgment, but passion as now has been said, in not obeying penal laws: so
may they be justly forced thereunto: and in that sense may yet truly be said to
be all free, that is to say, free to do evil without punishment. But Catholics
following the dictamen of their consciences, concerning points of their faith,
received and continued in England since the beginning of christianity, cannot
with any equity be constrained, or coacted to contradict the same; no^ can it
be demed, but that so gri^^uous a punishmen^ proposed, as the penalty of
Praemunire, was, and is a great coaction, that takes away freedom. And
consequently those Catholics, Priests and Laics, that are said to have
freely taken the Oath, had not indeed freedom therein; but that only freedom,
which before has been mention^d of the M^rchant, casting out his goods into
the ^ea, which according to the rules both of Philosophy, and Divinity is not
true freedom, as now has been declared, and shall be more presently.

For now you must see a new shift of M. Barlow, who finding himself sore
graueled about my former speech of freedom, both out of the Philosophers, and
Schole-Deuines w^nt to read Medina, a School^ Doctor, about the matter of free
choice, but understanding him not, as it seemth by his pe^uerting of his
meaning, has cast himsel^^ into (...) greater broiles, and intanglements, then
before; you shall hear his discourse.

Were the Statute enforced peremptorily, Barlow page ^7
and no leisure granted for deliberation, or after deliberation no liberty of
choice, but inforst upon them to take it, whether they will or no: M. Barlo^s
^illy discourse
then might the Oath be accounted a pressure and the acceptance thereof a
slavery. But first time being given to consider thereof, and after consideration
leave granted to choose, or refuse; this in their own School learning is
true, and f^ll liberty. For to it they annexe these two conditions. Medina in
p^^mam 2. quas^. 6. a^t. 2.
1. indetermination^m iud^ij ad deliberandum, an unlimited scope for the
judgment to deliberate. 2. facultatem eligerdi v^l resutandi quod deliberatum
est, power either to chose, or refuse what is deliberated. The first is radix
libertatis, the sourse, or fontaine of liberty; the other is ipsa libertas,
freedom it self, says Medina. And that is the very case between the King,
and his subjects, in this matter of the Oath: so that the very refusal (after
deliberation) argues, that either to take it or no, they had liberty of choice;
but in r^fusing it no loyalty of affection.

Thus far M. Barlow. And surely it pitti^th me that I must ^ere open so many
de^ectes of his in this his discourse. For first he grants as you see, that
the urging of this Oath were a pre^sure, if the S^atute were enforced
peremp^orily, and no leisure granted for deliberation. But what dot^ he mean
by peremptory inforcement? to beat men with ^^uo^s to take the Oath? for
otherwise the inforcement of the punishment of the law of Praemunire, containing
the lo^se of lands, goods, and liberty, peremptorily proposed by the law to him
that refuses, is I think peremptory inforcement, su^ficient to make the
action inuoluntary, no less^ then the fear of death, inforceth the foresaid
Mercha^t to cast out his goods in a tempest. So as in this point M. Barlow
finds no refuge, for so much, as that which ^e says, if it were so, so it
were a pressure indeed, and consequently he grau^^eth the Oath to be a pressure.

But you will say, that he puts another condition ^ecessary to make a thing
inuoluntary, to wit, when the party has no leisure to deliberate: and upon
this he stands much, as radix libertatis, the root of liberty or fre choice,
and foundeth himself in the doctrine of Michael Medina a Catholic School
Doctor of our days, and thereof infers, for that the Catholics have a time
to deliberate to take the Oath, and after deliberation have choice to take it,
or not, those that take it, take it freely. But I would put to M. Barlow this
case. M. Barlow hardly urged.
If a thief should meet him alone in a place, where he were not afraid to be
discovered, and should will him, either to give him his purse or his little
finger to be cut of, and should give him a whole day to deliberate, and after
to choose, whether he would loose his purse, or his finger, and he chooses to
loose his purse, is this action free from inforcement, for that he has time to
deliberate, and after liberty to make his choice? What man of sense will say
this, but M. Barlow? Or will M. Barlow himself say, that he gave his purse
^reely, for that he had sufficient time to deliberate, and make choice after
his deliberation? I think he will not, were his time of deliberatio^ given
never so long.

Nay in this point, he has wholly perverted, corrupted, and m^^^^derstood
Medina, who never so much as named, Medina misunderstood.
or imagined this condition of time, or leisure granted to deliberate: for
always it is to be presupposed, that in every action good, or bad, there is
sufficient time for our reason to deliberate, for otherwise there should be no
deliberate action. But the pas^ime is, that M. Barlow falling upon two
conditions of liberty expressed by Medina, fir^^ indeterminationem iudicij ad
deli^erandum, the indetermination of our judgment to deliberate, and for the
power to choose, or refuse what is deliberated, he understood the former
condition to be of time, and so translateth it most ridiculously thus, an
v^limited scope for the judgment to deliberate, as who would say, that every
free action must have an unlimited scope of time to deliberate first, or that
otherwise it were not free. As if M. Barlow when he is riding from London to
Lincoln, and has two ways to take, must needs have an unlimited scope of
time for his determination, which way to ride, and this must be, not an hour,
nor half a day, nor a day, nor a month, nor a year, but an unlimited scope,
so as he may sit a whole year, nay seven years, yea twenty, or more to
deliberate which way he will choose: which were good for his flock, for so
perchance the wolf should never come amongst them. But was there ever such a
Philosopher? or any such Philosophy taught before, or Divinity? had he not
evil luck at this his first stumbling upon Medina so to mistake him.

But you will say, what does then Medina mean when he says, that the first
condition required to liberty is indeterminatio iudicij ad deliberandum, The
true meaning of Me^ina.
the indetermination of our judgment to deliberate, which he calls the root
of liberty? Whereto I ans^ere, that he means not an unlimited scope of time
to deliberate, as ignorantly M. Barlow imagines, for of this now you have
seen the absurdity: but that the judgment of him, that makes the choice, be
not determined and tied already by instinct of nature, to any one part, or
parcel of the object but that it be indifferent of it se^fe, and in the power
of the said chooser, to employ it to what part he will, which is called
indetermination of liberty, or indifferency of iu^gment, to think what the
chooser will: upon which indifferency of judgment follows liberty of choice
in the will, as upon the root and ground thereof.

Medina his example is taken from the difference between the choice of a brute
beast, and a man, for that the brute beast has his judgment, or
estimatiue^power so tied, and determined by ins^inct o^ nature to one part of
the object, as he cannot divert from that to any other. As when you propose
meat to a beast that is hungry, he cannot but be moved to admit the same, as
thinking that best in this his estimate, or brutish judgment: but man's
judgment, or understanding is not so determined to one part by instinct of
nature, but may apply it self also to consider of the opposite.

I shall allege the words of Medina, Medina in 1. 2. q 6. a. 2. p. 72.
which will make all the matter clear. Libertatem voluntatis (says he)
antecedit indeterminatio, and indifferentia iudicij ex part intellecius:
appetitio emin sequitur cognitionem: igitur vniuersa libertas nostra ex
cognitione originem trahit. Before the liberty of the will goes the
indete^mination, and indifferency of the judgment or estimate, on the behalf
of the understanding, for that the appetite, or will does follow knowledge; and
therefore all the liberty of our will has her beginning or origin from
knowledge. So Medina: laying this for a foundation, that if the judgment in a
man, or estimate in a beast do not first know, and discern the object, there
can no appetition, or choice follow in the will or appetite But Medina does
explain himself further, showing that this knowledge of the understanding or
estimate, which he calls here judgment, if it go not before the choice, no
choice at all can be made: bu^ further also it must be indifferent, and
indeterminate to both parts of the object, and not dete^mined, or tied to any
one, as he proves by the example of a sheep, whose understanding or estimate
is so determined by instinct of nature to fly a wolf, when she sees him, as
she cannot think on the contrary; and consequently can have no election to
fly him, or not fly him; as not only a man, but a dog also may, which has
strengh, and courage to resist him, and fight with him.

But let us hear the rest of Medina his discourse to show M. Barlow his
ignorance. Itaque (says he) si iu^icium no^ suerit in facultate iudican^is,
se^ determinatum ex iustinctu naturae etc. Where^ore if the judgment be not
^reely in the power of the iudger, but be determined by the instinct of nature
to one part; then the appetition or choice that follows thereof is not free,
and indifferent, but determined to one part. As for example: for so much as a
sheep has this judgment imprinted in her by nature, that a wolf is to be
fled, she cannot choose but fly the same. But when the judgment is in the
power of the Iudger, so as he is able to judge this, or the opposite, or
contrary thereof; then the choice ensuing is free, and indi^ferent: as in a man
that may judge whether a wolf ^e to be fled, or no, and upon this judgment of
understanding may make free election out of the freedom of his w^ll, which
freedom as you see does consist formally in the will, but fundamentally in the
judgment, or understanding.

Hitherto is the discourse of Medina about the two parts, wherein the liberty
of choice consists both of men and beasts, to wit, judgment, and will:
though concerning free will in man, he refers his Reader to a further, and
far larger disputation, wherein he says, he is to dispute fusissime contra
Lutheranos, most largely against the Lutherans, that deny free will. And then
he comes to conclude with these two conditions before mentioned, related, but
grossly misunderstood by M. Barlow, of indetermination, or indifferency of the
understanding, and choice of will. Modo definitum sit (says he) quod ad
libertatem dua condi^iones sunt necessariae; alia est indifferentia and
indeterminatio iudi^ij ad deliberandum, alia est post deli^erationem fa^ul^as
elegendi, vel refutandi id quod deliberatum est. Prima conditio est sons, and
radix libertatis: secunda est ipsa libertas. And now let it remain determined,
that two conditions are nece^sary to liberty of freedom, the one is the
indifferency, and indetermination of the judgment to deliberate what is to be
done: the oth^^ is power to choose or refuse that which is deliberated in
judgment. The first condition is the fountain, and root of freedom, the
second is freedom itself. So he.

And now let us behold M. Barlow his good understanding, and skill in School
divinity, that cannot understand the very terms thereof, M Barlows sheepish
apprehension.
nor conceive the meaning of his own author Medina, which he alleges, though
(as you see) it be clear enough, but ignorantly by him per^erted, especially
when he translated i^determinationem iudicij ad deliberandum, an unlimited
scope (o^ time) ^or the judgment to deliberate, and thereupon urges the
Catholics, that they have t^me to deliberate, in swearing. So as according to
his doctrine, If you gave the sheep mentioned, time enough to deliberate, when
she sees a wol^e, whether it be be^^ for her to fly or not, she may chance
resolve not to f^y. And is not this a very sheepish apprehension indeed? Did
not M. Barlow read all this discourse now by me related in Medina himself, how
the sheep judgment, estimate, or understanding is tied, and determined to
one part only by instinct of nature? to wit, that she must fly, when she
sees the wolf? And how could he conceive then, that Medina should mean, that
this sheep must have time to co^sult, whether she must fly, or no? Has he
ever seen any sheep in this deliberation? Men-sheep may well do it, and ought
to do it, and would God his Lincolne-sheep, that by this false proceeding of
his, and many other of his words and actions do or may discover him for a wolf
indeed, would enter into serious deliberatio^ how to fly him for safety of
their souls, whereunto according to his own doctrine they are allowed an
unlimited scope for their judgment to deliberate. God grant their wills be
correspo^dent to make choice of that, which God in their judgments shall tell
them to be the best.

But now to his last conclusion, which is, as before you have heard him say,
that this is the very case between the King, and his subjects in this matter
of the Oath, so that, the very refusal after deliberation (says he) argues
that they had liberty of choice, to take or not, but in refusing it no loyalty
of a^^^^tion. M. Barlows bad inference.
Which last words, are words of slander, and ^cophancy, as now has been
sufficiently declared, not founded upon reason, or any lawful inference at
all. For to repeat briefly again some of that which before has been more
largely treated, how does the very refusal of the Oath prove, or argue this
disloyalty, or that they have freedom of choice? Is every thing that is
re^used, refused freely without coaction? What say you then to the refusal of
Eleazar in the Machabees, that refused with loss of life to eat swines-flesh?
Was there freedom in that choice? and yet, had he not sufficient time to
deliberate? or did the very refusal argue, as there is said, that he had
liberty of choice, and thereupon disloyalty of affection? who can say so but
upon ignorance, or malice?

When time is given to consider (says M^ Barlow) and after liberty leave
given to choose or refuse, ^arl^ p. 37.
this in their own Schoole-learning is true and full liberty. But this of
Schoole-learning M. Barlow, we have now discussed, and have found both true,
and full folly, and ignorance in your collection. For Schoolmen do not talk
of indetermination of time, and much less of unlimited scop^, but of
indetermination, and indifferency of understanding to be able to deliberate:
which being in the judicial part, then is there required power in the will, or
appetite to choose or refuse freely, without ballancing on either part, either
by fear, hurt, preferment, hatred, interest, or other potent, and forcible
impositions. By which doctrine if you ponder well, you shall find that
Catholics had not free choice to swear the O^th, when loss of goods, and
lands do balance on one side: nor you perhaps M. Barlow, may be said to have
free power, or liberty to refuse it: for so much as the current of the time,
the Princes favor, the weight of so fat a benefice as the Bishopric of
Lincoln is, and other crummes that you have gathered together, and hope to
increase, do so power^ully preponderate on the one side, that you have your
judgment so fast fixed to that object as the sheep by nature has hers. And if
you have not this tie or indetermination in your judgment; yet in your will
and affection: which is sufficient to make you no freeman, from which
thraldom Almighty God deliver you, who only can do it, and break your
bands. For as our Savior says. Ioa^^ ^.
If the son of God deliver you, then shall you be truly free indeed. And so
much of this matter, concerning our freedom to swear or not to swear: wherein
I have detayned my self some what longer, then I had purposed, for that it is
the most principal question of this our contro^^^sy. whether there be free
election given in taking the Oath, or n^?

ABOUT RECOVRSE MADE to the Bishop of Rome for decision, whether the Oath might
lawfully be taken by English Catholics, or no? wherein also the present Pope his
person is defended against sundry calumniations.. VI.
AND now having followed M. Barlow thus far in this controversy, we must
turn back again some pages to take the whole argument with us, which he had
ouerrunne, to handle the question of freedom before mentioned. And first he
tells us, that when the Oath came forth, and was urged, the Garnettistes did
differ from the Black^e^i^tes, some a^^owing Equivocation (says he) in matters
of ^aith, and others no^, Bar^. p. 23.
which is a notorious untruth. For the question was not whether the Oath might
be taken with Equivocation, A notorious untruth of M. Barlow
but whether it might lawfully be taken, as it lay, with a good exposition?
wherein some difference being found of opinion^, it seemed a just cause to
refer the decision to the universal Pastor: about which point M. Barlow
deals not uprightly, as commonly never he does in alleging my words, but
with notorious corruptions. I shall be forced to repeat again briefly, what I
then said. My words were these.

What should Catholics do? Letter p. ^.
they first consulted the case with learned a men at home: then also abroad.
The Oath consulted both at home, and abroad.
And albeit at home some were moved in respect of the compassion they had of
the present peril, if it were refused, (...) think, that in some sense the
Oath might be taken: yet none abroad were of that mind. For that they allowed
(...) of any sort of Equivocation in matters touching faith and religion. And
in these I hearesay, that the Jesuits were among the chief, and most forward,
as here also is confessed: who notwithstanding before were most accused,
bayted, and exagitated, both in books, pulpits, and tribunalls, for allowing,
in some points, the lawful use of Equivocation.

About which doubt, Catholics, according to their rule of subordination, and
spiritual obedience in such affairs, referring the matter to the judgment,
and consultation of their supreme Pastor, whom by the principles of their
religion they believe, that our Savior gives assistance, for the direction of
men's souls, they received from him, after due deliberation, this answer. See
the Breue to. Kai. October. 1606.
That the whole Oath as it lay could not be admitted with the integrity of
Catholic faith For that albeit diverse parts thereof were lawful, to wit, all
such clauses, as appertayned to the promise of civil and temporal obedience:
yet other things being interlaced and mixed therewith, which do detract from the
spiritual authority of their said highest Pastor (at least wise indirectly)
the whole Oath, as it lies, was made thereby unlawful.

And this I understand to be the substance of the Popes resolution and answer,
though all these particularities be not set down in his Breues, but only the
Oath declared to be unlawful in conscience to Catholic men, as it lies,
without distinction. And what malicious trick of the Devil then this may be
thought, where sheep do make recourse to their spiritual Pastor, in so great
and important occasions of their souls, as these are, I see not. Do English
Catholics any other thing in this, then that which all English subjects, both
great and small, learned and unlearned have done, and practiced from our first
Christian Kings, ^ntill the ti^e of King Henry the eight upon the point of a
(...) and years? Let the answer to Sir Edward Cooks Book o^ Reports lately
set forth be examined, wether it does not show, that in all those ages, See
Answer. c. 6.
recourse was ever made to the Sea Apostolic in like occasions, without
prejudice of sub^ects temporal duties to their temporal Princes.

No one English Christian King (though they were many) did ever a^solutely deny
recourse to Rome in spiritual things) notwithstanding in some other civil,
Recourse to Rome ever usual from our first Christianity.
or mixed matters, upon different occasions some restraints were sometimes made)
from our first King Ethelbert to King Henry the Eight, as by the said discourse
and answer is evidently proved: and much more throughout the whole ^anke of
the Christian Kings of Scotland, his Majesty's Progenitors, until his most
Renowned Progenitrix (by whom, and from whom he has his Royal Right of both
Crowns) who is known, Q. Mary of Scotland.
and reputed throughout Christendom to have died for defense of this Catholic
Doctrine. For so much, as if she would have abandoned that, there had been
little doubt of making her away. And the like may be said of all other great
Christian, and Catholic Princes of our days, as the Emperor himself, the
Potent Kings and Monarchs of Spain, France, Polonia, and other States,
Commonwealths, and Po^entates, do not think it any disgrace, diminution of
honor, peril, or injury unto them, that their subjects, for matters of
conscience, do make recourse to the Sea Apostolic, or that which is
consequent thereof, the said Sea, or general Pastor do interpose his
judgment, declaration, or decision in such affairs.

This is the Catholic doctrine and practice: this has been in use throughout
Christendom from all antiquity: and no where more then in our Realms of
England and Scotland, as has been said. In this belief and practice, lived,
and died all our forefathers, and our Noble Kings, that were our Sovereigns,
all our Bishops and Prelates that were our Pastors, all our great
Counselors, and Lawiers, that by their wisdom and learning governed the
Land, all our Nobility, Gentry, Priests, and Laity. Catholics do ho^ld and
practice what all their ancestors have don.
So as if now this be houlden for a malicious trick o^ the Devil,
dish^^^^^ble, and prejudicial to his Majesty, his Sovereignty, Crown, Dignity
and security, as here is insinuated, it must needs be, for that the Devil
indeed has made some change in other men and matters, by altering of opinions,
and apprehensions. For the Catholics are the same, that they were wont to be,
and do think the same, believe the same, teach the same, and practice the
same, that all their Predeces^ours have done before them.

This was my declaration and discourse. What substantial answer, or argument
can M. Barlow bring against this^ You shall see, how he will gnibble at the
matter, as a mouse at the cheese-vate, and cannot enter. He says first, that I
am in my element, when I am in this argument of recourse to Rome, used to be
made from age to age, by our ancient Christian English people, Prelates and
Princes, and that there is scarce any Epistle, Preface, Pamphlet, Book, or
Petition of mine, but that this is therein the Cyprestree, to make Rome the
loadstone for drawing thither the trial of our gould in both senses, and the
like: That I borrowed all from Cardinal Allen in his Apology: that we have
received full satisfactory answers in this behalf, to wit, that when the
Bishops of Rome in purer times did bear themselves as religious members, not
as presumptuous heads of the Church, and lived as ghostly Fathers to counsel,
not as Superiors to control, our realm being then also rude, and learning
scant, Religion new sprung up, and no where settled, I say then, and in those
days, M. Barlow grants, that the recourse was made to Rome, but yet upon
devotion, and mere necessity, and not then neither, without leave of the Prince.

This is his tale. And do you not see what gnibling this is? Do you not
behold the poor man in what straites he is, to say somewhat? What more
evident, or more strong demonstration could, or can be made (if he would join
really to see, and confess the truth) to prove the right, and continuance of
the Bishop of Rome his supreme spiritual authori^y over England, and recourse
made unto him therein, then that which was made against Sir Edward C^^ke, in
the answer of the fifth part of Reports, About re^ourse to Rome by our English
Princes, and people.
that from King Ethelbert our first Christian King, until the defection of King
Henry the eight, upon the point of a thousand years, and almost a hundred
Christian Kings, it was inuiolably observed in England to make such recourse
in matters of doubt, concerning Ecclesiastical, and spiritual affairs, unto
the Sea Apostolic and the universal Pastor thereof, as lawful judge, not
for counsel only, but for sentence, determination, and decision, both before,
and after the Conquest. So as except M. Barlow do see more then all they did,
and have more learning, and piety then any of them, who ^ollowed also therein
not their own sense, and judgment only, but that of the whole Christian world
besides: all these spruse, and princocke exceptions of ^urer times, rudeness
of the land, lack of learning, their being of new Christians, and the like,
are but ridiculous inventions of an idle busy-head, and so not worth the
standing upon to answer them, for that they are evidently false in the eyes of
all the world.

And like unto these are the other ^oyes, that do ensue page 25. 26.27. As for
example, that there was no need to make recourse to Rome for deciding the
doubts about the Oath, which he proves, forsooth, and that very ^oberly, out
of S. Paul 1. Cor. 6. Is there not a wise man among you? Idletrifling.
among all the Priests secular and ^esuited in England, that can determine a
controversy about the Oath of Allegiance? Might not your Archpriest Blackwell
so authorized by the Pope, so commended. and countenanced by two Cardinals,
Barl. p. 25.
Cai^tan and Burghesius be sufficient? But all this is simple geere, as you see,
and hangs not together, but rather makes for his adversary. For if the
Archpriest that then was, had his authority from the Pope, then reason was it,
that in so great a doubt concerning the souls of so many, the matter should be
consulted with the Superior, as we see it usual in England, that lower Judges
in difficult cases do consult with them, from whom they had their authority.
Neither does S. Paul here alleged, mean that the Corinthians should choose
some contemptible man to be their judge in Spiritual, or Eccle^a^ticall
matters for in all those he biddet^ all Christians to be subject to their
Bishops, and spiritu^ll Pastors, that have to render account for their souls;
but h^ means in temporal matters, and particular suits, and civil
controversies between man, and man, which he houldeth to be contemptible
things in respect of the spiritual, and especially to contend for the same
before Infidel Judges, as they did. And so does M. Barl^^ wholly pervert S.
Paul, as his fashion is commonly in most Scriptures, and authorityes that he
alleges.

But now we come to another argument of his, against our recourse made to Rome
for decision of this great doubt, Touching the person of this present Pope
Paulus Quintus.
concerning the taking, or not taking the Oath. And albeit you have heard how
many impertinent and childish arguments he has used before about the same, yet
none of them can be compared with this for absurdity, and impertinency: and it
consists in taking exceptions against the very person of the Pope, Paulus
Quintus, that now sits in the Sea: who being so eminent for his good parts,
and rare virtues, as laying aside his supreme dignity of Universal Father of
Christ's Catholic Church, the same does grieve exceedingly the hearts of all
Heretics, that hate the Aposto^^cke Sea, and him only, for that he sits
and governs so worthily therein, which they cannot abyde^ But let us see,
what they object against him in this behalf.

Barl. p. 26.
What is there (says he) in this Pope for his judgment in Divinity, that his
determination should be expected about this Oath of Alleg^^^ce to his Majesty,
more then in his predecessor Clemens, whose opinion was not inquired of about
the Oath for conspiracy against the whole Realm? Whereunto I answer that for so
much as the other Oath of conspiracy (if any such were) was but between
certain particular men, who did upon discontentme^t co^spyre together, and
bynd one the other by Oath to secresy, and did presume, that both Pope Clement,
and this Pope if they had been made privy thereof, would have let their bad
intentions, therefore the conspirators never proposed the m^^ter unto them, but
concealed it from their knowledge whom they as^ur^d to find opposite to their
designements in such like attempts. But this other Oath called of Allegi^^ce,
for that it was a public matter, and urged publikly to be taken by all
Catholics, with most grievous penalties of lo^se of goods, lands, and liberty
proposed for the refusers, and for that the said Catholics had a great doubt,
whether they might receive the same with a safe conscience in respect of diverse
clauses therein contained, tending to the denial, or calling into question the
Popes supreme authority over Christian souls, therefore they thought it
necessary to make recourse to the Sea Apostolic, See the answer to S. Edward
Cook, now chief^ Justice.
and to demand resolution thereof, according to the custom that had been
observed in the like cases in England, during the reign of all Catholic
Christian Kings from their beginning of Christianity until king Henry the
eight, as else where largely has been proved by a several book written
lately of that argument.

And as the English Catholics were desirous to exhibit unto their King all
duti^ull obedience, and subjection in temporal matters: so were they desirous
also not to do any thing against their consciences in spiritual affairs
toward their supreme Pastor, whom they acknowledge to govern them in place
of Christ our Savior. And this was the cause, why the one Oath was not
consulted with Pope Clement the Eight, and the other was with Pope Paulus the
fifth, not so much for his particular and personal judgment in Divinity
(though it be great) as in respect of his place, and the most certain
assistanc^, which almighty God gives him, and all other in that place for
governing of his people: as also for the particule^ obligation, that all
Catholic Christians have to obey their supreme Pastor, whose authority
received from our Savior, is more to be respected, then the gift of humane
learning, which I suppose M. Barlow in the Kings Royal Authorit^, and Person
will not dare to deny; or think it good dealing, or law^ull proceeding, if
when he sets our a Proclamation, his Subjects should dema^d what skill in
Law or Divinity he has for auouching ^he same? And much more if the question
had been made in the time of Q. Elizabeth who profe^^ed not so much learning as
this King, and yet would be obeyed no less then he, i^ her days, even in
matters Ecclesiastical, although I think, that the never studied Divinity. It
follows in M. Barlow.

Ibidem.
Of Pius Quintus (says he) who absolved the Queens s^^iects from their
obedience, it was said by some of his own, that he was homo pius and doctus,
sed nimis credulus, religious and learned, but too easy of belief. But of this
Paulus Quintus who has inter^^cted the Subjects of our Sovereign King to
swear their obedience, either for his Divinity, or Piety we have heard
nothing. Whereunto the answer is easy, for if you have not heard thereof, it is
for that you are loath to hear so much good, as you may, of his Holiness in
both points. His profession was not the faculty of Divinity, but rather of
Civil, and Canon law, before God did choose him to the place and dignity,
where now he is. It is well known that his Holiness has great sufficiency also
in the other, for discharging of his obligation in that high Office: and has
moreover so many learned men about him in all sciences to consult withal, when
matters of weight do occur, as this poor exception of the Heretic about
learning in his Holiness, is a good witness of his want of better matter, what to
speak to the purpose.

And as for his Piety, which is the other point, let his Holiness life, and
actions be looked upon, as we know they are by all Heretics in the world, and
curiously pried into; not only at home in their own Countries, but in Rome it
self, where many do go to certify themselves in this, and sundry other like
points, and do depart much edified thereby, and sundry of them converted daily
by seeing the contrary to that which before they heard: whereof my self among
others, can be a good witness, that have seen the effect hereof in sundry of
our Nation, as others can say the like by theirs. And this amongst other things
is very notable and known, spoken and confessed by all sorts of people in
Rome to be in him, to wit, an Angelical purity of life, throughout the whole
course thereof: in so much that he was never yet stained with the least blemish
of suspicion to the contrary. Which public voice, The purity of life in Paulus
Quintus.
and testimony how well it has been deserved of M. Barlow and his Mates^ I
remit my self to the common fame of their next Neighbors, or such as know
them best.

As for that he says of Pope Pius Quintus, that he was accounted by Catholics
themselves, nimis credulus, notwithstanding he was homo pius, and doct^s, as it
is no great accus^tion: so is it spoken and uttered without any testimony at
all, and therefore of small credit, as coming from one, that is found so full
of untruths in most of his allegations, whereof we have given so many examples,
and shall do more in the residue of this our Answer, as I doubt not, but that
he will scarsely seem worthy to be believed, when he brings witnesses, and
much less without them.

But there remains a more large impertinency of M. Barlow concerning this
Pope his skill in Divinity, setdown in these words, taken from the comparison
of S. Peter, and S. Paul. S. Peter (says he) whose successor he is styled,
Ibidem.
and S. Paul^ whose name he has borrowed, had their Divinity indeed by
in^^s^^n, but their writings, revealed it to the world. So that Peter we know,
and Paul we know to be singular D^uines; but who is this? Childish babbling of
M. Barlow.
No men that seeks to be ^amous does any thing in secret, say the brethren
of our Savior. Where then are his labors? his Sermons? his Treatises? his
Commentaryes? his Epistles Theological? his doctrinall determinations? his
Judicial Decis^^s? all which are usual attractiues to draw an opinion upon a
man, that he is a sound resoluer. So he.

But Sir, stay your Maister-ship: these are no sound grounds to build the
certainty of resolution upon in a Magistrate, especially such as the supreme
Pastor is, but rather the promised assistance, that Christ our Savior made to
S. Peter and his successors, sitting in the Apostolic Chair, That Hell-gates
should never prevail against the same. And how many have written Sermons,
Treatises, Commentaries, Epistles, Determinations, and Decisions, and do write
daily, to whom notwithstanding we ascribe not this certainty: albeit the last
two, for Determinatio^s, and Decisions, I doubt not but his Holiness has ma^^
many in his days, and those very profound, and learned, having been a Judge in
diverse great affairs, as the world knows, before he came to this dignity,
whereto he ascended, not by fortune, or favor, or negotiation, but by the
merit of his great and rare virtue, correspondent to the worthiness of the noble
and ancient family, from the which he is descended. And this will be evident to
any man that shall consider the eminent offices and dignityes, wherewith he has
been honored even from his youth, as of Referendary in the high Court of
Signatura de Gratia, of Vice-Legate in Bologna, of Nuntius Apostolicus into
Spain for most important matters, and of Auditor de Camera; in all which
charges, and employments, he gained such reputation of learning, wisdom, and
integrity, that Pope Clement the eight of blessed memory, held him to be most
worthy of the dignity of a Cardinal, whereto he advanced him; and afterward
never ceased to employ him in the gra^est and weightiest affairs of the Sea
Apostolic, partly in the holy Congregation of the Inquisition, and partly in
the Office of Vic^r-generall of Rome: besides other continual occupations in
diverse Congregations, and particular commissions which the said Pope Clement
daily commended unto him, as to one of the wisest, and most confident
Counselors he had. So that all this being considered, malice it self cannot
deny, but that his singular parts of learning, wisdom, experience, and all
virtue opened him the ga^e to the sovereign dignity of supreme Pastor, whereto
Almighty God of his particular providence (no doubt) has exalted him, for the
special good of his Church.

But M. Barlow misseth in the very ground of our Catholic certainty, and
infallibility, and so rangeth most ridiculously to matters nothing to the
purpose. For (...) what end I pray you, or with what judgment, does he bring
in that speech of our Saviors brethren, in S. I^^^s gospel, Joan. 7.4.
No man that seeks to be famous, does any thing insecret? does it appertain
any thing to our purpose? Or does his Holiness seek fame by learning, or in
secret, when he determines any matter? Surely it seems that this false
Bishop will needs make himself famous by his folly and false dealing; and yet
we must hear him out a little further for that the further he goes, the more
gall and malice he shows against the person, and dignity of Pope Paulus
Quintus. Now then he will needs bring in the testimony of certain secular
Priests, as he calls them, against the person of his Holiness; though in this
he deserve as little credi^, as in the rest. His words are these.

Into his qualyties I will not enter: he stands, Barlow page 27.
and falls to his own Master. But if he be that Cardinal Burghesius whom
some of the secular Priests have sometimes described, and have assured us to
be true in him, which is spoken of Tiberius Gracchus, M. Blues etc.
that he is a rash speaker, and an headdy undertaker, of a most violent spirit,
and impatient of contradiction, in whatsoever he has but once imagined. If
this, I say, be true (which God forbid in so great a Churchman) now surely he
is not the fittest Judge to be resorted unto in cases of conscience, especially
of such a nature, and consequence as this in hand. So he.

Where first the Reader may note, that he says, he will not enter into the Pope
his personal qualities, and yet he does: showing thereby, that his abundance
of malice overcame his judgment, and first intention. And if you stand attent,
you shall see, that Satan the Author, and Inspirer of all malignity, to work
this Heretics greater shame, made him lay hands upon such a calu^niation as
all the world both Catholics, and Heretics that have any knowledge of his
Holiness person will testify, to be a mere slander, M. Barlowes want of wit in
accusing the Pope.
to accuse Cardinal Burghesius, before he was Pope, to be a rash speaker, an
headdy undertaker, a violent spirit, and impatient of contradiction, is as
probable an accusation among the^ that know him, as to say, that S. Francis was
covetous, S. Thomas unlearned, S. Bernard indeuout, S. Dominicke without zeal
of souls at all; that is to say, to ascribe the contrary vices to him that was
singular, and emine^t in the opposite virtues. And this is so evident, and
notorius in the present calu^niation, that whosoever did but come to Rome, and
did discourse of Cardinals, of their qualities, and conditions (as men are
wont to do) but much more, if they conuersed with him, should understand that
he was so ^arre of from rash speaking, headdy vnderta^^^^ ^iolent spirit, and
the like; as the contrary virtues were ^^^gularly respected in him, to wit, of
prudent speech, of slow and moderate enterprizing, suauity of spirit, and
patience in hearing every man with lenity, as it pleased the divine Prudence of
almighty God afterward to use this general opinion, and conceit of him, as a
potent means among others, to induce the Cardinals to choose him to the place
and dignity that now he houldeth. So as any other slander, or calumination
might sooner find place against him, then this.

And whereas he alleges some of the secular English Priests to have been
Authors of this false accusation against his Holiness, quoting in the margent M.
Bluet etc. whereby he would signify, that he, and his fellows had affirmed the
same; Anno Domini 1602.
it seems that he does allude unto the time, when the said M. Bluet and three
other Priests went to Rome, upon a certain appeal; and so at their return,
might make this description, as he calls it. But why does he name one only,
and he dead? No doubt, but that the fal^e Bishop did foresee, that if he had
named them all, or the most part of them, the slander would have been answered
by some of them that are alive: but by naming a dead man that answers not, he
thought he might escape Scot-free from reprehension of the slander. And this is
no unusual art of heresy, that seeks to maintain it self by lying, and
forgery.

And thus much now be spoken about the thing it self to wit, how vnius^ly
these Phrases, and Epithets are ascribed unto the person of his Holiness,
supposing that the H^r^tick had deal^ uprightly in alleging them out of
Plutarke, as given to Tyberius Grac^hus: but the truth is, that in no one thing
commonly shall you ever find him true: and so here he both falsifieth Plutarke,
and iniureth Tyberius Gr^^chus. For Plutarke has nothing so much of Tyberius
Gracch^^, as here in English is fett down, neither that which he has, is
spoken by him in such reproach, as Master Barl^^ would have it seem. For
Plutarke relates the contention had before the people between Tyberius
Gracc^us, and Titus A^r^us, the first a most eloquent man in speech, the second
craf^y in proposing subtle questions, whereof having proposed one at their
first encounter that did sting Gracc^us, Plutarke says: Plutar. in vit^s Tib.
and Caij Graccherum.
Ad hanc quaestionem reserunt ita Tyberium hasitasse, ^t qui omnium esset ad
dicendum expectitissimus, and proiectissimus ad ^udendum, obmutuerit. At this
question of ^itus Annius men say, that Tyberius Gracchus did so stick, as that
he held his peace, though he were of all other men, the most pro^pt to speak,
and most bold to attempt. This is all that Plutarke says: so as the rest which
M. Barlow adds, of a most violent spirit and most impatient of contradictio^,
in what he has but once imagined, is his own imaginary fiction, and not
Plutarkes relation, as indeed he is forced also to confess in the eye of the
learned by setting down the sentence it self in gre^ke, amplifying the same
in the English tongue, for the deceiving of the unlearned English Reader:
(...), prompt in speaking, and bold in attempting, which later, though it be
taken for the most part in ill sense, yet sometimes also in good, that is for
magnanimus animosus etc. as out of Plato, Aristophanes, and other Greek
Authors may be proved.

And albeit I will not stand to defend that in the word (...) M. Barlow does
wrong Plutarke and Gracchus in translating, A shameful mistaking in M. Barlow.
headdy undertaker, rather then magnanimous; yet does he offer them open injury
in translating the other epithete (...) for a rash speaker, whereas indeed it
signifies to Gracc^us his praise, a prompt, and ready man in speaking,
eloquent, copious, and the like. But as for the other exprobrations of a most
violent spirit impatient of contradiction, and the rest; he abuses ^gregiously
both Gracchus, and Plutarke: for not only are those reproaches not found there,
as applyable to Gracchus, but the very contrary is said of him, and therein is
he preferred before his brother Caius in these words of Plutarke: Vul^u and
obtutu, and motu bla^d^ erat and compositus Tyberius, acer Caius and veheme^s:
Deinde or ati^ suln^nans Caij, dulcior Tyberij: pari modo in victu, and mensa
frugalis, and s^^rplex Tyberius etc. lenis etiam and placidus: confragosus
alter and seruidus. Tyberius both in countenance and motion was a^^^ble and
composed, Caius sharp and vehement; and consequently to this the Orations of
Caius were thundering, but those of Tyberius more sweet: and in like manner
Tyberi^^ was more frugall and simple in his diet, and table, then his brother
Caius: he was also very gentle, and pleasing in his behavior and speech; but
the other was rough and fervent etc. Now then, let the prudent reader see, and
consider how all this does agree to the description of Tyberi^^ set down by M.
Barlow, and how true a man he is in all his assertions. And how false soever he
was in the allegation, certain it is, that he dealt most wickedly in the
application of all to the person of his Holiness that now lives. And this much
shall suffice about this matter.

It follows page 27. and 28. after he had discharged such a storm against the
Popes own person, as now you have heard, for his meddling in this Oath, and
giving his decisio^ thereof, he says, that this was to be Judge in his own
cause, alleging a Poet for his proof, about sur and latro, one pleading at
the bar, and the other sitting at the bench. But does not the malicious man
see, that this his cauillation touches the interest of all Princes, as though
they might not be Judges, or give sentence in cases wherein themselves have a
part, if law stand with the^. For to cause other men to do it in their name, by
their authority, is as much as to do it themselves. And what did the Pope more
in this case the^ this? making a decision by counsel of his learned men,
according to Christian law, that this case of England touched points of
Religion concerning the Sea Apostolic; which authority no Pope can infringe or
diminish without sin, if he would; for that it was given not only to him, but
to his ant^cessors, and successors in like manner to endure for the good of the
whole Church, to the worlds end.

Very wisely spoken.
But (says M. Barlow) it had been plain dealing in the Pope, if before he had
sent his Breues of Interdiction, he had acquainted his Mai^stie with encounters
of doubt that bred the quarrel, and the ouer-swaying reason that carried him
to the negative. Very wisely spoken, and worth the wit of M. Barlow. And would
his Majesty have admitted the messenger, or message? who sees not, that there
is nothing here but trifling, and caueling? But I may add also scoulding, for
he breaks presently into a most desperate blast of railing against F.
Persons, calling him, M. Barlowes scolding.
traiterous Absalom, that cares not to set his ^^^e friends, land, yea to see
his native soil on a light fire, so he may purchase the Popes favor. All
which is spoken with much passion, and little reason, for that the probability
is much more that Master Barlow flattereth the Kings Majesty for hope of
preferment, whereof he is capable, and has gotten possession of a good part
already, then ^a. Persons the Pope, whose state and condition of life has no
need of such preferment; nor can it be proved, that ever Father Persons spoke
for a fee, forward, and backward as M. Barlow has done, in his best Patrones
cause.

As for the authority of the sixth Council of Carthage, about appellations to
Rome noted in the margent, it is not worth the answering, both for that the
words nor sense alleged by him are there found, and the controversy about
Appeals to Rome from Africa is so handled by me at large in my last Reckoning
with M. Morton, Sober R^c. cap. 3.. 2.
and he found so faulty, and defectuous in that accompt^ as if M. Barlow will
take upon him to pay that debt, and to answer that only Paragraph for him, I
shall say, that he is his friend indeed. Wherefore I expect the event.

In the very next lines following M. Barlow does so brokenly recite my words
about M^^^is aliena, Earl. page 29. and 30.
another man's harvest (for so did the Apologer write, that English Catholics
are to the Pope) that he makes neither me, nor himself to be understood. Read
I pray you his relation of my words page 29. numb. 5. and see whether you can
understand him, about M^ss^^aliena. My words were plain enough, for thus I
wrote page 12. numb. 20. by him cited.

For first about putting the Popes hook in ano^^er man's harvest, English
Catholics not ^^ssis aliena to the Sea Apostolik
supposing, as we do, that we ^^^a^e of Cat^olike people only, and according
to Catholic doctrine, and in matters belonging to Catholic m^ns souls, and
consciences; it cannot be called Messisali^na, another man's harvest, that the
Pope deals in England, with such kind of people, and in such cases, as well
as in Spain, France, Flaunders, Italy, Germany, Polonia, and other States, and
kingdoms: for that they are no less appertayning to his ^^ock, care, charge,
and harvest, then the rest. Neither does the material separation of our Island,
separate us from the union of one body, nor of one obedience, to one and the
self same general head and Pastor, no more then it does from the union of
one belief, and of one number and form of Sacraments, of one manner of
service, and other like points, belonging to the internal, and external
unity of Catholic Religion.

And is not this plain enough? How does he reply? You shall hear it in his
own words, and he will so imbroyle himself therein, M. Barlowes imbroylements.
as he will let fall near half a dozen of absurdities, ignorances, and open
falsities by the way. Do you stand attent then ^ thus he brings his answer
to my former discourse of Messis aliena. This is a (...) argument no doubt
(quoth he) the Pope has to do in England sait^ the Censurer, because some
Catholics suppose he has, but before this supposall be brought into a
positive resolute conclusion, it will ask a longer time, then such a Pamphlet
etc. Where you see first, that he quite mistaketh me, either of oversight, or
of purpose. For I do not make that argument, which he frames i^ my name, that
the Pope has to do in England, because some Catholics suppose he has. Nor
is the word supposing used by me, applied to some Catholics, as though they
supposed; but to my self, that I supposed: and so this change of the person,
as you see, is a foul oversight in repeating his adversaries argument. There
follows the like change of the subject, for my supposall was not, that the
Pope had to do in England, but that we treated, and spoke in that place of
Catholic people, according to Catholic Doctrine, and of Catholic
consciences, not of Protestants consciences, or judgments, for that the
question was not, whether Protestan^s with a good conscience might take the
Oath, or not, but Catholics with the integrity of their Religion. Out of which
supposall is inferred, that for so much, as Catholic doctrine in all Schools of
the world, as well of Spain, France, Italy, and others, do teach, and define,
that all Catholic people, whether they be far, or near, without exception,
are equally subject to the supreme Pastor of the Church, whereof they are
members: it follows, I say, that dwell they never so far of, they cannot be
called, nor accounted Messis aliena to their said universal Pastor.

But let us hear M. Barlow further, uttering other ignorances intolerable in
the ears of learned men. But before this supposall (says he) be brought into
a positive, and resolute conclusion, will require more time etc. What, M.
Barlow this supposall, that we treated of Catholic people only and according
to Catholic Doctrine, and not of Protestants? My words are plain, do you
read them over again, supposing as we do (quoth I) that we treat of Catholic
people only, and according to Catholic doctrine. You see my words: this was my
supposall: what difficulty is there now, to reduce them to a positive, and
resolute conclusion, saying and affirming resolutely that which then I
supposed, to wi^, that I treated in that place of Catholics only and their
consciences according to Catholic doctrine, and not of Protestants? Do you
see, how hard a matter this is to bring a supposall into a conclusion? And does
not your Reader see, to what straites of absurdityes, your folly has brought
you?

But yet the Reader must further know, that there is included in your words,
greater ignorance perhaps, the^ any of the former; for you imagine, as by your
sequent words appears, that a supposall is of much less certainty, then is
a positive, and res^lute conclusion, which is quite contrary: for that a
positive conclusion, how resolute soever it be on the behalf of the defender,
yet may it be controuerted, and called into question, or disputed of: but a
supposall cannot, for that it is supposed, and granted by both parts. Let us
see then M. Barlow his acumen in this matter. Thus he writes of me, and my
supposall.

It argued (say you) some ingenuity in the man, that he made it but a
supposall, and a^terward again, talking of a proposition, or conclusion of
Cardinal Bellarmine, about the Mother Church of Rome, Barlow page 30.
you say, the best writing Jesuits do indeed make it a supposall, and the most
^auorable of them, that it is b^ likely. Whereby it is plain, that the silly
man houldeth, that a supposal in Divinity, M. ^arlowes new Philosophy.
or Philosophy is more uncertain, then a resolute proposition or conclusion,
and in effect he takes it for only a Likelihood, or probability, which only to
hear is ^idiculous amongs^ learned men: for that always the things supposed
in any silence, are taken for most ^ue, and undoubted, as granted by both
parts, yea they are the very grounds and principles of all sciences, whereon
the certainty of all conclusions, throughout those sciences, does depend. And
so we see, for examples sake, the ^uclide in the beginning of his books of
Ge^^^^ does suppose certain principles, and grounds of that science, as that,
(...) est main sua part, every whole is greater then the part thereof: Si ab
aequalibus aequalia domas, ^^liqua e^^nt aequalia: i^ from equal things you
take equally away, the rest which remain shall be equal, and many such other
like suppositions, which are to be seen in the ^^st ^ooke of these 15. which
^uclide calls de Element^s, ^^ the ^l^ments, or principles of Ge^metry. And
now to say, that these supposalls are of les^e certainty then positive o^
r^sol^t^ conclusions deduced from them, and grounded upon them, as M. Barlow
imagines, is so absurd, as nothing can be more, ^or that the conclusions may
be denied or dis^uted (...), but the supposals may not.

^
A^is^otle also when he treats of the Principles of (...) wh^c^ as P^^lus
testif^eth, he calls suppos^io^^, a (...) or supposalls, quia supponenda
sunt, for that (...) are to be ^^ppos^d, and not to be proved; shows that
(...) supposals is infallible, for that they (...) parts, for which let this
one example (...) C^ris^i^n should contend with a l^w, about (...). Death or
Resurrection of our Savior, and (...), first as a thing evident, and
acknowledged (...) both, that whatsoever is contained in the old Testament, is
o^ infallible truth, and authority, and thereupon should frame many positive
and resolute Conclusions from the predictions of the ancient Prophets about
these mysteries of Christ; should these conclusions be of more certainty, then
the foresaid supposals upon which they stand? Or shall it be but likely only,
and probable, that the old Testament is true, for that it was only supposed,
and not proved at the beginning? What can be more ignorantly spoken then this,
concerning the comparison of conclusions, and suppositions? Nor can he run out,
by saying that he agreed not to my supposall at the beginning, for that there
are certain supposalls so evident of themselves, as they require no consent of
the adversary, as were those of Euclide before mentioned: and so was this of
mine in the passage of my Letter already cited, where I supposed that I treated
of Catholic people only, and acording to Catholic Doctrine, and in matters
belonging to Catholic men's souls, and consciences, Letter page 12. number. 20.
, and not of Protestants: which supposall no man can contradict, for that it is
most clear and evident by my own words, M. Barlow a poor Philosopher and
worse Divine.
and therefore consequently M. Barlow has showed himself but a very poor
Philosopher, and a worse Divine in this place.

But the two notorious untruths, which he utters presently in the next
ensuing lines (though I be weary now of such stuff) may not be pretermitted.
The first is against Cardinal Bellarmine, the second is against the Pope
concerning his prohibition of the Oath. His words for the first are these.
Barlow page 30.
If all the rest of the Apostles were not ordered Bishops by S. Peter (says
Bellarmine) then cannot the Church of Rome be Mother of all other Churches
(much less the Bishop) and whether it were so or no, the best writing Jesuits
do indeed make it but a supposall.

But now for the chastiseme^t of his folly, for saying but a supposal, as
though it were a speech of uncertainty I have said sufficient before. There
remains his untruth in saying that Bellar. does suppose, that if the rest of
the Apostles were not made Bishops by S Peter, then cannot the Church of Rome
be the Mother Church of other Churches, nor the Bishop universal Bishop. For
first as concerning the latter part, about the Universal Bishop, Bellarmine
has no one word thereof, but teaches the quite contrary, founding the power,
and authority of S. Peter over all other Churches, upon other grounds, and
namely upon the commission of Christ, Matthew. 16. and ^oan. 20. and not upon his
ordayning or not ordayning Bishops of the other Apostles: about which question,
he does but set down the opinion of Ioannes de Tu^re^remata lib. 2. Summae de
Ecclesia. Cap. 32. with his reasons ^or the same, Bellar. l. 1. de ^ont Romans
cap. 2^.
and consequently, does not ^et it down, as a supposall, certain ground, or
principle, but as a probable, and disputable opinion, though himself hold the
opinion of Turrecremata to be more probable. But on the other side Franciscus
de Victoria here cited by M. Barlow himsel^e, Victor ^ele^t. 2. de potest.
Eccl. conclu. 3.
though he be of a contrary opinion to Turrecremata, and to Bellarmine, about
the Ordination of all the Apostles by S. Peter: yet does he in the very same
place profess, that S. Peter was Universal Bishop over all the Church of God.
Primus, and Princeps cum summa supertotam Ecclesiam pot^state. That among the
Apostles he was the first, and principal, with supreme power over all the
Church. So as the denial of this particul^r privilege in S. Peter, that he
ordained all other Apostles Bishops, does not in^e^e, that he was not
universal Bishop of the whole Church, as here we see M. Barlow most falsely to
infer. And whereas he notes in the margent with great diligence diverse
Catholic writers, that d^^ hold the question to be probable on both sids, as
Salmeron, Victoria, Suarez, and Gregorius de Val^ntia, that is but an old trick
to shu^^le and make a noice, where there is no need: for Bellarmine does not
hold the thing to be de fide, or infallible supposall, and consequently it
little imports to bring in this diversity of opinions of the a^oresayd
Authors, about the matter.

Now then to come to the second untruth, that the Pope by decreeing the Oath,
as it lay, was unlawful, did also forbid even that very point of s^earing
civil obedience, which is so notoriously untrue, as whosoever does but read
the Popes Breue it self, or Cardinal Bellarmine his explication thereof, or my
Letter, wherein the contrary is every where protested, will marvel to see such
impudent proceeding. But of this more afterward. Now we shall pass to
discuss, whether there be any points in the said Oath, concerning the
religion, and consciences of Catholics, whereby the taking thereof was made
unlawful unto them. For this does Master Barlow utterly deny, as now you
shall hear.

WHETHER THE OATH BE ONLY OF CIVIL OBEDIENCE? Or whether there be any clauses
in it against Catholic Religion? CHAP. II.
THIS point being one of the most chief of al my Treatise about the Oath, is
handled by me somewhat largely page 13. of my Letter, where, upon the deni^ll
of the Apologer, that any thing is there required but Civil obedience, my
words are these: More co^teyn^^ in the O^^h then ^^^^ll obedience.
And how shall we clear t^is important matter, to wit, Whether there be any
points in the Oath belonging to religion, besides civil obedience? and I do
answer that it is v^ry easy to clear the same by four several, and distinct
wa^es. First, by the express words, sense, and drift of the Oath it self,
that besides the acknowledgemen^ of temporal respects, to wit, that our
Sovereign is t^^^ King, right^ull Lord over all his dominions, and that the
swearer is his true loyal subject, to obey him in all temporal affairs, and
other like clauses, whereat no man sticks, or makes difficulty; there be
other clauses also against the authority of the Supreme Pastor, which do
justly breed scruple of conscience to a Catholic to ^dmit, or take the same.

Secondly I showed the same, by the Popes words in his Breues, wherein he does
conioyne the taking of this Oath with the going to the Churches, and Service of
a different Religion, pronouncing the one and the other to be unlawful.
Thirdly I declared the same out of the judgment of Cardinal Bellarmine, and
other learned men, who having considered well the nature of this Oath, and
different clauses therein contained, do hold it for so cautelously compounded by
artificially joining together Temporal and Spiritual things, to wit Civil
Obedience, and forswearing the Popes supreme Ecclesiastical Authority, as no
man can thereby prof^sse his temporal subjection, and detest treason and
conspiracy, which all Catholics are most willing to do, but he must be forced
also to renounce the Primacy of the Sea Apostolic, from which all good
Catho^ick consciences do justly abhor.

Fourthly, for a more full, and final clearing of this matter, Letter page 16.
number. xxv^.
that I could think of no better, nor more forcible mean, then to make this
real offer on the behalf of every English Catholic, for better satisfaction
of his Majesty in this point so much urged of their civil, and temporal
obedience. A loyal offer of Civil obedience made by Catholics to ^is Mai^sty.
First that he will swear, and acknowledge most willingly all those parts,
and clauses of the Oath, that do any way appertain to the Civil, and Temporal
obedience due to his Majesty, whom he acknowledges for his true, and lawful
King, and Sovereign over all his dominions: and that he will swear unto him
as much loyalty, as ever any Catholic Subject of England, did unto their
lawful Kings in former times and ages, before the change of King Henry the
eight: or that a^y forrayne subject owes, or ought to swear to any Catholic
Prince whatsoever at this day.

These were the ^oure ways, which then occurred (...) my mind, whereunto it
shall be good, to examine brie^^y, what M. Barlow has been able to say in this
his answ^^^ He begins resolu^ely, as though he had intention (...) ioyn^
really indeed. Barlow page 31.
Now then (says he) this must be cle^^^^, whether the Oath does only concern
civil obedience, yea or no: (...) that it does not, the Censurer takes upon
him, to satisfy in eight ^^^bers from the 20. to the 28., and that four
several ways. So ^e. And what does he allege against these four waie^?
Impertinency.
(...) e^fect no word at all, though he babble not a little of diverse matters
impertinent to the purpose. We laying this (...) our ground, says he, that
first both swearing, and performing (...) obedience, is as well negative against
any intruder, challenger, or vs^^per, as affirmative ^or the lawful
governors, Barlow page 32.
and Sovereigns. Secondly that this challeng of the Pope in dethroning, and
deposing of Princes is a temporal intrusion, and no spiritual iurisdi^tion;
do c^^cl^^^ with a strong and apparent evidence, that the whole bulk of the
O^^^ both in the submissiue, and exclusive part, does only concern ci^ill
obedience.

All which speech of his, if I should grant, as by hi^ it is uttered, yet does
it not so much as impugn any of the former four ways, whereby it was showed,
that diverse points of Catholic religion are touched in the said Oath and
impugned thereby: so as a Catholic man cannot admit the same without prejudice
of his conscience, which these grounds do nothing impugn. But now let us see
how well grounded are these his two grounds impertinently brought in for some
show of answer.

The first is, that civil obedience to a lawful Prince requires the subject
to swear, not only affirmatively, that he is his lawful Sovereign, but also
negatiuely against any intruder, challenger, or usurper, which we deny not: but
do deny that the Pope as supreme Pastor over al^ Christendom is to be called
an Intruder, Challenger, or Usurper, when for preservation of Christian
Religion, he does interpose his authority for the restraint of any Christian
Prince, that is, or ought to be under his iurisd^ction.

And as for his second ground, that this authority of the Pope is a temporal
intrusion, The reason of the Popes power in te^poralibu^^
and no spiritual jurisdiction, we deny it in like sort: for though it be
temporal in some respects, yet is it no intrusion, but given by Christ
himself, as contained in the most ample spiritual charge and commission
delivered to S. Peter for governing of all souls belonging to the said charge,
which cannot be sufficiently governed and provided for, if there had not been
such power left also, whereby evil Princes might be restayned from perverting
their Kingdoms, especially by infection of heresy.

And whereas for proof of this temporal intrusion, as he calls it, he
says, that for to do me a favor he will remit me to T. M. the elder, to wit
to Thomas Morton ^is full Satisfaction part. 3. (whom he says, I do fear as
the rack) who among many others have canuased (says he) this point, in a
Confutation, to the Popes confusion: I will to quit his fauou^ send him back
to the said M. Morton again recanuased by me upon this point in two several
Books of answer, Thoma^ Morton canuased.
wherein so many notorious lies are charged, and convinced upon him, as may
serve not only for his Confutation, but also for the Confusion of all his
friends, whereof this Copes-mate M. Barlow may well be one: and so much the
more justly be shamed therein, for that he may be presumed to have seen one at
least of my said books, and the lies therein so openly laid forth, and
pressed, as he cannot but with impudency speak here as he does, in remitting
me to M. Mortons canuase, and that, I ^eared it as the rack etc.

But now let us come to look a little into M. Barlowes impugnation of the
Popes authority over kings. Barl. p. 33. nu^. 66. and 67.
This authority of the Pope (says he) if it be a spiritual Jurisdiction, it
must be either from heaven, or of men, grounded upon law, either Divine, or
Ecclesiastical: Bern. ad Eugen.
Nam quod ampli^u est, a malo est, says a devout Father to a great Pope:

all execution thereof not derived from either of these, implies a Tyranny,
importes no right. If upon divine law, then either the Old, or the New
Testament: not the Old, the Priests among the Jews had no such authority over
their Kings, Salmer. in Epist Pauli disp. ^2.
either united to their Priesthood by God, or assumed by themselves, confessed
so by a Jesuit, that the Sta^e of the Jews was rather earthly, then heavenly:
therefore the carnal part was more eminent, that is, Kings had the
sovereignty over the Priests.

Not in the new, for then S. Peter should have had it, either when the Keys
were given him, Matt. 16. or when that trebled Pasce was enjoined him, Joan.
21. If it be so, then had he this Jurisdiction directly from Christ, and
^^^uersally over the world: Bellar. l. 5. de Pontif. Romans c. 4. and 6.
but that is not so, says Robert the Cardinal, and this Robert his Echo, but
only over Christian Princes, and that indirectly and obliquely in ordine ad
De^^^ nay neither directly nor indirectly, says Sanders; for there being a
dubble power of Christian fortitude, De claue l. 2. cap. 13.
constant suffering, and courageous attempting, that power of suffering (as the
more excellent) Christ chose, as the fittest sibi and suis, for himself and
those that belong to him: or if you will, for himsel^e and his Apostles. So
then, to suffer oppression under kings, not to infer upon them Rebellion,
and disloalty, was the power Apostolical in respect of Princes.

This is M. Barl. his assault, which I have thought good to set down at large,
both faithfully, and punctually in his own very words, as my custom is, and
not contractedly and perfidiously perverted, as he every where uses to set
down mine, and that in a different letter (as often I am forced to complain)
as though they were my words indeed. And now to this passage of his I say,
that there is much impertinent stuff, many falsities, sundry great abuses,
misapplications, and wrong senses from the Authors own meaning whom he cites.
^. de Consider. longius ab in^^io.
For first it was impertinent to cite that sentence of S. Bernard, Nam quod
amplius est, a malo est: for that he uses the same to a far different purpose,
as every man may see, that will read the place in his second book de
Consideratione, which particular quotation Master Barlow did pretermitt,
citing only Bern. ad Eugen. thereby to make the finding thereof more hard, S.
Bernard having written five books to Eugenius.

Secondly that which he alleges out of Salmeron that the State of the Jews,
Salmeron abused by M. Mort. M. Barl. etc.
was rather earthly, then heavenly, and therefore the carnal part was more
eminent, that is, Kings had the sovereignty over Priests, is notably both
perverted and falsified. For first Salmerons words (speaking of the
Ecclesiastical government of the Jews in comparison of that, which was given
to the Christian Churches) are, Salm. in Epist. Paul. disp. 12.
Synagoga Iudaeorum dicebatur terrenum potius quam caeleste regnum. The
Synagogue of the Jews was called rather an earthly, then a heavenly kingdom:
meaning that their Power was but earthly, their Sacrifices earthly, their
promises and blessings earthly, in respect of the heavenly and spiritual
power, Sacraments, Sacrifice, and Promises of the new Testament. Nor does he
make comparison between the Kings power, and the power of Priests, calling
the former earthly and carnal, and the other heavenly, as most falsely and
seditiously M. Barlow here, after M. Morton, does aver: but only the
Ecclesiastical authority of the Jews Synagogue, with the excellent spiritual
power of the Christian Church. And as for the comparison between kingly, and
Priestly eminency amongst the Jews, the said Salmeron in the same place, does
not only affirm, but proves also by sundry arguments, and one, by the
worthiness of the Sacrifice offered in the first place for the Priest before the
King: that Priestly dignity, was above Princely in that people, and much more
amongst the Christians. So as here is notorious falsehood on M. Barlowes
behalf, Malicious falsehood in M. Barlow.
which is much the more malicious, and intolerable in him, for that he had
seen me to have objected the same falsehood, and untrue dealing unto M. Morton
in my book of Mitigation: Mitigatio^ page 101.
and that the said M. Morton was so far of from being able to answer the
same, as in his last Reply he left it quite out: and now lately I have objected
the ^ame to him again in my last Reckoning with him cap. 6. and 7. whereunto I
refer M. Barl. to help him out. And so much of this point.

It follows in M. Barlowes speech, that i^ S. Peter had received of Christ
with the keys, Math. 16. this Jurisdiction over Princes which we pretend, then
had it been directly, and universally over the whole world. But this is not
necessary, for he might recei^^ the same indirectly, as included and
comprehended in the spiritual, to be used for the preservation of the Church,
when spiritual necessity should require, as before ha^^ been said. And as for
Universal over the world, How the Pope may be said to have power over Infidel
Princes.
it is sufficient that it be over Christian Princes and people only, w^^ are
properly the sheep and lambs that are commended (...) the chief Pastors
feeding or government, Joan. 21^ though upon Infidel Princes also he may have
some power, in certain cases; as when they will go about to let the preaching
of the Gospel authorized by these words, Praedicate Euangelium omni
creaturae. But this appertains not to our question.

But whereas he says, that Cardinal Bellarmi^e and I do affirm, that the Pope
has only authority over Princes, indirectly, and obliquely in ordine ad Deu^:
we grant the word indirectly, but as for obliquely in ordine ad Deum, he will
not I think find the phrase in any writing of ours, but only ^^ ordine ad
spiritualia, which is to say, that the Pope has such authority upon Princes,
when the preservation of the spiritual affairs does so require, to wit, the
salvation of souls: and he that shall read the place of Bellarmin here by M.
Barlow quoted (for of mine he citteth nothing) to wit, lib. 5. de Pontif. cap.
4. and 6. shall find this sentence, in ordine ad spiritualia, but never I
suppose in ordine ad Deum: for that all power of the Pope is in ordine ad Deum,
and propter Deum, whether it be spiritual, or temporal: but in ordine ad
spiritualia has an other meaning, as now has been showed, to wit that the
Pope Has directly only spiritual authority to execute spiritual functions:
but when this cannot be co^s^^u^d, or executed without the help of temporal,
he may use that also for defense of the other. So as it seems, that this our
great Doctor does not understand the very terms of Deuinity, in this matter
whereof he disputes: and this his ignorance shows it self no less here,
then before, about indeterminatio iudicy, in free choice.

Nor does he onl^ relate falsely, and ignorantly this point, as out o^
Cardinal Bellarmine and me, but much more does he abuse the name of D. Sanders
in the very next words, that do ensue, D. Sanders abused by M. Barlow.
as though he should say, that neither directly, nor indirectly has the Pope
this temporal authority from Christ, but rather power to suffer, as now you
have heard him say, he citing for it de claue David lib. 2. cap. 13. whereas D.
Sanders does hold the quite contrary in that book throughout sundry Chapters,
to wit, that the Pope has received from Christ vtrumque gladium, temporalem
and spiritualem, both swords, that is, both temporal and spiritual authority,
and proves it by many arguments, and demonstrations: only in the 13. Chapter
he demands, why the^ had not the Apostoles deprived Nero and Domitius of
their Empires? Whereto he answers, among other causes, that these were Pagan
Tyrants, and not under the charge and power that was given to the Church over
sheep, and lambs. And then in the 14. Chapter, he demands further, why the
Apostles, and first Christians had not elected some new King Christan for the
good of the Church at the beginning? Whereto he answers, alleging sundry
reasons, why it was not convenient, that the Christian Church should be planted
with violence, but that for the space, and time appointed by Gods providence
Christians should exercise the other part of Christian fortitude which
consists in suffering, as is before touched^ but yet he never denies
notwithstanding that the said temporal power over Christian Princes was in the
Church, and Head thereof (though that season admitted not the use) but rather
proves it expressly: and consequently is egregiously abused, and falsified by
M. Barlow, when he says Doctor Sanders to affirm, that the Pope had neither
directly, or indirectly any such power from Christ.

But will you see this our doughty Doctor ouerthrown and confounded both in
him self, and by himself? De Clau^ cap. 10.
then harken to his words in the very next page. It is so, says Sanders: S.
Peter with the Keys received both powers, temporal and civil. Is it so Sir?
Contradictio^ in M. Barlow.
and why then did you even now deny it? Are you so mutable within the compass
of two pages? What misery is this of your cause to be driu^n to these shifts?
But let us see another devise, which is ^^ oppose Franciscus de Victoria to
this saying of Sanders; Victoria relect. 1. sect. 2. Barl. p. 35.
(...) thus you bring him in, No, not so, says a Jesuit, for this power o^ the
Keys, est alia a civilly potestate: is another power diffe^^^ from the civil:
thus they jar, say you. But whether we jar or no, one Catholic writer with
another; sure I am ^^at you jar with your self, and seem not to ha^^ your
wits at home. For even now you cited Docto^^ Sanders, as denying the Popes
temporal power, to co^^ neither directly nor indirectly from Christ: and now
you say him to affirm, that S. Peter received both powers with the Keys. Are
not these plain contradictions? How can this jar be excused by you?

But I have further to say to you yet in this matter, for that in the very next
words, where you would make a contradiction between Doctor Sanders, and
Franciscus de Victoria, you show much more folly, if not a worse quality. For
whereas you write, that a Jesuit says, No not so, for (...) the power of the
keys is different from civil power, and do quo^ the place of Victoria in the
margent: Victor. ^^lect. 1. sect. 2.
first, in calling him Jesuit, who was a Dominican friar, you show much
ignorance, if you err not of purpose. For who knows not, that Jesuits and
Dominicans are two different Religious Orders? and the very first page of the
book, and words of the title, which are Reuerendi Patris Francisci de Victoria
Ordinis Praedicatorum Relectiones etc. might have taught you, M. Barlow a
Preacher, though not Ordinis Pr^dicatorum.
that Victoria was no Jesuit: but it may be, that you seeing the words Ordinis
Praedicatorum, and understanding that Jesuits did use to preach also, you did
(full wisely) imagine Victoria to be a Jesuit, and by the same reason, you
might ^^well have imagined him to be a Minister of your coat, for you preach
also, if I be not deceived, though with shame enough somtims, as you did
against your Master the Earl of Essex after that you had heard his
Confession; and cons^quently in this your sense, you may be counted in like
manne^ Ordinis Praedicatorum, of the order of Preachers, and so a Jesuit. But
this is ridiculous. Let us come to that which is more malicious.

You write that the Jesuit Victoria does jar with Doctor Sanders about this
temporal power of the Pope: for that whereas Doctor Sanders says, that the
Pope received both powers, spiritual and civil, together with the keys, you
make Victoria to contradict him, saying: No, not so, for that this power of the
keys, is another power different from the civil. But what jar is this? both
speeches are true in both Authors senses, and meanings. For as it is true, that
S. Peter with the keys, received both powers, spiritual and te^porall, the
one directly, and the other indirectly, M. Barlow understands not his Authors.
as Doctor Sanders teaches: so yt is also true, which Victoria writes, that
these two powers are different one from the other, in their own natures,
especially when they are in different subjects, as the one in the Pope, and
the other in the King (in which sense Victoria spoke) yea also, and when they
are found in one, and the self same man, as namely the Pope, for that he has
them by different manners, the one immediately and directly, which is the
spiritual, the other secondarily, and indirectly, which is the temporal: so
as here is no jar, or contradiction, but a cosenage rather of M. Barlow in
misalleadging the plain meaning of this new made-Iesuite Franciscus de
Victoria.

And no less abuse does he offer to Cardinal B^llarmine in alleging him
quite against his own meaning in the very last vpshot of his pretended
proofs, out of Scriptures a little before, whereof he makes his Conclusion in
these words: By law Divine then (says he) it was excluded (to wit this
temporal authority given to S. Peter) for no man can tra^sferre that to
another, Barlow page 34. number. 6^.
which he has not himself: but this royal Sovereignty over Princes, to
depose them, or dispose of their States, Christ ^ad not, as he was man ( and
yet he said, Omnis potestas data est mihi in caelo, and in terra) yea such
power had been unprofitable and superfluous (says the Grand Cardinal)
therefore he could not tra^sferre it to S. Peter, or the rest.

This is his Conclusion, that this temporal po^^r was excluded by Gods law,
which he promised to prove out of the old, and new Testament; and it is to be
considered how substantially he has performed it. For out o^ the old
Testament, he has alleged no one proof, sentence, or example, but only
brought in the Jesuit Salmer^^ to affirm the same, who has no such matter,
but proves of purpose the plain contrary. And out of the new Testament has
as little, though he falsify and wrest both D. S^ders and Franciscus de
Victoria to make some show; but especially the Grand Cardinal (to use his own
words) whom mo^^ notably he abuses. Cardinal Bellarmin abused.
For albeit the Cardinal does affirm, that Christ as he was man, and as he
came to work ou^ redemption had not any temporal kingdom, for that it was
not needful, or profitable to the high spiritual end of our salvation which
he had before his eyes, yet had he by his supreme spiritual authority, power
also to dispos^ of all temporal affairs whatsoever, so far forth, as should
be needful to that spiritual end of his; for so teaches the Cardinal
expressly, in these words: Finis adue^us Christi in mundum etc. The end of
Christ his coming into the world, was the redemption of mankind, and to this
end temporal authority was not needful, but spiritual; for so much as by
this spiritual authority Christ had power to dispose of all temporal things
also, as he thought to be expedient to man's redemption.

So the Cardinal: whereby is evident, that albeit he holds with the common
opinion of Deuines, that Christ upon earth had no mere te^porall kingdom or
civil power, yet could he by his spiritual power dispose of all te^porall
matters in order to his spiritual end, and that this power he gave also to S.
Peter, to wit, indirectly, and in ordine ad finem spiritualem. Bell. l. 5. de
Romans Pon. c. 6. 7. 8.
So as the Grand Cardinal denies not this, but proves the same at large for
diverse Chapters together, both by Scriptures, reasons, and examples, out of ^n
my Histories both divine, and Ecclesiastical; and it had been good, that M.
Barlow had answered to some of them, if he had thought him self able to meddle
in this matter; or at leastwise he ought not to have so fraudulently cited
Card. Bellarmine against his own meaning, as now you have seen.

But now next after Scriptures M. Barlow comes to Ecclesiastical law,
requiring to have this power proved by Canons, Counsels, Decrees, and
Practices, for which I refer him to the Book, and Chapters now cited in
Bellarmine. And for so much as this temporal power of S. Peter, is founded
upon his spiritual commission as a thing necessarily following the same, and
needful thereunto, for the perfect government of the whole Church, and that this
spiritual power is founded most evidently and abundantly in the new
Testament, and consent of all antiquity upon the same, as the said Cardinal
does prove, and demonstrate throughout many Chapters of his first, and second
Books De Romano Pontifice, I will weary the Reader no longer in this matter,
but remit him thither, I mean to the foresaid Cardinal Bellarmine, where he
shall find store of proofs for both powers in the Pope, I mean both
spiritual and temporal, though differently derived unto him, the one
immediately and directly, the other secondarily and indirectly.

And albeit this were sufficient for this point, yet to the end that M. Barlow
shall not say, that I do leave out any thing of moment, which herein he
sets down^, I shall repeat his own words of conclusion in this ma^ter,
with far more fidelity, then he does mine. Thus then he writes, borrowing all
in effect out of M. Morton in his late Preambulatory Reply. Barl. page 34. nu.
69. De Council. lib. 1. cap. 13 Bar^l. lib. 6. cap. ^6. Sigebert in anno. 1089.
Cl^^d. Espe^caus in Tim. digress. li^ 2. cap. 6.

Ambros. Apolog. David. c. 4 and 10.




For Ecclesiastical law, no Canon, Council, Decree, Practice exta^t, reckon to
600. years after Christ, by Bellarm. confession, yea to 1000. and amplius says
one of their own writers, does ^uow it; in so much that a Friar of account,
writing in the year 1088. calls then the Doctrine thereof a Nouel^y, if not an
^eresie: and that act of Hildebrand, that famously infamous Pope, who first
took upon him to deprive an Emperor of his Regiment, is by a Popish Divine
called nouellum Schisma, a rent, and ^ rent of nouelty. The challeng of this
authority utterly unknown to the Fathers, who have pro^ounced Kings to be no
way liable to any violent Censure, or penal law of man, ^^i Imperij potestate,
their Empire and Sovereignty exempting and priuileging them therfrom.

This is his discourse, whereof he infers that (...) temporal authority of
the Pope by us pretended, bei^^ but humanum inuentum, a humane invention, or
rat^^^ intrusion, or usurpation, as he calls it; the matter of the Oath,
whereby the same is excluded, must need^^ (...) merely Civil, no less, then if
it were against any o^^^^ mere temporal Prince, that would usurp any part of
our Sovereigns temporal right or Crown. Whereun^^ I answer that if this were
so, and that it could be proved, that this temporal power of the Pope as we
teach it, were but a humane invention indeed, and not founded in any authority
divine, or humane; then M. Barlow had said somewhat to the matter, and the
comparison of an Oath taken against any other temporal Prince might have place.
But for that we have showed now, that this is not (...), but that there is
great difference between this temporal power of the Pope derived from his
supreme spiritual authority, as universal Pastor (which no temporal Prince
is) and the pretension of any mere temporal Potentate; therefore is the
swearing against the one, but a civil obedience, and the other a point
belonging to conscience, and religion, with those that believe the said power
to come from God.

But now for answering this his last collection of authors: I say first, that
Bellarmine in the place by hi^ cited, has no one word of any such matter, his
book being de Concilys: and his purpose is to show both in the 13. Chapter
here cited, as also in the precedent, C^i^ s^ cong^egare Concil^a, M Barlowes
impertinent falshood^
to whom it belongs to gather Councels, which he shows to appertain, and
to have appertained always to the Bishops of Rome, and not to Kings and
Emperoures, albeit they being the Lords of the world, the said Councels could
not well be gathered without their consent, and power. But of Excommunication,
or of deposition of Princes B^llarmine has no one word in this place: and so
M. Barlowes assertion and quotation i^ both false and impertinent, about the
first six hundred years after Christ.

But if he will look upon Bellarmine in other places, where he handles this
argument of Excommunication^, Bellar. li. 2. cap. 19. and lib. 5. cap. 7. and 8.
and depositions of Princes, as namely in his second, and fi^th book de Romans
Pontis. he will find more ancient examples, at least of Excommunication, which
is the ground of the other, then the six hundred years assigned out of
Bellarmine. For that Bellarm. begins with the Excommunication of the
Emperor Arcadiu^ and Eudoxia his wife by Pope Innocenti^^ the first, for the
persecution of S. John Chrysostom, which was about two hundred years before
this time assigned by M. Barlow, and diverse other examples, more ancient then
the 1000. years allotted by Doctor Barkley the Scottishman here alleged, as
the excommunication of Leo Isauricu^, surnamed the Image-breaker, by Pope
Gregory the second; the example also of King Chilperi^us of France, by
Zacharias the Pope: the example also of Pope Leo the third, that translated the
Empire from the East to the West.

And as for the Friar Sigebert brought in here for a witness (he should have
said the Monk, for that the religious orders of Friars were not instituted a
good while after this) who is said to call the doctrine of the Popes power to
depose Princes A Nouelty, is not an Heresy, it is a notable calumniation,
Sigebert calumniated.
as may be seen in the words of Sigebert himself, in the very place cyted by
M. Barlow. For though Sigebert following somewhat the faction of the Emperor
Henry the third, excommunicated by Pope Vrbanus the second, did often speak
partially concerning the actions, that passed between them, which many times
seemed to proceed of passion, more then of reason and justice: yet does he
never deny such power of Excommunicating, and deposing for just causes to
belawfull in the Pope, but the plain contrary. Neither does he call that
doctrine No^elty, or Heresy, that the Pope has this authority, as falsely M.
Barlow does here affirm; but only that it seemed to him a new doctrine, which
he would not call Heresy, to teach, that vicious Princes were not to be obeyed,
for so are his words; Nimirum (vt pace omnium dixerim) haec sola noui^as (non
dicam h^resis) necdum in mundo emerserat, vt (...) Dei doceant populum, qu^d
mali^ Regibus nullam debe^^t (...) To wit (that I may speak without offense of
all) this only nouelty (I will not say Heresy) was not yet sp^^^^ up in the
world, that the Priests of God should teach (...) people, that they ought no
obedience at all to evil Princes etc. In which words, you see, that Sigebert
does (...) deny or reprove the authority of Excommunication, (...) deposition
of Princes (especially if they be for heresy) b^^ only the Doctrine, that no
subjection or obedience is d^^ to vicious, or cuill-liuing Princes, which is
false, and scandalous doctrine indeed.

As for the fourth Author alleged in this place, (...) wit Claudius
Espencaeus, that he should call the fact of Pope Gregory the seventh his
excommunicating Henry the thi^d Nouellum schisma, a new rent, or schism (which
is borrowed out of M. Morton, as the rest, which in this point he alleges) I
will refer him for his answer, to the answer that is made of late to M.
Morton himself, which is called The quiet, and sober Reckoning, Sober
rec^oning c. 1. number. 104.
where this matter is returned upon him with so ^uident a conviction of wilful
falsity, as is impossible for him to clear his credit therein. For that these
words are not spoken by Espencaeus himself^^ but related only by him, out of a
certain angry Epistle written by certain schismatic Priests of Liege,
that were commanded by Paschalis the second to be chastised by Robert ^arle o^
^landers, and his soldiers, newly come from Jerusalem, about the year 1102.
for their rebellious behauyour. Which passionate letter of theirs Espenca^^
does only relate out of the second Tome of Counsels, M. Barl. and M. Morton
^oth falsifiers.
expressly protesting, that he will not meddle with that controuer^y of fighting
between Popes, and Emperors, though he pr^ue in that pl^ce by sundry ex^mples
both of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, that in some cases it is lawful for
Priests to use temporal arms also, when need and justice requires. So as this
falsification must now fall as well upon M. Barlow as upon M. Morton before, and
we shall expect his answer for his d^fence in this behalf.

As for the last authority of S. Ambrose, that Kings, and Emperors be tuti
Imperij potestate, sat by power of their Empire from any violent censure;
though I find no such matter in any of the two Chapters quoted by M. Barlow out
of his Apologia David: yet seeking ^urther into other books of his, I find the
words, which is a token that our Doctor writes out of note-bookes of some
Brother, and never sees the places himself: but though I find the words, yet
not the sense which he will infer, but wholly perverted to another meaning.
For that if S. Ambrose had been of opinion, that Kings and Emperors had been
so privileged by the power of their Empire, a^ they might not be censured by
the high Pastors and Prelates, himself would never have cen^ured, and
excomunicated his Emperor Theodosius, as he did.

The words then are found not in S. Ambrose his Book de Apologia David cap. 4
and 10. as here is cited, for there are two Apolygies prior and posterior,
which M. Barlow by his citation seems not to have understood, and the first
contain^th but 7. Chapters in all, and in the 4 is only this sentence, talking
of the penance of King David, Ambros. in 1. Apolog. David cap. 4.
Qui ^ullis tenebatur legibus humanis, indulgentiam petebat, cum qui tenentur
legibu^, aeudent suum negare peccat^m. King David that was subject to no humane
laws, asked forgiu^nes, when they that are bound by laws presume to deny
their sins. A place of S. Ambrose explicated.
But in his enarration upon the 50. psalm of David, he has the thing more
plainly, for thus he says. Rex vtique erat, nullis ipse legibu^ tenebatur,
quia liberi sunt Reges a vinculis delictorum, neque enim illi ad poenam
voca^tur legibus, tuti Imperij potestate. Ambros. in psalm. 50. statim ab
initio.
David was a King, and thereby was not under laws for that Kings are free
from the bands of their offenses, for that they are not called to punishment
by laws, being safe by the power of their Empire.

So S. Ambrose. Wereby is seen, that he understands, that Princes commonly
are not subject to humane laws, for that they will not, nor may be called to
account for their offenses, as private me^ are, being free by their power, or
that no man is able to compel them. And this privilege perhaps is tolerable
in their private and personal sins: but if the same should break out in
public, and against the universal good of Christians, then may we learn by
the foresaid act o^ S. Ambrose in Excommunicating the Emperor Teodosius, that
God has le^t some power by divine law to r^straine them, for the co^seruation
of his Church and Kingdom.

And so we may see, that all that which M. Barlow has chirped here to the
contrary, is not worth a rush, but to show his penury and misery, having been
forced of eight Authors here alleged by him, to wit, Salmeron, Sa^ders
Victoria, Bellarmine, Barkley, Sigebert, Espencaeus, and S. Ambrose to
misalledge and falsify seven, Of eight Authors seaue^ misalledged.
as you have heard, that is to say all of them saving Barkley, who in this
matter is of less account, then any of the rest (if the book be his which is
exta^t under his name.) For that he being no Divine has taken upon him to
defend a Paradoxe out of his own head only, different from all other writers
of our days, both Catholics and Heretics, granting against the later all
spiritual authority unto the Pope over Princes and Christian People throughout
the world, but denying against the former all temporal authority either
directly or indirectly annexed unto the spiritual: wherein as he is singular
from all, so he is like to be impugned by all, and is by M. Barlow in this
place, for the Protestants, calling him our own Writer. And for the
Catholics, Cardinal Bellarmine has lately written a most learned book
against him by name, confuting his private fancy, by the public authority,
weight and testimonies of all Catholic Deuines. And so much for this.

OF CERTAIN NOTORIOVS Calumniations used by M. Barlow against his adversary,
which no ways can be excused from malice, and witting error.. II.
AS the former fraud discovered and convinced against M. Barlow, of abusing
authors against their own words and meaning, is a foul fault and very
sha^full in him that pretends to have conscience or care of his credit: so is
the crime of appare^t and wilful Calumniation, bearing no show of truth or
reason at all, much more foolish and wicked. Foolish, for that it does wholly
discredit the Calumniator with his Readers: wicked, for that it shows plain
malice, and will to hurt, Nu. 10. 3^. 32.
although with his own greater loss. So then it falls out in this place,
that M. Barlow finding himself much pressed and strained with the reasonable
and moderate speech which I used in my Epistle throughout three numbers
together, concerning the Oath freely taken (as was said by many Catholics,
both Priests and Laics expounding their taking of the Oath in a good sense) he
does so malignantly pervert the same, by open calumniatio^s, as every child may
discover, not only the falsehood, but the fury also of his passion against me,
nothing being in his answer but exorbitant railing, and apparent lying.

For whereas I in reason deserved rather approbation, and commendation from
him, for expounding plainly and sincerely that meaning which those Catholics,
(if they were Catholics) had, or could have in their taking of the Oath,
without all Equivocation or mental reservation, which I condemned in an Oath,
as altogether unlawful concerning any point of religion, that ought to be
confessed; he not being able to abide the light of this truth, and plain
dealing, falls into a certain frenzy of railing against me, and for the
ground of his accusation ^ayeth hi^ own fiction, that I do teach them and
persuade them (...) Equivocate in this very case. For clear confutati^^
whereof, it shall be sufficient first to set down my own word^ as they ly in my
epistle, and then to consider and ponder the collections and inferences that he
makes upon the^. And if by this you do not find him to be one of the loosest
conscience, and law^est tongue, and least respectiu^ of his own credit and
honesty, that ever you saw, I am much deceived. My words then were these that
follow.

As for that multitude of Priests, and L^ickes, which he says, have freely
taken the Oath; as their freedom was that, which now I have mentioned, and a
principal motive (as may be presumed) the desire they had to gi^e his Majesty
satisfaction, and deliver themselves, and othe^^ so much as lay in them, from
that inference of disloyal meaning, The sense and meaning of Catholics that
took the Oath.
which upon the denial thereof, some do use (...) make: so I cannot but in
charity assure my self, that they being Catholics took the said Oath (for so
much as concerns the Popes authority in dealing with temporal Princes) in
^ome such lawful sense, and interpretation, as (being by them expressed, and
accepted by the Magistrate) may stand with the integrity, and sincerity of true
Catholic doctrine, and faith: to wit, that the Pope has not authority
without just cause, to proceed against them, Quia illud possum^^, quod iure
possumus, says the law: ou^ authority is limited by Justice. Directly also the
Pope may be denied to have such authority against Princes, but indirectly only,
in ordine ad spiritualia, and when certain great, important, and urgent cases,
concerning Christian religion fall out, which we hope will never be, between
ou^ Sovereign, and the Sea Apostolic; for so much as they have past already
many years (though in different Relions) in peace, and quietness, even since
his Majesty beg^^ first to rai^ne.

But concerning the general Question, to deny simply and absolutely, That the
Pope is supreme Pastor of the Catholi^^ Church, has any authority le^t him by
Christ, either directly or ^^^^^^ctly, with cause, or without cause, in never
so great a necessity, or for ^euer so great and public an v^ility of the
C^ristian Religion, to proceed against any Prince whatsoever temporally, ^or
his restraint or a^endme^^, or to per^it other Princes to do the some: this, I
suppose, was never t^eir meaning that took the Oath, for that they should
thereby contradict the general consent of all Catholic Deuines, and con^^sse,
that Gods providence, for the conservation, and preservation of his Church, and
Kingdom upon earth, had been defectuous, for that he should have left no
lawful remedy, for so great and excessive an evil, as that way might fall out^

Wherefore, for so much as some such moderate meaning, must needs be presumed,
to have been in those that took the Oath, for safeguard of their Consciences;
if it might please his Majesty to like well, and allow of this moderation, and
favorable interpretation, as all foreign Catholic Kings and Monarchs do,
without any prejudice at all of their safety, dignity, or Imperial
prehemi^ence: An humble petition to his Majesty for exposition of the Oath.
I doubt not but he should find most ready conformity in all his said English
Catholic Subjects, to take the said Oath, who now have great scruple and
repugnance of Conscience therein: both for that the chiefe^t learned men of
their Church, do hold the same for utterly unlawful, being mixed and
compounded, as it is, and the voice of their chief Pastor, to whom by the
rules of their Religion, they think themselves bound to harken in like cases,
has utterly condemned the same: and the very tenor of the Oath it self, and
last lines thereof are, That every ^^e shall swear without any Equivocation, or
mental reservation at ^^l, that is to say, heartily, willingly, and truly upon
the true faith of a Christian. Which being so, they see not how they may take
the said Oath in truth of conscience: for so much, as they find no such
willingness in their hearts, nor can they induce themselves in a matter so
nearly concerning the Confession of their faith^ to Equivocate or swear in
any other sense, then from his Majesty is proposed: and therefore do think it
less hurt to deny plainly, and sincerely to swear, then by swearing, neither
to give satisfaction to God, nor to his Majesty, nor to themsel^^^^ nor to
their neighbors.

And so much for this point.

Hitherto have I thought good to relate my for^^^ words somewhat at large, to
the end the Reader may se^ my reasonable and duti^ull speech in this behalf,
a^^ upon what ground M. Barlow has fallen into such a ra^e against me, as now
shall appear by his reply. First of a^^ he conde^neth me of h^pocrisy, saying:
Let the Reader c^^^^der ^^at an ^ypocrite he is, for it is an inseparable mark
of ^n hyp^c^^^^ to judge o^ other m^ns con^^iences; the heart of man is Gods
peculi^^, and ^o^ an^ man to place his cons^s^ory there, is high presump^ion:
M. ^arl^ws fond charge of h^poc^i^^ in his adversary.
and so be ^^nneth out in that common place which makes nothing at all to ou^
purpose as you see. For I did not iudg^t or con^^mne then con^ci^nces that
took the Oath, but exc^s^^ the same, yea interpreted their ^act in good sense,
giving my ^ea^ons for it^ that they being good Catholic could not be presu^^d
to mean otherwise then the in^^gritie of Catholic doctrine did permit them,
for that otherwise they should be no good Cat^olickes, if they should have done
any thing contrary to that which the^ selves held to appertain to the same, in
which I did not excuse their fact, which my whole book proves to be
vnlaw^ull, but only their intention, and meaning touching the integrity of
Catholic doctrine. And this is far dif^erent from the nature of hypocrisy
which forbids not all judging, but only evil and rash judging of other m^ns
actions or intentio^s, thereby to seem better and more i^st then they. For if
two (for example sake) should see M. Barlow to sup largely with flesh and other
good meat upon a vigill or fasting-day, and the one should judge it in the
worst part, saying, that he did it for the love of h^s belly, and sensuality,
the other should interpret the same spiritually, as done for glorifying God in
his creatures, by his thanksgiving for the same, for liberty also of the
gospel, and for to make him the more strong and able to ^peake and preach his
Service and Sermon the next day, I doubt no^ but that this second judgment
would not be censured by him for hypocritical. And this is ou^ very case with
those that took the Oath. For that I hearing what they had done, and that they
were Catholics, did interpret their meaning to the best sense. And was not
this rather charity, then hypocrisy?

But let us see a little if you please how M. Barlow can defend this general
proposition of his, that, it is an inseparable m^rke of an hypocrite to judge
of other men's consciences. To judge of other men's consciences no inseparable
mark of an hypocrite.
You have heard before how wisely he defended a certain definition which he
gave of an Oath: now you shall see him as wisely and learnedly defend an
inseparable propriety or mark of an hypocrite. And first you see that here is
no distinction or limitation at all, whether he judge well or ill, with cause or
without cause, rashly or maturely, how then if we should hear a man or woman
speak ordinarily lewd words, can no judgment be made of the speakers
consciences without hypocrisy? If a man should see another frequent bad
howses, or exercise wicked actions, may no man judge him to have an ill
conscience, from whence these things do proceed, but he must be ^n hypocrite?
Moreover if this be an inseparable mark or propriety, as he says, then
according to Aristotle and Porphyri^^ it must conuenire omni, soli, and semper,
agree to all, only, and ever. For if it do not agree to all, and ever, it is
not inseparable: and if it agree to others besides hypocrites, it is not
always the mark of an hypocrite: and therefore albeit that I had judged their
consciences, as M. Barlow imposes upon me, he could not by good consequence
have inferred, that I was an hypocrite. But this is ridiculous that all
hypocrites, and only hypocrites judge of men's consciences: for first the
hypo^rite, that sounds a trumpet before his alms, whose conscience does he
judge? The other also that kneeleth and prays in the corners of streets,
whose conscience does he judge, or condemn? Those also that came to tempt
Christ about the woman taken in ^dultery, and about Tribute to be paid to
Caesar, I read not whose consciences they judged, and therefore would be loath
to do them injury, except M. ^arlow can bring any just accusation against
them: and yet were they called hypocrites by our Savior, whereby i^ inferred
that all hypocrisy is not subject to this ^axatio ^f judging consciences, and
consequently this is no insepar^ble mark that agrees to all. In like manner
also it agr^^^^ not soli, that is, only to the sin of hypocrisy, to iudge^
of other men's consciences; for pride may do it, anger may do it, temerity may
do it, revenge may do it, and this without hypocrisy or justifying of himself.
For if to a known vs^rer, for example, you should object or exprobrate the
finne of usury, and he answer you again, that he suspected yo^^ conscience of
like sin, here he judges of your conscience perhaps falsely, and yet not by
hypocrisy: for he iustifiet^ not himself, ergo, this is not, propriu^ quarto
modo, any inse^arable mark or propriety of hypocrisy to judge of other men's
con^ciences.

Lastly let us consider, if you please, the definition of hypocrisy, which
should indeed have been the first i^ consideration, for trying out of the true
nature of this mark and propriety; for so much as according to Aristotle's
doctrine, and the thing in it self is evident by Philosophy, pr^pri^ passiones
fl^unt ab essentijs rerum, proprieties do flow from the essence of things, and
therefore they are best understood and known by re^erence to the said natures
and essences contained (as Aristotle says) in their definitions. The
definition the^ of hypocrisy is, Isidor. l. 10. ^. humilis a medio
according to S. Isidorus in his Etimologies, simulatio alienae personae, when
a man pretends to be another man, and better then he is, and according to S.
Augustine, Aug. l. 2. de s^rm. in mo^^e c. 3. ^i^ca prin^i^i^m.
Qui se vult vide^iqu^d non est, hypocrita est, h^ that will seem to be that
which he is not, is an hypocrite (which the greek word also whereof it is
derived, to wit (...) does confirm, that it signifies dissimulation) this
definition I say, which must conuer^i cum de^ini^o, cl^areth us, that this
i^separable mark, or propriety devised by M. Barl^ to be in all hypocrisy, is
both ignorantly and falsely ^eygned by himself, as not knowing the true nature
of propri^ pas^^, for that there be many ways of dissimulation of ^eyg^ing our
selves to be better then we are, without judging other men's consciences, that
is to say, there be many s^e^i^ and kin^s o^ hypocrisy and hypocrites that
have not this mark and propriety, as before has been showed, and consequently
not inseparable, that is, no proper or inseparable propriety at all, no more
then it is to ^ay, that it is an inseparable propriety to horses to be white,
for that some few are found white. M. Barlow a very feeble Philosopher and
weak Scholar.
And so we see M. Barlow when he comes to speak of any matter of substance
and learning, shows himsel^e a very feeble man, scarce to understand the very
terms, and first principles of the same.

But let us pass on now to another more grievous calumniation against me. He
is not content to make the former outcry against me for hypocrisy and judging
men's consciences, but adds also another assault, ^saying, that I do teach
Equivocation to be used in thi^ Oath, which is so far from all truth as I do
teach the plain contrary, as now has appeared by my own words before
alleged. For I say there of them that took the Oath, Letter page 18.
I cannot in charity but assure (...) self, that they being Catholics, took
the said Oath, for so much as concerns the Popes authority in dealing with
temporal Princes, in some such lawful sense and interpretation, as (being by
them expressed, and accepted by the Magistrate) may stand with the integrity
and since^i^y of true Christian doctrine, and faith: to wit, that the Pope
has ^ot ^uthority without just cause, nor directly, but indirectly only, in
^^dine ad spiritualia. So I wrote then: and the clear addition that these
exceptions and clauses must be expressed by the swearers, and accepted by the
Magistrate, does clearly exclude Equivocation, Impudent dealing of M. Barlow.
which consists of mental reservation, not expressed, nor understood, or
accepted of him to whom it is used: and moreover within very few lines after
continuing my speech, and desiring his Majesty to accept of these clauses of
moderation and Catholic exposition, I do yield this reason, that Cat^olikes
do^ not hold it l^wfull in a matter so ne^rely concerning the Con^ession of
their says, to equivocate, or swear in any other sense, then from his Majesty
is proposed. Can any thing be spoken more plainly? With what face then can M.
Barlow accuse me of the quite contrary, and so revile against me for the same?
Whereof some shall be here set down. Barlow page 39.
Let the Reader b^hold (says he) a malicious trick of a notable Equiuoca^^u^,
that cannot be contented to be him self alone the Devils sch^ller (that
ancient Equi^ocatour^ but must be (...) his Deuility Reader, or Schoole-man to
teach others ^o distinguish themselves t^ hell fire, shows him self to be
vere spiritus menda^ i^ ore Prop^^tarum, framing two distinctions, like the two
(...) of Sedecias, the false Prophet ( such another as himself, fu^^ of the
spirit) and putting them into their mo^thes. 3. Reg. 22
the first, that the Pope (...) not Authority without just cause to procee^
against Princes: the sec^^^, that the Pope has not this authority directly,
but indirectly, and in ordine ad spiritualia etc.

So he. Whereby we see how much the man delights himself, in comparing
these two distinctions or explications of mine to the two iron-hornes of
Sedecias, though the Scripture has not the particular number of two: but M.
Barlow adds that of ^is own, to make the^ meet the more fitly with the
number of my two distinctions, for besides the parity of number (which yet is
false) there is no other parity or likeness at all. For what have horns to do
with distinctions? And yet after a large and lewd blast of railing against me
for the same, he concludes thus: And now let the Christian Reader, that makes
a conscience either of God or common honesty, consider whether this be not the
profunda Sathanae, in the Reuelatio, even the very mist and mystery of
Iniquity.

But what Sir, to distinguish or use distinctions in a matter that may have
diverse senses or intendme^ts? Is this the profund^tie of Satan? or is not this
rather profound ignorance and absurdity in you to say so? To distingui^h i^ not
prof^nda Sathanae, but to reject distinctions is the profu^^ity of M. Barlows
ignorance
Do not you know that to distinguish belongs to the wise and learned,
according to Aristotle, and not to distinguish est imper^^^ mul^itudinis,
appertains (says he) to the unlearned vulgar sort? Does not reason and
expe^ience teach us, that to di^tinguish matters that be obscure and perplexed,
into their clear s^nses, or that be confused into their several parts and
members, or that may have many senses, into their different significations, is
a high work of wit, that gives life to our understanding to conceive the
truth, and light to our will to make choice of the same? How many foul
heresies in the Church o^ Christ since her beginning have been beaten down
principally by pious and prudent distinguishing, which otherwise would never
perhaps have been overcome? As namely the Arians, when they alleged such
abundance of Scriptures to prove or infer, that God the Father is greater then
Christ Jesus his Son, what other way was there for Catholics to say, but
that I distinguish: as Christ Jesus was man, he was in^erior to his Father, and
his Father greater then he, but as Christ Jesus is God as well as Man, he is
equal to his Father? Will M. Barlow here compare these two distinctions to
Sedecias his two horns? Or will he call them pro^unda Sathanae, the profound
mysteries of Satan and iniquity?

And the like examples I might alleadg in great store of many other heresies
discovered and dis^olued by the help of distinctions, as namely that of the
Euti^hians, that denied two distinct natures in Christ: that of the Nestorians,
that affirmed two persons to be in Christ: that of the Monothelites, that held
one only Will to be in Christ, by distinguishing on the Catholic party, were
v^^erly overthrown, and confounded. And now in these our days when the
Anabaptists deny al Magistrates authority in judging Christians (especially in
matters of life and death) all^dging for their ground these words of our
Savior, Matt. 7.
^olit^ iudicare, do not judge, we have no refuge, but a distinction, that we
are forbidden to judge rashly, and without just cause, and without due
authority: but with these circumstances we may judge, and Magistrates are
lawful. And will here M. Barlow again cry out of Pro^^nda Sathanae, M. Barlow
for his two horns deserves to be horned in Scotland.
and of the horns of Sedecias? if he do I will send him to Scotland to be
horned there. For truly he is worthy of it, to wit to be horned from the
company of all l^arned and sober men, if he persist in these absurdities, for
that I dare avouch against him, that there are many hundred places in the Bible
that cannot rightly be understood, nor expounded without the use of some
distinction.

Well then distinctions in general cannot be reproved without profunditie of
folly. Perhaps then my two distinctions here in particular are inueyghed
against, for (...) they are false, or not incident unto the matter, or of a^y
moment, or necessity, for explic^tion of the thing and controversy in hand, or
for direction of consci^nce^ of Catholic men, that are pressed to take the
Oath. Th^^ then let us examine in a word or two, and that as briefly and
perspicuously as we may.

The question is whether the Bishop of Rome as universal Pa^tour of
Christendom, by Catholic doctrine^ may at his pleasure by that Pastoral
power of his, depose Princes, and dispose of their Kingdoms at his pleasure,
for so is the common objection framed against us. Unto which question the
answer may be made, either affirmative or negative, according to the different
senses and interpretations of the words, which cannot be done but by
disti^guishing, to wit, that if we understand that the Pope may depose at his
pleasure, without just cause, it is denied, but with just cause Catholic
doctrine does allow it. And s^ again to understand that the Pope may do it by
his Pastoral power directly or immediately, it is denied, for that this power
is spiritual and given to a spiritual end, and to spiritual actions: but if
we understand it indirectly, as included in the other, for defense and
conservation of the spiritual, it is granted. And are not these distinctions
needful in this affair? Do they not clear the doubt in controversy? Do they
not remove confusion? Would M. Barlow have Christian men to swear, and swallow
up a bundle of word^ knit together, without opening and looking into the^?
That is meet for his conscience that has no eyes perhaps to see, nor will to
receive light, but is ready to swear any thing that may turn to his temporal
commodity: but Catholics that fear God, are not so taught, but rather to
look before they leap, and to examine well what they say or swear, for so
much as they shall give an account to Almighty God, either to their salvation
or damnation for the same.

By ^h^s then we see the Iniquity of M. Barlow his proceeding in exclaming
against me so exorbitantly, for using the form of two distinctio^s, or
explanations about taking the Oath; and above all the injury offered me, or
rather to himself and his own credit, in saying, Barl. p. 41.
that I do teach Equivocation here in this Oath number. 30. contrary to that I
taught a little before numb. 14. His words are these: No sort of Equivocations
is law^ull, says Father Persons, Notable falsity in M. Barl.
in matters of faith and religion, and yet says the same Father Persons,
Equi^^cating in this matter of faith is law^ull, and may stand with the
integ^i^y and sincerity of true Catholic religion: so then in matters of faith
and religion it is not lawful in any sort to equivocate, but yet in this
mat^^r, though it concern ^ayth and religion, F. Persons says it is lawful.

These are my contradictions according to M. Barlow. And truly I confes^e I
should blush and acknowledge my oversight, if they were truly related, but
being falsely either of malice or ignorance collected by him, he ought to
blush, and be sorry for his sin. For as I do confess the former part numb. 14.
that I allowed not any sort of Equivocation in matters concerning faith and
Religion: so do I utterly deny the later clause number. 30. that I do allow
Equivocation in this particular fact of taking the Oath. Let the places be read
in my book and thereby he will remain convinced. For I do say expressly that
these two clauses of explication added by me, that the Popes power in deposing
Princes is indirectly, and with just cause, must both be expressed by the
swearer, and accepted by the Magistrate, and then are they no Equivocations at
all; but direct assertions. For that they are no mental reseruations wherein
consists the nature and force of Equivocation.

Here then M. Barlow that accused me a little before of making no conscience of
God or common honesty, must look how he will defend his own, either
conscience or honesty (if he have any) in this foul calumniation, wherein I
do not see what tergiuersation he can use for his excuse. And so I would leave
him in this matter, if he did not continue on his railing and raging beyond all
measure, as though by this my explication and distinction used, I had committed
the greatest crime in the world. I will demand (says he) of this Jesuit:
first, whether ^his be not a Paganish delusion of God and men? Whereto I
answer, that it is ^^ delusion at all, but rather an instruction, and a
necess^^y explication, not Paganish, but Christian, for directi^^ men's
consciences. Nay, says M. Barlow, M. Barlowes bad application.
it is the very (...) o^ Lisander, that children are to be mocked with toys,
and (...) Oaths. Indeed Plutarke in his comparison of Lis^^der and Silla
records, that one said of Lisander. Leuem esse ap^d Li^^^drum iurisiurandi
religionem: Lisander made no scruple of a^ Oath, that he gave counsel to
deceive men with Oaths, as children with toys and bables. This was the fact
of a Pagan Atheist. What does the matter appertain to vs^ do we esteem so
little a false Oath? Why then do Catholics stand so much in England against
the receiving of this Oath? Why do they put themselves in danger of leesing
the Princes favor, their goods, their lands, their Country, their lives,
rather then to take the same against their consciences? It seems rather, that
M. Barl^^ concurreth with Lisanders opinion, who will have the^ take it,
although it be against their consciences, for thi^ is to have leuem
iurisiurandi religionem, little conscience of an Oath.

But yet he goes further in this matter, and cannot get out of it, for he will
needs prove this my distinction, and as he calls it Equivocation, not only to
be Paga^i^^, but more then Heatheni^h, and that even by Aristotle's testimony in
his Book of Rhetoric to King Alexander: Aristot. ad Alex. cap. 17.
his words are these: Nay this delusion is more then Heathenish, ^or Aristotle
was of opinion that he which doubts in his Oath, for th^^ i^ (...), M.
Barlowes egr^gious folly and fal^^ood.
to swear with a mental addi^ion, has neither ^ear o^ Go^^ v^ngeance, or
sh^me o^ men's reproof. But truly I having con^idered the place of Aristotle
how far his meaning is from that which here is alleged in his name, me thinks
that M. Barlow should fear these two last points of Gods vengeance and man's
reprofe. For Aristotle has not a word of d^^b^ing in his Oath, or of mental
addition, or reseruatio^ in an Oath, b^t only of plain forswearing. For his
argument is, having treated in that book to Alexander, Cap. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
how by the precepts of Rhetoric an Orator may prove or improve any fact or
crime that shall come in question, as by signs, by arguments, by conjectures,
by probability, by witness, and by torture, he comes at length to show how
it may be proved or improued by an Oath. His words are these: Iufiurandu^ est
cum diuina veneratione dictio probationis expe^s etc. An Oath is a speech
without proofs with divine veneration: wheref^re if we will confirm our Oath
and the credit thereof, we must say th^^, no man truly will forswear himself,
both in respect of the ^eare of punishment from the Gods, as also of disgrace
among men; and we may add, that men may be deceived, but the Gods cannot. But
now if the adversary will fly also to an Oath, and we would extenuate or
discredit the same, then we must show that the man that will not stick to d^e
evil, will not stick also to forswear himself, for that he which thinks he
may ly hidden from the Gods after he has committed an e^ill ^act, will think
that he may also escape punishment after he has ^orsworne himself. This is
Aristotle's discourse, which makes no mention at all, as you see of doubting in
an Oath, and much less of mental addition or reservation. Aristotle abused by
M. Barl.
And albeit M. Barlow do bouldly and ignorantly say that the word (...), which
by all Interpreters does signify peierare, to periure, or forswear, does
import also to swear with mental addition: yet is this only a fiction of his,
nor can he bring forth one example out of Aristotle or any Greek writer which
does use it in that sense, nor could Aristotle use it so in this place, where
he uses the said words thrice in these lines by me alleged always for
peierare, to forswear, and never for doubting or mental addition. Nay it
cannot stand with any sense of Aristotle's discourse, for if Aristotle should
say, that no man truly will doubt in his Oath, or have a me^tall reservation
both for fear of Gods chastisement, and discredit amongst men, it were a
ridiculous speech: for that men do not know when a mental reservation is
made, or when a man doubts in his Oath, but when he forsweareth himself it
may come to be known. And in like manner it is more ridiculous, to say against
the adversary, as Aristotle teaches us, that he which sticks not to do
wickedly, will not stick to doubt also in his Oath, or to use a mental
addition, which no man I think would understand, or can read without laughing.

Wherefore seeing that Aristotle speaks only of forswe^ring, and that the
Greek word (...) is so taken by him and by all other Greek Authors, whereof we
might he^^ allege infinite examples, and M Barlow cannot allege one for his
fiction; it is evidently seen, that he, miserable man, is sore pressed, when
to sustain his bad cause, he is forced to falsify and corrupt Authors, by
perverting and wresting them aside, quite contrary to their meaning, and
purpose. But now we shall pass to some other points.

THE REASON IS EXAMINED WHETHER GODS PROVIDENCE MIGHT SEEM DEFECTVOVS, if no
authority had been left in the Christian hurch to restrain and punish evil
Kings. AND Whether God be so wary in dealing with Kings, as M. Barlow makes
him. CHAP. III.
I SAID in my former Letter, as in the precedent Chapter has been seen, that
I could not persuade my self, that such Catholics as were said to have
accepted the Oath, did mean to abjure al authority of the Pope for depo^ing
temporal Princes for any cause whatsoever, for that therein they should
contradict the g^nerall consent of all Catholic Deuines, and confess that
Gods providence for the conservation and preseruati^^ of his Church, and
Kingdom upon earth had been defectuous. For that he should have left no
lawful remedy for so great and perilous an evil as that way might fall out,
by the exorbitant actions of some incorrigible Prince.

Barl. p. 41.
To this my speech M. Barlow answers thus: If by Catholic Deuines he means
Scriptures, Counsels, Fathers, Stories, for a thousand years after Christ,
the Reader must take it for a mendacious vanity, and let it pass for no
better. Whereto I reply, that as I do mean it, it is no mendacious vanity, but
a religio^^ verity, for that I mean by Catholic Deuines in this place, all
such of that profession as have handled the question particularly of this
temporal Authority of the Pope in certain urgent occasions, which are
principally Scholasticall Deuines, especially those of this age, that have
written against all sorts of Heretics that denied the same. And albeit M.
Barlow in his railing vain, do challenge the Schoolmen, The learning and
sincerity of Schoolmen.
as blasphemously detorting Scriptures; yet he that shall read them with
judgment and attention, without this furious passion of hatred against them,
and lack of capacity to understand them, shall quickly perceive that their
skill in Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and Stories is far superior by
infinite degrees to that of M. Barlow, and his Mates, that crake so much
against them, and their sincerity in expounding them according to their true
meaning; and is also without comparison more sound, as may appear by the many
gross and wilful corruptions, which I have noted in him before in that kind.

Exco^municatio^ of Princes practiced in the Primitive Church.
And albeit in some hundreds of years after Christ, there had not occurred any
such particular occasion of actual deposing of temporal Princes, as did
afterward, whereof we have treated before, for that Princes were not so
exorbitant: yet the ground and origin of deposing Princes, which is
excommunication and exclusion from the body of the Church, cannot be denied to
have been practiced often in those former ages. And when a temporal Prince is
so cast out of the Church by excommunication, and made no member thereof (and
much less may he be Head) if he persevere obstinate, and seek to infect, and
destroy the whole body; I say in this case what shall the said Church and
Governors thereof do with such a Prince? Wherein I said that all Catholic
Deuines do agree, that our Savior in this case has not left his Church
unprovided of some remedy, for that otherwise his divine providence might seem
to have been defectuous, not to have left a remedy for so great and universal
an evil.

But now at this reason, as strongly pressing him, M. Barlow stormeth and
stampeth exceedingly, saying, first it is a tryuiall objection borrowed by me
from Cardinal Allens Apology, Page 42.
and by us both from one Bertrand that uses the same in his gloss upon a
place of the Canon law. But what if all this were true, as it is not? M.
Barlowes meriment of the moon in the Asse^ belly.
What were this to the purpose? Let the force of the reason be considered, for
that only imports. Nay, but M. Barlow will make us first a little merriment
as he calls it, related out of Ludonicus Vi^es, who tells this tale,
affirming that a certain Country man, whose Ass drunk at a water, where the
moon shined, and after the said moone-light vanished away, the Countryman
said that the moon was lost, or else it was in his Asses belly, and this tale
he very fondly applies to our present matter, that either the Popes triple
Crown must have power over Princes, or Gods providence in the world must be
lost; and so from this merriment he passes to a vein of serious railing,
saying, that this speech of mine is irreuerent against God, yea blasphemous and
sauouring of the very spirit of Antichrist. But this shall appear presently by
the discussion that is to ensue and thereby also will appear what spirit
speaks in this Minister, to wit the most base and abject spirit of profane
fl^ttery toward Princes that ever proceeded from any Christian tongue or pen:
for he makes God afraid of temporal Kings, and to walk so warily in his
speeches toward them, especially in their iealousies, as if he were in dread
of their power and anger. The discourse is rare, and singular, and I never read
the devise in any before, at leastwise so plainly set down, and therefore I
beseech the Reader to lend me an attentive ear whilst it is discussed.

M. Barlows flattery of Kings. Barl. p. 44
He begins this flattery thus, (for I will set down his speech more
faithfully then he has any thing of mine, which he continually corrupts and
peruerteth as diverse times now I have aduer^ised.) It is natural to Kings to
be jealous of their thrones, wherein they can abide neither M^te for division,
not Check-mate for scorn. It cost Adoniah his life for asking Abishag to wife,
3. Reg. 2.
because Solomon did thereby take occasion ^^ suspect, that he which desired the
Fathers bedfellow, would also aspire t^ the brothers throne. It was not the
blasphemy laid to our Saviors charge by the Jews, that moved Pilate to
sentence him; that which hastened his death, was a jealous opinion, though a
false persuasion, that he should be a King, and thereby defeat Caesar of his
claim to Jury.

In that point we shall see God himself to be very wary; for (...) that
Psalm, Wisely Sir William.
which of the Scriptures is the most threatfull to Kings, and begins with a
thundering expostulatio^, Quare ^remu^runt gentes, and a^^iterunt Reges, it
pleases him to conclude it, not with a men^cing extrusion, but with a calm
persuasion, Osculemini filium, or as the vulgar has it, Apprehendite
disciplinam. And what is that? Be wise o ye Kings, and serve the Lord in fear:
if not, w^at^ the danger? Ne per^atis de via iu^ta, that is, least you loose
the right way to heaven, and your right in the Crown of heaven: he said ^ot,
your Titles to your Kingdoms, nor right to your Crowns on earth. God never
thought it fit to support his Church, by daring of Princes, prosessors of his
name; for that had been the way to have made them not nourishing Fathers, but
either pinching suppressours, or at least cold and wary sauourers of the same.

Thus far M. Barlow, to show that Almighty God deals more warily and
respectively with temporal Princes, the^ does the Pope, which threatens them
loss of their Kingdoms if they be incorrigible: and to this effect abuses
pitifully this Psalm here alleged, as presently we shall show. But first I
would demand of him, why he brings in that iealousy of Princes concerning
their thrones, and that Mate for division, or Check-mate for scorn? Does he
allow of these iealousies as proceeding from sanctity? Does he commend that
fact of Solomon for making away his brother Adoniah, for asking only Abishag to
be his wife? Sure I am, that diverse ancient Fathers do condemn the same,
Salomons fact of killing Adoniah condemned.
and a learned interpreter of this age, says: Excuset qui scit, mihi (...)
occurrit legiti^^a Salomonis excusatio etc. Let him defend Solomon that knows
how to do it, for unto me no lawful excuse of Salomons fact occurreth, for
that the sentence of death seems to me not only severe, but also unjust. So
he. Now as for the jealousy of Pilate whereby he made away our Savior, I
suppose M. Barlow will not be so shameless as to commend the same, except
Pilate were alive again, and he his Chaplain, for then perhaps the matter
were doubtful.

But whereto now does all this Preface pertain, of Princes iealousies? The
matter is clear, that it tends to show what great reason God has to walk
warily, least he offend Kings and Princes. For so it follows imediately in
that point. Therefore (and mark the inference therefore) we shall see God
himself to be very wary. But whereof M. Barlow? Is he so wary of not putting
Kings and Princes in fear and jealousy of their thrones as you call them? Why
is God afraid of them? For that your ( therefore) would seem to infer. Or is
his throne less or more weak the^ theirs? How then is it ascribed unto him as
a peculiar property, Deposuit Potentes de sede, and exaltauit hu^riles, Lucae 2.
he has put down the powerful from their seats, and thrones, and exalted
the humble? How is it said of him, Qui aufert spiritum Principum, and est
terribilis Regibus terrae, who takes away the spirit of Princes, and is
terrible to the Kings of the earth? And yet further qui balteum Regum
dissoluit, and pracingit fune renes eorum, Job 36.
he that does loose and take from the^ the warlike girdle, and girdeth their
loins with a rope. And in another Psalm, how dares God to say, if he be so
very wary, Ad alligandos Reges eorum in compedib^s, and Nobiles eorum in
manicis serre^: to bind Kings in fe^ters, and their Noble men in iron manacles?
And finally how warily was this spoken by the holy Ghost, not offending Princes
and Potentates, when he says, Potentes potenter tormenta pa^ientur; powerful
men shall suffer powe^full torments? Was almighty God wary in these speeches?

But let us see, how this Prince-flatterer does go about to prove this his
foolish impie^y out of the Scripture it self, to wit, out of the second Psalm
before cited, and thereby let the Reader learn what assurance men have of the
true sense of any Scripture by him and his alleged, when it is powdered and
seasoned with their exposition, God himself is very wary (says he) in
speaking to Princes, for that Psalm, which of all the Psalms is most dred^ull
to Kings, and begins with a thundering expostulation, Psalm. 2.
Quare fremuerunt gentes and Reges astiterunt? it pleases him to conclude, not
with a menacing extrusion, but with a calm persuasion, Osculemini filium, ne
irascatur, Kiss the son, lea^t he be angry, or as the vulgar has it,
Apprehendite disciplina^, ad^^it discipline. And is not this a goodly discourse
of Master Barlow, to prove the greatness of Princes, and that God himself
does speak very wari^^ unto the^? The hebrew phrase Kiss the Son, is as
much to say, as adore the son of God, when he shall be man, and acknowledge and
obey him as your King.

For as learned Vatablu^ in his notes upon the Hebrew text does observe, it was
a sign of submission and subjection amongst the Jews to kiss the Princes
hand, which is here meant by the phrase of the Psalmist, Osculemini filium,
that is kiss his hands, and adore him for your King, which the Septuaginta
Interpreters well understanding, did many years before the Nativity of our
Savior, as the Chaldean Paraphrasis in like manner, translate it, Apprehendite
disciplin^^, do you apprehend or admit the discipline, and doctrine of the
Son of God when he shall appear in flesh, and so do all the ancient Greek
and Latin Fathers interpret this passage of the Psalm: nor can I see with
what show of reason or probability M. Barlow can bring it for his purpose of
flattering Kings in this place: he says, that God concludes not here, with a
menacing extrusion (of Kings) but with a calm persuasion, Kiss the son:
this kissing seems perhaps to him an amiable thing: but if it be interpreted,
as now I have showed, and S. Hierome does expound it, for a matter of
subjection, humiliation, and of admitting discipline, it seems not oftentimes
so sweet and pleasant to Princes, as M. Barlow would have it.

But what shall we say to other phrases here contained, as when Kings and
Princes do swell, and take counsel against God and his Christ, saying: Let us
break their bands and cast of their yoke, then says the Prophet: He that
sits in heaven will scorn them, and our Lord will scoff at them. Then will
he speak unto them in his wrath, and terrify them in his fury. A little after
he says, That, he shall rule them with an iron-rod, and shall break the^ in
pieces like a potters vessel. The second psalm ill chosen of M. Barlow for
flattery of Princes.
And now M. Barlow, is this a calm persuasion? is here no menacing extrusion
threatened to Princes when they are threatened to be crushed like a potters
vessel? Nay mark also the subseque^t persuasion, Nunc ergo Reges intelligite
etc. Now therefore understand, o ye Kings, and be wise: Learn how to judge the
earth. Serve god in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling. Admit discipline
least he wax angry, and you perish from your way (for so has the Hebrew text:)
when his wrath shall be but a little kindled, happy are all those that trust in
him. What can be spoken more severely to Princes then all this? Or was this
Psalm well chosen by M. Barlow for his purpose of flattering Kings and
Princes, in respect of Gods warynes in his speeches? Whereas no Psalm amongst
all the rest utters so much terror unto them, only the words osculemini
Filium do seem to have drawn him to this impertinent imagination.

But now let us see his Conclusion, and application against the Popes
pretending authority over Kings, for which all the rest hitherto has been
brought in, Ne pereatis de via iusta: least you loose the right way to heaven,
and your right in the crown of heaven: he said not, your titles to your
Kingdoms, nor right to your Crowns upon earth: God thought it never fit to
support his Church by daring of Princes, Professors of his name. A Godly
speech, and fitting for so spiritual a man, as this Doctor seems to be,
if for refusing discipline and obedience God does threaten to Princes the loss
of heaven, with all the right they have to that everlasting Crown and
Kingdom, which includes also their eternal condemnation to hellfire and
torments! What great privilege is it to spare their titles to their temporal
crowns and kingdoms on earth, that may be lost in an instant, and long cannot
endure, why should God think it so inconvenient to support his Church by
daring of Princes, least perhaps they should wax angry, and dare him again?
For so it seems by the reason given here, least by daring they should not be
nourishing Fathers to the said Church, but either pinchi^g suppressors, or cold
sauourers. And why? For that God dares them forsooth with leesing their
temporal states. His daring for leesing of heaven seems not to trouble them
so much, but their peril to loose their temporal kingdom, if they be
incorrigible, is the thing that principally troubles them, according to this
wise discourse of M. Barlow. Do not his friends take pity of his folly? If I
would take upon me to lay forth the examples that are found in Scriptures of
Gods plain speeches, and menacing threats unto Princes (let M. Barlow call
them darings if he will) it would quickly appear how vain, and profane the
former observation of his is, that God is so very wary in his speeches toward
them.

For what will you say to that speech of his to King Sennacherib: Ponam
circulum in naribus tuis, and camum in labijs t^^s, and reduca^ in viam per
quam venisti. Examples of Gods terrible threats unto Kings.
I will put a ring in thy nostrills, and a bit in thy mouth, and will bring
thee back into the way by which thou did come. That also of Nabuchodonosor
the most potent King of Babylon, as the Scripture calls him: Eijcient te ab
hominibus, and cum bestijs serisque erit habitatio tua, and soenum vt bos
comedes. Dani^l.4.
They shall cast thee out from the company of men, and thy dwelling shall be
amongst wild beasts, thou shall eat hay as an ox. Was this a wary and
respect^ue speech to so great a King, and Monarch? That other speech also of
God to King Achab of Israel: D^m^tam posteriora tua, and interficiam de Achab
mingentem ad parietem. Si mort^us fu^rit Achab in Ciuitate, comedent eum canes:
si autem in agro, comede^t eum volucres caeli. 3. R^g. 21.
The hinder part of thy life I shall cut o^, and shall kill of thy stock, that
shall make water against the wall. And if that Achab dye in the City, the
d^^gs shall e^t him: and if he dye in the field, the birds of the ^air^ shall
devour him. And the like to his Queen Iezabell: The dogs shall eat ^ezabel
in the field of Iezraell. And finally to let pass Baltasar, Jeroboam, Iebu,
Manasses, and many other Kings, whom God threatened and dared, and performed
also the same without any such respective wariness, as M. Barlow does fancy;
his words and meaning are plain, and general in Job, that when Princes are
warned and do not amend: Job 36.
Si non audierint, transibunt per gladium; If they obey not, they shall pass
by the sword. And this is Gods plain speech, and plain dealing, for that
Princes to him are no more then poor men, all flesh and dust: albeit whilst
they live upon earth, and bear rule in his place, he will have them respected,
obeyed, and honored, as his Deputies in all that they shall command, not
contrary to his laws, which he will have observed both by Prince and people;
and detesteth all such profane flattery as here we have heard uttered by M.
Barlow. And so much for this matter.

Now then to come to my former proposition, that the Providence of God might
seem to be defectuous, if his divine Majesty had left no remedy for so great
an evil: it is founded upon all those places of Scripture, where it is said
that Gods works are perfect, as Deuter. 32. and that they are made in
wisdom, Psalm 103. verse. 24. that is to say, in most high wisdom, and
ordinata sunt, says S. Paul, Romans 13. they are according to order and well
ordered, and the like. Out of all which is inferred, that whatsoever the
perfection of wisdom, and good order does or can prescribe in any work, that
is to be presumed to be in Gods works, yea with far higher perfection then man's
wisdom can reach unto. Whereby it follows, that as when a prudent humane
Law giver instituteth a Commo^-wealth, he provides for all inconveniences,
that by humane probability may fall out unto the same: so much more Christ our
Savior, being not only man, but also God, must be presumed to have provided
sufficiently and abundantly for his Kingdom, and Commonwealth which is the
Christian Church, purchased with his own blood, for prevention of all hurtes
and evils imminent to the same; which seems had not been done, if he had
left this great g^ppe vnstopt, and this main mischeife unprovided for, which
might come thereunto by the incorrigibilitie of some deplored Prince, Gods
providence in governing his Church perfect and no ways defectuous.
impugning the same: for so much as all humane Law-giuers and Erectors of
Commonwealths, do never fa^^e commonly in this particular, for the defensive
part; and much less may it be thought, that Christ our Savior would be
wanting in so important a point. Neither is this any way blasphemous or
disgraceful to our Saviors infinite wisdom and providence, as M. Barlow
would most impertinently seem to urge, but highly rather to his honor: for
so much, as we profess that he has provided for this evil, and the
Protestants hold that he has not.

For as, when a man beholds a house made by some excellent Architect, and
considers all the parts and commodities thereof, with provision for all
uses, and providence for all cases that may fall out, he admireth the coherence
and dependence of one thing upon another, prayseth and extolleth the wisdom
and foresight of the Author, saying: If this or that had not been foreseen,
and provided for, as excellently it was, it had been a great want and defect,
but being provided for, it does infinitely comme^d his said care, wisdom,
foresight, and providence. And even so in our case, when a man considers the
admirable excellency of Christ our Saviors wisdom, in other points
concerning the government of his Church, how carefully and orderly he has
provided for the same, in all necessary points, as in part the holy Apostle
does describe both to the Corinthians, and Ephesians, appointing some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Doctors, some Pastors, ad
consummationem Sanctorum, in op^s ministerij, in aedificationem Corporis
Christi, for the consummation of the Saints, and for the works of the
ministry, and for the building up the body of Christ, which is his Church,
with exact order, providence and subordinatio^ of things, men, and offices, one
to another, with sufficient power and authority for every party to do his
office: these things, I say, being well considered, do infer that it cannot
possibly stand with such high wisdom and providence of our Savior, to leave
his said body and Church unprovided of sufficient authority, to prevent, or
remedy so main a calamity, as might fall upon the said Church by temporal
Christian Princes, if there were no restraint or punishment for them.

Nor do the Protestants themselves pretermit to use such kind of arguments, and
consequences for their own defense, when they deal with domestical
Adversaries, to wit, with Protestants of other Sects. As for example, when the
Puritan refuses all Bishops, Archbishops, and other distinction of
subordination in the Clergy: what urges in effect the Protestant on the other
side, but that it belonged to Christ his divine providence to leave such
distinction and subordination: and consequently that it might be noted for
defectuous, if he had left but the Puritan parity in all?

The like passes with the Lutheran, who denying the temporal Prince to be
Head of the Church, and confesses consequently that their Church is headless
upon earth, but only depends on Jesus Christ, as head in heaven; is refuted
by the English Caluinists with the same argument of the defect of Gods
providence, if he had not provided some Head on earth also. And much more
holds this argument against the Anabaptists, who hold that Christ has left
no temporal power or Magistrate in his Church, to judge or condemn, and
especially to death, for any cause whatsoever, for that he says, nolite
i^dicare, do not judge; which I doubt not, but our English Protestants will
re^ute, by this argument of Gods providence, which would have been judged
insufficient, if he had left so many Commonwealths and Kingdoms, as are
contained within this Christian Church, without any temporal Magistrate at
all. Whereby remains confuted the in^ulse insultation of M. Barlow against
the same, for that our inference is no^, as he fraudulently tells his Reader,
except the Popes triple Crown had power to depose Princes, Gods providence had
been defectuous, but if his divine Majesty having provided most sufficiently
for all other inconveniences, it would have been a note of defect in the same,
not to have provided for this case of extreme necessity, in some occurrents,
which we say he has done, by leaving sufficient authority in S. Peter^
Successors to remedy the same; not by their triple Cro^^es, but by virtue of
their Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority (including indirectly this temporal)
when great necessity urges, even then when they were most poor, and lay in
caves and vaw^es under ground, though there occurred not then occasions to use
the same. And thus now would I end this matter, but that I must say a word or
two concerning two Authors cited in the margent about the same.

The first is of Aluarus Pelagius, an ancient Canonist, says he, Alu. Pelag.
lib. 1. De planctu Eccl. cap. 13.
of their own, who talking of the Mathematical donation of Constantine,
says, Palea est, at Ecclesia pro gran^ habe^: And then does English it, that
is chafe indeed, though the Church does hold it for good corn, which word,
though they be in Aluarus, yet are they alleged by M. Barlow, Aluarus Pelagius
abused by M. Barl.
no less the^ commonly are other Authors by him cyted, with a guilty
conscience, for that he well knew, that Aluarus does not hold that Donation to
be chafe, but does approve the same to be true in diverse places of his works,
as namely, lib. 1. cap. 43. and lib. 2. cap. 29. and elsewhere, which M. Barlow
could not choose but know, by Aluarus his own words, and wh^le discourse: as
also for that otherwise he had confessed himself to hold against the Church,
who being a Catholic and an ancient Canonist of our own (as M. Barlow says)
would never have done, nor can be presumed to have done. What then will you say
was his meaning in those words, quae palea est, at Ecclesia pro grano habe^?
Sur^ly his meaning is far different from that wherein M. Barlow cyteth him. And
this is, that Gratian Compiler of the Canons, hau^ng this word ( Palea) set
down in his D^cretall, and prefixed before diverse Chapters, not to signify
thereby Ch^ffe, or contemptible matter to be contained therin^ (...) rather that
it was either the collection, or addition of one Protopalea, that was a
Cardinal, as diverse grave Authors do write, or some later collections of
Gratia^ himself, noted in the margent for memory and distinction sake, Gratian
Decret. part. 1. distinct. 5.
with this word Palea, derived either from the Greek word (...), which
signifies ancient, or (...), that signifies rursum, or again, as who would
say they were additions to the former collections, whereof the Reader may see
more in the Preface to the first volume of Gratian his Decretalls. But in what
sense soever the word Palea is there taken, certain it is, that it does not
signify Chafe in Al^ar^^ his judgment, though he does allude to the words
Chafe, and corn, for that the common signification of the latin word Palea
imports Chafe; but that he himself did not hold those things for Chafe,
and contemptible, which are contained in Gratian, under the titles of Palea,
may appear by the very first Chapter so entitled, which conteyne the words
and determination of S. Gregory the first, Greg. c. 10. ad interrogata
Augustini. Beda lib. 1. de hist. Angl. cap. 27.
written unto S. Augustine our Apostle, and recorded by Venerable Bede: so that
the meaning of Aluarus was, that albeit this donation of Constantine was
recorded by Gratian under the title of Palea, yet the Church does hold it for
corn, that is to say, for a matter of truth, about which I remit me to those
Authors, that did write of that affair long before Gratian, as Petrus Damianus
accounted for a most holy and learned man before the Conquest, Iuo Carnote^sis,
and others. So as here the untruth of M. Barlow, alleging of Aluarus against
his own meaning, is evident, that he intended thereby to deceive his Reader.

As for the second, that is Bertrand, Bertrand. in additione ad glos. de
maioritate and obedientia c. ^.
in the addition upon a gloss of the Common law, whom M. Barlow alleges to
say, that our Lord, saving his reverence, had failed in his discretion, for
government of this Church, if he had not left such a government therein for
deposing of incorrigible Princes; there is no great matter to be stood upon
therein, but only his manner of simple speech, which M. Barlow out of his
sincerity makes always worse by his relation: for whereas Bert^and says,
Videretur Dominus, God should seem to have failed: this man makes him say,
God had failed: and wher^s Bertrand says, vt cum reuerentia ei^ l^quar, that I
may speak it with due reverence, or regard unto him, M. Barlow translateth,
saving his reverence, which i^ our English phrase seems contemptible. And
thus he helps himself out at every tu^ne, with sleights and shifts, never
using sincerity commonly in any thing that passes from his pen against us.

WHETHER THE DEVISING AND URGING OF THIS NEW OATH WERE A BLESSING or no,
either to the Receauers or Vrgers? AND first of the Receivers: Wherein is
handled also of Conscience, and of swearing against Conscience. CHAP. IIII.
AFTER humble supplication made in my Letter to his Majesty as you have heard,
that it would please him to admit the acceptance of this Oath, by his
Catholic subjects, in the form and substance that should be allowable by
Catholic Doctrine, by yielding all dutiful temporal obedience unto his
Majesty, his heirs, and successors, with reservation only of their consciences
in points that concern their Religion; I was forced to ^^swere some few lines
about that which was said in the Apology, that God did bless this godly devise
and intent (of making and urging this Oath) by ^he admittanc^ thereof by so many
Prie^^es and Laickes: and I think it good to repeat my own words again, to
the end I may be the better understood. But before I do this, it shall not be
perhaps amiss to set down the relation of my said words by M. Barlow, whereby
you may see how faithfully and sincerely he does relate them, as well here, as
in all other places, for this is his fashion, albeit he set them down in a
se^erall distinct letter, to the end the Reader may imagine that they be mine
indeed. Barl. p. 49.
Is it be a blessing (says he) it must be so first to the takers, which are
of two sorts, either in act which are sworn already, or in desire, which wish
they might, and dare not. The first have no outwar^ blessing of liberty, for
they are still imprisoned: if inward blessing of comfort, he knows not. But to
the other it is the greatest pressure of conscience and angariation of mind,
that ever be^ell them; for that oppr^ssion exceedes all other, either corporal
for pains, or worldly for loss.

M. Barlows falfe dealing in alleging his adversaries words.
This is my speech as he sets it down, both ragged and scarce coherent, if
you consider it well: and this course he holds throughout the whole book,
that he makes me speak as pleases him to appoint me. My own speech is that
which ensues, somewhat more clear and perspicuous at least wise, as you will
see.

About this matter (said I) where the Apology says, That God did bl^sse this
godly devise and intent (of making and urging this Oath) by the admittance
thereof by so many Priests and Lai^ks etc. ^et. p. 20.
Which bl^ssing (if it be a blessing) must concern either the takers, or the
exibitours, or both. But for the takers, what inward blessing of comfort in
cons^ience they may have received thereby, I know not. But ^or outward
blessing, I see small, for they remain, ei^h^r in prisons, or under pressures
still, a^ has been said. But for others of the same Religion that cannot frame
their Consciences to take the said Oath, and yet would gladly give his Royal
Maie^ty conten^ment and satisfaction, so far as they might, without offending
God; I can assure you, that it is the greatest affliction of mind, among other
pressures, that ever fell unto them. For that no violence is like to that,
which is laid upon men's Consciences; for so much, as it lies in a man's own
will and resolution, to bear all other oppressions whatsoever, whether it be
loss of goods, honors, dignityes, yea of life it self: but the oppression of
the Conscience, no man may bear patie^tly, though he would never so feign. For
if he yield therein, he offends God, and leeseth his soul: neither does Metus
cade^s in constantem virum, fear that may terrify even a constant man, excuse
in this behalf, as appears by the example of the ancient Martyrs, who were
forced, under pain of damnation, to stand out to death against all humane
power, vexations, torments, and highest violence,, rather then to do, say or
swear any thing against their Conscience. To all these men then, which are
thousands in our Country, that never thought otherwise then to be good
Subjects to his Majesty, the devising of this new Oath, was no blessing, but an
unspeakable affliction, and angariation of mind.

Thus much I wrote concerning the Receivers of the Oath. The other part of the
Vrgers, we shall handle presently after. Now I say only, that I think the
Reader has seen some difference between my speech, as it is mine, and
comes from my self, and as it passes through the lips, and pen of M.
Barlow. But what does he answer to the substance of the matter? You shall
hear his first words. Indeed (says he) the trouble of conscience is a
fearful vexati^^, but the next to it is the trouble in answering a cauelling
Sophister. But what Sophistry, Sir, do you find in these words of mine now
recited^ Are they not plain? Are they not perspicuous? You run out into a
common place, that in the mult^^ude of a people is the honor of a King, Prou.
^4. verse. 28.
says Solomon; and then, God having blessed his Majesty, with the a^crewment
of a mighty ^ation etc. he devised this Oath for a pledge of his assurance, and
ma^y unrequired came and showed themselves to be populus voluntari^^ freely
offering to take the Oath, and this the Apology truly call^^^ a blessing of
God upon the devise.

Well Sir, let it be so: yet this blessing, if it be a blessing, concerns
rather the exhibitours of the Oath then the swears themselves, and
consequently touches no^ the point in hand; though I grant notwithstanding
that if those that come to swear, were indeed populus volunt^^^^ in that
behalf, freely offering themselves to swear of their own accord, then no
injury or angariation of conscience was laid upon them. But I speak only of
those Catholics which felt repugnance of their conscience, for that they
esteemed diverse clauses in the Oath to prejudice their Religion: What say you
of these and this case^ Let us hear your resolution. To answer once for all
(say you) is your Catholics have vexed consciences, Vincen. aduers. hares.
it is no marvel, for idolatry being mixed with superstition, and
superstition never void of (...) (because as it supposes there be many Gods, so
it wishes there were (...)) so sear must needs work vexation of mind: but
heresy is Idolatry, (...) Vincentius, August. de vera rel. cap. 38.
for so many self-conceipts are so many Gods, yea the ^ase^^ kind of Idolatry,
says S. Augustine: this adoring the work of men hands, and the other
worshipping fancies of their own brains.

This is his first resolution about Catholic consciences, which if he knew
what a true conscience means, and what is truly Catholic, he would never say
as he does: but for that it seems he is as far from feeling in the one, as
from knowledge in the other, he talks at random, he knows not what against
fear, and brings in Idolatry and superstition as causes of fear, which have
no more coherence with the matter in hand, Idolatry and superstition not
always causes of f^ar.
of the grief of a forced, and coacted conscience, then Canter^^ry with
Constantinople. For we say, that when Catholic men are forced by penal laws
to swear against their own consciences, that is to say, against the dictamen
of their own reason and judgment, which they have in matter of Religion,
their grief must needs be excessive, there being vndique angustiae, for that
on the one side if they swear, their own consciences will condemn them: and
if they swear not, they of^end their Prince, and incur most grievous penaltyes
of the law. What says our Doctor to this dilemma? He tells us a tale, how
that Idolatry is mixed with superstition never void of fear. What is this to
the purpose? We talk not now of fear which may be both good and bad, and the
former is highly commended in Scripture: and we are commanded to work our
salvation with fear and trembling: but this is not now to our purpose, nor
will I examine M. Doctor why he ascribes fear so particularly to
superstition, as that it is never void thereof, for that superstition being an
excess in religion, makes commonly the superstitious person to be more
confident, and less fearful then any other men; and this likewise
overthrows that foolish clause put in by M. Barlow, that superstition wishes
there were no Gods: for that her nature consisting in excess of supposed
religion, as h^th been said, she cannot wish that there were no Gods, but
leaves this rather to Atheism her contradictour; which as it belieueth no
Gods, nor cares for the^, so would it wish that there were none. But
superstition standing, on the contrary, upon disordinate, excessive and
erroneous serving of God, is absurdely said here to wish there were no Gods at
all.

For whereas diverse do assign four parts or members of superstition, Four
kind^s of superstition.
to wit disorderly worship, Idolatry, divination by wicked spirits, and vain
observation, I would know of M. Barlow by which of these four kinds
superstition may be said to hate Gods; to wish that there were none, or to live
in such special fear, as he imagines? But in truth our^ Doctor knows not
what he says, but is one of those doughty Doctors that S. Paul speaks of to
Timothy: desiring to be Doctors of the law, do not understand neither what
they say, nor whereof they do affirm: 1. Tim. 1.
he seems not to understand distinctly, what is the true nature of any one
thing here by him mentioned, to wit of conscience, of ^eare, of superstition,
of Idolatry, or of heresy.

And as for the last which is heresy, he has brought in two such Authors,
and authorities against himself, as in the whole rank of antiquity he could
not find (...) two more fit, and forcible to convince him, and his of Heresy,
and consequently also as himself infers, of more gri^uous and damnable
Idolatry. M. Barl. provoked to stand to his own Authors.
And he would not have brought them in to the purpose he does, if he had vel
micam salu, any the least part of prudence. For if I should by the occasion of
these two Fathers here brought i^, frame a Syllogism against M. Barlow his
religion, taking the mayor proposition out of these words here set down, and
adding the minor out of these two Fathers most manifest assertions, he would
never be able to avoid the conclusion: and if he can, I do provoke him to the
trial.

The Mayor.
The mayor proposition is this, according to S. A^gu^^^^^ and Vincentius
Lyrine^sis, that lived not long the one after the other. Heresy is Idolatry,
and heretics are Idolatours, yea the basest kind of Idolatours, that do
wo^ship the fancies of their own brains. This proposition is here brought in,
and gr^unted by M. Barlow as true^ and avouched by these two an^ient Fathers:
the minor ^ do add, and do offer to prove, which is this:

The Mi^or.
But according to the judgment and writing of these two Fathers, concerning the
nature and property of heresy, and heretics, M. Barlowes religion (if it be
the Protestants) is convinced to be heresy, and the professors thereof
heretics. Ergo, also they are Idolatours, and of the basest kind of
Idolatours, and damnably worship the fancies of their own brains.

This Syllogism, consisting of M. Barl. his mayor, and my minor, and the
conclusion following of them both, I could wish he would consider well. And for
so much as I know he will deny the minor, An important controversy to be handled.
I do offer to join issue with him, upon that point only, if he please,
reducing all our combat begun between him and me, to this important question,
much more profitable to the Reader, then these wranglings, wherein we are now
conversant: Whether according to the doctrine and judgment of S. Augustine and
Vincen^ius Lyrinensis, concerning heresy^ Protestants or Roman Catholics be
truly Heretics. Let us lay all other quarrels, I say, aside, and handle only
this grave and weighty Controversy, if he has so much confidence in his cause,
and in the doctrine of these two Fathers. But for so much as I do imagine that
M. Barlow will pause a great while, and consult before he accept of this
offer, and perhaps expect until the designed new College of Protestant
VVriters be up at Chelsey, or else where; I will in the mean space inuit the
Reader, to study and make familiar unto himself, the two aforenamed Authors
about this point of heresy, and heretics. And as for Vincentius Lyrinensis,
it will be easy, for that it is but a little book, though weighty in substance,
and it is printed both severally and together with Tertullian his excellent
book of Prescriptions against Heretics, both of his, and these our days: yea
illustrated also with diverse short notes, and Commentaries both of Ioannes
Costerus, and of I^stus Baronius a learned man and Counselor to the
Archbishop Electour of Me^tz, converted from Protestant Religion, principally
by reading and pondering that goulden Treatise of the said Vincentius.

The other Author S. Augustine is far more large and difficult to be studied
thoroughly, in respect of the multitude of his works, but there is a collection
made of them into four books by a learned man of our time, with the title of
Confessio Augustiniana: wherein is gathered the judgment of S. Augustine about
all the controversies of our time, which he has handled in his works so many
hundred years ago, before the new names of Protestants or Papists were ever
heard of; and to the diligent reading of this Book I would exhort all
indifferent men that have care of their souls, and understand the latin
tongue. For that S. Augustine being the man he was, both in learning, and
sanctity, and so special a Pillar of Christ his Church in his days, which was
about four hundred years after Christ, when yet the true Catholic Church is
granted to have flourished; it follows, that what doctrine he held for true,
and Catholic in his time, must also be now: and what held to be heresy, we may
also boldly hold the same: and what rules he gave to know and descry the one or
the other, If M. Barlow list to accept this offer, al^beit the author be dead,
he shall find those that will join with him.
may serve us now to the same end. I will not set down any particular places
in this Epitome of S. A^gus^i^^, for the Reader to repair unto above others,
for they are clearly propounded in the beginning of the work, and reduced unto
several heads, and Chapters. But if M. Ba^low or any of his shall be content to
join with me upon the issue before mentioned, we shall have occasion to
examine the work more exactly.

And this has been spoken by occasion of M. Barlowes answer once for all,
about Catholics vexed consciences with fear, as he terms the^, which full
wisely he will have to proceed of Idolatry, superstition, and heresy, as you
have heard; but says nothing of inforceme^t of their consciences by penal
laws, though that be the only matter in question. But it may be he will say
somewhat thereof in his second resolution, about this matter, for this is but
his first: let us hear him then further if you please.

Again (says he) where the mind has no certain stay for ^e^ vltima
resolutio, Barl. p. 52.
in matters and cases of faith and conscience, there must necessarily follow a
miserable vexa^ion, which is the case of th^se Catholics, whose dependence
for resolution, must rest upon the supreme Pastors determination, then which,
what is more uncertain: for what one Pope decrees, the other disallowes.

Here again you see he runs from the whole purpose, and talks in the
air: for the Catholics do not demand of him, What is the cause of their
vexed consciences? but rather do tell him what it is, as you have heard in my
words before rehearsed; to wit, the pressing of them to swear against the
judgment of their own consciences, or else to incur displeasure and
suspicion of disloyalty with his Majesty, as also the penalty of the law. And
what then does our Doctor tell us a tale of vltima r^solutio in matters and
cases of faith and conscience, to be the cause of their trouble and affliction?
Truly it is as far from the purpose as the other before was: and no less also
against himself, to make mention of this vltima resol^tio, which more
conuinceth him and his of heresy, then any other demonstration that can be used
to that effect. For that they having abandoned the authority and judgment of
the known Catholic Church, from which final resolution in matters of
controversy is to be taken, according to that rule of S. Augustine: There is no
vltima resolutio with the Protestants in matters of faith.
Si quis quaestionis difficultate ^alli meti^t, Ecclesia^ consulat: if any man
tear to be deceived with the difficulty of this question, let him take
counsel of the Church (meaning thereby the universal known Catholic
Church:) they having abandoned this way, of Di^ Ecclesiae, tell the Church, and
of recourse thereunto, as to the Columna and firmamentum veritatis, the pillar
and stay of truth, so called by S. Paul; what remains then to the^ for their
vltima resolutio, but their own heads, and private judgments, which are those
fancyes o^ their own brains, which M. Barlow recyted before our of S.
Augustine. And this shall I make manifest by the ensuing example.

If five or six learned men of different Religions should meet together in
Germany or Transiluania, to wit a Roman Catholic, a Hussite, an Arrian, a
Trinitarian, a Lutheran, a Zuinglian, or a Caluinist (for that all these
different Religions are there publicly professed, and both by speeches, books,
and sermons, preached and maintained:) and that you should demand of each one
of these the reason of his faith, and his vltima resolutio, or last rest about
the same; you should find their answers far di^fere^t. For if you should demand
of the Catholic, The Catholics answer concerning his v^tima ^esolutio.
for example, why he belieueth the Real Presence; he would answer you,
because it is revealed by God? If you ask him further how he knows it is
revealed by God; he will say it is contained in his word, either written or
unwritten, or both. If you ask him again, how he knows it is contained in
Gods word, in that sense that he defends it; he will answer, for that the
known Catholic Church does tell him so, by whose authority he is taught what
is Gods word, and how it is to be understood. And if you demand of him further,
how he knows the Church to have such authority, and the Roman Church to be
the Catholic Church; he will alledg for the former diverse Scriptures,
acknowledged also by the opposite Sectaries, as that before mentioned, wherein
she is called, The pillar and stay of truth: and for the second, he will
allege so many demonstrations, of the beginning, growth, increase,
continuance, succession, and visible de^cent of that Church, confirmed from
time to time, with so many miracles, and other manifest proofs and arguments
of credibility, as no man in reason can contradict the same: so as his vltima
resolutio, or last stay is upon the Church, testifying unto us the word of God,
and testified by the same.

But now the other five, though never so learned in their profession, will not
answer you thus; but being demanded every one of them severally, why they are
of that peculiar sect, more then of any other: and why they are different from
the Catholic in the former article of Real Presence: No resolution amongst
heret^cks.
they will all answer conformably for the first step, that they do build upon
the word of God, yea the written word only. But if you go a step further, and
demand of them, how they know that this written word is well understood by
them, for so much as they are of five different Religions, founded by them all
upon the same written word: here now they cannot pass any further to the
foresaid Catholic Church for final resolution, as the first did, for that
they all do impugn her, but each man must defend his different interpretation
of that written word, by his own judgment, or else by the judgment of his
own Congregation and Sect, which in effect is the same. So as these five
learned men do remain irreconciliable as you see, for want of a ground from
whence to take their vltima resolutio, and do show themselves according to the
former speeches of Vincentius, and S. Austine both Heretics and Idolatours, in
that, following the ^ule, and resolution of their own heads, they adore as
many Gods, as they have selfe-conceipts for ground of their faith. And will you
say that this point of vltima resolutio was wisely brought in by M. Barlow,
being a thing whereby himself and his are condemned to have no last resolution,
or certain ground at all for their belief, but only their own ^eads? But oh
( says he) you depend for resolution upon the Pope, which is so uncertain, as
what one Pope decrees another disallowes. But I have now answered, that we
depend upon the Catholic Church, What resolution is taken from the Pope.
as propounding unto us and expounding Gods word, and we depend of the Supreme
Pastor as head of that Church, unto who^ we rest assured by Gods own word and
promise, that he will assist him with his spirit for all resolutions in matters
of faith, which shall be necessary for his said Church: nor can M. Barlow prove
that what one Pope decrees in these matters of faith, another disallowes. One
of them may well alter matters of policy, government, Ceremonies, or the like;
but for points of faith we do allow M. Barlow sixteen hundred years to seek
them out. And if in so long time he could have produced but one true example, I
suppose we should have had it.

I do willingly pretermit a great deal more of idle and impertinent speech
which M. Barlow uses about this matter of Catholics Consciences, ^hewing
indeed to have little himself, nor yet to know well what it means, and much
less speaks he to the present purpose. For he tells us first, that if
pressure of conscience may serve for good Plea of Recusancy to Princes laws,
there is neither malefactor for crime, nor heretic for schism, but that will
make that his Apology. Whereunto I answer, that causes, persons, merits, and
demerits are to be distinguished in this matter, and not to be confounded. For
what has the malefactor for crime, or heretic for schism to do in this
affair? From the first I think the adversaries themselves will deliver them,
or at leastwise their neyghbors, among whom they dwell: and as for the second
of heresy and schism, we have spoken now already sufficiently, to show where
those imputations may, and must lie, and not upon the Catholics, who are
opposite to that charge.

Secondly, Page 53.
then he tells us, that we lack the light within us, which should drive away
the darkness of our consciences, and purge the eye thereof from mist, dust,
and lime. And upon this he makes us an exhortation, that we take heed of
Caligo tenebrarum in this life, that dusketh the eyes of our understanding to
perdition, especially by worldly delights, desire of honor, and wealth, this
being puluis pigmentarius, says he, the Merchants dust, which tickleth the
eyes, and blinds the sight of the wisest, as do also envy by emulation,
prejudice of affection, wilfulnes by opposition, which like unto lyme
tormenteth the eye, and peruerteth the judgment etc. And is not this, a very
grave, M. Barlows hate of ambition, scilicet, and his mortification.
and serious exhortation, coming from such a man as he is, known to be so
clearly enlightened, as neither mist, nor dust, nor lyme of ambition can stick
upon a man so hating worldly delights, honor, and wealth, as no part of this
merchants dust can tickle his eyes? Are not his mortifications known? His
contempt of the world seen by his life, and conversation? Is not his hate of
ambition, honor, and wealth discovered by his voluntary poverty? abundance of
alms? refusal of dignities, and temporal commodities? Let his Parishioners
testify for him.

But yet against us he goes forward, telling us, that the Jews veyle is
spread over our hearts, and consciences, and that by our own wilfulnes, error,
and peeuishnes. Item, to a corrupt stomach, yea the lightest meats are
troublesome, but cleansed, it will easily concoct, and orderly digest the
strongest food etc. Which last direction of clea^sing the stomach, to be able
to concoct, and put over the strongest food, being applied as M. Barlow
applies it, to the purging of a man's conscience from fear, thereby not to have
scruple, comes very evil from his mouth, M. Barlows stomach for digestion
and concoction.
who as they write from thence, is held to have so purged a conscience from all
due fear of offending God, by doing, saying, or swearing any thing, which to
the state or present Prince may be grateful, that already as I understand the
commonvoyce has been of him, as of D. Shaw who in his Sermon betrayed his Lord
and Masters Children, and whole Succession: as this man, I say, in a like
public speech betrayed his dearest Patrones honor, fame and credit. Wherefore
he may talk of corrupted stomakes what he pleas^: he may also talk of strong
digestions; no man's I think of his order, though many be bad, is known to be
more corrupt then his own. As for Catholics, if in this point they ^ad
corrupt stomakes, they would never stand so much as they do, and with so great
losses upon the contrary: but would rather cleanse their stomakes of all fear
and make that strong digestion, which here M. Barlow does insinuate unto them,
of putting over without scruple whatsoever is offered to be said, long, or
sworn, so it be plausible or commodious.

But now after all this, he makes his conclusion; and the best comfort that he
can give to Catholics is this: For them, says he, who are to take the Oath,
if they refuse it, the penalty is before them, their conscience is free. But
now what freedom this is, we have discussed before, both out of Philosophy,
and Deuinity, and M. Barlow has been showed to understand rightly neither of
them concerning this point, but to have showed himself ridiculous in both: But
let us hear yet what threat he adds further of his own to the former
words. Barl. p. 54.
The penalty, says he, is before them, their conscience is free, but his
Majesty no doubt will beware of them, and the State observe them, as branded
by the Apostle, seduced by the error of Balaams wages, and perishing in the
contradiction of Corah and Dathan. Here be words of great malice as you see,
but of small reason, coherence, or consequence. For first why is there no
doubt, but that his Majesty will beware of them, if they pay the penalty of
the Statute, for not sw^aring against any clause of their Religion, and do
otherwise offer to swear all temporal obedience? Why should not we think
rather that his Majesty will esteem of them as of men that have care of their
consciences, and consequently that being true to God will be also true to him, as
Gods Substitute?

We know that one of his Majesty's most noble Ancestors, yea Constantius,
Constantine the great his Father, did make that argument and consequence, when
he proposed some like Oath to his Courtiers, that might prejudice his Christian
Religion, the swearers he rejected, the refusers he embraced, as more faithful
then the other: and why may it not be hoped that his Majesty out of his great
wisdom, and clemency will do the same? And why should these men be said
here to be bra^ded by the Apostle, sed^c^^ by the error of Balaams wages,
perishing in the co^tradiction of Corah and Dathan? Is there any least
similitude of these things against the Catholics of England? Wherein has the
Apostle branded them? What hope of gain, what corruption of money, what wages
of Balaam has seduced the^, that suffer themselves to be so much spoiled and
impouerished for not swearing against their own Consciences? What
contradiction of Corah and Dathan is there in them, that offer all obedience,
and duty both to te^porall and spiritual Governors? that which is due to
Caesar, to Caesar, that which is due to God, to God: matters of the world, life,
and goods unto the King: matters of the soul, spirit, and life to come, unto
those whom God has appointed for government of souls. And this is no
co^tradiction of Cor^^ and Dathan, but the quite contrary, of conformity in
dutiful subordination, only found in Catholic men: all Heretics perishing
indeed, in the foresaid schism and contradiction peculiar unto them.

TOUCHING THE Exhibitours of the Oath, and of Scandal active and passive.
Wherein M. Barlowes gross ignorance is discovered.. II.
THIS having been spoken principally in the behalf of those that were pressed
with the Oath: there remains now the other member, concerning the
Exhibitours, or those that urge it, about which my former speech in my Letter
to my friend was this.

Letter page ^^.
To the exhibitours of the Oath also ( quoth I) I see not what blessing it could
or can be, so extremely to vex other men without profit, or emolument to
themselves, or to his Majesty's service, which herein they would pretend to
advance. For if there be any cause of doubt of loyal good will in the^, that
are forced to swear against their consciences: much more cause and reason may
there be of like doubt, after they have so sworn, then before. For that the
grief of their new wound of conscience remaining still within them, and
stirring them to more auersion of heart, for the injury received, must needs
work contrary effects to that which is pretended. And whosoever will not stick
to swear against his conscience for fear, favor, or some other like passion,
may be presumed that he will as easily break his oath, after he has sworn
upon like motives, if occasion do move him. And among all other passions,
none is more strong t^^n that of revenge for oppressions received: so as we
read of the whole Monarchy of Spain overthrown and given to the Mores, for
one passion of Count Julian, whereby he desired to be revenged of his King
Roderiquez. Nothing then is gained in this behalf of loyal good will, by such
extreme pressures, but much rather lost.

Th^se were my words, what cavil has M. Barlow against them? You shall hear
it in his own phrase. They are extrauagant (says he) from all De^inity and
Policy. Bar. p. 55.
How proves he this? Nay no one word of proof does he alleadg, it is enough
for this Pithagoras to say it; let the judicious Reader judge of it. He goes
forward: Of conscience we have already spoken, now for desperation. No doubt
Sir, but you have spoken substantially of conscience, as before has been
seen; but of desperation. I know not what you can say, if you keep your self
to your text: for I remember not to have mentioned that word in my speech
before rehearsed whereunto you pretend to answer. M. Barlows idle discourse.
True it is, that of the passion of anger and revenge, for supposed injuries or
oppressions received, I have made mention. But you have turned all your show of
answer against desperation, telling us much of the furious fancy of the
Donatists in Africa, that were desperately enraged. You ask also whether the
Catholics be no better instructed in Deuinity by their Priests? You tell us
that S. Peter's Deuinity was better, who^ he^^horteth Servants to be bucksome
and obedient in all fe^^^ to t^eir Masters. You say further, that true
Catholic^e Deuinity teaches men to endure laws, with all ^^^dy ^^bedience:
and if through weakness they cannot, or by repugnancy of conscience they dare
not be persuaded that they may lawfully swear unto them, then to endure the
penalty with an humble patience, alleging for the same, the words of S. Peter,
that, This is thanks-worthy, if a man f^^ conscience sake toward God end^^e
grief wrongfully, beca^se o^r ^^^ster did so etc. which we take for very good
doctrine indeed, 1. Pet. 2.
and so do teach and preach the same diligently, exhorting all good Catholics
to follow that rule. But yet on the other side we cannot forget also the saying
of the Apostle, non in omni^us est scie^tia, 1. Cor. 8.
al men have not true knowledge (...) they ought to do, and much less patience
in what they ought to suffer, and therefore is the gi^t of wisdom, providence,
and discretion granted unto Governors to moderate matters according to men's
infirmities in some ca^^^, and this is all that is said, or insinuated in this
passage, though M. Barlow out of his great prudence in De^i^^ty and Policy
notes that the example of Count Julian of Spai^e, that overthrew his Country
upon the passion of revenge, ought to be a caveat to the State of England, that
I do threaten. But it is a childish quarrel picked, for I do but call (...)
memory the history in confirmation of that which in my Speech is set down.

But there follows a second reason concerning them that press the Oath upon
others, to wit, the consideration of active scandal, which I set down before
in these words. But besides all this ( said I) is the grievous sin that they
commit, Let. p. 22.
who force or press other men to swear against their conscience, then which
nothing can be imagin^d more heinous, for it is to thrust men headlong
(especially such as are fearful) into the very precipitation and downfall of
hell it self. For it is the highest degree of sc^ndall ^ctiue, so much
condemned and detested in the Scripture, and so dredfully threatened by our
Savior, to be severely punished in the life to come. For that scandalizing
properly is nothing else, but laying a stu^bling block for other men to fall
and break their necks: and such a one is this formal Oath, which contains
diverse things lawful for a Catholic to swear, and other things unlawful, and
he is forced by terror to pass over, and swallow down one with another
without distinction, with manifest repugnance of his conscience, which
repugnance to him is always a sin, and damnable in such a public and
weighty action, though the matter were lawful in it self: and consequently
also unto them that forced him to the same, either knowing or suspecting his
said repugnance of conscience. For he that should force a Jew, or a Turk to
swear that there were a blessed Trinity, either knowing or suspecting that
they would do it against their conscience, should sin grievously by forcing
them to commit that sin. This is Catholic Doctrine, which I also think the
learned Protestants themselves will not deny.

Unto this speech of mine M. Barlow answers, first granting that a man should
rather endure any loss, of life, or goods, then swear against his conscience:
which doctrine I am glad, that in this present case the force of truth has
drawn from him. But he goes further treating of this point of scandal, after
such a fashion, out of our Schoole-Doctours, as he marreth all again. M.
Barlowes ill fortune in dealing with Schol men.
And truly he has so evil luck in dealing with them (not understanding as it
seems what they mean) as I marvel that he would ever name them. For though
in this place he alleadg only S. Thomas by the name of Aquinas in the margent
without quoting where, in what part, or place of his Works it is to be found;
yet does he pervert his meaning egregiously, going forward, and backward, and
taking one thing for another, that it is both pitiful, and ridiculous to
consider. But I shall cite his own words as they lie, and thereby shall we see
how able a Schoole-man he is.

But in this point of scandal (says he) will this great Divine vouchsafe to
learn a lesson from their own Schoole-man. Barl. p. 57.
Is the exacting of this Oath a scandal active in our Magistrates? then is it
passive in their Catholics. For it is no scandal given if is (...) I^ their
consciences be offended a^ it, they are ( says Aquin^^) (...) simply ignorant,
or wickedly malicious; and the last ^^^^er, (...) well instructed or truly
sanctified, can take no offense, though (...) ^uer so openly: which he
confirms by that place of David, G^^^^ is th^^^ peace that love thy law, and
non est illi scandalum: he which (...) loves God neither does scandalize by
sinning, nor is scandalized by ^^^ning, quicquid ei fiat.

In which discourse of M. Barlow, is to be noted first, that after his scorn
uttered against me, he takes upon him as a great School Divine, to determine
this consequence: Is the exacting of the Oath scandal active in our
Magistrates? The^ i^ it passive in their Catholics: Of ^ctiue and passive
sca^dall.
which I grant to be true in such Catholics, as by force of that exaction,
have been induced to swear against their consciences, and so finned. It is not
true in them that refuse the same, and they are those whom the Prophet
commends in the place here mentioned, Great is their peace, who love thy law,
and they are not sc^^dalized, nor do fall into sin, by the sin or
inducement of others. So as in this sense it is true, that such Catholics as
take the Oath with a repugnant conscience, suffered Scandalum p^ssiuum, but not
these that refused.

But M. Barlowes reason for that there is no scandal given, if it be not
taken, is most manifestly false, and the more intollerably foolish, for that he
sets it down as the reason of S. Thomas Aquinas: whereas the said Docto^^
does expressly contradict the same in sundry places, saying in one: ^. 2. q. 43.
ar. 1. ad 4.
Quandoque est scandalum actiu^m sine passiu^, pui^^^^ ^^quis inducit alium ad
peccand^m, ille n^n consentit. Sometimes ^^ere may be a scandal active without
a passive, Scandal active without passive.
to wit, when any man does induce by word, or fact, another man to sin, and
he do not consent unto him. And again in another place, Potest tamen esse
scandalum actiuum sieve pec^^^^ ^^t^rius, qui scandaliza^etur. Ibid. art. 2. in
co^por^.
There may be notwithstanding an active scandal given, without the sin of
another man that is scandalized, which is to say, that one man may s^eke to
induce another man by word, or fact to sin (which is the scandal given) and
yet the same not to be taken by the other, for that the said other consents
not, but resists, or contemns the said scandal given or offered. And of
this there may be five hundred examples alleged. And I cannot but wonder at
M. Barlowes gros^e oversight in this behalf: for when himself, for example
sake, in a Sermon does go about to persuade his hearers against the Real
Presence, against the Sacramental Confession of their sins, against their
Spiritual Obedience to their Supreme Pastor, and other such points, that we
that be Catholics do hold to be great sins: this we say to be a scandal
active, inducing men to fall into sin; so that in him the scandal is given:
but many of his auditors do not take this scandal, nor are induced to sin
by him, for that they believe him not, nor esteem him, but for a deceiuer. So
that here is a scandal active without a passive, and scandal given, but not
taken.

And the like example may be given of facts. As if a man should see M. Barlow
to eat flesh and feed freely, on fasting days, and in the lent, which perhaps
were not hard to find him doing, here is a scandal given, but it is not
necessary that every one that sees him do this, should fall, and follow his
fact, and so take the scandal. For many will say to themselves, that M. Barlow
follows not the life of S. Antony, or S. Hilarion, and other Saints that were
great fasters, Carnal Divinity.
but a good fellows life, that loves a good morsel when he has it, making
no difference of days or me^tes, for avoiding of superstition; for that this
is pleasant Deuinity and agreeing to his appetite. Some other would pass
further and say with the Apostle, Animalis h^mo non percipit ea quae sunt
spiritus Dei: the sensual man giuen^ to his belly, understands not the
things that belong to the spirit of God. But howsoever it be, here is a scandal
given, and not taken, and consequently M. Barl. is much overtaken in this, to
say there is no scandal given if it be not taken.

But now follows a far greater abuse against Thomas Aquinas in perverting his
whole discourse and meaning, with intent thereby to disgrace the consciences of
our English Catholics, that do refuse the Oath. For it follows immediately in
M. ^arlow: If their conscience^ be offended at it, they (...), says Aquinas,
either simply ignoran^, or wickedly mali^^^^s^ (...) last rather. And these
words of simply ignorant, or wickedly ^^^^cious, he lays forth to the view in
a different letter, (...) markable to all, and thereby would have us think
that they are so set down by Aquina^ himself, adding also the reason of
Aquinas, as he says, ^or that he which is well instr^cted, and truly
sancti^ied, can take no offense, though given never so openly.

Bad dealing in M. Barlow.
But if you mark this discourse of M. Barlow, you shall find it intricate and
difficult to be understood, which i^ the mark he shoots at, I mean, not to
be understood, as else where I have notified: but much more would you discover
and detest his fraud, if you look upon Aquinas himself, in his 43. question
about scandal, divided into eight several questions or articles, all which M.
Barlow hides, as before I have noted. And albeit he founded himself wholly
upon him, as in this place you see, and dot^ quote him twice in the margent:
yet does he not vouchsafe to name any one part or place of Aquinas his works,
where he handles this matter. But we have found the place, and shall clear
the fraud, as briefly as may be.

When S. Thomas Aquinas, had showed in his first article the definition of
Scandal, The definition of scandal, and what is active and pa^siue scandal.
that, It is an evil speech and fact, giving occasion to another man, of
spiritual ruin, or ^alling into s^^^: and by occasion of this definition, had
declared diverse other points concerning the same; as that, there is a scandal
active, and passive given, and taken: given, when a man does give occasion by
his speech or deeds to draw another man to sin, and this either out of his
own purpose and intention, which is the most malicious kind of active
scandal; or for that his speech or fact being naught, is of it self inductiue
to sin, though not intended by the scandalizer. And that passive scandal is,
when any man is induced and falls into sin by another man's speech or act,
and this either with ground or without it, as pres^tly shall be showed. After
this (I say) S. Thomas in his seventh article does declare how that sometime,
there may be a passive scandal without an active, or taken, and not given, as
when one is scandalized, and falls into sin by another man's fact or speech
without a just cause, and this either of malice, by misinterpreting his words
or deeds, or by ignorance, or infirmity by mistaking the same. The first is
called Scandalum Pharisaeorum, Sca^dalum Pharisaeorum.
the scandal of Pharisees, for that these people did maliciously so
misinterprete the words and factes of our Savior to an evil sen^e, and
thereby fell into sin themselves: the other is called Scandalum Pusillorum,
Sca^dalum Pusillo^u^.
the scandal of weaklings, for that they are scandalized, and fall into sin by
infirmity or mistaking.

Now then, says S. Thomas, for so much as we may not scandalize our brethren,
or give them any just occasion by our words or actions, to fall into sin,
under so grievous and horrible threatenings, as our Savior threatens in the
Gospel, what shall we do when we see any man scandalized without a just
cause? Whereunto he answers, that if it be the scandal of Pharisees, that is
to say, wilful, and out of malice, we must let them alone according to our
Saviors doctrine Matthew. 15. and go forward in our doings, as himself did. S.
Thomas expounded.
But if the scandal which they take do ari^e by reason of infirmity or
ignorance, then ought we to instruct them, and give them reason of our doings,
and sometimes also deferr our actions until the occasion of scandal be taken
away^ Si autem post redditam rationem hui^sm^di scand^lum d^ret, iam vid^tur ex
^^alitia ^sse^: But if, after we have yielded the reason of our doings, the
said party remains scandalized still^ now it seems that his scandal is not
of infirmity, but of malice. This is the doctrine of S. Thomas, which M. Barlow
applies to the Consciences of our English Catholics, that refuse the Oath,
which is hard to say, whether he does it either of ignorance, or of malice, or
of both. But sure I am he abuses egregiously the meaning of S. Thomas, who
writes this of those only that take scandal, and occasion of fall where none
is giuen^ and this either out of malice or infirmity, by misconstring, or by
misunderstanding, as you have heard.

But in our case there is the urging of the Oath both by speech and penalty,
which Oath being contrary to th^^r consciences as they are Catholics, and yet
swearing the same, they fall and run into the ruin of their souls by that
means, and this neither out of malice, nor ignorance, but rather out of a
certain weakness culpable, that is sinful both to themselves and to the
vrgers thereof. So as what S. Thomas speaks of one sort of men, M. Barl^^
sliely applies it to the other. Neither does S. Thom^^ use these bitter
speeches, of simply ignorant, or wickedly malicio^^, as before I have noted: S.
Thom. abused.
much less the third clause ( and the la^^ rather.) But least of all does he
add that reason, which here is touched, to wit, For that he who is instructed,
or truly sanctified, can take no offense though given never so openly. For S.
Thomas does not use the words instructed, or sanctified, but only makes the
title of his fifth article thus: Vtrum scand^^^^ passiuum possit etiam in
perfectos cadere? Whether a scandal passive may fall even upon such men as are
perfect? which ^e proves that it cannot, for that a passive scandal importing
an offense taken by other men's words or works, whereby the scandalized upon
perturbation depart from God, and fall into sin; perfect men are so firmly
united unto God, and to his holy will in all things, as no evil words or works
of men can wrest the^ aside from the same, according to the words of the
Psalm before recited, to wit, Such as do (...) thy law, have much peace, and
suffer no scandal: and consequen^ly perfect men cannot take passive scandal
(and much less commit active) without departing from their perfection. And
such men may be accounted in our case, those Catholics that would not be
scandalized, nor fall into sin and ruin of their souls by the unlawful Oath
offered unto them, but chose rather to incur the penalty of the law. The other,
as more imperfect, took the scandal that was given them, and either must be
presumed to have sworn against their consciences, if they were Catholics, or
to have followed an erroneous conscience in this matter, if they took the Oath
as it lies, as may appear by the declaration of the Sea Apostolic.

Well then to conclude, let us repeat briefly M. Barl. contexture, and see his
defects. Is the exacting of the Oath (says he) a scandal active in our
Magistrates? then is it passive in their Catholics. Which inference I have
allowed in some Catholics of the weaker sort, that took the Oath, but not in
all ( for it is no scandal given (says he) if it be not taken.) This I have
showed to be very false. It follows. If their consciences be offended at it,
they are, says Aquinas, either simply ignorant, or wickedly malicious. This I
have showed for the later part not to be in Aquinas, and for the former, evil
applied, and falsely alleged: evil applied, for those words which in Aquinas
his sense appertain to weak Catholics that took the Oath, this man
ascribes to the more constant that refused the same. Misalleaged also it is,
The errors of M. Barlow about the matter of sca^dall.
for that Aquinas says not, (...) their consciences be offended at it, for
that it is another thing for consciences to be offended at a thing, and mislike
the same, then to be scandalized and fall thereby into sin: for the former may
be in perfect men; yea the more perfect they be, the more are they offended and
grieved with evil things, that may scandalize, but the later cannot, as now
out of S. Thomas has been declared. And again a man may be scandalized and
fall into sin by another man's word, or act that offends him not, but rather
pleases him: as when a young man by some lascivious speech, or fact of his
companion, should fall into fornication himself, he is scandalized thereby but
not offended.

So as M. Barlow seems to speak exactly in nothing: for neither does he
translate well the word perfect, used by S. Thomas, o^ perfect men, which are
not subject to scandal, by the words, well instructed and truly sanctified,
for that a man may be well instructed, and yet not perfect in maistering his
passions, according to the saying of the Poet -- Video meliorae proboque,
deteriora sequor: instruction may teach him what he should do, and yet not
always make him perfect in doing. How many well instructed Protestants, yea
Ministers have you in England, who if they should receive a scandal active
from one of their ^ellowes by a box on the care, would be so scandalized, as
they wo^ld return him a passive for requital? And yet is not this for lack
of i^struction, but of patience rather, which perfect men h^^^; and you M.
Barlow had not, M. Barlows want of patience.
when you gave the poor fellow, that came to be confirmed, so heavy a blow
under the care in Lincoln Church, with which, as I have been credibly
informed, you felled him to the ground, for no other matter, then because he
smiled upon you. A rare example of Bishoply patience, such as I think was
never seen in that Church before.

Neither is every man truly sanctified, to be reputed for perfect, on whom
scandal may not fall, for that a Jew, or a Gentile newly baptized are truly
sanctified, and yet if you should exact works of perfection at their hands, as
patience in adversities, mortification of their passions and appetites,
contempt of the world, stability, and immobility in Gods love and service,
perhaps you should not find the same. Wherefore by perfect men that cannot be
scandalized, is signified a far different thing in S. Thomas, then well
ins^ruct^d or truly sanctified. And it is very fond that M. Barlow yet adds
again, that these well instr^cted and truly sanctified men, can take no
offense though given never so openly, for that no so^t of men are more
offended, grieved, and vexed with the open offense of Almighty God, t^^n these
that are well i^struct^d, and truly sanctified, for that their zeal is greater
then of any other, as we see in our Savior, who beholding the offense given to
his Father, by the abuse of his House, was so offended thereat, as that he made
a whip to drive the^ out: unto to which the Apostle applied those words of the
Prophet: The zeal of thy House has eaten and consumed me. To which effect
also K. David said in great fervor: Tabescere me se^it zelus me^: quia obliti
sunt verba tua inimici mei. My zeal has made me wither away, and consume: for
that my enemies were forgetful of thy words. And many such other testimonies
might be alleged, to show that M. Barlow understands not well what he
writes, M. Barlow understands not the tear^es o^ school Divinity.
nor conceyueth rightly the Authors meaning whom he alleges, especially if
he be a Schoole-Doctour, as S. Thomas here alleged is, wherein, as before has
been noted, he seems not to understand the very ordinary terms of School-
Divinity, and much less the true substance of things handled by him.

I do pretermitt, as very fond and impertinent, the next passage that ensues
(and is the last in this matter) in M. Barlow his book, where he makes this
demand: But what if there be none, or few that make such conscience, or take
such offense at the admission of the Oath, as he speaks of? To this question
I say, it is in vain to answer, for if there be so few, or no Catholics,
that make conscience, or scruple to take the Oath, the contention will be soon
at an end. But presently he contradicts himself again, taking another
medium, and saying, that there would be none, if they were not threatened by us,
to have their howses ouerturned, as some Donatists, says he, confessed of
themselves, by the witness of S. Augustine, Epist. 50.
that they would have been Catholics if they had not been put in fear, ne
domus little eu^rt^r^ntur (by the Circumcellians perhaps) which M. Barlow says,
may spiritually be applied to our threatening, that such as take the Oath, shall
be accounted Apostataes, and to have renounced their first faith, and to be no
members of the Catholic Church: and finally that we shall remain branded in
everlasting record with Balaams infamy, that taught Balaac, to lay a scandal
(or occasion of fall) to the people of Israel.

To all which I answer, first, that he that lays forth the truth of
Catholic doctrine unto Catholic men, Who lay the scandal of Balaam,
Catholics or Protestants?
may not justly be said to threaten, or terrify, but to deal sincerely and
charitably with them, laying truth before their eyes, what their obligation is
to God, before man, and how they are bound as members of his true Catholic
Church, to hold and defend the unity and integrity of ^ayth, and doctrine
delivered by the same, though it be with never so much temporal danger. And as
for laying a scandal, whereby they may fall into the ruin of their souls, it
is easy to judge, whether we do it rather, that teach them to deal sincerely
with God and their Prince, whereby they shall preserve their peace, and alacrity
of conscience; or you that indeauo^r to induce th^^ ^^ swear, and do against
the same, whe^eby they shall be sure to leese both their peace in this life,
and their everlasting inheritance in the next.

THE ANSWER TO AN OBJECTION. BY OCCASION VVHEROF IT IS SHEVVED, THAT
POSSESSION and Prescription are good proofs ever in matters of Doctrine. AND
The contrary is fondly affirmed by M. Barlow. CHAP. V.
THERE remains now for the final end of this first Part, to examine an
objection that might be made by the adversary, which I thought good by
^^ticipation to satisfy in the very last number of the first part of my Letter.
And it was, that whereas we complain of so great pressures laid upon us for our
conscience, especially by this enforced Oath, some man may say^ that the li^^
course is held in the Catholic States against them whom we esteem as
heretics. I shall repeat my own words, and then see what M. Barlow
answers to the same.

Letter page 22.
Here if a man should object, quo^h I, that among us also, men are urged to
take Oaths, and to abjure their opinions in the Tribunalls of Inquisitions,
and the like, and consequently in this Oath they may be forced under punishment
to abjure the Popes temporal authority in dealing with Kings: I answer first,
that if any heretic, or other should be forced to ^biure his opinions, with
repugnance of conscience, it should be a sin to the inforcers, if they knew
it, or suspected it: neither is it practiced or^ permitted in any Catholic
Court, that eue^ I knew. But you will reply, that if he do it not, he shall be
punished by death, or otherwise, as the crime requires, and Canons appoint,
and consequently the like may be used toward Catholics, that will not
renounce their old opinions of the Popes authority. But here is a great
difference, for that the Catholic Church has ius acquisitum, ancient right
over heretics, as her true subjects, ^or that by their baptism, they were
made her subjects, and left her afterwards^ and went out of her; and she uses
but her ancient manner of proceeding against them, as against all other of
their kind and quality from the beginning. But the Protestant Church of England
has nullum iu^ acquisitum upon Catholics, that were in possession before
them, for many hundred years, as is evident: neither was there ever any such
Oath exacted at their hands, by any of their. Kings in former Catholic times^
neither is t^e^e by any Catholic foreign Monarch, now living upon (...) and
consequently, by no ^e^son or right at all, can English Catholic men, be
either forced or pressed to this Oath against their conscience, or be punished,
be^^^^, or destroyed, if for their conscience they refuse to take the same:
humbly offering notwithstanding to their Sovereign, to give him all other
dutiful satisfaction, for their temporal obedience and allegiance, which of
loyal Catholic subjects may be exacted. And this shall suffice for this
first point, concerning the contents and nature of this Oath.

This was my speech and conclusion then. And now shall we take a view how it is
confuted by M. Barlow. First be amplifyeth and exaggerateth with great
veheme^cy the torments and tortures of our Inquisitions, which are used, as he
says, M. Barlow speaks more then he can prove.
with the most extreme violence, that flesh can endure, or malice invent:
wherein he says more I think, then he knows, and more perhaps then he
belieueth, and at leastwise much more then is true in my knowledge. For of
twenty that are imprisoned there, not one lightly is touched with torture: and
when any is in the case, by law appointed, it is known to be more mildly, then
commonly in any other tribunal. But let us leave this as of least moment, and
depending only upon his asseueration, and my denial, and let us pass to that
which is of more importance, for justifying the cause it self, to wit, by what
right of power and authority, the Roman Church proceeds against heretics,
and how different it is from that whereby Protestants pretend to be able justly
to proceed against us for matters of Religion.

First of all he says, that I do take as granted, that the Church of Rome is
the Catholic Church, which we deny says he, and the chiefest learned of their
side could as yet never convict our denialls. Whereto I answer that if
themselves may be judges, that are most interessed in the controversy, I do
not marvel, though they never yield themselves for convicted. But if any
indifferent judgment or trial might be admitted, I do not doubt, but that
their euiction and co^uiction, would quickly appear: and many learned men of
our days have made most clear demonstrations thereof, by deducing the Roman
Church, doctrine, and faith, from the Apostles days, unto our times
successively, The success^o^ of the Church of Rome.
as namely Doctor Sanders his Book of Ecclesiastical Monarchy, Cardinal
Baronius in the continuation of his Annals, G^nebrar^ in his Chronology,
Cardinal Bellarmine in his controversies: two special Books also in English,
not long ago especially published about that matter, the Three (...) of
England, and the Answer to Sir Edward Cooks Reports, where it is showed, that
from age to age, after the Apostles, the self same Church of theirs was
continued throughout the world, with acknowledgment of the pre-eminence, and
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome in the same Church; which course of proof was
held also with the Ancient Fathers, S. Augustine, Tertullian, Irenaeus, and
others, that brought down the descent of the true Catholic Church, by the
succession of the Roman Bishops, as Heads of the same.

Barl. page 59. and 60.
M^ Barlow demands of me, in what sense I take the word Catholic, when I
suppose the Roman Church to be the Catholic Church? For if I take it (says
he) for Universal, then Rome being but a particular City, and the true
jurisdiction thereof, confined within a limited Diocese, or Province, the Roman
Church cannot be the Catholic or Universal Church, M. Barlows arguments
against the Church of Rome.
for that it is but a particular Province. But if (says he) I take Catholic,
for the profession of the true faith, as S. Cyprian does, calling that Church
of Africa, the Catholic Church, then cannot the Romish Church neither in this
sense be the Catholic Church: for that which the Prophet Esaias said of the Jews
Church, Her gould is mixed with dross, and she whose faith was plighted in
Christ, is become an Adultresse, may be said also of the Roman Church of this
day, and so cannot be the Catholic Church etc. Which are two such mighty
arguments, as well declare the poor man's misery in the defense of his cause.

For to the first I would ask M. Barlow whether one man may not have two
Jurisdictions, or rather one Jurisdiction extended differently to two things,
one more particular, the other more general. As for example, the Mayor of
London has his particular government first and immediately over his own house,
family, and peculiar lands, and yet besides that, he has jurisdiction also
over all the City. And to make the case more clear, let us suppose that he
has both the one and the other from the king^ shall it be a good argument to
say, that he is Governor of his own particular lands, house, and family,
which is known to be confined and limited to such a part of the City,
therefore he usurps by stiling himself lord Governor of the whole City? And
the like demand may be made of the Kings authority first and imediatly over
his Crown lands, which is peculiar unto him, and limited with confines, but
yet it impeacheth not his general authority over the whole Realm: The Pope
both particular Bishop of Rome, and yet chief Pastor of the whole Church.
Even so the Bishop of Rome has two relations or references, the one as a
several Bishop, over that people, and so had S. Peter who was Bishop of the
same place, even as S. James had of Jerusalem, S. John of Ephesus, and the
like: and besides this, he has an universal Superintendency and jurisdiction
given him over all, as Head of the rest. So as Catholics do not deny but that
the Church of Rome, as it makes a particular Province or Diocese, is a member
only of the Catholic Church, not the whole, though a principal and chief
member, by the reason of the emine^cy of her Pastor, and that the said Pastor
thereof is but a member also of the Catholic Church, but yet the chiefest
member, whereunto all the rest are subordinate, that is to say the head and guide
thereof. So as this is poor argument as you see.

But the second is more pitiful, if you consider it well: for if we take
Catholic, says he, for the profession of the true faith, as S. Cyprian did,
when he called the Church of Africa the Catholic Church; then cannot the
Romish Church be the Catholic Church. And why? for that her gould is mixed
with dross, as the Prophet Isay said of the Jewish Church in his time. M.
Barlowes bad argument which is false both in antecedent and consequent.
But here are two propositions, an antecedent, and consequent and both of them
false. The antecedent is, that as the Church of the Jews, in the Prophet Isay
his days, being in her corrupt state, was not the true teaching Church, in
respect of the naughty life used therein: so neither the Church of Rome in our
days being full of the same sins and bad life, can be the true Catholic
Church: this antecedent, I say, is most ^uidently false, and impertinent, for
that Isay the Prophet in the place cited, does not rep^^hend the Religion of
the Jews, but their life and ^^^ners; nor does he so much as name their Church
or Synagoge, or tax their false teaching. For albeit the wicked King Manasses
that afterward slew him, did perforce set up false Gods among the Jews: yet
did not only he, and other Prophets then living, to wit Oseas, Amos, Micheas,
I^^^, Joel, Nahum, Habacuc, with the whole Church and Synagog not admit the
same, but resisted also what they might, which is a sign that their faith was
pure and good. Wherefore Isay in this place alleged, names not their Church
or Religion, as has been said, but expressly names the City of Jerusalem,
and wicked livers therein, saying: Q^^modo facta es meretrix, Ciuitas fidelis,
plena iudicy? I^st^ia habitauit in ea, nunc autem homicidae. Argentum tuum
versum (...) in scoriam, vinum tuum mixtum aqua. How art thou made an harlot,
thou faithful City, that were once full of judgment, and justice dwelled
therein, but now murderers? Thy silver is turned into dross, and thy wine is
mixed with water.

Does here the Prophet speak of factes, think you, or else of faith? Of wicked
life, or of false doctrine? and if it be evident, that he speaks of manners,
as he does indeed, then how false is the dealing of M. Barlow, in bringing it
i^ for proof of false teaching, and to convince, that as the Church of the
Jews could not be the true Catholic Church of that time, in respect of the
corrupt ma^ners used in her: so cannot the Church of Rome at this day, for the
self same cause be the true Church?

But I would demand of M. Barlow, what other known Church had God in those
days wherein a man might find true doctrine, besides that of the Jews, which,
he says, was not the true Church? Will he say perhaps of the Gentills? But
they lived all in Idolatry. And if a Ge^tile would in those days have left his
Idolatry in the time of Isay the Prophet, and have desired to have been mad^
one of the people of God by true instruction, whither could he have gone for
the same, but only to the Jewish Church? And whither would Isay have sent him,
but to the Governors thereof? Both false and impious then, is this antecedent
about the Jews Church, but much more the consequent that would draw in the
Roman Christian Church by this example, Evil life does not prejudice truth of
doctrine.
which has no similitude or connection at all. For neither can he prove that
it has such corruption in it, either in life, or doctrine, as he pretends:
nor if it had in life, does it prejudice the truth of Doctrine, as by the
testimony of our Saviors own words we remain assured.

These two objections then, that the Roman Church for that she has a
determinate Province, as also for that she has sundry evil livers in her,
are showed to be of no force at all. Not the later, for that evil manners may
stand with true doctrine: not the first, for that we do not say the Roman
Church is the whole Catholic Church but a chief member thereof, as has been
said: whereby also will appear what we mean by the name of the Catholic
Church, to wit, that visible universal Church, which being erected and founded
by Christ our Savior, when he was upon earth, has continued ever since and
descended visibly from age to age, by succession of Bishops throughout all
Christendom unto our times, and shall so continue unto the worlds end: by
which description may appear also how vain another objection is of M. Barlow,
in these words: If Vincentius rule be true, that that only is to be accounted
Catholic Doctrine, Barl. p. 60.
quod semper, vbique, and ab omnibus creditum est, neither shall Rome be proved
Catholic, nor England heretic: when any of these is soundly determined,
then let him plead her Ius acquisitum.

VVhereto I answer, that the rule of Vincentius is verified, by that which I
have said before, of the nature of the Catholic Church, to wit, that it began
under Christ, and has descended from age to age, and so she teaches, quod
semper creditum est. And for that she has embraced all nations, she teaches
quod vbique, in respect of place: and for that she has union of Doctrine,
she teaches quod ab omnibus creditum est. For albeit there h^^^ not wanted
heretics from time to time, that have de^ised particular doctrines, and
erected particular congregations: yet were they nothing in respect of the
universal consent of those of the Catholic Church, whose I^^ acquisitum, or
ancient right and power, upon all Heretics for their correction and
punishment, I said, was manifest, for that by baptism they were made her
subjects. Unto which point M. Barlow would seem now to say somewhat, M.
Barlowes Ministerial phrases of indument and stripping.
though never so impertinent: therefore he tells us a tale of an indument,
and a stripping to be considered in Baptism, under the words, Credo, and
Abre^^^^i^, and that neither the spiritual mystery, nor the prescribed form,
nor intended effect of Baptism do make him and his liable to Rome.

Whereunto I answer, that the whole action in that Sacrament without so many
divisions and subdiuisions, as here he makes to obscure the matter, does make
him and all other Christians liable to the Catholic Church. For that every man
that is baptized, as he is made a member and servant of Christ thereby, By
Baptism we are made members of the Church.
and enters into his Church, as by the first door; so is he made a subject to
the said Church, and is liable to her correction, if he should renounce,
change, or pervert that faith, which there he professes as a child of the said
Church. And all this I think M. Barlow will not deny: but only his question
may be of such as are baptized out of the Catholic Church, by some Heretical
Congregation; yet notwithstanding the matter is clear, for that such baptism
houlding only so far forth as they have intention to do that in their
baptism, which the true Catholic Church does, and use the form of words
which the said Church prescribes, to wit, I baptize thee in the name of the
Father^ (...) the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for that otherwise if either of
these conditions, to wit, either the form, or the intention of the Catholic
Church do fail, the baptism is not auaylable: it is evident, I say, that
such as are so baptized out of the Church, are liable notwithstanding to the
same, for any offense that they shall commit against the faith of the said
Catholic Church; for so much as their baptism had relation to this Church, as
is now declared.

And albeit they be departed from the same, either by their own wilfulnes, or
other men^ induceme^ts: yet remains still that obligation of subjection. Which
superiority o^ the Catholic Church practiced from time to time upon Heretics,
Protestants gone out of the Catholic Church, not Catholics out of the^.
and Schismatikes, that have gone forth from her (which the Adversary will also
grant for sundry ages after Christ) cannot be pretended by the Protestant
Church upon Catholics: for that we went not out of them, but they out of us,
which in England is most perspicuous. For that since our first Conversion by S.
Augustine the Monk to Christian Religion, it cannot be said with any show of
probability, that ever there was a Protestant Church exta^t^ and visible, or
publicly received in our Country, as the Roman has been: and consequently we
English Catholics cannot be said to have gone out of them, but they out of us:
and so by their baptism and admission to Christianity, they are liable to the
Roman Catholic Church, in matters of Religion; and not the Roman Church to
them.

But now besides this reason of obligation by baptism, I do allege another of
former possession and prescription, whereby the English Catholic Church has
had, and exercised this power of punishing Sectaries from time to time:
whereunto M. Barlow answers in a strange manner. Possession, Barl. p. 62^
says he, for hold, and Prescription for time, may be Pleas in civil
Courts; but not sound arguments in case of Religion. Which is so absurd an
answer, as nothing could more show and declare, that he had nothing to say,
then this. For if we suppose that to be true which Christ our Savior
affirms in the Gospel that the good corn was first soon, Matt^. 13^
and that the Darnell was over sprinkled afterward, and that truth of
Christian religion was first planted by our Sa^iour, and heresies afterward
sprung up, then are the Antiquity of possession, and the Plea of Prescription
very excellent good arguments to convince all Heretics: for that the former
must need^ be true, Antiquity and prescriptio^ good arguments in case of
Religion.
and the later must needs be false. For which cause old Tertullian writing in
the second age after Christ against heretics, thought good to entitle his
book, de Praescripti^^^bu^, of Prescriptio^s, showing thereby, that heretics are
by no way so evidently convinced, as by Prescription and Priority of time. And
first of all he gives this general rule by allusion to our Saviors words
before repeated, of good corn and darnell: Ex ipso ordine manifestatur id esse
Dominicum and rerum, quod est prius traditum: id autem extraneum and ^alsum,
quod est posteri^s immiss^m. Matthew. 13.
By the order it self of sowing the corn and darnell^ it is made manifest,
that to be true and pertaining to our Lord which was first delivered, and that
to be false and forreyne, which is thrust in afterward.

And then passing to examine particular heresies, and beginning with them that
pretended to be of greatest antiquity, yea from the Apostles times themselves,
he gives also a Prescription how to try them. If any heresies (says he) dare
presume to thrust themselves into the Apostles age, edant origines Ecclesiarum
suarum, euoluant ordines Episcoporum, let them publish the beginninges of their
Churches, and let them lay forth the order and succession of their Bishops. And
with this he thought their mouths stopped. And yet in another place he canua^eth
the^ again with the same Prescription, saying: Qui estis vos? vnde, and quando
venistis? vbi tam diu latuistis? What are you? whence, and when came you? and
where have you lurked so long? signifying herby that the Priority of time was a
great argument against them.

And furthermore he disputing against Marcion the Heretic, has these words:
Tertul. aduers. Marc. lib. 4.
Ego dico meum Euangelium verum, Marcion suum etc. I say that my Gospel is
true, and Marcio^ faith his: I do affirm Marcion to have falsified, and
Marcion says I have done it: who shall determine the matter between us, but the
difference of time, that will give Authority to that which shall be found to be
most ancient, and pronounce that to be corrupted which shall be proved to be the
later? So as here supposing that which before we have touched, that Catholic
doctrine was planted first, before any heresy sprang up, by the Prescription of
time, The Fathers do urge prescription.
is not only a sound argument in case of religion (which fondly M. Barlow
denies) but a conuincent demonstration also of truth; and to that effect used
commonly by all Fathers, that wrote against Heretics after Tertullian. Tarde
mihi (says ancient Hilarious against the Arians) hos pijssimos Doctores ^ta^
nunc huiu^ saeculi protulit, s^r^ h^s habui^ fides mea magistros. Hilar. lib.
6. De Trinitate, ante medium.
Too late has this present age brought ^orth these pious Doctors (he speaks
in scorn) too late are they come to be masters of my faith. And S. Hierome
writing against the Luci^erian Heretics, uses the same argument: Ex h^c ipso
(says he) qu^d posterius instituti sunt, ^os ess^ indica^t ^^os ^uturos
Apostolus annunci^^i^. Even by this it ^el^e, that Luci^erans have risen up
later, they show themselves to be those deceyuing Heretics, of whom the
Apostle does forwarn us, and bid us take heed of. And the same S. Hierom
talking to an Heretic, says: Hier. Epis^^ ad Pa^nachium.
Cur post quadringentos annos d^cere ^os ^iteris, quod ante nesciuimus? vsque
ad hunc diem ^ine vestra doctrina Christianus mundus fuit. Wherefore after
four hundred years, do thou go about to teach us that which before we knew
not? Even until this day the Christian world has endu^ed without this your
doctrine. And to this effect I might allege the saying of many other Fathers,
who use this argument of Prescription of time as a principal demonstration
against Heretics and Heresies.

But let us hear the reasons alleged by M. Barlow, Page ^2.
why Possession for hold (for so are his words) and Prescription for time may
be Pleas in civil Courts, but no sound arguments in case of Religion. For the
first, says he, may be claim by intrusion, which is their case that plead for
Rome, and the other may be antiquity of error, for so is prescription without
verity: therefore when truth appears, let custom yield to truth, was the
conclusion of a Council. Council. Ca^thag. apu^ Cyprianu^.
So he. And cites in the margent Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian. But he that
shall read that Council of Carthage in S. Cyprian, shall find first that these
words are not a conclusion of a Council, but the saying of one Bishop in that
Council, to wit Zozimus of Tarassa: Bad dealing of M. Barlow.
and secondly M. Barlow well knows, or should know, that, that Council or
Synod was rejected after by a^ the Catholic Christian world, for tha^ it was
gathered in favor of rebaptization of heretics that were baptized in heresy,
as may appear largely in S. A^gustine in his book against the Donatists,
where he sets down the sentences of diverse of that Council, and among
other one of Zozimus, which he says was this: so it appears also in S.
Cyprian: Reuelatione facta veritatis, (...) error veritati, when the truth is
reueyled, let error yield to truth. Upon which words S. Augustine makes this
note, Noluit quide^ iste dicere consuetudinem, sed errorem. This Bishop would
not say that custom should yield, but error. And yet M. Barlow against the
testimony of them both would needs relate it otherwise, let custom yield to
truth, and say it was the Conclusion of a Council, which was neither of the
Council, nor any in the Council; for that sometims custom conteyneth truth it
self, and gives testimony to truth, and we know it to be truth by tradition
of custom: so as the ancient Fathers went warily herein, and not so rashly
against all kind of custom, as M. Barlow and his fellows and followers do.

But perhaps he will allege out of M. Morton and other his fellow-writers, the
saying of S. Cyprian himself in his Epistle ad Pompeium: Consuetudo sine
veritate, vetustas erroris est, Custom without truth, is antiquity of error:
which all men will grant, but makes nothing to our case. For we suppose true
religion to have been planted first by Christ and afterward heresy to have
risen: which supposall being true, the argument of the Fathers before mentioned
is most effectual. We were before you in Christian religion and you rose up
after us, How posse^sio^ with prescriptio^ are euincing arguments in m^tters of
faith.
professing a different faith from us: Ergo, our religion is Catholic, and
yours Heresy. For that this is to be accounted Catholic doctrine, as M. Barlow
before alleges himself out of Vincentius, quod semper creditum est, that
always has been believed since the beginning of Christianity; and so that
which is most ancient is truest. And where M. Barlow says, that possession may
be a claim by intrusion, it may be indeed in temporal possession, but not in
this our case, especially when it is joined with Prescription from antiquity.
For supposing that the true Catholic religion was first put in possession by
our Savior, and his Apostles, as has been said, and that it can be proved
that this possession has been continued by Prescription, time out of mind,
even from the beginning, as we offer to prove: and that on the contrary side no
known interruption can be showed of this possession, either by intrusion or
other wise, as M. Barlow cannot prove that there has been, nor does he go
about to prove it, though he blush not to say it; Possession in this case
together with Prescription does euince the verity of our cause.

And for the saying of S. Cyprian, That custom without verity is the antiquity
of error, though in it self it be true, yet does S. Augustine tell us, that
it was ill applied by S. Cyprian, against the custom of the Church in his
days, for not rebaptizing Heretics, when himself was in that error, that
they ought to be rebaptized, and the Catholics urged the force of custom, and
antiquity against him. But yet otherwise when he was out of that necessity of
defending an error, himself says, he did not only allow of custom, but also
did often urge the custom, and tradition of the Church for very good
arguments, and proves many Catholic doctrines thereby, as the necessity of
Chrisme or Unction, lib. 1. Epist. 12. the offering of wine together with
water in the Sacrifice, lib. 2. Epist. 3. saying that it is Dominica ^r^di^io,
a tradition of our Lord, and other like points of Christian religion, which he
proves by the like force of Tradition, Antiquity, and Prescription, Sober Rec.
cap. 3.. 101. etc.
whereof I have treated more largely in my Book against M. Morton, showing the
same more abundantly out of S. Augustine: and that both S. Augustine and S.
Cyprian are in this point and many others abused by him.

And so now to return to our argument of Possession and Prescription, and to
end also with the same this first Part of our Answ^re, I say, that Possession
and Pr^scription^ (...) has been declared, the cause of M. Barlow is utterly
o^erthrowne, for that he will be never able to prove, either Intrusio^ in our
Possession, or Error in our Antiquity; which for a final vpshot to the Reader
in this behalf, I shall demonstrate by this ensuing reason. If ever the
Protestant^ Church or Religion were received publicly in Christendom, from
Christ's time downward unto ours, that is to say, in any one or more ages, and
was that first visible Church that was founded by Christ, into which M. Barlow
says, that we entered afterward by intrusion and fi^^ ^orce, and so possessed
Christendom, in such sort as for many ages the said Protestant Church appeared
not publicly, until these our days, I would demand of M. Barlow, M. Barlow
hardly urged.
Whether this his Church so put to flight from the eyes of Christendom, did
perish, or lay hidden only. For if it perished, then the true Church of Christ
perished, and the promises made by him, were not performed, Matthew. vlt.
That he wo^ld be with the same unto the end of the world: That the gates of
hell should not prevail against it: Matthew. 16.
for that in this case, the said hell should have prevailed. Moreover I would
demand, if she once perished how could she be raised to life again? In which
case S. Augustine writing against the Donatists, says thus: Si peri^t
Ecclesia, vnde ergo Donatus apparuit? Dic de qua terra germinauit? De quo mari
emersit? De quo caelo cecidit? If the true Church did perish, from whence is
Donatus come unto us? Out of what ground is he sprung? Out of what sea has he
peept? From what heaven is he fallen? which S. Augustin^ says, for that if the
true Church were perished before Donatus was borne, in what Church was he
borne, and how came he into the true Church, that now he braggeth of? and how
did that Church rise from death to life again!

But if M. Barlow will say, that the Protestant Church which flourished in, and
after the Apostles times, did not perish, but fled only into the wilderness, and
lay hidden, being spread visibly before over all the whole world (for so he
must say, if she were the Catholic Church:) then would I demand him, whether
this Church being thus in exile, and covert, but yet living, did make
profession of her faith or not, and if she made profession thereof, as she was
bound, for that as S. Paul says to the Romans, Ore (...) a^ salutem;
Confession of our faith is necessary to our salvation: then by this confession
she must needs make her self known, as Martyrs, and Confessors did in time
of persecution, and then she cannot be said to have layen hidden, and covert
from the sight of the world, no more then the Christian Church lay hidden in
the time of persecution, in Rome, and other places, when men and women lay in
caves under ground, but yet the confession of their faith appeared unto the
whole world: and no more then the Catholic religion may be said to ly hidden
now at this day in England, when all Christendom can be witness of their
Confession of the Catholic faith: which point I think M. Barlow does not take
upon him to prove of the Protestants Confession in ancient ages.

If then he will say, that the said Church lay altogether hidden indeed,
without any public confession of their faith: then must he confess that the
state and condition of this Church which was the only true Church which Christ
had upon earth, and of whose exceeding glory the Prophets did foretell so many
wonderful things, was more miserable then any least Sect of heretics that
ever was; ye^ then the Church of the Jews themselves in any of their
Captiuities; for that still they confessed their religion, and every Sect did
the like in their times, and had some meeting or Congregation and exercises of
their Religion, registered by some Authors, which the Protestant Church of this
our age cannot prove to have had visibly in the world, and dstinct from other
people in any age before ours. And this demonstration is sufficient to convince
the vanity of M. Barlow his assertion, that Possession and Prescription for
time, are no good arguments in case of Religion.

The last point which he touches, as he passes it over very sleigtly, so
shall I as briefly answer the same. I said in my Letter that among other
considerations, this was one very considerable, that there was never any such
Oath as this is, exacted at the hands of Catholic subjects, either by any of
their own Kings, or Princes at home in former Cat^olick times: ^or yet by any
^orraine King, or Monarch now living upon earth. No such Oath ever exa^ted by
other Princes.
Whereunto I may also add, if I be not deceived, all Protestant Princes in
other Countries, of whom I never heard or read, tha^ they odered such Oaths
to their subjects that were of different opinion in religion: all which M.
Barlow in effect confessing, or not contradicting, says: Barl. page 62.
If other Princes (...) not the like, we judge them not: perhaps it is in some
of them an infused persuasion, that it is not lawful: in others peradventure
it is a violent restraint, yea gladly they would, but cannot be suffered. Where
you see that all his answers goes by i^s and ands, perhaps and peraduentures,
and yet is the matter of moment, and sequel, if it be well pondered, to take a
course of extraordinary rigor, different from all other Christian Princes
besides.

It is not the Parasiticall flattery of a few Ministers at home, respecting
their own trenchers, will work the State so much honor and security, as the
general mislikes and murmurations abroad, may work the contrary in time. He
says, that his Majesty wanted not a motive to take this course, for that the
Pope was not so insolently busy with any nation, as of late with his Majesty,
and his Kingdom. He adds further, that if it had not been for him, our
gracious King might have enjoyed a peace more continual and happy, then
Solomon or Augustus.

But I would ask him out of passion, if ever he be void thereof, as by report
he is very seldom, what insolency has this Pope showed in being busy, as he
calls it, with his Majesty's Person, State, or Realm? For as for his Person
he has always honored the same, both before he was Pope and after, whereof
many evident testimonies might be alleged: and for his State and Kingdom,
while he was in Scotland, neither he, nor his Predecessors did go about to
trouble the same, in almost forty years, while he reigned there: all troubles
came from Protestants and their Ministers. And when his Majesty was called into
England, the Pope that then was, by this man's counsel principally, as it may
be presumed, for that he was Protector of Scotland, wrote to the Catholics
to further their Obedience toward him. He never meddled in any thing, until
this Oath so prejudicial unto his Authority, and unto the Consciences of
Catholics was proposed and urged.

And as for the peace here named, more continual and happy then that of
Solomon or Augustus, which M. Barlow says might be enjoyed by his Majesty,
with his Subjects, if the Pope were not: it is well, that he will so much as
name peace, who seems in all his speeches, to sow the seeds of wars,
hatred, and contention. But if his mind were to peace indeed, he cannot be so
simple, but to see, that the rigorous and afflictiue courses used, and this, as
all men take it, by the instigation of those of his coat and order, cannot be
means to peace of minds, howsoever otherwise they live in external quietness
and deuoyd of tumults. And this is all, that for the present I have to write in
this matter.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART, About the Breues of Paulus Quintus.
CONCERNING M. BARLOVVE His exorbitant flattery in exaggerating Queen
Elizabeth's Virtues, and Sanctity. CHAP. I.
OUR purpose then, being as now we have declared, to touch some principal
points only, handled by M. Barlow in this second and third Part of his answer,
About Q. Elizabeth's reign, life, and death,
we shall begin with the point he most stands upon, dilating himself for
twenty leaves together concerning Queen Elizabeth her reign, life, and
death, as an argument very plausible in his opinion, and capable not only of
his railing eloquence, and odious amplifications, but of all gross and abject
flattery in like manner; together with some hopes of other gains also that
way, whereunto it seems that the poor man has his tongue and pen most ready
to the sale at all turns and occasions offered. But it may be before we end
this conference, his market may be more then half marred in the judgment, at
least of disappassionate men, and especially with his most Excellent Majesty,
whom above all other he seeks to gull in this matter, turning all upon him,
which I both spoke and meant to a Minister of M. Barlowes own rank: and so I
disclaim from the calumnious imputation, that it concerns any way his
Highness, and shall answer all in the same sense which I then wrote, and
meant the same; reserving all dutyfull and respective reference to his
Majesty's Person and Judgment, as bounden duty obliges me.

First then occasion being offered, or rather necessity imposed to speak of
Queen Elizabeth: for that albeit the Pope had not so much as named her in any
of his two Breues, yet had the Apologer brought in her mention with many high
praises, for disgrasing of Catholics, and their cause, and for scorn to the
Pope, as though he had without cause pittyed and mourned their afflictions
under her, which he says was none at all, for that to his own knowledge she
never punished any Papist for Religion. For these causes, I say, I was forced
in my Letter, to say somewhat to this assertiue proposition, whereunto the
tribulations, afflictions, calamities, spoils, exiles, and blood of so many
shed by her, did manifestly in the eyes and ears of al men and women that have
lived in our days, contradict and reclaim. And yet did I resolve to do the
same as mildly and sparingly as I might, answering only the words of the
Apology, and abstayning purposely from al bitterness of speech, so far as the
just defense of the cause permitted, and so shall continue (...) Barlowes most
intemperate provocation to the contrary.

Whereas then in reciting the words of the Apologer, I mentioned these:
Having, says he, sacrificed, as I may say, to the Manes of my defunct
Sovereign, as well for the discharge of my particular duty, as love of
verity, I must now perform my d^ty also to his Majesty present etc. Upon
which words I noted that the phrase of sacrificing to the Queens Manes, or
Ghostes, seemed to me very profane, as proper to the Pagan Sacrifices, used to
those infernal spirits which they called Gods, and hurtful Gods, and therefore
endeauored to please them with sacrifices. My words and discourse were these.

But as for his heathen profane sacrificing to the Manes or Hob-goblins of his
late Lady, I confess it is an office fitter for a Protestant-Minister, Let.
p. 27.
that thinks it unlawful to pray for her soul, to deal with her Manes, or
infernal spirits, then with Celestial, Queen Elizabeth her Manes
by praying for her to Saints. But would God these Manes might now have license
to appear, and talk which him, and relate what passes with her, after all
this ioylity, and ruff in this world; I doubt not but they would cool his
excessive vain of flattering vanity. For if all the old platform of Saints
lives, prescribed in Scriptures, and practiced by the servants of God, were not
erroneous and vain, as much fasting, continual prayer, daily mortification,
frequent recollection, diligent chastisement of their bodies, humble and
fervent devotion, laboring and working their salvation in fear and trembling,
abundant almes-deedes, haire-cloth and ashes, contrition, sorrow and sobbing
for their sins: if these things (I say) were the ancient ways to life, and
everlasting salvation: then must the paths of Queen Elizabeth, which are
known by most men, to have been either wholly different, or most opposite to
these, led to another opposite end, quia vnusquisque recipiet secundum opera
s^^. Every one shall receive according to his, or her works: and the sentence
of the Apostle is clear and resolute: Si secundum carnem vixeritis, moriemini;
si facta carnis spiritu mortificaueritis vi^etis: if you live according to the
flesh you shall die; but if you shall mortify by spirit the works of the
flesh, you shall live, that is, to life everlasting.

About these words of mine M. Barlow takes occasion to make very large
discourses, and to dilate himself in three or four points ^xceedingly. First
in the excessive praises of the Queen; then in superlatiue raylinges against
me; thirdly in justifying the phrase of sacrificing to the dead Queens ghost;
and fourthly in setting out her frequent mortifications, that she used: but yet
in such sort, as he well shows, not only not to feel what mortification is
in it self, but neither to understand what he says, nor whereof he affirms.

In the first point of Queen Elizabeth's praises he straineth his eloquence or
rather loquence to the uttermost, M. Barlowes flattering loquence.
as though neither the earth whilst she was here, nor scarce heaven where now
he assures us she is, were worthy of her: She was a daughter of the blood
Royal, says he, borne to the Crown, in the Prophets words, from the birth,
from the womb, Barl. 64.
from the conception, a Princess advanced to the Crown in apparen^ right, and
by uncontrollable succession etc. Thus he says, and yet does the world know
what store of controversies was about that succession, and lawfullnes thereof,
and they are extant in their own Statutes yet in print; so as this man talks
that which he thinks to be most acceptable, and fit for his present purpose
of adulation more then what he finds written or registered, or belieueth
himself for that matter; and such as know the man, and his constitution, are
of opinion, that if his Majesty that now is, had come into England with that
mind, which his Noble Mother and her husband the King of France are known
once to have had, to claim and justify her title, presently after the death of
Queen Mary (for so does Doctor Sanders t^stifie that they had that mind, and
began to put the arms of England upon all the said Queen^ plate, but that by
the peace made, and Calis released unto the^ for the same, they were pacified
for that time) it is to be presumed that his Majesty if he had prevailed in
his pretense, that he should have found no one man more fit or ready in
England, or Scotland, to have gone up to Paul's Cross, or to any other place
else, to justify his Majesty's Mothers pretense, against Queen Elizabeth, or
to disgrace her whom now he extolleth so much, even in this point of
legitimation, from the belly, from the womb, from the conception, by apparent
right, incontrolable succession, and the like.

But now the wind blows another way, and he follows the blast, and turns
his sails according to the weather: M. Barl. turns with the wynd like a
weathercocke.
let us then hear him out further. She was (says he) an Imperial Monarch, a
famous Empress, or rather the very Empress of ^ame, blazoned out, not by
homebred favorites, but by foreign trauailers, and writers, before and since
her death, yea, ^uen by her enemies, both for Religion, and war, to be in her
time, and for her Sex, the star of Sovereignty, the mirror of Principality,
a terror to her enemies, the Loadstone of Majesty, drawing unto her both
Ambassadors Christian, and not Christian, only for enterview, and salutation,
but in truth for view, and admiration: for when they had satisfied themselves
with her sight (and hardly could they be satisfied) what Saba's Queen once
said of King Solomon, they all concluded of her, that which often falls not
out, says the Orator, their eyes had overcome their ears, and truth had
out-strip^ fame, report was less then verity, and her renown was far short of
her desert. Thus far our Orator. And does he not seem to speak well for his
fee?

But yet when he tells us how his famous Empress or Empress of fame, is
blazoned not only at home, but abroad by foreign writers, Queen Elizabeth
otherwise blazoned by foreign writers then M. Barlow reports.
he will not forget I hope to remember, that she is blazoned by many of them
in far other colors then here he painteth her out: and this partly in
respect of her hard measure toward Catholics, whose religion she professed
under Queen Mary, and made many fair promises of continuance therein; for the
breach whereof, and contrary proceeding afterward when she came to the Crown,
she sustained so hard a conceit and bad opinion of all forrayne Princes,
people, and Kingdoms Catholic, as the memory perhapes of no one Christian
Prince or Princess that ever lived, is more ungrateful and odious to them.
And this is the very truth notwithstanding all this parasiticall flattery of
the Minister: which I speak as God knows with great compassion toward her,
and our Country, for her sake, and not with any humor of revenge, insultation,
or exprobratio^ against her. The histories are extant, their speeches and
judgments are known to such as do travail foreign Countries, and with
indifferency and attention do mark what passes among them.

But yet this man sitting at home in his warm chamber, goes further in his
exaltations of her: and to pretermit many, as ouerlong for this place, he
says, Barlow. p. 66. and 67.
That all her actions, being Royally virtuous, virtuously religious, and
religiously wise; her wisdom seasoned her religion, her religion sanctified
her policyes, her polices graced her descent, all of them together wrought her
immortality, and her immortality is accompayned with renown upon earth, and
reward in heaven. So he, and much more, which I pretermit as idle froath of a
flattering tongue, who takes upon him also to Canonize her with the term of
Eternized Saint, and affirms resolutely, that she never blemi^hed her s^l^e
with vice criminal, or continued, for so are his words. And what he means
by continued, Q. Elizabeth Canonized for a Saint by M. Barlow.
I know not, exept he means as the word imports, that she continued not
from vice to vice without interruption, which had been horrible to have done
(if not impossible) or had perseuered continually in one and the self same
vice criminal, which had been as bad if not worse. He avouches further of
her, that she never in her life committed hellish crime; whereby I suppose, he
means mortal sin, for that the pain and punishment thereof is hell,
according to S. Paul's doctrine, and then I confess that this were to be
accounted an extraordinary sanctity indeed, Q. Elizabeth in M. Barl. his
judgment never co^mitt^d an^ mortal sin.
that a woman brought up in such liberty, for so many years together, in so
corrupt a time (who as M. Barlow here tells us, was no Cloystred-Nun, but a
Queen that lived in all prosperity in the midest of all temptations and
allurements, both of Satan, the flesh, and the world) should never commit so
much as one mortal sin.

But I would ask M. Barlow, how he comes to know this secret? did he ever
hear her Confession? For if he did, he might with far better conscience utter
her virtues known thereby, to her praise, and to the edification of others,
then he did the Earl of Essex his vices, to his infamy, and other men's
scandal. But I for my part do think, that albeit Queen Elizabeth went often
to confession in Queen Mary's days, yet from that time to her death, which
was more then forty years, she never took the benefit of that Sacrament; Q.
Elizabeth would never have chosen M. Barlow for her ghostly Father.
in which long time we may well imagine what store of dust a house much
frequented would have gathered, that had never been swep^ in so long a space.
And albeit she had had, both grace, will, and time to confess her sins, yet do
I believe that she would never have chosen M. Barlow for her Confessor, and
Ghostly Father; and consequently all that he talks here of her vices
criminal, and not continued, and of hellish crimes never committed, is spoken
without book, upon no greater ground, then that he lists to say and write so
of her. And this shall serve for the first point, concerning his excessive
praises of Queen Elizabeth, though we shall have occasion to handle somewhat
thereof again in the fourth point about her mortifications.

Touching the second point then of impotent and exorbitant railing; albeit much
were to be said; yet do I not mean to loose time in the repeating thereof, or
injury the ears of grave and modest men with hearing such contemptible
matter: it is revenge enough for me to understand by diverse ways, as I do,
that his own friends do condemn him, and think contemptuously of him, for
entering into such an odious kind of writing. And for other that are different
from him in religion, though they think him not worthy of any Answer, that
takes such a course; yet have I thought good for this once to bestow so much
pains as to run his Book over, and to return him answer to other points,
though not to this, but yet so, as by those other points which I handle, the
man's spirit may be so well known, as none will marvel that he took so
dishonest and impudent a course of virule^t railing.

As for the third point of sacrificing to the Manes or Ghostes of the dead
Queen Elizabeth, true it is, that supposing my self to have to do with a
Minister, that used the phrase, About Q. Elizabeth's Manes and sacrificing unto
the^.
in the case he did, I noted it as Heathenish and profane, in respect of both
words, to wit sacrificing to Ghost, especially Infernal, himself being enemy
to all Christian Sacrifice, or prayers for souls Christianly departed, or
intercession to be made for them to Saints in heaven, that are Supernall
Ghosts, and not Infernal. By which occasion M. Barlow takes matter to dilate
himself much (as he does willingly when he finds any thing to talk of,
though never so impertinent) to prove that this phrase of sacrificing to dead
Ghosts, though it were proper to the Gentiles and Pagans, may also be used of
Christians in a good sense: Barl. p. 74.
Especially, says he, it being used by his Majesty, as a borrowed phrase, and
uttered with a deprecatory parenthesis, as it were in modesty, asking leave for
the passage thereof, secretly thereby insinuating, that otherwise, it was that
which among the Rhetoritians is called audax Metaphora, a bold Metaphore.

Whereunto I answer, that with all these circumstances I see no difficulty, but
that the phrase may be used, especially by audax Metaphora, and by so great a
Prince, whose license in speech good reason allows to be larger then other
men: nor had I ever put difficulty in the phrase, if I had known it to have
come from his Majesty. But for a Minister to be so bold in his audacious
Metaphors, seemed not so tolerable: so as in the thing it self, supposing the
former qualifications, I have no further controversy. But yet I must note,
that the arguments scraped together by M. Barlow, Hierom. E^ist. ad Romans
Orat^^em. August. de D^^tr. Chris^ian.
for allowance of the phrase, are nothing worth at all. For that first the
testimonies here quoted by him, though at random, of S. Hierome, S. Augustine
and S. Basil, affirming that we may use the learning of the Gentiles to the
advancement of Christian Religion, as the Israelites did the spoils of the
Egyptians, are to be understood of such points of their learning, as may
piously be applied to our use, to wit their moral doctrine, Histories,
Philosophy, Examples, Sentences, Comparisons and the like, but yet do not allow
that we should use the peculiar phrases of their Idolatrous worship, about the
mysteries of our Christian Religion, as certain new profane companions of our
age have done, I mean Castalio and others, calling God, Jupiter, and our B.
Lady Diana, and the like.

Nor do the other examples alleged by M. Barlow for proof and allowance of
any such profane use, M. Barl. his trifling.
mak^ anything to the matter in hand, and consequently they are brought in by
him to no purpose at all, but to spend time and paper without vtility. For what
makes it to our purpose if S. Luke in the narration of S. Paul's navigations to
Rome, Act. 28. v. 11.
do say that the ship of Alexandria wherein he went had for his badge the sign
of ^astor and Pollux, the children of Jupiter, according to the fables of
Gentilitie? Or what if S. Peter in his second Epistle speaking of the damnation
of the wicked Angels, 2. Pet. 2. 4.
do name these chains of darkness wherewith they are bound in hell; which words
of chains and hell, are to be found in Poets? Is this a sufficient proof that
Pagan phrases concerning matters of religion may be used also in our Divinity?
I pretermit his idle bringing in of S. Paul, that used half a verse of Aratus,
a heathen Poet, when he spoke in the Council house of the Areopagus in Athens;
Act. 17. 28.
as also Nazianzen and Origin, for using the two proverbs Orci galea and
Plutonis cassis, for that these things are lawful, as before we have said, nor
have they any similitude at all with the phrase in controversy of sacrificing
to Queen Elizabeth's Manes, for that this being heathenish in the sense of both
words, to wit, of sacrificing, and of In^ernall spirits, and applied by the
Author of the Apology, to the Christian duty to be performed to a Christian
soul deceased, conteyneth much more in it, then those other Poetical words,
used to no such end, by the Christian Authors.

Nor is that worth the answering, which is brought in out of the Epistle of
Iustus Baronius, not long since converted from Caluins Sect, to the Catholic
Church, where recounting his journey through Millayn^ he says, that amongst
other Relics, they were brought to see the shrine where the Manes Ambrosij
iunioris Borrh^maei were contained, that is to say, the memory and relics of
the younger Ambrose, to wit Cardinal Borrh^maeus, which M. Barlow thinks to
be a great testimony against me: but indeed is none at all. For nowsoeuer this
man newly converted from being a Protestant, did use also some part of M.
Barl^^^s audax Metaphora, which he very well approves, and that this word
Manes, being used alone may metaphorically have some such sense, as the
Relics or memory of men departed: yet did he not use the whole phrase of
parent are Man^a^, to sacrifice unto the Manes of any body departed, which is
not used or permitted in Catholic Religion, to sacrifice unto the relics or
memory of any man dead, but only to offer sacrifice to God for them, if they
stand i^ need thereof. And thus much for this.

ABOUT QVEENE Elizabeth her Mortifications. And of the nature of that Virtue..
II.
THere remains the fourth point concerning Queen Elizabeth's Mortifications,
and Pe^nances voluntarily taken here in this life: whereof I said by just
occasion given, That if the old platform of Saints lives prescribed in
Scriptures, and practiced by the servants of God, were not erroneous and vain,
as much fasting, continual prayer, daily mortification, frequent recollection,
diligent chasticement of their bodies, abundant almsdeeds, hairecloath, and
ashes, and the like: if these things I say, were anciently accounted Viae
vitae, ways to life, as often and highly commended in the Scriptures by the
Holy Ghost, and practiced from time to time in the lives of the holiest men in
the Christian Church; then said I, must the ways and paths of Queen
Elizabeth's life which are known to be far different from these, be very
dangerous, and the end and success thereof not so assured of glory, as her
flatterers both promised her in her life, and now will needs after her death,
bear men down that it is performed.

To this M. Barlow answers in diverse sorts: first out of the Epistle of S.
Paul to the Romans, Romans 14.4.
What art thou that iudgest another man's servant, for so much as to his Lord he
stands or f^lleth? But this place is manifestly abused by M. Barlow, as are
commonly all other Scriptures alleged by him. For S. Paul speaks in this
place of indifferent things, as of eating and drinking, in which a man may not
condemn rashly another, In what cases a man may judge of another
Qui n^n manducat, manducantem non iudicet, he that eats not, let him not
judge him that eats. But touching our cause in hand, let him read the
sentence of the fame Apostle to Timothy, both clearly and resolutely set down,
1. Tim. 5. 24.
Querundam hominum peccata manisesta sunt, praecedentia ad iudicium: quosdam
antem subsequuntur. Similiter and bona facta manisesta sunt, and quae aliter se
habent, abscondi non p^ssunt. The ^innes of some men are manifest going before
the^ to judgment: but in some other they follow. And so in like manner good
works are manifest, and those that be otherwise cannot be hidden. Whereby it is
manifest in some cases, that a man may judge, or at least wise have a probable
conjecture (for Almighty God may alter in secret what to his divine wisdom
and mercy shall seem good) what end a Christian is like to ariue unto, by the
ways wherein he walks. And S. Paul himself does set down sundry particulars
in diverse places of his Epistles, in which he says that Christians shall not
be saved. So as this kind of judgment is not wholly forbidden, but rash
judgment only.

Secondly then M. Barlowe comes to lay hand on another answer, saying, Barl.
p. 75.
That fasting with a sower countenance, prayer in open places, dole of alms
with proclamations, are ensigns of hypocrites in our Saviors judgment. Whereto
I reply that these are but the abuses of good things, Matthew. 6.
which abuse the Servants of God flying, About external mortifications.
do retain the good use. Thirdly says he, (for he deuideth his proofs into
sundry heads, and all not worth a rush) such outward habits of mortification as
Jesuits term, of wearing of heare-cloth, and the like, 3. Reg. 2^. 27.
might argue Achab. who went barefoote in hayre-cloth and a^^es, to be a
mortified creature, as well as the seuerest self chastising Jesuit of you
all. So he. And this only example is sufficient to show, both the man's spirit,
and wit. His spirit in conte^ning and ^esting at that which God himself did so
highly esteem, his wit, that he sees not what makes for him, or against him.
As for the Jesuits, their Doctrine is, that all these external mortifications
are only so far forth gra^eful and acceptable to God, as they do proceed from
the internal mortification of the mind, and sorrow for their sins, and not
otherwise. And that this external mortification of Achab did so proceed, is
evident by the very words of Scripture, alleged by M. Barlow, which are
these: Achab truly mortified.
When Achab had heard the speeches of the Prophet Elias, he rent his garments,
and covered his flesh with haire-cloth and ^asted, and sl^pt in sakcloth and
walked with his head bowed douneward. And the word of God was made unto Elias,
saying, have thou not seen Achab humilia^ed before me? For so much then, as he
has humbled himself ^or my cause, I will not bring the evil upon him, which
I have threatened in h^^ days, but in the days o^ his Son. And let it be
marked, that he said humilitatus est mei causa, he has humbled him self for
my cause, which signified that it came from the heart, and from the sorrow that
he conceived, to have offended God: which is true internal mortification, and
made Achab, a true mortified or mortifying creature in that act, for which we
have God himself for a witness. Profane impiety in M. Barlow.
And it can be no less then profane impiety, and sinful secularity so
profanely to rest at it. But let us pass to another part of his Answer in
this matter.

Indeed, says he, she was no cloystered Nun. (to wit Queen Elizabeth: Q.
Elizabeth no cloystered Nun^e.
) And so I think to: and that the difference of their lives did show it. A
Queen she was (says M. Barlow) and a State She had to manage, a people to
gouerne^ and much business to attend, bodily exercise says the Apostle
profits nothing, b^t godliness, that is, a sound says with a good conscience
avayl^s ^ith God and argues a mind truly regenerate. This is M. Barlowes way
of mortification, not to meddle with Achabs contrition, humiliation, or
hayrecloth, nor with the lives of ^loystered Nuns, that serve God in the
austerity of Christian discipline, as fasting, praying, and other
mortification, but only he commends a sound ^aith with a good conscience,
which every man will easily persuade himself to have, especially if he believe
him in citing S. Paul to Timothy, as though the Apostle had called such
external mortifications, as fasting and the like, unprofitable ^odily
exercises, and that only a sound faith were piety. But this is as fraudulent
dealing as before: for that the Apostle his very manner of speech, Exerce ^e
ipsum ad pietatem, exercise thy self to piety, does show that he speaks of
good works and piety of life, and that he makes here a difference between
bodily exercise that has for his end, only the good of the body, and the
exercise of piety, which whether they be bodily or spiritual, are always
directed to a spiritual end. And so do the ancient Fathers understand the
words of exercise and piety, (...) especially such as best vnder^^ood the
force, and propriety of the Greek words, A place of S. Paul expounded
concerning bodily exercise.
as namely S. Chrysostom, who in his special Commentary upon this place of S.
Paul defines piety thus: pietas rectissima vitae norma est, and conuersationis
optimae disciplina: Piety is a most straight rule of life, containing the
discipline of a most excellent conversation, whereby only faith you see is
excluded. And then ^urther rejecting M. Barlows false interpretation of S.
Paul's words, as though he had meant fasting, and other external
mortifications, by corporal exercises which he calls less profitable, he
says, Ch^ysost. in comment. ad c. 4. in 1. Tim.
Quidam hoc Apostolum de ^eiunio aiunt dix^sse, sed prosecto errant: neque enim
est corporalis ex^ercitatio i^iunium, sed spiritualis. Nam si corporalis esset,
corpus profecto nutriret: cum autem id maceret and extenuet macieque conficiat,
corpor^lis dici omnino non potest. Some men (as M. Barlow) do say, that the
Apostle (speaking of unprofitable bodily exercise (means of fasting, but
truly they do err: for that fasting is no bodily exercise, but spiritual.
For if it were bodily, it would no doubt nourish the body: but whereas it does
chastise the body, extenuateth and makes it lean, it cannot any way be called
corporal. So he.

And if we will have the testimony of another as ancient as S. Chrysostom,
and most skill^ull in the Greek tongue wherein S. Paul writes these words,
though no Grecian borne; we may hear S. Hierome, who upon those words, of
Exerce te ipsum ad pietatem, exercise thy self to piety, sets down first
what piety is, saying Pietas est e^iam (...) tua tribulatione alijs subuenire,
Sicut Sareptana vidua seci^: Piety is to help other men even with thy own
tribulation as the poor, 3. Reg. 17.
widow of Sarepta did feed the Prophet Elias, with the bread that she had
reserved for her son and her self. And then as for corporal exercise, named
by the Apostle, he says it was meant of things belonging to the bodily health,
as Sanctarum balnearum, venationum and huiusmodi quae ad breue tempus carnali
proficiunt sanitati: holy bathes (such as holy men did use for help of their
health) hunting and other such bodily exercises for the same end, which do
profit to the health of the flesh but for a short time, which admonition is
thought to have been given by S. Paul to Timothy, as to a young man, that was
somewhat delighted with these bodily exercises, or counseled thereunto by
Phisitio^s for help of his said health. To which end also the said Apostle in
the same Epistle exhorts him not to drink water still, M. Barlow no friend
to mortifications.
but to use a little wine for help of his stomach, and in regard of his other
frequent infirmities. but yet would have him to exercise himself in the works
of piety, as now has been said. So as this place also of S. Paul has been
abused by M. Barlow his profane interpretation against external
mortifications.

But now lastly he comes near us indeed, and will show that Queen Elizabeth
her mortification was of another kind, perhaps not heard of before. Let us
hear his words: Fourthly (says he) to be a King, and to govern as a King
should do, is mortification of it self. This is the largest way (I suppose) of
mortification that he can lay before us: A strange kind of mortifica^^on.
for of this kind he will find, no doubt many mortified people, both of men and
women, that would be content to accept of this mortification, to be Kings and
Queens, and to govern well in their own conceits. For what Prince thi^keth
not, that he governs well, and not only Kings and Princes are to be
comprehended under this mortification, but proportionally also all other
Magistrates and Governors under them, who have one point more of mortification
lying upon them, then their Supreme Princes, for that they are liable to give
account to them, which the others are not, and consequently they are more
subject to mortification in their offices, and dignities; and yet most men do
seek after them, both in England and else where, which does show that there is
great store of mortified men in the world, or at leastwise of men that love
this mortification, and desire to be so mortified. And if to be a Bishop also
be a mortification, then has M. Barlow in like manner proved himself a
mortified man, and then those words of S. Paul to the Collossians, Mortificate
membra vestra quae sunt super terram: Mortify your members which are upon
earth, may have this sense also among other; do you mortify your self with some
good Bishopric, or other dignity, that in it self is a mortification. And do
we not see what profane trifling this is? And that by this drawing Christian
virtues out of their compass, true natures, and spheres, they do eneruate and
euacuate all their force, and bring their practice to a mere sound of words.

The Catholic doctrine is, that mortification is a most excellent Christian
virtue, commended highly in the Scriptures, Mortification.
and exercised by all Saints, and especially by our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles, and by the greatest Saints, and Servants of his, that have ensued in
his Church, as may appear as well by those words of S. Paul now recited, as
also these other to the Romans: Romans 8. 13^.
Si spiritu sacta carnis mortificaueritis, viuetis: If you shall mortify the
works of the flesh by spirit, you shall live. And then follows the contrary
set down in the same place. If you shall not mortify your said members, and
deeds of the flesh thereof ensuing, but shall live Secundum carnem, by obeying
the lust thereof, you shall die everlastingly. Whereby is also understood, the
nature of this excellent virtue, whose name of mortification is derived from
the word Mors, that signifies Death: for that as when death enters upon a
body and drives out the soul, the said body remains without sense, ^eling,
or other motion: so when this virtue of mortification is well exercised of a
Christian man, it does take a way the sensual life of our lusts and passions,
and does mortify them in their unlawful appetites, so as they remain as it
were feeble, cold, and dead, in resisting or rebelling against the superior
parts of the soul, directed by reason and religion. And this is that most
happy and excellent death so much desired by S. Augustine, when he said to God:
Aug. l. 1. confe^s. c. 5.
moriar, ne moriar, let me die, that I may not die: and good S. Bernard, Vti^am
hac morte ego frequenter cadam, vt euadam l^queos mortis, vt non sentiam vitae
luxurian^is mortisera blandimenta: Would to God I may often die this death, that
thereby I may escape the snares of the other death, and that I may not feel the
deadly flatterings and allurements of this present dissolute life. And then he
goes further to many particularities, saying: Bern sermon. 52. in Cant.
Vt obstupescam ad sensum libidinis, ad aestum auaritiae, ad iracundiae and
impatientiae stimulos, ad angoris solicitudinem, ad molestias cu^^rum: moriatur
anima mea morte i^s^^rum; bo^a mors quae non aufert, sed transfert in meltus.
Let me die by this death of mortification, that I may become sensles to the
feeling of carnal lusts, to the heat of covetousness, to the pricks of anger
and impatience, to the afflictions of solicitude, to the troubles of to many
cares: let my soul die with the death of just men; this is a good death, and
does not take life from me, but does change it to a better.

Thus that holy and devout Father of the works and effects of mortification,
and of his ardent love that he had thereunto. And the like I might most
abundantly show out of other Fathers, but it were ouerlong for this place. The
saying of S. Augustine upon the former words of S. Paul is general to all men:
Ser. 13 de verb^^ Apost.
Hoc est opus vestrum in hac vita, actiones carnis spiritu mortificare
quotidie, affl^gere, minue^e, fraenare, interi^ere: This is your work in this
life, to mortify daily the actions of the flesh, by spirit, and to afflict
them, diminish them, to bridle them, and to kill them. Which sense and feeling
of mortification, if M. Barlow had, and were of the same spirit, with these
holy men, he would never seek so many shifts to discredit the same, and to
make it contemptible as he does; first by scorning at fastings, prayers, and
a^me^^ed^, when by Hypocrites they are abused, which is nothing to the true
use, Strange kind of answering.
and consequently not to the purpose; then to disgrace the^, when they are well
used, by saying that they are bodily exercises, of small vtility; ^hen by
^e^ting at the sackcloath, ashes, and other penances, and external
mortifications, which God himself in King Achab approved, and took in great
good part; then i^ ^co^ting at the state of Nuns professing the like retired
li^e of mortification; then telling us further that the life of Queen
Elizabeth had ^ore mortification by living in a Court wh^re many temptations
were, then in a Monastery, which he proves out of Seneca, saying: Marcet enim
^^ne aduersario virtus: For virtue is sluggish where no adversary is. By which
consequence it follows that it is much better, and more excellent
mortificatio^s for young Ladies and Gentlewomen, to live in great Courts where
there be store of amourous young Knights and Gentl^men to tempt them, then to
live solitary, or retired from such Courts and companies, where no such
impugnation of the adversary is. And this is M. Barlowes good discipline for
women, which is far different from that which S. Cyprian prescribe^h in his
Book De disciplina. and habit^ Virginu^, no less then their two spirits are
different.

And lastly you see that he distracteth the word Mortification so far, as he
draws it to all dignity and honor, and that it is mortification to be a
King, Queen, or chief Governor, which are things most agreeable to man's
sensual desires, and opposite ^o mortification; though I would easily grant,
that if a man did hate and fli^ such dignities in him self, and that they were
forced upon him; of which sort of men S. Gregory writes Val^e destent quod
tarde ad patriam redeunt, and tolerare insuper honoris onera copell^^ur:
Gregor. 5. moral. c. ^.
they do greatly bewail that they return slowly to their Country (which is
heaven) and besides are forced to bear the burden of honors in the mean
space: Of these men I say who should so be forced against their wills to
sustain places of honor, as S. Gregory himself was, in taking the Popedom,
to such a man it is a mortification indeed to be a King, Prince, or Pope. But
this rises not out of the dignity it self as M. Barlow fondly teaches, but
out of the virtuous repugnance of the receivers will: so as if Queen
Elizabeth, to come to our proper case, did unwillingly and with repugnancy of
mind take the crown upon her, wh^^ Queen Mary died^ as S. Gregory did his
Popedom, then may it be said, that it was some mortification unto her;
otherwise it is ridiculous to make all high dignities and places of honor,
Mortification: for so much as every man does ordinarily feel in himself, an
inclination of our corrupt nature to desire them, which naturally
notwithstanding loves not mortification.

Moreover, whereas there are two parts and members of mortification, Two parts
of mortification, internal and external.
the one internal, the other external, the internal to mortify the inward
parts of our soul, both intellectual and sensual, as to deny a man's own
will, repress self love, subdue our iudgemen^ to the obedience of others,
repress the passions both of pride, anger, concupiscence and the like: another
part external, that mortifieth the body and outward senses thereof, making them
subject to reason by external punishments of the body, as by fastings,
watchings, and other chasticements of the same, which S. Paul testifyeth both
of himself, and the rest of the Apostles that they praised the same, which
being so, I would demand of M. Barlow, to which of these mortifications does a
Courtly and Princely life lead us, more then the state of a poor life. For as
denying a man's own will, it is far from Princes, to practice the same, who
endeavor rather to have their wills done, and that with reason: renunciation
also of the world and subduing of their own judgments, seems not so properly
to belong to that estate. And as for mortifying of passions, if they would
attempt to do it, their flatterers would not suffer them, for that they would
both say and swear, that every passion of theirs is a sound and solid virtue,
and every disordinate appetite a most just desire.

And if you pass further to external mortification, as often fasting, much
prayer, long watchings, course apparel, ^air-cloth, di^cipline, and the ^ike;
how unfit are they for a Court, or a Court for them? External mortification in
Princes.
Is not soft and brave apparel, delicate diet, banqueting, dancing, masking,
Comedies, loue-letters, and such other, more aggreable to that state and place?
Of the first our Savior himself testifies, Qui mollibus vestiuntur, in
domibus Regum sunt; and for the rest that they were grateful and familiar in
Queen Elizabeth her Court, and more frequented by her self then the other,
all men I think that were eye witnesses of the same will testify. Only there
wanted to the world a Divine, who by a new Theology should celebrate these
Courtly exercises for good mortifications; and now is sprung up M. William
Barlow, M. Barlow a Divine for the Court.
that has taken the matter upon him, and published it in print, making the
very state and condition of life it self, of being a Prince, to be a state of
mortification, and consequently also of penance (for that mortifications be
acts of penance) whereof it does ensue that Queen Elizabeth's life was a
penitential life, which is f^rre different from that store of felicity and
abundance of temporal consolation, which the Lord Cook describes with his
Copia and Inopia, which we shall handle afterward. And thus much of Queen
Elizabeth's Mortification.

There follows in my Book a word or two of her persecutions, for that it was
said in the Apology, Apol. page 16.

M. Barl. foolish shift in answering his Adversaries objection about the
Persecution under Q. Elizabeth. Let. pa^. 18.


first in general, that her Majesty never punished any Papist for Religion.
And again, that she was most free from all persecution. And yet further, that
she never meddled with the hard punishment of any Catholic, nor made any
rigorous law against them, before the Excom^^nication of pope Pius Quintus,
which was upon the year 1569. ^^d the eleventh of her Reign. Whereunto I
answered, that for punishments, all the Catholic Clergy of England were
deprived long before this for their religion, and many, as well Laymen as
Priests put in prison for the same, and multitude of others driven into
banishment of all sorts of people, whose names Doctor Sanders sets down in
his seventh book of his Visible Monarchy. The severe laws also against them
that refused to take the Oath of supremacy, and should say or hear mass, were
made long before this and put in practice: so as this narration could not
stand. What replyeth M. Barlow to this? Ni^il ad Rh^^^^ says he, the speech is
here of laws, whose pain is death. Yea Sir. And is it so? I refer me to the
words even now recited out of the Apology, that her Majesty never punished
any Papi^^ ^^^ Religion, that she was most free from all persecution; does not
all and any include other punishments besides death? Moreover when it is said
that she never made any rig^^ous laws against Catholics: does this only
comprehe^d the laws, whose punishment is death? To what straites is M. Barlow
driven here? And yet if he do remember well the oath of Suprem^cie, he cannot
but know, that the third refusal thereof is also death. So as every way the
poor man is taken.

OF QVEENE ELIZABETH HER FELICITIES, and infelicities. CHAP. II.
AFTER this follows another question between M. Barlow and me, about the
felicities or infelicities of Queen Elizabeth, or rather between the Lord
Justice Cook and me, who having upon diverse occasions to the exprobration of
Catholic men and religion, whom she pursued in her life time, enlarged
himself extraordinarily in her exaltation, calling her, The happy Queen, The
blessed Queen, and the like: I was forced for defense of the truth, to examine
somewhat the grounds of this felicity. My words then were,

That the said Lord Cook upon the occasion of certain words in Pope Clements
Breue, where Queen Elizabeth is named misera semina, a miserable woman (in
respect no doubt of the miseries of her soul, little respected by her:) upon
which words the Orator triumphs thus. Let. p. 29.
What miserable! it is said, that, miseria co^st^s ex duobus contrarys, copia
and inopia; copia tribulationis, and inopia consolationis, L. Cook in the book
of the late arraignme^t f^l. 53.
mi^erie consists of two contraries, of abundance, and penury, abundance of
tribulation, and penury of consolation. And then he shows in what abou^dance
of co^solations Q. Elizabeth lived in all her life, and without want of all
tribulation: which if it were true; yet is it but the argument which the
worldlinges used in the Psalm, to prove their felicity, that their Cellars
are full, their sheep fertile, Psalm. 143.
their kine fat, they suffer no loss, and then, Beat^^ dixeri n^ populim
cui^ac s^nt; happy did they call the people that had these things. But the
holy Ghost scorneth them, and so may all men do our Orator, that uses and
urges so base an argument, in so high a matter.

And as for his definition of misery, by copia and inopia, store and want, it
is a miserable one in deed, and never heard of before, I think, to come from
any man's mouth, but his own: it being ridiculous in Philosophy, and fit to be
applied to any thing that has either store or want. As a wise man in this sort
may be defined to be him, that has store of wit, and want of folly, and a
fool to be him, that has store of folly^ and want of wit: and so a rich man
is he, that has store of riches, and want of beggarie, and a poor man is he
that has store of beggarie, and penury of riches. And are not these goodly
definitions (think you) for so great and grave a man to produce?

Thus passed the matter then. But now M. Barlow does constitute himself
Advocate for the Justice, and if he plead his cause well, he will deserve a
good ^ee, for the cause it self is but weak, as presently you will behold.
The Lord Cook (says he) who at the Arraignement of Garnet indignantly
scorning that the high Priest of Rome should in a Breue of his call so great a
Prince (as Queen Elizabeth was) Miseram F^minam, Barl. p. 78.
a miserable woman, by a description of misery consisting of two contraries,
want of comfort, and plenty of tribulation, shows by many reasons, evident and
demonstratiue, that she, having abundance of joy, and no touch of affliction,
but blessed with all kind of felicities, could not be called Miserable etc. In
which words, M. Barlow very forgetful.
I would have you note first, that whereas here he says, that the Justice
showed this, by many reasons, evident and demonstratiue, within a dozen lines
after, he says of these reasons, But if they be not concluding demonstrations,
yet as least let them be probable persuasions, which is quite contrary to that
which he said before, that they were evident and demonstratiue, so soon the
man forgets himself. But to the matter it self, that albeit all these
temporal felicities ascribed to Queen Elizabeth had been so many, and so
great, as Sir Edward affirms them, yet had it been but the argument of
worldlings, who in the 143. Psalm, did measure their felicity by their full
Cellars, and were checked for the same by the holy Ghost, by teaching them that
not, Beatus populus cui haec sunt, but beatus populus cuius Dominus Deus eius:
and consequently that Queen Elizabeth might have these temporal felicities,
and yet be truly miserable in that sense wherein Pope Clement so called her, to
wit concerning the affairs of her soul, and everlasting salvation: To this, I
say, he answers first by demanding, why temporal prosperity may not be made
an argument of Gods love to Queen Elizabeth, and of her felicity, for so much
as it is scored up for one of the Notes of the true Church by Cardinal
Bellarmine, de Not^^ Ecclesiae, Nota 15:

Whereunto I answer, that this temporal felicity is not to our purpose, for
that Pope Clement spoke of her spiritual infelicitie, Temporal felicity no
argument of spiritual happiness
as has been showed: and that temporal felicity does not infer or argue
spiritual felicity, every man will confess, that has spirit to discern it,
for that the whole Scripture is full of testimonies, that wicked men (and
consequently miserable in soul) have been temporally blessed by Almighty God,
made rich, powerful, Psalm. 72. Hier. 12. Abacu^ 10.
and prosperous, even to the very affliction and scandalizing as it were of the
just and virtuous, but yet were they not happy for this, but most miserable,
even as those Israelites were, that having their fill of quails in the desert
sent the^ from God, they had no sooner eaten them as the Scripture says,
Psalm. 77.
adhuc escae eorum era^t in ore ipsorum, and ira Dei ascendi^ super (...), the
meat was yet in their mouths, and the wrath of God did fall upon them. And he
that shall read over the 72. Psalm, shall see, that it is altogether of this
matter, to wit of David's admiration of the wealth and prosperity of the
wicked, whose end notwithstanding he says to be most miserable, aestimabam vt
cognoscerem hoc, labor est ante me, donec intelligam in nouissimis eorum;
deiecisti eos dum alleuarentur: I did think I could have understood this
matter, but it is harder then I imagined, until I considered their ends; thou
have depressed them whiles they were exalted. So said our Savior to the rich
man, recepisti bona in vita tua, thou have received good in thy life, and note,
says S. Bernard, that he says recepisti, non rapuisti, thou receiuedst them,
and did not get them by force, and yet notwithstanding did he infer, that
therefore he was now tormented in hell, which he would not have said, if
temporal prosperity had been a good argument of spiritual happiness and
felicity.

B^llarm. de notis Eccl. cap. 15.
And as for that he obiecteth out of Cardinal Bellar^ine his making temporal
felicity in those Princes that defend the same to be a Note of the true
Church; first it is not to our purpose, as has been said, for that we affirm
Pope Clement when he called Queen Elizabeth, Miserable, meant of spiritual
misery, which is not contrary to Bellarmines speech: A place of B^llarm^
answered concerning temporal felicity.
for he does not argue, that every one of those temporal Princes that had
prosperous success in the wars vndertake^ for defense of the Church were
happy also spiritually for those temporal felicities; but that Almighty God
having an intention to preserve his true visible Catholic Church from age to
age, to the worlds end, did prosper those Princes that fought for the same; by
which providence and concourse of Almighty God, together with the cooperation
of the said Catholic Princes, she has been conserved from the Apostles times
to ours: and all other enemies, as well Heretics as Infidells, have been
dispersed, vanquished, and overthrown: which is an argument amongst others,
that this only Church is the true Catholic Church, to endure unto the worlds
end, for so much as this only, by Gods particular providence has been thus
defended, which is the true meaning of Cardinal Bellarmines drift, and whole
discourse in that place. Now unto the other about the speech of worldlings in
the 143. Psalm.

M. Barlow will needs have the words of worldlings, applauding their own
felicity in this Psalm, by the beauty and prosperity of their Children, their
full Cellars, fertile sheep, and fat kyne, to be true signs of felicity
indeed, as sent from God to testify his love toward them, and that D^^id did
writ all this in his own person, giving thanks to God for those present
temporal blessings: and that the check or reprehension giu^n by the Holy Ghost
in the last words, happy is the people whose Lord is Almighty God, was not a
reproof of the sentence imediatly going before, happy they esteemed the people
that have these prosperities, but rather a confirmation of the same. And for
some points of this exposition he alleges 2. or 3. expositours of our time,
as Flami^i^^, Genebrard, and Arias M^ntanus in their Paraphrases upon this
Psalm, who albeit upon some words of the H^brew text, somewhat different from
the Greek translation of the Septuagint, do make some exposition not
altogether agreeing with our common latin translation, which in this follows
the said Septuagint: yet are they far from agreeing also with M. Barlowes
exposition. Whatsoever they say by occasion of this difference between the
Hebrews, as now it is found, and the translation of the said Septuagi^ta made
400. years before the Nativity of our Savior, and used commonly to be cited
by the Apostles themselves in the allegation of the old Testament; most
certain it is that the ancient Fathers understood the sense of this Psalm as
we do now: for proof whereof I might allege many places out of their
Commentaries and Expositions, but S. Augustine shall serve for all, who
expounding this part of the said Psalm, Erue me de manufiliorum alienorum,
deliver me out of the hands of strange children, whole mouth has spoken
vanity, he expounds what this vanity is to wit, that they measuring happiness
by worldly prosperities, fair Children, full butteries, and the like, did make
this inference, Blessed are the people that have these commodities, and were
checked for the same by the Prophet, saying, Happy is the people whose God is
their Lord. I shall se^ down S. Augustines discourse some what at large, for
the better satisfaction of the Reader in this point, for that M. Barlow is not
ashamed to charge me with the perverting of Scriptures, and laying a slanderous
imputation upon the Holy Ghost himself. Thus then he writes. Nunc ergo
exponat quod dicit, Quorum os loquutum est vanitate^ etc. Now then let the
Prophet explayne unto us, that which he says, that their mouth spoke vanity:
what vanity did their mouth speak? That their children were new plants, well
established in their youth, he intends to reckon up their felicities: but be
you attent that be children of light, the sons of peace: attend you children
of the Church, members of Christ: stand you attent whom he calls strangers,
whom he calls foreign Children; attend I beseech you, for that amongst
these men you live in peril etc. S. August. discourse.
Be you attent that you may discern them: be you attent, that you think not
the felilicity that they desire, to be the true felicity. Behold what is the
vanity which their mouth speaks: take heed least you speak the like. And
take he^d that you speaking the like, do not imitate them, whose mouth speaks
such vanity, and their right hand is the right hand of iniquity. What vanity
has their mouth spoken? And what right hand of theirs is the right hand of
iniquity?

Harken: Whose children, say they, are new plants, established in their youth,
their Daughters fair, and adorned to the simili^ude of a Church, their
butteries full, their sheep ^ertill, their kine sat etc. And what shall we say?
Is not this felicity? I demand you children of the kingdom of heaven: I
demand you, that are borne to everlasting resurrection: I demand you, that
are the body of Christ, the members of our Savior, the temple of God, is not
this happiness to have these things? The holy Patri^^ches had good part thereof,
and shall we not call it felicity? Sit licet: sed sinistra: quid est sinistra?
temporalis, mortalis, corporalis, (...) illam ^am diffugi^s, sed neque dextram
putes. Let it be counted felicity, but it is left handed felicity: what is
left handed felicity? temporal, mortal, corporal, which I do not persuade
you to fly, but that you do not esteem it right-handed felicity, as strange
children do, and therefore it is said of them, dextra little, dextra iniquitatis,
their right hand, is the right hand of iniquity: for that they placed on their
right hand that, which they should have put on the left etc.

And then finally coming to the conclusion of the Psalm, and to handle the
check given by the holy Ghost for this mistaking, and misnaming this felicity,
he saith^ I do then reprehend these strange erring children, for that their
daughters be fair, their butteries full, and the like, sed quare ^os arguo?
quia, Beatum dixerunt populum cui haec sunt. O l^q^entis hominis vanitatem!
Wherefore then do I reprehend them? For that they say, that the people are
happy, that have these things. O speakers of vanity! They said that the people
were happy, that had these things, o maligni, o vaniloqui, o filij alieni!
Beatum dixerunt, cui haec sunt. O malicious and vain speaking men, o strange
children! they named that people happy that had these things: that which was at
the left hand, they placed at the right, they call the people happy that had
these things. But what do thou say King David? What say thou, o body of
Christ? o members of our Savior, you that are Children of God, and not aliens,
what say you? Beatus populus cuius Dominus Deus ipsius, happy is the people
that have God for their Lord.

Thus far S. Augustine. Whereby may be seen his sense, and the sense of the
whole Christian Church in his days about the meaning of this Psalm, which he
says I corrupted by my exposition, although it were no other then this of S.
Augustine, as you have seen.

And if you would see other Fathers to the same sense, you may read S. Hierome
in his Commentary upon the first Chapter of the Prophet Habacuc, S. Hierome.
where he recites these temporal prosperities, as vanities bestowed upon the
wicked.

Arnobius.
Arnobius also in his Co^mentary upon the Psalms, after having mentioned the
said temporal prosperities bestowed upon the wicked, co^clude^^ thus: Dicant
^rgo incroduli etc. Let the faithless say then, Blessed is the people that
has abundance of worldly prosperities, but let us say with the Prophet, that
people to be happy who have God for their Lord. And these are Fathers of the
Latin Church.

S. Basil.
And if we look into the Fathers of the Greek Church, we shall find the same
con^ent, for the meaning of this place. As for example, S. Basil having touched
the vanity of this temporal felicity, he puts down the reiection thereof
made by the Prophet: Alij quidem, inquit, beat^^ talia habentes, ego vero
beatum populum iudico, cuius Dominus De^^est. The Prophet says, that other men
do call them blessed that have these temporal commodities, but I, says he,
judge those people to be happy that have God for their Lord. With S. Basil
agrees S. Chrysostom in his Commentary upon this place of the Psalm, S.
Chrysostom.
where expressly he says, that the Prophet David spoke these words, quorum
fil^j sicut nouella plantationes in inuentute^ sua, and the rest, according to
the opinion of the vulgar sort, and that he himself was of a contrary opinion,
not holding them for happy, who possessed those things, but that people only,
cuius Dominus Deus ^ius: who have God for their Lord.

Theodoret.
Theodoret also in his Commentary upon the 72. Psalm expounds these words in
the same sense. They call the people happy that had these things, for that
being deuoyd of truth, they were not able to discern the nature of things, but
did measure happynes by their delights, wealth, and power, and so did affirm
them to be happy, that had these things: but those that are studious of truth,
do say with the Prophet, Happy is the people whose Lord is Almighty God.

Euthymius.
And according to this writes Euthymius in his Commentary. Many men ( says he)
do esteem that people happy which have this visible abundance of temporal
goods, which erroneous opinion of the vulgar sort King Da^id having mentioned,
he rejects the same, and sets down a better, and more true sentence,
saying, Blessed is the people whose Lord is their God.

By all which places and many more that might be alleged, M. Barlow in his
interpretation of this place of Scripture is convinced to be one of those fily
alieni, alient children, whereof the Prophet speaks: and I am freed from that
fond calumniation of his, whereby he says that I have slaundered the holy
Ghost, by writing, that the holy Ghost did scorn this argument of worldlings,
who say, That the people is happy, that have these temporal prosperities. For
you must note that M. Barlow coming to answer my former speech before set
down, he makes a flourish, saying: That my answer consists of three
points, first a shifting evasion, secondly a false interpretation of the
Psalm, thirdly a slanderous imputation of the holy Ghost. The evasion, he
says, consists in that I did hou^d, that outward prosperities are no
necessary arguments of Gods love and favor, and consequently neither in Queen
Elizabeth. The false interpretation of the Psalm you have now heard, to be the
interpretation of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, and
others now mentioned. The slanderous imputatio^ upon the holy Ghost, that he
scorneth at such inferences, is proved by the same, to be no slanderous
imputation, but a true assertion. And if the word, scorn, do seem unto him
unworthy of the holy Ghost, let him remember the words of the Psalmist talking
of such men: Psalm. 2. 4.
qui habitat in caelis irridebit eos, and Dominus subsannabit eos, he that sits
in heaven shall deride them, and our Lord shall laugh them to scorn: where you
see both the words, irridere and subsa^nare in one verse: and yet further in
another place: Psa.^ 36.23.
Dominus autem irridebit eum^ quo^ia^ prospicit quod ^eniet dies eius. And our
Lord shall scorn him because he forseeth that this day of ruin shall come. And
in another place talking of Christ, as some interpret it, he says, Sapien. 4.
they shall see him, and contemn him, and God shall scorn them. And yet
further the same spirit says to the like men, Ego in interi^u vestro ridebo,
and subsannabo, Proverb. 1. 26.
I will laugh and scorn at your destruction: and this in words, but in fact
when God Almighty said of the wicked man, miseriamur impio, and n^^ discet
iustitiam: let us have mercy upon the wicked man, and he shall not learn
justice: was not this a scorn? For it follows straight, he shall not see the
glory of God. What mercy was this when Christ also recounteth in the Gospel,
the speech of the rich man, that told how his barnes were full, and much
riches laid up for many years, and therefore bid his soul be merry, and our
Savior calling him fool, M. Barl^ moves habens.
for his great providence, advertised him, that, that night he would take his
soul from him: was not this a scornful speech against them, that so much
esteem the beatitude of temporal felicity? So as here also M. Barlow is found
minus habens.

But now to come to the solemn definition of misery, by copia and inopia
devised by the Lord Cook, and patronized by this his Champion and Chaplin, out
of which he would prove, that Queen Elizabeth was not misera femina, as Pope
Clement called her in his Breue, for that misery, as he says, L. C^^^^ in the
last bo^ke ^f Arr^ignme^ts page 64.
co^si^^eth o^ ^ro contraries, abundance, and penury: abundance of
t^ibulation, and penury of consolation, which, says he, was not in Queen
Elizabeth, but rather the contrary, for that she had perpetual store of
consolations, and penury of tr^bulations etc. whereunto I then said, that this
definition of misery was miserable indeed, nor ever as I suppose heard of
before, as ridiculous in Philosophy, and fit to be applied to any thing that
has either store or want, as a wise man in this sort may be defined to be him
that has store of wit, A bad definition of Misery by co^^a and ino^ia.
and penury of folly; and a fool to be him that has store of folly, and
penury of wit, and so in all other things: whereunto I add now, that it wants
the chief points of a good definition or description, to wit, genus, and
differentia, or at leastwise genus and accidentia propria, that may distinguish
the thing defined from all other things, neque co^uertitur cum definito, as
Logic prescribes, ^or that a man may have store of a^^lic^ions, and penury
of consolations, as Job had, and yet not be miserable, but happy: and
contrariwise one may have store of temporal consolations, and penury of
afflictions, as had the rich glutton, and yet not be happy. And again whereas a
definition should speak clearly, and simply without doubtfulnes or
equivocation; this does not, but quite contrariwise speaks equiuocately,
being apt to be understood either of temporal or spiritual misery, which is a
great defect in the law of a definition, or good description; for that by this
fault, here it comes to pass, that whereas Pope Clement called Queen
Elizabeth miseram Femina^, a miserable woman, in respect of the misery of her
soul, as being cut of from the Catholic Church. Sir Edward Cook argues that
she had no temporal misery, which supposing it were true, yet does it prove
nothing against spiritual misery, whereof only Pope Clement spoke, and
consequently was nothing to the purpose.

Yea ^urther, if Sir Edward had distinguished as he should have done betwee^e
tempora^l and spiritual misery, and had defined the same distinctly and
severally, yet had not this definition agreed punctually to either of them. For
if you talk of spiritual consolations or desolations of the mind, then is it
evident by all spi^ituall writers, that abounda^ce of sensible consolations
with want of desolatio^ or affliction of mind (which oftentimes evil men have
or at least wise such as are less perfect in virtue) makes not a man
spiritually happy: nor on the contrary part abundance of inward and spiritual
tribulations, does always make the party miserable; for then King David
should have been also spiritually miserable, when so often he cries out of
the desolations o^ mind, and afflictions of spirit, which he suffered as laid
upon him for his great trial, merit, and glory: as when he said, Psalm. 68.
aquae intrauerun^ vsque ad animam meam, floudes of wa^er have entered even into
my very soul, meaning thereby the waves and wat^rs of spiritual tribulations.
And the like does S. Paul himself when he uttered those words of compassion
concerning his internal afflictions, saying: 2. Cor. 1.
supra modum grauati sumus, supra virtutem, ita vt tederet nos etiam viuere,
we were pressed above measure, and above our power to bear it, so as we were
weary of our life, and it loathed us to live. And all the Apostles generally:
Sir Edw. Cook a poor Divine.
Et nos ipsi primiti^^ spiritus habentes, and ipsi intra nos geminus etc. we
that have received the first fruits of God his spirit, we do mourn and
groan within our selves: so as here Sir Edward did miss in his spiritual
Theology.

Nay nor yet does this definition by copia and i^opia hold in temporal
consolations themselves, wherein he notwithstanding has had more occasions of
better skill by experience, for that neither in them is it true that a man may
measure temporal felicity by temporal abou^dance, nor misery by their want,
for he that takes no comfort by his abou^dance, or delights therein, cannot
be said to be happy temporally by the said abundance, and he that loves
mediocrity, or voluntary poverty, and has need of no more then he possesses,
is temporally also rich: by all which is s^ene, that the Lord Cooks definition
of misery by copia and inopia, was very defectuous. Let us see now, how his
Champion defends him. First he enters with a great flourish, that he will
defend the definition by Poetry, None so bold as blind bayard.
Philosophy, Divinity, and cases of Conscience. But as commonly it falls out,
when M. Barlow would make any great o^tentation of his learning, he then most
betraveth his ignorance, and rusheth upon matters that he understands not
whereof he speaks: so here both the poor man stumbleth at the very
entrance, and misseth as it were in the very terms themselves, especially
about Philosophy, Divinity, and Cases of Conscience, as presently shall appear.

But first we must note what obligation he has to prove, and how far forth he
performs that obligation. I said in my reprehension of the Lord Cooks
definition, Let. page 29.
by copia and inopia, that it was defectuous in Philosophy, as fit to be
applied to any thing that had store or want: what is the defendant bound to
prove? no doubt but that it is a good definition, according to the laws of
Philosophy both in form and matter: and if he prove this, by any one of his
four ways, or by altogether, I shall confess, that he has performed the
office of a good advocate, but indeed he proves it by neither way, but only
shows that copia and inopia may be found in one subject, in respect of
different things, which no man ever denied, for it were great folly to say that
a man may not have good apparel, and an empty stomach, and another time to
have a full stomach and want of apparel, and so in all other matters: whereof
M. Barlow gives examples first out of Poetry, as of Tantalus, Narcissus, and
others that had copiam and inopiam, and were miserable thereby, which I deny
not, or is it the point that he should prove, concerning a good definition,
quae conuertitur cum re definita, and has the other conditions before
mentioned.

From Poetry then he passes to Philosophy, saying, that if I had read
Epictetus in his Euchiridion, and those that do comment upon him, I should
find it a Philosophical conclusion, that those two contraries, ( copia and
inopia) do make the greatest misery, when a man possesses much and yet
desires more.

Whereto I answer first, that although it be a Philosophical conclusion, as
well with Epictetus, as other moral Philosophers, that this is a misery: yet
do not they make it the definition of misery, for that there be many other
miseries besides this. M. Barlowes weak Philosophy.
And secondly though Epictetus do call it a kind of misery to possess much
and desire more, yet not the greatest misery, as M. Barlow does, for it is a
greater misery, by his leave, to have nothing at all, and to desire very much,
then to have good store, and to desire more. As for example, if M. Barlow
himself should have had an arde^t desire from his youth to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, even while he was a scholar in Cambridge, and had no preferment,
and should continue the same desire now, I do not think that he will deny,
but that it is less misery to desire and expect the same now, being already
well furnished with the wealth of a good Bishopric, then to have expected the
same with like ardent desire in his poverty, and consequently it is not the
greatest misery, when a man possesses much, and desires more. And this for
his Philosophy: now let us see his Divinity.

Barlow p. 82.

1. ^eg. 31. Eccles. 4. and 5.


And then (quoth he) in Divinity King Salomo^ no mean Philosopher, found that
to be afflictionem pessimam, a most vexing misery, as any under the sun,
when with satiety of ric^es, which implies plenty, there is joined an
insatiable eye, which argues want. Here now M. Barlow begins to show
confusion, and not to understand well the true distinction of these sciences.
In Divinity, says he, King Solomon no mean Philosopher found. How did he find
it? by Divinity or Philosophy? ^or here he names both: and if Solomon found it
by Divinity, what needed M. Barlow to add that he was no mean Philosopher? and
if it be true which he writes in the very precedent lines, that it is a
Philosophical conclusion, that the greatest misery is when a man possesses
much and desires more; M. Barlow hardly urged.
then is this second conclusion, that it is a vexing misery, with satiety of
riches, to have an in^atiate eye or desire, a Philosophical conclusion also
(which is the very self same that was set down before:) and consequently if
that was a Philosophical conclusion, then can it not be properly Theological,
for that one and the self same proposition cannot belong to two different
sciences sub eadem ratione formali, to wit Philosophy and Divinity. For that
Philosophy considers her object according to light, and direction of natural
reason, Divinity as it is reueyled from God and referred to God, as unto the
supernatural and last end of all creatures, whereof M. Barlow making no
mention, nor understanding the difference as it seems, makes the self same
proposition to be both Philosophical and Theological, and that under the self
same considerations, which is most absurd.

And if he say that we do grant it to be a conclusion Philosophical, and
that he proves it to be Theological, or appertayning to Divinity, for that it
is in the Scriptures uttered by Solomon, I answer, that every proposition
found in the Scripture is not of his own nature Theological, or appertayning
to Divinity, for that it is neither of truth reueyled not deduced from reueyled
principles, nor has reference to God, as he is the formal object of Divinity,
but may be in it self Philosophical, and known by light of reason, as we
have said of this proposition, M. Barlowes want of Divinity.
that it is a kind of misery to possess much and desire more, which not only
the Heathen Philosophers, but every man commonly by natural light of reason
will discern, and consequently M. Barlow though he strain the Scripture,
thereby to draw some semblance of proof from the same, as you have seen, yet
does he not prove it at all: and this third way of Divinity is less then
nothing.

But of all other his fourth and last way by Cases of Conscience is notable.
Let us hear his words: Strange cases of conscience proposed by M. Barlow.
And even in cases of conscience, says he, were they not those two contraries,
plenty of good desires in S. Paul to do well, but want of ability to perform
those desires, that made him to cry out, miser ego homo, miserable man that I
am? To which question I answer, that true it is, that S. Paul complains in
that place that he found a great fight and repugnance as other men do, between
the law of his flesh (or stirring of concupi^^ence) and the law of his mind.
Which if M. Barlow will call copia and inopia, he may draw any thing to the
Lord Cooks definition: even when as a man and his wife do fall out, there is
copia commonly and inopia also, for he shall be sure to have copia of ill words,
and inopia of peace and quietness, and thereby also some misery. But I would very
gladly know why M. Barlow calls this the doctrine of Cases of conscience, as
if it were a distinct thing from Divinity (for otherwise it would not be his
fourth way of proof?) where as we hold the said doctrine of Cases of
Conscience to be an essential part of Divinity it self, to wit the moral
part, that resolves doubts of Conscience in practice: as for example when
there arises some doubt about Usury, Restitution, Matrimony, or the like, what
in Conscience may be done, and what not, in this or that case, the matter is
resolved by this part of Divinity. But what is this to the example of S. Paul's
conflict between sense and reason, flesh and spirit, alleged by M. Barlow?
had the Apostle any doubt or scruple of Conscience therein what he had to think
or do, about these rebellions of the flesh ^ I think not; he said it was a
misery to suffer them against his will, but doubted nothing whether they were
to be resisted or no, by the help of Gods grace which assisted him in that
combat, and gave him the victory according to the promise of his Master made
unto him, Sufficit ti^i gr^tia mea, my grace is sufficient for thee to get the
conquest in this case. Wherefore M. Barlow to frame an argument upon this place
of S. Paul for his copia and inopia, has as much ground, as if he had founded
the same upon Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia.

OTHER POINTS concerning Queen Elizabeth's Felicities, or Infelicities.. II.
WE have seen by that which has hitherto been said how vain and feeble the
argument has been to prove that Queen Elizabeth was happy in this life in
regard of her temporal felicities, which the Lord Cook recites in these
words among many other as before we have noted. She was so miraculously
prot^cted by God (says he) so strengthened, and ^ortifyed, as she did beat her
most potent enemy, did set up a King in his Kingdom, defended nations,
harbored distr^ssed people, and the like. Unto which argument besides the
other reasons and proofs which I before opposed, I did show out of Jeremy the
Prophet the vanity of this argument, by a notable example of King
Nabuchodonosor, much more power^ull then Queen Elizabeth was, which
Nabuchodonosor received even from God himself, greater worldly prosperity and
consolations then these, and was called by God, Seruus meu^ Nabuchodonosor, my
servant Nabuchodonosor, and greatly advanced, protected, and made powerful over
his enemies for a time, and to punish, afflict and chas^i^e the people of God
himself, and yet was he not happy but miserable thereby: and so might be Queen
Elizabeth, though she prevailed against Catholic Princes, and people abroad,
and was permitted to afflict her Catholic people at home, whereby was
co^uinced that this argumet of worldly prosperity ^ though it were manifest
that it came directly from God himself, yet does it not infer any true
happiness at all. And has the Cha^pion M. Barlow any thing to reply for his
Lord in this? no truly but granting my proof to be substantial, as taken from
the Scripture it self, he runs to other impertinent matter of
dissimilitude, between Q. Elizabeth, and Nabuchodonosor, Nabuchodonosor more
happy then Q. Elizabet^
as that he had no successor, but the Queen has etc. which is not the
question in hand, nor was the comparison made in this, and moreover in it self
is false. For that Nabuchodonoso^s son called Euilmero^^th succeeded him, and
after him again Baltazar, which seems to have been fortold by the Prophet
Jeremy c. 27. saying: Seruient ci ones gentes^ and filio eius, and filio f^l^
eius. All nations shall serve Nabuchodonosor, and his son, and his sons
son. In which respect Nabuchodonosor was much more happy the^ Q. Elizabeth
who left no such issue to succeed her, and therefore the place alleged by M.
Barlow o^t of Isay, Ex quo dormisti etc. since thou were dead none came in thy
place to cut us up, by grave Authors is understood of Baltazar the last King of
that race, for to the former it cannot well be applied, whose son and nephew
after his death kept them wellnigh forty years in captivity, and they were not
delivered till after the death of Baltazar, by Cyrus, who with Darius overthrew
him and succeeded him: by which you may see how well M. Barlow pleads for
Queen Elizabeths^ happines^

And all this was spoken against the infe^ence of true felicity, supposing that
Queen Elizabeth's days had been so abundant and affluent in all kind of
temporal prosperities, as the flattery of these Orators would have it seem,
and that her self had such copia of consolations, and inopia of tribulations,
as the Lord Cook describes. But for proof that this was not so, the^e were
many par^iculer points touched, which did show that her temporal consolations
were mingled also with desolations, her prosperity with adversities, her joys
many times with grief, as for example the circum^tances of her nativity, the
declaration made against her by her own Father, as well in the putting to
death her Mother with note of incontinency, together with so many adulterers
punished with her, as also a^terward the same declaration made more
authentically in public Parliament, Q. Elizabeth her infelicities.
her disgraces passed a^terward again in the time of King Edward, and her
contemptible reiection by the setters up of Queen Jane, her pe^ills in Queen
Mary's time by the cutting off of her best friends, whereby she was forced to
a deep dissimulation in religion, that could not be but afflictiue unto her,
her fears and doub^s in the beginning of her own reign, what would follow by
change of religion, the pretense of the King of Fr^^^^ known to be in hand, for
his wives succession immediately after Queen Mary, her frights by the Duke of
Norfolk, and Earls rising i^ the North, and a great Counsel of the chi^fest
Nobility held at London against her, and in favor of the Queen of Scotland,
which then ^he was not able to resist, if it had gone forward: her public
excommunication, and deprivation by two or three Popes, which could no^ but
bring solicitude with it, her doubtfu^nes about ma^iing, being pre^sed on the
one side by the sollicitatio^ of her Kingdom for hope of succession, and held
back on the other side by certain desirs of designements of her own and her
favorites, her intricate reckonings with her said fauorits from time to time,
as Pickering, Dudley, Hatton, Packi^gton, Rawley, and Essex, among whom the
two Earls became in the end to be dreadful unto her, her ielousy and fears
conce^ned not only of foreign Princes, whom she had deeply offended with
raising their subjects and maintayning them against them, but of domestical
inhabitants likewise, especially of Priests, Jesuits and Se^in^ry^men, who
were painted out to her to be such dangerous people, together with the
Catholics, that used their helps in matters for their souls, as she never
ceased to add laws unto laws against them all, and against all use of
Catholic religion, whereunto her self had sworn, and voluntarily protested
in Queen Mary's days.

And not only this, but breaking also into blood, for these imagined terrors,
she put to death publicly above an hundred and thirty anointed Priests, only
for hatred of their order and profession, together with many other afflicted
in pri^ons, others sent into banishment, by forty, fifty, yea seauenty, at a
time. She put to death also both the nearest in kindred, and dearest in
affection, that she had on earth, as was her Majesty of Scotlnd, and the Earl
of Essex, the guilt of which proceeding lying upon her conscience, did so
trouble her for diuets years before her death, as was pitiful, but her death
it self more pitiful, in dying without sense, feeling, or mention of God, as
diverse do report, that do pretend to know the same most certainly. I should be
glad with like or greater certainty to know the contrary, for I take compassion
of her state with all my heart.

And this is in effect the sum and substance of that which was spoken before,
concerning the interruptions and interpellations of Queen Elizabeth's temporal
joys and comfort, which Sir Edward Cook, and M. Barlow do make to be so
singular, and absolute. And what reply is now made (think you) to all this?
Truly nothing at all to the purpose in hand: for that one of these two points
should be showed, either that these things are not so, or that they do nothing
at all impeach Queen Elizabeth^ te^porall felicity, and store of con^olations;
but neither of these is proved, what then? You shall hear: first he runs
again into an extreme rage of railing and reuiling, and scolding as it were a
tip-toe, enforcing his whole answer with the most contumelio^s speech that he
can devise: but to this is extant his own answer in print, M. Barlow eue^ by
his own censure and sentence contemptible.
out of Seneca, which he alleges in the Preface of his Sermon at Paul^
Cross, against his Master the Earl of Essex, Vt quisque est ^^ntemptissimus,
ita soluti^^ima lingua ^^t. As each man is more contemptible then others, so is
he more lewd and loose in his tongue. Then he chafeth intemperatly, that any
thing should be said or written against Queen Elizabeth after her death, and
her^ he dilateth himself very largely for lack of better matter upon that
common place, that the rulers of the people are not to be spoken evil of,
specially after their death: for which he cites both Scriptures, and profane
authors (I follow not his order in this, but the con^exion rather of the
matter) and will prove them to be both hoggs and dogs out of Aristophanes,
Pliny, Sophocles and other Authors, that do revile the dead. But to this
objection also I will put his own answer, in his foresaid Sermon against the
E^rle of Essex, where having made the same objection against himself, for
speaking evil of the said Earl after his death, as he does now against me for
calling to memory some of Queen Eli^abeths affairs, M. Barlow follows not
his own rules
his answer in his own words is this. But dearly beloved, there is a
difference in faults of men as in diseases, some only are hurtful to the
parties themselves, some loathsome and infectious to others; the first are to
be buried with their bodies, and forgotten, but the other will annoy, and
therefore must be remembered after death. In Scripture some Kings that were
vicious, had their faults touched ever after their burial, but no more, yet
some are never named in Scripture, but their sin is branded upon their name,
as often you may see of ^eroboam never mentioned, but presently adds the
son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin.

This was the man's answer at that time, for that it served for his purpose, and
the same may serve me now against him: for if the case of Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin, might be applied to the Earl of ^ssex, that was of their
own religion, and changed nothing therein so far as is known, and was but a
private person: how much more may the same be applied to Queen Elizabeth, that
indeed brought in that fatal division and new worship of Jeroboam into her
Kingdom, which she found quiet and united with the rest of Christendom in the
known Catholic faith of Christ's Church?

But says M. Barlow, reproaches are uttered either for repr^ose to amend,
^arlow page 96.
or for vexation to grieve the parties calumniated, both which ends do cease
in death. Whereunto I answer, that if they be reproaches, and contumelyes
indeed without truth (whereof M. Barlowes tongue and pen are ful^) they serve to
neither of these ends, but principally to show the wiked mind of the vtterer:
but if they be true, The vices of wicked Kings recounted after their death in
Scripture.
as those things are which I have touched concerning Q. Elizabeth her
infelicities, ^he^ albeit they be uttered to none of these two foolish ends
mentioned by M. Barlow, either to amend, or vex the dead, yet are they recorded
to warn and instruct them that are alive, by showing Gods justice upon sin,
his providence, his power, and his care to fear men by terror of everlasting
in^amy from the like offenses, and many other such holy ends: for the which in
Scripture it is a most common and ordinary thing to hear the sins of wicked
Princes repeated and reiterated after death, M. Barlow himself cannot deny it.

I did further add also in my former Letter the example of diverse ancient
Fathers, Letter page 35.
as Justinius Martyr^ Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others, who to comfort the
afflicted Christians in their days, and to honor more the cause for which
they suffered, did put them in mind what manner of people and Princes their
first persecutors were, as namely Nero and Domitian, what life they led, what
end they made, and that indeed they were ^it instruments to be the first actors
in such a work, which I applying to Queen Elizabeth, said that the like
observation and comparison might be made, she being the strangest woman that
ever perhaps lived, for diverse admirable circumstances before touched, and the
very first absolutely of that sex either Christened, or created, that took
upon her Supreme Power in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters etc. Whereunto
M. Barlow coming to answer, and having nothing at all to say to the purpose,
does so childishly trifle, as is most ridiculous, telling us first, that if the
Papists may comfort themselves, for that they have been beaten by a woman, then
may the devil comfort himself also that a woman is prophesied in Genesis,
according to our interpretation to break his head: Sysera also the Captain
may glory that he was overthrown by a woman. But this is trifling^ for I do
not say simply by a woman, but by such a woman as never was the like, in diverse
points of enormity against C^th^lic^^ religion, and therein was the Fathers
observations of enormous manners of Nero and Domitian, and not in the sex, as
they were men.

Secondly he says, that diverse Popes were more like to Nero and Domitian, then
Queen Elizabeth: A monstrous head of the English Protestant Church.
but this is also trifling. For neither is the matter proved, and if it could
be, yet does it not improve my comparison, as it was some comfort to the
ancient afflicted Catholics to consider what manner of Princes they were that
first began most sharp persecution against them: so might English Catholics
do by consideration of the person of Queen Elizabeth that first of all women
persecuted them in England, and with inspeakable monstrosity made her self
Head of the Church.

Thirdly he says about this matter, that heaven and hell ar^ not more
different, then those Christian martyrs of the Primitive Church, Barlow page 99.
from these later of English Papists: for they, says he, acknowledged the
Emperors supremacy independent upon any but God, prayed for them seriously both
living and dying etc. But this now is more then trifling, for it seems to me
mere madness to say, that ancient Christian martyrs under Nero and Domi^ian did
acknowledge those Emperors Supremacy independent upon any but God, Nero and
Domitian heads of the Church in M. Barlowes opinion.
which infers to my understanding, that they acknowledged them for Supreme
Heade^ of the Catholic Church in those days, for so signifies the word
Supremacy in the controversy between us: and the words immediately following,
independent upon any b^^ God, do seem plainly to confirm the same, as does
also the comparison and contrariety it self, which he puts between those
old Martyrs, and ours. For if he had meant of temporal Supremacy there had not
been any difference, or contrariety between them. For that our Martyrs also
do acknowledge temporal Supremacy to Kings and Princes though not spiritual,
which infers that M. Barlow ascribing more to the ancient Martyrs under Nero
and Domitian, must needs mean, that they held them ^or Heads of their
Church, even in spiritual and Ecclesia^ticall a^fayres, although they were
Pagans: and ^oe consequently might, and ought to repair to them in matters of
controversy about Christian Religion, and were ^ound to follow their direction
therein. And if this be not more then trifling, especially for a Prelate to
vtter^ I leave to the discreet Reader to consider.

But now let us see briesely some of his answers to the points before rehearsed
of Queen Elizabeth's life and death. First he says to the note about her birth
and disgrace by her Father and Parliament, that the Scriptures are not so
Censorious, for God himself mislikes the Proverb that it should be said, the
fathers did eat sower grapes, and the childrens ^eeth were set on edge; but
this is folly: for I alleged it not as a sin of hers, for the sin was her
fathers and mothers, but as some disgrace in temporal felicity. Touching the
birth of Queen Elizabeth.
Then he tells us, that in some places the civil Laws do permit some
bastards to succeed. Item that she showed well by her courage, and other
Princely qualities, that she was King Henry's daughter. Item that her self did
so far contemn those slanders published in print, as she would never consent
to have them cleared, but rather scorned them. Item that Queen Mary also was
disinabled by Parliament in her fathers days etc. And are not these strong
arguments to prove his purpose, to wit, that this proceeding of the Parliament
and declaration made against her, was no temporal disgrace? Albeit for so much
as belongs to Queen Mary, all men do know that her case was far different,
for that Queen Mar^es mother was never noted for incontinency, and much less
so many adulterers put to death with her, as might be doubted whose daughter
she was.

To the difficulties she had in King Edwards days both in respect of the
Admiral Seymer put to death for loue-matters toward her, M. Barl. Babylon,
Phil^ra, and loue-druggs.
and the like, he says in effect nothing, but breaks forth into a fi^t of
rage about the whore of Babylon her Philira, and loue-drugs, whereof this
fellow can frame a common place to intertayn^ him self for lack of other
matter. Of the time also of Queen (...) he speaks nothing.

About her laws, and cruel proceedings toward Catholics, he intertayneth
himself some what longer, but no more to the purpose, then in the rest. For
first he says that the sorest punishment for the first twelve years was
commitment to Bishops and Deanes houses, and some of them to prisons, M. Barl.
never like to be prisoner for religion.
where they lay as warm and waxed as fatt as in their own houses. And this
now has no need of answer, but that if M. Barlow be not yet fa^, this were a
good way to feed him, by lying in prison as they did, for some years, which is
thought will never be for Religion, come what Religion there will.

Secondly he says, that ^or the subsequent years, he yields, that there was
more rigor used, death being deservedly drawn on (to use his words) by the
merit of treason, whereunto Religion was made but a stawking-horse, and then
cites S. Augustine in defense of the Christian Emperors laws against
heretics. But first he does not prove, or ever shall be able, any such
demerit of treason to have drawn on this rigor, but only by calumniation,
which indeed is and has been the persecutors stawking-horse, to deceive the
simple, pretending one thing for another, thereby to oppress the innocent: and
secondly S. Augustine allows indeed and commends the Laws of Catholic
Emperors made for the temporal punishment of Heretics, after they were
condemned by the Church. But what Church was that? And what Catholic
Religion, for defense whereof those Catholic Princes in S. Augustines days
did make those laws so commended by him? Was it the Protestant Church? And was
the Religion thereof the Protestant religion, or ours? Will M. Barlow join
with me in this, which of our two Churches and Religions have descended visibly
from S. Augustins Church and religion unto our days? Can he deny that S.
Augustins Church taught Purgatory, S. Augus^^^^ ^o Prot^sta^t.
Prayer to Saints, Prayer for the dead, Mas^e and Sacrifice for the li^ing and
dead, and many other articles now in controversy between us? Dare he stand to
this trial out of S. Augustines works themselves? And if he dare not (as I
know he dares not, nor will ever accept thereof) why does he here prattle out
of S. Augustine, as though if he were now alive again, he would allow the
laws of Protestant Princes made against that religion and Church which
himself defended while he was living? This then is another absurd shift of M.
Barlow to delude his Reader. But there follows another if not more absurd,
yet at least less shamefast, for that the malice is more apparent.

Father Persons, says he, who in the Preface of one of his Legends, commends
Queen Elizabeth for her moderate government, and that was in the last year of
herraigne: and yet by the way, for the man's singular honesty, it is worth the
nothing, that in one and the same leaf, having so commended her in one page
(marry then she was alive) in the very next page (for then he heard she was
dead) in a Preface to his Majesty he compares her to no other, but Di^clesian
for cruelty.

Thus he, and for that he cites a book that is in every man's hand, to wit the
first part of the Three Conuersions of England, and thereby his allegation is
easy to be examined, I did magine that I should find him very exact and
punctual in his assertion. Wherefore I went to look upon the two pages of the
self same leaf, the one written before the Queens death, the other after:
but I could see no such matter so near together, then coming back some four
or five pages, I found that which I suppose to have given him the occasion of
this fond cavil, for that the Author having dedicated that book to the
Catholics of England, and in the Epistle Dedicatory laid forth at large the
great af^lictions and tribulations which they had long suffered for that
Religion, he commends them for their patience, and loyal behavior toward
their Prince in all worldly affairs: Which course, says he, though it has
not escaped the calumnious tongues and pens of some carping adversaries (making
all treason) yet is it justifiable and glorious both before God and man, where
reason rules, and not passion. And I doubt not, but that the wis^dom^ and
moderation both of her Majesty and ^er S^^ Counsel i^ ^ll rather in this
point p^nder your own facts, then your a^uersaries words. So there.

Where by is evident that the Author does not commend Queen Elizabeth for her
moderate government toward Catholics, as this man says (for that within five
lines after he says, they have passed so many years under the rod of sharp
afflictions:) but only persuadeth himself that the wisdom and moderation
both of her Majesty, and the Counsel will stay them from condemning
Catholics for treason upon other men's words, Calumnious citations.
rather then upon their own facts: which being but a particular case,
infers not, that Father Persons commends her for her moderate government.
Nor is the other point true, that in a Preface to his Majesty, he compares
her to no other, the^ to Dioclesian for cruelty. For that my words were these:
Here generally the applause is no otherwise, then it was in old time among the
Christians upon the entrance o^ Constantine into the Empire after Dioclesian,
and of Iouinian after Julian. Nor is there any mention, or comparison of
cruelty in that place: so as here neither the leaf or page do^ agree to his
citation, nor the commendation of her moderate government is found; neither the
comparison of cruelty with Dioclesian is extant; nor is he only mentioned, but
Julian also. Do you note how many defects of truth are discovered in so small
an allegation?

But after this again he comes in with a great scorn against me, for saying,
that our Catholic Priests put to death by Q. Elizabeth dyed for religion, and
were true Martyrs: for that having life offered the^ if they would renounce the
Pope, and con^orme themselves to the present state of of England, they resused
the same. And with this he makes himself merry with diverse ies^es about the
consequence of this argument. Whereunto I answer, that I alleged diverse
reasons, why our Catholic Priests dyed for religion, and not for treason.
First for that no such treason could be proved against them, in the sense and
judgment of any indifferent man that was present at their arraignments, to wit
of the one hundred and thirty that before I mentioned. Secondly for that the
public Registers themselves and Histories, as John St^w, and others in their
Chronicles do^ object no other treason to the most of them, but only being
Priests, and their taking of holy Orders beyond the seas, which in no sense can
be treason, no more then the confessing of the blessed Trinity can be made
treason by the Trinitarians in Transiluania.

Thirdly for that they themselves dying did protest upon their consciences, as
they should be saved, they never meant treason in thought, word, or deed
against Queen Elizabeth.

And then ^ourthly for confirmation of this, I alleged this other reason, so
much scorned by M. Barlow, they having life offered them if they would renounce
the Pope, and conform themselves to the State, they refused the same: which he
says is a false and faulty inference, and I say it is very good and true, and
that if M. Barlow had any moderate skill of the case according to the rules
^yther of Philosophy or Divinity he would be ashamed to say as he does in
Philosophy, it being a common axiom, that omnis actus specificatur ab obiecto
and fi^e, every action is specified, that is to say, takes his nature and
essence from his object and end. As if a man should kill one to gain his
goods, this act has both the nature of manslaughter and theft, the first from
the object, the second from the end or intention of the doer: which
Philosophical principle being applied to our case does evidently prove that
the choice of death in him that has life offered, upon condition he will do
some act against his faith, as going to the Protestants Church is esteemed by
Catholics, though otherwise he were n^uer so great a delinquent before, is an
act of Martyrdom; for that it has both the object and the end thereof: the
object to wit death; the end which is the profession of his faith.

And so if we pass to consider the same by Theology^ which more properly
treats of this virtue of Martyrdom, the controversy will be made much more
clear, for that the word Martyrdom being a Greek word^ and signifying a
Testimony or bearing of witness (as the word Martyr signifies him that
yealdeth testimony or be^reth witness) every testmony or bearing of witness
is not meant by the word Martyrdom, but only such a testimony as is given by
dying for God in the defense of some truth belonging to our faith, For what
cause a man may be a Martyr.
either expressly impugned or employed in the impugnation of some other virtue,
that contains the said truth of our faith therein; which last clause is added,
for that a man may be a true Martyr, though he dye not for any express article
of faith or part thereof, but it is sufficient that he die for the defense of any
one virtue, as Chastity, Obedience, Justice and the like, according to the
saying of our Savior: Matthew. 5.
Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iustitiam: Blessed are they that
suffer persecution for righteousness. And S. John Baptist is acknowledged by all
Deuines for a true Martyr, although he died for no article of faith, but for
reprehending the incestuous marriage of King Herod, with more liberty of
speech and spirit, then any such Prince-flatterer and base mind as M. Barlow
would ever have done in the like case, if we may guess at his virtue by his
writing.

But to apply the former ground and uncontrollable principle to our present
purpose in hand, whether these Priests died for refu^ing the Oath of the
Feminine Supremacy, or for that they were made Priests beyond the seas, or ^or
that they refused to come to your heretical seruice^; certain it is, The
Prie^^s that d^e ^^n Q. (...) time true Marty^s.
according to the rules of Catholic Divinity, that they died for de^ence of
their faith, or maintenance of virtue which is sufficient to justify their
Martyrdomes, having so great warrant, and store of all manner of witnesses ^or
the truth, and doctrine they suffered for, as might well in conscience assure
them of the righteousness of their cause, and that they died for that Religion
in which all the Princes and people of Christendom for so many years and ages
both lived and died. And whereas M. Barlow impugneth this by two cases or
examples, they are but so many arguments of his own ignorance. Let us speak a
word or two of them both.

The first is of Absalom, putting the case that he was an Idolator, as well as
a traitor, and that King David after sentence passed against him ^or his
treasons would acquit him from death conditionally, M. Barlows two foolish
cases.
that he should renounce his Idolatry, and that upon re^usall he should be
executed, Shall we say (says M. Barlow) that he died ^or Religion, or for
treason? We will say, good M. Barlow, that he died rather for false religion,
that is to say Idolatry, then for treason, and was the Devils Martyr: and none
I think can deny the same, unless he be as ignorant as your self, as shall
further appear by the answer to the next example, which in effect is all one
with this, to wit, that a younger son should aspire his fathers death with
hope to have his riches, and that being condemned, his father should offer to
save him, if he would go to Church and leave his evil life of following queane^
etc. Shall ^e say (quoth M. Barlow) that he is executed for his whore-domes, or
for this par^icide against his father?

But here I would ask M. Barlow, why he leaves out going to Church, which was
the first part of the condition, and names only whore-domes? no doubt but the
honest man, would have the staying from the Church in Catholics, and
whore-domes seem to be companions. But now I answer to his question, that if
he mean by refusing to go to Church, such as is practiced by Catholics, for
Conscience sake, and not to deny thereby the truth of the Catholic faith,
which forbids to go to heretical Churches, then dies he for the truth of
his faith, and consequently he is a Martyr. But if he choose to dye for love of
wicked life, and whoredom, it is no cause of Martyrdom, and consequently he
is the Devils Martyr, as we said before of the Idolator. But as for Par^icide,
clear it is, that he cannot be said to have died for it properly, as the
immediate cause of his death, for that it was remitted unto him; and their
passed another election on his mind, to wit, that he would leave his old life:
so as ^or this he died proprie and proxime, properly, and immediately: and for
the parricide only remote and occasi^naliter, a far of, and as from that which
gave the first occasion of his death. What says M. Barlo^ to this? Does not
common sense teach it to be so?

And thus much for the death of those our Catholic and innocent Priests, whose
death was pretiosa in con^^ecta Domini, precious in our Lords sight, that died
only for testimony of his truth; which if M. Barlow did as well see and feel,
as Queen Elizabeth does at this day, he would not so prattle as he does. Let
us see a little further.

He brings in for proof of the Queens mildnes an Historiographer of Genua
called Bizarrus, or Bizarro, which in English signifies a Mad-cap, and he is
brought in to tell us certain points of a Mad-cap indeed, to wit, the great
moderation of her mind, ^arl. p. 92.
her inbred clemency, though himself be an out-bred: that she governed her
subjects with exceeding great mildnes, abhorring from blood, or putting any to
death etc. which belike he writing in Genua, knew better then English men
living in England, who felt the smart in themselves, and others, whiles this
man was out of the Gunshot, and, as it is likely, well paid for his pains: for
Sir Horatio Parauicino was able both for his credit, and wealth, to undertake a
greater matter then this. And for that you M. Barlow, with M. Sutcliffe and
others do so often allege this Bizarro, as an Author against us, it shall
avail much, both for your credits, and his, to tell us where, when, and by
what authority he was printed, for here in Italy we can hear of no such work,
although some search has been made for him, which doubtless we should do, had
he been set forth in these parts, and therefore we think him to be no
Catholic writer, but of a bastard brood, and a Mad-cap indeed of your own
making. Besides that, how truly he writes, not only all England, but all the
whole world can testify: and to omit all other most cruel massacring and
bloodshed, the memory of the unnatural, and Butcherly Tyranny, executed upon
his Majesty's Mother, will remain for a most rufull example to all posterity.

But M. Barlow not content with externe witnesses alleges also domestical,
saying: Your own Priests shall speak for Queen Elizabeth's laws: and then
cyteth out of the book of Quodlibets a certain pathetical exaggeration in
praising Queen Elizabeth, Quodlib. page 269. 277.
and her laws also against Catholics, which we esteeming to come from that
good suggester Ri. Can. who suggested so notorious a lie unto M. Mort^n, as
himself complains, and has been showed in the late Reckoning with him, we
esteem it accordingly, and do give it the credit, that it deserves; which is
nothing at all. And M. Barlow is driven to a hard exigent, when he stoopeth so
low, as to take up these base rags to blazon Q. Elizabeth's praises withal,
which a wiser man would have been ashamed to allege: especially knowing with
what sorrow of heart the poor man that fathered that filthy work, repented him
at his death thereof, and asked of God and the Jesuits pardon for the same, as
before has been signified.

OF QVEENE Elizabeth's Sickness and Death, and other things belonging thereunto..
III.
AFTER the former points of Queen Elizabeth's laws and executions thereof made
against Catholics, and Catholic Religion, whereby she made her self most
odious both at home, and abroad to forrayne Princes, yea to many Protestant
Potentates themselves, that misliked such cruelty: I showed, that as the
natural effect, and consequence in such causes is fear, diffidence,
suspicion, and vexation of mind: so grew the same upon her very much in the
course of her life, especially toward her latter days, when she was
impressioned that not only Priests, and Jesuits, who indeed did pray to God
for her conversion, but souldiars also, and Captains, and Physicians did seek
her death, M. Barlows trifling.
either by poisoning her body, saddle, chair, seat, or somewhat else
belonging unto her, as the deaths of Lopez, Squier, and others do testify, to
all which M. Barlow does answer now, by running to certain common places, and
sentences, that prove nothing, but only that he has been more diligent then
judicious in gathering them out of Authors, and applying them without pu^pose:
for he tells us first out of Salust, that Ingenia Regum sunt prona ad
form^dinem, the inclination of Kings are prone to fear. And then out of
Seneca, D^bia p^^ certis solent timere Reges: Kings are wont to fear things
that be doubt^full for certain, which in my judgment makes more for my
purpose, then his. Then he says, that it was not so with Queen Elizabeth,
for that careful she was, fearful she was not: wary she was, but not
jealous: provident, but not suspicious: wherein I refer me to them that knew
her better then M. Barlow, and to the effects themselves, which are the best
witn^sses. And for that I said in my Letter, that this griping passion of
fear, and iealousy did force her to lay hands upon the blood of the most
dearest in affection and nearest of kinted that she had in this life, as the
Earl of Essex, and his Majesty's Mother: M. ^arlow coming to answer this
point, says never a word, but passes it over with mumme-s^lence: and no
marvel, for he had said so much before, both for the Earl, and against the
Earl, while the Queen was a live (for him, M. Barl silence and the cause
thereof.
in setting ^orth his excessive praises, and triumph after Cal^s voyage, when
he hoped to have preferment by him; and against him, after his death, when the
path of promotion opened it self another way, to wit by disgracing and
infaming him) as I think the miserable man knew not what to say, persuading
himsel^e (wherein I think he erred not) that whatsoever he should say, no man
would believe or greatly care of it, and therefore silence was the best.

But for the thing it self, I mean the manner of his death, I will not
meddle: nothing doubting, but that so loose and exorbitant a life as he led,
being always accompanied with crewes of goodfellow-Ministers, that by life,
and doctrine taught him that way of perfection in their trade, he deserved no
better an end, then he received. And moreover it may be also, that the State,
and Queen had further reasons to move them to severity against ^im, then every
man knows: although with the Queens own person he was thought to be further
engaged for special ^auours received, A charitable Bishop.
then that upon the suddayne he could fall to hate her, and seek her
destruction, and so he protested at his death: though this bloody Sycophant in
strayning his actions, thoughts and intentions after his death at Paul's Cross
(where in a man may discover supereminent malice issuing out of the root of
ambition) leuelled all his speech to that end, to styr up and confirm iealousy
in the Queens mind, that they two could not live together, and therefore in
the end of his Sermon extant now in print, he left thirteen most spightfull
records to be borne in memory, whereof the sixth is in these words: Hi^ li^e a
danger to the Queen, mark that. Which words of, mark that, are not adjoined
to any of the other records: whereby it is evident, that, that was the butt
whereat he shot, and may probably be ghessed, that as, Ladron de casa, one
wholly depending of him, and knowing his secret intentions, was used before to
beat this point secretly into the Queens head, while the other was alive,
which after his death he pre^ched so publikly.

And no man doubts, but that if his Majesty, that now is, whom he so highly
flattereth had then come in his way, and that it had as well layen in the
Queens power as it did in her desire to equal his fortune with his Mothers,
for her own greater safety: this fellow would as eagerly have run upon the
same Theme, as he did then against the Earl, to wit, that the King of
Scotlandes life had been a danger to the Queens life of England, and would
have said also, mark that. Nay he would confirm it with the saying of
Tacitus, which here he does allege, for justifying his Mothers death,
suspectus semp^r in^isusque dominantibus quis^^e proximu^ aestimatur. Barl. p.
94.
He that is next in succession to a principality is always suspected, and
hated by him that is in possession. Upon which ground M. Barlowes eloquence
would quickly have drawn forth some probable argument of likely danger to the
Queens life, if the other were permitted to live, and consequently consulen^^^
securitati, it is good to make sure. I will not stand to discourse what he
would have done in such a case, if it had fallen out for his purpose, for that
may be presumed by that which he did, which was to scan the said Earls
actions, words, driftes, and intentions, with as much malignity, as ever
lightly I have noted in any, to make him odious to the Prince, State, and
especially to the City of London, which ^e knew to be well affected unto him,
and therefore his thirteenth and last record was to the said Citizens there
present, delivered in these words: Hi^ hard opinion and censure of your
baseness, and vnfayth^ullnes to the Que^ne: which manner of Sycophancy himself
con^esseth in a Preface afterward to the Reader, Barl. Preface to his s^^mon
the first sunday in Lent, 16^0.
did so much displease the Mayne^ (to use his word) as if he had with Ananias
lied to the holy Ghost, or preached his own damnation: Others gave out that he
was struck suddaynly with a dreadful sickness: others (says he) with more
virulence, though with less violence, for penal charge, frame matter of hard
judgment out of the discourse it self: first in general, that I have broken
the Canon both of religion and law, in revealing a Penitents confession, which
was with remorse, and private etc. Secondly in particular, because in one part
of my Preface I said, that I was not a penny the richer, nor a step the higher
for the Earl, albeyt I celebrated his glory at the Cross for Cales victory,
and therefore hence they conclude, that I now speak of spleen, and preach for
rewards.

Thus far M Barlow testyfieth of the peoples judgment concerning him, and his
judgment of the Earl of Essex: wherein he being so much interessed, as now you
see, no marvel though he passed this point with silence. Let us see what he
says to the other concerning his Majesty's Mother, About the making a way his
Majesty's Mother.
and her making away. First he begins with a common place as before I
mentioned, saying: If jealous suspicion and fear extend it self to any; it
commonly alights upon the heir apparent or the successor expected. And for
proof of this he cites the words of Tacitus before by me alleged. And how
little this makes to his purpose for excuse of the matter every
meane-witted-reader will consider. He goes further therefore, saying: Tacitus
l^ 1. Histor.
That as before this censurer brought in the Mother of his Majesty's Father for
a parallel to the Powder Treason: so he reckons now for one of Queen
Elizabeth's miseries, the death of the Queen his Majesty's Mother.

Whereto I answer first, that the parallel was just, as to me it seemed: for
that as this treason was designed by powder, so that of his Majesty's Father
was both designed and executed. And as this was done by Catholics, so that by
Protestants: only this happy difference there was, that whereas the other had
effect, this had not. And secondly I say, I did not reckon the death of the
Queen his Majesty's Mother for a misery of Queen Elizabeth, if w^e respect
the effect it self, for that I doubt not, but that the said Queen Elizabeth
did hold it for a felicity to be able to achieue it: but I hold it for an
infelicity, in respect of the cause that forced her unto it, which was
miserable fear, iealousy, and suspicion. But what inference does he make of
this think you? Let us hear him utter it in his own words: VVherby (says
he) the Reader may judge, how he would use hi^ Majesty's own fame, if he were
gathered to his Fathers, when he is glad to allege so unsavory examples of
both his parents. What sequel or consequence is this? For that I do with
compassion and detestation of the facts make mention of both their murders
procured, and executed by people of M. Barlows Religion, therefore I would use
evil his Majesty's ^ame, if he were gathered to his Fathers. What coherence is
there in this? or whereof does this consequence savor but of folly only and
malice?

But yet he passes on to a further point of defense, for this has none at al,
as you see. That renowned Queens death (says he) was a misery indeed to this
whole Land, and the most in^^leble blot that can be recorded of this Country.
Do you see that now he calls her renowned, against whom in their ordinary
books and Sermons they did use in those days, the most vilest and basest
speeches that could ^e applied to a woman? M. Barlow turns his sails with the
wind and serves the time.
do you hear him say now, that in deed her death was a misery to the whol^
land? do you hear him tell us, that the blot thereon is indele^le? Would he
have spoken so in his Saint Queens life time? This fellow is no time-seruer
you may be sure. Well this is hi^ confession. Let us hear his excusation, ad
excusandas excusationes in peccato. But, says he, that our late Soueraygne was
abused therein, and that wicked act committed before her knowledge thereof,
Barl. p. 59.
besides her notable expressing of her own grie^es when she heard o^ it, other
sufficient proofs have fully resolved all hon^st men hereof. So he. And I trow
he means honest men of his own honesty, that will admit for sufficient, any
proo^es for the making away of any, without scruple, that stand in their light.

But was Queen Elizabeth abused therein? Was the act of cutting o^ the head
of Queen Mary of Scotland a wicked act? Would M. Barlow have called it so in
Queen Elizabeth's days? That it was committed before her knowledge? Durst any
man in her days ^ut to death a kitchen boy of her house, much less of her
blood, without her knowledge, approbation, and consent? Did she make so notable
a demonstration of her own griefs which she had thereof? What demonstration
was this? Wherein did it consist? Did she shed tears? Did she vest her self
with s^ckloth for the same? Did she put any man to death, any of the doers or
counselors thereof? And if not, what sufficient proofs, and notable
expressing of her griefs does this Minister mean? What mourning garments
were there seen throughout the whole Court, for this fact? What sign of
sorrow, and public affl^ction? Of her Mother, it is written, that when she
heard o^ Queen Dowagers death, she mourned in yellow satin with gould l^ce:
what apparel Queen Elizabeth did mourn in for Queen Maryes death by her
self commanded, I read not: but that then as the cause wa^ somewhat like of
both their joys, both of Queen Anne and Queen Elizabeth, mother and daughter
by the fa^l of their adversaries, it is probable also that their mourning
habits were not unlike.

But in truth when I do consider the circumstances of that lamentable and
unheard of bloody action, that a Queen of that Nobility, so honorably borne
and brought up, a Queen of two so great Kingdoms, and Heir apparent to the
third, coming into the Realm upon assurance given, having no obligation of
subjection, nor being liable to any corporal punishment by the laws, either
of nature or nations, being equal and no ways subject, and if she were
guilty in any thing, yet can it not be pre^umed to have been more then the
seeking of her own liberty, being unjustly deteyned, which is permitted both
by Divine and humane laws: yet notwithstanding, after so many years of
afflictions in restraint and pr^son, to be brought to a block, and to be
forced to lay d^wne her neck at her commandment, whom she allwa^^s esteemed
unequal to her self, and to have her he^d cut of as the poorest woman that
lived, by the common hangman, seems to me to be one of the most pitiful
spectacles that has happened in Chri^^endome, since that Christianity began:
especially she having so potent and able a Prince regnant at that time in so
warlike a Nation, and so near as his Majesty was.

But let us see what M. Barlow says to this, for it follows immediately upon
his former words: And since that ^ime, says he, our now Sovereign that had
the nerest interest in that errand, was long ago satisfied by her Majesty's
own purgation. But I would demand of M. Ba^low, what ingredients there were in
that purgation, he talks of Colloquintida a little before, but I will not
stand with him about Apothecary-druggs, but this I say, that exept the
purgation of Queen Elizabeth concerning his Majesty's Mothers death, Q.
Elizabeth's purgation about the Q of Scotlands death.
had for ingredients these three things, first Confession of her injustice in
that act: then sorrow and contrition for the same: and thirdly offer of
satisfaction, I must needs say as God by the Pro^het ^eremy said to Jerusalem:
Hier. 2. 22.
Silaueris te ni^ro, and mul^iplicaue^is ti^i her^am Borith, macu^ata es, and
in iniquitate tua coram me, dicit Domi^us. If thou sh^lt w^sh thy self with
^alt-peeter, and multiply never so much the herb Borith, thou art defiled
with thine iniquity before me, says the Lord God. But his Majesty, says M.
Barlow, was long ago satisfied with that purgation. That may be out of
prudence, ^o^ the causes that every wise man will gh^sse, the times standing as
they did. Yt may be also that his Majesty means to follow the wisdom of
King David, who left something in this kind to be done by his son, which sure
I am, that if his Majesty were but three months abroad in the world to hear
what is talked in other Princes Courts and Countries, he would exact perhaps a
larger satisfaction about this matter.

Now the^ to speak briefly of Queen Elizabeth's death, which of purpose for
some pages I have ouerslipt, to treat of these premises now handled that went
before it: About the disastrous death of Q. Elizabeth.
I said in my letter, that after so long a life in such worldly prosperity^s,
pleasures and iollityes, as hers had been, it was a pitiful death to depart
from this world to eternity with so little preparation or mention of God, as
she is reported to have used, whereof I said that I had seen a relation of a
person of worth, that was present at all her sickness and death, and had written
the same not long after her burial, which I said then I would pass over for
breuities sake. But now, for that I am so much urged thereunto by M. Barlow, I
mean to impart with the Reader the greatest part of the said narration, though
not all, for sundry respects, but without any addition of matter from my self,
as most sincerely I do protest. But first let us hear what M. Barlow says to
that which already I have written before.

First he says, That if Queen Elizabeth at the first assault of her sickness
were silent, and solitary, physic will ascribe it unto the nature of
melancholy diseases etc. Then, ^ hat reason would interpret, that as ^he in
refusing peremptorily her bed, did show her Princely resolution, Barl. ^ ^5.
stantem mori, to dye standing; so Christian charity would infer her retired
silence to be a withdrawing of her mind from her senses, for a more serious
meditation or her bypast life, and future state.

Behold here M. Barlowes spiritual Rhetoric or Rhetorical spirituality,
that can make madness meditation, and silence or rather dumbnes upon melancholy
to be a voluntary withdrawing of the mind from her senses. Indeed her bypast
life, and future state were matters that required deep meditation, yea
contrition also and tears, if we will believe Saint Augustine, who both wept
heartily, and repeated often over the penitential psalms when he lay on his
deathbed: and further said, as Possidius relates in his life, that no man
ought to go out of this life without penance, if he has time to procure it:
but alas it seems that Queen Elizabeth was not in that state of mind or
sense to procure it, or to accept of it, if any man had offered the same unto
her.

As for the other particulers, what she answered to her Doctor of Physic,
that she did meditate; that she did lay her hands upon the head of Doctor
VVhitguist Archbishop of Canterbury kneeling by her, and saying Amen to his
prayers, and said unto one of her Ladies waiting upon her, that her mind was
little of from God, and so gave up the Ghost etc. all this I say, for that it
is much different from the faithful relation of the aforesaid worthy person
which was present and wrote the Story, as an eye-witnes, which M. Barlow does
not, I shall remit my self and the Reader to the said relation, which is this
that ensues.

Her Majesty being in good health, one day a privy Counselor presented her
with a piece of gould of the bigness of an Angel, The narration of the manner
of Q. Elizabeth's death.
dimly marked with some small characters, which he said an old woman in Wales
bequeathed her on her deathbed, and thereupon he discoursed, how the said old
woman by virtue of the same, lived to the age of an hundred and od years, and
in that age having all her body withered, and consumed, and wanting nature to
nourish, she died, commanding the said piece of go^ld to be carefully sent her
Majesty: all^aging further, that as long as the said old woman wore it upon her
body, she could not dye.

The Queen upon the confidence she had thereof, took the said gould^ and wore
it upon her ru^fe. Now though she fell not suddenly sick, yet daily decreased
her rest, and feeding, and within few days fell sick indeed, and the cause
being wondered at by a Lady with whom she was very private and confident, her
Majesty told her (commanding her to conceal the same) that she saw one night
in her bed, her body exceeding lean, and fearful in a light of fire. This
sight was at White Hall a little before she departed from thence to Richmond,
and may be testified by another Lady who was one of the nearest about her
Person, of whom the Queen demanded whether she was not wont to see sightes in
the night, telling her of the bright flame she had seen. Afterward in the
melancholy of her sickness she desired to see a true looking glass, which in
twenty years before she had not seen, but only such a one as was made of
purpose to deceive her sight, which glass being brought her, she fell
presently into exclayming against them which had so much commended her, and
took it so offensiuely, that some which before had flattered her, du^st not
come into her sight. Now falling into extremity, she ^ate two days and three
nights upon her stool ready dresl^d, and could never be brought by any of her
Counsel to go to bed, or to eat or drink: only my Lord Admiral one time
persuaded her to drink some broth, ^or that any of the rest she would not
answer them to any question, but said softly to my Lord Admiralls earnest
persuasions, that if he knew what she had seen in her bed, he would not
persuade her as he did. And comaunding the rest of the Lords to depart her
chamber, willed my Lord Admiral to stay, to whom she shoo^^ her head, and
with a pitiful voice said unto him. My Lord, I am tied with a chain of iron
about my n^eke: ^
he alleging her wonted courage, she replied: I am tied, and the case is
altered with me.

About the same time two Ladies waiting on her in her C^a^ber discovered in the
bottom of her Chair the Queen^ o^ hearts, with a nail of iron knocked through
the forehead of it, the which the Ladies durst not then pull out, remembering
that the like thing was reported to be used to other, for witchcraft. Another
Lady waiting in these times on the Queen, and leaving her asleep in her privy
chamber at Richmond at the very first distemper of her sickness, met her at she
t^ought, three or four chambers of, and fearing that she would have been
displeased that she le^t her alone, came toward her to excuse her self, but
she vanished away: and when the Lady returned into the same chamber where she
left the Queen, she found her asleep as before. So in time growing past
recovery, having kept her bed some days, the Counsel sent unto her the Bishop
of Canterbury and other of the Prelates, upon sight of whom, she was much
offended, cholerikly rating them, bidding them be packing: and afterward
exclaymed to my L. Admiral that ^he had the greatest indignity offered her by
the Archbi^hop that a Prince could have, to pronounce sentence of death against
her, as if she had lived an Atheist. And some Lords mentioning to have other
Prelates to come unto her, she answered that she would have none of those
hedge-priests and so none of them came to her, till after she was past sense
and at the last gasp, at which time some prayers were said not far from her.

The Queen being departed this life, the Lords of the Counsel went to London
to proclaim his Majesty, leaving her body with charge not to be opened, such
being her desire: but some for some reasons having given a secret warrant to
the Surgeons, they opened her, which the rest of the Counsel did not
contradict. Now her body being seared up, was brought to White Hall, where it
was watched every night by six several Ladies: who being all about the same,
which was fast nailed up within a board-coffin with leaves of lead, covered
with velvet, it happened that her body brake the coffin with such a crack,
that it spleated the wood, lead, and cerecloth, to the terror and astonishme^t
of all that were present: whereupon the next day she was feign to be new trimmed
up, in so much as all were of opinion, that if she had not been opened, the
breach of her body would have been much worse. Diverse other particularities, ^or
that they concern special Pe^^onage^, I have thought good for some causes to
conceal.

And this narration I have been forced to set forth, to avoid the calumniation
of M. Barlow, who says upon my first words, in the Letter to my friend: This
is another Ies^^^icall trick, as well in matters histo^icall, as o^ doctrine,
to ^ra^e it out with an impud^nt tale: but ask the^ for their Author who says
it, then ansu^^er is like the C^clops c^y in Homer (...), nobody, nobody. But
we say contrary to the Cyclops, somebody, somebody, or rather many Lodies
together: for that in this point I have the original by me, and have showed it
to many men of gravity and judgment, though it be not convenient to declare the
name of the Relator for this present to M. Barlow, ^
for more causes then one. And as for his general slander and con^umelies
which he though good he^^ to cast in, that it is a Iesuitical trick, as well in
matters Historical as of doctrine, to brave it out with an impudent tale, the
assertion thereof must needs show his impudency, if he does not prove it with
some examples, as he neither does, nor can: but how often I have don it against
him in this book, the Reader has partly seen, and will more before we end.
And the two late books published, to omit all other, the one, The sober
Reckoning with M. Morton, the other, The Search of M. Francis Walsingham, one
of their own Religion, do so put them to the wall in this matter of lying and
falsifying, as if M. Barlow be able well to answer those two books, and
satisfy substantially for the main and huge number of falsities therein
objected, and demonstrated, it shall not be needful for him to trouble
himself any more to answer this my book, for I will take my self satisfied
by the satisfaction given to them.

And thus now having buried Q. Elizabeth and brought her body to rest for a
time; would to God we might hope the like, both for body and soul eternally,
and Christ Jesus our Savior knows how heartily and sincerely I do desire it,
without any worse affection toward her then hearty compassion, notwithstanding
all the outcryes and raging exclamations made by this intemperate Minister
against me for the contrary, to wit, ^or malice, and hat^ed against her and for
judging her before the time, against the prescription of the Apostle S. Paul,
which I have not done. For Gods judgments are secret, and cannot absolutely be
known in particular before the last day, when according to the Scripture all
shall be made mani^est, so far as it shall be convenient for men to know. But yet
in this life men also may give a guess, and take notice according to our
present state of many things, how they are to fall out afterward, as S. Paul
does often repeat, and affirm most resolutly, that such as shall commit such
and such delicts, as he there recounteth, shall never attain to the Kingdom
of heaven, but be damned eternally, according to their works, In what case we
may judge of other men's souls after their death.
as loose life, murders, fornications, adulteryes, sects, schisms, heresies,
and the like. And if one should see, or know some persons to commit all these
sins together, or the most of them, and so dye without contrition, or
pe^nance for the same to his knowledge, might not he by good warrant of S. Paul
affirm, that in his opinion they are damned? Nay does not S. Paul give this
express liberty of judging to his Scholar Timothy, and by him to us, when he
says as before also has been noted, Quorumdam hominum peccata mani^^sta sunt,
praecedentia ad iudicium: quosdam autem subsequentur. 1. Tim. 5.
The sins of some men are manifest going before them unto judgment, and others
have their sins following them. So as i^ either before their death or after
their death, when the particular judgment of every soul is to be made, any
man's gri^uous sins be made manifest, there is no doubt but that men may judge
also in a certain sort, or at least make to themselves a very probable and
likely conjecture of the miserable state of that party: yea more the^ a
conjecture, if the Church should censure him for any great sin co^mitted^ and
d^ing a^terwards in the same without due repe^ta^ce, which is wont to be
declared by denying unto him Christian burial, as when they murder themselves,
and the like.

But above all, when the said Church does cut of any body by Excommunication
from being any more a member thereof, for schism, heresy, or other offense of
this quality, a man may make judgment of his damnation, yea must also: for
then is he in the case whom S. Paul affirms to be s^buersum, No sin to judge
of men deceased in her^sie.
subverted by heresy, that is as much, to say, turned vpside down, or plucked
up by the roots, and proprio iudicio condemnatum, condemned not only by the
judgment of the Church, but also by his own judgment in like manner, when he
comes to answer the matter: for that being bound to follow the direction of
the Church, he became Haereti^us homo, as the Apostles words are, that is to
say, an Heretica^l man, one that out of choice or election would ne^des follow
his own judgment.

This point then that a man or woman dying in the excommunication of the known
Catholic Church, may be pronounced to be damned, and cannot possibly be saved
(albeit their lives were otherwise never so good and apparent holy) is a thing
so generally, earnestly, and resolutely affirmed, and incultated by the ancient
Fathers of the primitive Church, that no man can doubt of it, without
pertinacity or impiety. For S. Cyprian that holy Bishop and Martyr does treat
the same largely in diverse places, saying first, that an heretic or
schismatike that is out of the Church cannot be saved, Cyprian l. (...).
though he should shed his blood for Christ, inexpiabilis culpa, quae nec
passione purgatur: it is an inexpiable sin (to be an Heretic or
Schismaticke) that is to say, not ever to be forgiven, nor can it be purged by
su^fering for Christ himself. And again he says, S. C^pria^^ judgment of
such as dye out o^ the Church.
that such a man can never be a martyr though he should dye for Christ; nor yet
receive any Crown for confession of Christian faith, even unto death: which
death, says he, non erit ^id^i corona, sed poena (...): it shall not be a
Crown of faith, but a punishment o^ per^idiousnes. And many other like places
and s^yings he has, which for breuity I omit: wherein also do coacurre with
him, the other ancient Fathers that ensued after, and namely S. Augustine in
many parts of his worke^: (...) l 4 (...) 17.
in particular, where he says against the Donatists, That neither baptism,
nor Martyrdom profits an heretic any thing at all, which he repeateth often
times: and in another place he says: If thou be out o^ the Church, thou shall
be punished ^ith eternal pains, although thou should be burned quick for
the name of Christ. Au^ust. (...) 2^ 4. ad Donat^
And yet again the same Father: Here^ikes d^ sometimes brag, that they do give
much alms to the poor, and do su^^er much for truth, but this is not for
Christ, bu^ ^or their Sect. ^ ^oke for whom thou suffer, quia for as mi^^us
es, ideo miser es, ^or that thou art cast sorth of the communion of the Church,
therefore art thou miserable, whatsoever thou do or suffer otherwise. For
harken to the Apostle, saying to himself: I^ I should give all that I have to
the poor, and deliver my body to the ^ire, without ^harity I am nothing: he
that is out of the Church, lives out of chari^y. And let the Reader see more
of this in S. A^gus^ine, Sermon. Domini in mome cap. 9. and lib. 2. contra
Petilianum Donatist. cap. 98. lib. 1. contra Gaud^ntium cap. 33. and in Conc.
de g^stis cum Eme^^^o, where he has these words: A notable sentence of S.
Augustine.
I^ unto an heretic that is out o^ t^^ Church, it should be said by an enemy
of Christ: Off^r up sacrifice to my idols, and adore my Gods, and he in
refusing to adore, should be put to death by the said enemy of Christ for this
fact: yet shall ^^le damn^d and not crowned.

I pretermit in this matter S. Chrysostom hom. 11. in ^^ist. ad E^^es. S.
Pacianus Bishop of Barcelona, that lived s^m^what before him Epist. 2. ad
S^mpronium, S. Fulg^ntius that lived the next age after lib. de fide ad P^trum
cap. 29. whose words are these, spoken with a vehement spirit, and some men
ascribe them to S. Augustine: Firnassime tene and (...) dubi^^s etc. A ^ard
c^sure against all the ^abble of I^^n Fox his Martyrs.
Do thou hold ^or most firm and certain, and no ways doubt, but that
whosoever is an heretic, or ^chismaticke, and thereby out of the Church,
t^ough he be baptized in the name of the Father, the S^nne, and the holy Ghost,
do never so good works, given n^u^r so ^^ch alms, no though he should shed
his blood for th^n^ m^ o^ Christ, yet can he not be saved.

Well then this is the Mayor proposition, no Christian man or woman, though of
never so good life can be saved ^ut of the unity of the known common
Catholic Church, nor in that unity without good life; especially if he
should die in any of these sins mentioned before by S. Paul, that go before
or follow him to Judgment.

The minor proposition is, that Q. Elizabeth is noted most grievously in both
these kinds: Ergo, there may be a just fear of her everlasting damnation.
Neither does this prejudice Almighty God his extraordinary mercies to whom
he lists; we speak here of the ordinary way of salvation revealed unto the
Church, and in that sense only shall be said somewhat to the Minor proposition,
wherein stands the chief moment of this our question.

That Queen Elizabeth was excommunicated by name by two or three Bishops of
Rome, whom we hold for supreme heads on earth of the known Catholic
Church, no man can deny: that she was likewise excommunicated by con^equence,
though not by name, by the General Council of Trent, A co^uincing argument upon
the Premi^^s.
in all t^ose Canons and anathematizations which were made against Protestants
for their doctrine, which she also held, no man can doubt of: as neither but
that she was comprehended in all the cases that touched her faith or actions in
Bulla Coenae, every year repeated and pronounced against Heretics,
Schismatikes, and Usurpers of Ecclesiastical power, and authority, whereof she
avouched herself to be Head in her own kingdoms. And now that this external
visible Church called Catholic, and known by that name throughout the world,
as well by friends as enemies, which S. Augustine says is an argument that it
is the true Church indeed, is the self same visible Church, that was in the
foresaid Fathers times, and visibly deduced by succ^ssion from their days to
ours, is so manifestly to be proved, The hard ^ase of Q. ^lizabeth
as no man can with reason deny the same: and consequently if it were so
certain a damnation to be excommunicated, or put out of that Church, as now
you have heard the said Fathers to affirm, then is it so now a^^o, and then
go^th hard the case of Queen Elizabeth, as you see, for that it is not known
that she was ever reconciled, or taken into the said Church again.

And as for the other point, concerning other sins, meant or mentioned by the
Apostle, as on the one side I will not take upon me to determine what, or how
many or how great she committed: so on the other, considering the frailty of
mankind, the temptations of the triple enemy, the world, the flesh, and the
devil, the many occasions she had in her free state of life to fall into
sin; and that in the space of four and forty years at least, after the
entrance to her Crown, she never used the ordinary help of ancient Christians
for purging her soul, which the foresaid Fathers do teach us to be not only
contrition, but also Sacramental Confession, and absolution of the Church: her
state, I say, being this, it must needs follow, that so many as believe and
acknowledge this Sacrament of the Church to be necessary to salvation, when it
may be had yea is c^mmaunded by the said Church under pain of Censures to be
reiterated every year once at least, if not oftener, that this woman never
making the same, and dying in that state, cannot be saved according to the
judgment of all those that believe and follow that Church that condemns her:
which Church being spread throughout the whole world, as it was in S.
Augustines time, and having obtained the same privilege which he took to be
sufficient to demonstrate the true Church, to wit, that she is known by the
name of Catholic, both to friends and enemies, true Christians and
Heretics, according to the common sense of men (for he proves that never
heretical Congregation could obtain to be so much as called Catholic,
throughout Christendom, or to be known by that name) this thing, I say, being
so, we see what a dreadful prejudice this may appear to be against the
everlasting salvation of Queen Elizabeth. For if there were so great and main
a difference between bodily Phisitian^^ both for number, skill, experience,
antiquity, and authority about the temporal death of any Prince, as there is
here in all these qualities between the spiritual Physicians of Christendom
Catholic, A remarkable comparison.
and English Protestants, concerning the eternal death of Queen Elizabeth's
soul, to wit that so many more temporal Physicians in number without
comparison, so much more learned, so much more experienced in corporal
Physic, as the other exceed them in spiritual: yea further, and that they
had so many deadly Symtomes, Chry^es, and Prognosticons con^^med out of the
authority of Hipocrates, Gal^^, and other ancien^ Physicians, all tending to
mortality, as the other have out of the doctrine, judgment, and perpetual
practice both of the said Church, and holy Ghostly Fathers of the same, for
Queen Elizabeth's everlasting death: I doubt nothing but that the said Princes
temporal life, would be held for very dangerous, or rather his death were very
probable. Neither did I say any more of the spiritual death of Queen
Elizabeth most likely to accompany her corporal. I beseech the mercy of
Almighty God that it be not so.

And here I might add also another plain and familiar proof, out of the said
ancient Fathers, and namely out of S. Augustine, to the end we may see how his
Church did agree with ours, or rather the universal known: Catholic Church
in his days, with that Church that has the same name and notes in ours. For
besides that number of authorities which I cited out of him before, as agreeing
with other Fathers, that it is impossible for an Heretic, Schismatic, or an
Excommunicated person, dying in that state to be saved, he goes further in an
other place into more particulers; for being required by his friend
Quod-Vult-Deus to set down unto him a brief Catalogue, or enumeration of all
the particular heresies, that the Catholic Church had condemned, from the
beginning of Christianity unto their time, or did hold for heresies in those
days; he set down above fourscore, and added in the end, that if any man
should profess, or believe any of those heresies, or any other that had, or
should spring up, he could not be a Christian Catholic; and consequently
neither be saved, but everlastingly damned. Now in this Catalogue or book of
heresies (which was also gathered unto their days by Philastrius, and S.
Epiphanius before him) S. Augustine sets down for damned heresies some that
Queen Elizabeth did manifestly ^ould, Q. Elizabeth held condemned heresies.
and so was thought to hold, and for any thing that we know, died in the same,
as namely those heresies of the Heretic Aerius, that solemn fasts appointed
by the Church were not to be observed, but every man or woman to fast when they
would, Haeresi 53.
least they should seem to be under the law. So says that heretic. And then
(which makes most to our present purpose) that prayer and sacrifice were not
to be offered up for the dead, nor did profi^ them any thing at all, upon which
later point I am induced to make this ensuing consideration.

S. Augustine in his nynth book of Conseffions recounting the story of his
journey from Millan to Rome, Aug. l. 9. co^f^^^. c. 13.
and from thence to Africa his Country, in the compaine of his Mother, a holy
widow named Moni^a, shows how they coming to the Port of Ostia, where they
were to imbarke, his said Mother fell grievously sick, and after some days of
sickness departed this present li^e: and for testification of her great
sanctity, the said Doctor recou^counteth many of her godly speeches uttered
before her death, S. Monica desired to be prayed for at the altar after her
death which Q. Elizabeth did not.
and amongst other she earnestly recommended unto him and other there present,
that she might be prayed for at the altar in time of Sacrifice, which S.
Augustine not only performed himself, but in the same place most humbly
desires all those that shall read his words, to pray both for the soul of
his said Mother, and likewise for the soul of his Father dead long before,
named Patricius.

Now then have we the testimony of S. Augustine, and by him also of all the
Catholic Church in his time (for that he was never noted of error either for
thus writing, or thus doing:) first that Aerius was an Heretic, and
consequently damned for holding that Prayers and Sacrifice were not to be
offered up for the dead. Secondly we see by the fact of the holy widow, that,
that was the common sense of the universal Church in her days, for that she
having lived first in the Catholic Church in Afria, and then under S. Ambrose
in Millan, and sometime also in Rome, she would never have demanded this
office to have been done for her soul after her death, if it had not been the
common known practice of the universal Church in her days: neither would her
learned godly Son have permitted it, and much less performed the same
himself, and entreated others to do the like, whereof it seems I may well
infer, that if (...) were damned for teaching the contrary doctrine, then is
M. Barlow in great danger of damnation (if he repent not) for defending the
same doctrine. And if S. Monica and S. Augustine her Son may be thought to be
saved, that both believed and practiced prayers, and sacrifices for the dead,
then hardly can be saved Queen Elizabeth with her Chaplin M. Barlow (except he
change his opinion) that neither practice or believe that doctrine. I remit me
to the careful Reader, what force there is in this Argument.

OF THE FLATTERY AND SYCOPHANCY USED BY DIVERSE MINISTERS TO HIS MAJESTY OF
ENGLAND, To the hurt and prejudice of Catholic men, and their cause. CHAP.
III.
AS during the life of Queen Elizabeth one great Witchcraft of Ministers was,
for bringing her asleep in the bed of careless security, to intoxicate her
brain with excessive praises, and immoderate adulations: So, said I, they
attempted to do the like with his Majesty that now is, indeauoring to incite
him daily more and more against Catholics, and their religion, by pretense of
zeal toward his State and Person, which no ways would they have him believe
that Catholics did love or favor. And in this poin^ I did mention in
particular T.M. the younger, of whom I was credibly informed, that his custom
was by reason of his place near his Majesty, at the time of repast to iniure
Catholics that were absent, either by false relating their doctrine, or
misco^struing their actions, or alleging and showing forth some places out of
their books, that may seem prejudicial against the^, being taken at the
worst, and without due interpretation. My words at that time were these.

Let. p. 36.
We do verily persuade ourselves, that if his Highness had been left to
himself, and to his own Royal nature, See Answer to Sir Edw. Cook c. 15.
and Noble disposition in this point (as Queen Elizabeth was wont to say of
her disposition in religion) we had tasted indeed much of this his great
humanity; and so we began for sometime, but being prevented and diuerted by the
subtle working of this and other such Ministers, as desired to draw blood, and
to incite his Majesty against us, we having no place to speak for our selves,
His Majesty's mild disposition diuerted.
no admittance to be heard, no effectual intercessour to interpose his
mediation for us, no marvel, though we were cast of, and do endure the smart.

And I do name this Minister (T. M. the younger) in the first place among the
rest, for that it is commonly said, The exercise of the Minister T. Montague.
that his whole exercise is Sycophancy and calumniation against men of our
profession, be they strangers or domestical, and that among other devises he
has this, that every time his Majesty is to take his repast, he is ready
either with some tale, jest, scoff, or other bitter lance to wound us absent,
and that he has ever lightly some book and page thereof ready to read to his
Highness, somewhat framed by his art to incense, or auert his Majesty more,
either in judgment or affection, or both, and thereby to draw from him some
hard speeches, which being published afterward by himself, and others, do
serve to no other end, but to gall, and alienate min^es, and to afflict them
that are not suffered to give reason for themselves, and that is the service he
does his Majesty in this exercise.

And now unto this let us see how M.Barlow begins to frame his answer:
Barl. page 102.
Is not this ^ellow truly can is in praesepe (says he) that can neither speak
well himsel^e, nor endure that virtue should have her due commendation by
others? He m^an^th concer^ing the praises of his Majesty, which he would s^y
that I can neither utter them of my self, nor suffer others to do the same,
Maliciou^ contradiction.
and yet within a few lines after, finding me to have yielded unto his Majesty
sundry worthy due praises, he is forced to run to the quite contrary extreme,
of reprehending me for it, saying: Barl. page 103.
VVheras this Judas commends his Majesty's great humanity, Royal nature, and
Noble disposition, so did the Diueth con^esse Christ to be the Son of God,
but their conclusion was withal Quid tibi and nobis? what have we to do with
thee? So he.

And is not this humor of malicious contradicting very fit for the Devil
indeed, who thereof has his name of Satan? In the former lines he said, that I
would neither praise his Majesty, nor suffer him to be praised, and here he
compares me to the devil for praising him; and yet goes further, saying^
That his Majesty may demand, what evil have I done this day, that so bad a
fellow as this is, should speak so well of me? So as whether we speak well,
or hold our peace, M. Barlow a true parasite.
still we must be blame-worthie. And this also is a principal point belonging
to the prof^ssion of Parasites, if you mark it well, to admit noe concurrence
of their adversaries, in honoring that Prince (though never so sincerely
meant) whom themselves alone by their exorbitant adulation do mean to
possess.

Let us see what general ground our Antagonist here M. Barlow, that seems
indeed to be an egregious Craftsman in this occupation, does lay us down to
defend himself from the imputation of flattery, for this he is wont to do full
wisely, when he means to build somewhat thereon. Flattery, Barl. pag^ 102.
says he, cannot be without touch of both parties, because none use to
^latter, but such as have no other means to advance themselves, and none love
to be flattered but those which have no true virtue to commend themselves.
Which ground has two parts as you see, and both of them most evidently false.
The first, for tha^ otherwise none but poor men should be flatterers, whereas
rich men may perform the same office, About the nature of flattery and how Sy^
William demeaneth himself therein.
and do also often times more then others, either for increasing their riches,
or preserving that they have, by the grace of the Prince, whom they flatter, or
for to hurt others. The second part also is false, for that men endued with
many great virtues, may delight to hear themselves praised, and their virtues
acknowledged, though in their hearts perhaps (if they be wise and virtuous
indeed) they do scorn the prayser, when they understand, that he does it out
of adulation for his own gain, or to hurt others. For it is to be considered
that the nature of adulation which consists in excess of desire to please,
and delight the person which is flattered, does not always require that the
things themselves should be all false that are spoken in such adulation, but
it is sufficient there be excess in the measure or manner of utterance, or in
the time, place^ and other such circumstances.

For i^ a Prince for example, had a good leg indeed, for one to tell it him
often and openly in all places and occasions, and still to bring in speech of
good legs, as some will say the custom was to flatter a certain Earl when he
was young, in our English Court; this should be base flatte^y of it self,
though the Subject were true. But if here withal the flatterers intention
should be to gain unjustly, or to hurt any man injuriously thereby; then should
it be malicious and damnable flattery. And now whether also these circumstances
did concur in the flattery of M. Barlow, and his fellows toward Queen
Elizabeth, when she was alive and toward his Majesty that now lives, I will
not stand much to discourse: only I am sure, that the last circumstance, which
of all other is the worst, to wit, of hurting Catholics, never commonly
failed. So as we may truly say, as S. Augustine said upon those words of the
Psalm, Augu. in (...). 69.
Conuertantur statim erubescentes, Let flatterers presently with confusion be
converted, for that, plus nocet lingua adulatoris quam gladius persecutoris:
the tongue of the flatterer does hurt more th^n the sword of the persecutor.
And this we have well experienced.

I have somewhat touched before, how well M. Barlow observed the circumstance
of time in exercising this art: For when the Earl of Essex was in his ruff,
the^ was he his ^^comiast, and the loud-sounding trumpet of his triumphs, but
when time began to turn, and prosperous fortune to change her face, then did
he change his course also, and became not only a silent Orator in his behalf,
but also an open accuser, yea a calumniator and Syphocant, as out of his before
mentioned printed Sermon you may have observed: for that Sycopha^cy (as himself
in this place for the defense of his brother T. M. the younger, will presently
declare at large by the first institution of the word) signifies a complaint
or accusation of carrying out figgs from Attica, contrary to the law, and
afterward remained with the signification of false or trifling accusations, or
calu^niations, prying into other men's actions, malicious infere^ces, odious
collections, and the like, whereof in that printed Sermon against the said Earl
you shall find good store, M. Barlow an egregious flatterer.
especially those 13. last records which are left to the Citizens of London to
meditate upon, which in effect are all but captious illations, and odious
inferences of his own gathering: but on the other side the flatteries bestowed
upon the Queen are both eminent and excellent, which not to loose time in
repeating, I will only report the last con^ayned in the very last words of that
Sermon. What now remains (says he) but to conclude with my text, Give unto
Caesar the things of Caesar, our most Gracious Sovereign I mean, honor her,
obey her, fear her, but above all pray for her, that she being the light of
the Land, may shine among us as long as the two great lights in heaven, the
sun and moon: this God grant for his mercies sake. Amen.

Thus he taught his Auditory to pray by vocal prayer, and especially the
Citizens of ^ondon there present, to whom for mental prayer he had given the
forersaid thirteen points of meditation before set down, whereof the last
was, o^ the Earls opinion and censure o^ their baseness etc. But now I would
know of M. Barlow, whether in his Divinity, prayer may be made without the
virtue Theological of Hope, which appears by the whole course of Scripture
that it cannot: for he that hops not to obtain that which he prays for,
prays in vain. And then secondly I would demand wha^ grounded hope the
Citizens of London might have to pray with him, that Queen Elizabeth might
live, as long as the two lights in heaven, the sun and moon, should endure?
Could they hope for this, seeing her now an old woman, and weakened also by
many diseases? And if they could not hope it, how could they pray for it, but
only in jest? And whether jesting with God in prayer be lawful by M. Barlowes
Theology, M. Barlows prayers without hope.
I would also gladly know? especially for so much as he seems to have spoken
this in very good earnest, by adjoining a vehement reduplicati^e in the very
last words of all: This God grant for his mercies sake, Amen: as if he had
said, this is the point of most moment to be demanded at Gods hand, that the
Queen, the sun, and the moon might live out together, and be of one age,
and that they shin^ together, she over England, and they over the whole world:
this is the grace that we have most need of, Luc. 10. 21.
vnum est necessariu^: other folks with Mar^ha are solicitous and troubled
about many things, but we have need of one thing: This God grant us ^or his
mercies sake, that Queen Eliz^beth do not dye before the sun and moon: and
yet good man h^ did not consider in thi^ seruent devotion, that he o^fered
great injury to his Majesty that now is. For if Queen Elizabeth had lived
and shined as long as the sun and moon, his Majesty had never had any part
in that succession: for that after the sun and moon I suppose there will be
no succession. And this will serve for one example amongst the rest of his
adulation toward Queen Elizabeth.

Flattering of his Majesty.
B^t as for those which he uses toward his Majesty that now is, both in this
place, and throughout his whole Book, though they be gross and palpable
inough^ and consequently also seen I doubt not, and scorned in great part by
his Majesty's prudence: yet mean I not to treat thereof, for that the common
refuge of flatterers in this point is to say, that such as do tax or mislike
their flattery, are enemies or envious of the praises given to the person
flattered: and the same is M. Barlowes defense in this place. Only then shall I
^eau^ ^his matter to the judgment of the Reader, but especially of his
Majesty, who in this case for many respects may be the most competent Judge,
notwithstanding the cause does most concern himself.

Let us now se^ wh^t M^ Ba^lo^ says ^o that which before was obiec^ed against
him, and his like, and nam^ly against T. M. the younger, for sycophancie and
calumniation against Catholics, and their doctrine by sinister means, at
such times as his Majesty tak^th his repast. It is true, says he, that his
Majesty's (...) for the most part at times of repast, is a^ Constantines Court
(Ecclesiae (...)) a li^le V^iuersitie compa^sed with learned men in all
professions, and his Ma^estie in the midd^st of them ( as the Grecian in^ituled
one less deser^^^^) a living Library, Barl p. 105.
furni^h^ (...) all hands to reply^ answere^ (...) explayne (...) upon fact,
Sir VVilli^m deserves his fee.
or (...) upon (...)^ In which words for so much as concerns his Majesty's
person, I will not meddle withal to con^r^dict, but rather to admite and
r^ioyce (...) such excellencies of lea^ning in so great a Prince, and (...)
most heartily and (...) Almighty God every day that his Di^ine Majesty would
bestow upon him the true excellency, and indeed above all other learning,
which is ^he knowledge of his true Cat^olick^ Church and doctrine, without
which, as we have now heard out of the an^ient Fathers before alleged, that
all other skill and learning is either vain or pernicious, for that it shall
be as S. Cyprian says, non corona (...).

His (...) heard but one part, and has been ^uer obse^t with th^s^ Academicall
fellows both in Scotland and England, which here M. B^rlow names his
Table-^niuersity, being indeed ^ut ^r^ncher-Minister^: for in Sc^o^^^^ and
public (...) they dare not ^ppeare, or (...) their f^ce. And ^ow that his
Ma^^^ty has given so plentiful occasion of trial by writing with his hand t^
all Christian Princes, stirring up the^by great store of learned men to
dis^usse the questions in controversy; we do verily hope in the mercy of
Almighty God, that as goo^d by rubbing and heating is made more clear; so will
truth by disputation, and examination, wherein his Majesty having so principal
an interest, as now to the world is known, he will stand more attent to the
discussion, an^ issue of all, and thereby recei^e that lig^^ which is needful
to euerl^sting bliss. And this concerning his Majesty with all duty and
respective love.

But as for the little University of learned men of all professions, About the
little University.
that inuirone his Mai^sties table at time of repast, I must say somewhat more,
though very b^eif^y also. We do easily imagine by the effects, what m^^ner of
learned men, and of what measure in learning they are, that attend his Majesty
at those times, and places: and we do measure them principally by their books
which they have published, for that it i^ like that their (...) writings are no
less considerate and weighty, then their table-talke ex tempore. And then if
M. Barlow for example, should talk no more substantially in that place, and
audience then he does here in this hi^ ^ooke, which he has published to the
world, it would pro^e, God knows, a very poor University, which his Majesty
should have about him, of such men, wherein I remi^ me for some part to the
trial already made in this discussion of mine.

If we should compa^e the Ac^demies and Vniuer^^tyes of learned de^ines, that
his Mai^styes noble and renowned ancestors both of England and Scotland had
about them, from time to time for a thousand years together, for resolving
them in all cases necessary for belie^e or man^^^, with these new men, lear^ing
with learning, gravity with gravity, and authority wi^h authority, they being
joined with all other learned men of the Christian world in unity of doctrine:
and these men being alone, and ag^^ei^g with no other part or sect, ^o not of
their own Prot^sta^^ that live out of England, no^ having any other cert^ine
^^le of infallible direction but their own heads: the difference will quickly
be seen between them, as also whether his Maie^ties furniture be better or
not, in this behalf, then all theirs, and of all other Princes of the
Christian world bes^des.

And yet further to increase the weight of this consideration somewhat more,
let us suppose that this Majesty our Sovereign, with that great pregnancy of
wit, and other gui^tes bestowed by Almighty God upon him, should sit down in
an Assembly of half a dozen of the ancient learned Fathers and Doctors of the
primitive Christian Church, as S. Athanasius, S. Gregory Nazianzen, These were
an other manner of University.
and S. C^rysostome of the Greek Church; S. Ambrose, S. (...), and S.
Augustine of the latin, all living above twelu^ ^^ndred years agone, and that
S. Gregory the Gre^^ though coming somewhat after them, yet for that he sent
first Christian preachers into England, should sit down with them, and that
all the^e together should reason gravely wi^h his Majesty de Reg^o Dei, of
the kingdom of God, as S. Luke testifies that our Savior did with his
disciples after his resurrection for forty days together; Act. ^^
and that S. Athanasius as somewhat more ancient then the rest, S. Athan^sius.
should gravely begin, and recount unto his Maiesti^ what passed between him,
and other Catholic Bi^hops, and his Lord the Emperor Constantius, deceived
by the Arian Preachers, and Ministers of that sect, who flocked no^ less about
him at that time, to flatter him, ^^d incite him against Catholics, then do
these Protestant Ministers about his Majesty in these days: and namely he
should tell him, that which he has left written in a large Epistle of his,
Epist. ad solitari^m vitam age^tes.
how the said Emperor being auerted now from the Catholics by the Arian
M^^isters, (...) for di^ers Bishops, commanding them in his p^^ence to
subscribe to his Imperial order, for the banishing of Athanasius, and
communion to be frequented with the said Arians; and that the said Catholic
Bishops wond^ing at his command^ment, and telling him that it was against
Ecclesiastical Canons, that the Emperor should meddle with such matters; he
persisting notwithstanding to have his will done, they held up their hands to
heaven appealing unto God for remedy: presuming further to tell him, that his
Kingdom was not his, but from God, who gave it him, and it was to be feared
least ^b would take it away again, if he proceeded in that course: and finally
deuounced unto him the dreadful day of Judgment, persuading him not to
pervert the course of Ecclesiastical affairs, neither intermeddle the Roman
Empire in dealing with Ecclesiastical institutions etc.

All which and much more is set down by S. Athanasius himself in a long
Epistle of this matter, where he also recou^teth the bold speech of bishop
Osius the famous Confessor of Corduba, who was one of the 318. Fathers that
sa^^ as Judges in the first Council of Ni^e, and used the sa^^ liberty of
speech to the foresaid Emperor at another time which the other Bishops had done
before him, saying to him: Leave of I beseech thee o Emperor these dealing^ in
Ecclesiastical affairs; remember thou art mortal, fear the day of
Judgment, keep thy self free from this kind of sin, do not use commandments
to us in this kind, but rather learn of us, for that God has committed the
Empire unto thee, and to us the things that appertain to his Church etc. All
which speeches does S. Athanasius allow, and highly commend in the same place,
adding further of his own, That now the said Constantius had made his Palace
a tribunal of Ecclesiastical causes, in place of Ecclesiastical Courts, and
had made himself the chief Prince and head of spiritual Pleas, which he
calls, the abomination foretold by Daniel the Prophet etc. Which speech, if
old Athanasius should have used to his Majesty in the presence of all the
rest, and seconded by others that sat the^e with him, could not in all reason
but much move, especially if^ So Gregory Nazianzen, S. Gregor. Nazian.
and S. Ambrose S. Ambrose.
should have recounted their admonitions about the same, to their temporal
Lord and Emperor Valentinian, as when the former said unto him, as is extant
yet in his Oration, That he should understand that he being a Bishop had
greater authority in Ecclesiastical matters then the Emperor; and that he had
a tribunal, or seat of Judgment higher then the Emperor, Nazian. orat. ad
^iues timore perculsos.
who was one of his sheep; and that more resolutly S. Ambrose to the same
Emperor, when he commanded him to give up a Church to the hands of the
Arians: Trouble not yourselfe o Emperor, says S. Ambrose, Ambros. epist. 33.
ad sororem.
in commanding me ( to deliver the Church) nor do you persuade your self, that
you have any Imperial right over these things that are spiritual, and divine:
exalt not your self, but be subject to God if you will reign, be content with
those things that belong to Caesar, and leave those which are of God, unto God:
Palaces appertain unto the Emperor, and Churches unto the Priest.

And these three Fathers having thus briefly uttered their sentences (for much
more might be alleged out of them in this kind) let us see how the fourth, S.
Chrysostom.
that is to say S. Chrysosto^ Archbishop of Constantinople co^curred with the^:
Stay o king ( says he) within thy bounds and limits, for different are the
bounds of a kingdom, and the limits of Priesthood, and this Kingdom of
Priesthood is greater then the other. Bodies are committed to the King, but the
souls to the Priest. And again: Therefore has God subjected the Kings head to
the Priests hand, instructing us thereby, that the Priest is a greater Prince
then the king, according to S. Paul to the Hebrews, the lesser always
receaueth blessing from the greater.

These four Fathers then having gravely set down their opinions, about this
point of spiritual power not to be assumed by te^porall Princes, let us
imagine the other three to talk of some other matter, as namely S. Hierome, S.
Hierome.
that he understands diverse points of the heresy of Iouinian, and
Vigilantius, against whom he had with great labor written several Books, to
be held at this day in his Majesty's kingdoms of England and Scotland, which
could not but grieve him, they being condemned heresies by the Church. S.
Augustine also upon occasion given him, S. Aug^stine.
may be imagined to make his complaint, that he having written amongst many
other books one, de cura pro mortuis agenda, for the care that is to be had for
souls departed, and both in that book and in sundry other parts of his
works, said down the doctrine and practice of the Church in offering prayers
and Sacrifice for the dead, and delivering souls from purgatory: and that the
said Catholic Church of his time had condemned Aerius of heresy, for the
contrary doctrine: yet he understood that the matter was laughed at now in
E^gland, and Aerius in this point held for a better Christian then himself:
yea, and whereas he (S. Augustine) had according to the doctrine and practice of
the true Catholic Church in his days, prayed for the soul of his Mother,
and besought all others to do the like, his Majesty was taught by these
new-sprong doctors to condemn the same, and neither to pray for the soul
departed of his mother, dying in the same Catholic faith, nor to permit
others to do the same. S. Gregory.
All which Saint Gregory hearing, ^et us suppose him out of that great love and
charity wherewith he was inflamed toward England, and the English Nation, to
use a most sweet and fatherly speech unto his Majesty, exhorting him to
remember that he sent into England by the first preachers that came from him,
the same Catholic Christian Religion, which was then spread over the whole
world, and that which he had received by succession of Bishops, and former ages
from the said Fathers there present, and they from the Apostles: and that the
said ancient, true, and Catholic Religion was sincerely delivered unto his
Majesty's first Christian predecessor in England King Ethelbert, and so
continued from age to age, until King Henry the eight.

If, I say, this grave assembly of ancient holy Fathers should be made about
his Majesty, he fitting in the midst, and should hear what they say, and
ponder with what great learning, gravity, and sanctity they speak, and how
differently they talk from these new masters, that make up M. Barlowes little
University, I think verily that his Majesty out of his great judgment, would
easily contemn the one, in respect of the other. But alas, he has neither
time nor leisure permitted to him to consider of these things, nor of the true
differences, being so possessed, or at least wise so obsessed with these other
men's preoccupations, even from his tender youth, and cradle, as the Catholic
cause, which only is truth, could never yet have entrance, or indifferent
audience in his Majesty's ^ares, but our prayers are continually that it may.

And now having insinuated, how substantially this little University of ancient
learned Fathers, would speak to his Majesty if they might be admitted, either
at table, or time of repast, or otherwise: Let us consider a little how
different matters, even by their own confession, these new Academicks do
suggest, for that M. Barlow going about to excuse his fellow T. M. the younger,
M. Barlows division of Sycopha^cy.
from that crime of Sycophancy which was objected for his calumniations against
Catholics, in his table-talke; and trifling first about the word, what it
signifies in greek, according to the first institution thereof; to wit, an
accusation of carrying out of figs out of Athens, as before has been showed:
and then for him that upon small matters accuses another; as also for him that
seeks to recreate Princes and great men by pleasant speeches; and finally
also him that iesteth with a deprauing vain; he tells how that Master T. M.
may with credit be called a Sycophant in the three first senses, but not in the
last (says he) for that Sycophancy must be clanculum, and without witnesses,
but T.M. uses this Sycophancy openly, even by the Censurers confession, when
his Majesty takes his repast, that is, in the hearing of many; so that the
party being known, and the tale openly told, he cannot be called a Sycophant,
says M. Barlow.But I would first demaud of him, where he finds that the word
Clanculu^, or Secretly, must be contained in the definition of a Sychophant,
for that the first, and prime signification, and deriuation of the word does
openly repugne: for as M. Barlow says, in this place, such delatores ficuum,
or Sycophants in Athens, were honorable Magistrates, that did accuse publicly:
and secondly in application of the word, to a false accuser, and malicious
forged crime, there is no such restraint, that it must be secret, by any Author
set down, as may be seen in Henri^^s St^phanus his Thesaurus, where there is
no restraint of the nature of a Syc^ophant, or Sychophancy to such secrecy, ^^
here M. Barlow assigns, but it is sufficient, that it be a false forged
malicious crime: albeit if we consider the private place, and auditory while
his Majesty takes his repast eith^r by day, or night, in comparison of the
whole body of Catholics there calumniated, in their absence, there will not
want also this circumstance of clanculary calumniation, if M. Barlow will needs
have it necessary. But now let us pass to another point touched by M. Barlow,
wherein he pretends to be somewhat pleasant and to recreate his reader with
certain iestes, though with little grace, as you will see.

The occasions of his iestes are these, that for so much as this word
Sycophan^ie, is derived of figs, as now you have understood, he will tell us
diverse stories of figgs, some sweet, some sower, some pleasant, some
ungrateful, some poisoned, and the like: and under this m^eaphor he will show
us what figs T. M. and his fellows do p^rhappes represent unto his Majesty
at his table for his better rec^eation and pastyme: M^r^cles ^^^d^d and
c^ntemned.
as namely first, diverse stories of Popish feigned miracles, as that, says M.
Barlow, of S. Denis in France, who being Bishop of Paris and beheaded, carried
his own head in his hand after it was stricken of: and of Clement the first,
who when he was cast into the sea, with a millstone about his neck, the sea
fled three miles from the shore, and there was found a little Chapel ready
built in the sea, where his body was bestowed: and that of S. Gregory of
Ne^caesarea whose sta^^e being stuck down by him at the bank side, kept the
river from ouerflowing the banks, and presently sprung up and spread it self
into a n^ighty tree. Thus he. Condemning as you see our credulity in believing
these miracles.

But first I would dema^d of this little learned University, an^ their Procter
M. Barlow, what more religion there is in not believing these, and other like
recounted miracles, then in believing them? for so much as Infide^ity is an
easy matter to be found every where, M. Barl. a good proctor for the Turks
and Infidels.
in the worst kind of men, as Turks, Jews, and Gentiles, and the worst
Christians; but to believe is more hard, and to be found in fewer men, be it
humane or divine faith that is required. Secondly these, and many other such
like miracles not recounted in Scripture, are not proposed as articles of faith
necessary for every man to believe, though they being related by good and
probable Authors, every pious mind will rather incline to give them credit,
then scoff ^t them, as Heretics do. For that the scoffing at these things,
which they have no ground of any moment to impugn, shows but a profane,
audacious, and Lucianicall spirit.

And in this case I would demand of M. Barlow, what ground he has to scoff so
at these three miracles here set down as he does? to wit, of S. Denis^ S.
Clement, and S. Gregory of Neocaesarea, surnamed by ancient writers
Thaumaturgus, for the multitude and grea^nes of the miracles done by him? Is it
perhaps, for that they are strange, and not according to man's reason or use of
things that fall out ordinarily in the world? If this were not so, they were no
miracles. What then? Do they pass (perhaps) Gods power to do them? This he
will be ashamed to say. What then? Has he any testimonies of authors that auow
the contrary, and affirm that they were not true? This I presume he cannot
say; whereas we on the other side, have diverse Authors that affirm the same.
And if M. Barlow, and his fellows do believe many things of fact by humane
faith, for that some one probable Historiographer either Christian, or profane
does recount the same; with what reason can they scoff at us, for giving
credit to these things, that are testifed by many Authors? As for example, the
miracle of S. Denis the Areopagite, The miracles of S. Denis.
of carrying his head in his hands is testified by Nicephorus Calixtus, a
Grecian, in his second book of Histories, and twentieth Chapter, and by Simon
Metaphrastes another Grecian before him again in the life of S. Denis: and
before him again by Hildewinus Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Denis by Paris,
upon the point of eight hundred years agone, who all^adgeth also an other
Author elder then himself, named Lysbius, that had set forth the same in his
writings, and some other Authors in like manner: all which the said Hildewinus
gathered together both out of Greek and Latin writers, at the request of
Ludouicus Pius King of France.

The miracle of S. Clement.
The other miracle also of Saint Clement the first who was cast into the sea
with an anchor about his neck (but not with a millstone, as M. Barlow has
devised) and that the sea went three miles back etc. and the rest here
objected by M. Barlow, M Barl. turns an anchor into a millstone.
is mentioned not only by the foresaid two Greek Authors Nicephorus lib. 3.
Histor. Cap. 18. and Metaphrastes in vita Clementis: but by S. Gregory of
Towers also, that lived a thousand years ago, in his book de gloria Martyrum
Cap. 35. and. 36. And no less the third of S. Gregory Neocaesarea Of S. Gregory
surnamed Thaumaturgus, Thaumaturgus.
that he piched his staff upon a bank side, and kept the river from
ouerflowing, is writt^n and testified at large, not only by the said Necephorus
lib. 6. Cap. 17. but by a far more ancient Father, as namely by S. Grego^y
Nyssen, brother to S. Basil; which said holy man has written the admirable
life at large of the aforesaid S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, well near 1300. years
agone, which is extant in his works from the page. 918. to 949. and S. Basil
himself lib. de Spiritu Sancto Cap. 29. has touched the same: and after
repetition of many of his miracles, he ends thus: Sed omnino pe^longum fuerit
Viri percensere miracula, qui etc. But it should be ouerlong to recyte all his
miracles who for the excellency of gifts bestowed upon him in that kind,
wrought by the holy Ghost in all power, signs and miracles: he is called a
second Moses, even by the very enemies of truth themselves etc. Here then you
see what ground and just cause M. Barlow had to scoff at these miracles, as he
does with like ground and spirit, at the miracles of the new mynt, as he
calls them, of the Lady of Hales, of the conformities of S. Francis, the life
of ^^^^rius, of M. Garnets countenance in a straw, with all which he makes
himself sport, upon no other ground then lust of speaking evil. And upon the
same might any Infidel or Atheist scoff at the miracles recorded in the old
and new Testament, which to humane sense and reason are as impossible, as these
here alleged and scorned at by this Minister: as the multiplying of loaves,
walking on the sea, a hatchet to rise from the bottom of the water and join
it self to a handle, with the like, which in another place I have handled more
at large against M. Sutcliffe, and Sir Francis Hastings.

Next after this he brings in other figgs, and comes to scoff at diverse
Indulgences that do pardon, M. Barlows fooleries.
says he, enormous sins, for innumerable years upon sweet conditions; as
for kissing two Iron crosses at Saint Peter's Church door, 500. years of
pardon: for looking upon one of the Pence that our Savior was sold for, 1400.
years of pardon: for behoulding the Cross upon the top of S. John Laterans
steeple 14000. years of pardon, and other like ^oyes of his own invention,
which those that live at Rome are never acquaynted with, and himself cyteth noe
other proof but only notes in the margent Indulg. Romans liber: but where that
book is to be had, whether printed or written, where it was set forth, or with
what authority he tells nothing at all. In these parts I am sure, it is not
to be had or heard of. What these good fellows to make themselves merry and
deceive other men, may have devised to themselves in England, or else where I
know not, but I suspect the rather, for that I do understand that the Hugonots
of France devised a book not long ago, whose title was, Catechismus
Iesuitarum; and set it forth as in their name, full fraught with all manner of
errors, and ignorances, which being brought to Rochell, by them that had
devised it, they could not get it there printed, the argument was so absurd,
and the fraud so manifest: and yet now do I see it often alleged by Protestant
writers against them, and namely by Thomas Rogers in his late edition of 39.
Protestant Articles: so as one way or other, these people will ever make
themselves matter for exclayming against us, be it true or false, or never so
maliciously invented or perverted.

And here I would ask M. Barlow in good earnest, whether he do think indeed,
these particulers to be true, which here so confidently he has set down about
the years of pardon which he numbreth? For that I cannot easily persuade my
self, that in truth of conscience (if he have any) he can be of that judgment,
and much less in the other clause of slander which immediately follows: Sixtus
Quartus b^lyed.
to wit; that Pope Sixtus Quartu^ granted forty thousand years of pardon, to
him that would say a prayer of his making, consisting of about forty five
words, but he brings no other proof at all for the same, but his own bare
word. And the reason by himself alleged, why it was granted, conuinceth ^he
same of a manifest lie and fictio^: Barl. page ^08^
which reason is, ^or because his Catholics, q^^^h he, might not complain,
that the Protestants satisfaction was easier then theirs; and yet was there noe
name of Protestant known in the world in Pope Sixtus Quartus time, nor a good
while after: for that there passed four Popes, between him and Leo decimus,
under whom Luther began, and under him the name of Protestants: so as Sixtus
Quartus could not have that consideration of Protestants in his Indulgence,
which M. Barlow has devised. And would any learned man fall into such
absurdyties, and so show his ignorance both in things and times?

Again in his very first entrance to this Calumniation he utters two or
three gross untruths, which are inexcusable, when he affirms, that Popes
do pardon enormous sins, for innumerable years upon sweet conditions. For
first they pardon no sins at all by Indulgences, and much less enormous
sins: for that Indulgences of the Church in Catholic doctrine, as every man
knows that has the least degree of learning therein, do reach only to the
remission of temporal punishments due after the guilt of sin remitted, and
not of sin it self, which c^nnot be remitted, but by the Sacrament of
Penance, or virtue thereof. And it is strange that one profes^ing learning as
M. Barlow would feign ^eeme to do, would either err ^oe grossly or wilfully as
here it cannot be denied, that he does. But if he be desirous to know better
our doctrine herein, he may read Cardinal Bellarmine, Gregory of Valentia and
Francis Suarez in their learned books of this argument, and by them, if he
understand them, he may learn to see his own error, and acknowledge it also if
he have so much grace. Now then seeing that all which has been said by M.
Barl^w of Indulgences has been only spoken either upon heresy, and false
relation, or of error, ignorance, or malicious fiction, the judicious Reader
may consider, how unworthy an argument this was for M. Barl^ his little
University to treat by scoffs, before his Majesty at his rep^st: much more to
the purpose, had it been to have treated substantially, and gravely out of the
holy Scriptures, and Fathers, the principal question about this affair, to
wit, what ample authority Christian Priesthood has to remit si^^^ in this
world, whereof S. Chrysostomes books de Sacerdotis, proving that Christ's
Tribunal^ in heaven has submitted it self in a certain sort unto the Priests
tribunal upon earth, would have yealded them ample and grave matter: as also
many other ancient Fathers Treatises, and discourses to the same purpose.

The other question also that follows after this, whether after the guilt of
sin forgiven, there remains some temporal punishment to be satisfied,
either in this life, or in the next, either by satisfactory works here or by
fire there, had been a matter of moment to be discussed, and well pondered: for
that it belongs to all, and ^one can avoid their part therein. And to this
purpose they might have considered of diverse Tr^atises, as of Origin, Saint
Augustine, and other Fathers that handle the question at large. This then had
ben^ to some purpose to be treated before his Majesty: but those other trifling
^oye^ here mentioned by M. Barlow, of looking upon the top of a steeple, and
the like, are unfit both for his Majesty's ^ares, and presence.

But now he does insinuate further, that some other figgs also are exhibited
now and then in that assembly (...) bitter then these, Base babbling.
as namely, about the Powder-traitours, and absoluing them by the Jesuits.
Those dreadful cruel positions also (says he) of Popes deposing Kings,
exposing them to murder, incyting their subjects to rebellion, and determining
such parricide be to meritorious etc. And furthermore what an excellent vain,
both Popes h^^e in figging each other away (by poison) and Jesuits too (as the
Priests relate) in dispatching, with such pleasant pills any that stand in
their light etc. Which be mere calu^niations, and malicious maledictions,
unworthy either to be heard by his Majesty, or to be refuted by me: as also
that insulse insolency of the Minister, where he makes his Majesty to use
those odious words against all of the Catholic religion, O Romanistae seruum
pecus! O Romanists slavish beasts^ as though there were no Princes, and
Monarchs of that religion, that might take in evil part this insolency of
the malepart Minister: as if it had some allowance from his Majesty, for that
in his name he speaks it, and does dedicate his book unto him.

And thus much about this point of adulation, whereunto also I must add one
thing more, tending to the same effect, and much talked of at this present,
both at home, and abroad, which is; That these new Masters, of the little
University, and other their friends have persuaded his Majesty, that they are
valiant men in writing against their Adversaries, and would perform great
exploytes therein, if besides their Universities, and Cathedral Churches, they
had some special College of writers erected for that purpose, which men say
is appointed to be at Chelsey, Chelsey erection for writers.
and that the matter is very forward: and that his Majesty has assigned
thereunto, both situation of a house and other great helps; which if it be so,
I doubt not but that it proceeds from him, out of a most honorable respect,
for advancing learning: but I assure my self this will not serve, though there
were twenty Colleges more applied to this end, except his Majesty should give
them a new cause to write o^, ^or o^ this between Catholics and Protestants,
albeyt they multiply books, never so fast, they will never be able to write
with credit, either of them selves, or of their founders: for that falsity
cannot be defended but by ^alshood, nor one untruth but by another; and
consequently their cause being such as it is, their multuplying of writers, and
increasing the number of books is but to multiply their own disgrace, whereof
some scantling may be taken in the last two books (not to speak of any
others) that have gone ^orth on the Catholic side, to wit, the Reckoning with
M. Morton, and the Search of Francis Walsingham, wherein the proper argument
now in hand, is treated about true or false writing.

And yet on the other side, if the said designement shall go forward, I think
our English Catholics will be glad thereof. First, for that it will honor
not a little their cause, it appearing by this, that the learneder sort of
Protestants, do feel the weight of their weapons: for the besides the forsaid
Universities, Schools, and Churches, they are forced to seek yet further
furniture for their defense. Secondly, it may be hoped, that foreign Catholic
Princes hearing of this matter, will think themselves bound in zeal, and
honor of their own Religion to assist in like manner, for erection of some
House, or College, for English Catholic writers to defend the same. Thirdly
it may in reason be expected that this little University of Protestant Writers,
will for their honor, and credits sake, deal effectually with his Majesty,
that the passage of Catholic books written in answer unto theirs, may be
more free, and not so subject to loss, danger, and vexation, (...) ^^therto
they have been, (especially, if they be written modestly, and to the purpose
only) for that otherwise it would seem a very unjust matter^ to open, as it
were, a School of fence, and yet to forbid the entrance of any that would
offer to try their manhood and skill with them; or as, if proposing a goal for
runners, they would bynd the legs of such as should run with them. But
fourthly and lastly, our greate^^^ help of all would be in this case, that his
Excellent Majesty as before in part has been touched, being invited by this
occasion to read some books of both sides, would by the sharpnes of his Great
Capacity, enlightened with Gods grace, discover in time, where truth, and where
falsity remains, where substance, or fraud is stood upon: which would be the
greatest benefit that we can possibly desire, or wish for at Gods hands, for
the common benefit of our cause.

ABOUT TOLERATION OR LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE demanded by humble petition at his
Majesty's hands by Catholics, whether it were height of pride or not: AS Also
concerning the contention between Protestants and Puritans. CHAP. IIII.
AS by that which has been set down in the former Chapter, we have seen and
beheld, the good talent that M. Barlow, and his fellows have in fl^tering the
memory of Queen Elizabeth now dead, and his Majesty living: so now there
ensues another large Treatise of his, that shows his iniquity and virulent
humor of most bitter calumniation against all sorts of Catholics, for making
humble supplication to his Majesty, after his entrance to the Crown for some
liberty of conscience, or toleration at least in matters concerning religion,
which petition though proposed, as has been said, with never so much humility
and prostrate subjection of the petitioners, and many most forcible and
apparent reasons alleged for the same: yet will M. Barlow needs defend it for
a supreme height of Pride in them, to have hoped for such a matter, or made
supplication for the same.

Bar^. page 112.
The clemency of his Majesty (says he) wrought in them that height of pride,
that in confidence thereof they directly did expect, and assuredly promise unto
themselves liberty of conscience, and equality in all things with us, his
Majesty's most best and faithful subjects. And do not you see how great and
grievous a charge this is, especially if you cut of the second part, as you
must do, to wit, M. Barlow adds to the text.
equality in all things with Protestants his Majesty's best subjects? For this
was never demanded in the petition of Catholics: and much less either
directly or indirectly expected, and least of all assuredly promised to
themselves. For then should they have demanded also to share equally with
Bishops, and Ministers in their benefices, which we may assure our selus they
never so much as dreamed of, or of other preferments in the common wealth, with
that equality which here they are made to have assured themselves of.

Their petition then was only for liberty of conscience as has been said, or
if not that, yet at least wise some moderate toleration of the use of that
religion, which they had received from their Ancestors, from the first
beginning of Christian religion planted in our English Nation, and continued in
possession for more then nine hundred years together, until the time of King
Henry the eight, and his children, who made the first innovation, and by Regal
power interrupted the said possession, whereunto the said possessors, and
ancient tenants, though not presuming to demand restitutionem i^ integrum, full
restitution of that which by violence was taken from them; yet that they might
remain with some kind of quiet and rest, for the use of their said consciences
in private, A most reasonable and modest request of the Cath.
which they promised to use with all humility and moderation, without scandal,
or public offense, whereof they offered very good assurance, both for this,
and for all other dutiful behauour in their civil obedience, as became true
subjects: yea adding further also, that they would enforce themselves to
continue the payment of that mulct, or penalty of Statute laid upon them for
their Recusancy, at such a reasonable agreed su^me of money yearly to be paid,
as his Majesty should think convenient: So as by this means, they might have
some external peace, and quietness from the continual molestations, which now
they suffered in regard of their said consciences.

This was their supplication, and now why this should be called pride, yea the
height of pride, and highest degree of pride, and further, the extreme height
and celfitude of pride, and lastly, the summity and sublimity of pride, as M.
Barlow calls it, I understand not. For if pride be defined to be an
inordinate desire of excellency above others, I do not see that here in this
petition, either Catholics do prefer themselves disorderly before others, but
are content with a far inferior degree then Protestants: or that their desire
in demanding, is disordinate; whether we consider the same as it proceeded
either from themselves to desire a thing so necessary to the health of their
souls, or as it is directed to his Majesty, their Prince, and Sovereign, who
is the person that may relieve them: and consequently, the laying forth of such
their desires, by ordinate means of humble supplication, to their Lord, and
Prince, cannot be called inordinat^s appetitus excellentiae, ^a disordinate
appetite of excellency above others, and consequently no pride, and much less
celfitude of pride, as M. Barlow out of his celfitude of amplification, or
rather height of hatred does define it.

But yet let us see briefly what reasons he frames for this his consequence.
For first, says he, it is impious against God to grant any such liberty of
conscience, for that God symbolically forbids such mixture in the linsy-wolsy
garment, Deuteronomy. 22. and 11. Ergo, it is height of pride so sue for it. But
whoseeth not here that neither the antecedent nor consequent have any force?
God did forbid in Deuteronomy (...) garments, Ergo, it is sublimity of pride
for Catholics in England, to sue to his Majesty for some toleration of
conscience. Will their brethren the Protestants of France allow of this
argument? Let us see the second. Secondly (says he) it being a matter
dishonorable to the King, Simple and impertinent reasoning of M. Barlow.
is extremity of pride to demand it, for that honest men (even of their
equals) will expect nothing, but that which shall stand with the credit, and
reputation of the granter: but this without stayne of the Kings honor cannot
be gr^^^ted, Ergo, it is height of pride in the Catholics to sue for it: which
second or minor proposition, for that he imagined we would deny, that it would
be a stain to his Majesty's (...) to grant it, he goes about to confirm the
same, by diverse weak, and fond reasons, not unfit for his invention, as, that
his Majesty should be contrary to himself, and show too much weakness and
slipperines, having apprehended the religion, which he now professes, from the
cradle of his infancy, resolved in his conscience, mantayned it by disputation,
enacted it by laws, established it by Oath, and the like: which are reasons
quite from the matter. For the granting of toleration unto Catholics,
requires not change of Religion in his Majesty, no more then it does in the
modern King of France, in granting the said toleration to his Protestants, or
then it did in the Emperor Charles the fifth, when he permitted the same in
Germany: so as M. Barlow here rather roueth then reasons.

And further he is to be put in mind, that if it be a good argument, which here
he uses, that his Majesty may not change his religion, for that he has
professed it from the cradle of his infancy etc. which yet has not the
antiquity of fifty years by a good deal, what may we say of the continuance of
the Catholic religion in our country? How many fifty years are passed since
that cradle was rockt? And why may not we make the same argument for any other
sor^ of men whatsoever, that have lived in any other Religion for so many
years, as his Majesty has done in this? so little weight, or substance is in
this Ministers words, who, so he may seem to say somewhat, cares not greatly
what it be, or how little to the purpose.

I leave his other reasons as triuiall, and not worth the answering, as that
Queen Elizabeth would not grant this toleration of conscience, that our
doctrinall positions are dangerous, that if his Majesty should grant
toleration, he should loose the love of all his Subjects, and the like: whereof
some are false in the antecedent, as the second and third, for that our
doctrinall positions truly understood, are not dangerous to any common wealth
but salutiferous: nor should his Majesty leese the love of his people, by using
such ^lemency to so principal a part of his people, not a little pitied by
the rest, of most wisdom, and best natures. As for the first, though it be
true in the antecedent, that she granted no such toleration, yet is it most
fa^se in the consequent, that therefore it is height of pride, to demand it of
his Majesty: no reason requiring that her actions should be a necessary rule to
his Majesty for his, they being no better then they were.

But now we must see briefly what M. Barlow answers to all my reasons before
alleged for defending Catholics from the imputation of height of pride, in
making this demand, and humble petition to his majesty, which I shall set
down, in the very same words, which before I used.

And surely, I cannot but wonder, Let. p. 38.
that this Minister was not ashamed to call this the height of pride, which is
generally found in all Protestants never so humble: yea the more humble, and
underlings they are, the more earnest are they both in books, speeches, and
preachings, to prove, that liberty of Conscience is most conform to Gods law,
and that wresting, or forcing of Consciences, is the highest Tyranny that can
be exercised upon man. And this we may see first, in all M. Fox his History,
especially during the time of the three King Henry's. 4. 5. and 6. and
afterward, when those that were called L^llards, and Wickelissians, who as M.
Fox says, were indeed good Protestants, being pressed some what about their
Religion did continually beat upon this argument of liberty of Conscience,
and when they obtained it not, they set v^ public schedles upon the Church
doors of London, an^ made those famous conspiracyes of killing K. Henry the 5 d
and all his family, In vita (...) ^un^i.
which are recounted by VVatsingham. Stow, Fox, and other English
Historiographers.

In this our age also, the first opposition of Protestant Princes in Germany,
against their Emperor Charles the 5. both at Smalcald, Austburgh, and other
meetings; as afterward also the fierce and perilous wars by the Duke of
Saxony, Marquis of Brandeburge, and other Protestant Princes, and their people,
against the same Emperor, begun in the very same year that our K. Henry
dyed: Anno 1^46.
were they not all for liberty of Conscience? so pretended, so printed so
published, so diuulged to the world? The first Supplications, Memorials, and
Declarations in like manner, which the Protestants of France set forth in
print^ as also they of Holland, Liberty of conscience demanded by all
Protestants.
and Zeland in time of the governments, as well of the Duchess of Parma, Duke
of Alua, Commenda^or Major, and other Governors: did they not all expressly
profess, that their principal griefs were, about liberty of Conscience
restrained? And did not they cite many places of Scriptures, to prove the
equity and necessity thereof? And do not all Protestants the like at this day,
in all places where they are, both in Polonia, Austria, Bohemia, Styria, and
else where? ^ Psalm. 113.
And how then is Iordanis conuersus retr^rs^m, with this Minister? How is his
voice contrary to the voice and sense of all the rest? How, and with what
reason, may he call it the height of pride in English Catholics, to have but
hope thereof, which is so ordinary a doctrine and practice of all his brethren
in foreign nations, to wit, for us to expect liberty of Conscience, at the
first entrance of our new King, of so noble, and royal a mind before that
time, as he was never known to be given to cruelty, or persecution in his
former reign? The Son of such a Mother, as held her self much beholden to
English Catholics? And himself in his little Golden (...).
Book to his Son the Prince, had confessed that he had ever found the
Catholic party most trusty unto him, and thereupon had done sundry ^auours to
diverse of them, and given no small hope of greater unto others. From this King
(I say) whom they so much loved, and honored, received so gladly, and with
universal joy, meant to serve faithfully; and trusted that as he had united
the two Kingdoms in one Obedience by his Succession: so would he by his
liberality, unite and conioyne the hearts of all his Subjects, in bearing a
sweet and equal hand toward them all: From such a King (I say) for us to
expect liberty of Conscience, and equality with other Subjects (in this point
at least of freedom of soul) what height of pride may it be called? Height of
pride, and in whom it may be said to be.
May it not rather seem height of pride in this Minister, and his fellows,
that having been old enemies, and always borne a hard, and hateful hand, and
tongue against his Maiesti^ both in their Sermons, Books, Speeches, all the
time of the late Queens reign; now upon the suddayne sine vllis meritis
praecedentibus, will needs be so privileged, and assume unto themselves such a
confident presumption of his Majesty's special favor, as to suffer no man to
stand by them, but to hold it for height of pride in us to hope for any
freedom and liberty of our Conscience at all? What is height of pride and
folly, if this be not?

These are my words in my former book: and now let us behold what M. Barlow
lays forth against the same. First he begins with a pull at the Purytans,
though I neither named, nor designed them, but only said as now your have
heard, that generally all sorts of Protestants never so humble (or far of from
height of pride in their own conceit) do allow, and desire, yea the more
humble and underlings they are, the more earnest they insist, both by books,
speech, and preaching, to prove, that liberty of conscience is most conform to
Gods law etc. Whereupon M. Barlow makes this comment, that by vnderlinge
Protestants, Barl. page 110.
I do mean them, that do sever themselves from him, and hi^, in matter of
ceremony, and Church-gouerment, who are not underlings, says he, because they
are humble, for that pride only keeps them aloof. It is not the inferior
place, says he, or the dejected vysage, or the soft voice, or dislike of
Prelacy, that does denominate humility. Strange notes of h^mility set down b^
M. Barl^w.
And these are the notes belike, that do distinguish Puritans from the
Protestants, to wit, the in^eriour place, the dejected ^isage, the soft speech,
dislike of Prelacy. But yet I cannot but wonder to see him twice in this place
to repeat, that the difference between these brethren and them^elues^ is only
in matters of Ceremony, differing (says he) only in matters ceremonial,
though before he added also Church-gouernment. Whereby is euydent that he
houldeth their Church-gouernment, and Prelacy, matter of ceremony only, and
consequently also his own Prelacy and his being a Bishop, is but a mere
Ceremony, and no substantial matter in their Religion.

Now then let us see, what ensues upon this, and what honor and service M.
Barlow does to his whole Clergy, and namely to his old Master and Lord of
Canterbury, by this his new doctrine. M. Barlow betrayeth his own cause.
Is all the dignity, and pre-eminence, which his said Lord has above all the
Ministers in England, his superiority over the Clergy, his being Archbishop
and Primate, his spiritual Jurisdiction, his Courts of the Arches, his power
of dispensations, his making Ministers, and giving them power to preach, ^each,
and administer Sacraments: Is all this but a ceremony? Or do the Puritans in
denying and impugning this, impugn but a ceremony, and no point of Religion it
self? Truly then must I say that their cause against you, is far better then
I ever hitherto esteemed it to be. For if all these things be but ceremonies,
and contain no substa^tiall point of religion: why do you, that in other
things profess your selves enemies to Ceremonies, stand so much upon them to
the disturbance of the whole Realm? But of this I shall have occasion to
speak again a little after, and to lay open your absurdities in this eua^ion.

Now only, will I say a word to your argument which here you make against us,
for toleration or liberty of co^science^ If t^ese humble underlings, say you,
dwelling amongst (...)^ ^^d differing only from us in matters ceremonial, are
not heard in their suite of liberty of conscience: Barl. ibide^.
how much less those who in points essential, and fundamental are severed
from us, may not be tolerated? Whereunto I answer, that if we respect reason
and justice in this matter, there is more on the behalf of Catholics, then of
Puritans, The Protestant has Ecclesiastical power over Puritans.
for obtaining this toleration, notwithstanding their differences in points of
Religion were, or be greater: for that the Puritans came out of the
Protestants, and thereby the Protestant Church may pretend to have Ius aliquod
Ecclesiasticum, some Ecclesiastical right upon them. But the Catholics of
England came never out of the Protestants, nor their Church out of the
Protestant Church, but were long before them in possession, which is the
markable point so much pondered by S. John to discern heresy, 1. Joan. 2.
and heretics thereby, Prodierunt ex nobis, they went out of us. And
consequently the Protestant Church can have no spiritual jurisdiction upon the
said Catholics, and much less by right, or reason, can they bar them the
use of their Religion, as they may do to Purytans, that were members once of
them, though they differ in fewer points of belief. An Example may be the
Jews in Rome, who are tolerated in their religion, which Protestants are not,
though they differ in more points of belief: but yet for that they were in
possession of their Religion, before Christians, and went not out from them, as
Protestants did from Catholics, they are tolerated in that place, and
Protestants not.

And hereby is also answered M. Barlowes last reason against granting of
toleration, which I pretermitted before to be answered in this place: which is,
that if the cause were ours, as God be thanked he says it is theirs, we will
not grant liberty to them, for their religion. But how does he know that,
seeing so many Catholic Princes both in France, Low-Countryes, and Germany
do permit the said toleration, to diverse and different sects? And if he
object that in Queen Mary's days, it was not permited to Protestants in
England, nor yet by King Henry the eight, much less by the foresaid 3. Henryes
that went before him, yet may the causes, and reasons be different now. For
albeit for equity and justice the matter do pass, as before we have said, that
no sect in England whatsoever, as of L^^lords, VVickcliffians, Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Calui^ists, or the like can have any right in conscience to deny
toleratio^ of their religion unto them, In what case Catholics may yield and
grant toleration to Protestants.
out of which they themselves went, and that the Catholic Church has that
right upon them as going out of her: yet may she leave to use that right
oftentimes, and tolerate different sectaryes also, when they are so multiplied,
as they cannot be restrained without greater scandal, tumult, and
perturbation, according to the parable to our Savior, concerning the cockle
grown up amongst the wheat, which our said Savior willed rather to be let
alone, until the harvest day, left by going about to weed out the one out of
due time, Matthew. 13.
they might pluck up the other. So as these Catholic Princes his Majesty's
Ancestors, that did deny toleration, considering their kingdoms to be quietly
settled in the Ancient religion of their fore fathers, did justly and lawfully
resist the new attempts of innouators: and justly also may we affirm that if
other forrayne Princes at this day, of the same Catholic religion do permit
upon other reasons liberty, or toleratio^ of different religion: much more may
his Majesty of England do the same to his Catholic subjects, for the reasons
that have been now alleged. And so much of this.

To the examples of the Lollardes and VVickliffian Protestants, that made such
earnest suite for toleration and liberty of conscience, in the days of three
King Henry's 4. 5. and 6. and took arms for obtaining the same, he says,
that if any such conspiracies were, we de^end them not: subjection to Princes
we preach, insurr^ctions we defy etc. And with this he thinks he has well
satisfied the matter^ To the forreyne examples of higher Germany in the time of
Charles the fifth, and of the low-Countryes in these our days, he answers,
That these are noe fit presidentes for our State, the government of the Emperor
being limited^ and conditional, and we speak of subjects under an absolute
Monarchy. To those of Bo^hemia, Polonia, and Hungary he says, that it is to
be considered, Whether the en^rance into those kingdoms be Successiue, or
Elective by descent, without condi^i^^all restraintes: and if they were
absolute Monarchies, what is that to his Majesty, who in cases of religion
takes not men's examples, but Gods laws, for his dyrects. He knows what
Princes ought to do, not regarding what they please to do etc. But all this
while me thinks the chief point is not answered by M. Barlow, M. Barlow at a
Nonplus.
which is that those good Protestants were of opinion, that toleration, or
liberty of conscience might be granted according to the law of God, and ought
also to be granted. And why is Iordani^ now turned backward, says the letter^
Why is this Ministers voice contrary to the voice and sens^ of all other
Protestants?

The said Letter goes forward, laying down di^er^ considerations, which
engendered hope in the minde^ of Catholics, for obtaining this suite of
toleration, and namely these three, to wit: First, the first entrance of our
new King, known to be of so noble and royal a mind before that time, as he
never was noted to be given to cruelty or persecution for religion. Secondly
the son of such a Mother, as held her self much behoulding to English
Catholi^kes. And thirdly that himself had confessed, that he had ever found
the Catholic party most trusty unto him in his troubles, and many
conspiraci^^ made against him. To the first whereof M. Barlow in effect
answers nothing at all, but only cites certain places of Scripture, for
punishing of Idolatry. To the second he says, That if his Majesty's Mo^her had
not relied too much upon the Priested sort in England, her end had not been so
sudden, or unkind. Belike he was privy unto it, that he can tell those
particulars. And his Epithete of unkind, Unkind dealing indeed.
in cutting off her Majesty's head, was very iudiciously devised by him. For
indeed there can nothing be devised more unkind, then for two Queens so near
of kindred, to cut off one the others head, and that upon the sudden, as here
is granted, which increases the unkindness of so barbarous a fact, persuaded
and urged principally, as al men know, by the continual incitations of those
of M. Barlows coat, to the despite both of Mother and Son, and ruin of them
both, if it had laye^ i^ their hande^. Neither is this to cast salt into his
Majesty's eyes, as M. Barlow here says, but rather to open the sa^e, that he
may see^ what kind of people these are, that do s^ much flatter him now, and
impugned both him and his at that time.

But let us hear how Ironically he deals with vs^ in framing a fond argument
on our behalf, as to him it seems. The Mother, says he, loved Catholics
for their dutifulnes and loyalty^ Ergo, the Son must give them liberty of
consc^^c^. And i^ this Sy^ so bad an argument? Barl. page 124.
Do you take away the word (...), which is of your own thrusting in, and put
in place thereof, that the said Son may be the soone^ induced to grant them
that liberty, in respect of their former dutifulnes, and loyalty to his mother
in her distresses, and the consequence will not be evil.

To the third of his Majesty's confessed experience of the loyalty of
Catholics both toward himself and his Mother, in their distres^es, he
says: That his Majesty names not Catholi^kes at all, in his said Book, but
only prosesseth that be found none so steadfastly to abide by him in his
greatest straites, as they which constantly kept their true Allegiance to his
Mother. Well Sir, and who I pray you were they? Catholics or Protestants? Let
the acts of those times be seen, the Authors noted, the effects considered.
M. Barlow^ moderate and dir^ct Prot^^t^nt.
Yet, says M. Barlow, no^ i^ is very probable that when his Majesty, has cast
up his account of for^er disloyalties, he shall ^ind the moderate and dir^ct
Protestant^ that incli^es neither to right hand nor left, to be the first and
faithf^ll subject.

Well Sir, this may be p^rhaps f^^ the time to come, for your self says, tha^
it is but probable: but for the time p^st his Majesty having now cast up his
accounts, has found that reckonyng, as he h^th set it down. And the common
rule of wisdom is to believe as we have found, until different experience
teach us the contrary. And by the way we must^ learn here M. Barlowes new
devised epithetons, of a moderate and direct Protestant, that as, he says, is
neyth^r Iesu^ted, nor Geneuated, that is neither Catholic nor Pury^an, but
moderate, and direct: that is to say, moderate in not believing to much on any
s^de, if it stand not with his profit, and direct in following iump the Prince
and State that may advance him, whatsoever they should determine in matters of
religion. This is the man by M. Barlowes direction, upon whom his Majesty
must buyld, and not the Purytan or zealous Catholic, for that they are over
scrupulous.

I could wish that M. Barlow had been a little more scrupulous in the very next
ensuing number, where without all blushing, he casts out two notorious lies,
against Father Persons, M. Barlow belyeth F. Persons.
to make him odious thereby to his Majesty, saying first, that he pronounces
his said Majesty to be a desperate and ^orlorne heretic, but cyteth no place
where it is to be found; nor indeed is there any such place to be found where
Father Person^ uses any such words, as ever I could yet see.

Secondly he alleges for Father Persons express words, these: That
whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant, is a most grievous,
and damnable sinner, and cites for the same D^l^man page 216. which quotation
serves only to condemn M. Barlow of a notorious wilful calumniation, for
that these express words are not there found, nor is there any mention of the
Succession of a Protestant, but in general is said thus, That for any man to
give his help toward the making of a King whom he judges faulty in religion,
and consequently would advance no religion, or the wrong, if ^e were in
authority, is a grievous sin of what side soever the truth be etc. So as
neither Protestant nor Succession is named in this place, but m^king of a King,
by such as my have authority to do the same; and it may as well hold against
the entrance of a Catholic Prince, as of any other sect whatsoever. And
consequently both of these are s^landerous accusations, the first being a mere
invented untruth, and the second a malicious perverted calumniation: so as in
respect of both, I may well say with the Prophet, Psalm. 5^.
Dilexisti omnia verba praecipitationis lingua dolosa, and I pray God the
threat next ensuing do not take place, Propterea Deus destruct to in finem etc.
I desire not his destruction, but his amendment.

After this follows in my foresaid Letter a narration of the Dutiful
demeanor of Catholics toward his Majesty, even from his first entrance,
and how by the unjust persuasions of their enemies, they began quickly to feel
his hard hand borne over them, even before the powder plot, as by the
confirmation of all Queen Elizabeth^ penal laws, in the first year of his
Majesty's reign, with the execution thereof afterward, does well appear:
whereof many particular examples are set down; and among other things it is
touched, as a matter of special disfavor, that his Majesty vouchsafing in
his own Royal Person to give public audience both to Protestants and
Puryt^^ for 3. days together concerning the differences of their Religion, no
such grace at all was granted unto Catholics. Upon which words M. Barlow
stays himself, and makes this co^mentary. It is a strange humor, says he,
Barl. page 142.
that this Epistler has, i^ he says truth, he lies: It is true there was a
conference, but about difference in Religion, it is utterly false; say^^ they
would possess the world that we are at iar among our selves ab^^^ our
Religion, whereas the quarrel, though it be indeed unkind, yet it i^ not in
this kind, save only for Ceremonies external, no point subst^^tiall etc.

But now of this I have spoken somewhat before, showing, that if this unkind
quarrel between Protesta^^s and Purytans, Strange impudency.
as he calls it, be only about external Ceremonies, then is both his
Prelacy, and that of his Lord and Master the Archbishop only an external
Ceremony. And if his phrase of unkind quarrel be of the same kind that he
mentioned before to be in Queen Elizabeth toward Queen Mary of Scotland,
whose he^d she cut of^ then is the matter somewhat substantial, and not only
Ceremonial: and indeed he that shall consider what the Purytan in this unkind
quarrel pretends against the Protestant and his Church, shall see, that he
strikes at the head indeed, or rather strikes of the head of the said Church,
whether we consider either the external and ministeryall head thereof, to wit,
the Princes Ecclesiastical power, and of Bishops under him; or the internal
head metaphorically taken for the life, spirit, and essence of the said Church
in denying it to be a true Christian Church, but only a profane Congregation,
without any spiritual power at all.

This appears by all the course and drift of Puritan writers, and books
extant, of the differences acknowledged also by Protestant writers in their
Treatises against them: so as to me it seems, not only a shameless bouldnes to
deny it, as M. Barlow here does, but a sham^full baseness also, and beggary so
to run after their enemies, Baseness and beggary of Protestants
entreating them to have some association with them; whereas the other do both
contemn, and detest them. For this falls out not only in this case, but also
with the Lutherans, whom M. Barlow and his fellows, when they deal with us,
will needs have to be their brethren of one and the same Church, faith, and
belief, for all substantial points of doctrine: Whereas the Lutherans on the
other side do both deny and defy this communion in faith with them, and have
set forth whole books to prove the same, which were too long here to repeat.
Yea Caluinian, and Zwinglian Ministers themselves are witnesses hereof, in many
of their Treatises, as namely, the Tigurine Deuines, Theol. Tigurin. in prafat.
Apol. prafix. orthodox. C^n. anno 1578.
who confess, that their differences, and contentions with the Lutherans are
about Justification, Free Will, the Gospel, the law, the Person of Christ,
his descent into hell, of Gods election, of his children to life everlasting,
and de multis alijs non leuis momenti articulis, and of many more articles of
no small importance: which is evident, Lib. 2. de rat ineund^ Concordiae p. 2.
and 24.
for that Ioannes Sturmius another Zwinglian or Caluinist adds other
controversies, as of the Supper of our Lord, and Real Presence, of
Predestination, of the Ascension of Christ to heaven, his sitting at the right
hand of his Father, and the like: adding also that the Lutherans do hold the
Protestant Caluinian Churches of England, France, Flanders, and Scotland for
Heretical, and their Martyrs, for Martyrs of the Devil.

And conform to these their writings are their doings and proceedings with
them, where they have dominion; for that they admyt them not to cohabitation,
nor to the common use of marriage between them, nor to be buried with them,
after their deaths, as they well know who have lived, or do live among them.
And thus much for the Lutherans of the one side. Now let us see somewhat also
of the Purytans of the other.

And first of all this matter has been handled diverse times, and demonstrated
by Catholic English writers of our days, against this absurd assertion of M.
Barlow that the differences at this day between Protestants and Purytans are
not at all concerning religion, nor of any substantial, and essential points
thereof; but only Ceremonial: and in particular the same is convinced, and
made most manifest in the Preface of a late Book, entitled An answer to the
fifth part of Sir Edward Cooks Reports, where the different grounds of
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical power, Protestants and Puritans differ in
substa^tial points of religion.
between Protestants, Puritans, and Catholics being examined, it is found,
that their differences are such as cannot possibly stand together, to make one
Church and house of salvation, but that if one has the truth, the other must
necessarily remain in damnable error; which is evident also by the writings of
Protestants themselves, especially by the books entitled Dangerous positions,
set forth and imprinted at London 1593. and the Survey ofpretended holy
discipline, made as they say, by him that is now Lord of Canterbury, and Doctor
Sutcliffe, as also the Book entitled, the Picture of a Purytan, written by O.
O. of Emanuel, printed 1603. and other like books. But especially at this time
will I use for proof of this point, the testimony of Thomas Rogers Minister,
and Chaplin, as he styleth himself, to his Lord of Canterbury, who of late
having set forth by public authority, the faith, doctrine, and religion of
England expressed in 39. articles upon the year 1607. does in his Preface to
his said Lord, handle this matter of the differences between the Puritans and
Protestants, though partially against the discontented brethren, he being
their adversary, but yet sets down out of their own words, what their
judgment is of the importance, and moment of the controuersyes between them,
Rogers pr^f^^e page 9.
to wit, that they are not only about Ceremonies, and circum^tances, as M.
Barlow pretends, but about points contained in scripture, and in the very
Gospel it self. They are compryzed, say they, Arrige aures Sir William.
in the book o^ God, and also be a part of the Gospel, yea the very Gospel
it self: so true are they, and o^ such importance, that if every hair of our
head were a life, we ought to aff^ard them all, in defense of these matters:
and that the articles of religion penned, and agreed upon by the Bishops, are
but childish toys in respect of the other. So they.

And will any man think or say now that these men do not hold that their
differences with the Protestants are differences in religion, as M. Barlow
says, or that they are only matters of ceremonies, and not of any one
substantial point concerning religion? Let us hear them yet further telling
their own tale, and related by M. Rogers. The controversy between them and us
( say they, of the Protestants) is not as the Bishops, and their welwillers
bear the world in hand, for a cap, or tippet, or a Surplisse, but for greater
matters concerning a true Ministry, and regiment of the Church according to the
word of God. The first whereof, which is a true Ministry, they ( Protestants)
shall never have, till Bishops and Archbishops be put down, and all Ministers
be made equal. The other also will never be brought to pass, until Kings and
Queens do subject themselves unto the Church, and do submit their Scepters,
and throw down their Crowns before the Church, and lick up the dust of the
feet of the Church, and willingly abide the Censures of the Church etc. This
they write, and much more in that place^ which I trow is more then M. Barlow
ascribes unto the matter. For if it be contained in Gods book, yea a part o^
the Gospel, the very Gospel it self, about which they contend; what
proter^ity is it on the other part, to call it a matter only of Ceremony.

But yet further within two pages after again, they do explayne themselves,
and their cause more in particular saying: Our controversy with the Protestants
is, whether Jesus Christ shall be King or no: and the end of all our travel is,
to b^yld up the walls of Jerusalem, and to set up the throne of Jesus Christ
(...) heavenly king in the myddest thereof. And are these points also not
substantial, nor any ways touching religion, but Ceremonies?

Harken then yet further what they do infer upon the Protestants Church, for
dissenting from them in these points: Neither is there among them, say they, a
Church, or (...) least wise no true Church: neither are they but titular
Christians, and no true Christians indeed. And yet will M. Barlow continue to
say, that there is no difference at all in Religion; and that I lied, when I
said, that his Majesty yielded to a Conference between Protestants and
Puritans, concerning their differences of Religion. What will he answer to
the two precedent members touched by the Puritans, to wit^ that their strife is
for a true Ministry, and a lawful gouerme^t thereof, expounding their meaning
to be, that for obtaining the first, all Bishops and Archbishops must be put
down, and for the second, all temporal Princes, Kings, and Queens must leave
their superiority over the Church, and submit themselves, and their Crowns
unto the same Church, to wit, their Presbyteries, as M. Rogers expo^deth their
words? And is there no substantial point neither in all this, but only matter
of Ceremony? And does not the very life, and soul of the Church depend of
these two things, a true Ministry, and lawful Head? Is not the power of
preaching, teaching, administration of Sacraments, care of souls, possessing
Cures and Benefices, absoluing from sins, spiritual jurisdiction, and all
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy deryued from hence? And are all these things only
Ceremonial without substance, or essence of religion? M. Barlow a bad Advocate
Does M. Barlow discharge his duty of a Champion, either toward his king, or
his old Lord (from both which it seems al^eady he has received large fees)
in bringing both their authorities in Ecclesiastical matters to be mere
Ceremonies? No man I think will sue to be his Clyent hereafter, i^ he can
plead no better.

But let us yet see a little further, how he has advanced his Maiestyes
spiritual authority. Thus he writes of his being Moderator in the Conference
between the Puritans and Protestants. This difference (says he) about things
indifferent, his Majesty desirous to reconcile, vouchsafed his Princely pains
to moderate, and mediate. In which words, first do you note again his often
repetition, that they were things indifferent, to wit, whether his Majesty
should have Supreme Primacy in Church causes, or renounce the same, and cast it
down, together with his Scepter before the Presbytery of the Puritans; and
whether the Lord of Canterbury should leave of his Lordship, and Graceship, and
become a simple Minister equal with the rest? And so likewise M. Barlow
himself to leave the Sea of Lincoln, and title of Lordship, which none that
knows the humor of the man will imagine that he holds for a thing
indifferent, or a mere Ceremony.

This I say is the first Notandum: for if these things be indifferent, what
need so much a do about them? And the second Notandum is, that he says, that
his Majesty did moderate and mediate in this Conference: which is a very
moderate and mean word indeed to express so high and eminent Authority
Ecclesiastical, as sometimes they will seem to ascribe unto his Majesty. For
who cannot moderate or mediate in a Conference, if he have sufficient learning
and knowledge of the cause, though he have no eminent authority at all to
decide the same? But who shall determine or define the Controversy? M. Barlow
in the brakes.
Here no doubt M. Barlow will be in the brakes. For that a little after being
pressed with the free speech and denial of S. Ambrose unto Valentinian the
Emperor, Amb. ep. 33.
when he meddled in Ecclesiastical affairs, and in particular when he sent for
him by Dalmatius a Trib^ne, with a Notary to come and dispute in the Consistory
before him, his Counsel, and Nobility, with the Heretical Bishop Auxen^ius,
S. Ambrose refused utterly to go, yielding for his reason, that in matters of
faith and religion Bishops must judge of Emperors, and not Emperors of
Bishops: which denial M. Barlow well allows, saying, that Ambrose did well
in it, Ba^l. page ^69.
and said well for it, his fact and reason were both Christianlike.

But suppose, that his Majesty, had sent for the Bishops to dispute and confer
with the doctors of the Puritan party in his presence, as the Emperor
Valentinian did S. Ambrose and that they had refused to come, with the same
reason, that S. Ambrose did, would M. Barlow that wrote the Conference have
defended the same as good, and lawful? Or would his Majesty have taken the
same, in as good part, as Valentinia^ did? I doubt it very much, as also I
doubt, whether S. Ambrose if he had disputed, would have suffered Valentinia^
(suppose he had bin learned) to have moderated and mediated in that
disputation, as M. Ba^low says his Majesty did in this. But if without effect,
and that he could not conclude; who should give judgment of the matter? The
Bishops? They were party, and their whole interest lay therein. The Puritan
Doctors? They were also a party, and thereby partial. His Majesty could not do
it, according to M. Barlowes doctrine in this place, A hard argument for M.
Barlow to solue.
if any point of religion were handled therein. Who then should judge, or give
sentence? The Church says M. Barlow in another place. But who makes that
Church? Or who gives authority of judgment to that Church, if the supreme
Head and governor have it not in himself? Do you not see how intricate this
matter is, and hard to resolve? And according to this, as it seems, was the
effect and consequence of this meeting, if we believe M. Barlow himself, who
makes this question: Did th^se great and Princely pains which his Majesty
took with the Purit^ns, work a general conformity? And then he answers:
With the judicious and discreet it did, (whereof M. Barlow was one) but the
rest grew more awkward, and violent. So he.

But all this while if you mark it, there is nothing said to the point, for
which all this was brought in, to wit, why the like favor had not been showed
to Catholics, for a Conference also with them about their Religion. M. Barlow
does touch some number of reasons, as that our opinions do touch the very
head, and foundation of religion: That his Majesty was perfect in all the
arguments, that could be ^rought for the adverse part, and that he thoroughly
understanding the weakness of them, Silly stuff
held it both unsafe and unnecessary to have them examined: That the Protestant
religion being thoroughly well placed, and having so long continued, is not now
to be disputed etc. Which reasons being either in themselves fond, or against
himself, I will not stand to refute. One only contradiction will I note, that
our arguments being so weak, yet that it should be unsafe to have them
examined; and that the long continuance of Protestant religion in England
should make it indisputable: whereas more then ten times so long prescription
of Catholic religion could not defend it, by show of a conference or dispute
h^ld at Westminster at the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when the same
was changed and put out.

And finally I will end this with a notable calumniation, instead of a reason
uttered by M. Barlow, why this Conference ought not to be granted to
Catholics, for sooth: For that, even in their common petition for toleration,
they ^is^hed his Majesty to be as great a Saint in heaven, as he is a King upon
earth, showing thereby, says he, that gladly they would be rid o^ him, but
which way they care not, so he were not here. And may not this Prelate now
bear the prize for calumniation and Sycophancy, that out of so pious an
antecedent can infer so malicious a consequent? The Catholics do wish unto
his Majesty both life present, and everlasting to come; here a great King and
there a great Saint: M. Barlows li^le care of his Maiestie^ eternal life.
M. Barlow seems not to care much for his eternity, so he may enjoy his
temporality, by the which he himself gayneth for the present, and hops every
day to do more and more: it import^th him little how great a Saint his Majesty
be in heaven, so upon earth he live long to favor him and to furnish him with
fat benefices.

And thus he inforceth me to answer him, contrary to my own inclination, for
repressing somewhat his insolent malignant speech, which is the most exorbitant
perchance, virulent, and impotently passionate, that ever appeared in paper in
our English tongue, for which I intend not to follow him any further, step by
step, and foot by foot, as hitherto I have done: for it would require a huge
volume, and weary both us, and the reader with the impertinency thereof.
Wherefore I shall in that which is to ensue, draw the rest of this his Answer to
certain particular heads for more perspicuity and breuities sake, whereby shall
appear how worthy a writer he is, and well deserving his fee, that runs
into such absurdities, errors, ignorances, corruptions, and falsityes, as will be
laid against him: wherein I remit my self, not only to that which is already
said, but particulerly also to that which is to ensue.

CONCERNING ERRORS, ABSVRDITIES, IGNORANCES AND FALSITIES, Uttered by M. Barlow
in the rest of his Answer. CHAP. V.
WHERE AS page 49. and 50. of my Letter I began in the second Part of the second
Paragraph to handle whether temporal obedience were denied unto his Majesty,
by those that refused the Oath of Allegiance, and that by the express order
and commandment of the Pope in his Breue, as the Apologer often affirms, and
M. Barlow still avouches, I said, that this was injurious dealing toward us,
who never denied this poyn^, that all dutiful civil obedience was to be
performed^ and that it needed not to cite both Scriptures, Fathers, and
Counsels, to prove the said temporal obedience to be due, for that we both
confessed, taught, and persuaded the same to all his Mai^sties subjects, and
that the contrary never passed through our cogitations, but do hold (said I)
and tea^h that subjects are bound to obey their temporal Princes, Good and
evil Princes to be obeyed for conscience, but not against conscience.
in all things lawf^ll, and not only good Princes, but bad also; and not only
out of f^^re, and fla^tery (as some do) but out of conscience, as the Apostle
^eac^^th us to the Romans, propter conscientiam, says he, for conscience sake,
but yet not contra conscien^iam, against conscience, or contrary to conscience.

Against which clause M. Barlow very learnedly and piously sets down this
doctrine: They teach (says he), that the Prince is to be obeyed; Barlow page
160.
propter con^cien^iam^ n^^ contra conscientiam, for conscience sake, not
against conscience: that is no sound doctrine in the negative part: for even
against a man's conscien^e the Prince is to be obeyed, unless that he that
disobeyeth, c^^ prove his conscience to be the same, which the Apostle
describes, a good conscience, accompanied with true love, and ^ayth vn^ayned.
So he. And presently he add^th a reason out of Sir Thomas More one o^ our
Martyr's, as he calls him, and we worthily account him so, who says, that
there may be consci^ntia a^^nina, and conscientia lupina, the conscience of an
As^e, and the conscience of a Wolf, M. Barlow has the conscience of an Ass
and a Wolf.
which we easily grant, and that Sir Thomas More had neither of them, and M.
Barlow perhaps has both; the Asinina in making this ignorant and impious
determination, That a man may obey Princes against his own conscience; and the
Lupina in going about craftily and violently to defend it by the show of
Scripture, as presently will appear.

For albeit I have written somewhat of this mat^er before in the first Part of
this discussion, to wit, of the obligation that every man has to follow his
Conscience, and precept of his inward reason, be it right or wrong, so long as
it stands uncontrolled: yet am I forced to say somewhat more here, for
detection of this man's wilful ^rror or gross ignorance in this place, and
that in both the two points now mentioned, concerning the obligation that men
have not to do against their conscience, and the prescription of a good
conscience pretended to be alleged out of Saint Paul's Epistle to Timothy, for
in both points there be e^regious frauds, if not fooleries.

And for the first, the Reader must understand, that this proposition so
assertiuely set down here by M. Barlow; A strange and wicked assertion of M.
Barlow.
that even against a man's conscience the Prince is to be obeyed, is so absurd
and impious in Catholic Christian ^ares, especially of the learned, as
nothing can be more, for that it opens a plain way to Atheism, and
overthrows the very first moral principles of virtuous actions in us, to
wit, the Synderisis, and pr^script of reason it self, that God has by nature
planted in our souls, for our government and direction: against which light
and rule, whosoever does any thing willingly must needs sin, whatsoever the
thing that is done be, good or bad: the reason whereof is, for that the goodness
or badnes of any things embraced by our will, depends of the apprehension,
and estimation thereof by our understanding and prescript of reason, that
inwardly directs the said will, so as if it should be proposed unto our will
for example sake, as an evil thing, and with that apprehension embraced by our
will, though it were good in it self, yet to me it must needs be evil, for
that I did it, thinking it to be an evil thing.

As for example to believe in Christ (says S. Thomas) in it self is a good
thing, and necessary to salvation, 1. 2. q. 19. art. 5.
but yet the will of man does not embrace it, but as it is propounded unto the
same by our reason, and therefore if the said reason and judgment should propose
it as an evil thing, and not good to believe in Christ (as in Turks and Jews
it does) and that the will notwithstanding should choose, and embrace it as it
is proposed, under the same apprehension that it is evil indeed, then does our
will commit sin, for that in her conceit and apprehension, she chooses and
imbraceth evil: and though in it self it be not so, yet to her it is, that
judging it so, does notwithstanding embrace it. In which case Schoolmen do
define, that a good object so chosen by the will against the dictamen of
reason, and conscience, is ^on^m s^^pliciter and secundum se, but m^lum per
accidens huic homini si^ eligenti, it is good simply and in it self, but
accidentally evil to this particular man that chooses it, against the
direction of his judgment and conscience.

And this point is a thing so clear in nature it selfe^ as that Aristotle in
his first and seventh books of Mor^ls, trea^ing o^ the nature, and condition
of the incontinen^ man, shows that a man may be incontinent two ways, one
way properly in that he does exercise any act that appertains properly and
truly to the vice of incontinencie, the other way accidentally, when he does
exe^cise an act, that he imagines and persuades himself ^o be in the matter
of incontinency, and is not: and yet does Aristotle conclude this man to be
incontinent, for that his will did disagree in this matter from his reason and
judgment, making choice of that which the said reason did propound unto her, as
an evil thing.

Wherefore according to these principles, the universal consent both of
Philosophers an Deuines is, first that bonitas voluntatis seu actus interioris
dependet a ratione propone^te; The goodness of the act of our will does depend
upon our reason and judgment.
that the goodness of the internal act of our will^ in choosing any thing,
depends upon our reason and judgment that propou^deth the same; So as the
will may not choose or embrace any thing, that is so propounded, and
consequently that, Voluntas discordans a ratione, ^on solum recta ^e^um etiam
errante, est semper mala: that our will when it does d^sagree from our reason,
and conscience, and chooses not that which our said reason and conscience
propounds, it is always evil and sins, though the said reason and
conscience do err in propounding the same: yea further that this obligation
for our will, and ch^ice to follow our reason, judgment, and conscience, is, by
the law of God, in nature it self so strong and indispensable, as that not
onl^ any man liuing^ Prince or Potentate can dispense with the same, to have it
bro^e^ whi^^ the said repugn^nce ^ndureth, but neither God himself. Whereupon a
great learned Divine of our days sets down and defends thi^ proposi^ion,
Neminem nec ips^m Deum dispens^re posse, vt sin^ peccato quis faciat contra
propriam conscientiam, that no man, nor God ^imsel^e can di^pense, that a man
may do any thing against his own conscience without sin. and his reason is,
for that Almighty God should be contrary to himsel^e, if having put a precept
by nature, that our will must ^ollow our reason and conscience, and do nothing
against the same, he should notwithstanding dispense that the breach of this
precept should be no sin, for the^ should these laws contradictory stand
^ogeather, I ha^e^ery breach of Gods precept is a sin: and yet that the breach
of this precept is no sin. True it is, that God according to some Deuines may
dispense in his precepts by taking the^ away, and thereby also take away the
force of their obliging man to sin, that should do against them, but they
standing in force and vigor, no dispensation can be given to do against them
without sin, for the reasons now set down.

Well then this position and assertion is most certain in all Catholic
Schools, as well by the grounds of Philosophy, A sin to do contrary to an
erroneous conscience.
as Deuinity, that no man without sin may do against the dictamen, or
direction of his own reason or conscience, yea though it should be erroneous
in it self, for that so long as it is not known to be erroneous to the doer,
but thought to be right, he esteems it as a rule prescribed unto him by God,
and consequently to do against it, is to do against Gods rule, and precept,
and so must it needs be sin unto him.

But here perhaps some man will demand, what then may be done in ^a^ erroneous
conscience, What i^ to be ^one of him who ha^h an erroneo^^ conscience.
whether it be Afi^^a by ignorance, or Lupina by loosenes, or otherwise e^ring
as M. Barlow mentions. Truly the remedy is not, as he prescribes, to do
against a man's conscience, I mean against that very erring conscience, so long
as it seems to the doe^ not to err, but to be right, for therein he ^^old
si^ne, as has been said: But he ought to depose that conscience if he can,
and to seek rea^ons of better information, and therwithall frame unto himself
another conscience: but yet so long as he cannot do this, he is bound not to
do against the other conscience, which he think^th to be right, though
unknowing unto him, ^t should be erroneous.

But now in what cases, and upon what grounds, and with what circumstances a
man may be bound to reform or alter his conscience, either by direction or
authority of his Superiors, or by contrary reasons, proofs, arguments and
authorities, according to the substance and quality of the things, is a large
dispute among School Deuines, Casuistes, and Canonistes.

For us it is sufficient at this time to have seen, that all generally do
condemn, as most false and wicked, this proposition of M. Barlow, that even
against a man's conscience the Prince is to be obeyed: which proposition you
have seen before confuted. Now we must consider certain shi^te^ and
absurdityes used by M. Barlow in setting down this his false doctrine. ^. Tim.
1.
Even against conscience, says he, the Prince is to be obeyed, unless he that
disobeyeth, can prove his conscience to be the same, that the Apostle
describes, a good conscience accompanied with true love and faith unfeigned. In
which words you must note, that first there is contained a very absurd shift,
not void of impiety; and secondly much corruption and falsity. The shift is,
in that when any thing is proposed to a man by a Prince or Superior, that is
contrary to his conscience, he byndeth him absolutely to do it, even against
his conscience, unless he can prove that his conscience has true love and
faith unfeigned, which being a very hard matter for many men to discern in
themselves, especially the ignorant and unlearned, he does not only license
them but obliges them also, to do against their conscience, good or bad,
whatsoever is proposed unto them, which opens a gap to all impiety, and to
the overthrow of all conscience in most men.

For certain it is, that the far greater part of Christians have not
sufficient time, leisure, learning, or commodity to make this proof prescribed
out of the Apostle: and then I would demand him, what he will say of Turks,
Jews, and Gentiles that have not true faith? Have they no conscience? and must
they do what soever is ordained them, though never so repugnant to their
reason, because they cannot prove their conscience to be such as the Apostle
(though falsely) is presumed here to describe? M. Barlowes monstrous doctrines
more fitting the Turks Alcoran then the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
What will M. Barlow say also of Christian Sectaryes of our time, to wit,
Anabaptists, Trinitarians, ^^^^^tes, L^^berans, Swingfeldians, Brownists etc.
whom he will not grant I am sure to have true love, and unfeigned faith? Have
they no conscience, that may bind them to any thing, different from that which
is proposed unto them by Kings or Princes, whether it seem unto them good or
bad? May all these men ^weare to whatsoever is required, or do what soever is
exacted by a temporal Prince, without further examen, for that they cannot
prove as M. Barlow will no doubt suppose, that they have true love, and faith
unfeigned? Who would expect such monstrous doctrines, from the Chair of a
Prelate?

But now let us see how he uses S. Paul in this matter, and abuses his Reader
under pretense of his name, and authority. He says, that the Apostle
describes a good conscien^e, S. Paul abused.
to be that, which is accompanied with true love and faith unfeigned: and upon
this foundeth his discourse, as now you have heard, cyting for it^ 1. Tim. 1.
5. But if you read the place, you shall find the matter quite otherwise, and by
this you may learn, how these fellows that cry nothing but Scriptures, do
abuse the simple people, with misalleadging, and misconstruing the same. For
that the Apostle describes not a good conscience at all in that place, but
only assigns the same as a thing necessarily required, to the end and
perfection of the Law. For the words of the Apostle are these: Finis pr^cepti
est, charitas de cord puro, conscientia bona, and fide non ficta: The end of
the commandment or law is charity out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and
faith not feigned. Which is no description of a good conscience as you see, but
of the end and perfection of the law, which is Charity, according to that which
in another place the same Apostle says: Ple^itudo legis Charitas: the fullnes
or fulfilling of the Law is charity. But here he describes more at large what
manner of charity it must be, to wit proceeding out of a pure heart, as also out
of a good conscience (which ^^ge^^^^^ hope) and out of unfeigned faith. So as
here tr^e charity (...) described, and not a good conscience (which i^ named
^^^ly as a condition needfully required to the fulfilling of the Law, and not
described, as M. Barlow falsely aff^^^^^^.) For if a thing be described that
has many parts of (...) requi^ed to the complement thereof, it were very^
(...) to say, that every one of the said parts, or parcels it described thereby,
or that the said description may be ascribed (...) every one of them. As if a
man should describe a Knight or a Captain, that is to go to the wars, what
^^^^i^ure i^ required, to wit, a horse, s^ddle, spear, armor, and the like,
it cannot be said that a horse is here described, or a saddle, or a spear, but
only the Knight himself, who has need of all these things: So as in this M.
Barlow is found (...) have perverted the whole text and meani^g of S. Paul.

There remains then his conclusion, that for so much as Heretics and
Schismatickes also do plead conscience for their standing out, and that there
is no one article in the Oath offered, that can be proved to be contrary to a
good conscience, and true Christian religion, therefore stands the Apologers
conclusion inco^trollable still, That the Pope has prohibited English
Catholics to perform even civil obedience to their Sovereign. But all this
has been now answered, by that which has been treated before: for that
Shi^matikes and Heretics though they be ^ound both to inform and reform
their consciences: that be erroneous: yet so long as that repugna^cy indureth;
they should sin in doing contrary to the dictamen thereof. More co^te^ned in
the Oath, then civil obedience.
And as for the articles in the Oath, that are contrary to Englis^ Catholics
consciences, and to their religion, they are so many, as do any way impeach, or
prejudice their religion, which are the most part in the Oath, as is known.
Neither must M. Barlow run to this ordinary shift, and say as he is wont, that
their consciences are not well cleansed^ and that their religion is not true
Christian Religion, and therefore they ought not to have scruple in sweating^
for that now it has been showed, that it is sufficient for binding them from
swearing, that their conscyences do tell them the contrary, which conscience
to them does appear good, and their religion true: in which respect the Pope
that is of the same conscience and Religion has defined it to be unlawful
unto them, to swear against this their conscience and religion, so long as it
stands as it does. And therefore if M. Barlow will have them swear without
sin in this case, he must first make them Protestants, and so give them a new
conscience, and new religion, for in that they have, they cannot do it; albeit
for temporal obedience, they offer all that may be exacted, at their hands by
any law of Christian subjection to their temporal sovereign.

And this much may be sufficient for discussing of this point, Whether subjects
may or must obey their Princes, when they command things against their
consciences, which in my Letter I denied. And whereas the Apologer did alleadg
diverse authorities out of Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels to prove the
obedience of Subjects to their Princes, not only Christian but also Infidels,
as to king Nabuchodonosor of Babylon, to king Pharao of Egypt, King Cyrus of
Persia, my answer then was this.

He alleges for examples out of the Scriptures, Let. p. 51. Apol. page 22.
that the children of Israel obeyed the King of Babylon, as also they exhibited
temporal Obedience unto King Pharao of Egypt; Hi^r. 27. 12.
as in like manner to Cyrus King of Persia: All which examples we grant to be
true, Exodus 5.1.

Esdr. 1.3.


and could add many more, both of the Jews, and Christians that lived
peaceably under Infidel Princes in those days. But let one example (as I
said) be brought forth, wherein they obeyed them in points contrary to their
Conscience or Religion, and it shall be sufficient. We read in the Prophecy of
Daniel^ that those three famous Jews, Dan. 3.12.
Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, were most trusty unto King Nabuchodonosor in
temporal affairs, and so much esteemed by him, as he made them his universal
Governors over all the works of the Religion of Babylon, says the Scripture:
and yet when it came to the point, that he would have them for his honor and
pleasure, No obedience against God and a man's conscience.
and upon his commandment, adore the golden Statua, which he had set up; they
forsook him flatly, and said to him in the presence of all his Nobility
assembled together, that they were not so much as to answer him in that
Commandment, not would they do, as he had appointed them. The like in effect
did the ancienter Jews do with King Pharao of Egypt; for that albeit in
temporal affairs they obeyed him, even in that time when he oppressed, and
persecuted them most: yet in that he would have had them stay and sacrifice in
Egypt, and not follow Moses their Spiritual Superior into the desert
(notwithstanding that the King had some cause perhaps to suspect their
temporal Allegiance also by that departure, they being a potent multitude of
people:) yet would they not obey him nor do as he would have them, when they
persuaded themselves that God would have the contrary.

Deu. 1. (...) 1.
I let pass how Daniel and his fellows would not eat the meats of the King
of Babylon, nor Tobie those of the Assyrians, and much less would he leave of
to bury the dead, though it were forbidden by Proclamation under pain of
death. ^. Match. 1.
The Machabees in like manner obeyed King Antiochus so long, as he commanded
nothing against their Law and Conscience: but when he went about to force them
to sacrifice, and to eat swynes-flesh, and other things against their Law and
Conscience, they refused openly to perform that Obedience. So as these places
of Scriptures alleged by the Apologer, do prove nothing for him at all, but
are rather flat against him, and for us as you have seen.



Thus I wrote then, now let us see how M. Barlow overthrows it. First as
concerning the 3. Pagan Kings Pharao, Cyrus, and Nabuchodonosor, whereof I said
the Jews obedience unto them was in temporal matters only, he says, that
therein I do abuse the Reader, for that they showed their obedience (says he)
to be due, and performed the same, in matters of spiritual service: Barl. page
161.
whereat I think no man can but laugh, that M. Barlow is become so spiritual,
as that he can make those Infidel Kings to be spiritual Superiors also, A
strange assertion.
or at leastwise to have spiritual power, even in spiritual things over Gods
faithful people. Let us see his proofs of so strange an assertion.

To offer sacrifice (says he) unto the Lord in the desert is an ^igh case of
conscience, and religion; yet would not the Jews in Egypt attempt it, without
asking, and obtaining the Kings leave. Weak proofs.
And why was that? Was it for that they held him for their supreme Governor in
all causes Ecclesiastiacll, and temporal? Then they ought to have obeyed him,
when he would have had them offered sacrifice in Egypt, which they refused to
do, for that their spiritual governor Moses, though a natural borne
subject of King Pharao, ^ould them that Gods will was contrary: and as for
their asking, and obtaining leave before they went to sacrifice in the Desert,
who does not see, but that it was in respect of temporal danger, which might
ensue unto them, if so great a number of their unarmed people should have
adventured to depart without his license. But I would demand of M. Barlow, who
says, that the people of Israel showed their obedience to be due unto Pharao,
and performed it in matter of spiritual service, what manner of obedience was
that, which came always in the Imperative mood, Thus says our Lord, Dimitte
populum meum, Let go my people? And when he yielded not thereunto, he was
plagued and punished with so many afflictions, as are set down in Exodus for
9. or 10. Chapters together: and in the end what leave obtained they, but
against his will, when he durst no longer deny them? Which appears, for that
his fear being somewhat mitigated, he pursued them afterward again. And will
M. Barlow make this an example of spiritual obedience to temporal Princes,
that was thus extorted? Or of spiritual jurisdiction in heathen Princes, over
faithful people in causes Ecclesiastical, that was contradicted both in word
and fact by Moses himself? But let us hear his second instance, for it is
more ridiculous.

So, says he, the commandment of King Cyrus was in a cause merely
Ecclesiastical viz. the building of the Lords house in Jerusalem, and
transporting thither the consecrated vessels. But who does not see that these
things as they were ordained by King Cyrus were mere temporal, as is the
building of a material Church, A simple Discourse
for that otherwise, the Masons, Carpenters and Architects, that build the
same, should be Ecclesiastical officers, albeit they were Gentiles. If King
Cyrus had had authority to appoint them out their sacrifices, and to dispose
lawfully of their sacred actions therein, as he had not, nor could have, being
a Pagan, and not of their faith and religion; then might they have said, that
he had been a spiritual Superior unto them: but for giving them leave only
to go to Jerusalem to build their Temple, and to carry their consecrated
vessels with them, that had been violently taken away from thence, argues no
more spiritual jurisdiction in him, then if a man having taken away a
Church-dore key, so as the people could not go in to pray, except he opened the
door, should be said to have spiritual jurisdiction over that people for
opening the door, and letting them in, and that they in praying him to open the
said door, did acknowledge spiritual obedience unto him. And is not this mere
childish trifllng, and worthy the wit of M. Barlow.

What definition trow you, will M. Barlow give of spiritual power and
Jurisdiction, thereby to verify these monstrous and absurd propositions, which
in this affair he has uttered, partly by his assertions, and partly by his
examples? Truly I know no other set down by Deuines, but that it is a power
given by God, to govern souls for their direction unto everlasting salvation,
even as civil power is given for governing the common wealth to her prosperity
and temporal ^elicity. And will M. Barlow say, that God gave this spiritual
power to Pharao and Cyrus, that were Heathens, and knew not God, for governing
and directing the souls of the Jews, that lived under them, whose religion or
God they neither knew, nor cared for? Or that Nero the Emperor, or Claudius
had this spiritual power and Jurisdiction, upon the souls of S. Peter and S.
Paul, that lived under them in Rome, and were their temporal Lords and
Princes? These things are so absurd that I am ashamed to exaggerate them any
further, and therefore let us pass forward to the rest.

As for the other examples by me alleged how Sydrac^^ Mysach and Abdenago,
refused to obey Nabuchod^^^sor their King in adoring the Statua, as also
refu^ing the meats of the King of Babylon, and Toby of the Assyrians, and the
Mac^abees for refusing to eat Swines-flesh at the commandment of their King
Antiochus, he says, that all these had their warrants for defense of their
consciences, from the word or will of God: as who should say, Catholics have
nothing for justification of their Conscience, which is a mere cavil, and as
Logitians call, Petitio principij, and wholly from the question: for that we
affirm, first that they have sufficient grounds, for justification of their
consciences in that behalf, as they will easily verify in every point if they
might be hard with any indifferency. And secondly if they had not, but their
consciences were erroneous; yet so long as that dictamen rationis, or prescript
of conscience stands to the contrary, and tells them, that they have
sufficient ground, they may not do against it without sin, as now has been
proved. Let us see what he says of the other example of Tobies breach of King
Senacherib his commandment in Niniue, which we shall examine in the next
ensuing Paragraph.

WHETHER TOBY DID well or no, in breaking the commandment of the King of
Nini^e, concerning the burying of the dead Jews. And how M. Barlow answers
unto the authorities of the Fathers: and overthrows the Kings Supremacy.. II.
AMong other examples and testimonies alleged by me out o^ Scripture of
lawful disobeying temporal Princes commandments, when they are unlawful,
the example of Tobias that disobeyed the edict of King Senacheri^^ of Niniue
about burying such as were slain, seemed to have troubled most M. Barlow in
this answer; and so after some discussion of the matter up and down, whether
he did it openly or in secret, by day or by night, by stealth or contempt, he
makes this conclusion; Take it either way, Barl. page 168.
says he, was his disobedience in such a cause justifiable? No. Gravely
resolved, as you see, and Doctour-like, but yet without any testimony, except
only his own. For first the context of the story it self having recounted the
circumstances of the fact, in the first and second Chapters of the book of
Toby, to wit, how the foresaid King Senacherib son to Salmanasar being
returned much exasperated from Jury against the Jews, for the evil success
which there he had, did promulgate an Edict, that such as he caused to be
slain should not be buried, the Story says, that Toby notwithstanding this
Edict and Commandment, did bury them by night, The fact of Toby against the
commandment of K. Senacherib.
yea and left also on day his dinner, and the ghests which he had with him, at
the same, for to fetch in the dead body of a Jew slain in the streets: and
when some of his neighbous, seeing the peril thereof did reprehend him, for
aduenturing upon so great danger, saying to him^ that himself had been
commanded to be slain for burying men before, the Story does not only defend
him, but also commends him for the same; saying: Tob. 2. v. 9.
Sed Tobias plus timens Deum, quam Regem, rapiebat corpora occisorum etc. But
Toby feating God more then the King, did take away the dead bodies that he
found in the streets, hyding them in his house and burying them at mydnight.

Secondly the Angel Raphael in the twelth Chapter discovering himself unto
Toby, together with the mystery of all his actions with him, does manifestly
show, that these his deeds of charity, of giving of alms, and burying the dead
bodies of such as were slain, were gratfull unto Almighty God: Tob. 12.
Quando cra^as cum lachrymis, and sepeliebas mortous, and derelinquebas
prandium tuum etc. ego obtuli ^^ationem tuam Domino, and quia acceptus eras
Deo, necesse suit, vt tentatio probaret te. When thou did pray with tears,
and did bury the dead, and did leave thy dinner for doing this work of
Charity, I did offer to God thy prayer, and because thou were acceptable unto
God, it was necessary that temptation should try thee. M. Barlow a bad Angel.
Here then we have the testimony of an Angel, against M. Barlow, that is no
Angel: and if he be, yet must we account him for a very wicked, and false
Angel, if the other be a good and true Angel.

Now then let us examine a little whether of these Angels deserves most to be
believed, or whether for a man's salvation it be more secure to follow the one
or the other, for that they speak contraryes. The one that this fact of Toby
was not iustifyable, the other that it was not only justifiable, but acceptable
also, and pleasing to Almighty God, and that in a very high degree, as by the
text appears. The one determines as you have heard, that Toby was
reprehensible in that he obeyed not the King^ the other says, he did very well
in obeying God, more then the king. How shall we know which of these two Angels
is the good, and which the bad. M. Barlow will on his part perhaps say, that
this book of Toby is not held by him for Canonical Scripture, The credit of
the history of Toby.
but only Hagiographum, a holy ancient writing, as the Jews themselves do
allow it to be, though not in their Canon of Scriptures: yet does not this take
away the credit of the Story, which has endured, and has been believed, and
taken for true, so many ages both before, and after Christian Religion was
planted? And M. Barlow cannot alleadg one authentical Author, or holy man
before these our times, that ever said this Story was false, or not to be
credited, though he received it not for Canonical Scripture.

Secondly we see it acknowledged for Canonical Scripture, and of infallible
truth, not only by a general Council of our days, wherein the flower of the
learned men in Christendom were present, I mean that of Trent: C^c. Tri^,
sess. 4.
but by another Council also above 1000. years before that, to wit, the third
of Carthage Carth. can. 47.
wherein S. Augustine himself was present, Aug. 2. de doc. chrism. cap. 8.
and subscribed thereunto; and in diverse other places of his works, gives the
same testimony to this book, as do sundry other Fathers ancienter then he, as
S. Ambrose, Amb. de Tob. 2.
that wrote a whole book of the Story of Toby, containing twenty four whole
Chapters, S. Basil in his Oration of Avarice; yea the holy Martyr S. Cyprian
also himself more ancienter then them all, Cyp. de orat. Dominica and l. de
mortali^.
and this in sundry places of his works, and after S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S.
Isiodo^us, Cassiodorus, and others: whereby is evident, that in S. Augustins
time, and before, this book was held for divine, and Canonical. And therefore
for a man now to venture his soul, upon this bare denial of M. Barlow, and
his Consorts (for there goes no less in the matter, his assertion being
blasphemy, if this be true Scripture) let his poor sheep of Lincoln think
well of it, for other men will beware how they venture so much with him.

But now setting aside this consideration, whether it be Canonical Scripture,
or no; let us consider a little further what holy men in ancient times did
think of this fact of Toby, S. Augustines and other Fathers judgments of the
fact of Toby.

Cap. 3.

Cap. 13.


whether it were justifiable or no. S. Augustine in his book De cura pro
mortuis habenda, has these words: Tobias sepeliendo mortuos Deum promeruisse,
test Angelo commendatur. Tobias is commended by the testimony of the Angel,
in that by burying the dead he merited the favor of Almighty God. And the same
Father repeateth the very same words and sentence again, in his first book of
the City of God. Whereby we see what his sense was in this matter, both in
believing the good Angel, and esteming that good work of burying the dead
(which M. Barlow by contempt calls a civil co^rtesy) to have merited with God.

S. Ambr.
And of the same sense was S. Ambrose, who speaking of this Edict of the King,
that no man should bury any dead man of the Jews in that captivity, commends
highly holy Toby for neglecting the same, in respect of that charitable work.
^ib. de Tob. c. 1.
Ille interdicto non reuocabatur, sed magis incitabatur etc. he was not stayed
by that Edict or Proclamation from burying the dead, but rather was thereby
incyted the more to do the same: Erat ^^im misericordiae praemium, (...) p^na:
for that the punishment of death, was the prince of mercy.

S. Cyprian also that holy Bishop and Martyr long before S. Amb^ose, in his
book Of our Lords prayer, extolling much the meryt of good works, and
exhorting men unto the same, amongst many other authoryties of the Scriptures,
cyteth this of Toby saying: Et ideo diuina Scriptura in^^r^it, dicens, bona est
oration cum ieiunio, and ^leemosyna: and therefore the dyuine Scripture
in^tructeth us saying: That Prayer is good accompanied with fasting and alms.
In which words first we see this book of Toby affirmed to be divine
Scripture, Tob. 12.
and secondly this speech and doctrine of the Angel Raphael unto Toby
concerning the praise and merit of good works, to be allowed by S. Cyprian^
which is full contrary to M. Barlowes Divinity. But let us hear our S. Cypria^
in the same place: Cyp. lib. d^ oratione Dom.
Nam qui in die Iudicij praemium pro operibus etc. For that he in the day of
judgment ( to wit our Sa^iour) will give reward for our good works, and alms,
and is now also ready to show himsel^e a most benign heater to him, that shall
come unto him by prayer and works: This is no Protestant doctrine.
and so did Cornelius the Centurion merit to be heard, as doing many alms upon
the people, says the Scripture. And when about nine of the clock the said
Centurion prayed, an Angel stood by him and gave testimony of his good works,
saying, Cornelius thy prayers and alms have ascended up before God: cito
orationes ad Deum ascendunt, quas ad Deum merita nost^i operis imponunt. Our
prayers do quickly asce^d unto God, which the merits of our good works do lay
before him etc. And presently with this Scripture, he joins the other out of
Toby: Sic and Raphel Angelus etc. So the Angel Raphael did testify unto Toby
always praying and always working: when thou did pray together with Sara,
I did offer the memory of thy prayer in the sight of God, and when thou did
bury the dead, and leave thy dinner for doing the same, I was sent by God to
tempt thee, and afterward to cure thee, and I am Raphael one of the sea^en just
Angels, who do assist, and converse in the sight of God etc. Where we see that
S. Cyprian makes another manner of account of the holiness and meryt of this
work, and of the truth of this Angel, then M. Barlow does. And the very self
same speech S. Cyprian uses in his book de M^^talitate, alleging this place
of Toby, and testimony of the Angel Raphael in the commendation of Tobies
fact, in burying the dead against the Kings commandment. So as white and
black, hot and cold, or the two poles are not more opposite one to the other,
then the spirit of S. Cyprian, and that of M. Barlow in this point.

And truly it seems that a man may gather by good consequence, that for so
much as he condemns that fact of Toby in burying the dead bodies of the Jews
in persecution, A great presumption of M. Barlowes piety.
he would also, if he had been there, not only not have buried these dead
bodies against the Kings Edict, but also neither have received the persecuted
into his house, against the commandment of the said King. Nay he would have
rather delivered them up to the persecutors hands, and the like, if he had
lived amongst Christians, under Nero, Domitius, and Dioclesian. And this is M.
Barlows piety in respect of that of holy Toby, and S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, and other such sincere pious men, who both approved and commended
this fact. Now let us pass on to the rest.

After these examples of Scriptures there were alleged by the Apologer sundry
authorityes of ancient Fathers which show the obligation that subjects have to
obey their temporal Princes, which in my Letter I declared no way to prejudice
our cause, who both acknowledge and offer all dutiful obedience in temporal
affairs, which is so much as the said ancient Fathers do teach, and for that
the said authorityes are clear, for us in that behalf, I shall ^et down here
what I answered to the same.

Letter page 52.
As these places of Scripture (said I) alleged against us do make for us, so
much more do the authorities produced out of the ancient Fathers, for that they
go about to prove the very same point that we here hold, that in te^porall and
cyuill affairs we must obey dutifully our temporal Princes, though Infidels
or Pagans: Authorities of ancient Fathers.
but not in matters concerning God, our Religion, or Conscience. And his very
first example out of S. Augustine is such, as I marvel much, that he would
cite the same, but that somewhat for show must be alleged: For it makes so
clearly and directly against him, as if it had been written purposely to
confute him in this our case. But let us hear what it is. Agreeable to the
Scriptures ( says he) did the Fathers teach. Augustine speaking of I^dian,
says thus: Apol. p. 23. ^

Aug. in Psalm. 124.


Julian was an unbelieving Emperor, was he not an Apostata? an oppressor and
an Idolatour? Christian souldiars served that unbelieving Emperor: when they
came to the cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord, but him that is in
heaven: when he would have them worship Idols and sacrifice, they preferred
God before him: but when he said, Go forth to fight, invade such a nation, they
presently obeyed: they distinguished their eternal Lord from their temporal,
and yet were they subject even unto their temporal Lord, for his sake that was
their eternal Lord and Master. Thus he.

And can any thing be spoken more clearly for us, and for our cause, then this?
For even this do we offer to our King and Sovereign: How far we are bound to
obey our temporal Prince.
we will serve him: we will obey him: we will go to war with him: we will
fight for him: and we will do all other offices belonging to temporal duty:
but when the cause of Christ comes in hand, who is Lord of our Consciences,
or any matter concerning the same, or our Religion; there we do, as S.
Augustine here appoynteth us, prefer our eternal King, before our
Temporal.

And like to these are all the other places of Fathers cyted by him, who
distinguish expressly between the Temporal honor and Allegiance due to the
Emperor, Apol. p. 23.
and the other of our Religion, and Conscience, belonging only to God. And to
that plain sense are Tertullians words cyted by the Apologer: Tertull. ad Scap.
We honor the Emperor in such sort, as is lawful for us, and ^xpedient for
him, as a man second after God, and as having received from God, whatsoever he
is, and only l^sse th^n God. And will not the Catholics of England use this
speac^ also unto their King? Or will the Apologer himself deny that Tertullian
here meant nothing else, but in temporal affairs, for so much as the Emperors
at that time were Heathens and Gentiles, and consequently were no^ to be obeyed
in any point against Christian faith or Religion?

The like plain sense have the words of Iustin^^ Martyr to the Emperor
himself, Just. Apol. 2. ad Anton. Impera^.
cited here in the third place, to wit: We only adore God, and in all things
we cheerfully perform service to you, prosessing you to be Emperors, and
Princes of men. And do not all English Catholics say the same at this day:
and in all other things, that concern not God and his Obedience, by rule of
Catholic Religion, they offer cheerfully to serve his Majesty, acknowledging
him to be their liege Lord and King, and inferior only to God in his Temporal
Government? And how then are these, and such other places brought in for
witness, as though they had somewhat to say against us?

Optat. contra Parme^. lib. 3. Ambros. Orat. co^tra Auxent. de Basilicis no^
trad. lib. 5. Epist.
The other two sentences in like manner cited out of Optatus and S. Ambrose,
the first saying: That over the Emperor there is none, but only God, that made
the Emperor. And the other, That tears were his weapons against the arms and
souldiars of the Emperor: That he neither ought, nor could resist: neither of
the^ do make any thing against us, or for the Apologer, even as they are here
nakedly cyted, without declaration of the circumstances: for that in temporal
affairs, the King or Emperor is Supreme, next under God. And when the
Emperor will use secular forces against the Priests of his dominion, they,
being no souldiars, must fall to prayers, and tears, which are Priestly
weapons. But what? Did S Ambrose by this acknowledge that the Emperor had
higher Authority, then he, in Church Matters? Or that if he had offered him an
Oath, repugnant to his Religion, or Conscience, in those matters he would have
obeyed, or acknowledged his Superiority? No truly. For in three several
occasions that fell out, he flatly denied the same, which this Apologer
cra^tily dissembleth, and says not a word thereof.

The first was, when he was cited by Dalmatius the Tribune, Three occasions in
which S. Ambrose resisted the Emperor his temporal Sovereign.

Libellus. Ambros. epist. 32.


bringing with him a public Notarie to testify the same, in the name of the
Emperor Valentinian the younger, to come and confer, or dispute with the
heretical Bishop Auxen^ius, in the presence of his Majesty and other of his
Nobility and Counsel, which point S. Ambrose refused utterly to do, telling
the Emperor plainly by a letter written unto him; That in matters of faith and
Religion Bishops must judge of Emperors, and not Emperors of Bishops. And
diverse other doctrines, by this occasion, he taught him to that effect, as is
to be seen in the same Epistle.

The second occasion fell out the very next year after Millane, when the said
Emperor, by suite of the Arians, Amb. l. ^. epist. 33.
and favor of Iustina the Empress on their behalf, made a Decree, that a
certain Church of that City should be delivered to the said Arians: which
Decree S. Ambrose the Bishop refused to obey. And when the Emperors Officers
coming with arms, urged greatly to give possession of the Church, he fled to
his former weapons of weeping and praying: Ego Missam facere coepi etc. I began
to say Masse^ and when the temporal Magistrate urged still, that the Emperor
used but his own right in appoynting that Church to be delivered, S. Ambrose
answered: Quae diuina sunt, Imperatoriae potestati non esse subiecta: That such
things as belong to God, are not subject to the Imperial power. And thus
answered S. Ambrose about the giving up of a material Church. What would he
have said in greater matters?

The third accasion was when the Emperor sent his Tribunes, and other Officers
to require certain Vessels belonging to the Church to be delivered, Amb. ibid.
which S. Ambrose constantly denied to do, saying: That in this, he could not
obey: And further adding. Ambros. Con^. de Basili^^s no^ traden^^^s.
That if the Emperor did love him self, he should abstain from offering such
injury unto Christ. And in another place, handl^ng the same more at large, he
says: That he gave to Caesar that which was Cesars, and to God, that which
belonged to God, but that the Tem^ple of God could not be the right of Caesar:
which we speak (says he) to the Emperors honor. For what is more honorable
unto him, then that he being an Emperor, be called a Child of the Church, for
that a good Emperor is within the Church, but not above the Church. So S.
Ambrose. What would he have done, or said, if he had been pressed with an Oath
against his Conscience, or any least point of his Religion?

Thus far I answered in my letter, and he that shall read M Barlows reply now,
will se^ that he has nothing at all in substance to say against it: for to
that excellent speech of S. Augustine concerning the Emperor Julian, he
tri^^eth exceedingly; first bidding us to show that point in the Oath which is
different from true religion: which is a cavil, as you see, for it is enough
if it be contrary to the swearers Religion. And whereas we offer upon that
speech as the subjects of Julian did, We will serve our Sovereign, we will go
to war with him, and we will fight for him, and the like, he says, it is but
an hypocritical flourish of words. To the speech and facts of S. Ambrose he is
forced either to say nothing, or to speak against himself. For whereas I do
make this demand, Did S. Ambrose by saying that he could not resist the
Emperor, and that his weapons were tears, acknowledge by this that the
Emperor had higher authority in Church Matters then he? Or that if he had
offered him an Oath repugnant to his Religion and conscience in those matters,
he would have obeyed; and acknowledged his authority? To the first he says
that it is only extra ole^s, not to the cause in hand, and that he will handle
it in another place; though every man of discretion will see, that the demand
is full to the purpose, and ought to have been answered here. To the second he
has but a ridiculous shift: Suppose, says he, that S. Ambrose would refuse
such an Oath urged upon him, would he withal forbid others to take it? Surely
no. But I say surely yea: for if we grant S. Ambrose to have been a good
Prelate, Pastor, and Father to his people, we must also grant, that what Oath
he thought pernicious for himself to take, he would have forbidden the same to
have been taken by his people, if they had demanded his opinion, as English
Catholics did the Popes, or else he had not been a faithful Pastor.

But what does M. Barlow answer to the three instances alleged out of S.
Ambrose, M. Barlowes shifting answer to the three places of S. Ambrose.
in all which he contradicted the Emperor, that was his temporal Lord, and
denied to obey in matters, Ecclesiastical: the first, when he refused to go
with the Tribune, and Notary sent for him by the said Emperor to dispute, in
the Consistory with Auxenti^^ the Arian Bishop, yielding for his reason, That
in matters of faith and Religion, Bishops must judge of Emperors, and not
Emperors of Bishops. Which answer of S. Ambrose M. Barlow does allow, and
commends it much: and albeit we have said somewhat before about the same, yet
shall we presently add a word or two more thereof.

The second refusal of the said Father was, as now you have heard, to deliver
up a certain Church in Millan^ to the Arians, at the commandment of the
Emperor, alleging for his reason, Quae diuina sunt, Imperatoriae potestatium
esse subiecta, that such things as are divine, are not subject to Imperial
power. Which answer in like manner M. Barlow allows, albeit I think I may
assure my self, that if his Matie of England should command one of his Parish
Churches of Lincoln Diocese to be delivered up to the Purita^s, or Brownists,
or other like Sectaries, and that his Majesty should be so earnest, and
resolute therein, as the Emperor was, sending his officers and souldiars to put
them into possession, M. Barlow would not be so resolute in his denial as S.
Ambrose was; neither would he be so bold to allege that reason which S.
Ambrose did, Feminine Supremacy more esteemed of M. Barlow then Masculine.
that divine things are not subject to King James his power; including in the
name of divine things, the possession of this, or that material Church. Or if
he would be so bold now, I assure my self he would not have been so in Queen
Elizabeth's days, whose spiritual Supremacy though femininae, seemed much more
to be esteemed of him, then this now of his Majesty, as presently will appear.

The third refusal of S. Ambrose to the Emperor was, when the said Emperor
sent his Tribunes, and other officers to require certain Vessels belonging to
the Church, to be delivered, which S. Ambrose constantly denied to do,
answering as before has been set down, That i^ th^^ (...) could not obey him,
and that if he loved himself, he should abst^^^e to offer such injury unto
Christ etc. which answer also M. Barl^^ well allows, signifying thereby, that
he would a^^wer^ in the same sort to the magistrates and officers of King Iam^^
if he should send them upon any occasion, to require at his hands the Communion
cup, or any other such vessels belonging to any Church in Lincoln Diocese.
And will any man believe this, that he will be so stout? But it is a pastime to
see how he chatteth about this matter, as though he would say somewhat indeed,
but yet says nothing, at least to the purpose. Let us hear what he brings.
Things separated (says he) to holy use, are not to be alienated to (...)
usage. Barlow page 171.
Here now every man will laugh, that remembers, how the Vessels, Vestments,
and other such things dedicated unto God, and consecrated to Ecclesiastical
uses, in the Catholic Church, have been handled by Protestants, taken away,
defaced, and converted to profane uses, which this man I presume dares not to
condemn. Let us hear him further. God has in them, says he, a (...) right,
as King David confesses: first as his gift to man, secondly as man's gift
again to him, which twofold cord tyeth them so strong, as it is an Anathema (
or curse) for any man, not consecrated to challenge them: yea for them which are
consecrated, if they do not only p^^ them to that use alone, for which they
were dedicated.

And do you see now heer^, how zealous M. Barlow is become upon the suddayne
for defense of consecrated vessels in the Church? What Vessels have they
consecrated think you? Or what kind of consecration do they use therein? He
says it is an anathema for any person not consecrated to challenge them: the
sacred Emperor, and King do demand them in this our case: if their persons be
sacred, then in M. Barlows sense they are also consecrated, and they may
demand these Vessels, which as I said are very few in the Protestant Church:
and if they had been as few in the Church meant by S. Ambrose, it is not
likely that the Emperor would have troubled himself so much in sending
Tribunes, and other officers for the same.

But suppose the vessels were of like number, price, and value in the one, and
the other Church. Yet I think M. Barlow will not deny, but that the manner of
consecrating them was far different, which may be seen in the ^^g^^churgians
themselves, in the fourth Century, Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 5. 6. and 7.
and by S. Ambrose in his second book of Office, cap. 29. where he puts
down two sorts of Church-Vessels dedicated to divine uses, the one initiata,
hallowed or consecrated, and the other not yet hallowed; and that in the time
of necessity to redeem Captives, The ancient use of hallowing Church Vessels.
or to relieve the poor, the second sort are first to be broken, and applied
to these holy uses, but the former with much more difficulty, for that they
were now hallowed. Which difference I think the Protestants do not greatly
observe, in their hallowed Vessels. S. Gregory Nazianzen in like manner talking
of such consecrated Vessels as were used in the Church in his time says, Naz.
orat. de s^ipso co^tra Arianos.
that it was such, as it made it vnlawfall for lay men to touch them, which I
think M. Barlow will not lay of his Communion-Cup, which all men take in their
hands. But now to the question it self.

Do you think that M. Barlow would deny unto King James that Communion-Cup, or
any other Vessels of a Church, if he should as earnestly demand them, as
Valentinia^ the Emperor did, when he sent his Tribunes and other chief
officers to require them of S. Ambrose? If he would, what kind of Supremacy
does he allow his Majesty in spiritual matters, if he may be denied and
disobeyed in these also that are in a certain sort mixed, and in some part
conjoined with temporal respects?

And truly when I do consider with my self, with what degrees M. Barlow does
descend and go downward in defending of the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of his
Majesty, M. Barlows declining in the point of Supremacy.
bringing it, as it were to nothing from that high pitch, wherein King Henry the
eight both placed it, and left it, and his children King Edward, and Queen
Elizabeth continued the same; I cannot but wonder and admire the providence of
Almighty God, that has wrought the overthrow in effect of that new Protestant
Idol, of spiritual Authority in temporal Princes, even by Protestants
themselves. John ^aluin beginning the battery, as all men know, calling it
Antichristian: the Puritans following him in that doctrine; and now M. Barlow
(though underhand and dissemblingly) confirming all that they have said or
do^^ therein.

The first pitch wherein King Henry did place the same, was, Stat. H. 8. anno
Domini 1535.
as appears by the Statute it self, in the twentieth six year of his reign,
That he and his herres should be taken, ^ccepted, and reputed the only Supreme
head on earth of the Church of England, called Anglicana Ecclesia, The
supremacy how it was given to K^ Henry and in what high measure.
and should have and enjoy, ^^nexed and united to his Imperial Crown, asi^eli
the title and style thereof, as also all honors, dignities, preheminences,
jurisdictions, pri^iledges to the said Dignity of supreme. Head belonging etc.
Whereby is evident that the Parliament gave unto him, as great authority over the
Church of England, as the Pope had before. And this very fame authority was
translated after him, to his Son King Edward though a child, K. Edwar^.
yea all Preachers were commanded to teach the people that his Minority of age
w^^ no impediment to his supreme spiritual government, for that a King is as
truly a King, at one years age as at ^wenty: so as the exception made by M.
Barlow, that Valentinian ^he Emperor was young, when he commanded S. Am^ro^e to
dispute before him, makes nothing according to this Doctrine, against his
spiritual authority, if he were Head of the Church, as King Edward was. And
further the Parliament in the first year of King Edward, explaining this
authority, has these words: An 1 E 6. cap. 2.
That all authority of Jurisdictions spiritual and re^porall is derived, and
deducted from the Kings Majesty, as supreme head of the Churches and Realms of
England and Ireland unto the Bishops, and Archbishops etc.

And the like was passed over also to Queen Elizabeth by a Statute in the
first year of her reign, wherein it is said, Queen Elizabeth.
That all such jurisdiction Ecclesiastical as by any spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power has hitherto been or may be lawfully exercised^ for the
re^ormation and correction of all manner of errors, heresies, schisms, (...)
etc. all and all manner of Jurisdiction, priu^ledges, and prehe^^^^^ces, in any
wise touching any sprituall, or Ecclesiastical iurisd^cti^^^ with in the
Realm, was given unto her, and united unto the Cr^^^e. This was the high
doctrine in those days of the Princes supreme Ecclesiastical, and spiritual
power, over the Church of England, no less the^ of the Pope himself over his
Church of Rome. But now of later days, and by later writers, the case seems
wonderfully altered; for not only have they taken away the name, and title of
Head of the Church, which was treason by King Henry's Statutes to deny, and
many were put to death for not yielding thereunto: but have taken away the
authority also it self, if we respect the substance, and shifting in words, to
seem still to retain somewhat. Wherein among others M. Barlow seems eminent,
and under a show of defending the Kings supremacy, to take it quite away. For
let us hear, first how he handles the question, about the Princes authority
for judging in cases of religion; which is the principal of all the rest. He
both proposes, and solueth the question thus.

May not then, says he, a Prince judge in cases of Religion and Faith? No: not
iudicio definitiuo, M. Barlows judgment about the Kings supreme Ecclesiastical
authority.
to determine what is sound Divinity or not and so impose that upon the
consciences of men for faith, which he alone defines to be so: but iudicio
executiuo, or iurisdictionis he may, and ought when the Church has determined
matters of says, command the prosessing thereof, within his Kingdome^ as the
soundest and worthyest to be received. This is his determination; whereby it is
evident, that he permits only unto the King to execute that which his Church
in England, to wit, the Bishops and Clergy thereof, shall determine about
matters of religion, which is no one jot more of power in Ecclesiastical
matters, then that which Catholics do ascribe unto their ^emporall Princes, to
execute what the Church determines: but yet with this difference of much more
dignity, that they are bound to the execu^ion only of that which the Universal
Church shall determine, and not of their own subjects alone, as it falls out
on the behalf of his Majesty of England in this case. In which point also I do
not see, how he can wind himself out of this maze, that must necessarily
follow of his own doctrine, to wit, that one should receive from another, that
the other received from him. As for example, if the Bishops being his Majesty's
subjects, as well in spiritual as temporal affairs, have no spiritual
jurisdiction but from him, as the Statute of King Edward does determine: and on
the other side his Majesty to have no authority, to define of any matter
belonging to religion at all, but only to execute that which the Bishops do
define; it seems that they receive from his Majesty that authority, which
they deny to be in him, and so, that he gives them the thing, which he has
not in himself, but is to receive from them.

Moreover it is evident by this doctrine of theirs, that the Bishops do make
their Courts and Tribunalls for matters of Religion, to be absolutely greater
then the Kings, for that they do allow him no other power for Judging in
spiritual matters, but only to execute, that which they shall define and
determine.

And albeit for dazeling the simple readers eyes, M. Barlow does in this place
fumble up a certain distinction, M. Barlows fumbling.
not well understood by himself, taken out of some Schoolmen, as he says,
noting Occam in the margent, that there be three parts of this executiue
judgment, the one discretiue to discern, the other directive to teach others,
the third decretiue: which third he says, is in the Prince both affirmatively
to bind to the observing of that, which is so tried and adjudged, and
negatiuely to suppress the contrary: and that this last is to Judge for the
truth; and the former of defining, is to judge of the truth. Yet does all this
reach no further, but to the power of execution of that which others have
determined, which may be called a power of impotency in that behalf; for that
therein he is subject, and not Superior, especially if it lie not in his power,
either to execute, or not to execute, as he shall think best, which M. Barlow
here denveth, saying: That he may, and ought to execute, when the Church has
determined. But on the other side, if he have power and liberty to execute, or
not to execute, then is the other power of defining in the Bishops to small
purpose. For that they may define, and he not execute, his judgment being that
they have defined e^ill, and by that way becomes he their Judge again, to
define whether they have defined well, or no. And this is another circle or
labyrinth which I see not how M. Barl^^ will easily avoid.

I do pretermit diverse other childish things that be in this speech of his,
as where he propounds thus the question: as first, Whether a Prince may
judge in cases of Religion, ^^d says? as though these two were Sinonyma, and
all one; Whereas religion contains many cases, as well of life, manners, and
cerimonyes, as of faith; in all which cases it may be demanded, how far the
King may be judge. Secondly he says, that the King cannot define, and
determine, what is sound Divinity or not, which is far from the purpose. For
the question is not, whether the King may judge and determine what is sound
Divinity or Theology, but what is matter of faith, and what is to be believed,
or not be believed by a true Christian within his realm. Thirdly in like
manner when he says, that the King has only iudicium executiuum, or
iurisdictionis, M. Barlows absurd distinctions and divisions.
as though they were all one: whereas executio, and iurisdictio are two
different things, and jurisdiction is more properly in that party that
defines, then in the other that executes: for that the former commands,
and the second obayeth.

Fourthly his term also of discretiuum ascribed by him unto all Christians, to
have power to try spirits, whether they be of God or no (besides that it
seems contrary to that of S. Paul to the Corinthians, who reckons up
discretion of spirits to be a peculiar and several gift unto some alone,
saying, Alij discretio spirituum etc.) is nothing well applied by him to
iudicium execu^iuum, for that it appertains rather to iudicium definitiuum,
for so much as those that have power to define, and to determine of matters, are
principally to judge of spirits, and not their subjects to judge of theirs: for
that other wise there must needs ensue an inextricable confusion of trying,
and judging of one the others spirits. As if for example the Bishops o^ England
should try and condemn the spirits of the Purytans, and they again the
spirits of the Bishops, by color of this power to discern spirits, given the^
by M. B^^lo^ out of the words of S. John, there would never be an end.

And lastly it appears by all this that his l^st distinction, wherein he
says, that the King may judge for the truth, and not of the truth, is a mere
delusion, M. Barlows delusion.
giving somewhat in words, but nothing in deed; for that if the judging for
the truth be nothing else, but to execute, allow, and approve, that which others
have defined, determined, and appointed out unto him, to be believed, and
defended as the truth, then has he no more free choice, or superiority in
judgment in this case, then every subject or common man, who is likewise bound
to believe and defend the same, according to his ability and power.

Now then to conclude the matter, and to reduce all to a brief sum, for so
much as M. Barlow takes away from his Majesty of England not only the title
and style Of Head of the Church, M. Barlow has marred the market of the Kings
supremacy.
which was given to King Henry, and confirmed to King Edward, but the Papal
authority in like manner, for decision of matters, which was ascribed unto them
both by Parliament, and confirmed to Queen Elizabeth; and here says, that he
cannot judge in cases of religion and faith iudicio definiti^o, to define and
determine any thing, but only execu^iuo, to execute what the Church of England,
to wit, what the Bishops shall define, and ordain: and for so much as he adds
yet further now, in that which before we have discussed, three other particular
cases out of S. Ambrose, wherein he con^es^eth that his Majesty has no
authority, but may be resisted, to wit, if he should call before him a Bishop
to dispute with another of a different religion, as Valen^inian did S. Ambrose,
and he denied him: If he should command a Bishop to deliver over a Church to a
people of a different religion: and if he should command a Bishop to deliver up
the Ve^els of his Church, as the said Empe^ou^ did, and the ^ther refused to
obey: all these things, I say, laid ^oge^t^er ^ut of M. Barlows doctrine, do so
much diminish the greatness of his Majesty's Supreme power in causes
Ecclesiastical, as in effect it comes to be no more, th^n Catholic doctrine
does ordinarily allow to every Catholic Temporal Prince, for the observance,
and execution of that which the Church determines. And this is M. Barl^^^^
heroycall exployt, to mar the matter he takes in hand for his Clyent. Let
every man judge how well he has deserved the good fee, which already he has
rec^a^ed for his plea, and hops to receive more hereafter, if he may speed
according to his expectation.

OF ANOTHER EXAMPLE Or I^stance out of S. Gregory the Great, about the obeying
and publishing a Law of the Emperor Mauritius, that he misliked: which M.
Barlow calls Ecclesiastical.. III.
THERE follows another controversy between M. Barlow and me about a certain
fact of S. Gregory the Great concerning the Law of Mauritius the Emperor
prohibiting souldiars, and such as were accomptable to the Emperors Courts
for offices borne by them, to enter into monasteries and profess a religious
life without his license, whereof I wrote thus in my letter.

Neither does the last place cited out of S. Gregory the Great to the Emperor
Mauritius, Let. p. 56.
make any thing mo^e for our Apologers purpose of taking Oaths against
Conscience. Apolog. page 24.
For albeit the same Father do greatly compla^ne in diverse places of the
oppression of the Church by the Kingly power of Mauritius, whom (though
otherwise a Catholic Emperor) he compares in that point to Nero and
Diocl^si^n, saying: Quid Nero? quid Dioclesi^^^s? q^id de^ique iste^ qui ^oc
tempore ^^^lesiam persequitur? N^mq^^^ (...) omnes porta Inferi? Wh^t was Nero?
What was Diocles^^^? what is he who at this time, does persecute the Church?
Are they not all gates of Hell? Yet in this place alleged by the Apologer, he
yealded to publish and send abro^d into diverse Countries and Provinces, a
certain unjust law of the said Emperors, How S. Gregory agreed to the
publishing of the law of the Emperor ^auritius.
that prohibited S^uldiars, and such as had been employed in matters of public
accounts of the Commonwealth, to make themselves Monks. Which law, though S.
Gregory did greatly mislike, and wrote sharply against it, Greg. l. 2. Epist.
65. Indict. 11.
to the Emperor himself: yet to show his due respect in temporal things
unto him, and for that indeed the law was not absolutely so evil, but that in
some good sense, it might be tolerated, to wit, that Souldiars sworn to the
Emperors wars, might not (during the said Oath and obligation) be received
into Monasteries, but with the Princes license: yet for that it tended to the
abridgme^t of Ecclesiastical freedom, in taking that course or state of life,
which each man chooses for the good of his soul; S. Grego^y misliked the same,
and dealt earnestly with the Emperor to relinquish it, or to suffer it to be
so moderated, as it might stand without prejudice of Christian liberty:
whereunto the Emperor at length yielded, and so S. Gregory sent the same abroad
unto diverse Primates and Archbishops of sundry Kingdoms mentioned by him, but
corrected first and reduced by himself, as supreme Pastor, to a reasonable
lawfulnes, and temperate moderation: to wit, that those who had borne offices
of charge in the Commonwealth, and after desired to be admitted to religious
life in Monasteries, should not be received, until they had given up their
full accounts, and had obtained public discharge for the same. And that
Souldiars which demanded the like admitta^ce, should be exactly tried, and not
admitted unto Monastical habit, but after they had lived three years in
their lay apparel, under probation.

This determines S. Gregory in his Epistle, beginning, Gregorius Eusebio
Thessalonicensi, Vrbicio Dyrachitano etc. adding further in the same Epistle,
as has been said, Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 1^. Indict. 1.
De qua re, Ser^iss^mus and Christianissimus Imperator omnimodo placatur: about
which matter our most Clement and Christian Emperor is wholly pleased and
content. So as in this S. Gregory showed his pastoral care and power, in
limiting and moderating the Emperors law, according to the law of God, though
in temporal respects he showed him the Obedience, that was due unto him. But
what is this unto our Oath? May we think that S. Gregory, that would not pass
a temporal law of the Emperor, without reprehension of the unlawfulness
thereof to the Emperor himself, and correction thereof in the publication, for
that indirectly it did infringe the liberty of Religious life, when men were
called thereunto; that he would not have much more resisted the admission of an
Oath, about such affairs, if it had been proposed? No man, I think, in reason
can imagine the contrary.

To this declaration of mine M. Barlow begins his reply thus: But that of
Gregory, says he, Barl. page 173.
touches the very quick, who as he thought his duty discharged to God, in
showing the reasons why he disliked the Law, so did he perform it very readily
to the Emperor, in promulging the same immediately, according to commandment.
Whereto I answer first, that howsoever it be, the quick of our question is
little touched hereby, for that we treat, whether an Oath offered against the
conscience of the swearer, may be taken or not, especially when the points
thereof concern matters of Religion: and here the question between S. Gregory
and Mauritius is about the publishing of a law, Mauritius his law no^
altogether Ecclesiastical.
partly temporal, for as much as it concerned the Emperors Army, Officers,
and public accounts, and partly also including some touch against
Ecclesiastical liberty, intaking that holy profession of Monastical life, for
help of their souls; for which la^er respect. S. Gregory was most earnest with
the said Emperor to be content to have the said Law mitigated, and tempered as
he had proposed the same; and so in the end obtained his purpose, as by his
words now recited does appear.

Secondly then, the chiefest point o^ difference between M. Barlow and me in
this matter seems to be, whether S. Gregory did yield to the publishing o^
this Law, before the mitigation and correction thereof, or not. He says he did.
But Cardinal Baronius, who seems more practiced in the writings of S.
Gregory, then M. Barlow in his Communion book, holds the contrary, and
proves it out of S. Gregory's own words and writings unto the foresaid
Archbishops and Metropolita^s, Eusebius of Thessalonica, Vrbi^i^^ of Dyrachium,
Consta^tius of Millane, John o^ Corynth, John of Creet, and others mentioned in
his said l^tter: which letter he sent together with the said Law, unto those
chief Bi^hops and Metropolitans, to be diuulged; but first moderated and
corrected (says Baronius) in the two points before by me mentioned. Adding
fu^ther that this Epistle o^ S. Gregory concerning this co^rec^ion is found in
his Register, not in his due place and rank, but removed from thence, as many
other of his ^pi^tles also are, which have given some occasion to M. Barlow for
to wrangle about the matter, for that in two other Epistles of his that go
before this, to wit, the 62. to the Emperor himself, and 65. to Theodorus his
Physician, he entreats earnestly for the Emperors consent to this
mitigation: whereof no man can marvel, considering the humility and sweetness
of S. Gregory's nature, and that the Law it self seemed to be made upon great
reason, for the Commonwealth, for some abuses perhaps that had pass^d, and
might pass; and consequently was no such Ecclesiastical Law, as M. Barlow
would have it to be taken for. And so much the more reason had S. Gregory to
deal humbly by way of petition, with the said Mauritius^ for allowing of his
modification, for that the Law did not directly repugne any Ecclesiastical
matter, How the Emperors Law was Ecclesiastical.
but by a consequence only, the subject of the Law being grounded upon
temporal respects, which consequence notwithstanding S. Gregory as a care^ull
supreme P^stour, would not suffer to pass wit^out due reflection made thereon,
with endeavor to have it amended.

But whither this were before or after his first sending o^ the law into diverse
Provinces, a^ he says Epist. 62. lib. 2. or after, as he writes to the
foresaid Metropolitans, Epist. 11. lib. 7. or whether he sent it two times,
^i^t to the Provinces with some aduertisements to be considered of, until he
should have obtained the Emperors consent: and then again unto the said
Metrop^litans, with more full resolution, and ^ssurance that the Emperor was
content, and satisfied, I shall leave the matter to be disputed between
Cardinal Baronius, and M. Barlow; albeyt the matter it self be of sm^ll
moment to our purpose, as I have said, for that, as S. Gregory did on the one
side show himself subject unto Mauritius at that time, in te^porall ^ffaires,
so did he not neglect his Pastoral office, and supreme care, in dealing with
those Arc^bishops, and Metropolitans of diverse Nations (to whom he sent the
Emperors Law) to practice the sam^ according to the temperament, and
declaration sent them. And if his spiritual authority had been acknowledged to
have been no more at that time, then over the Roman Diocese only, as now our
Protestants will acknowledge no more to our present Popes, he would never have
taken upon him to write, and send the Law with his exposition, to so many great
Archbishops of diverse other Realms, and Nations. And if Mauritius the Emperor
had held himself for Head of the Church in those days, and to have power
as well in Ecclesiastical affairs, A good consideration.
as temporal, and that S. Gregory had not been Head, he would never have sent
the law to have been published by him to the Metropolitans, both of the East
and West, Greek and Latin Church, himsel^e living in Constantinople, being
nearer unto diverse of the said Metrop^litans, then was Rome, but would have
sent the same immediately unto them, as from himself.

And this might be su^ficient for this matter, but that I may not let pass
without the note of another egregious ignorance, and malice, or rather
malicious ignorance of M. Barlow conjoined together in this place^ The malice
stands in this, that he accuses me of falsifying, for leaving out wittingly
certain words of S. Gregory in his for^said Epi^tle to the Metropolitans,
whereby he assures them, that the Emperor was pacifyed, and contented with
his mitigation of the law sent unto them. A fond cavil.
This ^alsi^ying Jesuit (says he) mentions the Epistle, but leaves out the
words very cunningly, mihi credit, Believe me, our Grati^^s Emperor is so
contented. Page 174.
Whereas if you look back upon my words, you shall find them set down by me
thus, as they stand in S. Gregory; De qua re Serenissimus and Christianissimus
Imperator omnimodo placatur. About which matter our most Clement, and Christian
Emperor is wholly pleased, and contended; if mihi credit were pretermitted, it
imports little to the matter.

This then was malicious, let us see the ignorance coupled with more then with
a single malice, when he speaks of S. Gregory's words written unto Theodoru^
the Emperors Physician, as before has been mentioned, sending a letter to
him to be delivered to the said Emperor, at his good commodity. M. Barlow
relates the matter thus. He writes to Theodore the Emperors Physician, Barl.
page 174.
says he, and entreats him to deal with his Lord and Sovereign about it. The
reasons whereof he had not, yea he would not, he says, a Respo^sali suo public
dare, publicly yeald as from his Chair and Oracle (much less by his Breue
interdict) but having suggested it privately, he left it to God and the
Emperors leisure and wisdom. A ridiculous error in Gra^mar of M. Barlow.
In which words, besides the gros^e ignorance, in taking Responsali for the
Popes Chair or Oracle, wherein he defines matters for direction of
Christendom (whereas the word signifies only his Messe^ger, Nuntius, or
Legate) there are diverse evident frauds discovered: as first that he does
interpret the Popes private letter or suggestion (as S. Gregory calls it,
which he sent to Theodore to be given to the Emperor) by the words yealding of
reasons publikly, which is far from S. Gregory's meaning, as presently shall
appear.

And secondly to make the sentence of S. Gregory more appliable to his fond
purpose, of interpreting it a Chair or Oracle, he cha^geth dari into dare. The
words of S. Gregory be: Nol^ eam (scilicet Epistolam, vel suggestion^m) a
Responsali me^ publicedari, quia vos qui ei familiarius seruitis, loquiei
liberius and ape^ti^^ p^^^sti^, que pro eius sunt anima. I will not have my
said ^^^^er (or suggestion) to be given to the Emperor publikly, by my Legate
or Agent, for that you who do serve him more familiarly, may speak unto him
more freely and openly, those things which be for his soul. Which words being
most plain, who but an ignorant man, or most malicious, would translate
Responsali, as from hi^ Chair and Oracle? which cannot stand in the sight of
every child, either with signification of Responsali^, or with the reason of S.
Gregory here alleged. For what sense may it have if S. Gregory should say to
Theodore the Physician, as M. Barlow feigneth him to say, I have not, nor will
not yield reasons publickely from my Chair and Oracle, and much less,
i^erdict by Breue, for that you serving him more familiarly, may speak more
boldly and openly. But as I say the wilful ignorance or malice is manifest,
for that he can never in his whole life show us in any one example where
Responsalis is taken for the Popes Chair or Oracle, but for a Messenger,
Ambassador, Nuntius, Legate, or Agent, named otherwise Apo^rysiarius.

We could show him a multitude of places out of S. Gregory him self, if we
would stand upon it, as namely in his 30. Epistle lib. 6. to Mauritius the
Emperor, talking of the Legates of Cyriacus Archbishop of Constantinople he
says, Responsales Fratris and Consacerdotis mei Cyriaci benign suscepi: I
benignly received the Legates or Messengers of my Brother and fellow Priest
Cyriacus. And again afterward in the same Epistle, Responsales eius mecum feci
Sacra Missarum solemnia celebrare. I caused his Messengers to celebrate the
holy solemnity of the Masses together with me. Where I hope M. Barlow will not
say, that he received Bishop Cyriacu^ his Chair with benignity, or that he
made his C^aire and Oracle to say mass with him. And the very same speech he
uses again in the very next ensuing epistle, to E^logius Bishop of
Alexandria, and to Anastasius Bishop of An^ioch. And again in his epistle 38.
to John Archbishop of Constantinople. Et ante per R^sponsales men's, and nunc
per communem filium meum Sabinianum Diaconum alloqui Fra^erni^^tem vestram
volui. I resolved first to admonish your Brotherhood by other Messengers of
mine, and now by our common son Sabinianus the Deacon. Many other such like
examples might be alleged, which for breuity I pretermit: and do take pity
of M. Barlow to see him err so grossly, as to imagine that Responsalis should
signify a Popes Chair, or Oracle. And so much of this.

WHETHER COVNCELS HAVE SVBMITTED THEMSELVES UNTO CHRISTIAN EMPERORS in
Spi^ituall affairs: and namely that of Arles to Charles the Great? CHAP. VI.
AFTER the examination of the Authorities of Scriptures, and Fathers alleged
by the Apologer, for the prerogative of temporal Princes in matters of
Religion, there follows also in ^he third place somewhat of Counsels, that
seemed to submit themselves in t^eir Decrees about Religion, unto the judgment
and liking of Emperors, which to the end the Reader may the better conceive,
and ^ee the whole conflict between M. Ba^low and me in this point, wherein as in
all the rest ^e seek^th to be obscure, I shall set down the whole speech ^sed
in my former Letter: thus then it was.

The last thing the^ (said I) that i^ cited without purpose by the Apologer,
Letter page ^8.
are certain Councels which ar^ said to have submitted themselves to Emperors
as that of Arles in France unto Charles the Great their King, for that in the
last words of the said Council, the Bishops there gathered together,
presenting the same to the said Charles write thus: Co^c. Arel. sub Carol. Can.
26.
Haec sub breuitate, quae emendatione digna perspexim^s, etc. these things
briefly which we have seen worthy of reformation, we have noted, and deemed to
be presented to our Lord the Emperor, beseeching his Clemency, if any thing be
wanting to supply it by his wisdom, and if any thing be otherwise done then
reason requires, it be amended by his judgment, and if any thing be reasonably
censured, it may be perfected by his help, and by the clemency of Almighty God.
So the Council. And heerof would the Apologer infer that this Council of
Bishops submitted it self to the Emperor.

But I would ask him wherein? To take any Oath that the Emperor Charles should
propose unto them? We see no Oath offered, nor mentioned, and so nothing here
to our purpose. Wherein then, or why are they said to have submitted themselves?
For that, perhaps, it is said in the Preface of the Council, that they were
gathered together by order, and commandment of the said Emperor. Surely it
was hard, that so many Bishops, and Archbishops should be assembled together
without his liking, and Order. But that the consent, direction, and chief
Commission for the same, came from the Bishop of Rome, may easily be gathered:
Vi^e in Capitularibus Franc. lib. 6. c. 285. de Concilio Worma^.
for that in the first Council that he caused to be celebrated in his
Dominions, which was that of Worms in the year of Christ 770. it was left
registered in these words: Auctoritas Ecclesiastica, atque Canonica d^cet, non
debere, absque sententia Romani Ponti^icis, Concilia celebrari. Ecclesiastical
and Canonical authority teaches, that Councels may not be held, without the
allowance of the Bishop of Rome.

And where in the^? Or why is this submission made? For approbation of matters
concerning faith? No, for that you have heard before out of S. Ambrose, that
therein Emperors are not judges of Bishops, but Bishops of Emperors. Wherein
then, or why is this submission, Wherein the Counsel or Arles did submit it
self to the Emperor.
or rather r^mission to the Emperor, and his judgment? It was, for that this
Council was made only for reformation of manners and matters, at the
religious instance of the good Emperor, the effectuating whereof did depend
principally of his good will and ass^^tance, and so after the first Canon,
where briefly is set down the Confession o^ the Christian faith, all the other
25. Canons (for there are only 26. in all) are about reformation of matters
amiss: as for more diligence in daily prayer for the Emperors person, and
his children, to wit, that Can. 2.
Masses and ^et^^ies be said da^lie for them by all Bishops, Abbots, Monks, and
Priests. Can. 3.
That Bishops and Priests study more diligently, and teach the people, both by
lessons and preachings: Can. 4.
That lay men may not put out Priests of their benefice, without the sentence
of the Bishop, nor that they take money of them for collation of the said
benefices: Can. 7. and 8.
That none be admitted to enter into the Monasteries of Virgins either to say
Mass, or otherwise, but such as be of appro^ed virtue: Can. 13^
How peace is to be held between Bishops, Earls, and other Great men,
especially in execution of Justice: Can. 15. and 16.
That weightes and measures be just and equal, and that none work upon holy
days: Can. 20. 22. 23.
That all Tithes be paid, al ancient possession mantayned to the Churches. That
no secular courts be held in Churches, or Church porches: That no Earls, or
other Great men do fraudulently buy poor men's goods etc.

These then were the points of Reformation, The zeal of Charl^ the Great to
have manners reformed by the authority of Bishops.
decreed in that Council of Arles, at the instance of Charles the Great, who
was so zealous a Prince in this behalf^, as he caused five several Councels to
be celebrated in diverse Parts of his Dominions within one year, to wit, this
of A^les, another at Towers, a third at Chalo^s, a fourth at Mentz, the fifth
at Rhemes, and another the year before (which was the ^ixt) ad Theodonis
villam, which is a town in Luxemburge. Al which Prouincial Synodes are extant
i^ the third Tome of Councels, together with the Canons and Decrees, which are
such as could not be put in execution, but by the temporal favor, authority,
and approbation of the Emperor in such matters, as concerned his temporal
Kingdom and jurisdiction. Wherefore i^ for these respects, the Council did
present unto the Emperor these Canons to be considered of by his wisdom,
whether any thing were to be added, altered, or taken away, for the public
good of the Common Wealth (no Controversy of faith being treated therein) what
is this to prove, either that the Emperor in spiritual matters was superior
to the said Bishops, or that if he had proposed unto them any such Oath, as
this is, wherein by pro^essing their temporal Allegiance, they must also have
impugned some point of their faith, that they would have obeyed him? And so
much of this Council.

This was then my speech, yielding furthermore a reason, why I did not stand
upon the places of some particular Councels alleged, for that the discussion
of this one made manifest all the rest, that they tended only to this end, that
they proved temporal obedience in subjects toward their Princes, in temporal
affairs, which Catholics deny not, and so in effect they prove nothing to the
purpose in hand. But yet it shall be good to ponder a little, what M. Barlow
brings in against that, which here I have written. First he says, that not
only these Provincial Councels, of Arles in France, and diverse others
submitted themselves wholly to the Emperor Charles the Great, in most humble
terms, but the four General Councels also s^mmoned at the beck, and command
of the Emperor, submitted themselves for the validity, and establishing of
their Decrees to his most Royal assent. And within three lines after again:
Barlow page 175.
Whole Councels, says he, submitted themselves in all dutiful reverence to
their Sovereigns, not only in matters of temporal affairs, but in faith and
religion. And yet further in the very next page: The Emperor, says he, that
has the sole authority to summon a Council, A gross contradicti^ in M. Barlow
has the sole power to make good or void what it concludes. And we must note
that he puts down the words to make good, or void, in a different markable
letter, thereby to signify that this is an Axiom of great solidity. And yet I
suppose that he could not be so forgetful, or negligent as not to see, that
all this is quite contrary to that which he wrote within three leaues^ before,
to wit, that in cases of religion and faith, Princes could not judge any thing,
iudicio definitiuo, to define or determine, but only executiuo, to put in
execution that which the Church determines.

But now if not only the Council of Arles, and other Prouincial Councels, but
the first four General Councels submitted themselves also for the validity and
establishment of their Decrees, which are known to have been concerning points
of religion and faith, unto the Emperors Royal assent: so as whatsoever was
decreed there by the Church (and this not a Prouincial or National Church only
of England, but the whole Universal Church gathered in those first four
Counc^ls) should have no validity, except the Emperor approved the same; this
is more then iudicium executiuum, to execute that which the other had
determined. For here the Emperor does judge of al, yea even of the judges
themselves, and of their Judgments and decrees, and consequently has the last
and supreme judgment de^initiue, to define and determine what Decrees are truly
and rightly made, and to ratify or make void what he shall think good, which is
as much as we do, or can ascribe unto the Pope. And this is confirmed in like
manner by M. Barlows second ass^ueration, That Councels must submit themselves
in all dutiful reverence, not only in matters of temporal affairs, but of
faith and religion also^ What can be ^poken more plainly in contradiction of
his former assertion? And what more absurdly then that which follows in the
third place, That the temporal Prince has sole power to make good or voyd^
what the Council concludes? A very forcible argument.
For that hereby all the Conciliabula or unlawful false Councels that met
together often in the primitive Church, as that of A^iminum for the Arians
against the Catholics, that of Carthage against Cecilianus, that of
Constan^inople against Marcellus, that of Antioch against Athanasius, that of
Burges in France against S. Hilary, and diverse other, having the assent and
approbation of heretical Emperors then bearing rule, shall be good and lawful
Councels, and all other Councels gathered for the Catholics against these to
be void, and of no validity. Do you see here M. Barlows manner of writing? and
how he plungeth himself above the ears in contradictions, without marking, or
respecting what he said before, so he may say somewhat for the present?

But do you think that he will stand to this now? No. For that in the very next
ensuing leaf, he being pressed by me to answer what submission that was,
which the Council of Arles made to Charles the Great for his approbation, and
whether it were of matters concerning faith, he runs quite back again,
denying that Emperors have any such authority. M. Barlows memory very short.
To judge, says he, definitiuely which are matters of faith, or no, is not for
the Emperor: but to ratify by hi^ assent, and command by his authority, what
the Church or Council so assembled has defined to be matter of faith, is
proper to Emper^^rs and Kings. Which words if you consider them well, do
co^taine most evidently the contradictory of that he said before, That Councels
were to submit themselves for the validity of their Decrees to the Emperors
Royal assent, and that not only in temporal affairs, but in faith and
^eligion: and that they only have power to make good or void all conclusions
of Councels: which contains manifestly power also to define: and it is but a
shift to say here, that it is not for the Emperor to judge definitiuely,
which are matters of faith or not. For it is not the chief question, which
matters belong to faith, and which not, for that is easily discerned in
general, but which opinions in these matters be true, or false, doubtful,
dangerous, Catholic, or Heretical in particular.

Wherein, forasmuch as the Decrees that are, or shall be made by the Councels
assembled, must take their validity from the Emperors assent, yea even as they
are matters of faith and religion, and that without this assent they are
utterly vo^de; it is a ridiculous thing to see M. Barlow play fast and loose,
M. Barlow plaieth fast and loose, about the Kings authority.
as he does in this matter, taking away with one hand, that which he gives
with the other, and then yielding again that which before he had taken away,
which proceeds of the miserable labyrinth, wheri^ he sees himself to be in
this question, about the Kings spiritual authority, which he would seem to
defend, ^^t in effect overthrows the same, when he comes to the point, as
before has been noted. And this necessity drives him to such contradictory
speeches, not knowing well where to rest himself, as even here in these his
last words, there is a notorious intanglement, if they be well considered.

For first he says, that it belongs not to the Emperor definitiuely to
judge which are matters of faith, but to ratify by his assent, what the Council
had defined to be matter of faith. Suppose that some Council had decreed that
Christ was the Son of God, and equal in God^ead to his Father, as diverse did
under Constantius the Aria^ Emperor, and he would not ratify the ^ayd decrees
by his assent, were they all void for this? and had they no validity? Or was
this Council bound to submit it self, A hard question for M. Barlow to answer.
in these points of faith and religion, unto that Emperor, as M. Barlows
former doctrine infers? though here he would seem to moderate the matter;
but indeed he knows not where to consist. For if no Decrees of Councels in
any matters of faith or religion, have any validity, without the Emperors
ratification and assent, as here also he does insinuate, then must we needs
allow also unto him power to judge definitiuely, and not only to execute, as
before has been proved.

And as for the instance which he alleage^h out of the Synod of Aquileia held
under the reign of Gratian, Valenti^^an, and Theodosius joint Emperors,
wherein was S. Ambrose that wrote with the rest of the Bishops unto the foresai^
Emperors, humbly and earnestly desiring them (says M. Barlow, Barl. page 178.
that they would vouchsafe to make good, what the Bishops ^ad in th^s Assem^ly
concluded, it is merely false, False dealing.
For first no such speech is found in the place by him cited: and secondly
though the said Bishops do complain much in that letter of certa^ne
disorderly heretics, that troubled their peace, namely Valence, and Attal^^,
and did request the protection o^ the ^ayd Emperors, for their quiet: ye^ do
they not, as M. Barlow falsely affirms, desire the Emperors to ratify their
Decrees, set down in matter^ o^ faith, or to make good, what they had
concluded; for that had been to have made them Judges of their said Decrees,
against which thing, as attempted by the heretics, S^ Ambrose excepteth in that
very place, saying, Amb. to^. 5. edit. Vatican. epist. pr^fix. an^e Con^il.
Aquile^e^.
That Pries^ must judge of lay men, and not lay men o^ priests, in matters
belo^g^^^ to religion: but they did demand their temporal help an^
protection, only for defense of that which they had decreed, and for peaceable
observing thereof, putting the said Emperors in mind, to have first respect
unto the reverence of the Catholic Church, and then unto the observation of
their own laws thereby: Reuerentiam pri^^^ Ecclesiae Catholicae, deinde etiam
legibus vestris Pietas Vestra defer^^ ^ubeat. that your Piety do first
command reverence t^ be exhibited to the Catholic Church, and afterward t^
your own laws. So S. Ambrose with that Synod. Where^by may appear, what
reverence, and respect they required at these three Christian Emperors hands
unto their Ecclesiastical decrees (they representing the Church) before their
own Imperial laws.

Unto the sentence which I do cite in my Letter on^ of the Council of
Worms, About the of Counsel Worms.
that Councels may not b^ held without allowance o^ the Bishop of Rome^ M.
Barl^^ an^wereth with more choler then reason, That it is a manifest untruth,
made good by an obscure author, out of a Council ^euer assembled, or never
recorded. But if it be so manifest, why had not he alleged so much as one
author, old or new since that time, which is above 800. years agone tha^
denied the same, until this our age? Whereas we alleadg^ for the affirmative,
that there was such a Council held at Worms upon that year of 770. ^^o^.
ann. 77^. and 772.

(...) F^a^c. ^ 6. c. 28^. ^^ l 7. c. 2^^.


both out of the life o^ Charles the Great, written by a very ancient Author,
a^ al^o out of the 6. and 7. Books de Capitularibu^ Franc. and out of many
Histo^ies after them, as namely Rhegine, tha^ lived full 700. years agone, and
mentions that Council of Worms, upon the same year: yea the Author^
themselves mentioned by M. Barlow, namely Genebra^d, Byn^^^ and Caranza, being
confessed by him to mention such ^ Council, do prove also that it was recorded.
And as for his negative argument out of Canisius in his short table of
Chronography, prefixed before his Catechism, who ^^ming some Councels, does
not name that Council of Worms, has no substance at al. For that Canisius
his purpose was not to name all Councels, especially such as were Provincial,
as this of Worms was, but some only (...) example sake: for in that very Age
of 800. wherein Ch^^les did flourish as Emperor, I find 5. or 6. at least
pre^^rmitted by Canisius, as Ratisponense, Altinense, Constantinop^^^^ (...),
Actinacense, Lugdunense, and some others. And in the precedent age, when
Charles was King of France, I f^nd above a dozen Prouincial Councels left out
of Ca^^^^^s his Chronology; and so might this also be of VVor^es, albeit there
is a Council of Worms registered by him, about the middle of the age of 800;
which also may be this, that we talk of, though placed by the Printer somewhat
lower in the Column, then it should be.

But why do we stand spending of time in these tri^^ing objections brought in
by M. Barlow against himself? If the Counc^ll be confessed by so many as
himself mentions here in this place, to wit, Genebrard, By^nius, and
Caranza, and the sentence before cited for the necessity of the Popes consent
in gathering of the Councels cannot be denied, but that it is registered in the
history before mentioned, de Capitularibus Franc. as Bynnius also expressly
affirms, though concealed by M^ Barlow; who does not see but that one or two
ancient Authors affirming any thing, are to be preferred before many, that
hold their peace, and say nothing to the contrary? But as for the main
question it self, whether it appertain unto the Popes authority to call
Councels, and approve the same, the proof is not taken so much from this
acknowledgment or testimony of the Council of Worms, which did but set down
the sense of the Christian Church in these days; but from other far more
ancient proofs and testimonies, as M. Barlow well knows, though here he
dissembleth the same, Better to be a fugitive for the Catholic religion on
abroad then to be a persecutour at home.
and cha^eth exceedingly, saying, That this fugitive (for such is his modesty
of speech) will f^tch a (...) sentence from this Council to warrant no Council
to be good, that i^ celebrated without the Popes Authority, and thereby at one
push overthrow the credit of al Councels, both general and particular for the
better part of 900. years after Christ. Whereto I answer first, that to be a
fugitive for the cause of Catholic Religion, is no reproach at al, but a high
commendation, warranted by Christ's own words, when he willed them that were
persecuted in one City, to fly into another: and much more happy is it to be a
fugitive, then a persecutour. S. Athanasius in his book de fugasua, of his
flight and persecution, does handle the matter at large, to whom I remit the
Reader.

Secondly, as for the summoning and gathering of Councils, general or
particular, our controversy is principally of General Councels, for as for
Diocesian Synods, as they may be assembled by each Bishop in his district, and
the Prouincial Councels by the Metropolitan, which Protestants themselves will
not deny: so by the due proportion of good order, General Councels must be
gathered by commandment or consent at least of the general Pastor, General
Councels ^lwaies called by the Bishop of Rome.
though in States subject to temporal Princes, good reason requires that the
matter be done in like manner with the approbation of the said temporal
Princes, for the houlding of the said Council, in this, or that place of their
Dominions. And this was observed in the first 4. General Councels, which were
commanded to be gathered by Constantine, Theodosius the elder, Theodosius the
younger, and Martian the Emperors, by the assent and approbation of the Popes,
Syluester, Damasus, Celestinus, and Leo: which besides other proofs of several
histories is made evident by the last of the said 4. Councels, to wit, that of
Chalcedon, where, in the first action, the heretical Archbishop Dioscorus was
punished publicly, and forbidden to sit amongst the Bishops, for that he had
presumed to call a Council without the authority of the Apostolic Sea: Qu^d
numquam licui^, say they, numquam sactum est, that never was lawful, nor ever
was done. And consequently this proves that all the first 4. General
Counsels were gathered by the consents and approbations of the Bishops of
Rome, though with the concurrence also of the Emperors, without whose good
liking, the meeting of so many Bishops in their States could not be permitted,
as before has been said.

But now here before I pass any further, I must make you acquainted with a
solemn foolery and falsehood of M Barlow, concerning Cardinal Bellarmine, for
that having uttered the words before mentioned, Barl. page 178.
that Councils were to be gathered by the Emperors, and not by the Bishops of
Rome, though he cites no one argument for the same: yet says he, this is a
thing so clear and radiant, that Bellarmine himself being dazeled with
behoulding the evidence, even as S. Peter, not wi^^ing what he said, though he
labored to build for the Pope, yet lab^^reth be also to build for the
Emperor, and in that same place he ^^eweth diverse reasons, why it rather
belongs to Emperors, then to Popes for ^o assemble Counsels, citing for the
same in his margent Bellar. de Council. cap. 13. But truly when I went to the
place of Bellarmine and read his words, The radiant folly of M. Barlow.
I was ashamed on M. Barlowes behalf, and his folly was so radiant in my eyes
(to use his phrase) that I could not read them without blushing: for that in
the Chapter by him cited, and in the other going before, Bellarmine does prove
most substantially by many arguments both out of Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
reasons, histories, practice, and examples, that it appertains not to the
Emperor only or principally, but to the Bishop of Rome to call General
Cou^cells, or at leastwise, that it may not be done without the said Bishops
consent, and approbation first had, so as the very contradictory proposition to
this, which M. Barlow sets down, is found in these express words in
Bellarmine, ^sse reuera Ponti^icis, non Imperatoris congregare Synodum
generalem, that is belongs truly to the Pope, and not to the Emperor to
gather a general Council. Adding notwithstanding 4. particular reasons and
temporal respects, why diverse general Counsels could not be gathered
together under the Emperors, who were temporal Lords of the world, without
their likings and consents. Not, says he, for that a Council gathered without
the authority of the Emperor among Christians should not be of validity, as
our adversaries do dream (whereas S. Athanasiu^ says plainly in his epistle
to them that lead a solitary life, Quando vmquam iudicium Ecclesiae ab
Imperatore authoritate^ habuit? when did ever the judgment of the Church take
authority from the Emperor? M Bar^owes impudency.
) but for that the temporal state of Christendom standing in the Emperors
hands, no such meeting could be made without their approbation. And can this
stand with that which M. Barlow here affirms in his name, that he shows
diverse reasons why it rather belonged to Emperors, then to the Pope to
assemble Counsels? Will he not blush, and be ashamed of this shameless
calumniation, or rather forgery?

As for that he objected concerning the Grant given to Charles the Great, by
Adrian the Pope, to have authority to approve the Election of the Bishop of
Rome, and other Bishops and Archbishops, and to dispose of the Sea Apostolic
etc. Ba^on. tom. 9. ann. 774.
I refer him to Cardinal Baronius for his answer in his Annals of the year
774. where he discusseth the matter at large, and proves it a mere fiction,
and plain fraud invented, and registered first by Sigebertus in favor of the
cause of Henry the fourth Emperor excommunicated by the Pope: which he proves
by many plain evidences out of all the ancient writers, for the space of 300.
years after Charles his time, who never made mention of any such Grant; as
also the express testimony of Eginhardus, that was Notary to Charles the
Great, and was always about him, and wrote his life, and by diverse other
proofs which were too long here to recite. Therefore with this shall we end
this Chapter.

WHETHER THE POPE IN HIS BREVE DID FORBID TEMPORAL OBEDIENCE to his Majesty
of England? AND Whether the said Pope has Power to make new Articles of faith?
CHAP. VII.
WHEREAS in the Apology, a great complaint was made against the Pope, A^o^. p.
26. and ^7.
for that in his Breue he did forbid temporal Obedience to be performed to his
Majesty, as a point against faith and salvation of souls; and moreover
charge him with assuming unto himself infallibility of spirit to make new
Articles of says when ever it shall please him etc. my answer thereunto was
this. I find no such thing in the Breue at all, Let. p. 61.
as that Temporal Obedience is against faith and salvation of souls: nor does
the Breue forbid it: Neither the Pope or Church can make new Articles of Faith.
nor does any learned Catholic affirm, that the Pope has power to make new
Articles of Faith: nay rather it is the full consent of all Catholic Deuines,
that the Pope, and all the Church together, cannot make any new Article of
belief, that was not truth before, though they may explane what points are to
be held for matters of faith, and what not, upon any new heresies or doubts
arising; which articles so declared, though they be more particulerly, and
perspicuously known now for points of faith, and so to be believed, after the
declaration of the Church, then before: yet had they before the self same
truth in themselves, that now they have. Nor has the said Church added any
thing to them, but this declaration only. As for example, when Solomon declared
the true Mother of the child that was in doubt, he made her not the true Mother
thereby, nor added any thing to the truth of her being the Mother: but only the
declaration. Wherefore this also of ascribing power to the Pope of making new
Articles of faith, is a mere calumniation amongst the rest.

So in my former writing: now we shall examine what M. Barlow replyeth about
these two points. In the first, whether the Oath do contain only temporal
Obedience, he is very brief; for having repeated my words by abbreuiation,
that the Popes Breue forbids not temporal Obedience. Barlow page 181.
No, says he, it forbids the Oath, wherein is only acknowledgment of civil
Allegiance. But this we deny and have often denied, and still must deny, and
crave the proof at M. Barlowes hands, who though he has often affirmed the
same, yet has he never proved it by any one argument worth the reciting, which
notwithstanding is the only or principal thing that he should prove. For that
being once proved, all controversy about this Oath were ended. And it is a
strange kind of demeanor, so often and every where to affirm it, A foolish
wrangling of M. Barlow.
and never to prove it. He adds for his reason in this place: He that
prohibits the swearing against a usurping deposer, denies temporal obedience
to his rightful Sovereign: and says never a word more. But what does this
prove? Or in what form is this argument? For if unto this Mayor proposition he
shall add a Minor, that we do so, or that the Popes Breue does so, we utterly
deny it as manifestly false. For who will say that the Popes Breue prohibits
swearing against an usurping deposer? Or what Catholic will say that his
refusal of swearing is against such a one, and not rather against the
authority of his lawful Pastor? Wherefore this proof is nothing at all^

But he has another within a leaf after, which is much more strange, for he
brings me for a witness against my self in these words. Barlow page 184.
What hitherto (says he) he ^a^ labored to confute, and now peremptorily
denies (that the Breue ^^insayeth not Obedience in civil things) he plainly
now confesses, and gr^^teth. The silly shifting of M. Barlow.
If this be so, that I do grant the Popes Breue to prohibit obedience in
temporal things, then will I grant also that M. Barlow indeed has gotten an
advantage, and some cause to vaunt: but if no word of this be true, and that it
is only a fond sleight of his own, then may you imagne to what poverty the man
is driven, that is forced to invent these silly shifts. Let us lay forth then
the mystery, or rather misery of this matter as himself relates it.

The Pope, says he, being justly taxed for not expressing any cause, or reason
of the vnlw^ulnes of the Oath, the Epistler says, there are as many reasons,
that it is unlawful, as there are points in the Oath which concern religion,
against which they must swear. And is not this a good reason, say I? Is not
the forswearing of any one point of Catholic Religion sufficient to stay the
conscience of a Catholic man from swearing? But how does be prove by this,
that I confess the Breue to forbid temporal Obedience? Do you mark, I pray
you, his inference, and consider his acumen. M. Barlowes acumen.
But there is no one point (says he) in the Oath, that does not so, to wit,
that does not concern Religion, even that first Article which merely touches
civil obedience. I do swear before God, that King James is the lawful King
of this Realm etc. Ergo, I do grant that the Breue forbids the swearing to
all the Articles, and consequently leaves no Obedience, civil or temporal.

But do not you see how he contradicts himself in the self same line, when
he says that there is no one point that concerns not religion, even the very
first Article, that touches merely civil obedience? For if it touch only and
merely civil obedience, ^hen does it not touch religion in our sense. For that
we do distinguish these two, dividing the Oath into two several parts, the one
containing points of temporal obedience, for acknowledging the right of his
Majesty in his Crowns; the other concerning points of Catholic Religion,
belonging to the Popes Authority. To the first whereof, we refuse not to swear,
but only against the second. And now M. Barlow says, M. Barlowes co^tradictio^.
that all concern religion, and consequently we grant that the Popes Breue
allows no temporal obedience, but denies all. And is not this a worthy
dispute? But let us pass to the second question, whether the Pope or Church,
has authority to make new Articles of faith, as the Apologer objected.

And first to my declaration before set down to the negative part, that the
Catholic Church pre^endeth not any such authority to make new articles of
faith, that were not of themselves true, and of faith before; he obiecteth
first Doctor Stapletons saying, that the Pope and Council may make the
Apocryphal books named Hermes, and the Constitutions of Clement to be
Canonical. Whereto I answer, that Doctor Stapleton says only, that as the
ancyent Christian Church had authority upon due examination by instinct of the
holy Ghost to receive into the Canon of divine Books some that were not
admitted before, as for example the Epistles of S. James, the two books of
Machabees, the Epistle of Jude, and diverse others, C^^. 47.
as appears in the third Council of Carthage, wherein S. Augustine himself
was present, and su^scribed; ^ta^leton. lib 9. c^^tro^. 5. de C^^. (...)
so has the same Church at this day, and shall have unto the worlds end,
authority to do the same, Si id ei sanctus Spiritus suggereret, says Doctor
Stapleton, that is, if the holy Ghost shall suggest the same unto her^ librum
aliquem al^^m n^ndum in Can^nem recep^um, Apostolorum tamen tempore conscriptum
etc. to receive into the Canon some other book written in the time of the
Apostles, and never rejected by the Church, though it were not received for
Canonical before, giving instance of the said two books of Hermes, and
Cl^ments Constitu^ions before mentioned.

So teaches Doctor Stapleton, and the reason of his saying is, for that the
authority of the Church is the same now, and shall be unto the worlds end, as it
was in the first ages to judge of Scriptures, when occasion is offered. And if
the Church should admit any such book now into the Canon of holy Scriptures,
which was not held for Scripture before, (which yet is a case not like to fall
out) then should no^ this book be made Scripture by the Church, but only
declared to be such, which was so from the beginning, though not so known and
declared. So as the Church in this case should not give infallibility of truth
unto the book, but only testimony by instinct of the holy Ghost, that this
book was such from the beginning, though not so accepted. So as you must note
two cogging tricks of M. Barlow in cyting Doctor Stapletons words, first to
conceal his first condition, Si id ei Spiritus Sanctus suggereret, if the holy
Ghost should suggest the same unto the Church: and then these other two
conditions, if it were written in the time of the Apostles, M. Barlowes
fidelity.
and never rejected by the Church: which omissions were made by M. Barlow of
purpose, to make M. Doctor Stapletons speech to appear more naked and
improbable: but indeed it was to keep his old custom, which is never commonly
to relate things truly in all respects, in any citation whatsoever.

His second objection is out of Bishop Fisher, Who says quoth he, that
whatsoever the Pope with a Council delivers us to be believed, that is to be
received as an Article of faith: which we granting to be true, do ad only
this, that it is to be understood according to our former declaration, and as
the Bishop himself expounds it, Art. 27. c^nt^a Luth^rum.
against ^uther out of Scotus saying: Non quod ^unc verum Ecclesia fecerit, sed
a Deotraditum explicauerit, says Scotus: not for that the Church made true
this Article (for it was true before;) but ^or that it did declare it to be
true, and to have been delivered by God, and this by direction of the holy
Ghost, promised by our Savior to the Church. B Fisher abused.
So says Bishop Fisher. Here now you see that neither the Church, nor the Pope
Head thereof do pretend to make any new Article of faith that was not in it
self an article of faith before (yea and so believed also fide implicita, by
employed faith) in the faith of the Church: but only the intention of the Church
is to declare it to have been such from the beginning, though not so known or
declared, and therefore men were not bound to believe it fide explicita, by
express faith, as now they are, after the Churches definition, and declaration
thereof.

And that this is the common sense of all Catholic Deuines, according to my
former words, that the Pope and all the Church together cannot make any new
Article of belief, that was not truth before, (at which assertion of mine M.
Barlow makes much ado, as though it were false) is proved among other learned
men of our days by Gregorius de Valentia, whose words are; that it is
Sententia communis Theologorum, Vale^tia in 2.2. dis^. 1. pun^^o 6.
the common opinion of Deuines: for which he cites in particular a multitude
of Authors, and principal Schoolmen. And his whole discourse founded upon
Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels and other arguments consists in this, that as
whatsoever is now believed by the Church for matter of faith, was in substance
believed before, in all other precedent ages unto Christ's time actu fidei
implicito, by an employed act of faith, that is to say, the believing in
general whatsoever the Church believed: so many things are now believed by
the Church, actu fidei explicito, by express faith, which were not so believed
before, for that the Church from time to time has had authority to explain
matters more clearly and expressly, which before were believed by an implied
faith only. As for example, the first Council of Nice though it determined
nothing for the p^oceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father and Son, as was
afterward declared unto us by the Church, but that it believed the same, yet
may we not deny but that it believed the same, not fide explici^a, but
implicita only. And so in like manner the other Articles of faith and
explications thereof made by the subsequent Councels, about the unity of the
Person and different Natures in Christ, and that his Mother should be called
the Mother of God, were believed implicit, by those of the Council of Nyce,
and consequently were then also Articles of faith, though they were not
believed by them explicit, as we are bound to do, after the explication made
by the Church. Let us conclude therefore with Bishop Fi^^ers own words against
M. Barlow: Quod tame^si nequeat Sum^^^ Pontisex etc. That albeit the Pope with
a Council, that is to say the Catholic Church, cannot make any thing true or
false, that is not true or false of it self, and consequently cannot make any
new articles of faith: yet whatsoever the said Church shall deliver unto us, as
an Article of faith, that, al true Christians ought to believe as an Article of
faith, which Scotus also himself in the same place affirms. Thus Bishop
Fisher (whom you see how impertinently M. Barlow alleges against my
assertion) says the very same that I do. Let us go forward.

Thirdly then he obiecteth S. Thomas of Aquine, D. Thom^ 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10.
who talking of the different Creeds that are set forth concerning the Articles
of our faith, some more large, and some more brief, demands to whom
appertains noua Editio Symboli, the new Edition of a Creed, when the
necessity of new heresies does require? And he says it belongs to the Pope
as Head of the Church. And what is this against me? Did not S. Athanasius also
set forth his Creed, though he were not Pope, with addition of many Articles
for explanations sake, which were not expressly in the Apostles Creed, though
in substance of truth they were nothing different? Did not diverse Counsels set
forth Credes with sundry explanations that were not before? All which stands
upon this ground so much pondered by ^. Irenaeus, that the Apostles had all
truth revealed unto them by Christ, and they left the same in the Church: so as
whatsoever is, or has, or shall be added afterward by the said Church, are only
explications of that first reueiled truth: and the childish babbling here of M.
Barlow to the contrary, is to no purpose at al, for he cites diverse authors
for that which we deny not, but yet always commonly with addition of some
untruth of his own, as here he alleges out of the Jesuit Azor, that it
belongs unto the Pope to define Dogmata fidei, Azor. In^stitut. par. 2, l. 5.
c. 12.
Doctrines of faith, which we deny not: but when he adds, that this belongs
unto the Pope only, and not to a Council, this is his own invention, for Azor
joins them both together, the Council as the body, Azor abused.
and the Pope as the head, and says that these words of the promise of Christ,
The holy Ghost shall teach you al truth, were not spoken to a Council, or to the
Church, as separate from her Head, but as adhering to her head, and joined with
the same.

So in like manner he cites Suarez to affirm, That the Pope may define any
thing, though not expressed in Scripture, to be defide, Suarez abused.
without any express revelation from God; which though in some part it be
true, for that the ordinary assistance of the holy Ghost to the Church, may
give sufficient direction for the Church so to determine: yet are there diverse
wilful corruptions here to be discovered, in these few words of M. Ba^low, for
that first Suarez does not speak of the Pope alone, but of the whole Church,
to wit, of the body together with the Head, as Azorius did before. Secondly he
does not say that any thing may be defined, for a point of faith, by the
Church, but speaks of a special doctrine in some special case, which case he
there sets down. Thirdly, Suarez ^o^. ^. in 3. (...) ^ 27 3. a^t. sect. 6.
though he required not nouam reuelationem expressam, a new express
revelation, as his words be, yet he requires implicitam and t^citam, an
employed and s^cret revelation. Al which limitations M. Barlow leaves out of
purpose, and therein shows his fidelity in citing of Authors.

^a^l. page 18^.
Next after this he has this speech: But what need opinions, says he, when the
practice is extant, a whole new Symbolum is set ou^ in the Prouincial Synod at
Millan, wherein twelve new Articles are added to the Nicen Creed, which al
Catholics are bound (...) pain o^ Anathema, to profess by word, and swear
by oath. So he. And truly this is a strange point, that a Prouincial Council of
Millan, reaching no further then within the compass of that Dyocesse, should
bind all Catholics upon pain of Anathema, both to profess by word and
swear by oath that which was there decreed. Does M. Barlow speak like an
intellig^nt man? But the very last words of swearing by oath, do discover his
fraud, to wit, that no new Symbol or Creed is set down in that Council, as
added to the Nycen, but only a large profession of the Catholic faith,
according to the Decree of Pope Piu^ Quartus there recorded, To^. 5. Co^c.
council. 4. Mediolan. cap. 1.
for all such as take Ecclesiastical promotion, in which prof^ssion, after the
whole Creed set down Verbatim, as it is repeated in the Mass (which is not
only the Nycen) there is added presently, About the Profession of faith in the
fourth Counc^l of Mill^ne fraudul^^tly all^adged by M. Barlow.
Apostolicas and Ecclesiasticas tradiciones firmissime admitto and amplector
etc. I do most firmly admit and embrace t^^ Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
traditions, as I do also admit and embrace the holy Scripture, according to
that sense which our holy Mother the Church has held, and does hold etc.
running over the chief heads of such Articles as are now in controversy
between us and Protestants, which heads are not here decreed for Articles of
faith by this Council, but proposed only to him that makes the profession: yea
the whole Chapter, which is large, has this title, De fidei prof^ssione, of
the profession of the Catholic faith. What new Articles are then here added
to the Nycen Creed? Is it not a shame to roue so far from the mark, and to
falsify the plain meaning of Authors, and writers in this sort?

But now he returns again to speak of the Oath, and we must follow him, for
that now we have bound ourselves so to do. Thus he says of us, Azor. par 1. l.
11. c. 4.. 2. Quaeritur.
They reply that it is not the substance of the Oath that sticks in their
consciences^ but the ^orme thereof, especially those last words: I do make this
recogni^ion willingly and truly: otherwise they have a trick in their religion
to swallow the whole Oath, without straining: for it is their Doctrine and it
is worth the obs^r^ing; that i^ a man be called to swear, if he take the Oath
unwillingly, i^ is unto him as he had not sworn at al: yea grant he have
voluntate^ iurandi, be very willing to swear, but has not voluntatem se
obligandi, not will to bind himself to perform what he swears, it i^ no Oath
unto him: he is as free, as if he were never sworn. And thus much he recites
as out of Azorius.

And do you hear this doctrine, or do you believe that he says truth therein?
Strange impudency of M. Barlow.
Certes I could hardly believe a man to be so wilful in falsehood. For first
where, or when can he show, that we stick not at the substance of the Oath, but
only at ^he form? Are not al those twelve points before mentioned in this
Epistle, which M. Barlow goes about to refute, which do touch Catholic
religion, and at which we do principally stick, of the substance of the Oath?
Can this be denied with any show of shamefastnes? But let us see how
egregiously he does abuse the learned writer Azorius, in making him the Author
of these absurdities about swearing, which here he sets down, as our
doctrine, if a man swear unwillingly, says he, it is unto him (according to
the Papists Doctrine) as if he had not sworn at al. But where can he find that
Azorius says this? If we look into the place by him cyted, where he handles
de Iure i^rando, there is no such matter, but only it is said to this point,
that if a man do swear having no intention to swear indeed (but only to
comply and deceive another) though it be no Oath in it self, yet in respect of
the injury or hurt ensuing, it may bind the swearer to performance: which is
quite contrary to that which M. Barlow here cites. And in another place
speaking of an Oath extorted by fear or death, as to a thief upon the way, or
the like, which no man will deny to be unwillingly made, he answers in these
words: Azor. par. 1. l. 1. c. 11.. 1^. Quaeritur.
Respondeo ex communi sententia Theologorum and Pontif^ij ^uris Doctorum,
valere. I do answer out of the common opinion of al D^uines, and Doctors of
the Common laws that it bind^th. For which he cites seven Doctors for the
same. And what will M. Barlow say to this? Will he not blush at this dishonest
dealing herein?

But he passes further to a second member of our Doctrine in this matter. If a
man be willing to swear, says he, (...) has no will to bind himsel^e to
perform what he su^eares, it is no Oath unto him: he is as free, as if he were
never sworn. But what ^hal a man say to these people, that are so forlorn in
this point of falls dealing, as they care not what they set down; so they may
satisfy their present appetite, of seeming to say somewhat? Let any man read
the place of Azorius here quoted, but according to my quotation, and not his
which ordinarily is false, and he shall see a good large and learned dispute of
Azorius upon this question, Whether a man promi^^^g a^y thing by Oath, without
intention to per^orme the same, be notw^thstanding bound in conscience to
per^orme it? Wherein having hid down the two different opinions of ^undry
learned ^en, together with their reasons, arguments, and proofs, the one
affirming that he is bound, as Caietan, Sotus, and C^^^rruuias; the other that
he is not bound by force of that Oath, as Syluester, Nauar, and others, Azorius
shows that both parts have their probability of reason, but he inclines more
to the first opinion, saying: M. Barlows transcendent impudency.
that if the swearer had an intention to swear, thinking nothing of the
obligation, then was he bound: and that in this sense the opinion Caietan is
most true. And further determines not the question: and therefore this
notorious untruth of M. B^^low, that Azorius holds this to be no Oath unto
him that swears at al, but that he is as free, as if he had never sworn, I
cannot tell in that Predicament of impudency to place it, and therefore we will
let it pass for a Tran^cendent.

OF CERTAIN OTHER Fraudulent, and untrue dealings of M. Barlow, unto the end
of this Paragraph: with a notorious abuse in alleging S. Thomas of Aquine his
Authority.. II.
Whereas often and eager inuectiues are made by M. Barlow against the Pope and
Cardinal Bellarmine, and all others, that do seem in any sort to exhort the
Catholics of England to stand for their consciences, and to suffer rather
whatsoever losses, hurtes, or dangers may happen to their lives, liberty,
goods, or other temporal affairs, then to prejudice any point of their
religion, M. Barlow terming these exhortations not only needless and vain
(there being no persecution at al against the Catholics) but that they do
tend in like manner to open disobedience against their temporal Princes, and
so may justly be cause of their ruin indeed; my answer was, Letter page 64.
I did not see but that the very same might be objected unto S. Cyprian, and
other Fathers of the Primitive Church, that they were guilty of so many Martyrs
blood, wilfully cast a way, See S. Cypr. exhor. ad Martyrs.
and of the ruin of their familyes, and other inconveniences, by exhorting
them not to do against their Consciences, nor to yield to their temporal
Prince^ Commandments against God and their religion: no not for any torments
that might be laid upon them, nor for any loss that might fall unto them, of
goods, life, honor, fame, friends, wife, children, or the like, which were
ordinary exhortations in those days of persecution, as by their books yet
^xtant does appear.

Neither is i^ sufficient to say, that those times and ours are different, for
that the thing^s then demanded were apparen^ly unlawful, but these not: for
that, to us that are Catholics, these things are as unlawful now, as those
other were then to them, for that they are no less against our consciences in
matters of Religion. For why should it be more damnable then, and indispensable
to deliver up a Bible, or new Testament, for example sake, when the Emperor
commanded it, then now to swear an Oath against our conscience and Religion,
when our Temporal Prince exacteth it? For that this perhaps, is called the
Oath of Allegiance? who knows not, that the fairest title is put upon the
fowlest matter, when it is ^o be persuaded or ^xacted? And he that shall read
the Histories of that time, and of those ancient afflictions, shall s^e that
Act also to have been required, See Euseb^ l. 8. c. 4. and Aug. de Bapt. l. 7.
c. 2. and l. 7. co^tra Crescon. c. 27. and A^nob. co^tra Gentes l. 4. in fine.
as of Obedience and Allegiance, and not of Religion, being only the deliue^y
up of material books: and yet did the whole Church of God condemn them for it,
that delivered the same, and ^eld for true Martyrs, all those that died for
denying thereof, for that they would not do an Act against their consciences.



Against this my speech M. Barlow first does trifle, affirmimg me to say, that
in the consciences of Catholics it is as unlawful to swear Allegiance unto
his Majesty their natural and rightful Sovereign, as to sacrifice to Idols.
Which is a mere cavil indeed, for first I do not say, that it is unlawful at
all to swear Allegiance to their natural Sovereign, as often has been told
him: M. Barlows slander without end.
but he ^^uer stays his tongue from repeating the contrary again without
end. The unlawfulness consists in swearing that for Allegiance, which
appertains not to human and temporal Allegiance, but divine Allegiance
also, in keeping our consciences unspotted before Almighty God. Secondly my
comparison was not so much in the things themselves, to wit, swearing and
sacrificing, or to determine which of these is the greatest sin in it se^fe,
as of the similitude in obligation both in those times and ours, to st^nd for
defense of the integrity of our conscience both in them and us, whatso^uer
inequality of the sin may be in the sight either of man or God. It is enough
that both of them be forbidden to sacrifice against Christian Religion, and to
swear against C^tholick Religion. And further to show that the external small
appearance of that which is forbidden, cannot always be a ^ule of taking away,
or diminishing the obligation of conscience in obeying the prohibition; I did
alleadg the other example of giving up divine books unto the persecutors, when
they demanded them, and might have alleged many other examples to the like
purpose, as namely the ^ating of flesh offered to Idols, in the beginning of
Christianity, with offense of others, whereof S. Paul makes so great account,
as albeyt he makes light of the thing it self, and says that the Idol is
nothing, yet does he account the transgression for damnable, if he do it
against his own conscience.

But what says M. Barlow to this? you shall hear his distinction and
determination. Simply, says he, to deli^^r up a Bible to his Superior,
requiring it, is no sin, yea to deny i^, i^ a contempt. About this
proposition we will not much contend, but only advertise him, that it is not to
the purpose, that we do talk here of Superiors lawfully requiring it, but of
a Persecutor unjustly exacting the same. Let us see then what he says further.
But if the Emperor, says he, Barl. page 187.
requires them, to wit the books, to burn and de^ac^, in conte^p^ and
despite, or ^ury and passion, or as Julian the Apostata, wh^ called in all the
heathen writers, both of Philosophy and Poetry, out o^ the Christians hands,
under a fair pretense of abandoning Paganism, to bereave them o^ all
knowledge, thereby to take from Christians the true means o^ their
instructions, the cause is far different: for so to o^ey were wil^ully to
betray the truth of God. This is his determination consisting of two members,
as you see: the first, of the unlawfulness of giving up the Bible, and other
such divine books of Christian Religion, consisted in the ill intention of the
persecutor, to bereave men of so importa^t means, for their instruction and
salvation, and therefore not to be obe^ed, which seems to be far different,
from that which before he held so resolutely, that Princes were to be obeyed
even against conscience: but of this we will not dispute any more now, but only
I say, that conform to this his doctrine, English Catholics are admoni^h^d
also to consider, with what intention this new Oath ^g^inst the authority of
the Bishop of Rome is exacted, whether to prejudice Catholic Religion, or no.
For that ^^is may increase their obligation of refusal or acceptance, ^^en
according to M. Barlowes doctrine in this place.

But for the second point concerning the fact of Julian the Apostata in
demanding Heathen writers to be deli^ered up of Philosophy, and Poetry; that,
in this case I say, there should be the like obligation not to obey that
Emperor, but rather to deny to obey, yea and to die for the said denial, if
need were, as many did for the other: I confess that I cannot conceive M.
Barlowes mystery therein. For who ever wrote this before? M Barlowes strange
mystery.
Or who was ever accounted a Martyr in the Church of God, for refusing to
deliver up ^ Heathen Poet, or Philosophers book? Does not now M. Barlow
shorten again, and straiten greatly the lymits of temporal obedience to
Princes, when h^ grants that Christian Subjects may deny to obey them, when
they exact the delivery up of a Poetical profane book, to wit a Catullus, or
Tibullus, or Ouids Metamorphosis, or some such other fit for M. B^rlowes
reading? Is not the man very constant to himself in his assertions, that
sometimes so ouerlasheth in extending temporal obedience, and sometimes so
exc^ssiuely contracteth the same?

He says that Julian herby did mean to bereave Christians of all knowledge,
and thereby to take from them the true means of their instruction; and for this
he notes in the marge^t the Ecclesiastical History of Socrates lib. 3. cap.
12. But as in all other citations commonly he erreth more or less, whereof I
might all^adge some scores of examples, if I would stand thereupon, and thereby
gives just suspicion, that he never read the Authors themselves, but had them
out of other men's note^bookes (as M. Morto^ confessed of himself, when he was
pressed thereunto,) so here no such matter is found in the Chapter by him cyted,
but in two Chapters after, Socrat. lib. ^. hist. cap. 14.
Socrates has these words, Atque Iulianus Imperator etc. And Julian the
Emperor applying his mind ear^estly to this thing, made a law that Christians
should not be instructed in the doctrine of the Gentiles, most certainly
assuring himself, that the f^bles that are read in Heathen writers, Socrates
perverted.
would ^asily be turned by the said Christians to the reproof of his Religion.
Which is anoth^r thing you see, then this which here is set down by M. Barlow.
And much more likely that he was afraid, that Christians reading the Pagan
writers, would turn the folly and foulenes of Heathen fabl^s against his
religion: and not that Christians should want true means of instruction^ for
want of those fables, as M. Barlow here fable^h. Albeit if he instruct his
flock with no better means of instructions, I must needs grant that they are
in a miserable case.

But let us go forward to examine a little further his very next lines, as they
ly in his book, about te^porall obedience to Princes, in which point he
runs so forth and back, from extremes to extremes, as it is strange to
consider: for having so diminished the same in hi^ former example of the
Emperor Julian, as now you have heard, that Christians might disobey him even
about the delivery of a Poetical Book, though he had never so earnestly
required, or commanded the same, now he starteth to the other end again,
saying, as out of S. Thomas Aquinas, that temporal Princes are to be obeyed
even in things vnlawf^^^. His words are these: D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 104. artic^ 6.
ad. 3.
From subjection to Princes there is no startling exception, says Aquinas,
unless he be either an usurper or I^truder which commands (and this is not
our case God be thanked:) or that he command things unlawful; if he say this
is their case, we deny it; but let us suppose it, yet their Angelical Doctor
will tell them, that in those things they must notwi^hstanding obey propter
vi^andum scandalum, aut periculum: Lying and cogging is proper to M. Barlow.
( of this divinity I judge not, it is their own.) Is this our own Sir? Not
so properly, as it seems that lying and cogging is your own, for we
acknowledge not this doctrine, but with due lymits, far different from your
allegation. But you do absolutely abuse both S. Thomas and the Reader, and
cannot choose but know that here is falsehood used by you, except you will
confess extreme ignorance in not understanding the sense of S. Thomas, whom
you allege, though it be most clear and plain for children to conceive,
that have the latin tongue. The title of S. Thomas h^s Article is, VV^ether
Christians b^ (...) to obey secular Powers, or not? S. Thomas his opinion
concerning Obedience due unto Princes.
And he proves that they are, by an evident argument deduced out of the 3. to
the (...), that the faith of Christ hinders not the order of I^stice appointed
by the Law of Nature, and consequently that no man is excused by being a
Christian from performing due obedience to temporal Princes: and for better
strengthening of this his assertion, he proposes an objection according to his
custom, and solueth the same. The objection is this.

S. Augustine in his fourth book of the City of God teaches, that great
Kingdoms when they cast of justice become great robberies, and the^uedomes,
but Christ his l^w does not bind Christians to obey such unjust Princes and
Magistrates, Aug. 4. de Ciuit. c. 4.
and therefore in all cases Christians are not bound to temporal obedience.
Whereunto he answers thus; that for so much as the order of Justice is the
ground of all Obedience, An objection answered by S. Thom.
therefore a Christian man is bound so far forth to obey secular Princes^ as
order of justice requires: and therefore if such Princes have not just
principality, but usurped, or that they should command unjust ^hinges, his
subjects are not bound to obey him, ^i^i forte per accidens, ad vitandum
sc^ndalum, vel periculum, except perhaps accidentally, for avoiding of
scandal, or peril.

And this is the Divinity that M. Barlow scoffeth at, and says he will not
judge of it, for it is our own. And I say that the Diui^ity is very good, and
so would have appeared, if M. B^rlow had either understood it rightly, or truly
alleged it, for that the doctrine of S. Thomas is very clear and
incontrollable, that Christian subjects are bound to obey their lawful
temporal Princes, so long as they command lawful things: but if they be
usurpers (in which ^ase I say also with M. Barlow, God be thanked we are not)
or command unlawful things, then are not subjects bound to obey them, at
leastwise by obligation of justice, and conscience, which is the true
foundation of obedience; though perhaps, says S. Thomas, accidentally they may
be sometimes bound thereunto, for avoiding scandal and peril.

As for example, if a Prince should demand of me the one hal^e of my goods
unjustly, I were not bo^nd in conscience and justice to give it him: yet if I
should doubt that by my denial, he would take away the other half also, or
perhaps my life, or that some scandal would follow, as that other men by my
example, would show disobedience in greater things; I should be bound in
prudence, and p^ety, for avoiding of these greater euil^, both to my self and
others, to obey, and give him the half of my goods, which he demands: but
this is not directly by force of justice and conscience, as you see, but per
accidens, that is to say ^accidentally for avoiding of those greater evils of
scandal, and peril, if I obey no^.

But now let us see the truth of M. Barlow in relating this resolution of S.
Thomas. First he cutteth of the words, nisi fore per accidens, which do alter
the whole case, and ^ayth, that their Angelical Doctor tells them, that in
vnlawf^ll things commanded they must obey, ^or avoiding scandal and peril:
whereas S. Thomas says, non te^tentur obedire, si iniusta praecipi^^^, that
they are not bound to obey their Princes, if they command unjust things.

Secondly M. Barlow distinguishes not, when unlawful things are commanded,
whether they be unlawful only unto the Prince that commands, or to the
subject in like manner, to whom they are commanded. And it may be that the
Ministers head conceived not the distinction, or if he did, he concealed it by
guile and fraud, for the thing imports much to the resolution of the case:
for when the thing commanded is unlawful only to the commander, M. Barlowes
ignorance or malice more declared.
as in the former example, when he commands me to give half of my goods
wrongfully; then may I out of prudence, as has been said, for avoiding of
greater evils, obey that unjust commaundment: but if the thing commanded
should be unlawful, not only to the Prince to command, but to me also to
perform, as to do another man injury, or to endanger my own soul, or to
offend God by any sin whatsoever, then may not I according to S. Thomas his
doctrine, for avoiding any scandal or peril whatsoever per^orme the same.
This was craftily here concealed by M. Barlow (for I will not hold him so
grossly ignorant, as that he did not consider it) and the c^^se o^ this
concealment was, for that it makes, wholly ag^^st him, in our main controversy
of temporal Obedience. For that the swearing to the new Oath commanded unto
Catholics in prejudice of their conscience, and Religion, is of the number of
those unlawful things, that are unlawful not only to the commander, but also
to ^^e performer: and consequently neither for the avoiding scandal or peril
may be obeyed. And thereby is cut of all M. Barlowes idle discourse which he
makes in this place of ^^e danger, and peril, that by taking this Oath he
says, may be avoided: and urges us with the doctrine of S. Tho^^^ therein,
that even in things unlawful we must obey our temporal Princes. But in this
you have seen both the depth, and fidelity of the man. Now let us see a point
or two more, and so end this Parapraph.

Page 190. he has these words against me: The Epistler says he, makes the way
to end this Paragraph, for as concerning Rome being Babylon, he speaks not a
word, as by silence granting that to be true which Cardinal Matthew plainly
also acknowledges, and ^^sesseth to be that Babylon of the Apocalypse. So h^.
And truly it is strange, and ridiculous to see men of reason, to proceed in
this manner so, without reason: for it Cardinal Bell^rmine and other
Catholics do grant that Rome was called Babylon by S. John in the Apocalypse,
and by S. Peter also that wrote his Epistle from thence, under the name of
^abylon: Strange dealing of our Adversaries.
and if S. Hierome and other Fathers do expound (...) of R^me, as it was
Heathen, and persecuted the Martyrs in those days, and not of Christian Rome,
or the Christian people of Rome, who were holy, and Saints in those days: if
this I say be so, and that the Protestants be told thereof above an hundred
times, and yet still their writers do come^ forth with this doughty Argument,
that Rome was Babylon; what shall a modest man do, but pass it ou^r with
silence and contempt?

There follows a certain contention about the two ^reues of Clemens Octauus
written into England at two different times^ about the point of succession to
the Crown ^fte^ the Queens death; the first exhorting the Catholicke^ to do
their best inde^uours ^or procuring a Cath^^licke Prince: the other altogether
in favor and recom^mendation of the advancement of his Majesty that (...) is;
of which two Breues I wrote in my Epistle, that haui^^ procured some knowledge
about that point, Letter page 65.
I found th^^ they were sent into England, not both together, nor i^^mediatly
before the late Queens death, as was objected but the one diverse ye^res before
she died, to wit, upon the year 1600. and the other 3. years after, to wit
upon the year 1603. immediately after the said Queens death contrary to which
M. Barlow says, that Tort^^ affirm^^^ that having the Copyes of 2. Breues in
his hand, About the Breues of Clemens Octauus.
(...) finds that they were sent in together upon the year^ 1600. But the
reconciliation of this is easy. For tha^ those two Breues named by Tortus, are
accounted by me b^ one Breue, for that they were all of one matter, but
d^plicated in effect, the one to the Archpriest and Clergy, the other to the
Laity, so that there is no contradiction at al^ For that besides that first
double Breue, there was another sent in, of another Argument, wholly in favor
of hi^ Majesty in particular, as now has bin said, upon the year 1603. And
so there i^ no contradictio^ at all in this, but that both the assertions are
true. Only that is fals^ which is here in parciculer affirmed by M. Barlow,
that i^ the first Breue was set down, that no man might be admitted, except he
would first swear, not only to tolerate, but also to promote the Romish
Catholic Religion, which words are not there, neither is swearing once
mentioned in either of these duplicated Breues.

And as this is untrue, so that which ensues is parasiticall, when unto my
speech of Pope Clements particular good opinion and affection toward his
Majesty's Person, when he was King of Scotland, to wit, that he loved him most
heartily, and always spoke honorably of him, treated kindly all those of his
Nation^ that said they came from him, or any ways belonged unto him: and
oftentimes used more liberality that way upon diverse occasions, the^ is
convenient for me perhaps to utter here; caused special^ prayer to be made ^or
his Majesty etc. To all which M. (...) answers in these words. That albeys
there is nothing (...) M^^^stie, but that which is amyable, and admirable, his
parts of (...), art, and grace all so singular, that by the eminency of his
place (...) descryed far and near, they must needs excite great love to his
(...), draw ^ne^s affections to him, and occasionate most honorable ^^^^es of
his qualityes, and deportementes: yet that Pope Clement (...) be so kindly
respective unto him, is much no be doubted.

And is it so Sir? Yet spiritual writers do admonish (...), that in dubiis
pars p^a magis s^que^da, in doubtful things the more pious part is to be
followed by a pious mind. M. Barlowes mind impious.
And why had not you done this also, if your mind had not (...) impious? You
know who says Mala men's, malus animus. And this is that which before I called
parasiticall in this answer, not so much for your gross flattery, and
anointing his Majesty with oleum peccatoris, which holy King (...) so much
detested, and his Majesty in time I doubt not will discern; but for your
malignity in misconstruing the known good affections of Pope Clement toward
his Majesty's Person, for that both these parts belong properly to a parasite,
as you know, not only laudare in ^s pra^^^^^, ambitiously to praise him that is
present, whether the things uttered be true or false; but malignantly also
(...) absenti, to detract from him that is absent: of which two parts, the
latter is the worse, for that the former may proceed sometimes of lightness, or
intemperate desire to please, but the other always goes accompanied with envy
and malice.

And as for his Majesty's due praises, M. Barlows cobling and clowting on of
his Majesty's praises.
albeit they cannot be but most pleasing and comfortable to all his loving
subjects, yet when they are so rudely clowted on, and so importunely thrust in,
and that by such a one as M. Barlow is held to be, that always speaks for
his profit, men can have commonly no other sense thereof, then is wont to be
when they see a fair garment marred in the cutting, or a delicate piece of
meat spoiled in the dressing. And as for the honorable speeches occasionated
abroad, as he says, of his Majesty's qualities and deportments, true it is,
that as his Majesty's rare qualities are had in due consideration with
external Princes and people, so is it not doubted, but that his deportme^t
toward his Catholic subjects also (...) be correspondent, were not the
sycophancy of this, a^^ other like flatterers continually occupied in egging
and v^ging him to the contrary. And among other speeches i^ these parts, M.
Barlow more fit to be a Sexton then B. of Lincoln.
none are more ordinary, then in lamentin^ that so good a nature, as that of
his Majesty is, should be (...) strange^y abused: as also in pitying the same,
that for w^^ of fit men he should be forced to bestow the Prelacies and
Bishoprics of his Realm, upon such as M. Barlow is (...) who in other
Cou^treyes would scarce be thought worthy for his manners to be a Servant or
Sexton, in so honour^ble a Church as Lincoln is.

The last point remaining of this Paragraph is of the later two Breues of
Paulus Quintus concerning the Oath (...) Allegiance, and his misliking thereof
in respect of the points contained therein in prejudice of the integrity o^
Catholic religion, which M. Barlow does so much debase, as here he takes
upon him to defend, that they ar^ deuoyd (especially the first which is the
principal^, the other being but a confirmation, or ratification thereon) not
only of all divinity, but of policy, and common sense also: which is a long
dispute, and a large enterprise to b^ taken upon his shoulders, that any man
that does but read the Breue, and is acquaynted with the gravity, learning,
wisdom, and modesty of the Author thereof, will rather laugh at M. Barlow, for
taking such an enterprise in hand, then persuade himself, that he can have
good success therein: but he that shall turn from reading the said Breue, to
read the pitiful proofs, which here M. Barlow goes about to set down, to
show that the said Breue has neither divinity, policy, or common sense in it,
will pity him indeed, and think that he lacks common sense in setting down
such senseless reasons, as he does against so sensible a declaration, as there
the Pope makes in that his Breue.

The end of the second Part.
THE THIRD PART concerning Card. Bellarmine his Letter.
OF THE OCCASION OF THE LETTER written by Cardinal Bellarmine unto M. George
Blackewell Archpriest. AND Whether he mistook the state of the question. ALSO
Of the change of Supreme Head, into Supreme Governor. CHAP. I.
FIRST of al then, for the better understanding of the whole matter, and to
make the Reader acquainted with the occasion of this present contention, I do
not think it amiss to repeat in this place, what I wrote in my Letter
concerning the same. My words then were ^hese.

The last Part of this Apology concerns a letter written by Cardinal
Bellarmine in Rome, Let. p. 69.
unto George Blackwe^^ Archpriest in England: which letter, as appears by
the argument thereof, was written out of this occasion: Apologia 56.37.
Tha^ whereas upon the coming forth of the forenamed new Oath, entitled, Of
Allegiance, there were found diverse points combined together, some
appertaining manifestly to Civil Allegiance, whereat no man made scruple, some
other seeming to include other matters, The state of the co^trouersy with
Cardinal Bel^larmine.
contrary to some part of the Catholic faith, at least in the commom sense as
they by; there arose a doubt whether the said Oath might be taken simply and
wholly, by a Catholic man, as it is there proposed, without any further
distinction, or explication thereof. Whereupon some learned men at home being
different in opinions, the case was consulted abroad, where all agreed (as
before has been showed) that it could not be taken wholly with safety of
conscience, and so also the Pope declared the case by two several Breues. In
the mean space it happened, that M. Blackwell being taken, was committed to
prison, and soon after, as he had been of opinion before, that the said Oath
might be taken as it lay in a certain sense; so it being offered unto him, he
took it himself. Which thing being noysed abroad, and the fact generally
misliked by all sorts of Catholic people in other Realms, as offensive, and
scandalous in regard of his place and person, so much respected by them;
Cardinal Bellarmine, Card Bellarmins opinion of taking the Oath.
as having had some old acquaintance with him in former years, as it may
seem, resolved out of his particular love, and zeal to the Common cause of
Religion, and especial affection to his person, to write a letter unto him,
thereby to let him know what reports, and judgments there were made of his
fact, throughout those parts of Christendom where he remained, together with
his own opinion also, which consisted in two points, the one that the Oath, as
it stood, compounded of different clauses, some lawful, and some unlawful,
could not be taken with safety of Conscience: the other, that he being in the
dignity he was of Prelacy, and Pastoral Charge, ought to stand fir^e and
constant for example of others, and rather to suffer any kind of danger or
damage, then to yield to any unlawful thing, such as the Cardinal held this
Oath to be.

This Letter was written upon the 28. day of Sep^ember 1607. and it was
subscribed thus in Latin; Admodum R.dae Dom.is V.ae
Frater and seruus in Christo.
Robertus Card. Bellarminus.
Which our Apologer translateth, Your very Reverend Brother: whereas the word
very Reverend in the Letter is given to the Archpriest, Page 44.
and not to Card. Bellarmine, which the interpreter knew well enough, but that
wanting other matter, would take occasion of cauilling by a wilful mistaking of
his own, A cauil.
as often he does throughout this Answer to Bellarmine, as in part will appear
by the few notes which here I am to set down: leaving the more full answer to
the Cardinal himself, or some other by his appointment, which I doubt not,
but will yi^ld very ample satisfaction in that behal^e. For that in truth I
find, that great advantage is given unto him, for the defense of his said
Epistle, and that the exceptions taken there against it, be very weak and
light, and as easy to be dissolved by him, and his pen, as a thin mist by the
beams of the sun.

This was the Preface used before to this third Part. To which M. Barlow having
very little or nothing to say, seeks to spend time in idle talk. For thus he
begins: Barl. p 201.
As if the Apologers answer, says he, Iosue 6. 15.
like to Iericho's walls should presently ^all with the blast of a Ramms-horne,
Rams horn.
and a few tournes about it and. So has he many tournings and windinges in the
preface before he come to it^ and being in it, he treads a laby^inth, and some
times loses himself, and yet in the conclusion he windeth his cornet with
three seue^all blasts, Communicatory, Causatiue, Supplicatory etc. And is not
this a pretty devise to spend time, and to play the Vise indeed? What of all
this is seen in my Preface?

Next to this he begins against me thus: Barl. page 202.
This Epistler s^yth, that Cardinal Bellarmine takes the Oath to be
compounded of lawful and unlawful clauses, whereas the Cardinal says
plainly, though it be so tempered and modified, yet is it wholly unlawful:
whi^^ is as much to say, as there is not a lawful clause in it. So he: and
this me thinks is to great an untruth to begin withal. A great untruth to begin
wi^h all.
For that according to art he should go by order and degree, and if he begin
with such wilful escapes as these are, what will he do before he come to the
end? Cardinal Bellarmine does not only not say this, which he imposes upon
him, but says the quite contrary, to wit: Vt Iuramentum recusetur non est
necessarium, vt cos and singulae parts eius sint male: satis est, vt velvna
sit mala. That the Oath may be refused, it is not necessary that al and every
part thereof be naught, it is enough that one only be naught. Is not this plain
enough?

Next after this he takes in hand the defense of that translation of the
Cardinals subscription unto his Letter Your very reverend brother Robert
Cardinal Bellarmine: the latin being as you have now seen, Admodum Rdae Domis
Vae frater and seruus in Christo Robertus Card. Bellarminus. And it is a world
to see how many ways he windeth himself to get out of this brake. First he
begins with a tal^ of a certain Emperor, A foolish fiction of M. Barlow
without application.
that would perforce make a gentleman believe that he was like to be sick, for
that he saw a pimple rising under his nail: but this tale he applies not: and
I se not where unto indeed he may apply it. Then coming to the matter, he
demands this question: Suppose it were not exactly translated, is not the
sense all one? Whereto I answer, no: for it were somewhat ridiculous to call
him self M Blackwels Reverend Brother. For by the same reason he writing to a
Duke; and ^aying, Excellentiae Vestrae Frater, might translate it, your
excellent Brother: and the same might a poor man do in like manner writing to
the same Duke, M. Barlows trifl^ng ignorance.
Excellentia vestrae humillimus seruus: your most humble Excellent Servant:
which I think no man will approve. But M. Barlow will prove it by reason, for
that both the Brotherhood says he, and Reverence are reciprocal, and may be
referred to both parties either, your Reuerence-ships brother, or your Reverend
brother: but this is refuted now already by my examples al^edged. And besides
this will M. Barlow have no respect to the cases and genders in Latin? Is not
Reuerenda with a dipthong, and of the femynine gender, and genitive case,
different from Reuerendus of the masculine gender and nominative case? And if
they be different, how can they then be reciprocal in signification and
translation?

But yet further M. Barlow has another shift, saying: that in the written copy
D. in the end had such a dash, as it might be taken for dus or dae. But this
shift is worse then any of the rest, for so much as that D. does not stand in
the end of the subscription, but in the very beginning, as has been seen by
the words before set down, which are Ad^^^um Rdae Domis Vrae, which D. though
it had never so great a dash, yet could it not signify dus, by force of the
sense, being set in the first place, and in such order as it was.

After this M. Barlow attempteth another evasion demanding of me, Barl. page
203.
why I had not translated the word Domi^^tionis into English, that he might
have posed me therein? For if it should be translated Lordship, it would have
seemed to much, and if Mastership, it would seem to little, M. Barlow
answers arguments by telling of tales, and those little to the purpose.
and thereupon tells us again another tale out of Diogenes L^^r^i^^ (for he
is copious in this kind out of his note books as before I have advertised:) and
the tale is, that Diogenes the Cynicke begging a tallent at King Alexanders
hands, he ^^d it was to much for a Cynicke to ask, then he dama^ded him a
halfe-penny, but the other answered, it was to little for Alexander to give,
and with this M. Barlow thinks he has well satisfied the controversy in hand.

Next unto this there is an exception made against Cardinal Bellarmine his
Letter to M. Blackwel, Card. Bellarmine wrongfully charged by M. Barlow for
mistaking the question.
as though therein he had mistaken the whole state of the question by going
about to impugn the old Oath of Supremacy made in King Henry the eight his
time, instead of this new Oath entitled of Allegiance, and consequently, that
the Cardinal did batter a castle in the air of his own framing. Which as I
confessed, had been a great ouerfight in him, so learned and famous a man, if
it could be proved: so I did convince by sundry evident arguments, and by
Cardinal Bellarmines own words, that it was not so: but that he impugned
directly this later Oath of Allegiance: The cause why this was objected to
Cardinal Bellarmine was, for that he going about to impugn the unlawfulness of
this later Oath, does insist much in reproving the Kings spiritual Supremacy,
and in showing the same to belong to the Bishop of R^^^, which they say
appertains to the ancient Oath, and not to this, wherein nothing is demanded
but Civil Obedience only, which the Cardinal denies, and in the very first
leaf of his answer under the name of Tor^^^, joins issue principally upon
that point, saying: Page 164. edit. Romans
Primum ^stend^mus Iuramentum hoc Catholicis propositum, non solum ciuilem
obedientiam, sed etiam Catholicae fidei abnegationem requirere. We shall first
prove that this (later) oath proposed unto Catholics, does not only require
civil Obedience, but abnegatio^ also of Catholic faith. And he proves it by
five or six arguments.

First by the words of the English Statute, the title whereof is, for the
detecting and repressing of Papists: which word of Papists, importing such as
stick to the Pope, or defend his Supremacy, makes it evident that the Statute
was not intended only against them that deny civil Obedience, but rather the
Kings Supremacy in spiritual affairs. Secondly by the words of the Oath
themselves, that the Pope cannot by himself, or any other, or by any authority
of the Church depose etc. Which is some denial of the Pope his authority, and
consequently not merely only of temporal Obedience: and so out of four or
five points more by him observed, and there set down; which as I had not
seen, when I wrote my Epistle, before the publicatio^ of the said Cardinals
book: so I used not those arguments, nor any of them, but contented my self
with one only taken out of the Cardinals words in the beginning of his Letter
to M. Blackwel, as sufficiently proving the same that in it self was most
clear, I said as follows.

This exception against the Cardinal for mistaking the state of the cause,
Let. p. 71.
seems to be most clearly refuted by the very first lines almost of the
letter it self. For that telling M. Blackwel, how sorry he was upon the report,
that he had taken illicitum Iuramentum, an unlawful Oath, he expounds
presently, what Oath he means, saying: Not ther^ore (dear Brother) is that
Oath lawful, for that it is offe^^^ s^^ewhat tempered and modified etc. Which
is evidently meant of the new Oath of Allegiance, not only tempered with diverse
lawful clauses of Civil Obedience, as has been showed, but interlaced also
with other members that ^each to Religion: whereas the old Oath of Supremacy
has no such mixture, but is plainly, and simply set down, for absolute
excluding the Popes Supremacy in caus^s Ecclesiastical, and for making the
King supreme Head of the Church in the same causes: all which is most evident
by the Statutes made about the same, from the 25. year of King Henry the 8.
unto the end of the reign of King Edward the sixth.

To this declaration of mine M. Barlow is in effect as mute as a Macedonian
frogge, if to say nothing at al to the purpose be to be mute, though words and
wynd be not wanting. But first to the Cardinals six arguments he s^yth never
a word, albeit he had both seen and read them, as may be be presumed. To my
reason of the difference between the Oath of Supremacy and this of Allegiance,
for that this is modified and tempered with different clauses of things partly
touching civil Obedience and partly Religion, whereas the other is simply of
Religion, against the Popes Supremacy: to this, I say, he answers with this
interrogation: If this Oath be so modified i^ comparison of the other, why is
it accounted by ^he Censurer the greatest affliction and pressure, that ever
befell the Catholics? Do you see what a question he makes, and how far from
the purpose? My intention was, and is to prove, that for so much as Cardinal
Bellarmine did particulerly impugn this mixed and tempered Oath, therefore he
did not mistake the question by impugning only the other Oath of Supremacy, as
was objected; there being between them this difference amongst others, that the
one, to wit of Allegia^ce, is compounded of different clauses (as has been
said) partly touching civil Obedience, and partly Religion: whereas this other
of Supremacy is simply of Religion. This was my demonstration. And to what
purpose then (for answer of this) was brought in that other dem^und of M.
Barlow, All is one with M. Barlow for a thing to be moderated or to be modified.
asking us very seriously why this second Oath should be afflictiue unto us, if
it be modifyed and tempered? Is there any sense in this? We say, for so much as
it is compounded and tempered, as the other is not, therefore it was meant by
the Cardinal, and not the other: M. Barlow says, if it be so tempered, why
does it afflict you? We say first, that this is nothing to the purpose, noe
more then, Which is the way to London? A poke ^ull of plummes.

Secondly to M. Barlowes impertinent demand we say, that albeit we grant that
this second Oath is modifyed and tempered: yet we say not that it is moderate
and temperate, for a law that in substance is mild, may be by some clauses or
circumstances so modified, that is to say, framed in such manner, as it may be
severe and rigorous: and a thing may be tempered as well with exasperating
ingredientes as mollifying, and as well with afflictiue as leniti^e compounds:
and so is this Oath more sharp perhaps then the other; and so does M. Barlow
him self confess within a few lines after, saying: Barl. page 205.
that this last Oath of Allegiance is more press^ng, pitthy, and peremptory,
and in all circumst^nces a more exact and searching touchstone, then the
^ormer of the Supremacy. And yet as though we did not see nor feel this, he
will needs have us to acknowledge in the same place that this Oath is allaied,
tempered, corrected, and moderated (for all these are his words) by the
variety of clauses therein contained, and thereon foundeth his subsequent
discourse of our ingratitude in not accepting the same; whereas both he, and we
do hold the contrary, that it is more stinging, as now you have heard, and that
even by his own confession: what then shall we say of this manner of M.
Ba^lowes disputing? Is he fit to be a Kings Cha^pion in writing? But here now
by the way I must tell the Reader, that in my Letter I interposed a few lines
in this place, for noting the different style used by King Henry, and King
Edward, in their Statutes concerning the O^^h of Supremacy, and this other now
related, in the A^^logy in these words: I. ^. do utterly t^stify and declare,
(...), that the King^ H^ghnes is the only Supr^me Gouer^^^, (...) in all causes
Eccl^sia^t^call, as temp^rall: whereas in the S^tute of twenty sixth of king
Henry the Eight, Stat. 26. Henr. 8. cap. 1.
where the Title of Supremacy is ^nact^d, the words are these (...) ^^^cted by
this present Parliament, that the King, his Heirs, (...) S^^cessors, ^^albe
taken, ^^^epted, and rep^t^d, the ^nly Sup^eme (...) earth, of the Church of
England, The first Oath of Supremacy.
and shall (...) and ^ni^y, (...) and united, unto the Imperial Crow^e of this
Realm, as^^^ the title and style thereof, as all honors, dignitie^,
authorities, (...), profits and comm^diti^s (...) the said dignityes of
Supreme (...) of the said Church belonging etc. And in another Statute, two
years after that: Stat. 28. Henr. 8. cap. 10.
From h^^cef^rth he shall accept, r^pute, ^^d take the Kings Majesty to be the
^^ly Supreme Head o^ earth, of (...) Church of England etc. And that the
refusers of this Oath, (...) reputed traitors, and suffer the p^y^es of ^^ath
etc. And in other Statutes it is decr^^d, that it ^halbe ^reas^^ t^ ^eny th^^
title (...) Headship; and that this was held of such importance, under King
Edward, who succeeded his Father, that it is decreed by Statute, Stat. 1. Edw.
6. cap. 2.
that all authority of jurisdiction, spiritual and temporal in the Bi^^ops,
and Mi^istry, (...) dedu^ed, and derived fr^^ (...) Kings Majesty as Supreme
(...) etc.

Upon this important doubt, I was so bold as to stay my self a little, as now
^lso I must, entreating M. Barlow to give the solution therof^ to wit; that
for so much as this matter of the Headship of (...) Church was held of so great
weight, by their prime, and principal Protestant^, and especially by their
Pa^riarkes, Cranmer, ^idley, H^^per, and others, then holding the places of
Bishops in Parliament, when the said Title was not only confirmed in the Child
King, but declared als^ to be the fountain of all spiritual ^uthority and
i^risdiction in the Clergy; and that it was treason, to deny this Title of
spiritual influxe in the Clergy; how this matter came about, that it should
be so little esteemed, as to be left of, and changed now, yea to be denied
expressly by their principal wry^^^^, as namely by Doctor John ^^ynolds, in
his ^o^ference with M. Heart, where he flatly de^yeth, that they do call the
Queen Supreme Head but only Supre^^ (...): which if they be Syno^^ma, and all
one, then what nec^^^^^ie to have denied (...) unto her^ But i^ Go^ernour do
signify any thing les^e, then Supreme Head, then have they changed their
principal point o^ doctrine, whereon depends the law^ulne^ of their whole
Cl^rgie, a^ you se^; and so the matter being of such weight, I thought it worth
the staying to have some answer.

But M. Barlow falls into a great chafe for this my stay: Barl. page 205.
The giddy fellow (says he) has an other err and to do, not (...) of the way,
but by the way. The Scripture sets a more esse^^i^^^ (...) upon such by-way
takers, saying: M Barlow vexed in defe^ding the Supremacy.
That wicked men declinant (...) o^^iquation^s, take all the by-ways, n^okes,
and lanes they c^^ pass, for fear to be descryed or apprehended: This is one
reprehension, as you see, instead of answering the matter. Yo^ shall hear
ano^h^r more ch^leri^ke: It is a vexing torme^^ (...) a man (says he) th^^ is
enjoined a io^rney, upon a speed^ (...) requiring a serious dispatch, page 209.
to tra^aile with a tri^ling compan^^^, that will make many er^ands by the way,
or has many acquaintances to stop him in the way, or is forced to make often
returns, vp^^ forge^fullnes of d^^ers ^hing^ etc. And I expected, that he
would have said also, that he must need^ d^inke at eue^y Alehouse, as he
passes by. But this perhaps, he thought would have caused more reflection then
he esteemed convenient; and those other triflings are enough, for so much as
they yield such a ve^ing t^rme^^ to M. Barlow in his i^ioyned (...), upon so
speedy a business. But, why did he not give me (...) a speedy answer, without
tryfling, and so dispatch both me, and himself quickly? Truly you have heard,
somewhat largely b^for^, what he can say to this matter; and therefore, I mean
no^ to dwell thereon long in this pl^^e, especi^lly for so much, as the man is
in such have, and so impatient of stay.

You have heard what has been treated before, about this point of spiritual
authority, in the temporal Prince, and to ^ow ^ow a pitch he brings the
same, even in effect to agree with us, granting unto the Prince the power ^^ly
o^ execution of such things, as are determ^^ed by the Church. But now in a wo^^
let us see, how he shifteth of the change of the name of Supreme Head. First he
says that (...) Majesty did not leave it out o^ his Title upon ^uer-awed (...)
to take it, 1. Reg. 15.
forasmuch as God gave the said Ty^le to a far worse King (and I pray you note
the phrase which is strange from a s^biects pen) ( to wit to Saul) when he said
he was Caput in Tri^^bus^ Head among the Tribe^ ^f Israel. 1. Cor. 11.
And S. Paul names the ^^sband head of the wife. But what is this to our
purpos^, that do talk of the spiritual Head of the Church? M Barlowes
impertinent answers.
Nay it seems rather to make against M. Barlowes proving that the Title o^
Head was lawful (and so it was in the true sense of civil Head ship) and
consequently it should have been con^inued: whereas we demand why it was left
of, and chan^ed? So as this first answer is nothing to the purpose.

His second is, that it is but identity of command expressed (...) ^iuersitie
of terms. But why then was it changed? And why does M. Doctor Reynolds by M.
Barlowes own, Reyn. Confer. cap. 1. disp. 2. p. 55.
^^^^i^ony, give the Title not of Head^ but of Supreme Governor? What need
that express negative, if they were all one? If you should deny to the Kings
Highness, the Title of King, and of Supreme Head of the Commonwealth, and call
him only supreme Governor, would it be taken well, or excused by identity? No
man can be ignorant, but that in every state never so popular, there is a
supreme Governor though no King.

Thirdly he says, that the change of supreme Head, into supreme Governor was
made by Parliament, the first year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, at the request
of the Nobles and Deuines of the Land. But the question is, why, and upon what
ground, for so much as it may be presumed, there were as great Deuines in King
Henry the Eight h^^ time in the Parliament? And if not, yet at least in King
Edwards Parliament, that did approve and establish this Title of supreme Head.
It was, says M. Barlow, not in regard of Queen Elizabeth her sex, Q.
Elizabeth in M. Barlowes opinion as absolute for Spiri^tu^ll authority as any
Male-Monarch.
for she being descended as she was, she had as absolute authority in the
fruition of the Crown (for both powers spir^tuall, and temporal) as any
Male-Monarch whatsoever. And a little after agai^e he says, that this change
was made, least a weaker (...) think, that they gave unto Kings t^^t Ti^le,
secundum interiore^ influ^um, according to ^he in^^riour influence, which (...)
the pr^p^^ office of the head, as being the fountain of moisture, and is ^he
^^st (...) attribute of Christ alone. Barl. page 207.
But not to speak in this place, of this internal influxe of grace, that
comes originally from Christ alone (although instrumentally also from men, as
in the administration of Sacraments, according to C^tholike doctrine) what will
he say of the external influ^^ of power, and jurisdiction over souls, of
preaching, te^ching, and administering Sacraments, ordayning Ministers, and the
like? Could this power come as well from a Feminine, as a Masculine Mon^rch? If
it could^ I do not see why she might not be called as well supreme Head of the
Church, as supreme Governor. And if it could not, then is there some
difference in the names, for that according to the Protestant Bishops, and
diverse of King Edwards days, that made the forenamed Statute, all spiritual
power descended from the title of Headship, which is here denied to descend
from the Title of supreme Governor. And this shall be sufficient for this place.

WHETHER THE DENYING Of taking this New Oath do include the denial of all the
particular clauses contained therein?. II.
IN the progress of the Argument here handled about the refusal of this New
Oath, the Apologer affirms first, as you have heard that there was no one
clause in the whole Oath that touched Religion, but were all and merely of
Civil Obedience. Secondly, that a man could not refuse this Oath, but he must
refuse all and every one of the clauses therein contained. The former point has
been h^ndled in the precedent Chapter: of the other we must speak now in this
place. ^^d for more perspicu^ty, we ^^all set down here what I wrote, before
in my Epistle about the same, which was this.

This later Oath (said I) albeit the Apologer sticks ^ot to say, Letter 74.
that it touches not any part of the Popes Spi^ituall Supremacy: yet in the
very next period, he contradicts and overthrows himself therein. For so
much, as dividing the said Oath of Allegiance into 14. The Oath divided into
14. parts.
several parts or parcels, twelve of them, at least, do touch the said
Supremacy one way or other, as by examination you will find, and we shall have
occasion after to declare more at large.

As for example, he writes thus: Apol. p. 49.
And that the Ini^stice (says he) as well as the error of Bellarmine his
gross mistaking in this point, may yet be more clearly discovered; I have
thought good to insert immediately the contrary conclusions to all the points
and Articles, whereof ^his other latter Oath does consist, whereby it may
appear, what unreasonable and rebellious points he would drive his Majesty's
Subjects unto, by refusing the whole body of that Oath, as it is conceived. For
he that shall refuse to t^ke this Oath, must of necessity hold these
propositions following: First that our Sovereign Lord King James is not the
l^wfull King of this Kingdom, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions.
Secondly that the Pope by his own authority may depose etc. But who does not
see what a simple fallacy this is, which the Logicians do call a composito ad
diuisa, from denying of a compound, to infer the denial of all the parcels
therein contained. As if some would say, that Plato was a Man, borne in Greece,
of an excellent wit, skillful in the Greek language, most excellent of all
other Philosophers, and would require this to be confirmed by an Oath; some
Plato^ist, perhaps, would be content to swear it: but if some S^^icke, or
Peripateticke, or Professor of some other Sect in Philosophy, should refuse
the said Oath in respect of the l^st clause, might a man infer against him in
all the other clauses also, Ergo he denye^h Plato to be a Man? He denies him
to be borne in Greece, he denies him to be of an excellent wit, he denies hi^
to be skillful in the Greek^ tongue etc.

Were not this a bad kind of arguing? Bad kind of arguing.


So in like manner, if an Arrian, or Pelagian Prince^ should exact an Oath at
his subjects hands, concerning diverse articles of Religion, that were believed
by them both^ and in the end, or middle thereof, should insert some cl^^ses,
sounding to the favor of their own sect, for which the Subject should refuse
the whole body of that Oath, as it was conceived; could the other in justice
accuse hi^, for denying all the several articles of his own Religion also
which therein are mentioned? Who sees not the injustice of this manner of
dealing? And yet this is that which our Apologer uses here with Catholics,
affirming in good earnest, that he which refuses the whole body of this Oath,
as it is conceived (in respect of some clauses thereof that stand against his
Conscience, about matters of Religion) refuses consequently every point and
parcel thereof, and must of necessity hold (in the first place) that our
Sovereign Lord King James is not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all
other his Majesty's Dominions. The contrary whereof all Catholics do both
confess, and profess: and consequently it is a mere calumniation that they
deny this.

This much was written about the matter. Let us consider what is brought by M.
Barlow against the same. And first concerning the contradiction objected to the
Apologer, in that he said, that the Oath touched not any point of the Popes
Supremacy, and yet he dividing the said Oath into fourteen points, diverse of
them are evidently seen to be against the same; M. Barlow after a great deal
of fumbling, and shuffling, of things together, as desirous to say somewhat,
thoug^ with such obscurity, as that (I dare auo^ch) any ordinary Reader can
hardly understand him; I find him to say no more in effect, but that these
clauses excepted against in the Oath, do concern the Popes temporal
authority, and not his spiritual Supremacy: but that is nothing. For as it
has been often said, this extraordinary temporal au^^ority to be used in some
cases, belonging to the censur^^g of temporal Princes, when other remedy is
not found, ^s it proceeds from the Popes spiritual charge, and is given for
the conservation of the spiritual: so consequently, can it not be denied, or
impugned without prejudice, ^^d impeachment of the said spiritual Supremacy it
self? and consequently for so much, as in the Oath it is ^^idently by sundry
clauses impugned, it must needs follow that the Popes spiritual Supremacy is
also impug^ed, which no man can deny, but that it appertains to the integrity
of Catholic Religion, which is contrary to that which M. Barlow says, Th^^
only and merely civil obe^^^^ce is exacted in this Oath.

To the Sophistical fallacy objected by me, of arguing a c^^posito ad diuisa,
that whosoever denies this co^pound (...), must needs deny all, and every part
and parcel therof^ and to the two examples by me alleged, against the ^^^e,
one of a Philosopher describing Plato, the other of (...) Arian Prince
propounding an oath, with many lawful clauses, and one only unlawful, tending
to the setting ^^^th of his own heresy, for that they are evident in co^^on
sense, and do press M. Barlow to the quick, he finds himself in very great
straits: and to the first he pre^ermitteth to answer at all, seeking to cover
himself with a ridiculous calumniation against me, for naming a Philosopher.
Barl. page 2^^.
He girds (says he) at his Majesty for bei^^ ^ Philo^^^her, which is his
Maiest^^s great glory, and our Realms happines^ for true Philosophy joined to
government, regulats the scepter to his subjects c^^fort, and to the Kingdoms
renown. By which words you may see, how vigilant and exact a craf^seman M.
(...) is in the art of adulation, M. Barlow without all occasion plaieth the
parasite.
in so much that if the sci^nc^ of parasitisme were lost he could restore it
again of himself. And I say he is vigilant in this place, for that he has
taken occasion to flatter his Majesty, where none at all was given. For I did
not so much as name his Majesty, but only said, as now you have seen, that if
any ^an would describe Plato, affirming him to be a man born in Greece etc. of
an excellent wit, and ^^ally a^^ing that he was the most eminent of all other
Philosopher^, (...) last point only might be sufficient to make (...)
Pe^^pate^icke deny to swear the Oath, although they did not d^ny all the other
particulers therein contained, ^o wit, that he was borne ^n Greece, of an
excellent wit, skillful in the Gr^^ke Language, and the rest: and so, that
albeit a Catholic man do refuse to swear to a^e Oat^ of Allegiance, in
respect of diverse clauses the^^in contained in pr^iudice of his religion: yet
does not he deny all the other clauses, as both absurdly and ini^riously M.
Barlow does affirm.

The second example in like manner, of an Ari^^ Prince proposing unto his
subjects an Oath containing di^^^^ clauses of true Catholic Religion, and
some one of A^ianism^, for which the whole is refused, M. Barlow ^^ndeth to be
as unanswerable, as the former, though for a ^^^rish he takes upon him, to set
it down again, in a better frame, as he pretends, but in very deed the very
same in effect, and wholly against himself, to wit, tha^ an Arian Prince
con^^yueth an Oath for his subjects to swear, that there are three persons in
Trinity, Barlow page 214.
that the second Person is the S^^^ of God etc. adding notwithstanding, that he
is not ^quall with his Father, which is Arianisme, some Christia^^, says M.
Barlow, M. Barlowes senseless demand.
fearing an error therein have recourse to s^^e great Doctor: he descrying the
Arianisme, sorbids them to take it, and not showing them the erroneous artic^e,
assures them that the (...) Oath as it lies is unlawful. And does not that
doctor conde^^e all the articles the^in? and wills them inclusiuely to deny
the Trinity? This is M. Barlowes demand upon this case. And every man of
common sense I trow will answer, No, that he does not either inclusiuely or
exclusiuely deny the Blessed Trinity. And it is strange that a man of sense
will argue so, or make so senseless a demand. For why, or how does this
doctor deny here the other two articles of true Catholic doctrine? For that
he did not tell them distinctly which of the clauses contained Arianis^^? First
this makes not to our case of the Oath of Allegiance, for that we set down
clerly the claus^s that we mislyke therein, which are all those, that touch
either the Popes authority, or any other part of the Roman Catholic
Religion. Secondly it was not necessary to tell the clause in particular that
contained the Arianisme, for that some of the people perhaps, that demanded
him the question could not well understand it, and therefore it was sufficient
to say, that the oath was, as it lay, naught: that there was some heresy
therein: as if a Physician should say of a dish of myn^ed meat brought to the
table, that the eaters should beware, for that in some part there were poison,
it were sufficient, though he showed not the particular part. Or if a Cook
should say, that among other herbs in the pot, there was one very noisome, it
were sufficient for advise, to refuse the whole pot of pottage: and yet by this
he does not condemn all the other good herbs, that might be in the pot.

Or was it perhaps for that the Doctor said that the whole Oath as it lay, M.
Barlow foysteth into his text the word whole, and thereupon grou^deth al his
idle dispute.
was vnlaw^ull? First I do not find the word whole to be used by Cardinal
Bellarmine, but only the word Iur amentum indefinitly. And secondly, if he had
said, that the whole Oath, as it lies, were to be refused, he had not thereby
condemned ^uery clause, or part thereof, which he proves in these words,
saying: Nam ex (...) sententia bonum ex integra a causa constituitur, malum
autem ex singulis de^ectibu^: quare vt Iur amentum prohibeatur vel recusetur,
(...) est necessarium omnes and singulae parts eius sint malae: satis autem
est, si vel vna sit mala etc. Bellarm. page 22. edit. Romans
For according to the common sentence of Philosophers, that which is good, must
consist of the whole cause, that is to say, of all parts requisite; but to make
a thing evil it is sufficient, that it has but some one defect; wherefore,
for prohibiting or refusing this Oath as evil, it is not necessary, that all
and every part thereof be evil, but it is enough if any one part thereof be
naught. And so on the contrary part, to the end that this oath may be
admitted, as good and lawful, it is necessary that no part thereof be evil.

This is Cardinal Bellarmines doctrine, wherein we see, first that he does not
use the word Whole, totum I^ramentum, which word notwithstanding M. Barlow
does often use, and repeat in this place, making it the foundation of all his
idle dispute. And secondly we see, that he does not condemn all the parts of
this oath, for that some be unlawful, but rather proves the contrary out of
the common sentence of Philosophers, that if any one part be evil, it is
sufficient to make the Oath evil and unlawful. In which kind M. Barlow himself
in the very nex^ ensuing page, gives an example of an Inde^ture that has many
clauses, whereof the breach of any one Prouis^ (says he) does forfeit the
whole; whereby is evident, that one de^ect is sufficient to make the thing
evil; More required to a good action then to an evil.
but to make it good, all that is requisite must be observed. And so in this
Oath, to make it unlawful, it is enough that any one clause thereof be naught,
or against a Catholic man's conscience, but to make it good and lawful, all the
clauses thereof must be good and lawful. And so you see how substantially M.
Barlow has answered this point, over throwing himself with his own argument.

I will not stand to confute that other mad assertion of his, more frantic
then fantastical, whereby he affirms, and will needs defend, that whosoever
refuses to swear, to any one of the articles of this Oath, acknowledges not
the first, that King James is lawful King of England. And what is his reason
trow you? No other, but that of the Indenture before mentioned: for the whole
Oath, says he, is like an Indenture, Barl. page ^15.
all the clauses tying, and tending to one condition o^ Allegiance, the breach
of oue Prouiso in the Indenture ^or^eits the whole; the denying of one article
in the Oath, is the dental of the whole, even of the very first, that King
James is not lawful King. So he. But he that shall examine the matter well, will
find that this pretended parity between the Oath and Indenture, articles and
Prouiso's, The difference between this Oath and an Indenture.
is only in sound of words, and not in substance; for that in making an
Indenture, and the Prouiso's thereof, both parts must agree, that the breach of
every such Prouiso shall forfeit the whole; for that otherwise every such
Prouiso, does not euacuate the whole Indenture, or make it naught. But herein
framing this new Oath, and the articles thereof, there is not the consent or
agreement of al those that are required to take the Oath, nor obligation of
conscience to agree: but rather to the contrary, they are bound by the
principles of their religion to disagree, and disclaim against the same, as
prejudicial to their souls. So as here those articles, or different clauses.
are not as Prouiso's agreed upon, as in an Indenture, but rather as points, and
conditions proposed and required by the Landlord, whereof the Tenant may by
right deliberate and consider, whether they stand well for him or not. And if
not, he may refuse them, or at the least so many as he shall think to be
hurtful or injurious unto him. Neither is the denial of any one or more, the
denial of al, as M. Barlows bad Divinity, and worse Philosophy presumes, to
teach men that it is.

But yet before I end this matter, on which he stands so much, I would demand
him further, whether this his assertion be not general concerning al Kings, and
he may not well deny it, for that his reason is general as presently ensues;
saying, Barl. page 215.
The King being once in lawful possession, whosoever shall say, that he may be
deposed for any cause, denies that he is lawful King. Whereupon it follows,
that the Kings of France, and Spain also are no lawful, or true Kings in the
opinion of their subjects, for that they al with uniform consent, do hold
this doctrine of the Church, that Kings and Princes may in some cases ^e
excommunicated and deposed. Saul also was never lawful King, for that he was
deposed, or else must we say that God did him injury in deposing him.

It follows also by this inference of M. Barlow, that if a man should deny to
swear to the last clause only, of all the Oath, to wit, that he swears all the
former articles heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the faith of a Christian:
So help him God. etc. does deny to acknowledge King James to be lawful King;
which is another point of parasitisme, more ancient (perhaps) then the former,
especially if you add thereunto his propositions, used here to that effect, as
namely, that if he were once lawful, he ^^ over so^ ^or th^^ (...) neither
intended nor remitted, Barl. p. 215.
that vnlaw^ulnes o^ title (...) with it the casuality of deposing, that no
varying in religion, (...) altering of manners, Strange and parasitical
paradoxes.
(...) misordering a Common wealth (...) his title; that only a King can say to
God, tibi soli p^^^ani; that whosoever de^ieth not to the Pope a deposing^
power, de^ieth to (...) King the law^ulnes of h^^ Inuestiture^ and do^^^ion;
that, let a ^ing (...) he will, for his religion, and government, if he has
right to the (...) his subjects must endure etc. And will you not say now, that
M. Barlow is as good a Chaplain for the King, as he is a Champion? that is to
say, as good a Ghostly Father of spiritual counsel and resolution of case^
of Con^cience, as he is a valiant defendour of whatsoever was set down before
in the Apology? But enough hereof.

WHETHER THE FOVRTH COUNCIL OF TOLEDO Did prescribe any such set form of
Oath to be exhibited to the Subjects, as is affirmed in the Apology? CHAP. II.
BUT now we must pass to another contemplation about a certain Council of
Toledo in Spain, alleged by the Apologer, for authorizing and justifying of
this new oath, not only allowed, but decreed also (as he says) in that ancient
Council, to wit, the fourth of Toledo: I shall alleadg his words together with
my answer thereunto at that time.

And that the world (says he) may yet further se his Majesty's and whole
States setting down of this Oath did not proc^ed from any new invention of
theirs, Let. p. 76. Apologia 52.
but as it ^warra^ted by the word of God: So does it take the example from an
Oath of Allegiance, The Oath of Allegiance confirmed by the authority of
Councels.
decreed a thousand years a^ gone, which a famous Council then, together
with di^uers other Councels, were so far from condemning (^^ the Pope now
has done this Oath) as I have though^ good to set down their own words
here in that purpose: whereby it may appear, that his Majesty craue^^ nothing
now of his Subjects in this Oath, which was no^ expressly, and carefully
commanded them by the Counce^ to be obeyed, without exception of persons. Nay,
not i^ the very particular point of Equivocation, which his Majesty in this
Oath is so careful to have eschewed: but yo^ shall here see the said Councels
in their Decrees, as careful to provide for the eschewing of the sa^e; The
difference between the ancient Councels, and the Popes counsell^ng of the
Catholics.
so as, almos^ every point of that Action, and this of ours, shall be foun^ to
have relation, and agreeance one with the other, sau^ only in this^ that those
old Councels were careful, an^ strait in commanding the taking of the same;
whereas by the contrary, he that now vaunteth himself to be Hea^ of all
Counsels, is as careful and strait in the prohibition of all men, from the
taking of this Oath of Allegiance.S^ he. And then I added.

And I have alleged his discourse at large, to the en^ you may better see his
fraudulent manner of proceeding^ He says, That the example of this Oath is
taken from a^ Oath of Allegiance decreed a thousand years agone in the
Counsels of Toledo, Con^. Tole. 4. can. 74.
but especially the fourth, which provided also for the particular point of
Equiuocatio^. But le^ any man read those Counsels, which are 13. in number,
and if he find either any form of an Oath prescribed, or any mention of
Equivocation, but only of flat lying and perfidious dealing, let him discredit
all the rest that I do write. And if he find none at all, as most certainly he
shall not^ then let him consider of the bad cause of this Apologer, that
drives hi^ to such manner of dealing, as to auouc^ Every point o^ that Action
to have agreeance with the offering of th^^ Oath.

Here now you see how M. Barlow is provoked to show his manhood in defense of
this passage, which he begin^eth very fiercely, with many contumelious words,
with I ^e^ pass as wind, and only shall relate those that ^e of some moment to
the cause. VVhiles this Jesuit (says ^e) i^ ^^aching the Apologer of supposed
fraudulency, himself even (...) be arested of a fraudulent impuden^y, ^or that
he charging (...) Apologer to say, that every point of that Toletan action has
(...) with ours, ^e leaves out the principal word, A lie in print.
which the said ^^^^^ger used, when he says, that almost every point agrees;
as if (...) were no^ difference, between his speech that should say, that
Father Persons was almost upon the Seacoast for England, Barl. page 217.
and his that (...) a^^rte, that he was at the sea-cost and shipped for England.
^^erto I answer first for the word almost left out. Secondly (...) the example.

The words of the Apologer about the likeness of our (...), to the Toletane
action are thrice repeated by me: first in the beginning of the matter p. 76.
n. 11. where repeating the Apologers words, About the leaving out the word
almost.
I said, almost every point of that action is (...) to ours. In the end also,
p. 81. n. 19. I related his words ^^s: that almost every point of that action
has agreeance with that of (...) etc. So as twice the word almost is repeated,
though in the third place page 77. number. 12. It is said, every point of that
(...) etc. which might be, as well the error of the writer, or printer, as
ouerslip of the Author. And how then can this be called fraudlent impude^cy?
Or rather was i^ not more fraudulent in M. Barlow, not to tell his reader, that
it was twice put down, though once left out? As for the two members alleged,
they are both known to be false, that either Father Parsons was almost upon the
Seacoast for England, or upon the Seacoast, and shipped for England, to expect
the ^^^der-^lot, for that hundreds of witnesses will testify in (...), that
neither at that time, nor in all that year was he out of that City; so as this
is somewhat more, then almost two untruths.

And this is as much, as in effect he answers to this matter. But I went
forward in my Letter to show out of the Council, and Histories of Spain, the
occasions, causes, and circumstances of this Council, and how it was procured
by the King of Spain, Sis^nandu^ of the Gothish blood, who having ceposed his
Lord, and Master King Suintila, was somewhat jealous, least the Oath of
f^^elity, made unto him by the Spaniards, would not be observed, and therefore
made recourse unto the Bishops, and Clergy, for assisting him in that behalf,
with their Ecclesiastical authority, as they did, both confirming the one, and
excluding the other: whereupon is set down in the preface of the said Council,
that he coming into the same, accompanied with many Noble, and honorable
persons of his train, K. ^^sena^dus his submissiue behavior to the Bishops in
the Council of Toledo.
coram Sacerdotibus Dei bumiprostratus, cum lacbry^^^ and gemitibus, pro se
interueniendum postulauit, he prostrate on the ground before the Priests of
God, besought them with tears, and sobs to make intercession for him.

Whereupon the Council commanded upon severe Censures, that no man should
practice his death or deposition, or break his Oath of fidelity made unto him;
but no particular form of oath do I find there to have been prescribed, or
decreed, whereby this our new oath may be confirmed, or authorized, but rather
another oath prescribed unto the King, and all his successors, Iuramento
po^licean^ur hanc se Catholicam non permissuros eos violare sidem: that they
swear that they will never suffer their subjects to violate this Catholic
faith. The Catholic Faith confirmed by the Council of Toledo.
And mark (said I) that he says ((...)) which was the Catholic faith then
held in Spain, and explicated in these Councils of Toledo; the particulers
whereof, do easily show that they were as oposite to the Protestants faith as
ours is now.

To all this, what says M. Barlow? He begins with a tale, as he is wont,
when he has little else to say: Pericles (says he) as some do affirm, had
that skill in wrestling, that though he received a fall, yet he would persuade
the wrastler, that cast him, and the spectatours that beheld him, that he was
the conqueror. M. Barl^w when he cannot answer fil^ to tell^^g of tales.
You will imagine how well this is ^pplyed by him: he says, that there is not
one point of this which I have said, to the purpose or against the Apologer.
But how does he prove it? First he says, that this Conncell was gathered by
the command of King Sisenandus. And what makes this to the purpose? Did not we
grant also, that Kings within their Kingdoms, may cause Provincial Councels
to be made by their Bishops, Archbishops, and Metropolitans? But how
submissiuely this King did behave himself in that Counsel, appears by his
former submission, both in fact and words. And ye^ by the way, the Reader must
note M. Barlows small truth in relating for his purpose these words:
religiosissimi Sisenandi Regis iussu and Imperijs conuenimus; M. Barlows
falsehood in relating the words of the Counsel of Toledo.
we are assembled by the command and authority of our most Religious King
Sisenandus, whereas the true words in the Council are, ^^m studio amoris
Christi, ac diligen^ia religiosiss^^^ Sisenandi Regis, apud Toletanam Vrbem, in
nomine Domini conuenissemus: whereas for the love of Christ, and by the
diligence of our most religious King, we came together in the name of God, in
the City of Toledo. And then those other words which ensue a^terwards, to wit,
eius ^mperijs atque iussis, are referred to another thing, not to their
meeting, but what matters they should principally handle touching discipline
etc. Vt communis a nobis ageretur de quibusdam Ecclesiae disciplinis tractatus.
In which Treatise of discipline, was contained in like manner the Kings own
temporal cause, concerning the assuring of his succession by Ecclesiastical
Ce^sures. When or wherein then shall we find M. Barlow to deal pu^ctually, and
sincerely? But let us go forward.

In the next place, he says, that this Council, and the Canons thereof do make
for the Protestants, and gives example in three or four Canons, and
concludes generally in these words: The Church o^ England, both for substance
in doctrine, and ceremony in discipline, does hold the same, which ma^y of the
said Canons do conclude. M. Barlowes shameless assertion.
Well then we shall see presently, how many they be. He cites only four of
seauenty and four, and those so impertinently, as by the citation he makes
himself miserable, as now you will perceive.

And first he cyteth the 43. Cano^, saying, that the marriage of Priests, so it
be with the consent of the Bishop, is therein allowed: and he begins with
this, for that it seems to him a knocker, and to the purpose indeed, for
authorizing Priests marriages. Wherefore we shall handle it in the last place of
the four alleged by him.

In the second place then he leapeth back from the 43. Canon, to the 24.
saying, that therein it was positiuely set down, that ignorance is the mother
of all errors, but not of de^^tion. A great objection no doubt against us; as
though we were great friends of ignorance: Ignorance (says the Canon) the
mother of all errors, is most to be avoided by Priests, who have the office of
teaching the people. Do we co^tradict this. What mean our Schools? Our
Seminaries? Our Colleges? Our Vniue^sities for bringing up, About ignorance and
devotion.
and instructing Priests? Are our Priests in England, or on this side the seas,
more encumbered with ignorance then the Ministers? Why then is this Canon
brought in against us? For that perhaps it says not, that Ignorance is the
mother of devotion, nor we neither, as it has been sufficiently proved against
Sir Francis H^sting^ that ignorant Knight, who following M. Jewel, objected it
as spoken once by Doctor Cole, meaning (if he spoke it) that some simple
people are more devout then greater learned: but that ignorance should be a
mother, or necessary bringer forth of devotion, M. Barlow very ignorant, but
not very devout.
was never affirmed by any position of Catholics, and was proved to be very
false in Sir Francis own person, who showed himself to be very ignorant, and
yet nothing devout. And the same in due measure and proportion, may be verified
in M. Barlow: and if he deny it, let us part our proofs. I have showed his
ignorance in alleging this Canon that makes nothing for him; let him prove
his devotion.

From the 24. Canon he steppeth forward again, to the 46. Wherein he says, is
decreed that the Clergies imm^nitie from civil molestations, and troubles, is
from the King, and by his Command and authority. And what makes this against
us, or for the Protestants? Why is not this practiced at this time in England,
that all Clergy men be free, ab omnipublica indictione atque labor, ^t lil^ri
s^ruiant Deo, says the same Canon? from all public taxes, and labor, to the
end they may attend to se^ue God more freely? Is the use of this Canon more
amongst Catholics or Protestants? and if more amongst Catholics, and nothing
at all amongst Protestants, especially in England, what wisdom was this of M.
Barlow, to b^ing it in as a point decreed by the Council, Immunit^ of Clergy
men from whence it first proceeded.
conform to their doctrine, and practice? But says he, this immunity came
from King Sisenandus his order and commandment. True it is that he, as a good
Catholic Prince, was very forward therein, yet the Decree was the Councels, and
therefore it is said in the Canon, id decreuit Sanctum Concilium, the holy
Council decreed it. Neither do we teach that this immunity, or freedom of the
Clergy, from secular burdens, is without the consent, and concurrence of
Christian Princes, proceeding out of their piety, and devotion toward the
Church, to favor and further that, which was esteemed by the Church needful
to Gods service, and conform to Gods divine Law, both written, and impressed
by nature. Lib. de Cler. cap. 2^. and 29.
So as this immunity of Clergy men was brought in both by Divine and Humane
Law, as largly and learnedly does prove Cardinal Bellarmine in two several
Chapters of his Book de Clericis, to whom, as to his Master, Vid^ in c^d^e
Theod^s. lib. 16. ti^. 2 leg. 16 and 26. ^t in Cod. ^^stin^. l^ge ^an^imus de
Sa^rosan. Eccl.
I send M. Barlow to School, though much against his will: where also he will
learn, that long before this fact of King Sisenandus, other Christian
Emperors and Kings, had consented to these immunities of Clergy men, and
confirmed the same by their temporal laws and decrees: which piety King
Sisenandus did follow, and imitate in Spain. And would God he would inspire
his Majesty to do the same in England.

But what helps this M. Barlowes cause? Truly even as much as the rest. Let
us see if you please, what is his fourth Canon, which he cyteth for his proof,
of the Councils agreement with Protestants. M Barlow for a Canon leapeth out of
the book.
He leapeth then lastly to the 75. Canon, which is one more then is in the
book, for there be but 74. but this is a small fault in respect of that which
presently ensues. His words are these: Lastly that all the decrees, and Canons
of that Council, were confirmed by the Clergy, annuente religiosissimo
Principe, after the Kings royll assent had unto them, and that set down Can.
75. Can. 75.
But first of all if the thing did stand in the Council as here it is set
down, that the Princes consent and confirmation had been demanded to all the
Decrees, and Canons, as M. Barlow says, yet the words being but annuente
Princip^, the Prince consenting thereunto, I do not see how it can be truly
translated, as it is by M. Barlow, after the Kings Royal assent had unto them,
which are the usual words whereby Parliament Statutes are confirmed, wherein
the King, as truly supreme head, has chief authority to allow, or reject;
which I doubt not but that King Sisena^du^ took not upon him, in this Council
of Toledo: nay if the place be rightly examined, which is in the very last
lines of the said Council, it will be found that the said consent of the Prince
was not about the decrees of the Council, but about the subscribing of all the
Bishops names unto the said Council. For they having ended all, and made a
large prayer for the prosperity of the said King, and all said Amen, it is
added lastly: Definitis itaque ^is, qua superius comprehensa sunt, annuente
religiosiss^mo P^incip^, ^lac^it d^inde etc. Et quia pros^ctilus Ecclesiae, and
anima nostra con^^ni^nt, and iam propria subscriptione, vt permaneant,
roboramus. Wher^fore having defined these things, that before are comprehended,
it seemed good also by the consent of our most Religious Prince, that for so much
as these things, that are decreed are profitable for the Church, and for our
souls, we do strengthen them also by our own subscriptions, to the end they
may remain. I Isidorus in the name of Christ Metropolitan Bishop of the Church
of Civil, having decreed these things, do subscribe etc. And so did all the
other Bishops by name.

Here then I see not what M. Barlow can gain by alleging this Canon. For if
this allowance of King Sisena^dus, be referred to the Bishops subscriptions (as
it seems by that it comes after the mention of the made decrees) or if it
were in general allowance of the whole Counc^ll by way of yielding to the
execution thereof, as M. Barlows doctrine ^lse where is; it makes nothing
against us at all. For we grant this consent to all Princes, whithin their own
Kingdoms, thereby to have their assistance, for execution especially for such
points as interesse, or touch the political state or Commonwealth.

There remains then to examine a little the first allegation out of the 43.
Canon, where he says, that Priests marriage is allowed in this Canon, so it be
with the co^s^nt of the Bishops. Two notorious frauds of M. Bar^low.
Wherein two egregious frauds are discovered so manifestly as he could not but
know when he wrote them, that they were such. The first is, for that he
translateth Presbyteri, for Clerici, peruersly thereby turning Clarks into
Priests, knowing well enough what he did, for that he must needs see the
difference in the very Canon, as presently we shall show. The second fraud is,
that he knowing, that this Counsel did utterly disallow the marriage of
Priests, yet he shamed not to affirm the quite contrary. We shall say a word
of the one and the other.

For the first he alleges as you have heard, the 43. Cano^, whose words are:
Clerici qui sine consultu Episcopi sui du^^int etc.: Clarks that without the
consultation of their Bishop shall marry wives etc. must be separated from the
Clergy, by their proper Bishop. Which word Cleri^i, M. Barlow translateth
Priests, notwithstanding he knows i^ i^ not so taken there by the Council,
but for inferior Orders under Subdeacon, which is the first of the three that
excludes marriage. This is seen by many Canons, as namely by the 40. which
begins thus: Omnes Clerici vel Lectores, sieve Leuitae and Sacerdotes,
detonso superius capite toto, inserius solam circuli coronam relinquant. All
Clarks and Readers, as also Deacons and Priests, cutting of all the hair of
the upper part of their head, let them leave in the lower part only the crown
of a circle. Here you see that Clerici, and Sacerdotes are distinct Degrees: M.
Barlowes forgery discovered about the Marriage of Priests.
you see also this Ceremony of discipline in that Church of Spain. Will M.
Barlow confess that his Church agrees in this? The title also of the 67.
Canon is, de cupiditate Episcopi, Presbyteri, v^l Diacomi, siu^ Clericorum: Of
the covetousness of a Bishop, of a Priest, or Deacon, or Clarks. Whereby is
evident that in the Councels sense, Priests, Deacons and Clerks are distinct
Orders in the Church, and consequently though the Council does say that Clarks
may not take wives, without the consent of their Bishops; yet their meaning is
not that may take wives, with the said consent; so as in this M. Barlow was
false, and knew that he deceived, when he translated Clerici for Priests.

But now for the second point, that he must needs know also, that the meaning
of this Council could not be, that Priests might marry, by allowance of the
Bishop, I prove it thus, for that this Council did make profession to follow
their Ancestors, and forefathers decrees; and we find registered in an ancient
Spanish Council held three hundred years before this, called Elibertinum,
this Canon which is the 33. of the said Council; Placuit in totum prohibere
Episcopis, Praebyteris, Diaconibus and Subdiaconibus positis in Minist^rio,
abstinere se coniugibus suis, and n^n g^nerare filios, quod quicumque ^ecerit,
ab honor Clericatus extermi^etur. It seems good to the Council wholly to
forbid, all Bishops, Priests, Deaco^s, and Subdeacons placed in Ministry, that
they abstain themselves from their wives, and beget no children: and whosoever
shall do the contrary, let him be cast out of the Clergy.

Con^. To. let. ^. tom. 2. Conc. an. Dom. 542.

The Decree of the Counsel of Tol^d^ about the chastity of Subdeacons, Deacons
and Priests.


After this again in another Counsel of Toledo, which was the second held
some hundred years before this fourth, the matter is determined in the very
first Canon thus, speaking of young men, that pretended to take holy Orders, and
to be Priests: Vbi octauum decimum aetatis suae compleuerint annum etc. When
they shall be full eighteen years of age, let the Bishop in the presence of the
Clergy and people search their wills, about desire of marriage, and then if by
the inspiration of God, the grace of chastity shall please them, and they shall
answer that they will keep their promise made of chastity, without conjugal
necessity, then let these men, as desirous of a most strait way, be admitted
under the most sweet, and easy yoke of our Savior. And first, let them take
the Ministry of Subdeacon at 20. ^eares of age after the probation had of their
constancy, and at 25. years, let them take the office of Deacon: cauendum
tamenest his, ne quando suae sponsionis immemores, ad terrenas nuptias vltra
recurrant: yet must these men take heed, least being at any time forgetful of
their promise or band, they do run back to earthly marryage.

By these two more ancient Counsels then of Spain (not to speak of others)
we may see what could be the sense of this fourth of Toledo, concerning
marriage of Priests, as also what is meant by that direction given in the 26.
Canon: vt quando Presbyteri, aut Diaconi per parochias constituun^^, ^p^rtet
eos primum professione^ Episcopo suo facere, vt cast and pure ^i^ant: when
Priests or Deacons are appointed throughout Parishes, they must first make
profession unto their Bishop, that they will live chastely and purely. The
Council does not say here, that they may take wives, with the Bishops
consent, as was said of Clerici before. Wherefore in both these points, I mean
as well in this translation, as in the maine assertion, that then it was
lawful for Priests to have wives, M. Barlow dealt fraudulently. I will not
cite other Counsels held both before and after this both in Spain and
elsewhere concerning this matter: as before, that of Toledo the third about the
year 589. that of Lions, 5^6. that of T^u^rs, 570. that of Orlea^ce, 587. as
also after, let the Reader view the 8. and 9. of Toledo, about the year 656.
and 657. that of Shalons in France the very next year after.

Yet can I not pretermyt one Canon of the forsaid third Council of Toledo held
upon the point of fifty years before this fourth, Let S^r William B. and his
fellows examine their consciences how they keep this Canon.
whereof we now talk, which third Council of Toledo, in the fifth Canon has
these words: C^mpertum ^st a sancto Concilio etc. It is understood by this holy
Council, that certain Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, coming from Heresy, do
continue to have carnal desires, and copulation with their wives, and to the
end this may not be done hereafter, it is commanded by the Council, as also it
has been determined in former Canons, that it is not lawful for them to live
together in carnal society, but that so long as conjugal faith does ^^mayne
between them, they may have care, one of the others common vtility, but yet not
dwell together in one ^oome: or if their virtue be such, as may seem to have
no^ peril; yet let them place their wives in another house, that their
chastity may have testimony, both before God and man. And if any man after
this ordinatio^, will choose rather to live scandalously with his wife, let him
be deposed from Priestly function, and beheld only as a Lector or a Reader etc.
Priests living with their wives noted by the Council to come from heretics.
By which ordination of the Counsel, we may see the severity of that time,
not only in keeping Priests from marriage after they were Priests, but even in
forbiding the use of their wives that were married before, if any such were
admitted. And it is to be noted, that the Counsel says here, that this
custom of Priests living with wives, came from the heroticks of those days,
and was practiced by them principally, that were turned from heresy to
Catholic Religion.

And finally I cannot pretermit, for the vpshot of this matter, to note one
sentence of Isidorus Archbishop of Si^^ll that was President, and first
subscribed to the foresaid Council of Toledo, who in his second book, de
Ecclesiastic^^ officys, talking of this very same Council, as it may seem,
said, Placuit sanctis Patribus, vt qui s^cra myster^^ cont^^cta^, ^asti sint,
and continentes ab vxoribus. It seemed good unto the holy Father, to determine
that such as do handle the holy mysteries, should be chaste, and continent from
wives. And thus much for the first point auerred by M. Barlow, that four
Canons of the fourth Council of Toledo do make for him, and his religion. But
now we have seen his ill fortune in the choice, for that no Canon makes for
him, but rather all against him, and especially this last.

Now let us see somewhat about the second point, that the Church of England at
this day, both for substance in doctrine, and Cerimony in discipline does hold
the same, which many of the said Canons do conclude: which though as before, I
have noted, it may seem to be a very dubious and imperfect assertion, for that
they of England, being Christians, and so those of that Council also, it were
very ^ard but that of 74. Canons (whereof the first only comprehe^deth the sum
and confession of all Articles of Christian faith contained in the common
Creeds:) it were hard I say, ^ha the Church of England should not hold in
substance, at least, the same that many of those Canons do conclude. Whether
the 4 Counsel of Toledo agree more with the Protestant church of England or
Catholic church of Rome.
But let us touch the point indeed, concerning the articles now in controversy
between us, and Protestants, ^oth for doctrine and cerymonies, whether in
these the said Council of Toledo, did agree m^re with the Church of Engl^^^ as
now is teaches and practizeth, or with the Church of Rome.

And albeit this Council was not gathered together, purposely to handle and
determine matters of faith, and doctrine for the establishing of King
Sisenand^^ his successi^^, and concerning ^he dep^sition of King Suintila, as
has been touched, and by that occasion, for reformation also of manners of the
Clergy: yet are there many things here handled which give sufficient signs
with what Church they more agreed, either the Protestants or ours. In the very
f^^st Canon, where they make their profession of (...), Christ's des^e^ding into
hell to deliver the Saints.
^hey say, Descendit ad inser^^, (...) he descended into Hell, to fetch from
thence tho^^ Sain^^ which were there detained. Do the Protestants agree to this
interpretation? And then talking of the last judgment they say: Merits of
works.
Alij pro iustitiae meri^ ^^ vitam (...): some shall receive life everlasting at
Christ's ^and^ for their merrits of justice. Will Protestants acknowledge this in
their Creed? And it follows immedi^tely, Haec est Ecclesiae Catholicae fides
etc. This is the ^^ith of the Catholic Church: this Confession we (...) and
(...) which (...) ^h^soeuer shall constantly keep, shall (...) li^e everlasting.
S^ they^ And for so much as there oc^^^red a doubt in the Church of Spain,
about the use of ^aptisme, some allowing a triple dipping in the water,
Recourse to Rome.
some one only; the Canon saith^ that the recourse in former ^^me was made to
the Sea Apostolic for deciding of the same, by S. Leander Archbishop of
Civil, who wrote to S. Gregory the Great then Pope of Rome, to have his
resolution. And will M. Barlow allow of this recourse? But let us hear the
words of the Canon. Proinde quid a nobis etc. Wherefore what we are to do in
Spain (says the Council) in this diversity of administering the Sacraments,
Apostolica Sedi^ in ^^^mem^r praecepti^, non nostra^ sed paternam instructionem
sequent^^: Let us (...) by the pr^cepts of the Sea Apostolic, not following
our own instruction, out that o^ our fore-^at^^rs^ Wherefore Gregory of holy
memory Bishop of Rome, at the request of the most holy man Leander Bishop of
Si^^^^, dema^ding what was to be followed in this case; answered him in these
words: Nothing can be more ^ruly ans^ered, about the three dippings in
Baptism, the^ that which you your self have set down, that diversities of
some customs, does not prejudice the holy Church, agreeing all in one faith. So
S. Gregory. But yet discusseth the question more largely, as may be seen in
that Canon: but much more in his own book, lib. 1. Regist. Epist. 41. And is
thi^ conformable to the practice and doctrine of M. Barlows Church? Some men
will say perhaps; yea, to the Church of Engl^^^ that then was, for that about
the very same time that S. Leander Metropolitan of: Si^ill wrote to S. Gregory,
to have his resolu^ion about this difficulty of diverse custome^ in baptizing.
S. Augustine Archbishop and Metropoli^^n of the English Nation, wrote unto the
same S. Gregory, about the like doubts, Beda lib. 1. hist. c. 27.
as appears by Venerable Bede, and had his answer to the same. But this
recourse also of the English Church at that time will not greatly please M.
Barlow.

In the seventh Canon some men are noted, that upon good Friday after h^ra
nona, did use to break their Fast, for which they are much condemned by the
Council, adding this reason for the same: for that the universal Church did
observe the fast of that day, wholly, and strictly, for the memory of the
passion of our Savior, and therefore whosoever should break that fast, besides
young children, old men, and sick men, before the Church have ended her
prayers of Indulgence, he should not be admitted to the Festival joy of Easter
day. And is this conform to the present Church of England? In the eight Can^n
there is a reason given by the Council, Cur lucer^a and cereus in peruigilijs a
nobis benedicantur: Wax tapers.
why the candell, and the wax taper are blessed by the Bishops. And if any man
will contemn this Ceremony, qui haec contempserit, Patr^^ regu^is subia^ebis,
says the Canon, he shall under go the punishments appointed by the rules of
the Fathers. This cogitation I think has never much troubled M. Bar^^^.

In the tenth Canon, order is given about the discipline to be used in Lent,
both in respect of public prayer, and private chastisings of the body.
Touching the first, it is ordained, vt in omnibus quadragesimae diebus, quia
te^pus non est gundij sed m^rori^, Alleluia non decantetur: All^l^ya.
that Alleluia be not song in all the days of Lent, for that is a time, not
of joy, but of sorrow^ and then for the chaftysment of the flesh they say: Opus
est fletibus and ie^u^ijs insistere, corpus cilicio and cinere induere, (...)
moeroribus deijcere, gaudium in trislitiam vertere quousque ^^^iat tempus
Resurrectionis Christi. It is necessary to insist in weeping and fasting, to
cover our body with haircloth and ^she^, Mortification in the time of Lent^
to deiect our mind with sorrow, to turn mirth into sadness, until the day of
Christ's Resurrection do come. And does this Ceremony of discipline please M.
Barlow, Or does his Church admit the same? And if he do not, th^^ let him
hear what follows in the Council, hoc enim Ecclesiae Vniuersalis consensio
in cunctis terrarum parti^us roborauit etc. For this the consent of the
universal Church has establyshed in all parts of the Christian world, and
consequently it is convenient to be observed throughout the Provinces of
Spain, and Galicia, and therefore if any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, or any
whatsoever of the order of Clarks, shall be found to esteem, or perferre his
own judgment before this Constitution of ours, let him be put from the office
of his order, and deprived of the Communion at Easter.This touches M. Barlow
near, and even to the very quick: and I think his Church will hardly brook
this severity of the old Spanish discipline, though you have heard him promise
that he will.

In the 12. and 13. Canons, order is given for singing of hymns in the time of
Mass, Masses and festiuities of Saints.
and namely that of the three Children in the furnace, and certain Priests are
reprehended quod in Missa Dominicorum dierum, and in solemnit atibus martyrum
canere negligant, that they do neglect to sing the said hymn at Mass on
Sondayes, and on the festival days of Martyrs. Wherefore this holy Council
does ordain, says the Canon, that throughout all the Churches of Spain and
Galicia, in omnium Missarum sole^^itate idem in publico decantetur, in the
solemnity of a^l Masses, the some hymn be publicly song; under pain of
loosing their Communion, who shall do contrary to this ancient custom of
singing this hymn, and shall violate this o^^ definition. So the Council. And
will M. Barlows Church admit this doctrine of Masses and celebrating the Martyn
feasts? In the 51. Canon remedy is provided for certain disorderly monks, who
^unning ou^ of their Monasteries non solum ad saecul^m reuertantur, sed e^iam
vxores ac^ipia^t, do not only return to the world, but take wives also: and
the remedy is, that they must be brought back to their Monasteries again, and
poenitentiae deputentur, ibique ^^fle^^t crimina sua, and be appointed to do
penance, and there let them weep, and bewail their sins. And what will M.
Barlow say to this point of discipline? Disorderly Monks punished.
Or at least what would his chief doctors and Grandfathers, ^^ther,
O^colampadius, Peter Martyr, Ochinus, or to come nearer home, what would Scory
of Hereford, Bartlet of Bath and Wells, Friar Bale, and others have said
thereunto? Might not Bears as soon be brought to the stake, as these men
again to their Monasteries to do penance? And yet if they had been in Spain
at that time, this Spanish discipline would have brought them back, which M.
Barlow in general says, that his Church houldeth also: but when i^ comes to
the particular, I doubt not but he will go from his word again: and therefore I
will stand no longer upon this point, though many other examples might be
alleged.

There remains only then now for the conclusion of this Chapter, to see and
weigh the comparisons that may be made between this Oath of fidelity of the
Spanish subjects unto their King Sisenandus (the keeping whereof is so earnestly
recommended by this Council) and this other English Oath of Allegiance,
required by his Maie^^ie, wherein I said I found no more parity or semblance,
but as that was an Oath of civil Obedience to their temporal Prince, so is
this also in some clauses, and therefore as the Council did well allow, yea much
recommend and incharge the keeping of that Oath to King Sisenand^^: so do all
good Catholics desire the observation of the foresaid clauses contained in
this Oath, so far forth, as they concern the said temporal obedience. But
this does not prove that any such form of Oath as this new Oath is, was there
prescribed or decreed, either quoad for^^^, or quoad materiam. For as for the
form, I find no particular form set down or decreed in the Council, as has
been said, but only an admonition to keep the Oath before taken, with an
earnest dehortation, and commination against all perfidious conspiring or
rebelling against their King, which we most willingly also agree unto. And as
for the matter and subject of the Oath it is clear, The difference between the
Oath of the Council of Toledo and the English oath of pretended Allegia^ce.
that, that was of temporal obedience only, and had no such clauses against
the authority of the Bishop of Rome, as this has: nor can it be imagined with
any probability that if any such thing had been proposed by K. ^isenandus to
that Council, that they would have harkened unto it, and much less agreed, and
subjected themselves to ^ake it, or allowed it to others, to be either proposed
or taken.

Well then, what says M. Barlow to this conclusion? Certes he seeks so say
many things, but so far from the purpose, that he truly may be said to say
nothing. He sets down clauses of my speech, with his answers thus. First,
quoth I, there is noe partyculer form of an oath put down in the Council and
consequently this new form could not be taken from that. He answers; Can an
oath be kept which was not first taken? But what is this to the purpose: for
the question is not, whether the Spaniards did take an Oath to their King or
not, for that is granted, but whether the form of the oath were like to this
of ours. And yet as though he had answered to the purpose he goes forward to
prove that an Oath was taken. It appears (says he) in the Canon i^ self, that
all of them had taken an (...) the State decreed it, Barl. page 220.
the subjects of all sorts took is, the (...) enjoined the inviolable
performance thereof. So then an oath there was^ that is without question, and a
form it ^ad, i^ not set down i^ (...) Council what is that to the point?
Very wisly spoken.
Truly Sir nothing at all: as is neither this your proving of that which is not
denied, but it had been much to the point to prove that, that form and this
form had been a like, and so the one confirmed by the other, which you
attempt not at all to do. And yet I pray thee good Reader, see here how he
braggeth immediately. Sufficiently (says he) has the Apolog^^ euicted what he
would to prove that the oath of Allegiance amongst (...) is no such strange
thing, having a president in like kind confirmed by diverse Counsels, about a
thousand years sithence.

But I would demand of M. Barlow, what was the question between us? Was it
whether there were ever any oath of Allegiance to temporal Princes allowed, or
taken in the Christian world before this of ours? For if this were the
question, then has he sufficiently euicted his purpose, by showing that so
long ago an oath of Allegia^ce was allowed in the Council of Toledo. But if
this was not the question, but only whether there was a like Oath to this in
form or matter allowed in the Council of Toledo, then has M. Barlow euicted
nothing, but his own disgrace, for that he has run quite from the purpose.

And yet to seem to say somewhat, he returns again afterward to speak of
the form, and matter of this oath, recommended in the Council of Toledo. And
first he shows, that albeit the form be not expressed in the Council, yet
must it be persumed to have been made in the name of God, as is commanded in
Deuteronomy the 6. But this is very general. Then he sets down a certain
Protestation made by the Bishops, and Archbishops in the sixth Council of
Toledo, for the temporal safety of their Prince, in these words: Ideo testamur
(...) Deo, and omni ordine Angelorum etc. Therefore we do testyfie, before God^
and all the orders of Angels, as also^ before the quire of holy Prophets, and
Apostles, and of all Martyrs, and before the whole Catholic Church, and
congregation of Christians, that no man intend the destruction of the King,
that no man attempt any thing against the life of the Prince, that no man
deprive him of the government of the Kingdom, that no man by Tyra^nicall
presumption usurp unto himself the height of his Kingdom, that no man by any
machination in his aduersytie do associate unto him the assistance of
Conspirators; Council. ^. Tolet.
and if any man shall presume to attempt any of these things, let him be
stricken with our Curse, and be condemned to everlasting judgment without any
hope of remedy.

Here now M. Barlow tryumpheth, A fond triumph of M. Barlow before the victory.
and says, that this is a form of an oath prescribed, and therefore I have
lost my credit, that denied the same (in the 4. Council.) Whereto first I
answer, that this is rather a protestation of the Council, a commination, or
threatening to others as appears by the punishment appointed, the^ any form
of an oath, either taken by themselves or prescrybed to others. And secondly I
say, that this is so far different from the form of our new oath of
Allegiance, now exacted as nothing can be more; which every man will see by
comparing them together: for I hope M. Barlow will not allow the invocation of
Angels, Prophetts, Apostles and Martyrs called for witnesses, as here is
used: and so the forms are nothing like, nor is this an Oath made to the King.
But let us see somewhat more of this matter.

He alleges my exception, that the Oath in the Council confirmed, was an
Oath of civil Allegiance only, which neither the Catholics refuse, now Pope
Paulus does prohibit. Against which he makes a long idle discourse, that the
same things are contained in the one, and the other Oath, as the safety of the
King, the preservation of his life and Crown, and the like. Which though in
some part it be acknowledged to be true (and in this we have no difficulty to
agree with him:) yet is not this only sought in the new Oath, but the denial
also of the Popes authority. Or if M. Barlow will contend, that this of the
Princes safety, is only sought: The Counsel of Toledo would never have allowed
of the new Oath.
we answer, that at least it is not sought by good and lawful means, but by
such as the Council of Toledo would never have yielded unto, if their King
Sis^^dus should have demanded them such an Oath, with such and so many
exceptions against the Popes authority, whereof in that Oath M. Barlow shall not
find one, although he search and sist it never so narrowly, and therefore all
that hitherto he has said, is nothing to the purpose.

There remains then only the last clause to be examined, whether the said
Council of Toledo did provide even for the particular point of Equivocation,
as the Apol^g^^ said, and I in my answer denied, that there was any mention of
Equivocation in that Council, but only a reprehension of lying and per^idious
dealing; which M. Barlo^ coming now to treat, confesses that there is no
mention indeed thereof, but that lying and Equiuocating is all one, About
Equivocation very ignorantly by M. Barlow confounded with lying.
which is to raise up again an old contention, that passed between M. Morton
and me, wherein I presume to have made so evident demonstration, that lying and
Amphilology or doubtful speech (by others called Equivocation) are far
different things, and cannot stand together (and much less are all one,) as
no man though ^f very mean capacity can but see the same; though malice does
not suffer M. Barlow to confess it. To which effect I have alleged many
proofs out of the nature and definition, both of the one, and the other, many
examples out of the holy Scriptures, out of the old and new Testament, the
authority of sundry ancient Fathers, the practice of many Saints, the consent
of Schoolmen, and other like proofs, which M. Barlow having read and well
pondered, should have confuted, or at least some of the^ in this place, before
he had cast him self anew into M. Mortons absurdities, by affirming again
with him, that menda^i^^ and Amphibologia, lying and Equiuocating is all one.

But he does not only this, but he runs also to find out certain Synonima
of different soundes, of the same sense, in the North and South of England, as
for example. Takers in the North, do signify thieves in the So^th, (...) used
women in the North are called wh^res (as he says) in the south: An immodest
example used by M. Barlow.
fit examples for his invention. But all is impertinent: for we do not hold
that mendacium and Equi^ocatio are Sy^^^i^a, but quite different things. For a
lie, as largly has bin han^ed against M. Morton, is when any false thing is
uttered, contrary to the knowledge of the vtterer; but he that does Equivocate,
The difference be^weene Equivocation and lying.
does always speak truth in his own sense and meaning, though the hearer do
conceive another meaning, for that the speaker reserved somewhat in his mind,
which he utters not: and this thing is so ordinary, and evident in the
speeches both of the ancyent Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ our Savior
himself, as M. Barlow, and M. Morton laying their heads together, will never
be able to answer the multitude of examples by me alleged in that behalf;
which appears sufficiently, both by that M. Morton in his late Reply,
pretermitted them all, and durst not as much as take them in hand to answer;
and the like does M. Barlow here, but only that this later, as more
temerarious, runs into other absurdities, showing indeed, not to understand
well the state of the question or nature of the thing it self. For thus he
describes Equivocation and lying. A gross lie of M. Barlow.
When a man, says he, speaks any thing contrary to that he thinks in his
mind, Equiuocare est ( say the Jesuits) mentiri est, says the M. of Sentences.
Whereas notwithstanding, every learned man knows that both the Jesuits, and
others that write of this matter do agree with the M. of Se^tences in this
point. For whosoever speaks contrary to that which in his mind he thinks,
it is a lie, and no Equiuocatio^, for he that does Equivocate, must always
have a true sense in his own meaning, which he cannot have, who does speak
contrary to that which in his mind he thinks.

Then goes he forward in his declaration, saying: Barl. page 226.
The principal difference which they make is in their purpose, for that they
do it not with an intent to deceive, but only to defend themselves: and then as
though this supposed ground were true, he goes forward to show upon the same,
that a good intention is not sufficient, to justify the doing of that which is
evil: but this principal difference seems to be a principal ignorance in
M. Barlow, M. Barlowes principal ignorance.
showing that he does not understand indeed wherein we do put the principal
difference between lying and equiuocating, which is not in the purpose and
intention of the speaker, as he says, but partly in the thing it self
uttered, to wit, that it be really true, in the sense, and meaning of the
vtterer: and then in the quality of the hearer, whether he be a lawful judge,
and thereby may oblige the speaker, to speak to his intention, and other such
circumstances, which are largely handled in my foresaid book, and not
understood as it seems, or not read by M. Barlow, which me thinks he ought
to have done, meaning to treat of this matter here. And so I shall pass no
further therein, but refer him and the Reader, to the larger Treatise of that
subject already extant.

CARDINAL BELLARMINE is cleared from a false imputation: and a controversy
about certain words and clauses in the Oath is discussed. II.
AFTER this M. Barlow passes to a point concerning Cardinal Bellarmine, set
down in the Apology in these words: Some of such Priests and Jesuits as were
the greatest traitors and fomentours of the greatest conspiracies against her
late Maiesty^ gave up F. Robert Bellarmine for one of their greatest
authorities and oracles. So says the Apologer, and notes in the marge^t,
Campian and Heart in their conference in the Tower. This was noted by me in my
Letter, as an unjust charge, both in respect of the two men mentioned in the
margent, who were most free from being traitors, and much more the greatest
Traitors: excepting only their Priestly functio^s most injuriously made
Treaso^s, against all truth and equity, as abundantly else where has been
proved; but much more in respect of Cardinal Bellarmine, who was not so much
as named, by any of them in any matter tending to Treason, or conspiracy
toward the late Queen; and therefore if he were by any of them named or
mentioned, it was in matter only of learning, not of Treasons, and
conspiracies, which M. Barlow is also forced here to confess, M. Barlowes
childish imputations against Cardinal Bellarmine.
and says that it was meant in matters of the Conference in the Tower: but
every man of judgment will se what the words of the former charge do import,
and how far they reach, which M. Barlow considering, he dares not stand to
his first refuge, but adds, that Bellarmine in his Book which English
Priests do study, does teach such doctrine as is the ground of rebellions: he
blows (says he) the bellows of seditious doctrine, which flames out by his
Scholars conspiracy, to the disturba^ce of the chiefest States of
Christendom. Barl. page 230.
But this now men will see how passionate, and untrue it is, that the chiefest
States of Christendom are disturbed by Cardinal Bellarmines doctrine: I do
not mean to stand upon the confutation of so childish imputations.

There follows a certain small controversy, about the words temperate, and
tempered, whether they signify the same or no: whereof we have handled somewhat
before, and so shall dispatch it here in a word. Cardinal Bellarmine had said
in his Letter to M. Blackwell, that this Oath is not therefore lawful because
it is offered as tempered, and modified, with diverse clauses of civil
Obedience, giving an example out of S. Gregory Nazianzen of the Ensigns of the
Emperor Julian, wherein the Images of the Heathen Gods were mingled and
conbyned together with the Emperors Picture, and thereby so tempered and
modified, as a man could not adore the one without the other. Which speech of
the Cardinal was much reprehended by the Apologer, as though Bellarmine had
misliked the temperate speech uttered in the form of this oath. But that was
no part of Bellarmines meaning, but that the said Oath was tempered, mixed, and
compounded of different clauses, some lawful, and some unlawful, as a man
would say, mortar is tempered with water, sand, and lyme: and this appears by
his example of the Ensigns before mentioned tempered, that is, mixed with the
images of the Emperors, and their false Gods. And if M. Bar^^^ will needs have
this temperament to have also with it some temperature, which is his only reply
now in this place, we will not greatly strive with him. Let it be esteemed to
be some temperature, that here are mingled some clauses of civil obedience,
with other concerning Religion, it helps the mixture, but not the scruple of
conscience to him that must take it.

I pretermit all the rest of M. Barlows superfluous and idle speech about this
matter, as striving to say somewhat, but yet in substance says nothing. It
follows in my Letter, concerning the answering of two questions proposed by
the Apologer, wherein I shall repeat again my own words then uttered: thus
then I wrote. That the Apologer having said with great vehemence of
asseueratio^, Let page 43 number. 24.
That heaven and earth are no further a sunder, then the profession of a
Temporal Obedience, to a Temporal King, is different from any thing belonging
to the Catholic faith, or Supremacy of S. Peter (which we grant also, if it
be mere Temporal Obedience without mixture of other clauses:) he proposes
presently two questions for application of this to his purpose. Two questions
proposed and solued.
First this: As for the Catholic Religion (says he) can there be one word
found in all this Oath, tending to matter of Religion? The second thus: Does he
that takes it, promise to believe, or not to believe any article of Religion?
Whereunto I answer first to the first, and then to the tending and sounding
that way, as before has been showed.

Clauses of belief or not belief in the Oath.
As for example the very first: I A. B. do truly, and sincerely acknowledge,
profess, testify, and declare in my conscience, that the Pope neither of
himself, nor by any authority of the Sea or Church of Rome, has any power and
authority etc. does not this include either belief or unbelief? Again: I do
further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious
and heretical, that damnable doctrine, and position, That Princes which be
excommunicated, and deprived by the Pope, may be deposed etc. Does not here the
swearer promise, not to believe that doctrine which he so much detesteth? How
then does the Apologer so grossly forget, and contradict himself, even then,
when he goes about to prove contradictions in his Adversary?

It follows consequently in the Oath: Page 12.
And I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me from this Oath, or any part
thereof. These words are plain as you see. And what will the Apologer say
here? Is nothing promised in those words to be believed, or not believed?

This was my speech. And now see what quarrel M. Barlow seeks against it.
First whereas in my answer to the first question, I say, if it be granted, that
the power and authority of the Pope, and Sea Apostolic etc. be any point
belonging to religion among Catholics, then is there not only some one word,
but many sentences concerning Religion in the Oath. What answers M. Barlow?
This Epistler (says he) does impudently impugn the Oath as utterly unlawful,
and against religion, which yet depends upon an If, Barl. page ^33.
and is not yet determined for a point of religion, that the Pope has any such
authority over Kings, as in the Oath is mentioned. No Sir? not among Catholics?
(for of them only I speak, though you leave it out, and do many ways corrupt
my words:) Will not they grant the Popes authority in such cases to be a point
belonging to their Religion? M. Barlowes caueling.
Does the word If put the matter in doubt, that when you say, If there be a
God, this or that is true or false, you may be said to doubt, whether there be
a God or no? And when you say, If I be a true man, this is so, you may be
thought to doubt, whether your self be a true man or no? Do not you see that
this is plain cauelling indeed, and not disputing? But what more? You say that
when I do affirm the Popes power, I do not distinguish whether in
Ecclesiastical or civil causes: but you know well enough that I have often
distinguished, and so do other Catholic Deuines, that the Popes authority is
directly only Ecclesiastical and spiritual, for governing and directing of
souls to everlasting life; though indirectly for conservation of this
Ecclesiastical, and Spiritual end, there is annexed also Temporal, in such
cases, as before has been specified, concerning temporal Princes. And so this
is but a shift to say, that I do not distinguish.

As that is also another, about my answer to the second demand of the
Apologer, where he demands whether any man that takes the Oath, does promise
to believe, or not to believe any one article of religion, contained in the
said Oath. For answer whereunto, I did set down sundry clauses of the said
Oath, whereby it seems plain, that the swearer does make such promise. Now
you reply with this new shift, saying, that I do still beg the question in
controversy. So you talk to seem to say somewhat. But what is the question in
controversy? Is it not whether the swearer does make promise to believe, or not
to believe any article of religion, in taking the Oath? Yes. And I have proved
that he does so, by diverse examples. How then do I beg the question, when I do
euince it by proof? You reply, that these articles abiured, or allowed by him
that takes the Oath, Barl. page 234.
concerning the Popes authority, are not points of ^aith, but rather
Machiauelismes of the Conclaue. But this now is railing, and not reasoning, for
that a Catholic conscience houldeth the doctrine of the Popes Supremacy,
Machiauels principles agree better to Protestants doctrine the^ to the
Catholic.
and all points belonging thereunto, for matters appertayning to faith and
Catholicisme, and not to Machiauelisme, which Machiauelisme agrees much more
fitly to M. Barlows assertions, that depend on the pleasures of Prince and
State, alteration of times, and temporal vtilities (whereof Machiauel was a
great Doctor,) then to the simple positions of Catholics, who without these
worldly respects, do plainly and sincerely embrace and believe, all such points
of doctrine as the known Catholic Church does deliver unto them, as any way
appertayning to the integrity of Catholic Religion.

Here then M. Barlow being driven from his refuge of my begging the question,
lays hand upon another, much more ridiculous, in my opinion: for it is
somewhat like the Sermon of the Parish Priest to his Parishioners, which he
divided into three parts; M. Barlow understands not himself.
the one, that he understood, and not they; the other that they understood, and
not he; the third, that neither of them both understood: and the third part
seems to be our case now: for as I confess, that I do not conceive well,
what M. Barlow would say, so I have reason to suspect that himself also can
hardly explane his own meaning, or at least wise, he does it not so here, as
the Reader may easily understand the same. His words are these: This censurer
is an absurd dispu^^nt, still to beg the Question, as if these articles abiured
or allowed were points of ^aith etc. This you have heard answered now: there
follows the other member: Or as if (says he) belief were used every where
^heologically, and that a Christians belief should always be taken for his
Christian belief: Barl. page 234.
^or there is a natural belief, the Objects whereof are natural and civil
things, such as in this Oath etc. So he. And did not I tell you, that you
should have mysteries? M. Barlow his seely distinction.
A Christians belief, is not always a Christian belief, but a natural
belief; the good man would have helped himself, with the School-mens
distinction, of fides diuina and fides ^umana, divine and humane faith, if he
could have hit upon it, but yet wholly from the purpose if he had found it out:
nay quite contrary to himself. For I would ask, what faith or belief, divine
or humane, Christian or naturall^ did the Apologer mean in his demand?
Whether he that takes the oath, do promise to believe, or not to believe, any
article of Religion? Did not he mean divine faith, or Theological belief? It
cannot be denied: for that the object being articles of Religion, as here is
said, which are not believed but by divine faith, as they are such; it
follows, that in this question, the Apologer ma^e his demand of Christian
belief, and not only of a Christians belief, yea of Theological belief, and
not of natural belief, that is to say of humane belief: and so conform to
this his qu^stion were the clauses of my answer, I do truly and s^^cerely
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my conscience etc. And again, I
do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, dete^t, and abjure, as
impious doctrine etc. And yet further, I do believe, and am in conscience
resolved etc. And is not all this belief in Conscience, out of Conscience, and
for Conscience, and of things belonging to Catholic Religion, to be understood
of Christian and Theological belief, but natural only? Who would write so
absurdly, but M. Barlow, who seems not to understand what he writes?

And that this may be better understood, I am minded to say a word or two more
of this matter. He makes a distinction here as you see, between natural,
and Theological belief, adding for his reason, that the Objects of natural
faith, are natural and civil things, and that such are the articles contained
in the Oath, M. Barlowes gross error in Philosophy.
aiming as before has been said, at the distinction of divine and humane
faith. But he is grossly deceived, in that he distinguishes these two faiths,
or beliefes, by their materyall objects, and things believed, contrary to the
general consent of all Philosophers and Deuines, who do hold, that o^^es
actus specificantur ab obiectis formalibus, that all acts are specified by
their formal objects, and not by their materyall, which may be the same in
acts of different nature, and consequently cannot distinguish them: and so in
our present purpose, these two faiths or beliefes are not distinguished, for
that the one has natural and civil things for her objects, and the other
supernatural. For that as well humane, and natural faith, may both have
natural, and supernatural things for her objects, as also dyuine and
Theological faith may have the same.

Divine and humane faith wherein they are distinguished.
As for example, when a man belieueth that there is a City called
Constantinople, for that many men do report it: and when a Pagan belieueth that
there is a God, for that some learned Philosopher has told him so, to whom he
gives credit; here both natural, and supernatural things are objects of
humane, and natural faith. And so on the contrary side, if a man should
believe natural, and civil things as revealed by God in his Scriptures, or
otherwise; as that Cayn killed his brother; Matth^salem lived so long, and the
like; these things should be objects of Thologicall and divine faith, as well
as if they were in themselves supernatural. Wherefore these two faithes and
beliefes, are not distinguished by their material objects, be they either
natural or supernatural, but by their formal objects or motives; non per res
creditas, sed per rations credendi, as Scholemen say, not by the things that
are believed, but by the motives and causes, for which they are believed: so as
whatsoever is believed upon any humane motive or authority, though in it self
it be supernatural, appertains to humane faith, and not dyuine; so likewise
on the contrary side, whatsoever is believed upon divine motives and
authority, and as revealed from God, though in it self, it be natural, and
cyuill, as M. Barlow calls it: yet does it appertain to Theological and
divine faith, as an object thereof. But these things it is like M. Barlow has
no commodity to study, and therefore I would easily pardon him these rude and
gross escapes, if he did not show himself so insolent in vaunting, as he does,
and so con^umelious against others that know more then himself.

WHETHER PRINCES HAVE JUST CAUSE TO FEAR MVRTHERING by the commandment of
Popes. And in discussing of the particular example produced by the Apologer,
concerning the fame, great fraud and malice is discovered in M. Barlowes
falsifying of Authors etc. CHAP. III.
IN the page 86. of my Letter, I do handle a certain speech of Cardinal
Bellarmine in his letter to the Archpriest, wherein he says, that neither his
majesty of England, nor any Prince else has cause to fear violence from the
Pope, for that it was never heard o^ from the Churches infancy, vn^il this day,
that any Pope did command, that any Prince, though an heretic, though an
Ethnicke, though a persecutor, should be murdered, or did allow of the
murder, when it was done by another. Thus the Cardinal. Against which was
objected, that Popes had deprived diverse Princes, and had raised great wars
against others, and that in war was contained the casualty of killing in like
manner. But this was answered, that the question was of murdering. Now what
reply think you makes M. Barlow? First he brings in a long idle discourse
to show that according to Homer, and other Poets, and politic Historians,
Princes ought to go always armed, and vigilant for their safety; and then he
makes this demand: The Pop^ never commanded any Prince to be murdered.
What difference is there between personal murdering of Princes, and raising
war against them, the lot whereof is common and impartial? Thirdly he brings
in my answer as saying, that though the Pope has waged war against Princes:
yet he never caused any to be vnlaw^ully murdered. Wherein, Bar^. page 217.
says he the Aduerbe is worth the observing, secretly implying, that the Pope
has commanded, or may command Princes to be murdered, but not unlawfully.
Wherein he shows himself to be a mere calumniator: for that I speaking
diverse times of this matter, did never join the Aduerbe unlawfully with the
word murdered; but in one place only I said thus: that albeit Popes upon just
causes, have waged wars against diverse Princes, yet they never caused any to
be unlawfully made away, murdered, or allowed of their murders committed by
others. Where you see the Aduerbe unlawfully is not joined with the word
murdered, but with the words made away.

And the like corruption of my words, and perverting my sense, he uses
afterward in the same page, with intolerable iniquity, making me to say that
which was far from my meaning, concerning the wars between popes and
Princes; and it is his general fashion, never commonly to recite my words
with sincerity. Barl. page 239.
But he goes forward to prove, that Popes do command murders of Princes,
saying: Bell. de Ro^. Pont. l. 5. c. 6.. ex quo
Were there no example of fact extant against the Popes in this kind: yet they
may command Princes to be killed, is Bellarmines own doctrine, both Symbolical
as the spirit may command the flesh to ^asting and chastisement, yea even (...)
death it self, i^ the spirit s^e it necessary: and Positive also, for that
Christians may not suffer an Infidel or heretical King to reign over them.
So he. And out of these two arguments does prove that Popes do, or may command
Princes to be murdered. But who does not see the folly of these arguments,
which can move nothing but laughter, or stomach? For albeit B^llarmine do
teach that the spirit in a man may punish the flesh by fasting and
chastisement, where it is necessary for the souls health (and I could wi^h that
M. Barlow had some of this spirit:) yet may he not kill him self, or punish his
body unto death, M. Barlow falsifyeth Bellarmine.
as M. Barlow falsifyeth him, but cum detrimento aliquo, and debilitatione
ipsius corporis, though it be with some loss and weakness of the said body.
True it is, that in another case of Martyrdom, Bellarmine teaches that the
spirit may command the flesh to yield it self up to the persecutour, for
defense of Christian faith: but this is not our question. So as in this first
point M. Barlow is found to falsify: and in the second, to make a foolish
consequence, that for so much as Christian men may not tolerate in some cases
an Infidel Prince etc. therefore they must murder him; as though there were no
other remedy but murder: these are odious inferences, fit for such a spirit as
M. Barlowes, who notwithstanding means not to murder himself by the
severity of Bellarmines doctrine, whom he falsely affirms to teach, that the
spirit may subdue the flesh, by fasting and other chastisements, yea even unto
death, nor yet to debilitate his body thereby, according to Cardinal
Bellarmines true doctrine.

Another argument of the Popes murders is made to be, for that he is said to
have commanded the body of Henry the 4. Emperor of that name, that died
excommunicated in Liege upon the year 1106. to be taken out again of his
sepulcher, and thereof he infers, that if the Pope would use such rage
against a dead body, much more against alive. But this argument houldeth no
more, though the matter were true, as here it is alleged, then the former,
for that many things are done against Princes bodies when they are dead, which
would not be attempted in their life time. Who will not confess this to be
true? M. Barlows foolish consequence.
But let us leave the consequent, and consider the antecede^t: two things are
avouched by the Apologer page 65. first, that the Pope (which was then Paschal
is the second) was enraged at the young Emperor Henry the fi^th, for giving
buryall to his fathers body, when it was dead, in the City of Leodium or
Liege. The second was, that the Pope had stirred up the said son Emperor
against his Father. and for both these points were cited in the margent as
witnesses, Platina and Cuspinian in their Histories.

To which I answered in my Letter, Let. p. 87.
that Platina had no such matter, and that Cuspinian had the contrary, to wit,
that when Henry the Father was dead and buried in a monastery at Liege, his
son would not make peace with the Bishop of that place, called Otbert, except
the dead body were pulled out of the grave again, as it was, and so remained
for five years. This I answered to the first point, about the exhumation of
the body, Name. part 2. ge^. ^7. in anno 11^6. Cra^^^. l. 5. histor. Saxon. c.
24.
by the enraged son against his father, for taking arms against him again,
after that with common consent he had resigned the Empire unto him: and for
more proof of this, I cited two authors more, to wit, Nauclerus and Crantzius
in their histories, that affirm the same.

To this now M. Barlow in his reply, says first never a word unto the silence
of Platina, nor to the testimonies of Nauclerus and Crantzius, but passes
slyly to prove another matter, that we deny not, to wit, that the body of the
elder Henry was taken out of the grave again at Liege, M. Barlow i^ (...)
where he (...) ^^^were.
after it was buried, but by whom or whose commandment either of the Pope
Paschalis, then living, or of his Son Henry, that lay near by with an army,
that he proves not, which is the only point he should have proved, to wit,
that by order of the Pope the dead corpse had bin taken out of the grave. I have
for the contrary besides the Authors before alleged, the manifest authority of
Vrspergensis who lived and wrote in that time, and might be present perhaps at
the fact, relating the matter how after that the death of Henry the 4. was
known to his son and to all the Bishops, and Archbishops that were there
with him, and that notwithstanding he dyed excommunicate, his body was buried
by the B. of Liege, that had followed also his part; the said young Emperor,
and Bishops would not admit the said Bishop of Liege unto their communion
(though he most earnestly offered himself) but with condition that he should
both do penance, Henry the 4. not unburied by Pope Pascalis.
and besides that, take out of the sepulcher again the buried body of the
said Emperor, which contrary to the Canons of the Church he had buried the day
before: his words are these: Leod^ensis autem Episcopus etc. But the B. of
Liege, and other Bishops who had followed the part of Henry the 4. were
received into communion to do penance with this condition, that they should
take forth of the grave the dead corpse of the said excommunicate Henry, which
they had buried in a Monastery the day before. So he. And the same word pridie,
the day before, has not only Vrspergensis, but also Nauclerus, Naucl. l. 2.
genesis 37.
which does evidently convince, that this exhumation could not be commanded by
the Pope Paschalis, that lived at Rome, and could not be advertised of the
death of the Emperor Henry, and of his burial so soon; and much less give
order for his taking up again within the compass of 3. or 4. days, if there
were so many between his death, and his burial.

To this I do add the manifest and perspicuous testimony of Huldericus Mutius
in the 16. book of his Germane Chronicle, (...) a Lutheran.
who speaking of the admitting to favor of the foresaid Bishop of Liege and
his people, says: Leodienses noluit recipere, nisi e^^ossum Genitoris sui
cadauer abijcerent in locum quempiam vbi solent mortua pecora loca^i. Henry the
younger would not receive into grace those of Liege, except they would cast out
the dead body of his Father, into some place where dead beasts are wont to be
cast: and this not so much for religion, says the same Author, as for deep
^atred, that he had conceived against his said Father. By all which is seen,
that not the Pope, but the young Emperor, and the Bishops and Archbishops, that
were with him, having stood against the old Emperor, and his followers, and
excommunicated the same, were the cause why the body was taken up again.

But now let us see how M. Barlow does seek to establish the contrary, M.
Barlows clouted frauds in his black cloud of witn^sses.
to wit, that he was dug out of his grave by commandment of the Pope, for in
this he labors much, and alleges for show thereof, some 5. or 6.
authorities of different Authors, calling them a cloud of witnesses. For
digging up, says he, the dead body out of his grave, that is compassed with a
whole cloud of witnesses. But if in all this cloud, we find nothing in manner,
but clouted fraud^s, and that no one of them has passed his hands without
corruption, then may you call it a black cloud indeed.

First then let us examine the two Authors already alleged for our cause, to
wit Vrspergensis and Nauclerus, cyted here in his margent, for that he will
have the^ to prove the quite contrary of that, for which I produced the^
before. And as for Vrspergensis, he cites his words thus: The Bishop of Liege
with other of his sort were received into the communion of the Church (who cast
them out but the Pope?) upon condition they would dig out of the grave the
corpse of the Emperor, which he had before buried in the Monastery. So he
relates the words of Vr^ergensis in a different letter, as though they were
punctually his, which indeed they are not, but accommodated by M. Barlow, M.
Barlow pareth and minceth Authors to his purpose.
with some paring and mincing to his purpose. For whereas Vrspergensis says,
that the Bishop of Liege, and his fellow Bishops inter caetera recipiuntur in
commu^^nem poenitentiae, were received among other conditions, to the communion
of penance, M. Barlow thought good to leave out the word penance: as also,
where he says cadauer i^siu^ excommunicati, the dead corpse of the
excommunicate Emperor, which did yield the reason of their digging up, M.
Barlow left out also the word excommunicate.

But of much more moment was his leaving out the word pridie, when he says the
body of the excommunicate Emperor buried by him the day before in the
Monastery should be dug up, for by that he strikes of the head of the
strongest argument that is against him, as before we have showed. For if the
Emperor were buried but one day before his exhumation was commanded, then
could not that commandment come from the Pope, but m^st needs come from the
Emperor and Bishops there present. Here then is found fraud in M. Barlow his
allegation; and to publish the same more, he would needs use the word BEFORE
BVRIED in great letters, M. Barlow shows himself a falsificator in capital
Let^ers.
as though they had well expressed pridie tumulatum, buried the day before. But
here perhaps some will demand, suppose this narration of V^spergensis were
granted to be true, as M. Barlow sets it down, how does it prove that the
Pope commanded the exhumation? Whereunto he answers here by a certain
demand, in a parenthesis, Who cast them out (to wit those of Liege) but the
Pope? Whereunto I answer that the Bishops and Archbishops that were with the
new Emperor, had excommunicated them long before, and the Emperor himself
had given out against them the Imperial band, which is a civil
excommunication: which besides that it is evident by the testifications of
Histories, is made clear also by that they received them into communion,
presently upon the death of the old Emperor, without imparting the matter to
the Pope, which they would not have done, if the excommunication had not come
from themselves: For that no man can take away, that which he could not impose.
And so here is nothing proved against the Pope, but a great good will to
calumniate him.

The like fraud is committed in the allegation of the other Author Naucle^us,
who, says M. Barlow, relates verbatim both the fact, and the reason of the
fact, as Vrspergensis does. Whereunto I answer, that it is true, that he
relates both; but the one and the other are perverted by M. Barlow: for thus
writes Nauclerus. Inopinata fama mortis Im^eratoris mox subsequitur etc. The
unexpected fame of the death of the old Emperor did presently ensue, which
being diuulged, all those that for gayne-sake had stuck unto him, and had sold
their souls unto him, did subject themselves sine mora, without delay unto the
obedience of the young Emperor, and to the Catholic communion. But they of
Liege were received into the said Communion, with this condition, that the dead
body of him that was excommunicated, and buried the day before in a monastery,
should be dug up etc.

In relating which words, we see that M. Barlow left out first the censure of
the Author against them, that had followed the part of the old excommunicated
Emperor. And secondly he leaves out, that they were reconcyled to the new
Emperor, and to the Catholic communion of the Bishops there present sine
mora, without any stay, which infers that they could not send for the Popes
consent to Rome. Thirdly, he leaves out as he did in his former Author the
words, M. Barlow trimmeth Authors to make the^ against their wil's and
contrary to that they write to speak for him.
per se pridie tumulatum ^ff^derent, that they of Liege should dig up again
the body, which the day before they had buried. Fourthly, he leans out these
words that ensued, comproba^tibu^ his qui aderant Archiepiscopis and Episcopis,
the Archbishops and Bishops that were present approving and giving their
consents. To whom? To the new Emperor that would needs have it so: which
delivers the Pope from having any part therein. And does not M. Barlow trim up
Authors well that pass through his hands to make them serve his purpose?

But now you must hear the trymming of another, which is Cuspinian the
Historiographer, whom I denied before, to affirm that Pope Paschalis was
enraged with the new Emperor Henry the fifth, for burying his Father, as was
said in the Apology, Let. p. 87.
but rather the contrary. For that when King Henry the Father (said I) was
dead, and buried in a Monastery at Liege, Cuspinian writes, that his Son
would not make peace with the Bishop of that place, called Otbert, except the
dead corpse were pulled out of the grave again: which words he says, that I
alleged as Cuspinian his own words. But I deny it, but only I alleged his
sense, as may appear in that I did not recite them in a different letter, as
is accustomed by them that deal plainly, when the proper words of any Author
are alleged, though M. Barlow does not observe this with me, but alleges as
my words, every where commonly in a different letter, those which are not my
words, M. Barlowes perfidious dealing in alleging F. Persons words.
nor often times my sense, but either framed of himself, or so interlaced with
speeches of his own, as that it is a quite different thing from that which I
do say. Let the Reader examine but some few places, as they come, co^ferring
his book, and my book together, and he shall see, that I have good reason to
make this complaint of his perfidious dealing therein. But now to the present
case.

M. Barlow affirms that the latin words of Cusp^^^^^ are, Filio procurante,
non potuit reconciliari Episcopus Leodiensis, nisi exhumaretur cadauer, by the
Sons procurement the Bishop of Liege could not be reconciled, except the dead
body were taken out of the ground again. Out of which words I did infer,
that the Bishop of Liege could not be reconciled to the other Bishops, but upon
condition, that the body should be taken up, and this at the procurement of the
young Emperor. And for so much, as his reconciliation with the said Bishops did
imply also his reconciliation with the Emperor, he that let the one, let
the other, which was the young Emperor himself, who though himself would not
for respects (the Bishop being a potent man) utterly deny to admyt his
submission; yet did he procure the stay thereof by others (to wit, by the
Archbishops and Bishops) until he had yielded unto the condition of taking up
the dead body, and consequently the thing is true, which I alleged out of
Cuspinian that the young Emperor would not make peace with the Bishop of Liege
except the body were taken up; for so much as himself was he, that had let
that reconciliation, as here appears, and procured also as may be supposed
the great reprehension which was given to the said Bishop and his company, when
they were admitted, whereof Crantzius speaks when he says, ad fidem Regis
confugie^tes grauiter increpati rec^piuntur, Cra^tz. l. 5. Hist. cap. 24.
they making their refuge to the protection of the Emperor, they were
admitted, but with a grievous reprehensio^: and this among other causes (no
doubt) for having buried the dead body of the Excommunicate Emperor.

This then being the plain meaning and sense of Cus^^^ian his alleged speech,
let us see how M. Barlow does trym up the same for his turn: Barl. page 240.
The ^ords of Cuspinian (says he) are plain, Filio procurante, non potuit
reconciliari ^piscopus Leodi^^sis, nisi exh^maretur cadau^r. That is, By the
Sons procureme^t, (at whose hands but the Popes? for what needed any
procurement by himself to himself?) the Bishop could not be reconciled (to
whom but to the Pope, M Barlowes notorious lies.
who had accursed both Church and Churchmen at Liege, for burying the
Emperor?) except the dead body were taken up again. So M. Barlow. Where you
may see, that in this only translation of two latin lines, he has inserted
twice two falsities of his own, against the Authors own sense, and meaning.
The Cuspinian and other Authors that have the words mox, fine mora, pridie, and
the like. The second is in his second interrogation, what needed any
procurement by himself to himself? which is a fallacy, for that a man being
desirous to stay a suit, and yet not willing to take all the envy upon
himself, may procure that the stay may seem to come from others. The to whom
could not the Bishop of Liege be reconciled, but to the Pope? Yes to the
Archbishops, Bishops and others, out of whose communion he was cast forth
before, as now has been showed. The fourth untruth is, that the Pope had
excommunicated both Liege, for burying of the Emperor, which cannot be true,
as now has been declared, for that in so short a space as 2. or 3. days,
news could not be sent to Rome, and answer be returned; and much less such
an Excommunication be sent. And albeit M. Barlow for this last do cite
Viterbie^sis: saying, that he lived in those very times; yet he being an
Italia^, and living near ^n hundred years after the fact, might be
misinformed. And howsoever it be, the credit of his own relation is not to be
matched with that of so many other Authors, and namely of V^spergensis, that
lived at the very same time, and with the said two Henryes, the Father and the
Son.

There remain three other Authors cyted by M. Barlow, who are Helmoldus in his
History of Sclauonia, Sigoni^^ in his ninth book De regno Italia, and Binnius
in his last edition of the Councels, all which he cyteth to prove this point,
that Pope Paschalis did forbid the burial of the dead body of Henry the
fourth. But in all this is voluntary fraud, and M. Barlow could not but know
it, going about to deceive his Reader by Equivocation in the time. For albeit
Pope Paschalis did not, nor had time to forbid the first burial, after the
Emperor was d^ad, nor yet commanded the taking up thereof again, as now by
many witnesses, and other arguments has been proved: yet the said body being
once taken up, and carried to Spire, and there placed in the Chapel of S.
Asra, in sarcophago lapideo says Cuspinian, in a tomb of stone, where it
remained five years, before it was buried solemnly in the Church of our Lady:
In this time (I say) the Pope informed perhaps of more of his enormityes of
life, and not to seem to condemn the fact of so many Archbishops, and
Bishops, who had excommunicated him, as among others, Dodechinus Abbas that
lived presently after the fact does testify, and to the terror of others that
should live, and dye out of the Church in excommunication: for these and other
reasons (I say) Pope Paschalis seeing the body placed already in a sacred
Chapel, was not easily moved for some time, to have the same solemnly and
publicly buried; though at length his Son in respect of his honor, desired
and demanded the same.

But what is this to prove our chief question, whether the said Pope did
forbid the first burial, or commanded him to be dug up again, when he was
buried? Where is the Cloud of VVitnesses that should prove this? M. Barlowes
cloud of witn^sses (...).
No one of these three last alleged does auerre it, no not as M. Barlow
corruptly alleges their words. For out of Helmodus he cyteth them thus:
Tanta seueritate Dominus Papa in ipsum vl^us est, vt humari non sineret: the
Pope did pursue him with such severity, as being dead he suffered him not to be
buried: which could not be at the first burial, and consequently must be
understood of the subs^quent time, when he lay in the Chapel of S. Afra.

I pretermit the sleight of M. Barlow here, laying all upon the Pope alone,
Helmod. (...). l. 1. c. 33.
whereas the Author says, Papa and (...) ad^ersary ciu^, the Pope and other of
his adversaries did pursue him, and speaks still in the plural number.
Sigenius also speaks to the very same effect, that the Emperors body lay
unburied for five years, in a certain de^art Cell of a Church, Pontifice id
sepeliri vetante, the Pope prohibiting the same to be buried: which must needs
be understood in like manner of the time ensuing, after the first taking up of
the body. And finally Binnius makes no more to his purpose then the other, but
says the same thing, though he have taken more pains in corrupting him then
the rest. For thus ^e relates him to say: the Emperors body being put into
the earth, Binnius misconstrued.
hortatu Papa, by the Popes persuasion it ^a^ dug out again, and remained
alo^e ground five years. And here you will find a notable patching, to make
up a sense without a Verb, and thereby seem to say somewhat, but flying the
true words, and contexture indeed, as they lie in the Author, which are these:
Binnius tom. 3. page 13 c 4.
C^m hortatu Papae defuncti and excommunicati cadau^r exhumatum quinque annis
insepultum reliquisset anno Domini 1110. Romani pety^ etc. Whereas Henry the
fifth by persuasion of the Pope had left the dead body of the Excommunicate
Emperor, taken out of the grave, unburied for five years, he went upon the
year 1110. to Rome etc. By which words we see, that the Popes persuasion was
not to have the dead corpse dug up again, but for so much as his Father died
in excommunication, and that his body was now taken up, he should leave the
same unburied (according to the Canons, for terror of others) and not that he
persuaded it to be taken up, as it was in Liege: or this was not possible, as
before has been showed. And why now had not M. Barlow recited the whole
sentence, as it lay in Binniu^? Why should he use such nipping and paring in
his allegations, but that Iuglers must not be seen in all their knacks? If his
cause were good, he would not need these shifts.

And by this also we may discover the foundation of a great many of other
impertinent discourses, and assertions which M. Ba^low makes in this place,
both out of Viterbiensis and Baronius, to prove that the Son Emperor was
^ory to have his Father lie unburied, and therefore he alleges out of
Viterbiensis: Filius ossa Patris doluit fore c^^ sceleratis, It grieved the
Son, that his Father should lie amongst wicked men. Baronius is also alleged
to affirm out of Petrus Diaconus (not Paulus, as M. Barlow erroneously, or
ignorantly does name him, for that Petrus, and Paulus Diaconus, were different
Authors, and lived long one after another:) Baronius, I say, is affirmed to
relate out of the said Petrus, that amongst other points in a certain
consultatio^, between the Popes Commissioners, and the Emperors, near unto
Rome in the year 1110. it was demanded by the Emperor, that his Fathers dead
body might be interred, and that the Pope denied the same. But neither of these
points do make against us, nor in favor of M. Barlow his assertion, for that
we deny not, but that Pope Paschalis, for the reasons before touched, was,
after some time that the body had been taken up and placed in the Chapel of
S. Afra in Spire, unwilling to yield to the sollemne, and sumptuous reburyall
thereof, the man dying excommunicate, and out of the Church, and the memory of
his many violent actions against the Church, being yet fresh in all men's minds.
The air cleared of M. Barlowes cloud of witnesses.
But what proves this to our principal controversy, whether the Pope did
prohibit his first buryall, and commanded his disinterring in Leige^ Do you
not see how M. Barlow fights in the air with the wind, and runs from the
purpose in every thing he takes in hand, and yet braggeth of a cloud of
witnesses? But I hope I have cleared the air, and dispersed all these smoky
clouds.

But it is worth the considering how besides this deuiation, he uses both
Baronius, and Petrus Diaconus, in relating out of their testimonies Pope
Paschalis his answer to the young Emperors Commisioners when they proposed the
matter, of the solemn burying of his Father some four years after his body
had been taken up in Liege, by the said Sons commandment. M. Barlow relates
the matter ironic^ thus. The Pope yielded presently to the demand, with a
strong negative, and tells him, it may not be, and gives him his reason, for
that he had received a terrible iniunction from the Martyrs deceased, and in
those places shrined, that he should suffer no wicked persons to be buried
within their Church, for they would not endure it. And all this relates M.
Barlow in a different letter as if they were the very words of the Author, A
common false trick of M. Barlow to set down his own words in a different
letter as if they were the words of the Author by him cited.
and diverse clauses he sets out in great letters, which commonly are great
lies, and not found in the Author. I shall set down the true words as they
stand in Baronius, taken out of Petrus Diaconus. Ad hoc respondit Paschalis
etc. To this demand of the Emperor, about the buryall of his Father. Pope
Paschalis answered: The authority of holy Scripture is against this, and the
reverence we bear to divine miracles does forbid the same, for that Martyrs
themselves now placed in heaven have dreadfully commanded, that the carcasses
of heinous wicked men should be cast out of their Chappells, and with whom we
have not had communion in their lives, we may not communicate when they are
dead. These are the words of Paschalis verbatim, which M. Barlow has trymmed
to his purpose, as you see. For if he had set them down sincerely as he found
them in the Author, they would not have appeared so ridiculous, as he desired
they should appear, and therefore spiced them after his own fashion. For
first the Pope begins not, with that strong negative, It may not be, set
down in great letters, but only says, that the authority of holy Scriptures
was against it, alleging, as may be presumed, to th^se places of Scriptures,
wherein separation is willed to be made, between the good and the bad, the
wicked and godly, especially such are cursed out of the Church for their
contempt, and dyed in the same contempt, according to that saying of our
Savior, si ^cclesiam non audierit, sit tibi tamquam ^thnicus and Pu^licanus:
if he hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen, and Publican.

And we may see by the diligence of Tobie, and other holy men, how careful
they were least the bodies of the faithful people, should be mingled with
Gentiles, which S. Augustine, Aug. de Ciuit. l. 1. cap. 13. and lib. de cura
mort. agenda.
and other Fathers do much commend, and for avoiding whereof even from the
beginning of Christianity, places of special burial for Christians were
provided, as appears by S. Dionysius Areopagita in the end of his
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which places afterward were named in Greek (...),
C^emeteria, that is to say dormitories or sleeping places: for that Christians
deaths are accounted but for sleeps, appears by the Apostle. And the holy
Martyr S. Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. penultima and Po^tius in vita sua Optatus l. ^.
contra Parmen. Cyp. ep. 6^.
and others after him do often make mention of these Cemeteries, or burials of
Christians: and among other things, the foresaid S. Cyprian writing an Epistle
to the Clergy, and people of a certain Church in Spain against one Martialis,
that had committed Idolatry, he accuses him among other points; quod filus
apud profana sepulchra depositos, and alienigenis consepultos permisisset: that
he had suffered his children to be depositated in profane sepulchers, and to
be buried with such as were externes, and not of the same Church and communion.

This was the care at that time, but much more afterward did the Church by
special provision of Ecclesiastical Canons, ordain that Infidels, Heretics,
Schismatics, and excommunicated persons, should not be buried together in
sacred burial, Infi^els, heret^kes, and excommunicated persons, depriu^^ of
Christian burial.
as well for the instruction and terror of such sorts of men, as also for the
reason alleged here by the Pope, that with whom we have had no communion in
life, we should not communicate after death: which reason M. Barlow in his
plain dealing thought good to leave out, as also the mention of the authority
of holy Scripture, named by the Pope, and the reverence due to divine miracles.

There remains then the chief jest, brought in by M. Barlow, of the terrible
iniunction, which the Pope said he had received from the Martyrs deceased and
shrined in those places, that he should suffer no wicked persons, within their
Churches, for they would not endure ^t. In which few lines consider I beseech
you how many corruptions there be, and confess that M. Barlow is a crafts man
indeed. First the Author does not say that the Pope himself had received this
terrible iniunction from the Martyrs shryned in those places, as M. Barlow
does, but only that Martyrs now in heaven had so commanded, but by what
revelation, or to whom, or when, he says not: so as it might be many years
before, and in far different places that the apparitions had been made.
Apparitions of Martyrs.
For that Martyrs have often times appeared to good men, and reueiled somewhat
touching their own or other men's bodies, is evident by all Ecclesiastical
histories, whereof we have example of the Saints Geruasius and Protasius, in S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others: S. Am. seri 5. de sac^is, and l. 7. Ep. ep.
53. and 54. Aug. Conf^ss. 1. 9. c 7. and ser. 39. and de Civit D^i l. 22. c. 8.
Greg. l. 4. Dialog. c. 52. 53. and 54.
and of the apparition of S. Fa^stinus Martyr in Brixia, commanding the
remouall from thence of the body of Valerianus Patricius, whereof S. Gregory
writes, as also of other examples to the like effect in the ensuing Chapters.

Secondly he does not say, that the Martyrs commanded to suffer no wicked
persons to be buried within their Churches, for that were hard, that no sort of
evil men should be admitted to burial within Saints Churches: but the
apparitions must be presumed to have been at certain particular places, upon
particular occasions, where the said Martyrs willed, vt sceleratorum corpora de
suis basilicis ei^cerentur, that the bodies of certain heinous wicked men, such
as Infidells, Heretics, excommunicated persons are, should be cast out of
their Chapels. Why does M. Barlow confine the matter to these Martyrs, M.
Barlows license of adding and subtracting at his pleasure.
that were deceased and shrined in those places of Germany, where the Emperors
body lay? Has he a general license, to take away or add what he lists to
his Authors words? And finally those last words, that they would not endure it,
written in great letters, where does he find them? And if he find them not, who
gave him leave to add them, and crown his own invention with Capital
letters? Is there no law of truth or sincerity? Is it lawful for every man to
devise, add, alter, cut of, or disguise what he will without controlment? Is
this the liberty of Ghospellers? Strange liberty of the new Ghospellers.
There have been now alleged by him about this point some eight several
authors, Cuspinian, Helmodus, Vrspergensis, Nauclerus, Sigonim, Binnius,
Baronius, and Petrus Diaconus, and every one has received his cut. Will ever
Catholic writer be found that deals so with authors? And so much of this
point.

About the insurrection of He^^y the 5. against his father.
Then follows the other, whether the Pope did stir up the Emperors Son,
that is Henry the 5. against his Father. And first I said that it could not be
verified of Pope Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh, for that the
rebellion of the son succeeded after Gregory's death, and the report also was,
that Gregory the 7. before his death had absolved the same Emperor Henry the
fourth. Let. p. 87.
And this I alleged out of the Apologers own author Cuspinian: and moreover
I showed that the said Cuspinian affirmed, that the rising of the Son against
his Father, was by the persuasion of the Marquis Theobald, and of Ber^ngarius
Count of Noricum, now called St^ria, and of Otho which was near a kin unto
him by his Mothers side: and for confirmation of this, I alleged four other
Historiographers besides, to wit Vrspergensis, Nauclerus, Crantzius, and
Sigonius.

To all which authorities M. Barlow replyeth never a word in this his answer:
yet to the former point wherein I said, that the report was, that Gregory the 7.
did before his death absolve the Emperor, he answers thus. Barl page 242.
First this is written but for a report, then which there is nothing more
uncertain, says the Orator. But yet what follows h^erof, therefore the Pope
stirred not up the Son against the Father? A weak consequent. Whereto I
answer that the consequent is good, and strong to prove, that Pope Gregory the
7. of whom I spoke, did not stir up the Son against the Father, if he
absolved him, especially if you join this with the other alleged by me, that
he took not arms against the Father, till after the said Popes death. And as
for the other Popes that followed, Victor, Vrbanus, and Pas^halis, under whom
the rising of the Son against his Father was; and under whom the said Henry
the 4. died almost twenty years after the death of Gregory the seventh, the
testimonies now alleged of those other three Noble men that stirred the said
Son against the father, do sufficiently deliver the sequ^nt Popes from that
calumniatio^ of setting him on; albeit it is not denied, but that diverse years
after, when that all the States of Germany did generally so much mislike the
life and government of Henry the fourth, as by common consent and counsel
they determined that it was convenient, and necessary for the good of
Christendom, that he should give over his government to his said son Henry
the 5. Paschalis the second of that name Pope, being informed by the said
States, of the said necessity, and that Christendom otherwise could not be
quieted, nor infinite miseries, calamities and abuses remedied, he concurred
with them, with his consent and approbation, though himself were at Rome. And
the Diet or meeting of the States was held at Mentz, from which Parliament were
sent, in the name of the Pope, and all the rest, three Archbishops, to wit, of
Mentz, Cullen, and Worms, all Princes of the Empire, The deposition of Henry
the fourth.
to take from him, that was prisoner in a little castle near unto that place,
all the Imperial ornaments, and ensigns belonging to that State, and to
deliver them over to his son Henry; and so was it done. And what more orderly
proceeding could there be then this, in an act of such quality? M. Barlow
makes it a heinous point, against the Pope for dealing in the matter; and
brings in the testimonies both of Sigonius and Genebrard, to aggrauate the
same; but both of them (as always) somewhat corrupted: for albeit he do
allege these words of Sigonius truly, Sig. de reg. Ital. lib. 9. ann. 1106.
which were spoken by the fores^id t^ree Ambassadors unto Henry the 4.
Pon^^fici Principibusque Germaniae placuit etc. It has seemed good to the
Pope, and to the Princes of Germany, that thou be deprived: yet does he
craftily leave out the reasons yielded of the said deposition by the
Ambassadors, to wit, quia tu deterrimo dissidio multos iam annos Dei Ecclesiam
lacerasti etc. for that thou have rent the Church of God many years by most
wicked breach of discord, and for that thou have put to sale both Bishoprics,
Abbeys, and all other Ecclesiastical dignities; and that thou have broken all
lawful order in choosing of Bishops etc.

And that M. Barlow may not except against the testimony of these Ambassadors
because they were then in actual opposition against him, their sentence in
this behalf may be confirmed by one who was not the Popes friend, but of great
authority, as I suppose with M. Barlow, to wit John Caluyn himself, Col. 4.
Instit. c. 11. 13.
who in his 4. book of Institutions says thus: Henricus Imperator eius
nominis quartus, (...) leuis and temerarius etc. Henry the 4. Emperor of that
name an unconstant and rash man, of no wit, very audacious, and of dissolute
life, had the Bishoprics of all Germany exposed in his Court, partly to sale,
and partly to pillage. And a little after: Erat Henricus etc. This Henry for his
very insolent manner of government was odious to the most part of the Princes.
So he. But not to depart from Sigonius, Sig. in ann. 1093.
of whose testimony we now specially treat, he that shall read what he relates
of him out of Helmodus and Dodec^i^^^ touching the horrible abuse done to the
Empress his wife called Adelis, by his commandment, will be ashamed if he
have any shame in him, to praise and commend a man of so monstrous iniquity, as
I for my part do for mere shame forbear to express the thing. And besides
that, his other excesses were so enormous in the eyes of all disapassionate
men, as he of all others may least seem worthy to be produced for an example,
of such as have sustained wrong at the hands of the Pope, in regard that all
the courses held against him, both by Popes and Princes, may in respect of his
outrageous demerits seem to have been very myld, moderate, and gentle. And so
much for Sigonius.

The other words of Genebrard also are cited with diminution, Genebrar. l. 4.
anno mu^di 5206. in Paschal.
by saying that Genebrard comes not short of Sigonius, who says, that this
was done (to wit the deposition) iussu Paschalis Pontifi^is, by the
commandment of Pas^halis the Pope, leaving out the next words, and Principum
qui ad generalia Comitia conuenerant; and of the Princes of Germany that met in
that universal Diet or Parliament at Mentz: so as every thing is here minced
to the purpose, and scarce any thing set down sincerely and simply throughout
the whole book.

And as for the principal point, that M. Barlow would and should prove in this
place, that Pope Paschal^^ did set on the son against his Father; now you
have seen, that those his two authorities alleged of Sigonius, Ann. 996. sub
Papa Greg. qui^to.
and Genebrard, that he concurred with the general Diet in Germany, do prove
it nothing at all, for that the Election of the Emperor by seven German
Electors, having been appointed by the Sea Apostolic not much above an hundred
years before that time, to wit, by Gregory the 5. that crowned Otho the 3. and
annexed the Imperial dignity to the Germane nation, Pope Paschalis having by
this means, besides all other, so great right to have a hand in this matter,
for the good of Christendom, cannot be said to have stirred up the son to
rebellion, when he concurred with the whole State of Germany for the
translation of the Crown, from the Father to the Son. Nor when the said
Son took arms against him afterward, does any probable author ascribe it
to the Pope, but expressly unto others, and namely to the three noble men before
mentioned out of Cuspinian? Unto which three noble men in like manner
Vrspergensis, that was present, and saw what passed, does ascribe the said
rebellion upon the year 1105. without ever mentioning the Pope, against whom
notwithstanding the said Vrspergensis as one that followed the part of Henry
the fourth uses no favor at all in his relations, and consequently may be a
witness without exception, as also may be Huldericus Mutius, a Protestant German
^riter, whose words are: Huld. Mutius l. 16. chron. Ger^ fol. 127.
Henricus filius quorumdam consilijs seductus, aduersus Patrem moli^ur res
nouas: Henry the Son being seduced by the counsels of certain men, did
attempt new things against his Father: and in all his narration he touches
not the Pope, ascribing any part therein unto him.

And this shall be sufficient for this matter. And as for the other point that
he touches out of Cuspinian and Sigebertus, that Pope Gregory the 7. did
acknowledge at his death, that he had molested Henry the 4. unjustly, and was
sorry for the same, besides that it makes nothing to our purpose for stirring
up the son against the father, which happened almost 20. years after Gregory's
death, none of the does allege it as a thing certain, but as a report, which
M. Barlow a little before proved out of the Orator to be uncertain: besides
that they do not agree in the narration in diverse points: and finally for the
most of them, they are plainly contradicted by a multitude of witnesses, which
you may read laid together, both by Doctor Sanders in his Monarchy, and
Cardinal Bellarmine in his 4. book de Romans Pontifice. And so I shall need to
say no more in this matter.

ABOUT THE DEATH OF HENRY the third King of France: whether it may be an
example of the Popes allowance of such murt^ers? As also about the late Queen
of England.. II.
FOR another example and proof, that Popes are wont to allow murders of
Princes is brought in a certain Oration which Pope Sixtus Quintus is said to
have made in the Consistory with admiration and praise of that fact, and that
the friar which committed the murder, should have been canonized for the
fact, if some Cardinals out of their wisdom had not resisted the same:
whereunto was answered both by me first, and afterward by Cardinal Bellarmine,
that no such oration was ever extant in Rome, or else where, but only amongst
the Protestants in foreign Countries, that wrote against it in their
declamatory Inuectiue, entitled Anti Sixtus, who in this against the Pope
deserves small credit. Only it is acknowledged that Sixtus in a secret
Consistory upon the first news of the fact, did utter a certain speech in
admiration of the strange providence of almighty God (said I) in chastising by
so unexpected a way, so ^oule and impious a murder, as that King had committed
upon a Prince, and Cardinal Archbishop (and those two also of nearest blood to
his Majesty of England) without any form of judgment at all, and that a
spectacle hereby of Gods justice was proposed unto Princes to be moderate in
their power and passions, for that in the midst of his great and royal army,
and corporal guards, he was strangely slain by a simple unarmed man, when he
nothing less expected, or feared, then such a disasterous death.

To this now M. Barlow replies with great excess of railing against the Pope,
saying, that the Oration was made, and that the Pope therein was like young Elihu
whose words boiled within him for joy of the fact, Barl. page 244.
like new wine in a bottle, and with open mouth, and stretched sides and
glorious terms he did hyperbolize both the author, manner and fact, and that
this Oration was like to have rec^aued in that Consistory an Herod's Plaudite in
Deifying the Pope, and canonizing the friar etc.

All which as it has no other proof but the assertion of M. Barlowes wild and
unruly tongue, so is it easily contemned by any man of discretion, Sixtus V.
belied by M. Barlow.
especially since there be so many grave men, Cardinal^ and Bishops yet alive
that can testify of the matter, and Gentlemen that were at Rome also at that
time, and never saw or heard that ever any such Oration of Pope Sixtus Quintus
was extant, or made by him in allowance, or approbation of that horrible fact
of the friar, though otherwise as I said, he did highly admire the strange
providence of God in chastising by so unexpected a way, so foul and impiou^ a
murder, as that King had committed against all order of law and justice.

Secondly then having nothing in effect to say to this; yet for that he is
bound to say something for his fee already received, he thought best to carpe
at those words of m^ne, that Pope Sixtus did highly admire the strange
providence of God in his unexpected Justice upon the said King; and so jesting
at my words of strange providence, he says, Barl. page 245.
A fit Epithete doub^les, and fetched from profound (...): for can Gods
providence be strange, which in the universal government of the world, and
guidance with protection of particular creatures, i^ daily and continual?

M. Barlows egregious folly.
Well then here M. Barlow will needs show the profundity of his Diunity, and the
shallownes of his adversary. And in very deed he utters diverse profundityes,
which are so deep, as I think that the Reader will say, when he has
considered of them that himself understood them not, when he set them down,
and much less that he can justify them in the Readers understanding. I shall
touch some of them in order.

M. Barlows ridiculous profundityes discussed.
The first profundity that he utters, is in his first question or demand,
which now you have heard, to wit: Can Gods providence be strange which is daily
and continual? As though it could not. And in this demand two positions are
contained if you mark the matter, and both of them false: the first, that the
providence of God in those effects, which are daly and continual, can not be
strange and admirable: the second, that this event whereof we entreat to wit,
of the King of France his unexpected chastisement from God, is daily and
continual. And who will not laugh at these two profundityes of M. Barlowes
divinity, neither of them being iustifyable in the eyes of any man of mean
capacity? As for the first, I remit him to S. Augustine his learned discourse
upon the miracle of our Savior in S. John's Gospel, An excellent discourse of
S. Augustine concerning Gods providence.
when he did feed five thousand men with two barley-loaues: upon which place
the said learned Father makes a notable discourse to prove the quite contrary
of M. Barlowes assertion, to wit, that many things of Gods providence, and
heavenly power that fall out daily and continually, are as strange and
admirable ( mira stupenda) in themselves, August. t^act. 24. s^p^r ^oa^.
as other things that fall out seldom, and by their seldom events do seem
more strange; and he guieth an example of the daily government of the whole
world, the course and continance of the stars, the multiplying of grains of
corn in the ground, which is no less meruaylous then the multiplying of those
two loaves to the feeding of five thousand people: and yet says S. Augustine
this is wondered at, and the other not wondered at, non quia maius est, sed quia
rarum est, not for tha^ it is a greater miracle, but for that it falls out
more seldom. So as according to S. Augustine the effects of Gods power and
providence which are continual, and fall out daily, are no less strange and
admirable in themselves, for that they are so common: seeing the strangnes
thereof is not to be understood as M. Barlow would have it, only for the
rarenes of the event (for then it should seem strange that M. Barlow should
speak a wise word, because he does it so seldom) but for some thing which is
admirable in the work it self, whether the same be seldom or common: and
this also, especially in the judgment of wise men, as here M. Barlow will seem
to be accounted: but that this first depth of his helps him nothing to the
attayning of that good opinion.

His second depth also or profundity contained in this question, which is, that
this event of King Henry of France his unexpected chastisment by so an
vnimaginable means of a simple friar, and other like circumstances, is daily
and continual, and consequently neither strange nor admirable, is such a
depth, that every shallow wit will easily discern it to be both false and
fond, and against experience it self. For how many such examples can M. Barlow
produce to have happened in many ages together, and much less daily and
continually, and thereby to be neither strange not wonderful?

But now his third profundity stands in another question immediately ensuing
upon the former, which is deep indeed, and passes all sense and understanding.
An other strange prof^^ity of M. Barlow without all wit or sense.
For is any thing strange in Gods providence (says he) which sees things to
come, as if they were present and existent? Which demand is quite from the
purpose: for our question is, whether Gods providence in his works and effects
may be called strange and admirable in our eyes, as this of the King of France
his punishment; and not whether any thing can be strange or admirable in the
eyes of God, and his eternal providence. ^he^e questions are as ^arre
different, as are the understanding of God and man, and the two poles the one
from the other.

But will you hear another profundity of his, in another question. Can visible
acts (says he) be called Gods pro^^^^^^ And why not Sir, as they are the
effects of Gods providence, and do proceed from the same? As when we see
certain effects of Gods justice upon any wicked man; we truly say it is Gods
Justice. And the like when we see certain eminent works of Gods mercy toward
any people, Country, or private person, we truly say, that it was Gods mercy
toward them, and so in all the rest of Gods attributes, though they remain in
God, and be the self same thing with God: yet when they work, and their
effects be apparent, we do commonly call the effects by the names of the
attributes themselves, that is to say, the effects of Gods justice, Mark this
doctrine Sir William.
are called Gods Justice; the effects of his Mercy, are called his Mercyes; of
his Wisdom, his Wisdom; of his Providence, his Providence; which as it is
most true, so notwithstanding my words were with more exactnes uttered, then M.
Barlow would seem to take them, I saying that Pope Sixtus Quintus did highly
admire the Providence of God, in chastising so ^oule a murder: so as I
distinguished between the cause and the effect, and between Gods providence,
and the chastisement of the King proceeding from the same: whereby is prevented
a certain petty flourish made by M. Barlow, by naming the definition of
Schoolmen to be, that Gods Providence is so far forth called Gods
Providence, as it remains in his secret Counsel: but when it shows it
self in effects sensible, then is it called Fatum, and not Prouidentia. And
for this he cyteth in the margent, Aquinas, summa contra Gentes, but no place
at all where (the said work being great, and containing four Books, and
above an hundred and fourscore Chapters) the thing may be found, which is a
common shift of his, when he will not be understood, nor found out.

But the worst of all is, that the poor man understands not one scrap of
what he has read in S. Thomas, or other Schole-men concerning this matter, for
they do not say, as he does, D. Thom. 1 p^^ 22. and q. 116.
that Gods Providence is no longer called Providence, then it remains secret
in Gods counsel, and that when it shows it self in sensible effects it is
no more providence, but Fatum: but thus they say, that whereas Gods providence
has two parts in it, the one which is in the mind of Almighty God to dispose
of all things in the world, how they shall fall out; and the second the
execution of this disposition by secondary causes: this second part of Gods
providence containing the co^nexion and order of the seco^dary causes, The
difference between pro^^^e^^^a and fatum.
is called, though improperly says S. Thomas, Fatum, destiny, for that in
respect of Gods immoucable order in his disposition, the second causes do
work infallibly, though in producing their effects some work necessarily,
some casually, some freely.

Hereby then we see first, that M. Barlow understood not his Authors, in saying
that Gods Providence is so far forth called Gods Providence only, as it
remains in Gods secret counsel: for as Saint Thomas in the book by him
alleged, D. Thom. cont. Gentes lib. 3. cap. 77.
says, Gods Providence has two parts, the one is ordinatio or ^ispositio
rerum, the other is ordin^^ executio per causas secundas, which second is
called fatum, or destiny; but yet is a part of Providence, as you see, and
thereby does M. Barlow err grossly in contraposing it to Providence, The
profoundity of M Barlowes ignorance in School-Diuinity.
saying it is called fatum, and not providence, whereas fatum is a part of
providence, as appears by that which has been said: but yet more grossly
does he err, when he says that when Gods Providence does show it self in
sensible effects, it is destiny and not providence, for that this Fatum, or
destiny consists, as it has been said, in the order and connection of the
second causes, before they work their effect, and not in the sensible effects
themselves, when they are now produced, and extra causas. And so by this we see
in part M. Barlowes profundity in Schoole-diuinity.

But we have not yet done, for that he goes forward against the Pope, saying:
If after the murder of the King of France, the Pope had seen that some really
true, not partially supposed good, had been effectuated by the Parricyde, that
should he truly and only have ascribed to Gods Providence, Barl. page 264.
as Joseph applied his being in Egypt, for the relief of his kindred unto Gods
permission, but not unto his brethrens sale etc.

An other profound ignorance of M. Barlow.
And here now we see another profundity, not so much of Divinity, as either of
ignorance or impiety, ascribing only unto Gods Providence things that in our
eyes seem good and profitable, wherein he impiously abridgeth Gods Providence,
which is over all things without exception either dispositiue or permissiue, by
ordayning, or by permitting: as he might have seen in the Author by him
alleged, D. Thom. 1. p. q. 22. a^^. ^3.
I mean S. Thomas in his question de Prouidentia, not that God is the Author
of sin, or of the obliquity thereof, as Calvin and his followers wickedly
affirm, but that God does use even naughty and sinful actions oftentimes to
his glory, and to the universal good of his government: and so he used the
wicked action of Herod, Pylate, and others to the furthering of Christ his
sacred passion: for so it is said expressly in the Acts of the Apostles unto
God himself, Act. 4.
that Herod and Pilate together with the Gentiles and Jews conspired against
our Savior, facere quae manus tua and consilium tuum decreuerunt fieri, to do
those things which thy hand and counsel have determined to be done. To which
effect many other places of Scripture might be alleged: whereby it is evident
that the admiring of Gods Providence in such actions, is not an allowa^ce of
the thing it self, as lawful in the doer, for that no man will say, that the
Apostles did allow the actions of Herod and Pilate, in putting Christ to death,
though they do acknowledge it as we have now seen to have come by the
particular providence of almighty God: and consequently all that idle speech
which is here used by M. Barlow against Pope Sixtus Q^intus, 1. Reg 2. 6. 2.
Reg. 3. 27.
that he did not as King David did, in detesting Ioab for his traiterous
slaughter of Abner, but would have canonized the Friar, if some Cardinals had
not resisted: this speech, I say, is very idle indeed. For never was there any
such cogitation known to have been in the Pope for canonizing that man, nor
did the Pope ever praise, or allow the fact, as often has been said: nor does
M. Barlow know, how he would have dealt with the said Friar for the same, if he
had escaped death, and had been in his power to punish him: so that all here
is spoken out of passion, and will to calumniate: much also out of error and
ignorance, as has been said, as namely, that nothing is to be ascribed to Gods
Providence, but that which to us seems really true, good, and not partially
so supposed. So as here a man is made judge, what is to be ascribed to Gods
Providence and what not. In which case I do not see how the actions of Herod
and Pilate could well be ascribed to Gods providence, as the Apostles did
ascribe them. I do not see also, how M. Barlow can mantaine his assertion here
set down, Joseph sold into Egvpt by God his providence.
that the selling of Joseph into Egypt by his brethren was not by Gods
Providence, but only as he says for the relief of his kindred; which the
Patriarch Joseph does seem plainly to contradict, when discovering himself
unto his brethren, he said: I am your Brother Joseph whom you sold into Egypt,
be not afraid, nor let it seem unto you a hard thing, that you sold me into
these Regions, for that God sent me before you into Egypt for your safety. And
more plainly in the last of Genesis, Genesis 45. v^ 4. 5. 6.
where the Patriarch speaking to his Brethren, says: Vos cogitas^is de me
malum etc. you thought to do me hurt, but God turned it to good, to exalt me,
as at this present you see, and to save many people. And are not these words
plain, that the whole action of Joseph his selling into Egypt was by Gods
permissiue providence? Or will M. Barlowes profound divinity teach us, that in
the self same mysterious actions, one part is subject to Gods Providence, and
the other not?

The last example brought forth to prove the Pops accustomed attempts for
murdering Princes, is that of Queen ^lizabeth, late Queen of England,
against whose life was objected many attemptes to have been made by priuity
and incitation of diverse Popes; but I desired some proofs thereof: whereto was
answered in th^se words, for veryfication of this, there needs no more
proof, then that never Pope, Let. p. 89.
either then or since called any Churchman in question for meddling in those
treasonable conspiracyes. To which my words of answer were: And needs there
noe more Sir but this (quoth I) to condemn both Confessors and Popes, for that
no Pope has called into question or punished any Clergyman for such like
attempts? what if he never knew of any such attempt, nor believed, that there
were any such really designed? What if he never heard of any Clergy man
accused, except such as were put to death by the Queen herself, and so were
sufficiently punished, whether they were culpable or innocent?

To all which demands of mine M. Barlow answers with great impatience. Barl.
page 250.
For where I demand, And needs there no more, Sir, for proof but this? His
answer is: There needs no more (CVRR) but that. But this I ascribe to his
choler. And for that he brings no other thing of any moment about this
matter, M. Barlowes immodesty.
and that I have spoken largely else where of Queen Elizabeth her affairs; I
shall here pretermitt the residue of the trifles, which M. Barlow for
lengthening his book brings in, spicing the same every where with most
virulent raylings; as the examples of Squire and Parry, which so often have
been answered by us, the former as a mere fiction, for so much as concerned
his sending from Spain into England by F. VValpole the Jesuit for poisoning
the Queens chair, and the Earl of Essex his saddle; the other a devise of
his own, to wit of Parry himself, to gain the Queens goodwill, and thereby
some preferment by telling her that he was sent to kill her, by some Catholics
out of the Land: whereas indeed he was never trusted by them in far less
matters, then in such an enterprise.

Q. Elizab^th no Joy nor Iew^^^ of the Christian world.
But he returns yet once ag^ine excessiuely to praise the said Queen. That
Lady Queen Elizabeth, says he, the diamond amongst Princes, the glory of
royal Majesty, the joy of the Christian world for her sex whilst she lived.
And what will the discreet reader hold M. Barlow for his sex? Truly I think
for one of the most gross and palpable flatterers that mankind does contain:
and as for her being the joy of the Christian world, I marvel what Christian
world he can pretend to mean. For if he will confine the Christian world
within the Protestant world, it is, God wot, but a very small part thereof, and
yet in this Protestant world neither was she held to be so rare a diamond, or
glory of royal Majesty, nor was she such a joy unto them, as there is said,
which is evident by their writings extant, especially of the Lutherans that
misliked her religion, and manner of proceeding, and especially her taking upon
her to be head of the Church, whereat they do laugh, even until this day.

And the same or greater dislike was even in the purer sort of Caluinists, both
at Geneua the Mother Church of that profession, as also throughout all France,
Holland, Zeland, Scotland, and England: so as this little Protestant world held
her not for such a joy, nor yet Jewel of theirs, as here by M. Barlow she is
described. But as for the Catholic Christian world, for what diamond they held
her, and what Joy they took of her, and in her, appears well by their books
which are extant, and will endure till the worlds end: so as the chief ground
of all these excessive and exorbitant praises and flatteries, is no other, as
far as I can see, but the volubility of this Ministers tongue for the present:
what it may be hereafter upon the blast of other winds I know not, but it is
like that the Weather cock will turn. M. Barlowes consta^cy, Scili^et,
Some examples have we seen before of his constancy about the Earl of Essex,
and may do also hereafter concerning Queen Elizabeth, if his Majesty that now
reigns shall never so little turn the favor of his eyes from her actions,
which of all other Princes, by the judgment of most men, he has most cause to
do, as somewhat I touched in my ^ormer letter, and now shall be enforced to repeat
somewhat again for defending my self, against M. Barlows calumniations; but it
shall be only the conclusion of that my discourse.

To conclude then (said I) about Queen Elizabeth: albeit Pius Quintus, and some
other Popes did excommunicate her and cut her of from the body of the Catholic
Church by Ecclesiastical Censures, in regard of her persecuting Catholic
Religion: yet did I never know it hitherto proved, that any Pope procured or
consented to any private violence against her person: albeit, if the
forealleadged Statute of the 28. year of King Henry the 8. be true, wherein it
is determined both by the King himself, his Counsel and whole Parliament, and
by the Archbishop Cranmer, with his Doctors in his Judicial Seat of the
Arches, that Lady Elizabeth was not legitimate, nor that her mother was ever
King Henryes true wife (which once being true, could never afterward by any
humane power be made untrue, or amended to the prejudice of a third, rightly by
due succession interessed therein: Statut. an. 28. H. 8. c. 7.
) and if, as the whole Parliament testified, it should be against all honor,
equity, reason, and good conscience, that the said La. Elizabeth should at any
time possess the said Crown, Q Elizab^th against conscience held the Crown
from his Maiestyes Mother 44. years.
then the said Popes respecting in their said sentence (as it is certain they
did) the actual right of the Queen o^ France and Scotland, and of her noble
issue his Majesty that now is, they might proceed, as they did, against the
other, for her remouall (whom they held for an usurper) in favor of the true
inheritours oppressed by her, not only by spiritual, but temporal arms also,
as against a public malefactor and intruder, contrary to right and
conscience. And I cannot see, how this fawning Apologer, can either without
open untruth, or manifest injury to his Majesty, auerre the contrary. Which
being true, does greatly justify the endeauours and desires of all good
C^tholicke people, both at home and abroad against her, their principal
meaning being ever known to have been the deliverance, and preferment of the
true Heir, most wrongfully kept out, and unjustly persecuted for right ^ousnes
sake.

To this discourse of mine M. Barlow with many bitter words takes upon him to
reply this that follows: About Q (...), legitimation.
First, that there are many more evidences to prove, that the Pope is
Antichrist, then that Queen Elizabeth was illegitimate: this you see what
force it has, and how fit it is unto this purpose, and therefore he takes
ha^dfast of another hold, thus: If King Henry her Father, B. Cranmer, with his
Court of Arches, and, body of the Parliament, did sentence her for such; yet the
same Father Arches and Parliament, upon better ground within few years
renounced the same sentence, and repealed that act. Barl. page 253.
This now is somewhat, if M. Barlow had cited the Act, or Parliament, or Decree
of Bishop Cranmer, or his Arches, or some other particularity, how, or where it
was repealed, as I did cite for the contrary of her condemnation Rastals
Abridgments.

I do find indeed in the book of Statutes that seven years afterward, to
wit, anno 35. of Henry the eight cap. p^^^o, when King Henry had determined in
person to go over and make war in France, as in the said Statute is affirmed,
and after the death of so many other wives had married the Lady Katherine Parre
widow, having small hope of more issue, he made a certain declaration of the
succession, if in case himself and the Prince Edward, and Lady Mary should dye
without lawful issue, to wit, that for lack of such issue the said Lady
Elizabeth should succeed in her turn: but there is no word of her
legitimation, nor of the repeal of the foresaid Statute declaratory, of the
inualidity of her Fathers and Mothers marriage. And albeit I find diverse other
clauses of that Statute 28. Henry 8. cap. 7. repealed by 1. Edward. 6. cap. 12.
and primo and secundo Philip. and Mariae cap. 1. and 8. yet do I not find any
such repeal made concerning the said illegitimation of Queen Elizabeth. And
King Henry himself in that Parliament of the 35. cap. 1. does profess that he
had authority by Parliament to give and dispose the said Imperial Crown by his
Letter Patent at his will and pleasure; which shows that he might if he would,
appoint her to succeed in default of other issue, though she were never so much
illegitimate; seeing all was referred to his own appointment.

But for so much as M. Barlow does make so light account of this sentence of
Parliament, as after you shall hear out of his own conte^ptible words against
the same, I have thought it good briefly to repeat them here, and thereby
show the weight and moment thereof. Thus then they ly in the Statute.

And albeit, most dread sovereign Lord (says the Parliament) that the said
acts were then made, The Stat^te of (...) He^^^ for t^^ (...) of Q Elizabeth.
as it was then thought by your Majesty's Nobles and Commons, upon a ^^re,
perfect, and clear foundation, thinking the said m^rriage then had between
your Highness and the said Lady Anne in their consciences to have been pure,
sincere, p^r^^^^ and good, and so was reputed, accepted, and taken in the
Realm, till now of late, that God of his infinite goodness (from whom no secret
things can be hid) has caused to be brought to light evident and open
knowledge, as well certain, just, true, and lawful impediments, unknown at the
making of the said acts, and fithence that time confessed by the said Lady
Anne, before the most Re^er^nd Father in God Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury
Metropolitan and Primate of all England, sitting iudicially for the same: by
the which plainly appears that the said marriage between your Grace and the
said Lady Anne, was never good nor correspondent to the laws, but utterly void
and of no effect, by reason whereof your Highness was, and is lawfully divorced
and separated from the bands of the said marriage, in the life of the said lady
Anne. And this notwithstanding most gracious and sovereign Lord, the Lady
Elizabeth your Daughter, being borne under the said unlawful marriage, by
virtue and authority of the act of your Succession above remembered, for lack of
Heirs-males of your Body, should immediately succeed as your lawful hei^e in
the most royal Estate of your Imperial Crown of this Realm, against all
honor, equity, reason, and good conscience, if remedy should not be provided
for the same.

This was the sentence, which is grave and weighty as you see, for that the
whole Parliament affirms, that such impediments were discovered by Gods
infinite goodness, and con^essed by Queen Anne in public judgment before
the Archbishop Cranmer, sitting upon the same matter, as by the same it was
evidently convinced that she was never King Henry's true wife indeed, and
consequently that the lady Elizabeth was never his true and lawful daughter.
And did not this deserve, that M. Barlow should have brought forth authentical
testimony to the contrary? For if this attestation of the Parliament, King, and
Metropolitan were good and true, that Queen Anne was never in her life lawful
wife to King Henry, then could not any future Parliament, though never so feign
it would, afterward make her legitimate, or lawfully give her the Crown, in
prejudice of the next lawful heir, after Queen Mary's death, which at that
time was his Majesty's Mother Queen of France and Scotland.

But here now M. Barlow would seem to make some answer to these last words of
mine, saying: that being once true, quoth he, to wit the illegitimation, no
huma^ power could make it untrue to the prejudice of another; Whether Q.
Elizabeth's bastardy were in body.
and then he answers: If the illegitimation had been in her blood, it is true,
no law could make it good against the right Heir. And do you grant thus much
Sir? That if the illegitimation had bin in her blood, no law could make it
good? Wherein then I pray you was this illegitimation? Was it in her bones, or
in her flesh, or skin? For in one of these four it must needs be: for as much
as it descended by her birth from her Father and Mother. But, says M Barlow,
Ba^^. p^g. 253.
her blood being sound, seming allegations and plausible inferences might for a
time dazell, not alter her right, but they being cleared and reuersed, these
second deliberations did not so much establish her right, which was inherent in
her bl^ud, as make it more apparent, and sensibly incontrollable.

Here now is indeed that begging of the question which without cause it
pleases M. Barlow sometimes for fashio^s sake to object against me. For here
our question being, whether Queen Elizabeth was sound in blood or no, he
supposes it for a principle, that it being so, then seeming allegatio^s, or
plausible inferences cannot hurt her right, but the Parliament supposes and
proves the contrary, that she was not sound in blood, but wholly vnsou^d by her
birth and nativity: and the same do we suppose by the authority of this
Parliament, and by the testification both of her Father and Mother. And how
ridiculous then is it that M. Barlow should suppose the con^^ary without
proof, saying: that supposing she was sound, plausible inferences could not
hurt her?

Secondly he calls the resolute, and severe asseuerations of King Henry
himself, and of Archbishop Cranmer and of all the Lords both spiritual and
temporal of the Parliament together, M. Barlow^ ^pe^ injury unto ^. ^e^^^ the
^. and the whole Court of Parla^e^t.
with the judicial confession of Queen Anne her self, before her execution;
he terms them I say but seeming allegations, and plausible infere^ces, which
thing considering both the greatness of the persons, and grauity^ of the matter,
both in the sight of God and man, and the most weighty consequences which
thereof did depend, is the grievous injury that in words could be offered to so
great authority. For it is to make them all wicked men and liars, they
affirming the matter to be true, and to have been revealed by gods infinite
goodness, so evidently, as there is set down; and M. Barlow saying to the
contrary, that they are nothing but seeming allegations, and plausible
inferences.

Thirdly, where he says that these plausible inferences being cleared and
reuersed in the second deliberation, to wit of the Parliament, did not so much
establish her right, which was inherent in her blood, as make it more apparent,
he beggeth again the question, M. Barlow^ begg^^g o^ the question.
and supposes that for his ground, which we deny until he can prove it, to
wit, that the former determination of Parliament, was reuersed concerning her
illegitimation. For why should not this appear in the Satute book, as well as
the former. And whereas he says, that her right of succession was but dazeled,
and not altered by this Decree of Parliament, for that it was inherent in her
blood, we have now showed, that it is a ridiculous tergiue^sation, for that the
Parliament condemning, and disanulling utterly the marryage of her mother with
her father, does thereby condemn her whole blood for unlawful to succeed,
except M. Barlow will say she had other blood, which she took not from Father
or Mother, or else that he will teach us by his law or divinity, that albeit her
Father and Mother were never truly man and wife: yet she borne by their
coniu^ction, had true right in her blood to succeed in the Crown, which yet
the Parliament denies, as you have seen. And this shall suffice for this
matter: whereby may appear what causes some Popes might have, in respect as
well of this known illegitimation by her Father and Mother, as also of other
many Pe^^^nall demerits of her own, to favor the right of her next lawful
successor, persecuted, and iniuted, and finally destroyed by her.

But now as for the other cavil of recrimination that D^^^man in his Book
says, that it is a grievous sin for any man to give consent to the making of
a King that is of a contrary religion, it has been answered sufficiently
before against M. Morton, who objected the same, but with fraud and falsehood,
as this man does, leaving out the principal words that do ensue, which are,
Dolem. co^f^^e^^e part. 1. c. 3. page 210.
that is a sin to him that does it, ^^hat side souer the truth be, or how
good, or bad soever the party (...) that is preferred. He does leave out also
the reason of the speech, taken out of the authority of S. Paul in these words:
Romans 14.1. Cor. 8. and 10.
For if S. Paul have pronounced so absolutely and plainly in the place before
alleged, that even in eating a piece of meat it is damnable for a man to
discer^e, and yet to eat; what may we think will it be in so great and
important a matter, as the making of a King is, for a man to ^ssemble, or do
against his own conscience, and judgment?

Here you see is nothing, but that a man should not do against his conscience
in the choice of a King, when that case shall fall out. Can M. Barlow say any
thing justly against this, if he will not calumniate? I see not what. But yet
he leapeth to another thing, in a far different place, where Doleman says,
that the Statute of Association was objected by other Competitors against the
succession of Scotland, About the Stat^te ^^ Association.
which Statute was made in the 27. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and
intended principally (as it seems evident both by the Queen, and by such as
procured the making thereof) against the said succession of the Queen of
Scotland and her issue, in such form of words, as she being prisoner in
England might easily be ^^tr^pped therein, as afterward she was by the attempt
of M. ^abingt^n and his fellows, and lost her life for the same.

The Statute contained, That if any Act should be attempted tending to the hurt
of Queen Elizabeth's person, by or for any person, that shall, or may pretend
any Title to the Crown of this Realm, after her Majesty's discease, by any
person, Doleman part. 2. p. 117.
or with the priuity of any person, that shall, or may pretend Title to the
Crown etc. then all such persons shall be excluded and disabled for ever, to
have, or claim the said Crown etc.

Hereto M. Barlow answers now first, that they only in this Act are excluded
from Succession, by who^e means Queen Elizabeth's life should be taken away
(not sought) and that should not touch their issues, except they had been any
ways assenting or privy to the same. But to this may be replied; that the
words now set down in the Statute are contrary, which say, that if any act be
attempted tending to the hurt of her Majesty's most Royal person (though not
achieued) yet they shall be excluded. And as for their heirs and issues, though
in the second part of the Statute, when Queen Elizabeth's life should be taken
away by such attempts, there is mention of them, that it must be by some assent
or priuity of theirs; yet in the former part now alleged, there is no
mention; whereby notwithstanding the said pretenders, for whom, or by whose
priuityes such attempts only should be made, are condemned of treason, and made
incapable of any pretense to the Crown: which being once effectuated, the
consequence does easily ensue in like manner against their heirs and issues.
So that this is but a mere trifling matter, brought in for want of other
better.

OF CERTAIN CONTRADICTIONS OBJECTED TO Cardinal Bellarmine: AND what
confidence may be placed in a man's own good works. CHAP. IIII.
WHEREAS among other things there were objected in the Apology of the new Oath
of Allegiance certain co^tradictions against Cardinal Bellarmine, out of his
works, as impugning the one the other, I thought good in my Letter, to look
into some t^ree or four of them, leaving the rest for the Cardinal himself
to answer, as he did very sufficiently: which answer might serve for us both,
but that I having enlarged my self somewhat for the better explayning of the
first objected contradiction, about the placing of confidence in good and
meritorious works, M. Barlow has been so copious in his reply, partly
preaching, partly prattling, without substance or verity, as I am enforced to
insist more upon the matter, then I had purposed. And for more plain dealing
and discovering of his fraud, and impertinency I shall here repeat again, what
in my Letter I set down about this controversy.

The Apologer ^quoth I) does thus begin his list of co^tradictions against
Cardinal Bellarmine. Let. p. 93.
First in his books of Justification (says he) Bellarmine affirms, that for
the uncertainty of our own proper righteousness, and for avoiding of vain
glory, The first su^^osed ^^^tradic^i^n.
it is most sure and sa^e, to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy
and goodness of God: which proposition of his, is directly contrary to the
discourse, and current of all his ^iue books De Iustificatione, ^^llarm de
I^^^i^. ab 5. cap. 7. Apol. 63.
wherein the same is contained etc. Of this first contradiction we have said
somewhat before, to wit, that it is strange, that five whole books should be
brought in, as contradictory to one proposition. For how shall the Reader try
the truth o^ this objection? Shall he be bound to read all Bellarmines five
books, to see whether it be true or no? Had it not been more plain dealing to
have alleged some one sentence, or conclusion contradictory to the other? But
now shall we show, that there can be no such contradiction betwixt the senten^^
of one part of his said Book of Justification, and the whole discourse or
current of the rest: for that Bellarmyne does make all the matter c^e^re by
soyling three several Questions in one Chapter, which is the seventh of the
fifth Book here cyted.

^
The three Questious are these about Fiducia quae in merit is co^^oca^i possit,
what hope and confidence may be placed by a Christian man in his good works,
and merits. The first Question is, whether good works, in a Christian man,
do increase hope and confidence by their own nature, and the pro^ise of
reward made unto them? And Bellarmine answers that they do: and proves it
by many places of Scriptures, as that of Toby the 4. where it is said: Tob. 4.
That almes-dedes shall give great confidence, and hope to the doers thereof in
the sight of God. And Job says, that he which li^eth justly, shall have great
confidence and hope, and shall sleep securely. Job. 11.
And S. Paul to Timothy says: That whosoever shall minister well, shall have
great confidence etc. 1. Tim 3.
I omit diverse other plain places of Scriptures, and Fathers there alleged
by him, which the Reader may there peruse to his comfort, showing evidently,
that the conscience of a virtuous life, and good works, does give great
confidence to a Christian man, both while he lives, and especially when he
comes to dye.

The second Question is, whether thi^ being so a man may place an^ ^o^^idence
wittingly in his own^ ^^rits, or ve^^uous li^e. And it is answered, I hat he
may; (...) be with due circumstances of hum^lity, auoydin^ ^^^^e and
pr^sumption. For that a man feeling the effect of ^ods grace in himsel^e,
whereby he has been direc^ed to live well, may also hope, that God will crown
^is gifts in him, as S. Augustines words are. And many examples of Scriptures
are alleged there by Card. Bellarmine of sundry holy Saints, Prophets and
Apostles, that upon iu^t occasions mentioned their own merits, as gifts from
God that gave them hope and con^idence o^ his merciful reward: and namely that
saying of S. Paul, 2. Tim. 4.
I have sought a good fight, I have consummated my course, I have kept my faith
etc. and then adds, that in regard hereof, R^posita^ ^st mihi corona
Iustitiae: a crown of Justice is ^ayd up for me, which ^od the just Judge
shall restore unto me.

The third Question is (supposing the foresaid determinations) what counsel
were to be given, Whether it be good to put confidence in a man's own merits o^
no? Whereunto Card. Bellarmine answer^th, The su^^^e o^ Card. B^^^^r^in^s (...)
and An^wea^e.
in the words set down by the Apologer, That for the vncer^ain^y of our o^ne
proper Justice, and for avoiding the peril of vain glory, the su^^st way is
to repose all our confidence in the only me^cy and benignity o^ God; from whom
and from whose grace our merits proceed. So as albeit Cardinal Bellarmine does
confes^^, that good life, and virtuous acts do give hope, and confidence of
themselves, and that it is lawful also by the examples of ancient Saints, for
good men to comfort themselves with that hope and confidence: yet the surest
way is to repose all in the benignity and mercy of almighty God, who gives
all, and is the Author, as well of the grace, as of the merits, and fruits of
good works that ensue thereof. And thus has Cardinal Bellarmine fully
explicated his mind in this one Chapter, about Confidence in good works, by
soluing the foresaid three different Questions, whereof the one is not contrary
to the other, but may all three stand togea^^er. And how then is it likely,
that the foresaid proposition, of reposing our confidence in the mercy of God,
should be contradictory, as this man says, to the whol^ discourse and current
of all his five Books of Justification? Let one only sentence be brought
forth, out of all his five Books that is truly contradictory, and I shall say
he has reason in all the rest of his ouerlashing.

This was may declaration, and explication of Card. Bellarmines doctrine, in
this point, whether any confidence might be placed in good works, and what his
counsel is therein. Whereunto, though M. Barlow finding himself unable to make
any substantial reply, do multiply words from the matter, without answering
directly, to any one of these points now set down, and much less, to the
authorityes of Scriptures, and other proofs alleged for the same: yet shall
we take an account of him what he says, reducing him back again to these
heads, as they lie in my letter, now recited, and see whether they make any
just satisfaction for an answer or no.

First then, whereas I required, as you have heard, that for proving this first
contradiction, objected to Bellarmine that one only sentence, might be brought
forth, out of all his five books of Justification, that is truly contradictory
to the foresaid proposition, counsailing to put our whole confidence in Gods
only mercy: this hitherto is not done, which notwithstanding had been easy to
do, if the whole current of these five books, as there was said, had been
contradictory to this proposition. But now let us see M. Barlowes proofs, out
of those books in general. Barlow 258.
All the chiese questions (says he) in that bulk o^ controversies (about
Justification) may be reduced to these two principal heads, either to the
quality of our Justice, that is inherent, not imputative: or of the merit,
whether it be rewarded ^or the value of the work, or of mere grace. And both
these by the first word of this proposition (to wit uncertainty) are directly
cut off. Thus he. And this we deny: for that the uncertainty of a particular
man, concerning the perfection of his own merits does not cut off any of those
things, which M. Barlow fondly dreameth. Let us hear his proof.

For the uncertainty there mentioned (says he) is either rei, or personae, of
the righteousness it self, or of him which has it. Whereto I answer, that it
may be of both in regard of a particular person, for that he may have some
uncertainty, both whether the Justice that is in him, be perfect, or that
himself have performed all circumstances requisite to true merit, though
notwithstanding he does not doubt but that the doctrine of the Catholic Church
is true, and most certain, about the merit of good works: and that in the
said Church, and many of her children, there be true merits, wherein justly some
confidence may be placed, as the Scriptures themselves, and the plain words,
and example of S. Paul before alleged do evidently convince. For which cause
S. Bernard alleged by Card. Bellarmine does worthily cry out. Ber ser. 9. in
Psalm. Qui habita^.
Felix Ecclesia, cui nec merita sine praesumptione, nec praesumptio absque
meritis de est. Habet merita, sed ad promerendum, non ad praesumendum. Happy is
the Church, unto whom neither merits are wanting without presuming thereon, M.
Barlowes follyes.
nor presumption without merits. The Church has merits, not to presume upon
them, but to deserve Gods favor by the^. And why had not this been answered?
Let us hear his further speculation. If the uncertainty (says he) be of the
thing it self, then is it no true righteousn^s. This now is one folly. For a
man may have true righteousness, and yet not be sure thereof himself, according
as the Scripture says: no man knows whether he be worthy of love, or hate at
Gods hands; but let us hear him further. For truth, says he, whether of
essence, or of propriety cassiers all vncertain^y. This is another folly. For
how many things be there truly and really in particular men, which they
themselves know not, as would appear, if they should see their own anatomy?
And in M. Barlow, may there not be true ignorance, pride or presumption in many
things, Much idle babbling ^f M. Barlow to no other purpose then to s^^w his
own igno^ance.
though himself either do not know, or at leastwise will not confess it, for
that he remains not persuaded thereof, and consequently uncertain? I might
name, for example, those two words of Essence or Propriety thrust in here,
either of ignorance or ostentation, without sense or purpose. For what is truth
or propriety, that ^assiers uncertainty? The man would seem to speak
pro^oundly, and so exceeds his own capacity.

But let us hear him further. It is hypocrisy (says he) not righteousness,
which is not true: if not righteousness, then not inhere^t. Whereunto I answer,
that this is not true which he says first, for that all defect of true
righteousness, makes not hypocrisy, but only when a man pretends to be just,
and is not. But if a man should doubt, whether his righteousness be perfect or
no (which is our case) then were it no hypocrisy at all, and if it were, then
were it inherent hypocrisy in the hypocrite, which is contrary to the other
inference of M. Barlow: that if it were not true, and perfect righteousness, it
were not inherent, for that be it true or false, perfect or imperfect, such as
it is, it must needs be inherent in the subject, which it does denominate.

And this is M. Barlowes wise discourse, about the first part of his
two-membred proposition, of incertitudo rei, and personae; incertainty of the
thing it self, or of the person (to wit) of righteousness it self, or of him
that has it. Now he comes unto the second, about the person, saying: If the
uncertainty be of the person, then the second part of the proposition,
concerning merit, is cut of: for merit raises a confidence, but where there is
no comfort, there can be no confidence; and in uncertainty there is no comfort.
Which speech is so prudently uttered, as how many inferences, so many plain
falsities there be in the same. As first, that where there is no comfort, there
can be no confidence. For that Job in his tribulations, was greatly abandoned
of comfort, and yet he said to God, Albeit thou shall kill me, yet will I hope
in thee, and it is an ordinary thing with God to take away oftentimes sensible
comforts from good men, who notwithstanding do not loose their confidence in
him, and his mercies for the same.

The other proposition also is false, that in uncertainty there is no comfort.
For then would no man labor to obtain any thing, whereof he were not certain:
no merchants would adventure to the seas, being uncertain of their gain; no
suitors would come to London to feed Lawiers being uncertain what success they
shall have: and f^nally, not only common experience, but also common sense
does convince these propositions to be ridiculous, and so I mean to spend no
more time in examining them, but will pas^e to the examining of the other three
propositions or resolutions of Cardinal Bellarmine before mentioned. In the
mean space, you see how well and substantially M. Barlow has proved hitherto,
the contradiction of the third proposition, against his five whole books of
Justification, wherewith notwithstanding he says the Cardinal was so pressed,
as he gasped for wind, when I stepped in to help him. He steps, says he, to
Bellarmine, over whom, as if the Cardinal were gasping for breath under the
blow he has recieued for his contradictions, he braues it with some
^hetoricall ^lorishes etc.

This is his confidence, which I grant comes not of merits, but of only
faith, or rather presumption, and therefore I mean not to impugn it. He says
then concerning my answer before set down, out of my Letter; first of all,
that Bellarmines case standing so bad in it self as it did, I m^de it far
worse, by seeking to assist him: and for proof hereof he says, that I,
supposing the Cardinal to handle the controversy by questions and answers,
whereby it seems that I never read the place myself, do sum up the Chapter
in way of Interogatio^, and solution. Whereto first I answer, that the many
particulers, which I do set down out of that Chapter, whence the proposition
is taken, as well of Scriptures, and other reasons, must needs convince M.
Barlow, that I had read the whole Chapter, and so he cannot say this here, but
against his own conscience.

Secondly it is true, that Bellarmine does not handle those three assertions of
his by the way of questions, and solutions, but only by way of assirmatiue,
and resolute propositions. But I thought it best, and more clear for the
English Readers understanding to frame the questions of my self, and take the
sum of his said propositions, for answers and solutions to the same. What can
M. Ba^low mislike in this? He says, that I have wrongfully set down the
Cardinals meaning, and namely in the first question, and that there is no such
thing in the whole Chapter. Let us examine then this.

M. Barlows false charge upon his aduersaty.
The first question then, said I, is whether good works in a Christian man do
increase hope, and confidence, by their own nature, and the promise of reward
made unto them. And Bellarmine answers that they do, and proves it by many
places of Scripture. Thus I said: and does not Bellarmine allow this doctrine?
Or does he not teach any such thing in this chapter? Let the reader peruse it,
and blush for M. Barlow that affirms it. But he gives an instance saying:
Neither Bellarmine, nor any other Divine, either Protestant or Papist, will say
good works increase confidence in their own nature. But good Sir, is your
nature such, or lack of grace so great, that you can speak nothing without
manifest falsehood? I say that good works in a Christian man, do increase hope
and confidence, by their own nature, and the promise of reward made unto them.
I do join two things together, you do separate them and caui^l upon one
only. I do speak of good works in a Christian man, to whom the promise of
God is made of reward for good works, you leave out that, and do speak of good
works as they may be in a Pagan, and for the same cause you say in their own
nature, as considered in th^^elus and without Gods grace and promise of reward:
I do ^ay, that they do increase hope, and confidence by their own ^^ture, and
Gods promise of reward. Whereby I do mean that being works so qualified, they
do of themselves, and by their own nature of meritorious works increase hope
and confidence in the worker, though he for his part, do not place any
confidence in them. These then are the first corruptions used by M. Barlow upon
my words. Why did he alter them, and not recite them as I set them down?

But let us see a second proof of his. He alleges Card. Bellarmine against
me, saying, that he distinguishes between good works, and merits, for that
all good works are not meritorious: and so say I too. For that good moral
works, may be in Infidels, as has been said, for they may do almsdeeds, and
other such good things, but they cannot be meritorious, for that they do not
proceed from grace, and have not the promise to God made unto the^. What then
does this make against me? Nay harken I pray you what ensues: he brings the
words of Bellarmine against me, saying: that if good works should be
consider^d in their own nature, without respect both of the promise made unto
them, and also of the dignity of Gods spirit, the original worker of them,
they could carry no merit: Bellar. d^ Iustificat. lib. 5. cap. 12.
which doctrine I willingly acknowledge, as fully making with me, and
condemning M. Barlow of false dealing, that he left out wilfully in my words
before recited the clause of the promise of God made unto them: and so in this
he fights against himself, and discovers his own untrue dealing.

But has he any more to say, think you, against the first question? or does
he answer one word to the plain testimony of Scriptures, alleged out of
Toby, Job, and S. Paul for proof thereof, all cyted by me? No, not so much as
one word, and much less to those other, that stand in Bellarmines book, which
are more in number, as neither to the ancient Fathers S. Cyprian, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, evidently confirming the same, that good
and meritorious works do of themselves comfort the conscience of the doer, by
increasing hope, and confidence in him, in respect of the promised reward; yea
albeit he do not of himself place any confidence in them, but respects
only, and relyeth upon God almightyes grace and mercy; for that so it may
often fall out (and it is to be noted and borne in mind) that a man may have
confidence by good works, Good works may give cause of confidence although a
man put no confidence in them, but only in Gods mercy.
and yet place no confidence in good works; for that a virtuous life enriched
with many meritorious actions, may of it self give a man much confidence, for
the life to come, though he for his part do not place any confidence therein,
but only in Gods mercy: so as now we see the first proposition of Cardinal
Bellarmine to be true, that the confidence of holy m^n, which they place in
God, does not only spring out of ^ayth, but also out of good meri^s, and
therefore that ^uery man must labor wi^h all study, to procure good meri^s, to
the end that they may have confidence with God; which is the very same in
substance, that I set down in my letter, though somewhat by me abridged and
accommodated to the capacity of the vulgar reader.

Bellar. lib. ^. de Iustif. cap. 7.
There follows the second question, proposed by me in these words: Whether
this being so, a man may place any confidence wittingly in his own merits, or
virtuous life? and it is answered, that he may, so he a^oyd pride etc. which
contains the very same in effect, that does Cardinal Bellarmines second
proposition, that some confidence may be placed in good me^its which are known
to be such, so as pride be avoided; unto which second proposition, M. Barlow
not being able to say any thing against the truth thereof, confirmed by many
testimonies, and examples, both out of the old, and new Testament, and writings
of holy Fathers, that did both teach, and practice the confidence of a good
conscience, he runs to seek Cauills, both against me, and Cardinal
Bellarmine; and for me he has devised one of the most childish, A ^hildish
(...) of M. Bar^^^.
that ever perhaps you heard, and such a one that does evidently declare the
malice of his mind, and misery of his cause, that drives him to such shifts:
for that never man of gravity, or sincerity would use the like, knowing, that
it must needs be discovered, by the first inspection of the book, by his
adversary: thus then it is.

Where I do frame the second question thus; Whether a ^an may place any
confidence in his own merits, and do answer, yea; he leaves out of purpose,
the question it self, B^^l. page 2^4.
and puts down the solution only without question, a^^i^ming me to say, as
it were by way of proposition, A man m^^ place any confidence in his own
merits, and writes the word ANY, in great letters, to make it more markable,
as though I ha^ said, a man may place ( any) confidence w^atsoeuer, that is to
say, al confidence in his own merits: whereas if he had set down the que^tio^
simply as I did, whether a man may place any confidence in his merits, and
answered only yea, as I did, without adding any further, it would have appeared
plainly, that the word ( any) did signify as much as some con^idence, answering
to Bellarm. words, aliqua fiducia; whereas omitting the question and putting
down again the word ( any) he changes the signification thereof, and makes it
to signify, as much as all, or any whatsoever, A notable ^^gging of M. Barlow.
as though I had said, a man may put all confidence, or what confidence soever
in our merits, and thereby disagree from Bellarmine, whose word^ are, as has
been said, aliqua fiducia in bonis meritis collocari potest; some confidence
may be placed in good merits: and this shifting fraud is so palpable, as it may
be discovered by infinite examples. If one should ask another, whether he had
any bread in his house, as Elias for example did ask the poor widow of
Sarepta, every man of sense sees that the meaning is, 3 R^g. 17.
whether he have any bread at all, of any sort soever, and not whether he have
all kind of bread: and so if the other do answer, yea, without adding further,
it is to be understood, that he answers according to the meaning of the
demaunder, that he has some bread in his house; but if he should answer, as M.
Barlow makes me to answer, yea, I have (any) bread, it would import, that he
had all sorts of bread.

And the like is, if a man should ask M. Barlow whether he have any virtue,
the meaning is, whether he have any at all, and so every man I think will
understand it, and himself also, I believe, would take it, and think himself
injured thereby, if any man should answer, no: but if he should repeat again
the same word ( any) in the a^swere, saying: y^a he has any virtue: here the
word ^(...)) changes the fo^mer signification, and import^th as much, as that
he has all vertue^ which I suppose himself would be ashamed to answer in his
own cause, as a thing contrary, asw^ll to his own conscience, as to other
men's knowledge.

And the l^ke i^^ if a man should demand him, wh^^he^ h^ hat^ any s^^ll in the
Mathematickes; he might an^^^^e pe^h^pps, y^a, if he added no ^urther,
vnders^^nding ther^by that h^ has some skill: but if he should a^swere, a^ he
makes me to do; yea, I have any skill; it may s^^ue to make pa^time to his
demaunder: and yet upon th^^ f^ol^sh ^^^ging d^uise of the different taking of
the word ( a^y) he mak^t^ great a do; and foundeth many ^r^^^^ntations,
writing it still with great letters, a^ pres^n^ly you shall see, seeking
thereby to prove, that Cardinal B^llarmine, and I are at debate; he saying,
that some con^^dence may ^e placed in merits, and I saying, that ( any)
confidence may be placed: which is al he has against me, about the ^econd
question. Now let us see, what he has against Cardinal Bellarmine.

^wo things he pretends, to wit, that his second, and third propositions are
contrary the one to the other i^ two points; for that the second proposition,
does ^llow some kind of confidence, to be put in man's merits, the third does
exclude all, ^
and says it must be in the only mercy of God. But this is a very ridiculous
contradiction, to be objected to so learned a man as Bellarmin is. For that
both th^se are true, and may stand together as (...) s^tteth them down: for
that, it is both true, that a m^n may place some confidence is his merits, as
Cardinal B^^^^^min^ proves, both by Scriptures, and Fathers before mentioned:
and it is true also which he says in his third p^oposition, that this
notwithstanding, tu^^ss m^m ^st, it is mo^^ safe for a man, though he have good
m^rits, yet not to respect them, but to place all his confidence in the only
mercy o^ God. And what contradiction is there here; A man may place some
con^idence, but the sure^t way is to place none? Cannot these two stand
together? Let us examine some places of Scriptures.

If a man, or woman had come to S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7.
to ask his opinion, whether he, or she should marry, or no; he would have
said as he wrote: You may marry, you shall not si^ne by marrying, but the
safest way is not to marry: the one is lawful; the other more perfect: should
this ^peach of S. Paul be contrary to it self? An excellent example out of S.
Paul to con^ute M. Barl^w^ contradiction objected against the Cardinal.
I trow no. Now t^en let us see, whether Cardinal Bellarmines speech be a
like: he is demanded, whether it be good for a man to put any confidence in
his merits, or not: he answers, that i^ he find that he has good merits, he
may put some hope therein, so it be done without pride; but yet the saf^st way
were not to respect, or think upon his own merits, but only to put his whole
confidence in the only mercy of Almighty God. Is here now any contradiction? He
says in the one, that he may put some confidence: in the other, the sa^est way
is to put none; this is but a counsel what were best to be done, and most
safe; the other a declaration, what in rigor may be done; no man I think of
common sense, will say that here is any contradiction, and yet does M. Barlow
urge it again and again; insisting upon the words, Ba^l. page 26^.
whole con^idence, and al^ne mercy of God, used in the third proposition, which
carries with it (says he) a double contradiction, both subiecti, and obiecti;
the subject, tota ^iducia, all man's confidence, tota, the whole, whether
greater, or less; whether weak, or strong; whether one, or the other, is
wholly to be cast upon Gods mercy; even as our Savior commands us to love
God with our whole soul, heart, and strength, includes therein all the
facultyes of the soul and body, parts inward and outward, inward of
understanding, will, affection, outward all the members of our body to be made
S. Paul's whole burnt sacrifice etc. And so runs forth, amplifying upon the
words (whole) and ^ all^ and then also upon the object, saying, that the object
affoards a strong co^tradiction^ sola misericordia, only mercy, or mercy alone,
which admits no participation with another: and ^uch more like ^^usle, as if he
were in his Pulpit, deluding the people there, by vain repetition, and
exagg^^ation o^ ^^^^e words, which yet import no mo^e, ^ut that Car^inall
Bella^mi^e his counsel is (though not as a p^ecept of nec^ssity) that albeit
a man have ^^uer so many good works, and may iu^^ly thereby in^r^a^^ his hope,
and con^idence in God, by looking upon t^^m as his gi^^^^; yet to be ^ure (for
that a man may be decei^ed in e^timatio^ o^ his own merits) the best way is
no^ to respe^t them, but only to place his whole hope in the sole mercy of
Almighty God.

And this by way of counsel, and not of precept, as you have heard, B^^l.
page 2^^.
though M. Barlow does egregiously also abase him, y^a very per^idiously,
urging against him, that in his third proposition he says, ^
We must place all our whole con^^dence in the sole m^rcy of God, and th^n
indeed it were cont^a^^c^o^y to that, which he says in the second, that a man
may plac^ some confid^nc^ in his merits, but the Cardinal says not that, we
must, but that, it is the saf^st way.

And the like perfidiousnes does he use in perverting, and urging the words of
his second proposition, as though he did ^ay, some con^idence must be put in
our merits, and not only may: whereas the Cardinal says ^n^y, that some
confidence may be put: and this also with a restriction, vt ca^catur super^ia,
that pride be avoided. Let us hear I pray you M. Ba^lows insolent conclusion,
after that he has (...) beaten himself up and down to prove these to be
co^^r^d^^^ions. ^her^ore, says he, the Apolog^rs o^^^ruation (...) made, and
^ogi^ke, ^onf^^m^s it to be a viol^n^ contradiction; (...) t^o pr^posi^ions, ^
man's whole confid^nce i^ to ^e (...) God^ me^cy alone; and, some confidence i^
to be (...) in man^ ^^^it, will no more agr^e as b^ing m^st opp^^^te, (...) a
new pee^e, wi^h an old g^rm^nt, which our Sa^iour saye^h to ^e an (...)
i^possi^ility. So he.

By which speech of his only, if the^e were no other o^ (...) note, the man,
and his truth may be t^roughly dis^^^ned, h^uing here falsified both Cardina^l
B^llarm^n^ words, and mea^ing, in the recital of both the^e propositions. For
as Cardinal Bellarmine sets them down, they are both true, as before I
have showed: but as this man rela^^th them, he makes them opposite. For
Cardinal Bella^mine says not, that man's whole confidence is to be placed in
Gods mercy alone, as though it were by way of nec^ssity, and not lawful to
respect any thing our own good works, but that, the safest way is so to do.
And secondly, he does not say, that some confidence is to be put in man's
merits, as though this also were of necessity, but that some may be put: so as
this man seems wholly to be compounded of fraud, and that with sincerity of
truth he cannot utter any sentence, either of his own, or ours without some
imposture. What a Prelate is this ^or men to hang their souls upon the truth
of his words?

The other point in this sentence, I leave to be laughed at by his Reader, that
^ogick confirms a viol^nt contradi^tion, between t^ese two propositions, to
wit, that himself has framed out of his own fingers ends. And as for his
example of cont^adict^on, and highest opposition, yea imp^ssibility of
cohe^ence between a new piece, and an old garment, every beggar that goes up
and down the country, Every beggars patcht cloak conuinceth M. Barlow of
egr^gious folly.
with a patcht clo^ke, will convince him of untruth therein, e^pecially if he
have passed lately by any Tailors shop, where he has had commodity of new
shreds to join to his old cloak, and show, that there is not such Logical
contr^diction or opposition between them, but that they may stand together in
a beggars cloak, if not in congruity of decency and handsomnes (whereof it
seems that our Savior only meant: yet at leastwise without Logic^ll
opposition, or impossibility^ which was far from the s^nse of Christ in that
Parable. So as here are now thr^e or four fal^^oods at once discovered, and
convinced against M. ^a^l^w, about this first imputed contradiction, ^etwene
these two propositions. ^
Let us see the second.

The second objected contradiction is, for that C^^d. B^llarmine says in his
second proposition, or (...) to the second question, that a man may put (...)
dence i^ bonis meri^is, quae talia e^se compertum sit, in go(...) that are
found to be truly such. And in his third proposition, he says, that propter
incertitudinem propriae iustitiae tutissimu^ est etc. for the uncertainty of
our own proper justice, the safest way is to put all our confidence in the only
mercy of God: which, says M. Barlow, is contradictory the one to the other;
the former affirming, that we must know, that our merits be truly good, before
we can put any confidence in them; and the second, that this is uncertain, and
therefore it is most safe to put our confidence only in Gods mercy. Whereto I
answer, that if these things be well considered, there is no contradiction;
for that the knowledge of our merits, which is required before we can put any
just confidence in them, is a moral knowledge only, such as may stand with some
uncertainty, as is to be seen in many things of this world. As for exmple, a
man borne now in England, is morally certain, that he is baptized, for that he
is told so by his parents and others, for that the Ministers do odinarily
baptize infants in the Parish where they dwell: but for that he does not know
certainly, whether he that did baptize him, had the intention of the Church,
and used the form of words prescribed, it may stand with some uncertainty,
whether he be baptized or no. And the like is in marriage, wherein there is
moral certainty, that a man and woman that have lived together many years in
wed-locke, are truly husband and wife: but yet for that there is not absolute
assurance, that both parts did consent in heart to that marryage, it may stand
with some uncertainty, whether the marriage were good or no. And so in infinite
other things. And in this our case it is evident, that the knowledge required
by the Cardinal of our merits, is but moral, such as may stand with some
uncertainty; for though we should know, that we have given alms abundantly,
redeemed captives, nourished orphans, visited the sick, and imprisoned, and
done other good works commended by our Savior, that promised life ever lasting
to the same: yet because we know not whether we have done them with all due
circumstances or no, it is but a moral knowledge of their being true merits,
and con^^quent^y may ^^and with some uncertainty, as is said in the third
proposition.

And what now has M. Barlow to say to this? Still he tells us, that they are
contradictions, and sets them down thus in great letters. A man (says he)
must be a^ertained that the works that he does be truly g^od, or ^ls ^e may ^ot
trust in them, and yet no man can assure himself that they ar^ so, ex^^pt he
have a revelation says the Cardinal. Well Sir, and what will you infer of
these two propositions? You say that they are opposite, and contradictory.
Prove it: ^or that a contradiction est a^^irmatio, and negatio de eodem,
respectu eiusdem: here the certainty and uncertainty, that are spoken of, are
of different kinds. A man must be acertained that the good works, that he has
done, be truly good before he put confidence in them. This is to be understood
of moral certainty only; not absolute and infallible. And then again, no man
can assure himself, or know certainly that his works are such, which is to be
understood of absolute, and infallible certainty; so as moral certainty, and
absolute certainty, being neither the self same thing, but much diffe^ent, the
former may be affirmed, in the ^econd p^oposition, and the other denied in the
third, without any co^tradiction at all. So as all the rest of M. Barlowes
tat^^ng, in this place, saying; B^rl. p^g. 265.
That better it were ^or the Cardinal to ac^knowledg an over sight, then to
ouer^hrew one soul, redeemed by Christ's blood: and: That contradiction in
assertion wounds but o^e o^posite member, but unsoundness in doctrine does
wound the we^^^ cons^ience of a Christian: that this may be amended by repeal,
retr^^^ing it etc. All this, I say is but idle, and vain speech, without any
ground given on the Cardinals behalf, as before has been showed. And the
unsoundness has been pro^ed to be on M. Barlows side, in reg^rd of the many
vn^ru^hes, sleightes, and absurdities committed by him. And not to loose any
more time in this, we will pas^^ to other contradictions, objected to the said
Cardinal.

OF THREE OTHER Contradictions imputed unto Cardinal Bellarmine, but proved to
be no Contradictions at all.. II.
AS we have been more large then was purposed, in the discussion of the
precedent objected contradiction, about the thr^e que^tions, and answers
proposed: so shall we endeavor to recompense our length there, with brevity
in this place, for that M. Barlow indeed has here as little to say, as there
he speaks much to small purpose. The second Contradiction then, The second
supposed contradiction.
is said to be, for that Cardinal Bellarmin taking upon him to show that God
is not the author of sin, nor inclines man thereunto, has this proposition:
That God does not incline a man to evil, eyth^r naturally or morally, physi^e
vel morali^er; B^llarm. li^. 2. de Statu pe. cati, and amis^. gratiae ^. 13.
expounding in the same place, what he means by the words naturally and
morally, to wit, that to incline a man naturally to evil, is immediately to
move his will to some evil act; but to incline morally is to command, or
counsel an evil act to be done (which is properly called moral
concurrence:) in neither which kind, may God be said to incline a man to evil:
but yet there is another way, called o^casionaliter, or by occasion, as when an
evil man that has a naughty will is bent to sin, God almighty, by sending
some good cogitation to him, may be the occasional cause, why he commits
this sin, rather then that: whereof I gave an example out of the book of
Genesis, the 57. Chapter, where the brethren of Joseph, having a naughty will
to kill him, God almighty by sending that way the Ismaelite mercha^ts of
Galaad, ga^e an occasion rather of thinking how to sell him into ^gipt, then to
kill him, and so to commit rather the lesser sin, then the greater.

Cardinal Bellarmine also in his answer repeateth again those words of the
Psalm, Psalm. 140.
Conuertit cor ^orum, vt odi^ent populum eius, God did turn the hearts o^ the
Eg^ptians, to hate his people: not that God did either physice o^ morali^er,
properly move their wills, or command or counsel the Egyptians to hate his
people, but only occasionali^er, that is to say, as S. Augustine expounds the
matter, God by doing good, Bellarmin clea^^ ^^^o^ contradiction.
and b^e^sing his said people (which was a good action in him) g^ue the
Egyptians occasion to envy, and hate them, they abusing that to evil, which he
did for good. And for that this occasional concurrence, may be termed also
moral, in a certain large sense, therefore God may be said also to co^curre
morally in this meaning: but for ^o much as these two meanings of moral
concurrence, are far different; the first which is proper, may be denied, and
this which is improper may be granted without ^ll contradiction, for so much as
a contradiction is not, but when the self same thing is affirmed and denied in
the self same subject, and in the same re^pect, which here is not; no more
then if a man should say, these two propositions are contradictory: God
commands expressly all men in general, Non oc^ides, thou shall not kill; and
yet to diverse in particular for several causes, he permits to kill, and yet
here is no contradiction, for that killing is taken in different senses.

And this is so plain, that M. Barlow though he strive to talk some what, for
that he is obliged for his credit, and hired thereunto (as you know:) yet
finds h^ nothing to fasten upon by any probability, and therefore in the end,
having entertained himself for a while in repeating what Bellarmine says, in
the place from whence this supposed contradiction about the different sorts of
Gods concurrence is taken (in repetition whereof he shows plainly not to
understand him:) he finally breaks out in his malice to end with the odious
example of James Clem^nt the Monk, in killing the late King of France;
dem^nding how God concurred with that action, either in general or in
particular? But to this now the answer is already made, and so many ways of
Gods concurrence, or not concurrence, as concern this cause, have been
explained, as to stand long^r upon it, were los^e of time: let M. Barlow
meditat^ by himself, how God can concur with so many ^urthering actions of
his, by slandering and de^aming his neighbor, as here again he charge
Jesuits wit^ poisoning of Popes; which being not only apparently f^^^^, but
without all show or color of probabilit^, and yet most violently malicious;
sure I am, that God concurreth not therewith, either physice, or moraliter, by
moving his heart or tongue to speak so wickedly, and much les^e by commanding
or approving the same. But whether he ^o it occasionalit^r or no, ^
to his greater sin and damnation, ^^at I know not: but certain I am, that
the contumely being ^o intolerably false, and ridiculous as it is, and yet
vtter^d and repeated again so often by him, in this his book: most
certainly, I say, I do persuade my self, that the D^uel has co^curred with
him in all these three ways, both ph^sice, moraliter, and occasionaliter.
Almighty God forgive him, and make him to see, and feel out of what spirit he
speaks. And so much for this second proposition.

The third contradiction is urged out of Bellarmine, in two books of his; the
first, de Clericis, Bell l. 1. de Cl^^i^is ^. 14. and l. 4. de P^nt. cap. 25.
where he says, that all the Fathers do constantly teach, that Bishops do
succeed the Apostles, and Priests the se^uenty disciples; and then in his book
de Pontifice, he has the contrary: that Bishops do not properly succe^d the
Apostles: Unto which my answer was at that time upon viewing the places
themselves in Bellarmin, that this was no contradiction at all, ^
for that it was spoken in diu^rs senses: to wit, that Bi^hops do succeed the
Apostles i^ power of Episcopal order, and not in power of extraor^inary, and
Apostolical jurisdiction, and so both were true, and might well stand
together, for that all Bishops have the same sacred Episcopal order, which the
Apostles had, but not their extraordinary jurisdiction over the whole world, as
each one of them had: which answer o^ mine, since that time, has been
confirmed by Cardinal Bellarm^ne himself, in his own defense, though in
different words, saying: Episcopos succedere Apos^olis etc. that Bishops do
succeed the Apostles, as they were the first Bishops of particular Churches, as
James of Jerusalem, John of Ephesus, and the like, is granted in the book de
Clericis, but yet that Bishops do properly succeed the Apostles, as they were
Apo^tle^, that is to say, as they were sent into all the world with most ^ull
power, is denied in the book de Pon^i^ice. So as in different senses both are
true: ^
Neque sunt contraria, vel con^^a^ictoria, says Be^l^rmine, nisi apudeos qui I
ogi^am ignoran^, v^l sensu communi carent: neither are they contrary, or
contradictory, but with them that want Logic: or common sense. So he.

All which being so plain, yet notwithstanding M. Barlow will needs say
somewhat to the contrary, not ^or that he does not see, that the thing which he
is to say, is nothing at all to the purpose, but perchance, that h^ thinks
himself bound to say somewhat for fashions ^ake, and so rusheth himself into
absurditie^, as now ^ou ^hal (...). Thus then he relates the case, ^
that Bell^rmine (...) place that Bis^ops do succeed the Apostles, and in
another, tha^ ^is^op^ do not properly succeed the Apostles: and least any
should thi^k^, t^^t this is no Antilogy, because in the last proposition ^he
(...) ^p^^p^^ly) qualifieth it, the Cardinal himself ha^h in the v^ry next
pre^ Chapter, prevented that, wh^re he says, D^ C^^e. l. 1. cap. 13. (...).
that Bishops do pr^^^^^y succeed the Apo^^les: then which, what more strong
coun^e^-^^ocke ca^ there be b^^^^ene any two? So he. And what ^e me^neth by
this strong counter-shocke, I know not, but sure I am that he gives a ^trong
counter-buffe to his own credit, by bringing in this reply; for that
Bellarmine in the very sel^e^ame place, and words of the precedent Chapter,
wh^re he says, that Bishops do properly succe^d the Apo^^les, shows him
self to mean in succ^ssion of ^piscopall ord^r, and power of preaching
thereto b^longing: in which power of preaching he s^yth, Epis^opi proprie
Apostoli^ (...) ut, Bishops do properly succeed the Apo^^l^s; and proves it
out of the sixth of the Acts; but where he says in the other place, that they
do not properly succeed the Apostl^s, he mean^th, and so expounds his meaning
to be, that they do not succeed them in their extraordinary vniue^sall
jurisdiction over all the world. And could M. Barlow choose but see this when
he wrote his Reply? If he did not, ^
yet will I not retu^ne the uncivil word, here used to me, out of the Poet
(for th^re lies his learning) nauiget Ami^yras, ^or that my brain wants
purging etc. but I will answe^e ^im mo^e modestly, to wit, that if he saw not
this error of his, then it was at least a great oversight in him to look so
negligently to what he writes: but if he did see it, and yet wou^d so falsely
alledg it, then were a pu^gation rather to be wished for his conscience, then
for his brains.

But he cease not here, we must see two, or three false tric^s of his more.
First he takes upon him, to prove that Bella^mine in the place before cited de
Clericis, ^^lla^m. c. 14.
does ind^^d prove tha^ Bishops do succeed the Apostle, not only in power of
holy Order, but also of Jurisdiction. For that B^llarmine being to prove, says
he, according to the title of his Chapter, that Bishops are greater then
Pri^sts, he setcheth his second reason from their differ^nt power of
jurisdiction in the new Testament, because they, the Bishops, have the same
that the Apostles had: Nam ^pi^copos Apostolis succedere, that Bishops do
succ^ed the Apostles, therein is not one man's testimony alone, constanter docent
omnes Patres, say^h he, all the Fathers do hold it with one consent, without
varying in themselves, or differing from others. Hitherto M. Barlow. And if he
show himself faithful in this, you may trust him if you will another time: but
if in this as in most other things, he still use shifting, then you may trust
him as you find him.

First then it is true that Card^ Bellarmine his purpose in this 14. Chapter,
is to prove against Calvin, and some other Protestants, that Bishops and
Priests are not equal in degree, but that Priests are inferior to Bishops,
and he promises to prove three points. First that a Bishop is greater then a
Priest, quoad Ordinis po^estatem, in the power of holy order. Secondly, quantum
ad iurisdictionem, that he i^ greater also in jurisdiction, for that a Priest
has iuri^diction but over one Parish, and a Bishop over his Dioc^ss^: thirdly
that Bishops in the primitive Church, were not only, as Calvin says, like
Consuls in a Senate, but like Princ^s rat^er in (...). The first, an^ (...) of
which points appertain not to our p^^s^nt p^^po^e, ^ut ^^ly the ^^cond about
iuri^^^ction, ^^d this not much neither, if you consider it we^l, ^or that
Cardina^^ (...) in^ent is, to show, that the iuri^^iction of B^s^ops i^ greater
the^ that o^ Prie^ts, but not that Bishops had a^l the iuri^dictio^ which the
Apostles had, no^ does ^e once name it, or say any such thing: and it is a
no^orio^^ deceit of M. Bar^^^, when he says ^^ere, that (...) ^etcheth his
second reason to prove the prehemine^ce of Bishops above P^iests from their
power of iuridis^tion, because they have the some that the Apostles had.
Bellarmines words are these: Se^^^^^ probatur h^c idem, ex aistin^^i^ue
Apos^clo^um and Dis^ip^lor^m s^ptuaginta. Secondly the same is proved (to wit
that Bishops are greater then Priests) by the di^tinction of the Apostles, and
the seauenty Disciples; and then do ensue immediately those words: Epis^opos
Apostolis suc^edere, that Bishops do succeed the Apostles, and Prie^^s the
seauenty disciples, all Fathers do constantly teach.

So that here Bellarmine does not found his argument of proving Bishops to be
greater, and worth^er then Priests^ upon the succession of Bishops to the
Apostles Apostlicall Iu^isdiction, but in the dignity of holy Order, which is
sufficient to prove the^ to be greater then Pri^sts: nor does he fetch this his
second reason from jurisdiction, but from distinction, as you see, in his
plain words: and therefore these other words of M. Barlow written in great
letters, that they have the same (to wit Jurisdiction) which the Apostles had,
and did succeed the Apostles therein; this I say, is falsely put in, and he did
well to write the word ( therein in markable great letters, M. Barlow sett^th
(...) his own^ fraud in mark a ^^ great le^^ters.
for that it contains a markable fraud, no such word b^ing in Bellarmine to
that sense: nor did all Fathers, nor any Father teach this, that Bishops
succeed the Apostles in Apostolical Jurisdiction; but rather the plain
contrary, as is largely proved in the other places, ci^ed out of the fou^th
book de Pontifice, where the negative is put down by Bellarmine as you have
heard, concerning Apostolical Jurisdiction; to wit, that Bishops do not therein
succeed unto the Apostles; which though of it self it be evident, for that
every Bishop has not Jurisdiction over the whole world, as the Apostles had,
nor may teach, or preach, or build Churche^ throughout the world, as they by
their universal jurisdiction might: yet does Bellarmine prove the same largely
t^roughout four whole Chapters together, showing that al^eit Christ our
Savior did give immediately unto all the Apostles, universal jurisdiction over
the world (but yet differently to S. Peter from the rest, for that he was
appointed to be the ordinary high Pastor over the same, and they
extraordinary, and consequently he to have successors in his universal
jurisdiction, and they not:) yet does he not so give it to all their
successors, but only mediatly by the chief ordinary Pastor of al, which is
Peter's successor, and that also with more limitation of place: whereof ensues,
that no Bishop, besides the Bishop of Rome, though he succ^ed the Apostles in
dignity of Episcopal Order; yet does he no^ in iuri^diction, but receives
that mediatly only from God, by the said Bishop of Rome.

Lib. 4. de Pontif. c. 22.23.24. 25.
And this does Bellarmin prove, (to wit, that all Bishops take their
jurisdiction from the Bishop of Rome) by eight several arguments out of
Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels and reasons in one chapter, which is the 24.
next following, and answers all the arguments objected to the contrary, to
wit, fix by name, repeating often and proving, that in this power of
jurisdiction, Episcopi non succedunt proprie Apost^lis, Bi^hops do not succeed
properly the Apostles: expounding also what he mean^th by the word properly^
Dicuntur Episcopi (says he) succedere Apostolis non proprie, eo modo quo ^nus
Episcopus alteri, vnus Rex alteri, sed duplici alia ratione, primo ratione
Ordinis sacri Episcopalis, secundo per quamdam similitu^inem etc. Bishops are
said to succeed the Apostles, not prope^ly, as one Bishop succeeds another,
and one King another, (in all their power and jurisdiction) but two other
ways; the first by reason of sacred Episcop^ll Ord^r which they have, which
the Apostles had: and secondly by a certain similitude or proportion, that as
the Apostles were the first, and immediate under Christ, when he was upon
earth, so are Bishops now under the chief Bishop etc.

A^l which being set down so clearly in Bellarmines own words, and writings,
hear I pray you what modest conclusion M. Ba^low makes of all that is said.
Barl. page 269.
If he stand (says he) on the place where the negative is, to wit, in the
fourth book de Pontifice, there indeed the Cardinal, driven to ^is shif^s, is
forced to coin this distinction: but yet that salues not the contradictio^,
but makes it greater. For therein he shows, Shamles dealing o^ M. Barlow.
that he mani^estly opposes both himself and all the Fathers. For in
superiority of Jurisdiction Bishops by testimony of all the Fathers succeed the
Apostles, as himself con^esseth, proves, and approves in this place. So he.
And what shall we say now to this? Was there ever the like dealing or manner of
answering, to outface a man, against his own words, proofs, and
protestations? Does Bellarmine confess, prove, and approve in this place, that
Bishops do succeed the Apostles, in their superiority of jurisdiction, received
immediately from Christ, which he has impugned before by so many strong
arguments? In what law of modesty does this lie, to affirm such things? But
see, I pray you, how co^tradictory he is to himself, even in these few lines.
For if Bellarmine were driven to coin this distin^tion, that Bishops did
succeed the Apostles in dignity of Order, not in power of jurisdiction, then
cannot he be said to confess, prove, and approve, that they do succeed in
superiority of jurisdiction, as here M. Barlow affirms him to avouch. M.
Barlow makes ^ely Whitaker to be terror unto Bellarmine. spectatum admissi
^isum tene atis.
And can there be any thing more contradictory then this? And is not passion a
great infirmity, that drives a man to these absurdities?

I will let pass that childish, though malicious scorn which he uses against
Cardinal Bellarmine in comparing him with D. Whitaker, whose name (says he^
though dead, like Zisca his drume, is a terror to Bellarmine: alluding unto
that famous roguing Rebel of Bohemia, Zisca, who enraged with the drunkenness
of John Husse his new heresy, upon the point of some two hundredth years ago,
took arms against his lawful Sovereign, made an army of the common people,
that were put into madness with the same heresy, took Castles, spoiled Towns,
bu^ned Villages, Monasteries, murdered in^inite people, especially o^ the
Clergy, and finally died so miserably blind, both in body and soul, that as
having not any one eye corporal left him: so seems he (though M. John Fox do
set him d^wne for a Saint and Confessor of his Church, Zisca the blind
Bohemian rebel a fit Saint for John Fox.
in his Ecc^^siasticall Calendar, upon the fifth day of February) to have had
no lea^t part of any spiritual eye in his sou^e; for that men coming to him
as he lay on his deathbed, to know how he would be buried, and what sort of
obsequies he would have, he answered most profanely, that they should ca^t him
out where they would, that ^oules might devour his flesh, but that first they
should take of his skin, and make a drum thereof, assuring them, that his
enemies (the Papi^^s) would fly upon the only noise of the same.

This is the witty, and modest comparison that M. Barlow thought good to use
between Cardinal Bellarmin, and D. Whitaker; and of the terror that M.
VVhitakers name, being now dead, does strike into Bellarmine, as often as he
hears it, no less then the drum of Zisca. But how like soever M. Whitaker
might be to Zisca for his sect and religion (scarce settled peradventure in any)
I will not dispute; but for the terror of his drum to Bellarmine it is
ridiculous to them, that have read, or do read both their works. And surely
what miracles M. VVhitakers memory, or skin may work now after his death
(especially if it should be made into a drum, as that of Zisca was) I cannot
tell, but sure I am, his tongue, and pen wrought few miracles, whilst he was
alive. And that is evident both by his own writings, and of others against
him, as well in English, as that of M. D. Stapleton, M. Gregory Martyn, and M.
William Reynolds; as also in latin, of the said D. Stapleton in two books,
Duraeus, and Gretz^rus have evidently d^clared.

And to repeat only a note or two, given by the said M. Reynolds, whom all men
know to have been a very modest man, and for many years to have been a great
Protestant, his censure was very mean of M. Doctor VVhitakers learning, as may
appear by his book against him, ascribing unto him very shallow knowledge, and
in^olerable arrogance, in condemning all Doctors and Fathers, M Reynolds
refutatio^ o D. Whi^taker.
as appears both in his Preface p. 44. 45. and in the ensuing book page 495.
496. And again he shows, page 109. that he understands not the Protestant
doctrine of only Faith, which he takes upon him to defend. Moreover he
shows, page 23. 25. 114. 115. 123. 126. 319. how he contradicts himself
most mani^estly: M. Whitakers ig^norance.
and that this is his custom, which is no sign of exquisite learning as all
men know. And finally to enter into no more particularities, I will cite only
half a score of lines, if they be so many, of M. Reynolds words, concerning M.
VVhitakers ignorance, discou^red in one only Paragraph.

In this Paragraph, says M. Reynolds, M. Rey^nolds confutation ^ 97.
you commit as many errors as lightly you may. For first you understand not M.
Martyn, whom you go about to confute. Secondly you understand not S. Paul
alleged by him. Thirdly you understand not S. Paul alleged by your self.
Fourthly you understand not the state of the question, of which you talk. And
lastly you understand not your self, and the doctrine of your fellows. Thus
he. And presently proves all these ignorances, one by one, in such sort, as I
see not how any of them may justly be denied. And yet (forsooth) this is the
man, whose skin and drum M. Barlow will have to be a terror to Bellarmine. Let
us put this to his other follies, and so an end. But if this do not suffice,
let M. Barlow if his leisure serve him, read the two books of M.D. Stapleton,
against M. Whitaker, Whitakers boo^ not wort the takin^^ up.
and he shall soon see the man's weight and worth, and what drum might be made
of his skin, or rather what scar-crowes, to fear fools, for learned men he
can never fear, that was himself so ignorant, and so ever esteemed amongst
them, in his lifetime; whereto we may add this for an argument, that his large
latin Duplication against the said Doctor, was held by all to be such poor
stuff, as it lay on the printer ( Legates) hands for want of sale: in so much
that he was forced to make suit to M. Chatterton (your predecessor M. Barlow in
the Sea of Lincoln) in respect of the great multitude of Ministers in that
diocese, that he would cause the^ to buy the copies, thereby to ease his
charge, who otherwise was like to be much ^a^nified, if not undone by the
printing of such a worthless work, which of all the works of Bellarmine and
Stapleton, you shall never hear of to have happened, though they have been
printed, and reprinted diverse times.

There follows the fourth Contradiction objected to Cardinal Bellarmine,
about Judas, where he is accused to ^ay in one place of his works, to wit, lib.
1 de Pontifice, cap. 12. That Judas believed not: and yet in another place,
lib. 3. de Just ficatione c. 14^ he says, that Judas was just, and certainly
good, which I say was no contradiction at all, if we respect the two several
times, whereof Card. Bellarmine did speak, proving out of S. John's Gospel,
that Judas in the beginning was good, and did believe, but afterward, he became
evil, and lost his faith.

This was the sum of my answer: and the Cardinals book coming out
afterward, has the same in effect in these words: Apolog. To^t. page 75.
Distinguish the times, you shall agree the Scriptures. Judas believed, and was
just, and good, in the beginning of his election; but afterward he yealded to
the tempter, and not only did not believe, but became a thief also, and
betrayed his Lord, and lastly hanged himself. So he.

And now what do you think, that M. Barlow out of his ingeniosity will find to
bring for maintenance, that this was a true contradiction in Bellarmine? Truly
he will adventure far to find somewhat, though it be to his own shame and
discredit. (...) page 27^.
Let us hear his mad defense. The joining ^sayth he) of the Aduerbe vere ( by
Bellarmine) that Judas was truly righteous, and certainly good, and yet did
not believe, makes it a contradiction incurable. And to the end that his fraud
may be more notorious, he writes the words truly, certainly and not believe,
in great letters. But now if you look upon Cardinal Bellarmines words, you
shall find first, that he does not join the aduerbe vere, that is truly
righteous, nor the others of certainly good at all; his words are these: ^
Fuisse Iudam aliquando iustum, probat S. Hieronymus ex verbis Domini ^o annis
17. Pater quos dedisti mihi custodiui, nemo ex eis periji nisi filius
perditionis. Si Pater de dit illum Filio, certe bonus erat. That Judas was
sometimes just, S. Hierome does prove out of the words of S. John 17. Father I
have kept those, that thou have given me, and none have perished, but the son
of perdition. If God the Father gave him to his Son, truly he was then good.
Here then you see that there is no ^ere iustus, truly righteous, as M. Barlow
has thrust into Bellarmines words. And albeit he says, certe bonus erat, yet
certe is not referred to bonus, as is evident. An egre^gi^us abusing Cardina
Bellarm to fram^ contrad^^ction
These are then two wilful corruptions. But the third is much more eminent,
that he makes Bellarmine to say, that notwithstanding that Judas was truly
righteous, and certainly good: yet did he not believe. Whereas Bellarmine
says, he did believe, and so is it set down in the form it self of the
objected contradiction, saying; that first he did believe, when he was chosen
an Apostle, and that then he was just: but afterward he lost his faith, and did
not believe. And now will M. Barlow for making up of some show of contradiction
against Bellarmine, make him say, that at the one, and the self same time,
Judas was truly righteous, certaynely good, and yet not believed. And to show
that this is an absurd proposition, he makes a long discourse out of
Scriptures and Fathers, to prove, that without faith a man cannot be truly
righteous, nor certainly good, as though Cardinal Bellarmine had denied the
same. Is there any shame in these men?

But after this again, he goes further in another place, demanding; whether,
Ba^l. pa^ 273.
supposing Judas to have believed at the beginning, his faith were ^ormata or
no? S. Thomas e^r^g^ously (...) by M. Barlow.
that is, informed by grace, working by charity; ^llead^ging Aquinas in these
words: Surely in him that has such a ^aith Aquinas says, nihilinest
damnationis, there is no damnation For being once had, it cannot totally, and
finally be lost: nor is it more separable from him, then the essential form
of any thing from the subject, which it denominates. Thus he. And will not
every man that reads these words, think that Aquinas does hold all this
doctrine here auerred, that fides formata once had, cannot be finally lost? M.
Barlow has helped the matter the best he can to deceive his Reader, in not
citing any place of Aquinas, where he houldeth this, for that he could not do
it: D. Thom. 2^. q. 23. art 10. in corpore. and art. 11. and 12. per totum.
but they that are acquinted with Aquinas his books, and doctrine, know him
expressly to teach the contrary, as the Reader may see, if he li^t to peruse the
places here quoted, where he purposly proves, that charitas semel habita
potest ami^^i, and for that charity is the form of faith, it follows by
necessary consequence, that fides formata, to wit, a justifying faith may in
Aquinas his opinion be lost: and hereof no Catholic Divine can doubt. So as
the impudency was strange, in charging Aquinas with this, which is the proper
heresy of John Calvin: Lib. 3. Institut. c. 2.
but much more that in the very place, whence this pretended contradiction,
about Judas, is taken, to wit, out of Bellarmines third book de
Iustificatione, Lib. de Ius^i^i^at. c. 24.
Bellarmine does prove by eight examples out of Scriptures the quite contrary,
to wit; that faith, and justice being once had, may be lost again. What will
M. B^^low answer to all this? will not his friends blush for him in this
behalf? Or will not every judicious Reader make a pause here, and say, that it
is a strange misery of a cause in religion, which cannot be defended, but with
such gross, and palpable falsehoods. Let us leave the^ these objected
contradictions and pass to some other things. The Cardinal has answered all the rest him self; nor did I think it good, that wrote besore him, to prevent
him therein, nor yet to ^asse any further, having proved these first four to be
such, as now you have seen: though M. Barlows defense has made the matter far
worse.

OF THE CONTENTIONS OF SUNDRY OTHER EMPEROVRS, KINGS, AND PRINCES with Popes of
their times, in temporal affairs: objected as arguments against the security
of acknowledging the Popes Superiority. VVHERIN many frauds and forgeries are
discovered in M. Barlow, particulerly concerning Frederick the second, and his
contentions with Popes. CHAP. V.
THis argument of the temporal dangers imminent to Princes, as is pretended,
by acknowledging the Popes supreme Authority, and of so many hurts and dangers
ensuing thereof, though we have ^omwhat largely handled before by occasion of
the examples objected of the Emperors Henry the 4. and Henry the 5. yet here
are we forced to re^terat^ the same argument again: for that many more
examples are objected, concerning the said Henry the fourth his doing penance
at the Ca^tle of Canusium, Letter page 98.
enforced thereunto by Pope Gregory the 7. as also of the Emperor Frederick
the 1. forced by Pope Alexander the third to lie a groo^e on his belly, and to
suffer the other to tread on his neck: of Philip the Emperor said to be slain
by Otho, at the Popes motion: of the Emperor Frederick the second
excommunicated and deprived by Pope Innocentius the 4. and procured afterward
to be poisoned: that Pope Alexander the third wrote to the Souldan to poison
the Emperor, and sent him his picture to that effect: that Pope Alexander the
sixth caused the brother of Baiazetes the Turkish Emperor named Gemen to be
poisoned at his brothers request, and had two hundred thousand crowns for the
same: That our King Henry the second, besides his going barefoote on
pilgrimage, was whipped up and down the Chapterhouse, like a school boy, and
glad to ^scape so too: That the Father of the modern King of France was
deprived by the Pope of the kingdom of Navarre, and himself (I mean this
King of France) forced to beg so submissiuely the relaxation of his
excommunication, as he was content to suffer his Ambassador to be whipped at
Rome for penance.

All these examples (said I in my Letter) were heaped together to make a
muster of witn^sses, for proof of the dangers that Princes persons are, or may
be in, by acknowledging the Popes supreme Authority: L^tt. p. 9^.
adding this for answer. But first (quoth I) in perusing of these, I find such
a heap indeed o^ exaggerations, additions, wrestings, and other insincere
de^lings, as would require a particular Book to refute them at large. And the
very last here mentioned of the present King of France, may show what credit is
to be given to all the rest, to wit, That he s^ffered his Ambassador to be
whipped at Rome^ and the latin Interpreter turns it, Vt Legatum suum Romae
virgis caesum passus sit, as though he had been scourged with rodds upon the
bare flesh, or whipped up and down Rome; whereas so many hundreds being yet
alive that saw the Cerimony (which was no more, but the laying on, or touching
of the said Ambassadors shoulder with a long white wand upon his apparel, in
token of submitting himself to Ecclesia^tical discipline) it makes them both
to wonder, and laugh at such monstrous assertions, coming out in print: and
with the same estimation of punctual fidelity do they measure other things here
avouched.



As ^or example, Touchi K. Hen^^ the seco^^^
that our King Henry the second was whipped up and down the Chapter House, and
glad that he could escape so too, ^or which he cites Houeden, and this he
insinuates to be by order of the Pope: in respect whereof (he says) the King
had just cause to be afraid. Houed. 303.
But the Author does plainly show the contrary, first setting down the
Charter of the Kings absolution, Ib. p. 30
where no such penance is appointed: See Bar^^ in an 117 sub ^inen
and secondly after that again in relating the voluntary penance which the
King did at the Sepulcher of S. Thomas, for being some occasion of his death,
does refute thereby this narration, as fraudulent, and insincere, that the King
was whipped like a school boy by order of the Pope, as though it had not come
from his own free choice, and devotion.

Thus said I in my Letter. To these two last examples of whipping, both in the
King of France his ^mbassadour, Barl. page 275.
and our King Henry the second of England, M. Barlows reply is only in certain
scoffs for intertaining of t^^e. M. Ba^^low off^^^ded for that the King of
France (...) Embass^^dour (...) not wh^^^ped.

Matthew. ^ E^hes. ^.


A wand (says he) was laid so^tly on the Ambassador of France his shoulders
etc. Is the rod of Ecclesiastical discipline in Rome, turn^d now in^o a white
wand so^tly laid on? Again after: Herby a man may conjecture, what the
sel^e-whipping of Jesuits, and Roman^sts is. Will they not s^y when they have
the ^^ip in their hands, as S. Peter said to his Master, Parce tibi: be good
to your self Sir? For no man yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourished it:
which is a better place of Scripture against selfe-whipping, then the Pop^ has
any for turning the rod of correction, into a wand of Cerimony. So he.

And whether it be a better place of Scripture or no, I will not decide: but
sure I am, that the practice is more ^asy and sweet to nourish a man's own
flesh, then to discipline the same; and more allowed, I doubt not, by M. Barlow,
and such as follow his spiritual directions. But yet about this better place
of Scripture avouched by M. Barlow, against whipping, it shall not be amiss to
consider somewhat, how rightly it is aleadged, and thereby see what becomes of
Scriptures, when it is once brought into these men's possessions.

The place is cited together, as you see, all in a different letter, as if S.
Peter had spoken the whole; and yet in the margent he quoteth Matthew. 16. and
Ephesians. 5. whereby those that are learned understand, Matt. 16. Ephesians. 5.
that the former words only of Parce tibi: spare your self Sir, are of S.
Peter, and the later, of nourishing our flesh, against disciplining, is of S
Paul. And not to stand upon the former clause, albeit that it differ from the
vulgar translation, surely the place of S. Paul bears not M. Barlows sense
and application against disciplining of our flesh, which is so far of from
the Apostles true drift and meaning, as nothing can be more. His words are
these: Husbands ought to love their wives, as their own bodies, and he that
loves his wife, loves himself, for no man ever hated his own flesh, but
nourishes, and cherishes the same, even as Christ the Church. And is this so
good a place of Scripture now, as M. Barlow says, against selfe-whipping, for
so much as here the Apostle speaks of husbands nourishing and cherishing
their wives, as Christ does his Church? Which though he loved as his own
flesh, yet does he often whip and chasten, as all men do both see, and feel,
that live in her. This then is impertinent, and nothing to S. Paul's meaning.

But what? were it not a better place to the contrary, for whipping and
chastening a man's own flesh voluntarily, when the same apostle says, Cas^igo
corpus meum, and in ^^r^itutem ^e^igo: (...).
It do chasten my own body, and do bring it into servitude: the Greek word
also being more forcible, to wit, (...), which signifies to make black, or
^lew: as also where he talks of Vigiliae, and ieiunia multa, of many Vigills
and fastings, practiced by him, and other Apostles. Does not this prove that a
selfe-chastizing of a man's body is pleasing to God? What will M. Barlow say to
that other precept of S. Paul; Mortificate membra vestra super ^erram^ do you
mortify your members upon earth. Does not voluntary mortification of the
members of our body include voluntary cha^tisment of the flesh and consequently
also whipping sometimes if need require? (...). 5.24.
What will he say of that crucifying our members, whereof the same Apostle
speaks? M. Barlow little a^^^a^nt^^ ^ith (...) body by di^^^pline. 1. (...).
2. 14.
Does not crucifying imply as much as self whipping? But it seems that these
things are strange paradoxes to M. Barl. that was never acquainted with the
same, but being accustomed rather with the other part of the sentence of
nourishing and cherishing his flesh, by good cheer, soft apparel, and other
delicacies of life, so far ^orth as he has been able to procure it, laughing
at them that ta^ke o^ whipping, quia ani^alis homo non percipi^ ^a qu^ (...)
sp^^itus D^^ because the fleshly man does not understand those things that
appertain to the spirit of God. And this shall be a sufficient answer to M.
Barlowes trif^ing about whipping, both in the King of France his Ambassador at
Rome, and King Henry the second at Canterbury in England.

But yet one thing is to be noted, for conclusion about whipping King Henry the
second, of whom it was said before, that he was whipped up and down the
Chapter-^ouse, like a school boy, and glad to escape so too: now being pr^ssed
by my answer thereunto out of Houeden, and other witnesses that the penn^nce
which King Henry did there, was voluntary, and not enjoined by the Pope: now (I
say) M. Barlow answers it thus: ^a^l^w page 2^7.
Whether the penance were voluntary or enio^ned to the King, who makes the
question? the Apologer said no such thing etc. But let the words themselves now
recited be judges in the matter, which say, that he was whipped up and down
the Chapter House like a schole boy, and glad to escape so too. Does this
import voluntary or inuoluntary whipping? And how then can M. Barlow say, that
the Apologer said no such thing? For if he were glad to escape so too, who will
not infer, that he would have escaped with less whipping, if he could, and
that therefore the same was in^erred? which is yet contradicted by those
Historiographers that recount the same. And I think M. Barlow will find very
few school-bo^es that are voluntarily whipped.

There remain now the other examples of the Emperors Frederick the first,
Henry the sixth, and the rest before mentioned, affirmed to have been
injuriously dealt withal by Popes of their time. All which I might justly
pretermit, as proving nothing against our case of the Oath, though all were
granted, which has been objected about them. For suppose that some Popes had
dealt hardly, and rigorously with some Emperors, Kings, and Princes, that
should no more take away his authority, then it should take away any Kings
authority, if he should offer injury to one, or more of his Nobility. But
besides this, I said further in my Letter, that in examining the particulers, I
found many exaggerations, additions, wrestings, and insincere dealings in the
alleging of these examples. And as for the first of Frederick, Frederick the
first.
that he should ly a groo^ on his belly, and suffer Pope Alexander the third to
tread on his neck, and say, super aspidem and basilis^um etc. is a great
exaggeration, and refuted as fabulous by many reasons, and authorities of
Authors alleged by Card. Baronius, to whom I remitted the same, About the
coronatio^ of Henry the sixth.
for that the discourse thereof was ever long to be repeated by me in that
Letter.

The other example also of Henry the 6. Emperor, whose Crown C^l^stinus the
Pope is accused to have stricken from his head with his foot, after he had set
it on, I held in the same number of fabulous narrations, for that it being said
to be done in Rome, it was only mentioned first by an ^nglish writer Roger
H^ueden, that lived so many hundred miles from the place, and thereby might
easily be deceived, as Reynold of Ch^ster in like manner was, that took it of
him. Wh^ras no other writer o^ other nations, either present (...) coronation,
when the thing is fayg^ed to have been done^^ God^ fridus (...) Secr^tary to
the said Emperor) n^r other writers afterward relating the said Coronation, In
^ita C^l^stini.
(...), P^rt. ^. g^^. 40. in (...). 11^.
Na^^^^rus, (...) ^. (...) ^.
Sab^ll^^^s, ^n An. 119^.
Blondus, (...).
Sigoni^s and (...).
(...) do so much as o^^^ make mention thereof, which ^s ^m^rob^^le that they
would have pretermitted, being so (...) a ^oint, if it had fallen out.

To this last example, and my answer about the same, M. Barlow has no reply to
make, but that Baronius seems to take it for a truth, and graceth it, says
he, Baronius An. 1191.
with a symbolical hieroglyphike, expressing what the Pope should mean in
doing so. Whereto I answer, that Baronius relating the matter out of Roger
Houeden, does neither affirm it to be true, or false, but according to that
narration of Houeden expounds what it might signify if it had been true, and as
it was ^ould Houed^n in England. But so many other authors that speak of that
Coronatio^, and mention not this other f^ct, as ^ow we have alleged, do make
the negative much more probable.

And as for the former about Frederick the first Emperor, and Pope Alexander
the third, I (...) to stand to my former remission thereof, to the large
di^cussion of Cardinal Baronius, far over long to be brought in, into this
place: but there all may be seen at large, to wit, the meeting of the said
Pope and Emperor at Venice, upon the year 1177. the kind and friendly
reconcilement between them, written by the second Archbishop of Sal^rnum
called Rom^aldus, who was Legate or ^mbas^ad^ur to the King of Sicily,
Alexander the 3. ^^eared (...) a ^^lu^ny.
and was present, and saw all that pass^d: whose Records are yet extant in an
ancient Got^icall character as well in the Church of Sal^rnum, as in the Vaticam
Library. He proves the same also by the epi^^les and act^s themselves of Pope
Alexander yet extant, and by the silence of all ancient writers that lived
then, or soon after, w^o m^ntioning all that passed very particulerly, do not
make mention of this act of the Popes putting his foot upon the Emperors
neck, nor of any such spe^ch, as super a^pidem and ^asilis^u^ etc. And finally
he proves the same to be a table, by the disconueniency of diverse other things
there done to make peace, as that yt had been the way to overthrow all, and to
exasperate the Emperor for ever, whom the Pope sought by all means to pacific
and gain, and yt was contrary to that Popes nature and condition, who was
sweet and courteous, with sundry other arguments, which I let pa^^e, re^erring
the Reader to that co^ious discou^s^ and declaration of his about this matter:

Paron. in annal. an. 1177.
Against all which, M. Barlow now alleges nothing of any moment at all, but
inueighing first against Baronius for alleging a manuscript in the Popes
Library, one Romualdus (says he) not yet extant in view, and for ought is
known, may as well be ^orged as true. ^arlow page 281.
And is not this good dealing, when ther^ are so many authors o^ credit in
print, to a^^ow this s^orie? One manuscript, vn^o^h, ^b^^ure ^rit^r must
encou^t^r the credit of them all. Ba^l. page 269.
So he. And ag^ine after he tea^meth the said Rom^aldus, A Vatican Desk-creeper
etc. But the answer is easy, that the printing o^ a book, makes it not of
greater authority: for then no work had been of authority, some hundred
years ago when there was no print in the world, but all were manuscripts. And
as for the truth of this s^orie, Baronius touches so many particulers of the
two Libraries where the work is extant in Gothicall characters, which every
man may see and read, as no probable doubt can be that he has devised or
feigned it; Walthramu^ so often obiec^ed of no credit.
as there may well be of VValthramus Naumburg^nsis so often alleged against
us, of whom notwithstanding we have no other certainety then the credit of
Flaccus Illyricus the Lutheran, which with us is very small: whereas Baronius
remitteth all men to these two ancient manuscripts, still exta^t and to be
seen by all that will. And as for some later writers objected by M. Barlow to
have affirmed the same of Frederick, Baronius his answer after many other
proofs, is this: Si quid huiusmodi per Alexandrum Papam etc. If any such thing
had been done by Alexander the Pope, how would these writers, that were present
and wrote every least thing that was done, yea did set down every seu^rall
thing, in the very words that they were sp^ken there, and that with all
diligence, as we have seen now the Kings Legate Romualdus to have done: ^^ron.
Tom. 12. (...). R^^. page 7^.
how I say, is it probable, that they would have pretermitted this matter, so
strange, so new, so mon^^rous for the indecency thereof, there being also so
many emulators, and of faction against the Pope? Would no one of them set it
down in their writings, or so much as make mention thereof? So Ba^o^ius.

There follows in the third place, the story of the Emperor Philip, of which
I wrote thus before: Let. page 1^1.
That also of the Emperor Philip, affirmed to be slain by Otho his opposite
Emperor, at the incitatio^ of Pope Innocentius the third, is a mere slander,
for that according to all histories, not Otho the ^mperour, but another Otho
named of VVitil^spacke a private man, and one of his own Court, upon a private
grudg did slay him. Albeit Vrspergensis, that followed the ^action of the
Emperors against the Popes, do write, that he had heard related by some the
speech here set down, that Innoce^tius should say, that he would take the
Crown from Philip, or Philip should take the Myter from him: yet he says
expresly^ quod non erat credendum, that it was not to be believed. And yet is
it cited here by our Apologer, as an undoubted truth, upon the only authority
of Vrspergensis in the margent.

To this also M. Barlow has very little to reply, and might well have held his
peace; but that he saw himself obliged to say somewhat. Wherefore first he
grants, that such a mistaking of one Otho for the other, might be in so
intricat a Story. Then he goes about yet further to amend the matter, by this
evasion, that it was not said, that Philip was slain by Otho the Emperor his
hands, but that Otho slew him, which may ^e re^^rred (says he) to his means,
rather then to his hands. But what is this to our purpose, who do seek which
of the Otho's did slay Philip? And Vrspergensis who then lived, says, that he
was slain by Otho the Count, without any mention in the world of any
procurement thereof by Otho the Emperor, and much less of the Pope; howbeit M.
Barlow makes one Nicolas Cisucrus (o^ whom yet I had otherways no notice^ to
tell us out o^ Vrspergensis, That not long after the p^ace was concluded
mutual^y, what ^y the Pope, what by Otho, betw^ne them BOTH, Philip, was
murdered in his Chamber, and ^laine: putting the words, what by the Pope, what
by Otho in di^^erent letters, and then the word BOTH in capital characters, to
make his lie more visible, which otherways was gros^e enough of it self. ^or
^^re I am, that no such thing is to be ^ound in Vrsp^rgens^s: and if Cis^erus
relate no other then he has of him, it is very probable that he has as
little, and that all is framed out of the forge of M. Barlows chymerical
invention. And as for the distinction, which he makes in the same place,
between Conradus a Lich^^na^, and Abbot Vrspergensis, I shall a little after in
this Chapter, upon another occasion, show it to be no more, then there is
between Wiliima Barlow, and William ^incolne, as he styles hims^l^e in the
end of his Epistle to his Majesty, to wit, that it is one and the self same
man, and it is but a dream of M. Barlow to make them two.

So likewise touching the other distinction^ set down in the words before
alleged, that the (...) mark re^erred to Otho the Emperors means, as w^ll,
or rather, ^^en to (...) hands; there shall need no further r^futation, (...)
the Apology it self, saying: Apolog. page 72. About Philip the Emper^r ^laine
not by Otho the ^mp^ror, but by Otho the C^u^t. (...).
Whereupon the Pope sti^^ed up ^^aith he) Otho against him, who sl^^^ him, and
presently went to Rome and was crowned Emperor by the Pope. Do not these words
affirm plainly, that Otho the Emperor, and not Otho the Count slew Philip?
And yet does his Author Vrsp^rg^nsis cited in the margent affirm expressly,
that Otho the Count, and not Otho the Emperor slew him, as now has been said,
which M. Barlow here grants, though with an exception, saying: For the Count
he is plain, of the Emperor he says nothing: silence omits the relation,
excuses not the guilt. By which words it seems that he would say, that
albeit Otho the Count did sl^^ Philip, yet Oth^ the Emperor had his hand
therein. But what one author can he alleadg of any credit, that says the same?
He alleges for a coniect^re, and vrg^th the words of the Pope before cyted;
that he would either take from Philip his crown, or Philip should take from
him his M^t^r, which being related only by Vrspergensis, as a (...), he adds
notwithstanding, quod non erat cr^den^^^, that it was not to be believed: which
word^ M Bar^^^ now corre^t^th, s^^ing, that his true words are, dissi(...), and
vi^ credendum, which he Eng^isheth thu^; (...), was a hard thing to be related,
and scarsely (...), wherein you see that he helps the dye (to use M. M^^ton^
phrase) by a favorable translation. The substance is not any thing different
from the sum of his words which I set down before.

There ensues in the fourth place, the objection about the ^mperour Frederi^k
the second, L^tt^ page 1^1.
of who^ I wrote in my Letter thus. The like may be said of the tale of
Frederick the second, attempted to have been poisoned, first in Apulia by Pope
Innocentius the 4. and afterward effectuated by one Man^redus, as hired by the
Pope: which is a very tale indeed, and a malicious tale. For that he which
shall read all the Authors that write of his life, or death, as In vita
Inno^e^. 4.
Platina (whom the Protestants hold for free in speaking evil of diverse Popes)
Lib. 2. D^^ad l. 75
Blondus, Tom. 2. Enne. 9. l. 6 non long ante finem.
Sabellicus, Part. 2. genesis 41. an^ 1247.
Nauclerus, Lib. 8. c. 18 su^^ Saxoniae.
Crantzius, In fine l. 18.
Sigonius, and others, shall find, that as they write very wicked things
committed by him in his life: so talking of his first danger in Apulia by
greiuous sickness, they make for the most part no mention of poison at all, and
much les^e as procured by Pope Innocen^ius, praised ^ land. v^i supra.
for a very holy man, and to have proceeded justly against Fred^ricke. And
s^condly for his death, they agree all, that it was not by poison, but by
stop^ing his breath and stifeling him in his b^d with a pillow, by Man^redus
his own bastard-Sonne, to whom he had given the Princedome of Ta^entum, for
(...) l^a^t he should take it ^ro^ him again, and b^stow it upon Conradus his
other son. But that the Pope was privy to this, or hired him to do the fact,
as our Apologer a^^irmeth, there is no one word or syllable in these Authors
thero^.

But you will sa^, that he cyteth one Petrus de Vineis in his margent, Petrus
de Vi^eis lib. 2. ^p^st. 2. and (...) vita (...).
and Cus^^nian in the life of Frederick, both which are but one Author; for
that Cuspiniam p^of^sseth to t^ke what he says, out of Petrus de Vin^^s, which
Petrus was a servant to Frederick, and a professed enemy to the Pope, and
wrote so parti^lly of this contention, as Pope Innocentius himself wrote
Libros Apologe^i^os^ (as Blondus record^th) Apologeticall Books, (...).
to confute the l^e^ of this Pet^us de Vin^^s in his li^e time. And yet you
must note, that ^^ auouc^eth not all that our Apologer does, with so much
stomach, or affirmative ^ssertion. For thus relates Cuspinian the matter out
of Petrus de Vineis: Non potuit ca^ere, etc. The Emperor could not avoid, but
when he returned into Apulia he perished with poison, the 27. year of his
reign, and 57. of his age, on the very same day that he was made Emperor. For
whereas at the town of Horenzola in Apulia, having received poison he was
da^gerously sick, and at length, by diligence of Physicians, had overcome the
same, he was s^ifeled by Man^redus his bastard-sonne, begotten of a noble woman
his Concubine, with a pillow thrust into his mouth, whether it were, that
Man^redus did it as corrupted by his enemies, or by the Pope, or for that he
did aspire to the Kingdom of Sicilia. So he

And albeit, as you see, he says more herein against the Pope, Enforcing of
matters against the Pope.
then any of the other Authors before mentioned for that he desired to cast
some suspicions upon him: yet does he it not with that bold asseueration, that
our Apologer does, saying: That both his first sickness was by poison of the
Popes procurement, and his murdering afterward by hyring of Manfredus to
poison him again: whereas the other ascribes not the first poisoning to the
Pope (if he were poisoned) neither does so much as mention the second poison,
but only the stifeling, and finally leaves it doubtful, whether the same
proceeded from the Emperors enemies, or from the Pope, or from his Sons own
ambition, and emulation against his brother.

Thus much I wrote then. Whereunto now M. Barlow endeavors to make a large
reply, but without any re^utation in e^fect, of that which is said: only in
words he seems to wrangle, wherein I mean not to follow him, but with
breuity, to see whether any thing in substance be contrary to that which here
is set down. The points in controversy are: First, whether Frederick the
Emperor dyed by poison: then whether he were murdered by stopping his mouth
with a pillow by Man^redus his Son: and thirdly whether the Pope had any part
in the one or the other.

The first two points are of small importance to our purpose, but only the
third. About the first that ^e died of poison, my words were, that the most
part of Authors make no mention thereof; but whether they do or not, it little
impo^teth. M. Barlow replieth to this, saying: That he was poisoned, there are
as many ^or it, as otherwise: Cus^inian, Petrus de Vineis, and Matthaeus
Pari^tensis. W^erto I answer, that these three will not make one sure witness
in this matter: for the first is of small credit, and withal so variable in
his tale, as within the compass of six lines he contradicts notably himself.
For having said, that v^n^no p^r^t, he died of poison, in the same place he
says, that by help of his Physicians he overcame the poison, and was stifled
by Man^red. And so our question being, whether he died of poison, Cuspinian
says in the last place, no, but that he recovered of the same, and was choked
with a pillow. Let M. Barlow tell us which we shall believe: for that, he
recovered, and died of the same poison, is a clear contradiction, and then I
shall answer him further.

Neither can Petrus de Vineis, as after I shall show, be a witness at all, for
this poison. And truly it S. Augustine i^s^ed at the Jews because against the
truth of Christ's resurrection they brought forth dormientes testes, Aug. in
^sal. ^3.
sleeping witnesses, much more may we laugh at M. Barlow, for producing the
blind braineles carcass of this Peter, to write and testify what passed a
year after his death. For albeit there may be some mistaking in the sense of
Cuspinian, who (as M. Barlow afterward tells us) prefereth this Petrus de
Vineis before the Italian writers (because he fitted his humor best) for the
truth of those things he writes of Frederick; Barl. page 2^4. in ^in^ and 295.
yet more exactly reading that Author, I find that he speaks not of his
death, but of the other accide^ts of that ^mp^rours life, to which that
testimony of Petrus de Vin^is only by him is applied, which at the first sight,
may seem to be referred unto all, I mean, as well to his death, as life. But
M. Barlow his errors are so gross in this affayre, as they can be excused by
no mistaking: for he does not only often au^^re, that all which Cuspinian has,
is taken out of Petrus de ^ineis, but sets down, and that in a different
letter, the very words as he would have them seem of this Author, saying:
Barl. page 291.
In Apuliam rediens veneno per^^t, says Petrus de Vineis. Returning into
Apulia he perished by poison; and then cites in the margent Epist. lib. 2. But
all is cogging and notorious forgery, as more at large shall afterward be
showed, when we shall handle this authority more in particular.

And for the third witness, brought in for a supplement by M. Barlow, to wit,
Matth^us Parisiensis, I say, that neither he can be a sure witness of this
poisoning, for that he affirms it not with that certainty, which M. Barlow
assures his Reader, B^rl. page 291.
when he says, Certain it is, and therein most agree, that the Emperor was
drenched, and had taken in the poison before he came to Apulia, potionatus
venit in Apul^am, says Matthew Paris. But here I must call upon M. Barlows
vnsincerity in alleging Matthaeus Parisiensis, M. Barlows Iugling.
to his own purpose, and ^^auing out that which served not his turn. Matth^ws
words are: ^edijt in Apuliam, vt dici^^^ potionatus; he return^d into Ap^lia,
as it is said, drenched. Why should M. Barlow leave out the words (as it is
said) and yet infer a certainty upon his words? Is this plain dealing?

And as for the second point; to wit, whether he died by poison, or by
stifeling, M. Barlow though he allege Nau^le^us, yet confes^eth, that allbeit
he make mention of poison, yet does he no^ determine it. But I do add further,
that the same Nauclerus, in the very same place, and in the words immediately
following, affirms the very same that I do say, that is, that the most part
of Authors do affirm, that he was killed by his bastard son Mansredus.

Binnius also, he says, is doubtful, in respect of the variance of writers.
^^^dem.
But by his leave, he houldeth the opinion of his stifeling for probable: and
lastly he says, that S^^^nius houldeth that he died of poison in Apulia. But
this is little to the purpose. For what Authors besides Sigonius, or sound
arguments, does M. Barlow bring to prove, that the death of this Emperor
Frederick was by poison, and not by stifeling? Whereas, first we have for the
later, in some sort Sigonius himself, confe^^ing that it was so reported, but
more assertiue by Vincentius, Ioannes Villan^s, S. Antoninus, Blondus, Platina,
Sabellicus, Thomas Fazelius, Crant^ius, Paulus Lingius, Cuspinian, Barl. page
290.
and others, whom we omit; for that these may suffice, to convince the Apologer
affirming resolutely, that he died of poison, which is the case now in question
between us, and denied by me.

And ^ere by the way (gentle Reader) I cannot omit (having since the printing
of my Letter, ^allen upon another edition o^ Cuspinian, with large annotations
upon the same, by one VVolfgangus Hungerus, a Dutch m^n) to let thee know also
his judgment herein: who having much travailed, as it seems, to si^t, and
search out the truth of this matter, rejects both the one, and the other
opinion as fabulous, and proves largely, that he died of a fever, and that
also very repentant. To which we may add the testimony of Abbas Stadensis, and
Matthaeus Pari^iensis, who making mention of his final repentance, absolution
from Censures, and putting on the habit of the Cistercia^ Monks, have nothing
of the poison, or pillow, which Matthew yet living at that time, by all
likelihood, should have heard of the same, if any such thing had happened. And
with the former Authors agrees also Scardius the Caluinist in the li^e of this
Emperor. And therefore that he should dye of poison, is of all the rest most
improbable: and it argues small sincerity in M. Barlow, in so resolute terms
to affirm uncertainties, only to disgrace the Sea of Rome, which yet will more
fully apeare by that, which is now to ensue in the third point; to wit, whether
Pope Innocentius procured his death, which M. Barlow goes about to prove thus.

No Author freeth the Pope, says he, from this matter: the only freedom which
they give him, is their silence o^ him. And is not this S^r a good freing? I^
you had been alive at that time and should now be accused to have had part in
that fact, were it not a good freeing of you to say, the Authors that wrote
thereof, never so much as mentioned you? Bu^ let us hear you further: Their
freeing of him is by their silence of ^im, sa^e only one, to w^t Matthaeus
Parisiensis, who acquitteth him thus: That indeed the enemies of the Church
gave it out, Barlow page 29^.
that the Pope had hired one, what with money, what with promises, to poison
him^ but does he free him thereby? God knows, says he, whether it were true or not, but (absorduit Domini Pap^ s^ma per hoc non mediocriter) the Pope got him
a soul name by it: quoth that very Author. Thus M. Barlow. But what proves
this very Author against the Pope in this matter? to wit, that he was infamed
by the enemies of the Church. And may not this happen to the holiest man that
is? And did it not happen to our Savior hims^l^e, and S. Paul, and other great
Servants of God? And is the infamation of enemies sufficient with you, M.
Barlow, to condemn a man?

But now for this very Author, brought in here by M. Barlow, and urged against
the Pope, why does he alleadg him so ca^telously, and with such sleights? Why
had he not told us plainly, what he finds in him, concerning the credit o^
this his relation? Why does he so closely cover and mince the narration, by
telling us a part, and not the whole, as it lies in the Author? He says, that
the Pope was reported to hyre one to poison the Emperor, but he tells not,
who that one was, though his Author does, and makes a large declaration thereof
in this very place cited by M. Barlow, and says, it is was Petrus de Vineis,
as afterward shall be further declared, when we come to discuss M. Barlows
inf^llible demonstrations, which he brings in for proof, that the Emperor
was poisoned by the Pope, the chiefest of which is the authority of this Petrus
de Vineis, whom M. Barlow there exalt^th above the clouds: but we shall so
pull him down, as he shall be brought under the earth, and rotten also before
that Frederick died, and so not in case to testify that, for which he is
alleged.

And ^or that M. Barl. to conclude more forcibly against me, and more evidently
convince, that the Emperor was poisoned by the Pope, lays down two sorts of
proofs, the one which he calls strong presumptions, and violent inducements;
the other which he makes more sure and e^iden^: I shall for once be content
exactly to examine them both, and see what weight, or moment they carry with
them, and whether they be sure foundations to build so much upon, as M. Barlow
would make them. I shall therefore for better perspicuity, set down his own
words at large, and then after examine them part by part.

Well then that the Pope procured the Emperors death by poison, he goes about
to prove in this manner. The presumptions (says he) are very strong for it; M.
Barlows lying discourse p. 292.
for sure it is, that the Pope hated him so extremely, vt noc^es, di^sque
(says Cuspinian) that day and night he devised how to DESTROY him. Saul not
more eager in the pursuit of David (yet he eyed him and followed him as the
Hawke does the Partridg) then Pope after Pope was in pursuing that Emperor, 1.
Sam. 26. 20.
more like Devils then Christians, if their own stories be true.

He is excommunicated and deprived of Crown and Allegiance, upon slight
pretenses by them; Plat. in Honor. 3. Vide ^ac omnia apud V^spergen.
he is procured by them to promise in person to go into the Holy Land against
the ^urke (even as Jason by P^lias into Col^hos for the Goulden-Fleece) that in
the mean time they might ri^^e his Territories in his absence, and so they did
indeed. The Emperor by reason of his dangerous sickness, was forced to stay
his journey one year; the Pope took it for a dissembling, and excommunicated
him for his delay; the Emperor sending his Ambassadors to Rome with their
affidauit, to make faith for his sickness, the Pope would not admit them to
his presence.

Next year, to satisfy the Pope, the Emperor determined his journey, but
before his going, he called a Counc^^l of his Princes to Rauenna, which he
appointed also for the place of R^ndre-^ous for some of his Soldiers to attend
him. The Pope caused them to be stayed from that meeting, way-laying the coasts
of Verona and Mil^an, and took order that the Soldiers should be spoiled,
that were prepared for that expedition against the Tu^ke; which, alas, is a
shamfull thing to speak of, says the Abbot that wrote it.

The Emperor being in the Holy Land, and in battle against the Turk, the
Pope (in his absence) enters Apulia (part of the Emperors Dominions) surpriseth
and takes it to his own use, and keeps back all supply of Soldiers that
should go ^or aid of the Emperor in that holy war: and (which is the height
of all impiety) the Emperor having performed his promise by this journey,
requesting absolution from the Pope, he, not only with contempt denied it, but
commanded the Christian Soldiers in A^ia, Nau^l. ge^. 41. anno 1228.
to leave the Emperor to the Turks malice, as being a public enemy of the
Church; and dispatched secret Letters to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the
Soldiers there, to Rebel against the Emperor, a^ Blondus (the Popes soothing
flatterer) is forced to confess: and by private Letters (which were
intercepted by the Emperor, and whereof he complains) dealt with the Saracens
to make no truce with the Emperor, nor to deliver the Crown of Jerusalem
unto him, though he should win it by Conquest. And when the Emperor sent
Letters of joyful aduertisment to the Pope, of his victory and truce taken
with the Turk, the Pope threw away his Letters in disdain, and caused it to
be given out through the Empire, that the Emperor was dead; upon which rumor,
there grew a de^ection of many Cities from the Emperor to the Pope; and those
valiant soldiers (the Almaines) which were returned from that Christian
expedition against the Turk into Apulia, were designed to be slain by the
Inhabitants, upon this rumor.

What is this (will he say) to the Popes consent for his POISONING? Surely
they are violent inducements, that he thirsted after the Emperors death which
way soever: for he which would arm the Emperors own Soldiers against him;
cause a treacherous Revolt from him while he was fighting the Lords Battails;
betray him into the mouth of Christ's sworn enemy; invade his possessions in
his absence; disperse ^al^e rumors of his death, contrary to truth and his own
knowledge; and by contempts and Anathema's do his best^ or worst to break his
heart: would make little account or conscience to dren^h him out of this life,
if opportunity and secrecy wou^d concur.

Thus you see, I have fully set down M. Barlows loathsome discour^e: now let us
briefly examine the substance, M. Barlow disse^bl^th the E^perors fa^lts there
by the better to charge the Pope of injustice against him.

^^innius in Gr^g.

9. Tom. 3. page 147^.


and truth thereof. And whereas he does so odi^^sly accumulate the rigorous
proceedings, as he would have them to seem of diverse Popes against the
^mperour; yet does he, as you see, fraudul^ntly dissemble and conceal the
Emperors demerits, and misbehauiour against the Church, and whole State of
Christianity, ^^s^ifi^d by so many Authors, as he may be ashamed to plead
ignorance of it: as it may appear, first by that which Binnius, out of others
sets down, of the causes of his excommunication by Gregory the 9. in these
words: Fredericum secundum tamquam ^oedifragum, Sarace^o^^m sautorem etc.
Gregory did ius^ly, and worthily excommunicate Frederick the second, as a
league-breaker, a favorer o^ Saracens, a deceauer of the King of Jerusalem,
yea, and of all the Christians that made war in Asia against Infidels, a
breaker of his vow, often confirmed by oath to make war against the Saracens,
and when afterward he was absolved from c^nsures by the same Gregory, and
restored to the communion of the Church, he added to his offenses before
abiured, other more gri^uous crimes, to wit, he besieged the Cities of the
Church, and raised up again that most odious faction of the Gu^lphs and
Gibbelines, after it had been appeased for more then 200. years. He gave
offices to the Saracens, and granted them a City called Nu^eria Saracenorum.
H^ spoiled Churches and Monasteries: he Tyrannically oppressed the Sicilians:
he dissuaded, and withdrew the King of Tunis his brother, from his holy desire
of Baptism at Palermo: he stopped all the ways, for the assembly of the
Council which Pope Gregory had called at Rome: and finally he kept certain
Cardinals, and other Prelates in prison, for which Pope Gregory excommunicated
him the second time. Thus he.

All which may be seen more at large in the definiti^e" sentence of
Excommunication, and deposition exta^t in the Council it self of Lions, and
related by Matthew Paris; where also are specified diverse other particul^rs of
his perjury upon perjury, horrible abusing of the Clergy, his Assassinating of
the Duke of Bauaria, the notorious suspicion of his being an Heretic (for as
Fazelius writes, Thom. Fazel. Decad. 2. l. 8. c. 2. circa fine^.

Vide in 6. Decret. de s^nt^nt. and rei^dicata c. 2.


he termed Moses, and our Savior Impostors, and Deum de Virgin nasci non
potuisse horrende protulerit; and horribly pronounced that God could not be
borne of a Virgin, and the like:) which albeit he partly excused, and resolutly
denied; yet were the proo^es so evident, and euincent, that Patrum omnium
consensu (says Fazelius, with diverse others here noted) with common consent of
all the Fathers, he was excommunicated, Fazel. ibid. Jacob. Phil. Bergom. an.
1^24.

VVestmonast. anno 1225. Sab^ll. Enead. 9. l. 6. Paulus. AE^^l. in L^d^^. nono.
Monacus P^du^nus in anno 1225.

Antoninus tit. 1^. cap. 5.

Platina in Inno^^ntio q^a to. Ioannet. and Al^h^^^. Ci^^^n. Vbert. ^^^^et. l.
4. hist. G^n^^^s. Paul. ^Enal in ^^dou. 9.


and deposed. To which, if we add what all other Authors (excepting
Vrspergensis his follower, and fabulous Cuspinian) write of ^im, we shall find
him a fit subject for such an Encomiast, worthy, I mean, to have his praises
thus blazoned out by M. Barlow. For none I think of any honesty, would ever go
about to commend so wicked a man.

But this whole matter will better appear by the particul^r examination of
that, which M. Barlow here reports. He is excommunicated, and deprived, says
he, of Crown and Allegiance, upon slight pretenses by them. And are these
slight pretenses Sir William? It seems your conscience is not very ^trait
that can swallow down so fast such great gudgeo^s. And the same to be no
unjust charge against the Emperor, great multitude of Authors may be produced,
which both for learning, truth, and credit, will far ouer-weigh the flattering
collusion of one Vrspergensis, of whom Paulus A^milius (seeing how he
contradicted all manner o^ authority) in his French history writes thus: Abbas
Vrspergensis cius temporis aequalis, Historias suas claudit laudibus Frederici,
insectation^que Pontisicum etc. Fama frequenter, and sensus prope omnium
conspirans eum d^mna^t etc. Abbot Vrspergensis who lived at that time, ends
his histories with the praise of Frederick, and railing against the Pope etc.
The more common fame, and the conspiring consent almost of all men do condemn
him. So he. But it sufficed M. Barlow, that this Abbot could flatter the
Prince, and ra^l^ against the Pope, which are the most frequent flowers in all
his writings. Which two alone, with the huge heap of his lies, being deducted
out of this his large Answer, that ^e^t which remains may be ^hut up in a
le^se nut-shell, then that was, wherein ^lexander is said to ^aue kept Homers
Iliades. But M. Ba^low goes on.

He is procured (says he) to promise in person to go to the Holy-^and,
against the Turk, that in the mean time they may ri^l^ his Territories, in
his absence: and so they did indeed. M. Barlows untruth about the cause of the
Empe^rours going to the Holy-la^d.
So he. This is much wrested, or to speak more plainly, is a notorious
untruth, and framed out of his fingers ends, not only against the credit, and
uniform report of Authors, but even contrary to Vrspergensis himself, on whom
only he will seem to rely for ^is whole narratio^. For read Vrspergensis that
will, he shall not find him to assign any such cause of the Emperors sending:
and if he have it not, I would feign know upon what authority M. Barlow does
auerre it? But we have seen store of such legier-d^-main; and if any one trust
such a Iugler further then he sees with his own eyes, he shall not tail to
be deceau^d. The most that, that Schismatic Abbot says, is, that the
Empero^rs enemies taking occasion of his abs^nce, invaded his Ter^ito^i^s. And
if M. Barlow will ^ay, that this is all one: although any blind man will say,
that there is great diversity, then let him also combine these two together as
one: When M. Barlow was in London, the Earl o^ ^ssex was beheaded^ and M.
Barlow was in London, that the Earl of ^ssex might be beheaded. And if he cry
out against this la^^r, I will ^lso cry shame on the former, for they are both
of one stamp.

The true causes then why the Pope cau^ed some of his States, The tr^e ca^^es
why the E^perors Sta^^ were inuad^d in hi^ absen^e.
as namely Apulia, to be invaded, are diverse: first the certain advertisement
he had received of a fraudulent peace made by him secretly with the Sultan,
before he d^parted out of Italy, and in confirmation thereof, upon his arrival
at Acra in Syria, his Mar^hall depa^ting from him, Antonin, ti^. 1^. 4.. 1.
(...). l. ^ ^. 1. (...) l. 6. c. 17. etc.
attended not (says S. An^oni^us) to fight against the Saracens, but against
the Christians, whom he spoiled, as they returned victorious with great booty
gotten of their enemies, killing many of them, taking many prisoners, in
acco^plishment, as it is thought, of his ^ecret agreement before made. ^o^^oue^
being a^ A^^a, h^ would have destroyed the Church of the Ten plans, and ind^^d
he took many ^or^restes from them; and ^inally I^^^salem being yielded unto
him, by the Sol^^n, according to their composition, he permitted the ^oly
Temple of our Sauiou^s Sepul^her to be still in the Saracens hands, that
Ma^omet might be served and inuoca^ed th^^^i^. In so much, that neither the
Pop^s ^egate, nor the Patriarch of Hi^rusalem nor the ^^m^plars, nor the
Knights of S. John^, nor other Barons and Noble men in Syria; nor the Captains
of the s^rangers would consent to this peace, Quia omnibus v^sa est pax
fraudulenta etc. (says S. A^toninus) because it seemed to them all a
fraudulent peace, to the hurt and shame of the Christians, and hinderance of
the conqu^st of the Holy Land. And a little after he adds: Gregorius audita
nequitia Imperatoris etc. Gregory hearing of the wickedness of the Empe^our, and
his treacherous peace made with the Souldan, ordained, that besides the
sentence of excommunication pronounced against him before, that King John of
Hi^rusal^m, who was then in Lom^ardy, with the army of the Church, should with
his soldiers enter Apulia, and stir up the people of that Kingdom, to
revolt against ^redericke. So he.

And besides this, two other causes are assigned of this Sigonius, to wit, that
the Emperor departed before S^gon. in a^ 1228. H^l^^^. M^tius in an. 1227.
to rifle, and spoil the Churches o^ Sicily. And as for his other most
pe^^id^^us dealings before related out of S. Antoninus, they are all recorded
in like manner, not only by Ioannes Villanus, who lived soon after Fr^de^icke
and by diverse others: but also by the Pratriarch o^ Hierusal^m himself, who was
an eye witness of what passed in Sy^ia in his ^pistle to the Christians of the
west, who sets down so many particulers of his foul and unchristian
dealings, as makes the matter most ^u^d^nt.

A fourth cause, and by all liklyhood one of the chiefest, was, ^rantz. (...).
8. c. 2.
that at his departure to the Holy ^and, he le^t order with R^ynald his Deputy
in Sicily, to hold the Pope and a^^ Clergy men for enemies, who accordingly,
upon Fredericks departure, Fazelius D^cad. 2. lib. 8. c. 2.
entered into the state of the Church and t^ere took certain towns in the
Marchia of Ancona: as^ so Conradus Guiscard, another Captain of his, entered
into the vale of Spoleto, and took Ful^gnio. So as we see, that the first
beginning of this war came from the Emperor and not from the Pope, which M.
Ba^low might have seen in Nau^l^rus himself, N^u l. (...). 41. (...) 1229. in
^in^.
whom diverse times he cyteth; but that he will have all men see, that he
seeks not the truth but to intertaine talk by telling of untruths, for
Nau^l^^us tells expressly, that whereas the Emperor complained after his
return, that the Pope had invaded his territories, w^il^t he was in the Holy
Land, the Pope answered that he did that, because R^ynaldus, Fredericks Deputy
did first ^et upon the state of the Church. And as for the cause of Fredericks
voyage (which M. Barlow blusheth not to affirm, to be procured by the Pope
that he might ri^le his estate at home al Authors agree, that it was specially
pro^ured by Io^n King of Jerusalem, Why Frederick went to the holy la^d.
who seeing the present danger of his own Country, to be ouerru^ne by the
Saracens, came in person into Eu^ope, and most earnestly solicited both Pope,
Emperor, Kings o^ France and England, and other Princes, ^or present succor:
whereunto they all contributed, as every where is testified. And thus much for
thi^ point.

M. Barlow proceeds, and says, The Emperor by reason of his dangerous
sickness, was forced to sta^one year^: the Pope ^oc^e it for a d^ss^mbling, and
excommunicated ^im for his delay: and the Emperor sending his Ambassadors to
R^me with their ^ffi^auit, to make says for his sickness, the Pope would not
adm^t (...) to his presence. So he. In which words two things are au^uched:
first that the Emperors stay and delay of ^is vo^age wa^ truly sic^nes: The
Emperors sickness counter^ait.
and secondly, that for the sam^ h^ was ^xcommu^icated. But both these if we
believe the who^e torrent of other Authors are manifestly false. For most agree
that the sickness was counterfeit, and that the cause of hi^ e^communication,
was not for that del^y, but rather for his return^ again with his f^rc^s and
gall^^^s a^^^r he had been for some time at sea, which M. Ba^low could not but
have seen, and therefore might have been ashamed upon the credit of one
Schismaticke to check all other writers, and to set down this fabulous report
for true. For that his sickness was counterfeit may manifestly be gathered by
the very behavior of the Emperor himself, who in that very time, when he was
sick, forsooth, hearing of the death of the Lantgraue of Thuring, came in all
have from Sicily to Brundusium, to rifle the said Lantgraues Palace, where ^e
took away ^^yth ^rantzius, di^ssimi, P^incipis ^quos, arma, aurum and
argen^^m, lau^iss^mam supe^^^^^lem; Lib. 8. c. 1.
the ^o^^^s, ar ^ou^, gould, silver, and other most sumptuous furniture o^ that
most wealthy Prince. Na^^l. lo co c^^ato.
And this his dissimulatio^ of sickness, in plain terms is ^uo^ched, fi^^ by
the Pope himself in hi^ letters, who (...) that he knew the sam^, even from the
(...) who then were with the Emperor: and by the ^a^d ^a^zius, In^ br^n.
(...). ^n 1217.
Paulus Langius Luthers ^nco ^^a (...) il. e^^e^ ^n.
^om^i^a^io ^hronologica al Germans al^o by in Greg. n^no.
Platina En^a. 9. l. ^ in G^egor.
Sabellicus, Decad. 2. l. 7. anno. 1226.
Blo^dus ^. ^art. hist. l 14. H^ld ^uti^^s ^nno 12^7. (...). Fr^d^ri^k
sp^^ial^y exco^^uni^ated for his retu^ne from sea.
Ta^cag^o^a, and others: but these in so clear a matter may suffice.

Now that his excommunication was not for his delay but for his return, after
he was set forth from Brundusium, is most evident by the testimony of most
writers, amongst whom Hulderi^us Mutius, a brother-German of M. Barlows (I
mean of the same Sacramentary faith, although as it seems, of a more sincere
historical faith or fidelity then he) relates the matter thus: Mense Augusto
venit Fredericus etc. In the month of August came Frederick to Brundusium, and
making no stay, by reason of the insection, with all his navy set forth, and
went directly for Asia: but being on his way, he came back again with the
fleet, and returned not without shame: for now all did openly cry out, that he
was a coward, an effeminate, and perjured person, that he never intended to go
against the enemies of the Christian faith, that he was a dishonor of the
Empire. The Pope when he was certified, that Frederick was returned back
again, presently calling a Council, with common and joint consent of all
assembled, judged the Emperor excommunicated, by virtue of the sentence
pronounced against him by his predecessor Honorius, and again he does
anathematize him until he perform his voyage to Jerusalem, and this sentence
be caused to be promulgated by his Legates, in Germany, France, and Italy.
Frederike when he understood this sentence of the Pope to be every where
esteemed, himself to be accounted a ^oole, and hated of many, and that by
contempt of the sentence, there might arise danger, that he might be deposed
from the Empire; the next spring he sailed with many troops o^ German and
Italian soldiers into Asia etc. So says this Zuinghan. And v^^th him agrees
G^n. 41. an. 1^27.
Nauclerus, ^^b. 8. cap. 2.
Crantzius, Decad. 2. l. 8. cap. ^.
Fazelius, Lib. 6. cap. 17.
Villanus, Lo^o citato.
Blondus, vbi supra.
Sa^^ll^us, vbi supra.
Ta^^agnota, vbi supra.
Platina, Tit. 19. cap. 4.. 1.
Antoninus, In anno 1227.
Sigonius.

^o which also we man ad^ Matthew Paris, Matthew. Paris. a. 1^28. page 4^5. Ib. p
4^4. Matthew Paris his cen^ure of the ^mperours return.
in whom may be seen, both Pope Gregory's testimony of the cause why he did
excommu^ic^^^ him, as also Frederiks letters to the christian Princes in
purgat^on of himse^^, for his retu^ne, affirming himself to be vniu^tly
excommunicated, for that as he t^^re says, he was sick: and last of all the
Authors judgment of the fact it self, though otherwise partial enough to the
Emperor. For he writes that upon the news of his return, above forty
thousand soldiers were so discouraged, that they returned home: Q^od sactum
Imperatoris (says he) domnose nimis etc. which fact of the ^mperour did
redound to the great hurt, shame, and prejudice of all the whole business of
Christ crucified, and for that cause according to the opinion of many, the
Savior o^ the world (as has been said) showed himself to the Christian
people, nayle^ on the Cross, and besprinkled with blood, as it were making
open com^laint unto all and every one, of the injury done unto him by the
Emperor. Thus Matthew Paris. Whose testimony M Barlow using so often in other
things, I hop^ he will not reject in this. But let us go forward.

It follows in M. Barlow. The next year to sati^fy the Pope, the Emperor
determined his journey, but before hi^ going, he called a Council at Rau^nna,
which he appointed also for the place of Re^dre-vous, ^o^ some of his soldiers
to at^nd him: the Pope camed ^^^m ^o (...) ^tayed from that meeting, way-^aying
the coasts of Verona and Millaine, and took order, that the soldiers should
be spoiled, that were prepared for that expedi^^on against the Tur^e, which
(alas) is a s^ameful^ thing to speak o^; says the Abbot that wrote it ^ T^us
he.

But by his leave his Author Vrspergensis has it not, in such sort, as he
sets it down, and therefore it is a shameful thing in M. Barlow to belly
him. A shamfull lie of M. Barlow.
For the Abbot says no other, t^en that, when the Emperor had called a Diet
to be held in Lent, at Rauenna of the Princes of Germany, he was hindered from
the same, by the messages, and Embas^ages of the Pope, Nam Veronenses, and
Mediolane^ses, says he, non permiserunt etc. the people of Verona and
Millaine, would not suffer any to pas^e by their Territories, spoiling and
rifeling even those that were signed with the Cross, vt assereba^t,
au^loritate Domini Papae etc. as they said, by the authority of the Pope, which
(alas) is a shameful thing to speak. And this is all which that Author has
hereof.

And here we may see the di^^erence between Vrspergensis, and M. Barlow, in
seting down this thing. The ^^r^t only relating what the soldiers pretended
and said, for their excuse: and the other most resolutly affirming it for true.
Vrs^ergensis says, V^sperge^si^ ^ade w^rse the^ he is by M. Barlow.
that those of Verona and Mill^ine affirmed, that they spoiled the Emperors
soldiers by the Popes authority. M. Barlow seteth it not down, as the words
and excuse of the soldiers, but with a resolute affirmation, that the Pope
took order, that the ways should be laid, the soldiers spoiled etc. wherein
also it is to be noted, that this thing falling out in the year 1228. as is to
be seen in Vrspergensis, and Frederik^ being excommunicated the year before,
and remaining (...) under ce^sures, these soldiers having relation to the
sentence past, might well say, that they did it by the Pope (...) to wit, by
virtue of the excommunication, alt^ough the Pope him self never knew thereof,
and so you see the obiec^ion to be frivolous, albeit we should believe
Vrspergensis the Schismatic Abbot, de^ending the Emperor ^uen then, when he
was excommun^c^c^: yet yt had been we^l that M. Barlow for his credits ^ake had
cited him, as he is: ^or he o^ himself is had enough, and little needed M.
Barlows furtherance, to have made him worse.

The next charge against the Pope is more tragical, then the ^ormer, and is
thus expressed by M. Ba^l^w. The ^mperour being in the Holy Land, and in
battle against the Turks, the Pope (in his absence) enters Ap^lia (part of
the Emperonrs dominions) surpriseth and takes it to his own use, and keeps
back all supply of soldiers, which should go for aid of the Emperor in
that holy war^e, and (which is the height of all impi^ty) the Emperor having
performed his promise, by that his journey, reque^ting absolution from the Pope,
he not only with contempt denied it, but commanded the Christian soldiers in
Asia to leave the Emperor to the Turks malice, as being a public enemy of
the Church, and dispatched secret letters to the Patria^ke of I^rusalem, and
the soldiers there, to rebel against the Emperor, as Bl^^dus (the Popes
soothing flatterer) is forced to confess. Thus far M. Barlowes piti^ull
complaint.

And as for the first point, it is already sufficiently answered, A heap of M.
Ba^lows lye^.
in ^hewing Frederick himself to have been the Author of the wars in Apulia, by
giving order to R^^nald son to the Duke of Spoleto, and the Emperors D^puty
of Sicily, to invade the Popes state in his absence, which he did, a^ already
at large has been declared. All the rest which is added, contains nothing
but mere malicious untruths, and calumniations. For untrue it is, that the
Pope ^ept back all supply o^ soldiers, whilst the Emperor was in the
holy land, which he labored to gather from all parts of Christendom to send
thither. Neither does V^spe^g^nsis ^ay so much, but only that he denied passage
by ^ea to the signed soldiers in Apulia and ^omba^dy, which comes far short
of k^eping back all supply, unless it may be proved, that ^e had no other
soldiers, but in those two places, or that they could have no passage but from
thence: both which are very false, as this charge is both ridiculous and
untrue, Ridiculous, for the wars being so ^oat on foot, both in Lombardy, and
Apulia, what need was there of any prohibition, ^or not sending away of
soldiers out of these parts, when as they were so needful at home? Untrue,
for that M. Barlow cannot be ignorant, that Frederick in his letter to the
Duke of Cornwall, which he wrote after his return from the Holy Land, and in
which he lays down all his agrieuances sustained (as he would have the world
to believe) at the Popes hands, has not one syllable thereof: which silence
could not come of any ^orgetfulnes, being written after his return, when
things were fresh in his mind, nor yet of any desire he had to spare the Pope:
seeing, that lesser matters, and more unlikely are there urged, with the most
advantage: and by all means he did seek by this accusation, to discredit him
with all Princes, as the most potent means, to cover his own shame, and
dishonorable behavior, as well in the Holy Land, as in other parts of Europe.

Secondly, it is false, that the Emperor performed his promise, which was to
go to aid the Christians, and recover the Holy Land, w^eras he with his secret
and treacherous treaty, and peace, which of purpose he made to hinder the war
intended against the Sultan, says Antoninus, and Villanus, betrayed them both:
the one (to wit the Christians) sustayning intolerable injuries at his hands,
and Jerusalem with all the Country soon after his return being vtterl^
lost. And this cause all Authors al^eadge, for the not abs^luing of the
Emperor by Pope Gregory, when by his Ambassadors he did request it. To whom,
says Crantzius, Crantz. l. 8. cap. 2.
the Pope even to their faces objected the per^idious dealing of their Lord the
Emperor, and as Faz^lius adds, Faz^l. l^co ^^^ato.
even the very Turks themselves confessed, that had Frederick joined with the
Christians, and fought against them, he had gotten out of their hands by force,
both City and Kingdom.

And the evidence of this truth is so radiant (to use M. Barlows phrase) that
even the above named Zwinglian Huld^^icus Mutius writing of this request of the
Emper^ur, Huld. Mut vbi sup^a.
and the Pops denial, sets down the matter in these words: Mit^it autem in
Europam Legatos etc. The Emperor sendes his Ambassadors to ^^gni^y to the
Pope and Princes how he had forced the Sultan to yield him up Jerusalem; but
that peace with the Sultan nothing pleased the Pope, who forsaw that it would
not endure, because the chief strength of the Kingdom, remained in the
enemies hands in such sort, that as soon as the Christian army should be
di^^olued, the enemy would easily recover all again. Neither was Frederick
himself so simple, that he saw not this, but that his mind was wholly set on
Germany and Italy; and thought it enough for him to have satis^^ed his vow (by
going thither) sic fit cum venatur aliq^is in^i^is ^a^ilus; So it falls out
(says he) when men do hunt with dogs that have no list to run.

And Naucleru^ shows the issue of this affair after the ^mperours return
into Europe upon the year 1247. where he writes that this very Sultan of
Babylon, (...). ge^. 41. a^n^. 1247.
with whom the Emperor had dealt, caused the Ara^ians to rise in arms against
the Christians: which Arabians setting first upon the Knights of the Temple,
quite vanquished the^, and easily took the City of Jerusalem, which had no
wall to defend it, and slew the Christians that were in the same. And the
Sepulcher of our Savior which until that time had been kept untouched, was
now with great shame defiled. Thus he. And this may suffice to show how well
Frederick performed his promise, and what good of^ices he did to the Christian
cause, by his going to the H^l^-Land.

The third which follows, is so emin^nt an untruth that alone it may carry
away the silver whetstone, from all the liars of Lincoln: for who ever heard,
or read before M. Barlow set it out in print, that the Pope ^o^maund^d the
Christian soldiers in Asia to leave the Emperor to the Turks malice? What
malice is this in M. Barlow to report so sham^ull an untruth? What Author
besides himself does auerre it, in this manner, as he does? For the Pope knew
full w^ll, that Frederick was in no danger of the Turk, with whom before his
departure from Europe he had made peace, and by whom upon his arrival into
Syria, Paris. an. 1228.
he was still either fea^^ed, or presented with rich gifts in recompense of
his perfidious league, by which he betrayed the Christian army and cause, as
has been declared.

And all that which Naucl^rus says, whom M. Barlow cites to aver the same, is
in these words: Nauclerus abused by M. Barlow.
Pontisex Hospitalarijs, Te^plarijsque in Asia mili^a^^ibus, vt ^rederico
ta^quam hosti publico sauores detraher^nt, iniunxit. The Pope commanded the
Knights of the Hospital, and Templares to withdraw their help from Frederick,
as from a public enemy: or, as other Authors Platina, Fazelius, Paulus
A^milius, and others expres^e it, Vt ab Impera^or^ ^aue^^nt; Vbi supr^.
that they should beware of the Emperor. And the last named is more
particular, saying: Vt cau^^et nomini Christiano insidias a perditissima
simulatione F^ederi^i; that they should beware of the treachery, intended
against the Christian cause, by the most wicked dissimulation of Fr^d^ri^ke S^
he. And the^ adds, Ne^ vana suspitio visa, Arabibus, A^^yp^y^que aequio^
inu^ni^atu^ Caesar quam nostris. Neither was this a vain ^u^pitio^, ^or the
Emperor was found to be a greater friend to the Arabians and Aegiptians the^
to the Christians. And this alone shows how free Frederi^ke was from any
danger at the Soldans hands: which the Pope well knowing, could not intend to
leave him to his malice, as M. Barlow has most confidently affirmed: but
contrary wise, in respect of the great league, and love that was between him
and the Sultan, he feared more that the Emperor would betray the Christians,
and leave them to the Soldans malice (as in the end it fell out, as now you
have heard) then that they should leave him, of whom there was no fear, by
reason of the ten years truce already made between the^, by which Fred^ricke
was secure from all danger, and might stay in the Holy Land, and return at his
pleasure.

Which being so, and the Emperor excommunicated at this time, there was great
reason why the Pope should give order to the Christians for the one, and the
other: to wit; as well to take heed of him, as of a perfidious Traytou^ to the
cause, as also to withdraw their favors from him, as from an excommunicated
person, and public enemy of the Church: but both of these come far short of
leaving him to the Turks malice, as M. Barlow does most fa^sly and maliciously
avouch.

There remains yet one untruth more in this matter, and that worthy of the
maker, to with, that the Pope dispatched secret letters to the Patriarch o^
Jerusalem, and the soldiers there, to rebel against the Emperor, as B^ondus
the Popes soo^^ing flatterer (says M. Barlow) is ^orced ^o confess. Blondus
nota^ly belye^ by M Barlow.
But here without all soothing and flatteryng I must con^esse, and profess
also, that all is lying and forgery which here you speak. For where I pray you,
as Blondus forced to this confession? Where does he mention these secret
letters to the Patriarch? Truly these letters are so secret, that no mention of
them is to be seen in Blondus, and therefore I will more believe my own eyes,
then M. Barlowes reports in this affair. Hospi^alarijs Templarijsque in Asia
pro Crucis honor milita^tibus (says Blondus) vt Fred^rico tamquam hosti
publico fauores detraherent, iniunxit. The Pope commanded the Knights of the
Hospital, and Templars fighting for the honor of the Cros^e, to withdraw
their help or favors from Frederick, as from a public enemy. And this is all
he has of this matter, in which as you see, he says no more, then Nauclerus
said before, but much less then M. Barlow would have him, or rather force him
to speak. For there is no mention in him, of any secret letters to the
Patriarch, or of any rebellion to be made against the Emperor, but only that
they should withdraw their favors, which no wi^e man, I think, will take to
be all one, with rebellion: the one being but a mere negation of help, and the
other an actual opposition of hostility. All which being considered, there
remains only this, that some good friend of M. Barlows, advise him before he
write again, that for common honesties sake at least, he would in his
assertions be true in some thing, for hitherto we have found him f^lse in every
particular, and shall do much more in that which is to ensue. For thus it
immediately follows in M. Barlows charge, or rather lying slander against the
Pope.

By private letters (says he) which were intercepted by the Emperor, and
whereof he complains, the Pope dealt with the Sarracens, to make no truce with
the Emperor, nor to deliver the Crown unto him though he should win it by
Conquest. So he. This tale is of it self so incredible, and deuoid of all
shadow, M. Barlows other lies.
or likelihood of truth, as there needs no other proof besides the bare
narration thereof to refuse it: and M. Barlow guilty, as it should seem, of
forgery, cites no Author for the same, unless he referr us unto Vrspergensis,
whom in the beginning of this paragraph he cyteth thus: Vide haec omnia apud
Vrsp^rgensem; see all these things in Vrspergensis. But of this matter, I must
tell him, that Vrspergensis, has not one syllable, and therefore me thinks,
some other Author should have been cited either in text, or marge^t. The most
that I can find hereof, is in a letter of the Emperors, to Richard Earl of
Cornwall, unto which it may be M. Barl. has relation, where amongst other
complaints, the Emperor says the Popes Nuntius and Legates in Syria dealt by
secret letters with the Sultan, that he should not render to the Emperor the
Holy Land, which by right was due unto him: but, that he should make no truce
with him, nor yeald him the Crown though he should win it by Conquest (which
are M. Barlows words) there is no mention: and therefore I shall believe M.
Barlow, as I shall see his proofs, having already found him so false in all
other Authors whom he has cited.

But granting all to be true, to wit, that Frederick objected this thing, and
in this manner against the Pope; yet it may be presumed that M. Barlow could
not but know the answer of the said Pope, Paris. an. 12,9.
which also Matthew Paris sets down at large, to wit, that the thing was so
absurd, and so improbable, as no man, that was well in his wits would believe
it. And moreover the virtuous life of Gregory, and the wickedness of the
Emperor being known to all, this answer of the Pope to this and other such
imputations, being published and spread over Christendom, Paris. i^id.
did make the Emperors letters suspected to the whole wo^ld. And so much for
this. Now let us examine the last which follows in these words.

And when the Emperor sent letters of joyful advertisement to the Pope of his
victory, and truce taken with the Turk, the Pope threw away his letters in
disdain, and caused it to be given out through the Empire, that the Emperor
was dead: upon which rumor, there grew a de^ection of many Cities from the
Emperor to the Pope: and those valiant soldiers (the Almaines) which were
returned from that Christian expedition, against the Turk into Apulia, were
designed to be slain by the Inhabitants upon this rumor. So he.

Still M. Barlow will be M. Barlow, like himself, and false in all things. M.
Barlow like himself, that is, false in all things.
For why could he not here have set down the words of his Author? Or why does
he so resolutely affirm that for certain, which Vrspergensis, otherwise
imprude^t enough, does but only relate upon hearesay? Papa (says he) ^um suis
co^plicibus (vt ass^rebant homines) seci^^n Apulia diuulgari etc. The Pope with
his followers (as men gave our) caused to be reported in Apulia, that the
Emperor was dead etc. Were these words so heavy that they must ly on your
stomach M. Barlow, and not be uttered. Truly if Vrspergensis, who cared little
what he spoke against the Pope, said he had it but by hearsay, we may well
say, that it is unlikely to be true, seeing that without that limitation, he
bouldly affirms for true many things, which all other writers condemn for
fal^e. But I perceive we must perforce pardon you M. Barlow; for it seems that
by some necessity, you are constrained to be sincere in nothing; your self
telling us out of the Orator, that there is nothing more uncertain then a
report: and this being spoken by the Abbot as a report, and that also of the
vulgar people, must needs in the judgment or disapassionate men, and by force
of your own position, be uncertain, and consequently your malice very
singular, in putting down this hearsay as an undoubted truth.

And thus good Reader have thou seen all this sharp charge against the Pope,
to have been sufficiently refuted, and that, unless I be deceived, to M.
Barlowes shame. And if this suffice not, I hope that which ensues will make up
fu^l weig^t, and therefore I pray thee to stand attent to that which upon the
premises M. Barlow will now infer: ^or all this has been alleged to make
it probable, or (to use his own words) to lay down strong presumptions, or
violent indu^ementes, that Pope Innocentius the 4. in whose time Frederick
died, had hired one to poison him. Thus then he concludes his former charge
upon the premises.

What is this (will he say) to the Popes consent for his poisoning? Surely they
are violent inducementes, that he thirsted after the Emperors death, which way
so ever: ^or he which would arm the Emperors own soldiers against him,
cause a treacherous revolt from him, whilst he was fighting the Lords
batta^ls; betray him into the mouth of Christ's sworn enemies; invade his
possessions in his absence; disperse false rumors of his death contrary to
truth and his own knowledge; and by contemptes and Anathema's do his best, or
worst to break his heart; would make little acompt or conscience to Drench him
out this lif^, if opportunity and secrecy would concur. So he

Well pleaded M. Barlow. But soft Sir, I pray you take me with you. M. Barlows
false and ridiculous plea.
What is that, which by these violent inducementes, as you term them, you go
now about to prove? Is it not to show that Innocentius the 4. hired one to
poison Frederick? And are these particulers, or any one of the^ which you have
so much urged, for this purpose, to be verified of Innocentius? Did not all
these things pass in the time of Gregory the ninth (of whose going about to
poison the Emperor no man hitherto ever so much as dreamed:) neither do you
your self charge him therewith, diverse years before Innocentius was Pope? How
then may these things violently induce any man to believe, that Po^e
Innocentius did conspire the poisoning of Frederick? And to the end that your
inducementes may be the more strong, we shall reduce the whole force of them
into a Logical argument, thus:

Pope Gregory the ninth armed the Emperors soulddiers against him, caused a
treacherous revolt from him, whilst he was fighting the Lords battails,
betrayed him into the mouth of Christ's sworn enemies etc. Ergo twenty years
and more after this, Pope Innocentius the 4. hired one to poison him.

This is M. Barlowes violent inducement, set down in form, to prove Pope
Innocentius the 4. to be guilty of poisoning the Emperor. And what force it
has, I shall not need to declare. For the argument is so ridiculous and
transparent, as there is no child so simple, that does not see through it. And
truly M. Barlow cannot here excuse himself in my judgment from wilful
malice, that alleging all this out of Vrspergensis, who ended his history
with the year 1228. or the beginning of the next, at what time Pope Gregory
lived, Malicious cosenage in M. Barlow.
as he did for 12. years after, would notwithstanding lay it all upon
Innocentius the 4. for which cause as it may be thought, he dissembled Pope
Gregory's name throughout al his relation, which he could not but see expressed
in his Author. And what will you say to such malicious folly, or foolish
malice?

M. BARLOVVS MORE sure and stronger proofs are discovered to be lies: with
other things concerning Frederick the second, and Innocentius the fourth.. II.
BUT M. Barlow, you may think, has some better proof besides these violent
inducements, to prove the Pope accessory to the poison, and death of
Frederick, by which he will make all so clear, as there shall rest no more
difficulty in the matter. In those, perhaps, he will use more sincerity: and I
say, perhaps, The habit of l^ing hardly removed from M. Barlow^
for that the custom of lying is so habituated, and rooted in him, as it is
difficise mobilis a subiecto, hardly to be separated from him, as the
Philosopher speaks of all other habits, which are not easily separated from
their subjects. Let us see then what demonstratiue proofs, and irrefutable
arguments he will bring to prove, what he intends. His words are these. [And
yet that presumptions ( says he) may not only carry it, Cuspinian having
Authors for both reports, relates the procurers thereof doubtfully, but the
instrument certainly, that Mansredus POISONED him wit^out controversy, sieve ab
hostibus, sieve a Ponti^ice corruptus, but whether corrupted by enemies of the
Emperor, or by the Pope, he will not say; but so he died^ So he.

What still nothing but lying M. Barlow? Did you not promise us surer
arguments, then presumptions? And why then do you begin with so notorious
untruths? Does Cuspinian say, that Manfred poisoned him? Then truly has M.
Barlow belied Cuspinian before; Barlow page 291.
for that he said, And Cuspinian agrees with them (to wit Petrus de Vineis,
and Nauclerus) that the Emperor recovering by the help of Phisuians, from the
poison, Manfred took a shorter course with him, A flat contradiction in M.
Barlow. 4. R^g. 8.
and as Hazael served Benhadad with a cloth, stopped his breath with a pillow.
So he. And if this be true M. Barlow, how then do you here set it out in
Capital letters, by the Authority of Cuspinian, that Man^red POISONED him, and
that so died: for these are your words here. So as if M. Barlow be true in one
place, he must needs be false in the other. For in the one he says, that he
recovered of the poison, in the other, that he died of the same: which is so
plain a contradiction, as M. Barlow will never be able to make does parts to
agree. Cuspian ^^ lied by M. Barlow.
Besides it is a gross untruth to affirm, that Cuspinian should say, that the
Emperor was poisoned by Man^red, whereof he speaks nothing at all: and
therefore where you say, that he reported the instrument certainly, that
Mansredus poisoned him without co^trouersy, certainly without con^rouersie it
is a lie of yours, and not the assertion of Cuspinian, whose words you might
have seen set down in my letter alleged thus:

Non pot^it cauere etc. The Emperor could not avoid, but when he returned
into Apulia, he perished with poison, the 37 ^eare of his reign, and 57. of
his age, and the very same day that he was made Emperor, for whereas at the
town of Florenzola in Apulia he was daungerously sick, and at length by
diligence of Physicians had over come the same, he was stifled by Manfredus his
bastard-sonne (begotten of a noble woman his concubine) with a pillow thrust
into his mouth, whether it were that Manfredus did it, as corrupted by his
enemies, or by the Pope, or for that he did aspire to the kingdom of Si^ilia.
So he: where you see no mention made of Man^red for the poisoning, but only for
the sti^eling. And how then does he relate the procurers of the poison
doubtfully, and the instrument certainly? I think M. Barlow uses to write
sometimes in his sleep; for had he been waking, he would not (as I suppose)
ever have been so shameless, or ignorant, as so to corrupt or mistake the
Authors which he cites, in so base a manner. And truly Cuspinian himself
seems to have dreamed in these few lines here cited, as before I have noted,
M. Barlow and his Author Cuspinian taxed.
for having said veneno peryt, he perished or died with poison, yet presently
after as you see, he says, that by diligence of Physicians he overcame the
same, and afterward was stifeled. And with such sleepers, and dreamers are we
troubled with all, who not seeking to find out, or deliver the truth in the
matters they handle, do contradict themselves, and run into gross, and
palpable absurdities. But let us proceed.

The second maine pillar, upon which M. Barlow relieth for proof of the Popes
poisoning of the Emperor Frederick, is Matthew Paris, an English man, who
(says M. Barlow) affirms, that the Emperor having discovered a poison
intended and prepared, or him by his trustiest attendan^es, as he thought, upon
examination, ^ou^d it to be the Popes doing, and makes a lamentable complaint
thereof. So he. And indeed this testimony seems somewhat more forcible and
euincent, then the former, both for that the Author lived at that time, and for
that he aue^reth it so con^idently, saying that upon examination he ^ound i^ to
le^se Popes doing. But what if here also upon examination we find M. Barlow a
lier? What if neither these words no^ the sense of them, be to be found in
Matthew Paris (as indeed they are not) nor yet in any Author besides? Is not
then the false Prelate worthy for ever to be discredited? Well, let us see
what Matthew Paris has hereof; Matthew Paris belied by M. Barlow.
who having set down the story, how the Emperor discovered the treachery of
Petrus de Vineis, and his intent to poison him, sets also down the said
Emperors complaint, in these words: Vae mihi contra quem propria pugnant
viscera etc.

Woe be to me, against whom my own bowels do fight. Matthew. Paris in an. 1249.
Peter whom I beleyued to have been a rock, and the half of my soul, has by
treason sought my life. And lo, the Pope whom the Empire has exalted of
nothing, and enriched under my Noble predecessors, does go about to exterminate
it, and seeks to overthrow me the Governor of the same declining Empire. Whom
shall I trust? Where shall I be safe etc? So Matthew Paris: whom you see
auerreth not, as M. Barlow says he does, that the Emperor found it to be the
Popes doing: for all that can be truly gathered out of these words, is, that
the Emperor suspected some such thing in the Pope. And so far is Matthew Paris
from affirming that it was found to be true, that having said that the Popes
fame was thereby much blemished; he adds this restrictiue clause, as from
himself, Veritatem tamen nouit Deus secretorum scutator infallibilis: but God
knows the truth, who is the infallible searcher of secrets, as though he had
said, that this matter had no other ground then the Emperors suspicion, and
slander of his scismatical followers, for had there been but any apparent
proof thereof, it would have been laid open to the uttermost. And to confirm
this, the same Author a little before the words now rehearsed, says, that the
enemies of the Church gave out, that the Pope had sought to corrupt Petrus de
Vineis to poison the Emperor. So then to conclude, whereas out of this Author
M. Barlow says, that Frederick upon examination found it to be the Popos
doing, there is no such thing to be found: that which we find, is that M.
Barlow either corrupts, or corruptly alleges all the Authors which he
deals with.

But now you may think, that he has kept a sure card for the last, and
brings forth an Author without all check or control, who with his very
name will ouerbeare all opposition: and indeed he is here discribed as an
unconquerable Giant, and as such a one, who by himself may stand for
thousands: and this man forsooth is Petrus de Vineis, Petrus de Vineis
magnified by M. Barlow.
of whom M. Barlow speaks th^s: But what better witness, and of more credit
can there be, then Petrus de Vineis, who lived in those days, and was
continually about the Emperor: and as Cuspinian says, has truly related the
occurrences of that time? And again after: Who was ever about him, wrote
truly, and is an Author approved. And yet further: In whom Cuspinian, an
Authentical writer, ver^ies that Proverb, omnia sub vnam Myconum, he alone
may stand for all rest. Yea this man is so great, that in M. Barlows judgment,
no man is to be heard against him. Not Innocentius the Pope, who refuted him:
not the Italians, who contradicted him: nor yet all other Authors, that
condemned his partiality, and falsehood: in so much, as if we will believe M.
Barlow, he is an Author of infallible truth, notwithstanding he were a
professed enemy of the Pope, and sworn servant of the Emperor. And if we
believe other Authors, a very corrupt man, Villanus l. 6. cap. 23.
and therefore justly punished by allmighty God with untimely death: and that
rather for his greatness, upon a picked quarrel (as some affirm) then for any
just cause of demerit given by himself for the same, against the Emperor.

What then shall we say to this ground, or rather to this strong foundation,
and invincible bulwark? The words of this Author are plain, Barlow page 291.
In Apuliam rediens veneno peri^t, returning into Apulia he perished by poison:
and M. Barlow notes us the place in the margent thus Epist. lib. 2. but yet
like a bad Grammarian he omitteth the principal verb, I mean our chiefest
question in hand, which is not so much, whether Frederick were poisoned, as
whether he were poisoned by the Pope, for to that end are these strong
presumptions, violent inducements, and other arguments brought, and what place
is cyted out of this Author for proof hereof? Truly no more the^ there is
alleged to prove that Frederick went about to poison the Pope. And is not
this per^idious treachery in M. Barlow to make him his chiefest pillar, who
has not one word o^ the matter in controversy? But let us suppose that some
such thing is in his book (which I cannot believe to be true) I am content
that for once it be not thought ridiculous in M. Barlow, which in other men
would seem to be mere madness, to produce one, and that such a one against the
whole stream of other Authors. Let us make this Petrus de Vin^is another
Achilles, Hercules, or Golias; yea let him stand for all, as M. Barlow will
have him, and let his little finger be as great as Alexanders back, yet sure I
am that for the poisoning and death of Frederick, either by the Pope or any
other, he will stand for nothing else but to condemn M. Barlow, and all others
who layne so much upon him, of fraud, or folly, or worse dealing, which I trust
to make so evident and clear, as it is clear and evident M. Barlow never saw
one to write after that his eyes and brains were out, his body cold, and his
bones rotten.

And first I suppose, which M. Barlow does freely grant me, that this Petrus de
Vineis was Secretary unto Frederick and continually about him; but certain it
is, by uniform consent of all Authors of those times, that the same Petrus de
Vineis was dead a year at least before the Emperor, and therefore could
testify nothing of his death, unless he wrote by Prophesy: for by the Emperors
commaundment for treason either indeed intended, or pretended only, as I have
said, he had his eyes put out, and being committed to prison, he knocked out
his own brains; which besides the testimony of Catholic Authors, as Tit. 19.
c. 6.. 1. in fine.
S. Antoninus Lib. 6. cap. 23.
Villanus, Lib. de Script. Eccles. and in Catal. Viroru^ Illustrium in Petro de
Vineis.
Tritemius, In Anthropol. l. 23. a. 1212.
Volateranus, an. 1249.
Sigonius, Eode^ an.
Matthaeus Parisiensis, Decad. 2. l. ^. cap. 2. in fine.
Fazelius, Lib. 3. histor. de Prin^iribus Estensious.
Pigna, Lib. 4. hist di Napol. a. 1240.
Caraffa, Par. 2. l. 14. a 1247.
Tarcagnota, Cantio^. 13. 1. partis, and in eu^ locu^.
Dantes the Poet, who lived presently after in the same age, with his two
Commentatours Landinus, and
Landinus, and Velutell.
Velutellus, and others, is also testified by In vita Petri de Vineis ep. prae
fixa.
Scardius a Caluinist in the life of the said Petrus de Vineis, set out with
his epistles, and Martin. Crus. part. 3. An. ^ue^^coru^ l. 2. an. 1249
Martinus Crusius a Lutheran, who also cyteth Poggius a Florentine writer. And
this M. Barlow did well foresee, though he would s^eme to dissemble it, or
which is worse, is forced to forge a new devise (as the man is full of his
fictions) and to come us out another Petrus de Vinea, who also should be
Secretary to the Emperor and continually about him, which is an invention
worthy of M. Barlow, having no Author or shadow of reason for the same, seeing
all writers to agree, that the same Petrus de Vineu who knocked out his own
brains, had been Secretary to Frederick, and written tam ex persona sua, quam
Imperatoris, Epistolarum libros sex, six books of Epistles, as we^^ o^ his
own, as the Emperors, says Tri^emius: besides that it is most improbable,
that he would take another Secretary, of the same name, within less then a
year after so horrible a treason, as was pretended against his own person,
which alone might make that name hate^ull unto him whiles he lived, and
therefore M. Barlows marginall note, to wit, Some think it was the same party,
but it is not probable, is without all probabylitie. And M. Barlow should have
alleged some Author for the same; but that he saw all Authors, reason, and
truth it self to stand against him in this point.

Wherefore seeing so many to stand for me, in defense of this truth, and no one
man that I have seen to deny the same, I may with more reason challenge the
priuiledg of Gods rule of two witnesses against M. Barlow, then he does against
me. For a little after in handling the matter of Alexanders poisoning of Gemin,
related by Iou^us and Guicciardine, which I said to have most Appearance of
truth of any of the former accusations, and yet not to be altogether certayne^
for that other Authors do otherwise report the same, M. Barlow thus replyeth.
Barl. page 299.
The rule of Almighty God is, that is the testimony of two witnesses speak
with one mouth, in ore duorum, it shall be an establishment: and that is more,
then an appearance of truth. In the case of Frederick the second, Deuteron. 19.
15.
Vineis and Cuspinian were both produced to confirm one story, that would not
serve the turn, because they were but one (the last borrowing what he said
from the foremost:) in this instant there are two different witnesses, which
concur in the veri^^ing of one and the self same ^act, and this, though thus
seconded, is slightly turned of, as making but an APPEARANCE. Thus far M.
Barlow, pleading a certainty upon the credit of two witnesses, which yet in the
case of Susanna proved not so certain, and much less in the matter we now
talk of, wherein is diversity of opinions, and neither of the two Authors
avouches it for certainly true, as in the next Paragraph we shall show. In the
mean time, this rule will serve most APPARENTLY and CERTAINLY also, M. Barlow
by Gods rule condemned of forgery
to condemn M. Barlow, seeing that here not only in ore duorum, in the mouth
of two, but of seven or eight times as many, we have proved M. Barlow a false
forger of Petrus de Vineis words, and that with such euidency, as he cannot
produce one man to the contrary, and therefore is compelled to defend one, by
making of another ^for by writing one and the self same name, of de Vinea, and
de Vin^is, in the singular, and plural number, he will needs show us a
plurality of persons, and make one man to be two. But let us see what ground
there is of this fond invention.

All that he has for proof of his idle conceit, is a seely conjecture, set
down in a few words, and those also so obscure, as they require some
attention in the reader to understand them, if not Natatorem Delium, to
interpret them. For thus he says: A man shall oftentimes hear his own
servants cursing him, says King Solomon: and no fitter instance can be given,
them of this Emperor in that case: for he differed not much from the
Historians name, whom the Pope hired once to poison this Emperor ( if
Parisiensis do not err, or deceive his Reader) for his name (being of near
place, and trust about the Emperor, even for his soul) was Petrus de Vinea,
that was so HIRED, and plotted withal. This is all, and very intritate also,
as you see. But his sense, and meaning is (if I mistake him not) to make a
difference where there is no diversity, in separating one and the self same man
from himself, to wit Petrus de Vineis, from Petrus de Vinea, which is all one.
But this is not the first error which M. Barlow has committed in this manner
of Metamorphosis, M. Barlows error concerning Vrsperge^^is.
by transforming one man into two; for some three leaves before, he does the
very same with Vrspergensis, making him to differ from Co^radus of Lichtenaw;
whereas there is no greater difference between them, the^ that Conradus of
Lichtenaw was A^^ot of Visperge, and writer of the History: for so ^ay
Tritemius, Posseuinus, and others, notwithstanding M. Barlows metaphy^^cal
distinction, Barl. page 2^9.
who tells us that Ni^b. Cisuerus justifies that ^e says, by the testimony of
an Abbot of Vrsperge, ^^ose name being for a long time not kno^ne, ^is Annals
were as^ribed unto him whom we vsualy call Vrspergensis, till the er or was
espied and amended. So he. And puts in the margent Conradus or Lichtenaw.
But I pray you Sir, whom we call usually V^spergensis, is not this name
Conradus of Lichtenaw? Surely his own printed book (with the abridgement of
his life set before it) Tritemius, Posseuinus, and others say, yes. And how
then was the error espied and amended? Where I pray you was there any error at
all? And if no error, wherein was the amendment? I would to God, M. Barlow, your
errors could be as well amended, as they are espied, and then might your
friends hope to see you once a true man ere you dye.

Now for Petrus de Vineis, that he was the same with Petrus de Vinea is so
evident, as I much marvel at your simplicity, for calling it into ques^ion.
It is a sign you read little, or understand not what others write: for whom In
anno 1249. and in eode^ Sigon.
Parisiensis, Paulus Aemilius, Sigonius, Lib.1 ^. an^ 1244.
Philippus Bergomas, Vbertus ^olieta, Lib. 4. Chron. an. 1245.
G^ne^ard, Ciaconius, In Apparatu i^^ Innocent. 4.
Posseuimus, with others call Petrum de Vinea, or Petrum Vineam, the same, S.
Antoninus, Fazelius, Tritemius, Dec. 2. l. 7
Blondus, An. 1229.
Nauclerus, Lib. 31. hist. c. ^05.
Vincentius, In anno 1254.
Paulus Langius, In vita Frederici.
Collenutius, In vita Petri de Vineis.
Scardius who wrote his life, John Fox, and In Chro^. an. 1^46. and ali^^ lo^^
supracitatu.
Huldericus Mutius (all which four last are Protestant Calumists) with Crusius
the Lutheran, call Petrum de Vineis: to whom we may add the Italian writers, as
Villanus, Pigna, Caraf^a, Landinus, Velutellus, Dantes, and Tarcagnota, who
call him in their tongue Pietro delle Vigne, which in latin is de Vincu. And he
that shall confer all their writings together, cannot choose but see, that he
is one, and the self same man, who is signified by both these names: yea
Volateranus in one work calls him, both Petr^m de Vineis^ and Petrum Vineam;
and the self same things are recorded under both names, as that he was
Secretary to the Emperor Frederick the second, in great and special favor
with him, was sent to the Council of Lions with Thaddaeus Sinuessanus, had his
eyes pulled out for treason, and finally knocked out his own brains: only I
must confess, that none of these Authors, under the one or other name, do
mention of his miraculous writing of Frederikes death, after his eyes and
brains were out, but left that as a mere lying fiction to be registered alone
by M. Barlow.

This then being so, whereof I think no learned man, that has read the
Histories can make any doubt, to wit, that Petrus de Vinea, and de Vineis is
but one man's name, who was put to death by the Emperor Frederick; it must
needs follow (as I have said) that, that Epistle, or what else so ever, under
his name, which mentions the poisoning or death of the Emperor (if there be
any such) to be bastard, counterfeit, and forged by some schismatic or
heretical writer, who the better to deceive the Reader would use the cloak,
and authority of the name of Petrus de Vineis, and M. Barlow, who sets him
out with such lofty praises, and makes him according to his misapplyed
proverb, to be omnia sub vnam Miconum: He alone, says he, may stand for all
the rest, shows himself to be a brain-sicke beetle, so much to comme^d a
blind and brainles author f^r a thing, which either he never wrote, or else he
did it, w^e^ both his eyes and brains were out of his head: and th^n you may
be sure, it was very wisely done.

And as wisely hereunto does M. Barlow apply the proverb of omnia sub vnam
Miconum, which he in ^rpreteth, as you have heard; he alone may stand for all
the rest: whereas Strab^, whom he alleges for the same, does explicate it
in a far different fense, M. Barlows Proverb misapplied.
saying: Omnia sub vnam Miconum, Adagium est de his, qui sub vnam descriptione^
cogunt ea quae natura seiunxit: All under one Miconus, is a Proverb spoken of
the^, who comprehend things of different natures under on description. And the
like he might have seen in Manutius, who explicating the proverb, says, qui
res natura diuersas eodem titulo complectuntur: who comprize things of
different natures under one title. And with them agrees Calepine. But it is M.
Barlows good fortune to be mistaken in all things, be it of History, Humanity,
Philosophy, or Divinity. But not to stand longer on these trifles, but to draw
to an end of the whole matter, in which M. Barlows manifold mistakinges have
made me the longer, it will not be amiss for conclusion hereof, to lay good
Reader, before thine eyes, all the errors and untruths, that in this matter
only M. Barlow has committed, by which thou will easily consecture, how great
a bulk I had been forced to write, if I should have been so particular in all
other points, which he handles, as I have been in this: but I thought it
sufficient for a taste to exemplyfie only, in some few, omitting the rest, as
being loath to loose good time in searching so narrowly into such false and
frivolous matters.

Untrue then it is, that the Emperor was excommunicated upon sleyght pretenses,
M. Barlows untruths heaped together
as the Council of Lions, and all other Authors do testify. It is untrue,
that the Emperor was sent into the Holy Land, that the Pope might rifle his
State at home. Thirdly it is untrue, that the Emperor stayed for sickness,
which (even by them who were with the Emperor) was testified to be but
seigned. Again it is not true, that for the same stay he was excommunicated,
but for his return with the Navy, after he had set forth to sea. Fifthly
Vrspergensis says not, that the Pope way-lied the coasts of Verona and
Millaine, and took order that the Soldiers should be spoiled. Sixthly, that
the Pope kept back all supply of forces from the Holy Land whiles Frederick
was there, which his own Author says was but only in Lombardy and Apulia.
Seauenthly that the Emperor performed his vow, and promise by his voyage to
Hierusalem^ and therefore was unjustly denied absolution. Eighthly, that the Pope
commanded the Christians in Asia to leave the Emperor to the Turks malice,
and that Nauclerus does affirm the same. Ninthly. Blondus is belyed, whom M.
Barlow will have to avouch, that the Pope sent secret letters to the Patriarch
of Jerusalem, to rebel against Frederick; but Blondus has returned him a
Writ of Non est inuentus in baliu^ meo, there is no such thing to be found in
my book. The tenth untruth is, that the Pope dealt with the Sarac^^ns to make
no tru^^ with the Emperor, nor deliver him the Crown, though he should win it
by Conquest: both parts are false, and for such may be crowned. The eleauenth
is, in making Vrspergensi^ resolutely to affirm, that the Pope caused to be
given out in Apulia, that the Emperor was dead, whereas he does report it only
by hearsay. And to make up a full Jury of twelve, to cry guilty at the bar
against M. Barlow, a most notorious untruth it is, that these things were done
by Innocentius, as M. Barlow avouches.

And these being all the strong presumptions, and violent inducements, that are
brought by him to prove the Popes poisoning of the Emperor, and proved by me
to be all lies, slanders, and corruptions, I leave it to the Readers judgment
to determine whether they be not strong presu^ptions, and violent inducements
rather of M^ Barlows per^idious dealing, and bad conscience, then any proof, or
probability of the Popes poisoning of the Emperor at all.

But besides these inductiue lies, there remain yet certain capital or
fundamental, M. Barlows fundamental lies.
to wit; the evident, and demonstratiue euictions (as M. Barlow would have them
seem) of this counterfeit poisoning, which we now have both euicted, and
demonstrated to be nothing else, but open untruths: to wit, that Cuspinian
should say, that Mansredus poisoned the Emperor: that the Emperor died of the
poison, which lie we have showed to be joined with a gross contradiction of M.
Barlow himself: that Matthew Paris should say, that the ^mperour found his
poisoning to be the Popes doing: that Petrus de Vineis testifies, that the
Emperor was poisoned by the Pope: to which if we add the lie which he makes
of Inn^ientius 4. which I shall now set down, I see not what can be more
required to make M. Barlow free of this trade, that in defending his Majesty,
either by violent inducements, or evident demonstrations, has brought no other
arguments for the one, or the other, but mere cogging, lying, and forgery.

And that you may know, that he will end, as well as he began, thus he knitteth
up all his discourse of this ^mperour Frederick. Pope Innocentius (the 4.) did
see, that his acts could be no longer hid: Pope Innocentius the 4. calumniated
both by M. Barlow and Fox.
descried they were: and is was time for him to speak^: and then if he would
not make the best for himself, with his own pe^, he might have been begged for
an Innocent. This is the final vpshot of his defense. And it is marvel, that
he did not adioyne John Fox his dream of the same Pope, how before his death
at Naples, he heard a voice saying, veni miser ad iudicium Dei, come thou
wretch to the judgment of God: and the next day he was (says this fabling
Goose) found in his bed all black and blew, as though he had been beaten with
batts. If you ask what Author affirms it, John Fox only tells you, that
the writers of Annals record it: but who these writers are, and what their
names be, you may seek if you list, and find if you can, for he gives you no
further direction. Perchance he had it by revelation, as he had the explication
of the Apocalypse for counting the months by Sabboths, See three Conuers. p^t.
2. ^. ^.
when the Spirit that speak with a majesty within him, called him, THOU FOOL.

Pope Innocentius acts, says M. Barlow, could be no longer hid: descried they
were etc. what were these acts I pray you? Were they these which you huddle
together for strong presumptions, and vehementinducements, to prove that he
would have poisoned the Emperor? But all these we have showed, in case they
had been true, as they have proved false, to touch Gregory 9, and no way to
concern Innocentius. And if you mean the other part of your charge,
concerning the same subject, of his hyring one to poison him, that also we have
showed to be as false, as the former. What then are th^se great matters with
which Innocentius is to be charged? Forsooth those things which are imposed
upon him by Pe^^us de Vin^is. But what reason is there that I should believe
more this Author against the Pope, then the Pope against him? To this M. Barlow
so answers, as if there were no other proof, it alone may suffice, to show
his folly and vnsincerity. I shall very briefly let you see what he says
hereunto, and if you knew not his wit before, now may you take the just
valuation and measure thereof by this example.

It was objected by me, that Petrus de Vineis was a servant of Frederick, and
sworn enemy to the Pope. To this M. Barlow gives three answers: Three of M.
Barlows answers examined.
first that so were S^^iu^ and Baronius to the Popes Sea, and professed enemies
of their Religion. But this reaches not home, for these collect their
histories out of other Records, and write nothing of themselves, but Secondly
(says M. Barlow) Servants do not always speak the best of their Masters
etc. And he, as appears by Cuspinian, dissembles not, even the foul vices o^
the Emperor his Master. This lo, is far more silly then the former: for
although that servants do not always speak the best of their Masters, yet
for the most part they do, especially if they by Princes, and that to the
vttemost, with most palpable flattery, and most of all if they speak or write,
that which their Masters may hear or read, as Petrus de Vineis did, whilst
he was in Frederickes special favor and grace, and as we see M. Bar^. to do
throughout all this loose idle work of his, when he has occasion to speak of
his Majesty, which also he often of purpose takes, where none is given. And
not to seek further for an example in this kind of Sycophancy, besides many
others which before have been alleged, the very next ensuing words after
those of his charge against Pope Innocentius, most evidently confirm the same,
wherein all his poor wit and skill, is bent to flatter his Majesty to the
uttermost.

And whereas M. Barlow says, that Pe^r^^ de Vineis (as it appears by
Cuspinian) does not dissemble his Masters foul vices, Another untruth of M.
Barlow.
it is a clear sign, that they were so foul, as that they could not be
dissembled: although I rather think these things in Cuspinian concerning the
Emperors vices, to be spoken by Cuspinian himself out of other Authors, for
that Petrus de Vineis should so write of the Emperor, and that in the said
Emperors time, whilst he was in grace with him, seems a mere fiction.
Neither does Cuspinian infinuate any such thing out of Petrus de Vineis, as M.
Barlow here would make us believe, and therefore this may pass for another
untruth.

And to this we may adioyne a very solemn foolery, which follows in the very
next page, where forsooth he rejects Blondus, by the same reason, by which he
here iustifies Petrus de Vineis, Blondus nicknamed by M. Barlo^
to wit, because he was secretary and servant to a Pope, nick-naming him
glozing Recorder Blondus, and painful Pseudolus, and yet he con^es^eth, that
he lived two hudreth years after Innocentius, in which respect there is less
cause of any suspicion in writing partially of Innocentius, as having no
dependence of him, then there is of Petrus de Vineis, Servant and Secretary to
the Emperor, and writing whiles the Emperor was alive, and himself in his
service.

The third answer then, which of all the rest is most Barlow fetreth down
thus: Thirdly says he, A seely reason of M. Barl. to justify Petrus de Vineis.
neither did Vineis write this as a servant, but as an Historian, who in all
his tract must have m^^e to the ^^th, without w^^ch as Polybius well rese^bles,
it is like a living body with all the bones taken out. Thus he. And does not
this reason clear as well Blondus as Petrus de Vineis? For did not Bloudu^
write as an historia^, and not as a servant? Or did Petrus de Vineis write any
history? I would gladly know what proof he has for the same, Barlow page 296.
for I find no such history of his, nor any record thereof, only I find recorded
his Epistles, as well in his own name, as the Emperors, and therefore as may be
presumed, written by him more like a Servant, then an Historian. And truly this
reason of M. Barlows seems to justify all histories, that ever were written,
seeing that as he says, an Historian must always have an eye to the truth,
and therefore Petrus de Vineis, when he wrote the history of the Emperor, did
write the truth, and so did Philostratus, when he wrote of Apolonius Tranaeus,
and Gessrey of Monmouth in setting down the Ge^ts of Vther-Pendragon, and
Prince Arthar.

These are the reasons of M. Barlow, why Petrus de Vineis should be credited
against Innocentius, but that Inuocentius should not be believed in his own
case, writing an Apology for himself against Petrus de Vineis. This he would
seem to prove, harken I pray thee good Reader, if thou can without laughter,
for M. Barlow will play the Vice in kind. A ridiculous exception of M. Barlow
against Innoce^tius.
But did the Pope (says he) write these books in defense of himself, to
consute Petrus de Vineis? Surely that is an argument that he was guilty. And
why, good M. Barlow? Suspitionem (says he) mihi facit nimia diligentia, says
S. Hierome: Pr^mptitude of excuse implies a consciousnes of the fault. Yea
what says the same Father of Judas the Traitor, when our Savior told his
disciples that one of them should betray him, and all the rest of the Apostles
(as stricken with grief) pluck their hands from the dish, forbidding meat to
their mouths, and Judas only thrust in his hand. This he did, vt audacia bonam
conscientiam mentiretur, that thereby he might dissemble, and think to perswad
his INNOCENCE with mere bouldnes. So he. And is not this good stuff? Who ever
heard wise man before draw an argument to prove one to be faulty for that he
wrote in his own defense? For by this reason S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S.
Gregory Nazianzen, who wrote Apologies for themselves against their
calu^niators, shall also be guilty of these crimes, wherewith they were charged
by their adversaries: neither shall the Emperor Frederick himself be free,
who wrote diverse Epistles in his own defense, as every where we find: yea your
whole Church of England, M. Barlow, shall be condemned, who wrote a lying Apology
for it self, refuted by D. Harding, and shamefully defended by your Brother,
the Superintendent of Salisbury, M. John I^ell.

And truly the inference of M. Barlow in proving Innocentius guilty, for that
he defended himself, being before wrongfully charged, is not more childish,
then the proose which he brings for the same is impertinent, suspitionem
(says he) mihi facit nimia diligentia, and then interprets it thus:
promptitude of excuse implies a consciousnes of the sault. This is his reason
(if so it may be termed) out of which it follows, that the sooner a man
offers to clear himself, the more he is to be suspected as guilty thereof:
which who sees not how ridiculous it is: and moreover I would feign know how,
or upon what ground, M. Barlow does gather, that Innocentius was so prompt, or
forward in answering, that his very promptitude gave so great occasion of
suspision, as that it was to be compared with Judas readiness in putting his
hand into the dish, to cover his malicious intention, for in this only stands
the force of his proof: how (I say) does he prove, that Innocentius was more
pro^p^, then slow in writing? Or that he may not as well be condemned, for his
too much slacknes, as for his over much ha^t? What proofs are there for the
one, more then for the other? Are not these pretty fooleries M. Barlow? May not
any man prove Quidlibet ex Quolibet by this your manner of reasoning, in which
you say what you li^t, and prove nothing at all? And for the example of Judas,
who sees not that it much better befits M. William Barlow, for betraying the
Earl of Essex his Master, then Innocentius the Pope, for defending himself.
But to return again to your former charge of Pope Innocentius.

If the Pope be not liable to these former pretended Imputations, of which we
have now fully cleared him, M. Barlows charge against Innocentius only in
generalities.
I would, as before I have said, feign know what these acts were, that are here
said to be descried, any could no longer be hid: for in Cuspinian (this Popes
professed adversary) I find no such personal crime objected against him, but
only the contention between him and the Emperor, for which the whole Council
of Lions, which represented the Church at that time, does clear him, in
condemning Frederick: and all Authors, excepting one or two set out by
Heretics, do not only clear him, but also much commend him; and out of
Petrus de Vineis, M. Barlow cites nothing, whereas, me thinks, in so odious a
calumniation, some instance should have been produced, some Author alleged,
and things more specified, t^en in such general terms. But that (as the
Philosopher says ^dolosus versatur in generalibus, the guilfull man goes upon
generalities: by which no man is so free, but may be charged, none so INNOCENT
that may not be condemned, especially if general oc^asions, without particular
proofs may take place. But we against this general assertion, will produce the
particular praises, that Authors do give of this Pope In which one thing the
Reader may note by the way, that as these writers commend Innocentius for his
prudence, learning, virtue, constancy, and other eminent talents: so in no
particular thing do they condemn him; of which we shall see the contrary in
Frederick to wit, that his disorders were so great, and so gros^e, that even
his chiefest flatterers, that use to make ex musca montem, to praise him far
beyond desert, did yet by force of truth confess his foul vices, as
Cuspinian, and the two Matthews, I mean Paris and Westminster, as I shall
anon show, when I come to specify, what all Authors write of him. But first let
us examine, Arist. in problem.
what they say of Innocentius, that so, contraria iuxta se posita, magis
illucescant, two contraryes being confron^ed together, may both of them the
better appear.

Innocentius then for his learning, is called of Volateranus, Vincentius,
Philippus Bergomas, Tritemius, Ioannetus, The pra^ses of Pope Innocentius the
4. by diverse Authors.
and those who wrote his life, Doctissi^us, most learned: and by C^antzius,
Summus Doctor, and Iuris peritissimus, the chiefest, and most skillful Doctor
of Law: and Durandus a famous L^wy^r of that time, calls him the Father of
the Law, as testifies Alphonsus Ciaconius: and the same does Genebrad ou^ of
Volateranus. Geneb. 4. C^ron. in an. 1245.
And he was not only learned himself, but was also a great furtherer and
favorer of learning and learned men, as witnesses the said Genebrard, and
Tarcagnota. For his constancy and upright dealing, L^ng. hist. Citiz. in an.
1242.
he is called of Paulus Lauzius Luthers friend, Vir rigidus, and iustitiae
tenacissimus executor, a seu^re man, and most constant executor of Justice. For
his invincible courage, of Folieta, to be Impauidi ad terrores animi, one who
apprehended no fear. Poliet. l. 4. hist. Genuensium. Ibi^^m.
For his wisdom and prudence, he is said of the same Author to have been,
Insignipictare and pruden^ia, of excellent piety and wisdom. And the like
has Ciaconius. For his providence, and circumspection, of the Monk of Padua,
In vita Innocent. Mona^h. Pa^^uan in a^. 1245.
who then lived, Sagacissimus Papa, a most provident, or circumspect Pope. For
his sanctity of Nangis the French man, in the life of S. Lewis, Beatae and
felicis vitae, and s^nctissimus Papa, of a blessed and holy life, and most holy
Pope. And that this was the common opinion of him, through all France at that
time, the testimony not only of this Frenchman, who lived soon after; but also
of Blondus do make evident, blond. Decad. ^. l. 7. an 1148. in sine.
who says, Suanis^^mus erat in Gallys famae odor grauitatis, sancti^atis, ac
rerum ges^arum eius Pontificis: cha^is, there was a most sweet odor in France,
of the gravity, sanctity, and acts of this Pope Innoc^n^ius. And this seems
to be confirmed by the singular reverence and dutiful respect, which S. Lewis
of France did yield him at the Council of Lions, as writes Paulus A^milius,
in his history. And Ioannetus in the li^e of this Pope says, that the Emperor
was nothing glad for his election: Norat enim virtutem viri, atque animi
magnitudinem; for he knew well his virtue and great courage. The same also is
avouched by Ciaconius, who with Onuphrius Panuinus a famous historiographer of
our days, In Innocent. 4.
gives him this ^^ncomium^ Multis egregys factis clarissimus, and ob vendicatam
assertamque libertatem Ecclesiasticam omnibus saculis laudatissimus; most
famous for his worthy deeds, and for recovering the Ecclesiastical liberty of
the Church, to all posterity most renowned.

And therefore his life being so commendable, no marvel though his death were
be wailed of all good men, Touching the death of Innocentius and the general
lamentation for the sa^e. R^be^ s^ l. 6. ^^^t. Raven. immediat^ ante an. 12^6.
Lib. 4. ^^st. Gen^.
^s testifies Hicronymus Rubeus in his history of Rauenna, saying: Innocentius
vitam cum morte commutauit, and quidem ingenti ^onorum omnium dolor. Vir enim
suerat magnitudine animi and vir^tute praesta^tissimus. I^mocentius departed
this life, and truly with the great grief of all good men, for he was a man
both for courage, and virtue most excellent. But this is more fully expressed
by Vbertus Folieta in these words: Hic annus non modo Genuensibus, sed omni
Christiano orb atque omnibus bonis luctuosus suit morte Innocentij 4. in Vrbe
Neapol^ etc. This year was doleful not only to the people of Genua, but also
to all the Christian world, and all good men, by the death of Innocentius the
4. in the City of Naples; who in the eleauenth year of his Popedom, ended
the course of his most renowned government, with this noble act of adding the
Kingdom of Naples, to the State of the Church. This man was made memorable and
famous to all posterity, as well for his exquisite learning, whereof he left
notable monuments, as also for his excellent piety, his noble deserts toward
the Weal public of Christendom, and continual, and infatigable labors,
whose known virtue was so admired, and believed of all men, that bewayling his
loss, they did commonly say, talem Virum aut numquam nasci, aut numquam mori
oportuisse, that so worthy a man either should never have been borne, or never
have died. So he.

And that this their mourning was not for the present only at his descease,
Ciaconius testifies saying: Clerus, and populus eum dudum luxerunt etc. In
Vita Innocent. 4. Innocentius death for a long time bewailed.
The Clergy and the people mourned for him a long time, as appears in the
History of Genua, written by Augustinus Iustinianus Bishop of Nebia, as also in
Ricardonus a Florentine writer. So he. Who also yealdeth the cause hereof in
th^se words: Relicta apud omnes fama non modo excellen^is scientiae, and
exquisitae virtutis, sed ettam integritatis vitae, admirabilisque prudentiae.
For that he left behind him the fame, not only of excellent learning, and
exquisite virtue, but also of integrity of life, and admirable wisdom. Which
rare encomium of good life, and long lamentation after his death, may be much
doubted, whether it will ever be left registered by any Historiographer of M.
Barlow, unless he make some great chang of himself from that which at the
present he is said to be. And this may suffice for Innocentius, whereby, good
Reader, thou may see and judge with what truth and spirit M. Barlow wrote of
this Pope, that he was forced to defend himself, for that his acts were
discried, and could be no longer ^id. Now then let us see what opinion writers
have of Frederick, whom M. Barlow so much commends, and defends against
all Popes and writers.

Although it be an odious and loath some thing to rake up the ashes of dead
men, Touching the life and vices of Frederick the second.
and to rip up their vices, which shouldly buried with them in silence (for
which cause I shall be the shorter in their rehearsal:) yet enforced hereu^to,
even against my inclination, by M. Barlows importunity, or rather impudency,
who to commend this Emperor, blusheth not to condemn so worthy a man, as you
have now heard Innocentius to have been. But I shall deal more uprightly
therein, then he has done with the Pope, for that I will charge the Emperor no
further then with that, which I find him in all Historiographers, or public
records to be charged withal, one only schismatic Vrspergensis being
excepted, Frederick the 2. condemned by Matthew Pari^ and Matthew Westminster.
Matthew. Paris. in an. 1245. p. 922.
who in this, as I have showed, de^erueth no credit. And to begin with them,
who seem to favor and defend him most, I meene Matthew Paris and Cuspinian,
the former having set down an Epistle of Fredericks to King Henry the third of
England, written after his excommunication, and deposition in the general
Council of Lions, gives his censure thereof in these words: Haec cum ad
Christianissimos Francorum and Anglorum Reges nuntiata peruenissent etc. When
these things came to the knowledge of the most Christian Kings of France and
England, it appeared more clear then the sun to them, See also the same
Author anno 1239. p. 651.
and their Nobility, that Frederi^ke with all his endeauours went about to
anihilate the liberty and dignity of the Church, which he himself never
advanced, but was established without his liking, by his noble predecessors:
and therefore making himself suspected of heresy, did impudently and
imprudently extinguish, and worthily blot out that little spark of good name,
which hitherto he had amongst the people, for wisdom and prudence etc. And
with Matthew Paris agrees Matthew of Westminster, Matthew. Westminster. an. 1245.
page 20^.
saying, that by this letter, Se volens excusare, impudenter accusauit, going ^
out to excuse the matter, he did impudently accuse himself.

And as for Cuspinian^ although by all means he seeks to excuse and iusti^y
this Emperor; yet were his vices so notorious, as he could not conceal them
altogether, Cuspinians judgment of Frederick
but having set down those things, which he thought commendable in him (as
there are none so bad commonly, but that some good thing or other may be noted
in them) he concludes his praises thus: Has praeclaras virtutes contamina^unt,
and obscurarunt etiam quadam vitia, sae^itia scilicet hominis, and libido
immensa, qui praeter gentis morem concubinas multas and scorta aluit. These
noble virtues certain vices did stain and obscure ^ to wit, the cruelty of
the man, and his insatiable lust, who against the custom of his Country did
maintain many Concubines and queanes. And this, as already has been noted,
he speaks of himsese without any reference to Petrus de Vineis (as M. Barlow
would have us believe: Barl. page 296. in fine mon. 93.
) neither want there store of Authors who tax him for the same. And for the
first, Palmerius says, he was non essrenis modo ira, sed rabie, and
crudelitate immanis, not only impotent in anger, Pal^e^. in Chron. an. 1250.
Foliet a hist. Genu. l. 4. VVerner in f^s^^^^^o an. 1224.
but fierce with rage and cruelty: which Folieta terms, barbaram
crudelitatem, barbarous cruelty: VVernerus, in fasciculo temporum, calls it
Tyrannidem, Tyranny. And he that shall but read what he did at his siege in
Rome, related as well by German Authors, to wit Crantzius, Nauclerus,
Huldericus Mutius etc. as by Blondus, Sabellicus, M^ssia, Iacobus Philippus,
and others, shall well see that he was not only cruel, but barbarous and
Tyrannical indeed: for thus does Crantzius relate the matter, and with him do
the rest agree: but I have chosen him out of the rest, as being a German; for
the Germans, as M. Barlow out of Cuspinian notes, do write more faithfully
of their own affairs, then other strangers, who cannot so well conceive them:
and this Author is more grave, learned and ancient then the other two.

Fredericus Pontificem and Ecclesiam satigabat etc. Frederick did afflict both
the Pope and Church: Crantz. l. 8. c. 9. Saxoniae. Frederick his barbarous
cruelty.
those who were signed with the Cross, once resisted his coming, for
hastening to break down the gates, and wales of the City of Rome, those of
the Cross stood in combat with the mighty army of the Emperor: at which he
being afrighted was so moved with fury, and rage, as fighting in the Vanguard,
he cried out that all such as wore the Cross, and could be taken, should be
brought unto him alive: and the Romans that were brought unto him, he caused
partly to be thrust through with four wounds, after the fashion of a Cross;
and partly he cut their heads into ^oure parts, and caused their forheades to
be cut with Crosses: but Clergy m^n that did wear their Crowns shaven, he
commanded to have their Crowns ado^ned (as he termed it) with a cro^^e, cut
into the same with a knife, of whom one for that he seemed to bear the wound
too patiently, they tied him with a rope, and drew him through a heap of
straw, or chafe, and when as he still preseuered to praise and glorify God,
they burned him. So he. Again in the end of the same Chapter: Mirae sunt, and
raro alias auditae crudelitates etc. Wonder^ull are the crueltyes and seldom
heard of before, which at this time Frederick showed against the Legates of
the Church, throughout the Kingdom of Sicily, who partly killed many
Archbishops and Bishops, partly kept them in prison, partly banished them:
amongst these was the Bishop of Catana, by whom Frederick from his infancy had
been brought up. So Crantzius. And more also in the ensuing Chapters,
especially the 24. which for breuity ^ omit.

Only I will add unto Crantzius two other Germans, Nauclerus and Mutius,
N^^^l. (...) 41. anno 1247. Mutius anno. 1246.
who speaking of his siege of Parma, say, that he caused as many of his
enemies, as were taken to be shot out of great Crosbowes into the town: and
using great cruelty as well to women, as men, caused many to be torn in pieces
before the gates of the Cytty etc. And could there be any more barbarous
Cruelty or Tyranny then this?

Besides these two examples of his outrageous cruelty, one more, omitting the
rest, we will adioyne in another kind, out of a Germa^ History, called
Compilatio Chronologica, Compila^. C^^onol. an. 1245.
wherein is recorded, that this Frederick maintained certain Man-quellers, and
desperate Cutthroats which were sent from a Pagan Prince in Syria, King of the
Assassines, from whom the name of Assasinates seems to be derived, whose
proper profession was to hazard there lives to murder any man, when they were
set on work: and they were the more resolute and desperate in this behalf,
for that they held their obedience herein, to be a special act of Religion, yea
to be rewarded, and crowned with immortality in the next life, as may be seen
in Nubrigensis. Nubrig. ^. 4. ^. 22. and l. 5. ^. 24.
The King or Prince of those people, is always called Vetus de Monte, or
Vetustus de Montanis, that is, The old Man of the Mountain, rather in respect
of his wisdom, and gravity then for his age, says Nubrigensis, being held for
a Prophet, by those bloody murderers. Then Frederick had diverse at his
command, by whose help he killed the Duke of Bauaria, and also (as Monachus
Paduanus adds, Monach. Paduan. l. 2. an. 1246.
who lived at that very time) the Duke of Hungary. Which examples fully
express the horrible cruelty of his nature, and how much he thirsted after
blood. And so much of this. Let us now come to the second.

The lice^tious life of Frederick.

Cu^pin. and Messia in vita Frederic. Ciac^ in Innoc. 4. Blondus Dec. 2. l. 7.
Naucl. ge^. 41. anno 1247.

C^a^tz. l. 8. c. 14. Mut. an. 1246.

Crus. part. 3. c. 1. Colenut. in vit. Fox Acts and Momuments. page 286.


For the other vice of licentious life, and that in so high a degree as little
beseemed his Imperial Majesty, there are many proofs; for with Cuspinian
agrees Messia, in the life of Frederick, Ciaconius in the life of
Innocentius, Blondus out of the relation of one who then lived, and wrote what
he saw and knew, Nauclerus, Crantzius, Huldericus Mutius, Crusius, Colenutius,
and out of him John Fox, who sets down the matter somewhat nicely, with a
Ministerial diminitiue phrase, or (to use M. Barlows words) with an
hypocoristi^all alleuiation, as being loath to touch him too near, who was so
eager an enemy to the Pope, saying: He was not without his fault and human
fragility, for the VVriters impute unto him some fault of concupiscence,
wherewith he was stained and blotted, and it appears that he was not all
clear thereof. So he.

And truly I smyled when I read this clause, some fault of concupiscence, in
Fox. For seeing that even in the regenerate in the Protestants opinion,
concupiscence is a sin, and so still remains after Baptism, why is it here
imputed as a special fault in this Emperor more then in other men, seeing that
all men are as guilty thereof as he, as having it al alike engendered within
the^? But he means his wa^ton life, which he would closely cover with the
general and gentle title of Concupiscence. For he adds that he had by sundry
Concubines three base Children, Entius King of Sardinia, Man^redus Prince of
Tarentum, and Frederick King of Antioch, which is somewhat more as you see,
then bare Concupi^cence: and yet much less then others do write of him in this
kind. For who so will read his siege of Parma, when he lay at his new town of
Victoria, shall find almost in every Author, the great multitudes of women,
which he there kept, who after the Turkish guise (for to that Sect as all
testify he was singularly devoted) were attended upon by Eunuchs, or, as
Bonauentura Angelus in his history of Parma says, by droues of Eunuchs, for
which he is specially taxed, as I said, by all Authors: to which their general
and uniform consent, I see not what for proof can be added, or answered for
reply.

And to show further the base mind of this lascivious Emperor, A very base and
barbarous example.
besides his own personal misbehauiour in this filthiness, Crantzius relates
one example of his beastlines, as may alone show how far this his faulty
Concupiscence did extend it self. For to gratify the Turks (says Crantzius)
as well those who followed him in his wars, Crantz. l. 8. Saxon. cap. 10.
as those that lived in Africa, he not only suffered, but procured throughout
all Sicily and his kingdom of Italy, the fairest women, and maidens which the
Turks lusted after, to be taken from their parents bosom, and married wives
even out of their husbands arms to be given unto them. So he. And was not this
a virtuous man trow you; who to pleasure the Turks, sworn enemies of Christ,
would thus deal with Christians? And does not this man deserve to be credited,
speaking in his own behalf before Pope, all writers, and whatsoever other
testimony?

But indeed this dealing was conform to his devotion, for he who so vilely
esteemed of our Savior himself, no marvel if in his other behavior he were
so irreligious, base and wicked: The blasphemou^ speech of Frederick^.
for, as we have before out of Fazelius showed, he held our Savior and Moses
to be no better the^ Mahomet, calling them all three Seducers, as with Fazelius
the Chronicles of Augusta, and Compilatio Chronologica, both German histories
do avouch; and moreover affirm, that he speak the same in the hearing of
Henry the Lantgraue, saying withal; If the Princes of the Empire would but
follow me, I would ordain a b^tter manner of belief, and li^e for all Nations.
And verily it seems, that he aimed at this, when as you have seen before,
out of his own epistle, set down and censured by both the Matthews, he went
about to abase all the Clergy, by taking all livings from them, and to deprive
them of all their dignity: ^or that being once effected, he might with more
ease afterward have made a new Clergy, a new faith, a new Christ: but he
forgot in this his foolish feruor, what the Kingly Prophet David said, and
prayed against such atte^ptes, Psalm. 82.
Omnes Principes qui dixerunt hereditate possideamus Sanctuarium Dei etc. All
those Princes, who have said, let us possess, as our inheritance, the
Sanctuary of God, let them be, O my God, as a wheel, and as straw before the
face of the wind: as a fire that burns the wood, and as a flame that consumes
the mountains. So shall thou persecute them etc.

Which seems in some sort to be verified litte^ally in this man, who after his
excommunication, being in extreme calamity, as well by the election of another
Emperor, and defection of a great part of the Empire from him, as also for
that one of his sons, to wit, Entius King of Sardinia was taken prisoner by
the people of Bolognia, and another was dead in Apulia. Likewise himself
percussus est (says Matthew Paris) morbo qui dicitur lupus, vel sacer ignis,
was stricken with the disease which is called the wol^e, or holy fire; whereby
he was so humbled (as the same Author witnesses) that he offered unto the Pope
good conditions of peace, according, says Matthew, to that saying of the
Psalmist, which follows immediately in the same Psalm by me now alleged,
Imple facies eorum ignominia, and quaerent nomen tuum Domine: fill their face
with confusion, and they will seek thy name, O lord.

And this chastisme^t of almighty God, as it began in his own person, The
punishment of God upon Frederick and his issue.
so it continued in his issue, partly whiles he lived, and partly after his
death, until they were all extirpated. In his life time, his Son Henry was
made away by his own procurement, being cast into prison where he was either
poisoned, by his command (as some think) or else died naturally, as others
report. Entius, was taken by the Bolognians, and there after twenty years
restrainst and more, being kept in an iron cage, he pined away, and died
miserably. Bononiam ductus (says Muti^^) mittitur in ferream^ caueam, in qua
sordidissimo victu nutritus, miserimam vitam post aliquot annos finiuit. Entiu^
being brought to Bolognia is cast into an iron cage, in which being entertained
with most filthy diet, after some years imprisonment ended a most miserable
life. So he. His other bastard-sonne Frederick died in Apulia. Huld. Mutins in
Chron. an. 1249. in fine.
And after the said Emperor his death, his son Conrade King of Sicily was
poisoned by Manfred his bastard-brother, and Manfred was slain in battle, by
Charles of Ang^ow: and Conradinus Son or Nephew to Conradus (for in this
Authors differ) was beheaded at Naples, and so ended the race of this wicked
and unfortunate Emperor, of whom that may justly be said, which Job speaks
of the like men. Job. 27.
Haec est pars impij apud Deum etc. This is the portion of the wicked man with
God, and the inheritance of the violent (oppressors) which they shall receive
from the omnipotent. If his sons shall be multiplied, they shall die by the
sword, and his nephews shall not be filled with bread. All whom he shall
leave behind him, shall be buried in destruction. Which if all Princes could
remember amidst their greatness, no doubt, but they would be more moderate in
their power and actions, and also fear him more, Psalm. 75.
qui au^ert spiritum Principum terribilis apud omnes Reges terr^: who takes
away the life of Princes, and is dreadful to all the Kings of the earth.

Before we have set down out of the Council it self, Other enormities of
Frederick.
then which there can be no more grave, or greater authority, all the causes of
his condemnation, as his sacriledges; his periuries upon periuries; his
perfidiousnes to the Christians; his treacherous treaty with the Sultan; his
spoiling of Churches and monasteries; his expelling of the Christians out of
Nuceria, and giving it to the Turks; his reviving the foul faction of the
Guelphes and Gibbelines; all which and many more, as they may be seen in the
sentence of Innocentius, and Seuerinus Binnius: so also many other Authors
might be alleged for the same. And he who lists to read more hereof, may
peruse William of Nangis the Frenchman, Nang. in an. 1245.
in the life of S. Lewis: and with him all the Authors whom before we have
cited, where some of these things have been more particulerly touched: which no
doubt was the cause why VViceli^^ a German in his Epitome of the Popes lives,
in this Innocenti^^ the 4. spoke so contemptibly of the Emperors death, as he
said, sub hoc perijt bestia Fredericus: In the time of this Pope died that
beast Frederick. And the Monk of Padua, registring the same death, says;
Vitam amisit in Apulia etc. On S. Lucies day Frederick died in Apulia, and
descended into hell, carrying nothing with him but a sack of sins. So he: far
different from that which before we have heard others to write of the death of
Innocentiu^.

And this may suffice to show what small reason M. Barl. had, so much to justify
this Emperor: and for his sake to condemn the Popes who then lived, forgetting
in both that severe co^mination of the Holy Ghost. Proverb. 17.
Qui iustificat impiu^, and qui condemnat iustum abominabilis est vterque apud
Deum: He that iustifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, both are
abominable before God. Which makes M. Barlowes case the more pitiful, for
that he alone has done both the one and other in this example. God send him
grace to see, repent, and amend his error. And so much for Frederick the
second.

I will now end this matter, with this advertisement to the Reader, that
whereas M. Barlow and others of his profession, use to serve themselves much
out of the writings of Matthew Paris, Matthew Paris censured.
Cuspinian, and Peter de Vinei^, the truth is, that no one of them deserves so
much credit, as our Adversaries would feign force upon them. For the first has
many fables, contradictions, railinges, and dogmaticall assertions, which
little beseem a religious spirit, or true Catholic, which at least he was
known to be: and therefore as well this Matthew, as the other, being set out by
Heretics, and printed at London, by order, as I have been informed, from the
Superintende^t of Canterbury that then was, and no other ancient copy being
extant that I can hear of, that might be conferred with this in print, it is
very likely, that many things which are now urged against us, are not the
words of Matthew Paris the Monk, but of Matthew Parker of Canterbury: and he
who shall but read Harpsfields History, and examine the places which he
brings, or things which on their authority he avouches, shall soon see,
that his Matthewes spoke otherwise then these, who in many things are made to
write like good Protestants, although hitherto nothing has been alleged out
of them by M. Barlow in this matter, which I have not fully answered.

John Cuspinian as he is a late writer, Cuspinian censured.
so is he of little credit, especially for his books of History of the
Emperors which himself never set forth, but as Gerbelius writes, Nico.
Gerbel. praefat. ad Carolu^ Quintum
morte praeuentus inemendatos, and ob scriptoris inscitiam soedissimis
er^oribus deprauatos reliquit, being prevented by death, he left his books of
history uncorrected, and through ignorance of the writer, corrupted with most
filthy errors. So he. By profession Cuspinian was a Physician, and knew perhaps
how to frame his potions, according to the complexion of the receauers, and
therefore this Frederick being descended as some think, or at least by marirage
nearly allied to the House of Austria, he thought by making the most of him, to
gratify both Maximilian his master, and young Charles the fifth of the same
family, yet seeing he never set forth this book, but left it imperfect,
uncorrected, full of errors etc. and that afterward it was first published by
Nicolas Gerbelius, a Protesta^t-brother of Strasburge, as may be presumed, who
printed it in the year 1540. we may well think, that it was sauced by the
setter forth, according to the new Gospel, and good appetite of them of his
own profession.

And as for Petrus de Vineis, Petrus de Vineis ce^sured.
besides the just exception of partiality, which I took against him in my
Letter, and that which I have already answered unto M. Barlowes Reply thereunto;
I shall not need to adioyne any more. Wherefore I will only content my self with
two censures which I find in two Authors of him, to wit, in S. Antoninus an
Italian, S. Anton. tit. 19. cap. 6.. 2^
and Tritemius a German. The first notes him in these words: Iusto Dei iudicio
factum videtur etc. The death of Petrus de Vineis seems to have been procured
by the just judgment of God, that because he had done many things to please the
Emperor, against the Church, in favor and excuse of him, by him he was
condemned, for whom he had offended both God and the Church. So he. And
Tritemius thus writes of him, Tritem. l. de Scriptorib. Eccles. in Petro de
Vineis.
Petrus de Vineis etc. Peter de Vineis by nation a German, Secretary and
Counselor of the Emperor Frederick the second, was a learned and eloquent
man, but in this very faulty, that adhering to Frederick, he did in favor of
him, bark like a fool (stolidus latrauit) against the Roman Church, by whom
he was worthily rewarded: for having in some things offended him, he had his
eyes pulled out etc. So he. And in his Catalogue of Worthy men, to the like
c^nsure, he adds this clause, In Catal. Virorum Illustriu^ in Petro de Vineis.
Hoc praemium eorum etc. This is the reward of the^, who do serve the humors of
Princes, against the obedience of the Roman Sea, and Vicar of Christ, and like
wretches fall headlong into hell, except they repent etc. Which aduertisment
being given by so grave an Author, before these controversies were raised by
Luther, I wish M. Barlow, and all other in authority and credit with Princes,
as Petrus de Vineis was, seriously to ponder.

OF THE EMPEROVR Frederick the first, whose picture was said to have been sent
to the Sultan by Pope Alexander the third. And of the charge of Alexander the
sixth, touching the death of Zizimus or Gemen, M. Barlows innocent Turk.. III.
METHOD and rules of learning require, that every thing be put down in his due
place and order, and therefore me thinks that Frederick the first should by all
reason, have been mentioned before the second Frederick his successor,
especially seeing that there is another objection made a little before out of
this very Emperor and Pope, whereunto this might well have been annexed, had it
not been that the margent of the Apology was to be filled with citations, and
the text with variety of examples, to make Popes more odious. But the
transposition we^e pardonable, if the thing avouched were true, and the Reader
not abused by these forged calumniations, who through the heat and heap of
many words, is made to conceive, that M. Barlow says much to the purpose, and
with great sincerity: whereas all he has, is nothing else but vain
Thrasonicall ostentation, impudent lying, and that which always acco^panieth
the loose liberty of a licentious tongue, exorbitant railing against all sorts,
and degrees of men whatsoever. And this, as it has been every where already
showed: so shall it be more in this, and the other ensuing Chapters, though
with much more breuity then the former, least both this Chapter and the whole
book, be drawn forth to greater prolixity and length, then I have purposed
with myself that it should be: which only reason has made me in other places,
to leave more advantages, then I might have taken against M. Barlow; albeit I
have taken more then I think will stand with his credit, or honesty, if yet he
have any part or parcel of the one or the other left him.

But let us hear him speak, if he can without lying, which here I assure you
he will not, but begin with a round one, at the very first entrance. For thus
he says: M. Barlow page 298. numb. 96.
Another instance (says he) objected ^y his Majesty ( which pincheth their
holy Father to the quick) is of that Pope, who when Emperor Frederick was in
the Holy Land, ^ighting in Christ's quarrel ( ^earing that his return would be
some annoyance to the Romish Sea) betrayed him to the Sultan, to whom he
directs his private letters, and with them also sent the Emperors picture, in
case the Sultan should mistake his Person. So M. Barlow. A cluster of lies in
M. Barlow.
And least any man should misdoubt of the certainty of this thing, he says,
that I made no answer thereunto, because in likelihood I saw it uncontrollable.
But I hope so now to check and control the same, as all indifferent Readers
shall cry shame on M. Barlows ignorance and impudency, who in so false and
forged a matter, reposeth so great confidence, as to affirm, that it pinchet^
the Pope to the quick, and is incontrollable.

And to answer first in general to this brutish charge; I say, that it is full
of malice, deuoid of truth, and wholly founded upon lies, which I shall by such
evident demonstration euince, as better proof in such a matter cannot be
required, or had. But first I must advertise thee, gentle Reader, that reason
and modesty required on M. Barlows behalf in so odious and injurious an
accusation, that some Author, record, or proof should have been produced, for
confirmation of the same, especially seeing Iouius who was first cited in the
Latin and English Apology, was by me denied to have any one word thereof. But
instead of proving this, M. Barlow tells us, how Saul sought for his fathers
Asses, and found the^ not in Salila, nor Salim. But howsoever he sought and
found them not there, here I am sure we have found one at least, if to play the
formal fool, as M. Barlow does often, may deserve that title. But let us
examine the thing it self.

The Pope, who is charged in the Apology of the first and second edition, as
well in the English as Latin copies, Alexander the third calumniated.
is Alexander the third, much by all Authors, as well of that time, as of the
ensuing ages praised both for a worthy Pastor, and excellent man, Baronius
tom. 12. Bern. epist. ^34. ad Rolandu^ (for that was Alexa^ders name before he
was Pope) Cancellariu^ etc. Rob. de Monte in Chron. an. 1181.
as Baronius in his last Tome, through the whole course of his Popedom does
show, and S. Bernard gives an honorable testimony of his demeanor before he
was either Pope or Cardinal, as also the French Author Robertus de Monte does
after his death. And did this man I pray you send these letters and Frederickes
picture to the Sultan? It is incredible; and no otherwise is it here verified,
then by a bare assertion of M. Barlow, by which kind of proof, I may as well
prove him to be a Souldan, or Turk, as he does, that there was ever any such
letter or picture sent. And truly, there is as much ground for the one, as for
the other: and as well shall I be able to show, that this matter between
Frederick and Alexander is a mere counterfeit fiction, as ever he shall be able
to show, that he is not a Souldan (for of his being a Turk I will not so much
contend, seeing him so earnest in defense of Gemin.) And truly if in any thing,
the uniform consent of all historiographers be to be heard, it is not to be
rejected in this, but it were to long and unnecessary a labor to lay down,
what all of them have written in this affair. It shall suffice me to allege,
that wherein they agree with the^ who then lived, as Nubrigensis, Houeden,
Robertus de Monte, and Nicetas the Grecian, or not long after, as the two
Matthewes, to whom I will of Protestant writers ad Huldericus Mutius a
Zuinglian, and Martinus Crusius a Lutheran, that M. Barlow may the better
perceive how exorbitant his malice and folly is, that will have that pass for
uncontrollable, which by all manner of writers is contradicted.

First then, by both the Matthewes, and Houeden, Vterque Matthew. in an. 1188.
Houed. eodem an. Nubrig. also for thetim agrees, l. 3. cap. 23.
it is evident that Frederick at the persuasion, and preaching of Henry
Cardinal, and Bishop of Alban, sent by Cl^m^nt the third, as Legate unto him,
first resolved to wear the Cross, and to undertake the war of the
Holy Land, and that in the year 1188. as with them testifies Nubrigensis:
though the Lutheran in this differ from them in putting this resolution of the
Emperor one year sooner, which makes little or nothing at all to our
purpose, although in the next year he say, that at the instance of Clement the
third Pope, the Emperor prepared himself to the field. When Frederick went
into the Holy Land.
So that all agreeing herein, that Frederick went at the persua^ion of Clement;
and further it being cer^aine, that Clement was not made Pope until the year
1188. there can be no difficulty touching this controversy of the time. And no
less clear and certain it is by these writers, that Frederick set not
forward toward Syria, until the next year after, 1189. for so say both the
Matthews, Nubrigensis, Robertus de Monte, and Cr^sius, who al^o agree, that he
was drowned the year after, to wit 1190. And in this I see no difference or
variety of opinions, amongst these writers. And albeit there should be any
about the time, when he resolved to wag^ this war, or when he was drowned;
yet in this all jointly, without any contradiction, agree that he went this
voyage, and died diverse years after Pope Alexander the third his death.

Houed. loc. citat. Antonin. tit. 17. c. 9.. 19.

Nicet. Choniat^ lib. 2. hist. in Isaacio Angelo.

Compilat. Chronol. Suff^idus. Fragme^t. hist. Godef. Chron. Austral. Chro^.
August. Mercator in an. 1190. Sigon. de regno Italiae l. 14. and 15. Messiah
and Cuspin. in vita Freder. Blond. dec. 2. l. 6. Sabe^l. En. 9. l. 5. Paulus
AEmil. l. 6. Antonin. tit. 17. c. 9.. 19. Cra^tz. l 7. Saxon. c. 1. Vinc. l.
29. c. 51. Huld. Mut. l. 19. in an. 1190. Crus. Annal. Su^ui. par. 2. l. 11. c.
11 and 18. etc.

V to que Mat^h. in an. 1181. Nubrig l. 3. c. 5. Houed. part 2. in an. 1181.
Robert. de Monte in anno 1181. G^neb. in chro^. Nau^ler. vol. 2. gen 40.
Tritem. in chron. Monaster. Her sa^gien.


But this computation of time which I have declared as it is most common amongst
Authors, so is it conform unto truth, which none could better know then those
who lived in that age: amongst whom in this point as I said there is no
disagreement, for they all say, that he se^ forward for Syria in the year
1189. and that in April, as both Matthews avouch, on S. Georges day from
Reinsburg, or Ratisbon, and going all the way with his whole army by land
through Hungary, Bulgaria, Thracia, and other Countries as Houeden writes;
finding also such unexpected hind^rances in Greece, at Isaacius his hands, who
was then Emperor of the East; it must needs follow, that it was very late in
that year before ever he could ariue into the holy Land. In so much, as
Nicetas a Greek Historiographer then living, says that he came not thither
until the beginning of the next year, which as it was the first of his
arrival there; so was it the last of his life, to wit, the year 1190. as we
have said, and all the Authors here cited do testify.

All which if we suppose (and who, against the authority of such manner of
witnesses, can make any doubt or exception?) and withal consider what, not
only all these English writers, with the Protestants, but all other Authors
besides extant before these later controversies in religion were raised, do
write of the time of the death of Pope Alexander the third, which by the
uniform testimony of them all (two only ^xcepted, who put it a year later)
fell out in the year 1181. he I say who shall consider all this, will blush
for very shame, if he be M. Barlows friend, to hear him thus resolutly to
affirm, That when Frederick was in the Holy Land fighting in Christ's
quarrel, fearing that his return would be some annoyance to the Romish Sea,
the Pope betrayed him to the Sultan etc. For how I pray you could he betray
Frederick, being in the Holy Land, who was dead eight years and more, before
ever he came thither? For now we have showed that Pope Alexander the third died
in the year 1181. which was s^aue^ years before Frederick resolved to wear
the Cross, and wage that ba^taile, and more then 8. before his arrival into
Armenia where he was drowned. And here to urge M. Barlow with a Dilemma: Either
he knew this diversity of time, I meanne of the Popes death, and Frederickes
expedition for the holy land, when he wrote his book, or he knew it not. If the
first; then is he very shameless, and malicious, who contrary to his own
knowledge and conscience would deceive his Reader in a printed book, and that
in so triumphant manner, as you have heard. If he knew it not; then truly he is
very ignorant, and unworthy to write in defense of so great a Monarch as his
Majesty is; and withal very negligent, that would not so much as see, and
search his Authors; or else very foolish and simple, if he would have us believe
him without any other authority, or proof then his bare word, which I think
of his next neighbors will not be taken for much.

And by this example the Reader may know how hereafter to trust him in other
places, when he vaunteth and braggeth of advantages, for these are but sudden
pangs, whereunto the desperatenes of his cause does drive him, when no other
answer can be made. For what is true, or untrue, ^e seems to care little, or
not to seek much, but only indeauoreth to intertaine talk, and get his fee;
and yet this is the man, who in his Epistle to his Majesty thinks me too
weak to dispute with him; M. Barlow very great in his own conceit.
and so braggeth of himself, as that, he has neither dallied, nor deluded his
Reader: yea so far is he confident in this his answer, that he says, he
assures himself security from any sound Reply thereto f^o^ me. But what either
of us have done in this kind, he for Answer, or I for Reply, not he, nor I,
but the Reader must judge. And yet here I dare bouldly interpose thus far also
mine own Judgment, that if M. Barlow be no more exact in other things then
he has been in this, let him brag as much as he list, and flatter himself,
with the conquest before ever he see his Adversaries weapons; let him ^ound out
his own triumphs in every page of his book, and make himself as glorious as
he can: yet it will be more eas^e, then praise worthy for any adversary to refute
him, seeing his pro^es are every where so weak, his lies so frequent, his
citations so corrupt, and the whole order and method of his discourse so
patched, harsh, and disioynted, to speak nothing of his railing, flattery, and
slanderous detractions, as (like the apples of Gomorrha) with a light touch all
will resolve to smoke and dust, as any one, who with indifferent attention shall
read over the same, will soon confess.

For what now I pray you is become of all this sharp charge, and virulent
accu^ation of Pope Alexander? Is it not evidently demonstrated, upon the
diversity of the time of Fredericks being in Asia, and death of the said Pope,
to be counterfeit, to be false, to be impossible? I think M. Barlow will not
affi^me that Pope Alexander by special privilege before the general
resurrection did rise again from death to life, to dispatch this business of
betraying the Emperor: and yet I call back my word again, for I see by this
charge, that he is resolutel^ bent to affirm any thing. And this privilege
the poor man must confess, or else cry guilty against himself, of as many
lies, as there be lines in his accusation (to speak the least) for here is no
pinching instance, but a forged fiction, no betraying of the Emperor, whiles
he was in the Holy Land, no letters, no pictures, no Pope Alexander then
living, noe fear of annoyance to the Romish Sea, with which at that time
Frederick was united in all love and freindship, and at Pope Clements request
undertook that enterprise, which M. Barlow truly calls the fighting in
Christ's quarrel, though it were not for the Protestant Gospel, but for the
preservation of the Catholic faith in the Holy Land, which this Minister and
his Mates in their Bedlam books, and Sermons call Idolatry^ the Whore of
Babylon, Antichrist, and the like. But it was sufficient with M. Barlow in this
place, to make it Christ's quarrel, because he meant to force it against the
Pope: such is the wit, conscience, and sincerity of the man.

And truly in this place, seeing the truth so clear, and testimonies of Authors
so consona^t, I was somewhat moved with curiosity to see, if either in the
Apology of the last editio^ with the Monitory Epistle, or the Torturers book,
there were any thing more said for this fable, in supply of M. Barl. defect,
and silence in the same. In the former I only found mentioned the History of
Frederick, written in dutch, in the other, many names, as the dutch History,
our English Bale, Scardius the German Caluinist, and besides the^, Barnus,
Ioannes Marius, and Cremonensis: but all this noise is but empty wind, all
these witnesses but one, and he scant worth the taking up. For this dutch
History, and Scardius is all one, and so is Scardius and Bale, the one taking
it out of the other: the three Catholic names (if they be Catholics) serve
but for Ciphers, to fill up paper, for no words of theirs are cited, no works
extant of this matter that we can hear of, unless perhaps lately printed at
Amaur^t in Vtopia, anno magno Platonis, and so conuayed into England amongst
our Ministers.

And as for the narration of Bale in his Centuries of this Fredericks death, it
is so frought with lies, and those gross, palpable, ill coherent, and
incredible, as a learned writer of our age having refuted many of the^, adds
in the end his censure or judgment of the Author, Gretserus Apologia pro
Cruciat. exped. cap. 8.
in these words. Piget taedetque plura vanissima Balai me^dacia percensere,
quae adeo sunt enormia, vt posteros nostros vix pute^ credituros fieri
potuisse, vt hoc saculum nostru^ tam e^^rontes criminatores and calu^niatores
protulerit. That is to say: It does loath and trouble me to recount more lies
of this most vain Bale ( in this matter of Frederick) which are so gross,
Bales egregious lying ce^sured.
or enormous, as I scarcely persuade my self, that those who shall live after
us, will ever be brought to think it credible, that this age of ours has
brought forth such shameless accusers, and slanderers. So he. And if any list to
make trial hereof, let him turn to the place here by me cyted, and he will
desire no more satisfaction in this behalf, but for ever after loath from his
heart so lying a Mate. And here the Reader may with himself consider that if we
against the known testimony and written histories of former times, should
allege to the contrary our only bare assertions, as M. Barlow does in this
without further authority, conjecture, or proof, how would our clamorous
English Clergy cry out against the same? How would they exaggerate such an
advantage? And yet here in a most heinous accusation against all writers,
without all proof, we must stand to M. Barlows bare assertion, or else to two
modern writers, both heretics, both enemies, to wit John Bale, and Simon
Scardius, who (especially the former for his notorious lying, and lascivious
scurrilitie) with us, the Lutherans, and all learned Protestants are of as much
credit, as Robin-Hood, and Little-Iohn.

But let us proceed with that which follows in M. Barlow, who for that I said
in my Letter, that Paulus Io^ius in his second book, did not testify this
matter (though he were ^yted for it, both in the English and latin books of
the Apology) replyeth against me thus. If Saul in seeking his fathers asses,
had returned such an answer, or himself retired, Barlow page 298.
because he ^ound them not in Salila, and Salim, he had not proved Saul inter
Prophetas. So contume^^ous still is M. Barlow in all his speeches; but we have
now showed where the Ass, without further seeking is to be found. Let us
likewise see how prudent his answer is, or rather evasion. The Printer, says
he, displaced the quotation, giving it a higher room by five lines in the page
then he should have done, for that it concerned the next story imediatly
following. But then I would ask M. Barlow, why the letter F. was placed in the
text before Alexander, and the same correspondent in the margent in Paulus
^ouius? Could the Printer also change the letter in the text? And not only
this, but the Latin translation also, that came after the English has the same
quotation of Paulus ^ouius, annexed with the letter A. both in the text and
margent, unto the same story. Was this also the slip of the Printer? Besides
this, the said Latin translation leaves out the word tertius, and names only
Alexander: will you assign this also to the Printer? But if this quotation of
Iouius did not se^ue to this allegation about the Popes writing to the Sol^an,
what other Author is there, that does testify so odious an accusation? For if
that had been omitted, then why had not M. Barlow now supplied that defect,
with aleadging or quoting some Author, that testifies the same?

Lastly, for that we have been ouerlong in this matter we shall end with one
only example more, which is, that whereas he alleges out of Cuspinian, that
Pope Alexander the sixth did take two hundredth thousand Crowns of Baiaze^es
the Emperor of the Turks, Touching Gemin the Turk.
to cause his brother Gemin whom he held captive in Rome to be put to death,
which soon after ensued, he being in the French-mens hands that took him with
them from Rome, when Charles the eight King of France passed that way with his
army toward the Conquest of Naples: I answered, that concerning the story it
self, true it is that Cuspini^n, that gladly seeks occasion to speak ill of
Popes, writes that the said Gemin or Zizimus (for by both n^mes he is called)
brother of the Turk, was put to death by poison in the army of the Frenchmen,
haud ignorante Pontifice, Pope Alexander not being ignoran^ thero^. But he
says nothing that the Pope procured the same, as neither that he received the
said sum of two hundred thousand Crowns, as neither does Iouius, though he
does m^ntion that such a sum was offered by the ^urke, together with ^estis
incons^tilis Christi, the garment of our Savior without seame. And that besides
these Authors, others also writing thereof do relate the matter doubtfully, as
Onufrius Panuinus, saying, In vit. Alexa^d. 6.
that he died at Capua of a bloody flux, without mentioning poyson^ and before
him Sabelli^us relating the matter as doubtfully, says: Fuerunt qui crederent
veneno subla^^: there were some that believed that he was made away by poison,
AEnnead. 10. lib. ^.
and that Pope Al^xander was not ignorant thereof.

And albeyt M. Barlow about this poyn^ ^^riueth to utter a great company of
words, partly to prove that which was not denied, that diverse authors do make
mention of this thing (though with uncertainty as you have heard) partly in
amplifying the wickedness of the thing, to yield to the putting to death (as he
said) of an innocent Turk; partly by inueghing, and scoffing at the offer made
by the Turkish Emperor of Vestis inconsutilis Christi, of Christ's garment
without seame, deriding much in his vein of Infidelity, that such a garment
can be imagined to have come down from the Souldyers, that cast lotts over it,
M. Barlow scoffeth at relics.
unto the Turks hands (and yet notwithstanding it is known, and confessed that
he had taken Jerusalem, and thereby had the spoil of all Christian monumentes
of that place) but much more scorning, that now such a Relic, forsooth,
should be made the price of innocent Gemins blood, without any just cause given
for the same (and yet can it not be denied, but that he had rebelled against
his Lord and brother the Emperor and procured both against his person and
state what mischife he could:) All this, I say, notwithstanding, it is evident
that these words of M. Barlow are but wind to intertayne time, and fill up
paper, as he has bound himself by the enterprise, he has taken in hand, and
so you will see, partly by the stir he makes about my very last words, and
lines in this matter, which yet I assure m^, being equally considered by the
indifferent Reader, will not seem so reprehensible. Let. page 105.
For these they are. If a man would go about (said I) to discredit Kingly
authority, by all the misdeeds of particular Kings, that have been registered by
Historiographers, since the time that Popes began, he should find no doubt
abundant matter, and such as could not be defended by any probability: and yet
does this preiudicate nothing to Princely power or dignity etc. For this speech
of mine, which M. Barlow terms a yerking comparison of Kings with Popes
(though I know not why) he inueigheth greatly against me, alleging first out
of Seneca, That art cannot long estrange nature, as though out of Nature
belike, I were inclyned to make such comparisons, and then likening me to Venus
her Cat, that was trickt up (as he says) like a wayting-mayde, but yet she
discovered her self when she saw a mouse: Barlow page 303.
So the censurer (quoth he) who all this while, would make the Reader believe,
that he confuted only one T. M. the younger, who being exasperated with his
round ca^uasing of the Pope, he forgets his dissembled adversary, and
retorts upon Kings. So he.

And do you see his vanytie? Is the very naming of Kings, especially in so
honorable a sense, as I do, for mayntenance of their authority, M. Barlowes
sicophancy
sufficient to make retorting upon Kings? Or is the mentioning of Kings in
general a sufficient inference, that I mean of his Majesty in particular?
What speech can be free from calumination, when such Sicophancy is used? Does
not every man see the itching humor of adulation, discovered here upon any
least occasion? But let us hear some reason of his. What insolency (says he)
is this, Romans 13.
to compare Popes with Kings, subjects with superiors, for even Priests as
well as others are subject to their sovereigns, by Chrysostoms rule. And so
say we also Sir, in temporal affairs, belonging to the Common wealth. But how
does this inference of yours hold? Priests are subject unto temporal Princes,
that are their Sovereigns: therefore also Popes. Is there no difference? And
for that you name S. Chrysostom in this matter, and call it an insolency, to
compare Kings with Popes, I would demand of you, whether you ever read S.
Chrysostom de comparatione Regis and Monachi, of the comparyson of a King and
a Monk: Monks and Priests preferred before Kings by S. Chrysostom.
as also his other Books de Sacerdotio? And if you have, and understood, what
you read, then will you have seen that S. Chrysostom preferred ^he dignity of
both the one, and the other, Monk and Priest, before the dignity of a King.
And Cardinal Bellarmin^ last book, and third Chapter does allege so much
about this matter, as makes it sufficiently clear, without any derogation of
Princely authority at all.

AN EXAMINATION OF CERTA^NE ^ENTENCES, AND AVTHOR^TIES of ancient Fathers,
alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine in his Letter to M. Blackwell, and impugned
by M. Barlow. CHAP. VI.
AMONG other points that were impugned out of Cardinal Bellarmines Letter,
were certain sentences, examples, and authorities of ancient Fathers, about
the Oath. And first of all was the comparison of the subtle art, and deceit
(said I) used by Julian the Emperor, surnamed the Apostata, and recounted by
S. Gregory Nazianzen, in placing, and inserting the Images of his false Gods,
into the pictures of the Emperor, in his Imperial banner, so as no man could
bow down, and do reverence to the Emperors picture (as then was the custom)
but that he must adore also the Images of the false Gods; which art of
tem^erament the Cardinal does compare unto this mixture, and combination of
clauses, lawful and unlawful; civil and ecclesiastical, in the Oath
proposed: so as, a man cannot swear the one, but he must swear also the
other: for which cause, I said in my Letter, that the whole Oath with all the
clauses, as it lies (in which sense, it has bin also forbidden by his
Holiness) cannot in any wise be taken, although touching some one only clause,
not only cyuill, but also ecclesiastical, as for example, of the Popes
authority, of charity I might think (as then I wrote) that the Priests who
took the Oath, took it in some such sense, as being explycated by them, and
accepted of the Magistrate, might stand with the integrity of faith. And that
the sense of the said clause, might be agreed upon, between his Majesty and his
subjects, in such sort as it should agree with the opinion, and practice of all
other Catholic Princes. But the whole Oath as it lies, is no other, then the
picture of the Emperor, together with the Images of false Gods. Which
similitude and comparison, though it express most fitly (as it seems) the
matter in hand: yet was it impugned, by seeking out dissimilitudes, and
disparities in other points, then wherein was made the said comparison. As for
example, that first Julian was an Apostata, but our Sovereign is a Christian:
Julian changed the religion he once professed, but our King not: Julian became
an Ethnic, or Atheist, our King is not ashamed of his profession: Julian dealt
against Christians, his Majesty deals only to make a distinction between
true subjects, and false hearted traitors etc. And so he goes forward,
alleging many sundry diuersityes, between man and man, thing and things,
state and states: which I said is nothing to our purpose. For a similitude
requires not likeness, or parity in all points, for then it should be idem,
and not simile, but liknes only in the point, wherein the comparison is made, as
here in the compounding, and couching together of lawful, and unlawful
cl^uses in the oath, as the other did Images in his banner: for that other
wise, if we will stand upon seeking out differences between the things that are
compared, and other things wherein the comparison is not made, and thereby
condemn the similitude, we shall overthrow all similitudes whatsoever, and
particulerly we shall eneruate, and make void all the Parables commonly of our
Savior, wherein if we go from the point it self that is compared, we may find
^or the most part more dissimilitudes, then sim^litudes. Similituds h^ld not in
all things but only in that wherein the similitude is made.
As for example; Be ye ^ise as serpents, and simple as doves; what enemy of
Christian religion might not cavil, and calumniate this similitude by seeking
out diversities between a serpent, and a man, and between the malicious craft
of the serpent and the true wisdom, that ought to be in a prudent man: and the
like in the nature, and simplicity of doves, many dissimilitudes may be sought,
but it is sufficient that the similitude do hold in the point, wherein the
comparison was made, which is that Christians should be both wise and simple,
as are serpents, and doves, and imitate both the wisdom of the one, Mat^h. 10.
and simplicity of the other, so far forth as is convenient for a Christian
life, which S. Paul does afterward expound, how far it must reach, when he
says: Romans 16. 19.
Volo vos sapientes esse in bono, and simplices in malo, I would have you to be
wise in good, and simple in ^uill,

This then being my declaration of that similitude, out comes M. Barlow (as
it were) with his dagger drawn in great heat, to encounter the same, casting
upon me, all kind of reproach, and by his ordinary scurrility, calling me
Salomons loathsome creature, to wit, a spuing dog, Ba^l. 307.
resuming the eiection which he had once avoided, such is the modesty, and
ciuilytie of this new Prelate. But why, does he show himself so enraged? M.
Bar^lowes immodesty.
You must imagine he is in some straits to answer the former discourse, but yet
must needs set upon it, well, or ill. Let us se how he performs it.

All the Censurers speech ( says this Minister) comes to this profound
conclusion, that a similitude must only hold in that point, wherein it is
compared, because that if the comparison should hold in all, it were pentity,
and not resemblance. Which doctrine of mine he seems to allow, and replieth
not; but yet to seem to say somewhat, and not sit out, he passes to another
discourse, that in four manners comparisons may be made, either in the nature
of the thing, or in the disposition, when some affection is resembled, or when
a passion or perturbation is assimilated, or when the action only is compared
without circumstances; which are obscure things without ground at all: and as
well may fourteen points of comparisons be found out as four; to wit, so
many as there may be differences between things that be compared; and therefore
we recall M. Barlow from these idle euagations to the point it self. M. Barlow
called from his idle vagaries.
And for so much as he now grants, that things compared must not be like in
all, but only in the point, wherein the comparison is made, how will he
ouerturne Cardinal Bellarmines comparison, between the banner of Julian, and
the Oath of England.

His point of comparison was this; that as Julian did set forth in his banner,
and combine together the images, as well of the Emperor, as of the false
Gods, seeking to temper and mollify the one by the other; to wit, by bowing to,
and honoring the Emperors image (which then was held for lawful) to bow
also, or seem to bow at leastwise to the other, which was not lawful: so in
the Oath are combined together different clauses, some of temporal obedience,
which are lawful; some other detractory to the Popes authority, which are held
by Catholics for unlawful. Do you see M. Barlow, wherein the comparison is
made? Then stand to me closely (I pray you) and let us examine this ma^ter
without running from the purpose.

What say you to the former answer made; to wit, that Iuli^n was an Apostata,
but our Sovereign is a Christian? Julian changed his religion, but our King
not? he became an Ethnicke, but our King is not ashamed of his profession, and
other such like differences? Are these the points wherein Cardinal Bellarmine
made his comparison, or not? If not, then are you from the purpose. But what
say you now in this your last Reply after mature deliberation? You will not, I
trust, fall to the same absurdity of seeking dissimilitudes, that are from the
point of the comparison it self? And yet you must needs do it, for so much as
you will needs say somewhat, and have nothing to say against the said point of
comparison.

First then, your reply is this; that the resemblance between the banner, and
the Oath, brought fort^ by the Cardinal was produced by him for no other
purpose, but for the mixture of diversities, both in the one and the other,
Barl. page 308.
VVherin (say you) the Cardinal has manifested more malice then judgment.
For even in that very point, this similitude, as taken with the crampe, hal^s
right down, because in the Imperial pictures, though there were different
^eatures, yet they all concurred to one end and for the same intent, that is
for adoration, though to the one more openly, to the other more covertly etc.
But in the Oath it is taken clean contrary, which is so far from being a
mixture of Allegiance, that it separates all acknowledgment o^ any temporal
right, or right of any temporal acknowledgment from Pope, or any other else,
but to his Majesty alone within his Realms.

Thus far are the words of M. Barlow, who being well, (as you have seen)
toward the end, intangleth himself, and runs quite from the purpose. He
acknowledges in the beginning, that the comparison of Card. Bellarmine is only
to show the mixtures, as of the Images in the banner, the one lawful, the
other unlawful, so of the clauses in the Oath, the one lawful, the other
unlawful: but presently he steppeth aside, to put a difference betwixt the
mixed adoration of the one, and the mixture of Allegiance in the other; wherein
Card. Bellarmine made not his comparison, M. Barlowes shifting.
no more then between the banner it self, and the Oath; or between the silk
cloth wherein the pictures were painted, or the book or paper wherein the Oath
was written, or in any other such like differences, as might be picked out,
whereof this also is one, very impertinent to the matter, that the banner did
tend to a mixed adoration, but not the Oath to a mixed allegiance, of which mixed
allegiance Card. Bellarmine never spoke word, but only, that as the mixture of
these Images was devised to deceive the Christians at that time; so the mixture
of different clauses, some containing civil obedience, some ecclesiastical
disobedience, the one law^ull, the other unlawful, was devised to entangle the
consciences of the Catholics. And so we see, that M. Barlow is forced to run
to the same shift, that before he condemned, which is to seek out diversities
in points wherein no comparion was made.

The second example which is reprehended in Cardinal Bellarmines letter, is
out of the second book of Machabees, of old Eleazar that venerable man, who
rather chose to die, then to do a thing unlawful, and against his own
conscience, or to seem to do it by dissimulation. Which example the Cardinal
applies ( said I) to the taking of this unlawful Oath by such as are
Catholics, Letter page 108.
but especially by the Arch priest, Head of the Clergy in England, whose case
he presumed to be more like to that of Eleazar, for his age, estimation, and
authority above the rest. About the example of Eleazar.
To which example the Apologer answers thus. That if the Archpriests ground
of refusing this Oath, were as good as Eleazars was for refusing to eat of the
swines-flesh, that was proposed and urged unto him, it might not unfitly be
applied to his purpose: Apol. page 81.
But the ground failing (says he) the buylding cannot stand. But this is an
escape much like the former, that runs quite from the matter: for that the
Cardinal supposes a Catholic conscience in him to whom he writes, to which
conscience it is as repugnant to swear any thing, sounding against any point
of Catholic religion or doctrine, as it was to Eleazar to eat swines flesh^
against the law of Moses. Which supposition being made, and that in the
Cardinals judgment this Oath contains diverse clauses prejudicial to some
points of the said Catholic belief and doctrine, concerning the authority of
the Sea Apostolic, and that the taking thereof would not only be hurtful to
the taker, but offensive also and scandalous to many other of that religion,
both at home and abroad, the application of this example of Eleazar was most
fit, and effectual.

This was answered at that time. Now M. Barlow comes with new devises. First
he calls this example aprochryphall, for that it is taken out of the second
book of Machabees: but Catholics do hold it for Canonical; and so do the
ancient Fathers: and so was it declared by a holy Council, above 1200. years
ago, wherein S. Augustine himself sat as one of the Judges. But whether it
were or no; that makes nothing to our present purpose, but only whether the
example be well applied or no.

Secondly, that eating of swines-flesh refused by Eleazar was forbidden by the
law of God, but this swearing (says he) is warranted by Scripture. Whereto I
answer, that swearing in it own nature, and with due circumstances of truth,
judgment, and justice is warranted, Hier. 4.
when true and just things are sworn; but every Oath in particular is not
warranted by Scripture; and namely if it contain any thing, that either in it
self, or in the swearers judgment, and conscience is not true, or lawful. And
such is this Oath to Catholics in both respects, and therefore not warranted,
but condemned by Scripture.

Thirdly he says, when I am at a stand, and can go no further, I do wind my
self out, by running to the common place of conscience, and Catholic religion.
But what says he, if there be a false assumption, and an untrue applycation by
the conscience, is it then erroneous, and not binding? As put the case, the
conscience assumeth that to be sound and Catholic, which is false and
unchristian doctrine. An erroneous conscience binds.
To this question I have answered now sufficiently before, and have largly
proved, that an erroneous conscience also byndeth until it be reformed; and
that it is impiety, and ignorance to teach the contrary: nor shall it be
needful to repeat all the reasons and arguments here. This one may stand
instead of all the rest, which is the ground of all, That if a man may without
sin do against the dictamen or direction of his own conscience, then may he
do that which he thinks to be naught, and consequently do naught, wittingly
and willingly without sin, which is against the grounds both of Divinity,
Philosophy, and Nature it self. And yet M. Barlow is so wise, as to affirm
here, that an erroneous conscience byndeth not.

WHEN the R. Father, F. Robert Persons, the Author of this Treatise was come
thus far in the examination of M. Barlowes Answer, it pleased God to take him
out of this mortal life: which as he had employed to the profit of many, and
the edification of the whole Christian world; so he ended with great Religion
and Pi^ty, and passed, as we hope, to et^rnall r^st. He commended on his
death-b^d the finishing of this work, to an especial friend of his, who for
his zeal in Gods cause, and his love to the said Father, will, I doubt not,
learnedly and exactly p^rforme his requ^st, and shortly cause it to be printed
and published, t^ough in a s^parate volume, as for many respects is thought
most convenient.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page, line, fault, correction. 6. 19. reaceaued received 118. 6. swears
swearers 149. 35. soon sown 161. 16. which with 172. 6. Prohet Prophet 188.
3. miseriamur misereamur 197. 8. Scotlnd Scotland. 203. 14. nothing noting 276.
17. an and 289. 4. prince price 321. 36. is it 325. 24. vnlwfulnes unlawfulness
333. 21. opinion Caietan opinion of Caietan. 343. 7. no to 395. 37. yet they
yet that they 436. 12. truth or truth of 442. 32. is in 444. 14. abase abuse
460. 7. acquinted acquainted. 498. 32. Popos Popes. 502. 24. them then 516. 27.
wales walls 520. 37. restrainst restraint 518. 3. Then Frederick Of them
Frederick

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS HANDLED IN THIS BOOK.
A
ACHABS truly Mortification. page 170. Adoniah slain by Solomon. page 105.
Alexander the 3. Pope cleared of calumny. page 467. Aluarus Pelagius abused by
M. Barlow. page 112. S. Ambrose abused by M. Barlow. page 85. His resistance of
the Emperor Valentinian against the Arians. page 193. Anchor turned into a
Millstone by M. Barlow. page 244. Antiquity a good Argument in case of Religion.
page 150. Apparitions of Martyrs. page 409. Aristotle abused by M. Barlow. page
99. Assembly of ancient Fathers, reasoning with his Majesty de regno Dei. page
237. S. Augustine, and other Fathers Discourses of temporal and spiritual
felicity. page 184. 185. 186. Item about dying out of the Church. page 223. His
discourse about Gods Providence. page 416. Author of the Apology for the Oath
of Allegiance. part. 1. cap. 1.. 1.
B
M. BARLOVV his sharp wit. page 7. His ignorance in Grammar, and Humanity.
Prefac. n. 8. 9. In Logic and Philosophy. page 16. and 93. and 191. and Praef.
n. 12. and n. 59. In Histories. ib. n. 15. In Scriptures. ib. n. 17. In
Divinity. 193. 419. 420. His ridiculous folly. page 17. His virulency against
Jesuits. page 21. and 220. His abuse of F. Ga^net. p. 2^. of F. Persons. 24.
and 31. and 402. and praefac. a number. 86. vsque ad 108. His boldness with the
Scriptures. p. 35. His friendship to Aduerbs. page 39. His misunderstanding of
Medina. p. 43. His bad conscience and dealing, vbique per totum librum. His
notorious untruths page 49. page 93. 97. 98. 116. 134. 403. 505. 506. Paulus
5. the Pope accused by him page 59. his mistaking and abusing of Gra^^hus and
Pluta^ke. page 61. his scolding. page 63. and praefac. a nu. 90. vsque ad 107.
his new Philosophy page 66. his abuse of Salmeron and Sanders^ page 75. 77. and
of others. page 99. 112. 136. 246. 263. 279. 328. 330 338. of S. Thomas, page
459. of Vrspergensis, page 486. of Nauclerus, page 490. of Blondus. page 491.
509. of Cuspinia^. page 496. of Matthew Paris. p. 498. of Pope Innocentius the
4. page 507. 510. 512. of Card. ^ellarmine Praef. n. 66. his horning in
Scotland. page 95. his merriment of the Moon in the Asses belly. page 103. his
flattery of Kings. page 104. his hate of ambition, and his Mortification^ page
1^6. 172. 173. his Digestion and Concoction^ ib. his carnal Divinity. page
133. his phrases of Indument and Stripping. page 148. his Inco^stancy. page 163.
and 314. his Canonization of Q. Elizabeth. p. 164 his Courtly Deuinity. page
177. his Philtra and loue-drugs. page 201. his Parasiticall flattery of the
King. page 231. 233. 343. 359. and praef n. ^18.119. his prayers without hope.
334. his little University. 238. his Proctership for Turks and Infidels. page
24^. his strange notes of humility. page 258. his Impudency. page 264. 332. 333
338. 340. 341. 344. 441. 474. 477. 487. 492. 493. Praef. ^. 64. his absurdities
and errors etc. part. 2. cap. 5. per totum. his Contradictions. page 314. 326.
his fast and loose with the Kings authority page 316. his radiant folly. page
321. his slanders. page 335. his falsifying of Cou^cells. p. 369. His clouted
frauds. page 399. his mincing of Authors for his purpose. ibid. and 401. 444.
his falsification in Capital letters. page 400. 453. his ridiculous
profundities. p. 414. his conscience need to be purged. page 452. his Proverb
omnia sub vnam Myconum misapplyed. 504. his scoffing at Relics. 535. What
manner of writer he is. pr^fac. n. 4. His Paradoxes pr^f. n. 24. his conscience
like a cheuerell point. ib. nu. 25. his strange construction of orbis terrae.
ibid. n. 11. his extra spheram. praef. n. 52. WHOLY mistaken. ib. n. 54. His
potent word. ib. n. 55. his bad brewing. ib. n. 65. his Melancholy conceit.
ib. n. 67. his sudden pange of devotion. ibid. nu. 68. his railing against
Saints, ib. n. 108. his obsessio^, circumsession, and possession of Devils.
ib. n. 111. a Bridewell-Doctour. ibid. his Sermon in S. Edwards Church in
Lincoln, and abuse of Sir Io. Cutts. ib. n. 112. his co^demning his Majesty's
Mother. ib. n. 116. his leuity in writing. ib. ^. 121. his hypocoristicall
alleuiation. ibid. n. 122. his new found phrases. ib. n. 123. his paring away.
ib. n. 128. his Feminine sex predominate. ib. n. 153. Bellarnine, see
Cardinal. Binnius abused and misconstred by M. Barlow. page 405. Bishops how
they are said to succeed Apostles. page 450. M. Blackwell the Archpriest. p.
536.
C
CARDINAL, what dignity and title it is. page 8. Cardinal Bellarmine abused
by M. Barlow. page 80. his Letter to the Archpriest discussed. page 345. and
deinc^ps. his opinion of the Oath of Allegiance p. 346. 347. and deinceps.
cleared from false imputation, page 386. 387. defended from Contradictio^s.
page 432. 442. 443. 448. 449. Charles the Great Emperor his zeal in
reformation of manners in the Clergy. page 313. Ch^lsey erection for writers.
page 248. Clement 8. his Breues sent into England. page 342. Clergymen freed
from secular burthe^s whence it first proceeded. page 371. L. Cook Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, his book of Arraignments. page 188. his
definition of Misery by Copia and ^nopia. ibid. his poor Deuinity. page 190.
Conscience erroneous, how and when it binds. p. 33. and 277. Contentions
between Popes and Emperors. page 480. and deinceps. Controversy between S.
Gregory and Mauritius the Emperor. page 304. Council of A^les how it
submitted it self to the Emperor. page 313. Counsels General always
assembled by the B. of Rome. p. 320. Council of Millaine corrupted by M.
Barlow page 33^. Council 4. of Toledo in Spain, and of the Oath prescribed to
Subjects therein. page 365. and d^inceps. Difference between that and the Oath
of Allegiance. page 381. and 384. falsified by M. Barlow. page 369. Whether it
agreed with the Protestant Church of England. 377. S. Cyprians judgment of such
as die out of the Catholic Church. page 222.
D
DESCENDING of Christ into hell. page 377. Difference Essential between
Protestants and Puritans. praef. n. 32. Differen^e between the writing of F.
Persons, and M. Barlow. praef. n. 132. Devils concurrence with M. Barlow. page
450. Divinity of M. Barlow, carnal. p. 133. fit for the Court. page 177.
Division of the work. page 2. Doctrine of the Church not preiudicated by evil
life. p. 147.
E
EARL of E^sex his Confession revealed by M. Barlow. p. 22. Preached against
by him. 212. Edward, vide Cook. Eleazar his glorious death for not eating of
swines flesh. page 541. Q. Elizabeth her life discussed. part. 2. cap. 1. and
2. per totum. Her manes. page 161. and 166. Canonized for a Saint by M. Barlow.
p^g. 164. and praef. n. 114. her Mortifications. page 168.. 2. per totum. No
cloistred Nun. ^. 170. her Felicities, and Infelicities. part. 2. cap. 2. per
totum. her birth. page 201. her sickness and death. page 209.. 3. her Purgation
about the Q. of Scotlands death. page 215. her disastrous end. page 216. 217.
held for an Heretic. page 226. How she was a joy and Jewel to the Christian
world. page 422. her Illegitimation. p. 424. declared by her own Father in
Parliament. page 426. nec Virgo, nec Martyr. praef. n. 115. Equivocation not
lawful in matters of Religion. page 30. confounded with lying by M. Barlow.
page 384. 385. Excommunication of Princes practiced in the Primitive Church.
page 102.
F
FAITH divine and humane distinguished. page 392. Feli^ities and Infelicites of
Q. Elizabeth part. 2. c. 2. per totum. Felicity temporal, no argument of
spiritual. p. 181. 182. 183. Ancient Fathers discourses thereupon. p. 184. 185.
186. Festiuities and Masses of Saints. p. 379. B. Fisher abused by M. Barlow.
p. 328. Flattery of his Majesty by Mininisters. part^ 2. cap. 3. per totum. of
the nature of flattery. p. 231. Fox his rabble of Martyrs. p. 233. F^edericke
the first Emperor his submission to the Pope. p 466. Frederick the second his
contention with Popes, page 480. and deinceps. his voyage to the holy land,
481. and 48^. his counterfeit sickness, ibid. his vices and bad life. page 514.
his barbarous cruelty. 517. his blasphemy. 519. Gods punishment laid upon him
520.
G
F. Garnets face in the straw. p. 23. Gemen the Turk poisoned. page 533.
Gracchus abused by M. Barlow. page 61. S. Gregory rayled at by M. Barlow.
praef. n. 108.
H
HEAD of the Protestant Church monstrous. p. 200. Henry vide Wotton. Henry the
4. Emperor taken up again out of his grave after burial page 398. His
deposition. 411. Henry the 5. Emperor his insurrection against his father.
page 410. Henry the 3. of France his murder. page 414. Henry the 8. of England
injured by M. Barlow. page 428. Henry the 2. of England his absolution. page
463. Henry the 6. Emperor his coronation. page 466. S. Hieromes Discourse of
felicity and infelicity. page 185. Hope cannot stand without certainty of
faith. praef. n. 48. Huldericus Mutius a Lutheran. page 398. Hypocrisy what it
is, and what is the mark of an hypocrit. p. 91.
I
JAMES vide King. Idolatry and suspicion not cause of fear always. page 118.
M. Jewel contrary to himself. pr^f. n. 41. Immunity of the Clergy, whence it
first proceeded. page 371. Inconstancy vide ^arlow. Infelicity vide Felicity.
Infidels denied Christian burial. 408. also Heretics, and excommunicated
persons. ibid. Innocentius the 4. Pope abused by M. Barlow. page 509. 510. 511.
his death and lamentation thereof. 513. 514. Io^n vide Fox. Sir Io^n Cu^^ abused
by M. Barlow in the pulpit. praf. n. 112. Ios^phs ^^lling into Egypt. p. 421
K
KING James said to be the Author of the Apology for the Oath of Allegiance.
part. 1. cap. 11. 1. Why his Majesty was not named in the book. page 5. that
he never ^ead the book ^ttenti^ely. ibid. Injured by M. Barlow page 12.
flattered by Ministers egregiously. part 2. cap. 3. per totum. His mild
disposition diuerted. page 230. Kings their vices recounted in Scripture. page
199. King Henry the 2. of England his absolution. page 46^. King Henry the 4.
of France his Ambassador at Rome, and the Ceremony of public absolution. page
465.
L
S. LEO rayled at by M. Barlow. ^raf. n. 108. 109. Liberty of Conscience
demanded by all foreign Protestants. p. 256^ Liberty of Conscience, vide
toleration.
M
MACHIAVELS principles agree with Protestant doctrine. page 390. Master, what
it signifies, and how it is a title of honor. page 9. Marriage of Priests,
and M. Barlows forgery therabout. p. 373. Decree of the Council of Toledo
against the same. page 374. 375. 376. Martyrs in Q. Elizabeth's days. page 206.
Medina misunderstood by M. Barlow p. 43. explicated. 44. 45. M^ri^ of works.
page 377. Misery defined by the L. Cook. page 188. Moon in the Asses belly.
p. 103. Monks punished living disorderly. page 380. M. Morton canuased. page
73. 74. his abuse of Salmeron. 75. Mortification of M. Barlow. page 126. of Q.
Elizabeth. page 163. external Mortification, and internal. page 169. 171.
176. Mortification for Princes. page 177. Mortification in time of Lent. pa.g.
376.
N
NABVchodonosors punishment. page 195. more happy then Q. Elizabeth. ibid. Ne^o
and Domiti^n Heads of the Church in M. Barlowes opinion. page 200.
O
OATH of Allegiance discussed. part^ 1. cap. 1. and 2. per totum. whether the
taking of it be a blessing from God. p. 37. and part. 1. c. 4. per totum. what
freedom the taking thereof brings to Catholics. p. 39. coufuted both at
home and abroad. p. 50. more contained therein then civil obedience. p. 70. 71.
and 280. humble petition to his Majesty for the exposition thereof. p. 89.
Scandal in exhibiting thereof. p. 126. 127. etc. No such Oath ever enacted
before by former Princes. p. 156. Card. Bella^mins opinion thereof. page 346.
347. etc. divided into 14. parts p. 357. difference between the said Oath, and
an Indenture. page 362. Oath of Supremacy. p. 353. defended by M. Barlow. 354.
and 355. Obedience against God and man's conscience none. page 282. Obedience of
our temporal Prince how far and when it binds. p. 291. defined by S. Thomas.
339. Ordination of Protestant Bishops first under Q. Elizabeth. praf. n. 136.
P
PAVLVS Quintus Pope defended. 54. 55. 56. 57. his Breues discussed. part. 2.
per totu^. whether he forbad temporal odedience to his Majesty therein. p. 323.
and deinceps, ^. Persons calumniated by M. Barlow. page 204. belyed. p. 263.
Petrus de V^^^is extolled by M. Barlow. p. 499. justified. page 509. censured
523^ Philip the Emperor his murder. page 470. Plutarke abused by M. Barlow.
page 61. Popes power over Infidel Princes, p. 76. how they are particular
Bishops of Rome, and Pastors of the whole Church. page 145. whether they can
make new articles of faith or no? page 324. 325. and deinceps. whether they
command Princes to be murdered. page 394. 395. etc. Powder Treason. page 13.
14. 15. etc. F. Persons accused therewith by M. Barlow. p. 23. Powder Plot of
Antwerp. page 18. of Hage. p. 19. of Edenborrow. ibid. Prescription of the
Church of Rome. part. 1. cap. 5. per totum. good argument in case of Relion.
page 150. and 152. vide Antiquity^ the same urged by the Fathers. ib. belyed
shamefully. page 246. Protestants gone out of the Catholic Church. page 149.
their Ecclesiastical power over Puritans. page 259. their baseness and beggary.
page 265. their conflicts with Puritans about matters of Religion. page 270.
their Church basest of all others. praef. n. 36. Providence of God discoursed
of by S. Augustine. page 416.
Q
QVEENE Mary of Scotland put to death for Religion. page 51. preached against
by M. Barlow. page 212. Queen vide Elizabeth.
R
RESOLVTION of Catholics in matters of faith. p. 123. of Protestants none at
all. ibid. and 124. what resolution is taken from the Pope. page 125. M.
Reynolds writing against Whitaker, page 457. Rome, Recourse to Rome about the
Oath of Allegiance. p. 50. 51. 52. etc. The same practiced in all difficulties
by our English Princes and people. page 53. and 377. Church of Rome impugned.
p. 144.
S
SALMERON abused by M. Morton and M. Barlow. p. 75. Salomons fact of killing
Adoniah condemned. page 105. D. Sanders abused by M. Barlow. page 77. Scandal
in exhibiting the Oath of Allegiance. p. 128. 129 130. etc. of active and
passive scandal. page 132. 134. 135. scandal of Balaa^. page 139. Sigebert
calumniated. page ^3. K. Sis^nandus his submission to the Council of Toledo.
p. 36^. Statute of Association. page 429. S^^pition vide Idol^try. four kinds
of suspicion. page 119. Supremacy mascu^^ne and feminine page 395. how it was
given to K. Henry the 8. page 29^. to K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth. ^bid. to K.
James. page 29^. and M. Barlowes judgment thereupon. ibid. and page 300
Sycophancy vide Flattery, M. Barlowes division of Sycophancy. page 242. Sixtu^
vide Pope.
T
S. THOMAS his opinion concerning obedience. page ^^^. about Totally. praef. n.
52. abused by M. Barlow. page ^36. Threatenings of God unto Kings. page 108.
T^byes breach of the King of Niniue his coma^ndment about burying of the dead
Jews. p. 289.. 2. the ancient Fathers judgment thereof. page 288. the credit of
the History of Toby. page 287. Toleration of Religion humbly demanded of his
Majesty. part. 2. cap. 4. per totum. Thomas vide Morton. Treason vide
Powder Treason.
V
VESSELS consecrated to Church uses ancient. p. 237. Vi^es of wicked Kings
recounted after their deaths in Scripture. page 199. University of M. Barlow,
little. p. 236.
W
M. WHITAKER a terror to Card. Bellarmine in M. Barlowes judgment. page 455.
his book refuted by M. Reynolds page 457. his ignorance. ibid. William vide
Barlow. VVorkes-Good works may give cause of confidence in God. p. 440. Sir
Henry Wotton a wodden Ambassador. praef. n. 70. his pranks at Ausburge and
Venice. ibid.
X
XYSTVS 5. belyed about the murder of King Henry the 3. of France. page 115.
Z
ZISCA the blind Rebel of Bohemia. page 456.
FINIS.

