A REVIEVV OF TEN PVBLIKE DISPVTATIONS Or Conferences held within the compass
of four years, under K. Edward and Qu. Mary, concerning some principal
points in Religion, especially of the Sacrament and sacrifice of the Altar.

VVHERBY, May appear upon how vveake grounds both Catholic Religion was
changed in England; as also the fore-recounted Foxian Martyrs did build their
new opinions, and offer themselves to the fire for the same, which was
chiefly upon the creditt of the said Disputations.

BY N. D.

Aug. lib. 2. against Petilian the Donatist. We are constrained to hear,
discuss, and refute these trifles of yours: least the simpler and weaker sort
should fall into your snares.

Imprinted with license Anno M. DC. IIII.

The contents of this Reuievv.
THe Preface showing what vtility disputation may bring, for discussion of
matters in controversy; and how far: together with the causes, why the
reuiew of these ten disputations is now published.

1. Often public disputations, recounted by John Fox to have been held in
England, about controversies in Religion, especially concerning the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, within the space of four years, at two several
changes of Religion under K. Edward and Q. Mary; besides many other more
particular, held in Bishops consistoryes and other places about the same
matters. CHAP. I.

2. The state of the chief question handled in the forsaid disputations,
concerning the Real presence, Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass; with the cheese grounds that be on either side. CHAP. II.

3. Certain observations to be noted, for better answeringe of heretical
cauillations against the forsaid articles. CHAP. III.

4. The examination of such arguments, as in the former disputations were
alleged by the Zivinglians and Caluinists, against the Real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament. CHAP. IV.

5. What Catholic arguments were alleged in these disputations for the real
presence: and how they were answered or shifted of by the Protestants. CHAP. V.

6. Of two other articles about Transubstantiation, and the Sacrament of the
Altar, what passed in this disputation. CHPP. VI.

THE PREFACE, Shewinge what vtility disputation may bring, for discussion of
matters in controversy, and how far: together with the causes, why the
reuievv of these ten disputations is now published.
THAT disputation is a good means and profitable instrument, to examine and
try out truth, even in matters of faith, if yt be rightly used, and with due
circumstances, no man can deny; for that experience in Gods Church does teach
yt, to wit, that great vtility has often-tymes been received by such
disputations: and we read among other examples, that in the time of Antoninus
the Emperor son of Seuerus, that died in York, a little more then a hundred
years after Christ, the Montanists heresy, who were called also
Cataphrigians, growing strong, and dravvinge to it diverse pricipall men, and
namely Tertullian, with the admiration of the whole world; one Caius a Cath
man most excellently learned, and of rare and virtuous Anno Domini 215.
life, took upon him to dispute publicly in Rome in the presence of the
whole Church, with license of Zepherinus the Pope, against a chief
principal man of that sect called Proclus, and so confounded him therein, as
from that day forvvard the sect began greatly to decline; of which disputation
do make mention both Eusebius and S. Hierome, and yt did Eusebius. l. 6. hist. c.
14. Hier. de vir. Illust. in Caio.
much profitt that Catholic cause.

2. And about 2. hundred years after this again, we read of another
profitable disputation held in our country, by S. Germanus and his fellows,
French Bishopps, with the British Pelagians upon the year of Bed. l. 1.
hist. c. 14. and Constable. presbyt. in vita S. Lupi episc.
Christ 429. vvherby they were so confuted, as also with the miracles
wrought by S. German, by certain relics brought from Rome, as their heresy
never prospered there afterward, but was soon extinguished. We read in like
manner of diverse public co^flicts and disputatio^s, held by S. Austen with
diverse learned heretics of sundry sects, as namely with Fortunatus a Manichean
priest, in the city of Hippo in Africa, upon the year 392. all the clergy and
people being present, and public notaryes appointed to set down both their
arguments: and the issue of this disputatio^s was, that when the Manichean
heretic could not answer, he said (says Possidonius) secum suis maioribus
collaturum, that he would confer those difficultyes with his betters, and
then if they could not satisfy him se animae suae consulturum, that he See the
acts of this disputation in Possid. l. de vita Aug. c. 3.
would have care of his own soul. But this care was (says the same
Possidonius) that he ran away from the city, and never appeared there
again. Which point S. Augustine himself obiecteth, in a certain epistle, to
another Manichee Aug. epist. 244.
Priest, that came to succeed in Fortunatus his place in that city, prouokinge
him also to like disputation, but the heretic refused the combatt.

3. And after this again, the said Father being now made Bishopp, upon the
year of Christ 405. he disputed publicly for two days together, with
another principal Manichean heretic named Foelix, in presence of the whole
people, notaryes being appointed on both sides to take their arguments. In S.
Austens disputation with Foelix Manichaeus
which disputation, S. Austen did so evidently convince his adversary, as he
in the end yielded (a strange example in an heretic) and renounced his heresy,
and became a Catholic, whereby the Mauichean heresy was so shaken and
discredited throughout all Africa, as no man ever openly afterward durst
defend the same in disputation, but it vanished away by little and little, as
a smoke when the fire is putt out. This whole disputation is to be seen at
large in S. Austen, laid forth in two books of his de actis cum Faelice
Manichaeo. And this for the Manicheans.

4. But with the Donatists and Arrians, he had many other like conflicts: as
for example, upon the year of Christ 411. there was a sollemne disputation
held at Carthage S. Ausren his disputation with the Donatists.
in Africa, for diverse days together, between the Catholic and Donatist
Bishopps, the Cath. Bishopps being in number 286. vvherof the principal
disputer was S. Austen Breuic. collat. primi diei.
himself; and of the Donatist Bishops 279. which shows the multitude of
heretics in those parts to have been great, notwithstanding they had bin much
diminished by Cath. Bishops labors and vvrytings: for that 17. years before,
there met together against the Catholics 400. Donatist Bishopps, exceptinge
six: this disputation was before the Conte Marcellinus governor of that
country, and public notaryes were present to take the arguments on both
sides, and all being ended the Judge pronounced this sentence: Omnium
documentorum manifestatione, a Catholicis Donatistas confutatos. Aug. in Breuic.
That the Donatists were convinced by the Catholics, by the manifest truth of
all kind of arguments. S. Augustine himself sets forth a brief relation of
all that meeting and disputation, intituling yt Breuiculum. And in a certain
epistle of his testifies moreover of the event, that albeit those miserable
Epist. ad Gaudent.
Bishops were not converted thereby, but rather made more obstinate and
obdurate: yet that many of their people were, and especially of the furious
Circumcellians, that were ready to murder men upon zeal of their heresy.

5. I let pass another disputation which the said Father had, some 10. or
11. years after that, by the order of Pope Zozimus of Rome, in the City of
Caesarea in Mauritania, with one Emeritus a Donatist B. of that City; all the
whole people of the City, together with diverse Bishopps, being present; but
little good could be done with him, his obstinacy was so great and perverse.
Acta apud Aug. ep. 157. and l. 2. Retract. c. 51. and Possidon. in vita Aug. c.
14.
The acts of that disputation are extant in S. Austen, and often mention thereof
is made by himself, and by Possidonius in his life. And this for the Donatists.

6. But with the Arrians I find the same Father to have had sundry
disputations also, as namely once upon the year of Christ 422. the Governor
Bonifacius, having many Possid. ib. cap. 17.
Goths in his camp who were of the Arrian sect: they had also an Arrian
Bishopp that governed them, named Maximinus, who in their opinion was very
learned, and therefore they made instance, that he might dispute with S.
Augustine, which the good Father accepted, for he refused none, and so they
had their meetinge and disputation, S. Augustines disputatio^s with the
Atrians.
and the acts thereof are extant in his works, together with a certain
book of his own added thereunto, for explication of diverse points, vvherof
these heretics were wont to vaunt afterward, as though they had got the
victory; which happened to the same Father in another combatt, held the very
same year, with one Conte Pascentius of the same Arrian sect, who was
chief fifchall or treasourer of the Emperor, and most arrogantlie challenged to
dispute with S. Austen, but yet in private and without notaryes, in respect
of the Imperial laws, that did forbidd public disputations in favor of
sects and heresies. Which disputation S. Augustine accepted; and the same was
held privately, in the presence of many noble and learned men, but the heretics
Aug. epist. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77.
would not yield, but rather published soon after (as their fashion is) that
they had the victory, which S. Austen was forced to refute by many several
epistles, and by settinge forth the disputation it self, as yt is to be seen
in his works.

7. And this may suffice for a taste of some disputations, held at diverse times
and in diverse countries, with heretics of sundry sects in the ancient Church:
And I might recite Photius in Bibliotheca.
many more, as that of Maximus a learned Catholic monk in Africa, Anastasius
hoc anno.
who upon the year of Christ 645. held a very famous disputation against one
Pyrrhus, Archbishop of Constantinople, a great pillar of those heretics called
Monothelits, that held one only will, and not two to be in Christ our
Savior, which disputation being made in the presence of many Bishopps, and of
the governor of that Country, named Gregorius Patricius, the heretical
Archbishopp was so confounded, as he left his heresy, went to Rome, and gave
up a book of his penance to Pope Theodorus, and was received by him into the
Catholic communion again: and that was the event of that disputation.

8. And not full 20. years after this again, to wit upon the year 664.
was that great disputation also in England, between the English and scottish
Bishops, about the observation of Easter, in the presence of two Kings Oswyn
and Egfrid his son, Kings of Northumberland Beda l. 3. h^st. cap. 25.
and of the Mercians: the chief disputers, on the Scottish Bishopps part,
were Colman and Cedda, and of the English, Agilbertus Bishopp of the
VVestsaxons and Wilfrid: and the issue of this disputation was, that Kings
Osvvyn was converted to the union of the Roman Church, and caused the use
thereof to be practiced in his country.

9. And so we see by these examples, and many more that might be alleged,
that disputations in points of Religion are sometimes necessary, and do much
good, when they are taken in hand with equal and due conditions, and
convenient laws for indifferency in tryinge out the truth, for that
otherways they may be pernicious, and have been refused by ancient Fathers, as
we read of one rejected by Saint Ambrose in Milayne, upon the year Public
disputation refused by S. Ambros. upon just causes.
of Christ 286. when Auxentius the Arrian-Bishopp, being puffed up with pride
and arrogance, by the favor of the Empress Iustina, infected with the same
heresy, had not only provoked S. Ambrose to public disputation, but had
further procured that Valentinian the young Emperor, being yet a child, and not
baptized but only Cathecumenus, did make a public edict, to command the said
disputations to be held upon such a day, in his public court or consistory,
before himself and the said Empress, certain learned Pagans and Jews being
appointed for judges in that matter. But S. Ambrose, by the counsel of diverse
Bishopps gathered together with him, refused to come to those disputatio^s,
writing a book to the Emperor Valentinian for his Ambros. epist. 31. where
is extant also the book sent by Ambrose to Valentinian.
excuse, shevvinge the injustice and vnequality of the order, and of those
times, and persuadinge him to recall the said law. And if he would have that
controversy in religion, betvveene them and the Arrians, treated again, he
should follovv therein the excellent example of his predecessor Constantine the
great, who suffered Priests and Bishopps only to handle that matter in the
Council of Nice, and so was this disputation broken of: and presently there
happened a thing of great admiration (says Paulinus in the life of S. Ambrose)
which was, Paul. in vita Ambrosij.
that a certain principal learned Arrian, acerrimus disputator; and
inconuertibilis ad fidem Catholicam, being a most eager disputer, and esteemed
not possible to be converted to the Catholic faith; being deceived, at it
seems, of his hope and expectation to dispute in this conflict, went to the
Church, to hear at least what Ambrose could say out of the pulpit in his
sermons: where seeing an Angel to speak as it were in his ear, he was by
that miracle not only converted to be a Catholic, but became also a most
vehement defendor of that faith against the heretics.

10. To return then to our purpose of disputation, yt is of great moment,
how, and in what time and place, and with what laws and conditions they
are made, vvherof you will see the proof and experience also in these ten,
that here we are to present; vvherof six being The comparison between Cath
and heretical disputations.
held under the government of Protestants, and 4. under Catholic magistrates,
you shall see complaints on both sides of inequality used: but he that shall
read and consider them in differently, and without passion, even as they are
set down by Fox himself (for we could get no other records thereof for the
present) he shall easily see no small differences to appear. For that the
disputatio^s both at Oxford and Cambridge in K. Henryes days, were only
certain ostentations of light skyrmishes a far of, so vainly and fondly
performed, as they have no substance in them at all. And so he will see that
shall read these examinations. The other under Queen Mary, though the first of
them in the conuocation-house, vvherin Protestants only were opponents, was
not much unlike the former for substance, or rather lack of substance: yet the
other three held in Oxford against Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer by Catholic
disputers, are of a far different kind, as having both judges, notaryes, and
arbitrators to the likinge of both parts appointed. And albeit in the manner of
vrginge arguments, there want not complaints of the Protestant party, as after
you shall hear: for that diverse somtymes are said to have spoken together,
and one man to have putt himself into the prosecution of another man's
argument, somevvhat disorderly as to them yt seemed: yet touching the things
themselves, to wit the arguments and proofs there laid forth and prosecuted,
there were so many clear, substantial and weighty, as the reader will
confess there was no time lost in those 3. days disputation of the Cath
party. And so to the examination thereof I remitt me.

11. One thing of no small importance there is to be considered in this preface
about the nature of disputation; to wit, that as it is a fit means
Disputation fitter in some to move doubts and examine the truth, then to
resolve the same.
to stir up man's understanding to atte^d the truth, by layinge forth the
difficultyes on both sides; so is yt not alvvayes sufficient to resolve his
judgment, for that yt moves more doubts then he can aunsvvere or dissolve.
And this happens not only in unlearned people, which by no means can
descerne which party has the better, when both parts are learned and allege
arguments for themselves, in matters above their capacity, but even the most
learned also, if they have no other means of resolution then arguing to and
fro by disputation, are brought many-times to be more doubtful thereby then
before, and this even in matters both natural and moral of this life. The
reason vvherof is, that man's understanding being limited, and the light of
knowledge imparted unto him from God, being but a little particle or sparkle
of his infinite divine knowledge: yt comes to pass, that the more this
sparkle is exercised, and inkendled in searching out Gods works and secrets in
this life, the more yt sees her own weakness, and begins to doubt more,
and to be more ambiguous in herself, whether that which she apprehends be
truly apprehended or no, or whether by further search she shall not find it
otherwise, and see herself deceived in this apprehensio^, as she has found
in many other apprehensions that went before, when she had less knowledge.

12. And upon this ground no doubt came those philosophers, called the
Academicks, to found their sect and profession, that they would belceue or
affirm nothing, but dispute of all things to and fro without assent. And
here hence came also the saying of that other philosopher: Hoc Unum scio, me
nihil scire. I know only this, that I know nothing. And S. Austen himself
before his conversion, being yet a Manichee, and vvearyed out with this search
by way of arguments to and fro, which should be the true Religion (for this
was one of their principal grounds, as himself testified, to believe
nothing, but that which was evident by reason) fell at length to forsake the
Manichees, and to join himself to the Academiks: but after long search
finding no certainty also therein, and hearing their sect Aug. l. de moribus
Ecclesiae contra Manicheos.
every day impugned by S. Ambrose Bishopp of Millayne (where then Augustine
remained) he returned in the end by the motion of almighty God, to consider
what more grounds the Catholic Religion had, to stay a man's judgment Aug.
confess. lib. 5. cap. 13. and lib. 6. c. 1. 2. 11.
or conscience, then the uncertainty of disputations, and findinge the same,
resolved himself to renounce all sects and to be a Catholic, as in his own
confessions at large he declares.

13. By this then we do see, that albeit disputation rightly used, be a good
means to discover truth by mouinge doubts to and fro, yet is yt not alvvayes
sufficient to resolve and quiett a man's judgment, even in natural things:
and if not in these, how much less in supernatural and divine, vvherin
human disputation has far less force? For that human sciences,
deducinge their disputation from principles that are evidently known unto us
by light of nature, may far better resolve a man by force of those
disputations, and enforce What force disputation has in resolving matters of
faith.
him to yield his assent, then in matters of divinity, where the first grounds
and principles, are not known to us by light of nature, as in human
sciences, but are received only by light of faith, and reueyled from God:
wherefore these disputations may serve to examine and discuss matters, for
stirring up our understanding, but the resolution and determination, must come
from a more certain means which is infallible, and this we see practiced in
the very first co^trouersy, that ever was handled in the priuitiue Church, as
is recorded by S. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, where the question being,
whether Christians converted of gentills, should be bound to the observation
of the mosayicall law or no? there was (says the text) first magna
conquisitio, Act. 15.
a great search or disputation about The manner of proceeding under the
Apostles.
the matter; and then secondly the Apostles declared their sentences in order;
and finally the determination was in all their names, representing the whole
Church, visum est spiritui sancto and nobis, yt seemed good to the holy ghost
and us, and so was the matter determined, and the like form has been observed
ever since that time in the Cath. Church, determining all controversies that
have fallen out, to wit, that first there should be great search and
discussion of the matter, by lavvfull and free disputation, to which end the
most learned men of all nations are sent commonly to general Counsels, to
perform this point. And secondly all arguments on both sides being heard and
examined, the Bishops present do give their voices, and according to the
greater part, with concourse and general approbation of the general head, do
they determine visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. So as here disputation
serves not to determine but to examine.

14. And for that the sectaryes of our days have not this sound mean to
determyne matters, but do depend The want which sectaryes have to determyne
matters by Cicero in Paradox.
only upon probability, and persuasibility of speech, or writing one against
the other, by which (as Tully says) nothing is so incredible, that may not be
made probable: therefore are their questions and controversies endless and
indeterminable; and though they have had above a hundred meetings, conferences,
disputations, Counsels and synods from their first disputation held at Lypsia,
upon the year 1519. unto their synodde in Vilna, upon the year 1590. whereof
you may see more largely in Stanislaus Rescius his observations: yet could
they never agree, nor will hereafter, lackinge the forsaid means of
resolution and determination upon their disputations.

15. And if this do fall out even in the learned of our sectaryes, that they
cannot by disputations alone resolve soundly either themselves, or others in
matters of co^trouersy, for that still there remain doubts and difficultyes,
whether matters were well prosecuted or no; and new arguments do offer
themselves daily to and fro: what shall we think of the unlearned and
ignorant people, that cannot understand that is argued, and much less judge
thereof? and yet upon the creditt of such disputations do adventure their
fowls, as you have seen by many lamentable examples before in both me^ and
vveomen, that upon the fame and creditt of these English disputations here
set down by Fox, partly under K. Edward, and partly under Queen Mary, and
upon the probability of some fond and broken arguments The willfullnes of
Foxtan unlearned sectaryes in disputation.
used therein for the Protestants side, as somevvhat apparent and plausible to
their senses and capacity, have not only stood therein most arrognatly against
their Bishopps, and learned Pastors by open disputatio^s in their Courts and
Consistoryes, but have run also to the fire for the same, vvherof Allerton,
Tankerfield, Crashfield, Fortune, and others Mensi^us Ian Mars. Sept and Noucmb.
before mentioned being but Cooks, Carpenters, and Coblars by occupation: yea
vveomen also as Anne Alebright, Alice Potkins, Joan Lashford, Alice Dryuer, and
others may be ridiculous but lamentable examples.

16. Neither is this a new or strange thing, that heretical vveomen should
grow to such insolency, as to stand in disputation with the learned Bishops
of the Catholic side, for that we read it recorded in Ecclesiastical
historyes above 12. The story of a Mani hean woman that disputed with a Bishopp.
hundred years gone, to wit upon the year of Christ 403. that a certain
vvillfull woman of the city of Antioch named Iulia, infected with the
abominable heresy of the Manichees and fervent therein, came unto the city
of Gaza, vvherof S. Porphyrius a holy learned man was Bishop, and beginning
there to pervert diverse Christians, and being for the same reprehended by the
Bishopp, she contemned him, yea challenged him to open disputation, which the
good man admittinge, she behaved herself so insolently therein as was
intolerable: So as when he had suffered her a great while to allege her
blasphemous arguments, and could by no means reduce her or make her harken to
the truth, he fell from disputation to use another mean, turning himself to
God, saying: O Eternal Mareus in vita S. Porphirij.
God which have created all things, and art only eternal, having no
beginning or endinge, who art glorified in the blessed Trinity, strike this
vvomans tongue, and stopp her mouth that she speak no more blasphemies against
thee. Which words being uttered, Iulia began to stammer, and to change
countenance, fallinge into an extasis, and so leesing her voice, remained dumme
until she died, which was soon after, vvherat two men and two vveomen
that came with her fell down at the Bishopps feet as king pardon, and
were converted, as were diverse gentills also by the same miracle.

17. And this was the conclusion of that disputation; and though it pleased
not almighty God to use the like miracles externallie in Qu. Maryes days, for
the repressinge of those insole^t vveomen that disputed so malepartlie, and
uttered so many blasphemous speeches against the sovereign mystery of
Christ's real presence in the Sacrament; yet can there be no great doubt, but
that invvardlie he used the same, or no less justice unto them, especially
seeing he suffered them to go to the fire all without repentance, and so to
perish both bodily and ghostly, temporallie add eternally. And for that in
recytinge The cause of the Edition of these disputations.
their stories before set down, intendinge all brevity possible, I could
not conveniently lay forth their several arguments in disputation, as neither
of those that were their masters and inducers to this maddnes; I have thought
good here to examine all together in this Re-vievv, whereby you shall see
what grounds they had of so great an enterprise, and of so obstinate a
prosecution thereof. And this shall suffice by way of Preface: Now will we
pass to the recytall of the said disputations.

OF TEN PVBLIKE DISPVTATIONS, Recounted by John Fox, to have been held in
England, About Controversies in Religion, especially concerning the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, within the space of 4. years, at two several changes
of Religion, under K Edward, and Queen Mary; Besides many other more
particular, held in Bishops Consistoryes, and other places, about the same
matters. CHAP. I.
Now then to come more near to the matter yt self, we are breefly to recount
the forsaid ten disputations, or public meetinges and conferences, that after
the change of the outward face of Catholic Religion in England, were held in
our country within the space only of 4. or 5. years, and the effects that
ensued thereof, which in great part were not unlike to the success of all
those disputations, meetings, conferences, colloquies and other attempts of
trial before mentioned, to have been with little profitt of agreement, made in
Germany, Polony, France and other places amongst the Protestants of this age,
since the beginning of their new gospel, the causes and reasons whereof, have
in part ben touched by us in our precedent preface, and shall better appear
afterward by the examination of these ten public disputatio^s, from which, as
from general storehouses, or head schools, were borrowed the armor and
arguments, for these other lesser bickerings of particular Foxian Martyrs,
which they had with their Bishops, Prelates and Pastors at their examinations
and arraigneme^ts, upon the confidence and pride whereof, they were induced to
offer themselves most obstinately and pitifully unto the fire, as in th'exame^
of John Fox his Calendar, you have seen abundantly declared.

First Disputation.. 1.
2. Wherefore to recount the particulars as breifely as we may, the first
public disputation First disputation of Peter Martyr at Oxford. 1549.
of these ten, whereof we now are to treat, was held at Oxford against the real
presence of the blessed body and blood of our Savior in the Sacrament of the
Altar, by Peter Martyr an Italian Apostata friar, upon the year of Christ (as
Fox sets it down) 1549. which was the third of K. Edward the sixth his
reign, about the month of June (for he expresses not the very day) and the
chief moderator or judge in this disputation, was D. Cox Chancelourat that
time of the university; but after under Q. Elizabeth was B. of Ely, and his
assistents were Henry B. of Lincoln, D. Haynes deane of Exceter; Fox page 1249.
M. Richard Marison Esquier, and Christophor Ne^^son Doctor of Cyuill law; all
comissionars (says Fox) of the Kings Majesty, sent down for this effect to
authorize the disputations.

3. For better understanding whereof you must note, that albeit K. Edward had
reigned now more then full two years, and that the protector Seymer and some
others of his humor, would have had change of doctrine established even at the
beginning, about the point of the blessed Sacrament; yet could they not
obtain it in Parlame^t, partly, for that the far greater part of the realm
was yet against it, but especially for that it was not yet resolved by the
Archbishopp Cranmer himself, of whom if you remember, John Fox does complain
in one place under K. Henry; that good Cranmer had not yet a full feelinge of
that doctrine. Fox page 1115. and 1205.
Whereupon we see, that in the first parliament of K. Edwards time, begone upon
the 4. of November and ended upon the 14. of December 1547. there was an act
made with this title. An act against such persons as shall irreverently speak
against See Statue. book an. 1. Edw. 6. cap. 1.
the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, etc. Wherein magnificent words
are spoken of this Sacrament and all those greatly reprehended, that in their
sermons, preachings, readings, ta^ks, rymes, songs, plays, or gestures, did
name and call yt, ^y such vile and unseemly words (says the Statute) is
Christian ears did abhor to hear yt rehearsed; and this was the the first
spirit of that Caluinian humor in England, misliked by Cranmer and the rest at
that time, but soon after allowed well by John Fox in such of his Martyrs, Fox
page 1548.
as call yt wormes-meate, idol, and the like.

4. And finally this party so much prevailed with them that governed, as not
long after, that is to say, in the second parliament be gone the 4. of November
1548. and ended the 14. of March 1549. they got their new communion
Zuinallanisue admitted. 1546.
book to be admitted, wherein their new doctrine also against the real
presence was contained, and then Peter Martyr, who, as in his story we have
Sup. December. 26.
showed, was sent to Oxford before with indiffere^cy, to teach what should be
ordained him from higher powers in that parliament, having expected all the lent
long, whilst the parliament endured, what would See Doctor Saunders l. 2. de
sehi, m. A^gl.
be decreed about this point; and finding himself in straytes, for that he was
come to the place of S. Paul to the Corinthians, where he must needs declare
himself, receauinge now 1. Cor. 11.
aduertisment of the new decree, did not only accomodate himself to teach and
preach the same doctrine presently: (which yet the other The dissemblinge of
Peter Martyr and Bucer.
friar, his companion Martyn Bucer would not do in Cambridge) but also was
content upon request and order from the Council, to defend the same in public
disputations, for better authorizinge yt through the whole body of the realm.
This then was the occasion of this first public disputation, to give some
countenance and creditt to the new received opinion and paradox of Zuinglius,
Occolampadius, and Carolstadius, three scholars of Luther himself, against
the real presence, which as often Luth. lib. cont Sacrament. and alibi sap^.
you have heard before, Luther did condemn for damnable heresy, and them for
heretics that mayntayned yt.

5. The questions chosen by Peter Martyr were three: First about
Transubstantiation, whether after the words of consecration, the bread and wine
be turned into the body and blood of Christ. The second about the real
presence; whether the body and blood of Christ be carnally and corporally (for
so are his words) in the bread and wine, or otherwise under Three questions to
be disputed at Oxford 1549.
the kinds of bread and wine. The third was: whether the body and blood of
Christ be united to bread Sacramentally? But of this last question Fox relates
nothing, that yt was either handled or touched in this disputation. About the
former two, this manifest fraud was used, that whereas the first about
Transubstantiation, depends of the second of the real presence, it should
have been handled in the second place, and not in the first, as here yt is; for
cleerer conceauing whereof, the Reader must note, that the main controversy
between the Sacramentaryes and us, is about the real presence, to wit
whether the true body of Christ be really and substantially in the Sacrament
after the words of consecration, which we do hold affirmatively, and so does
Luther also, and then supposing that it is so, there follows a second
question de modo essendi, of the manner of Christ's being there, to wit,
whether yt be there together with bread, or without bread, or whether the
bread be anihilated by the ptesence of Christ's body, or whether yt be turned
into the very substance of Christ's body, as we have showed out of Scotus and
Durand before, in the discussion of Plessis Mornay his Trial; and every See
the defense of the relacio^ of (...) his disputation with B. Pe^on of Eureux
tom 2 part. 3 or our three conuernons,
one of these opinions, about the manner of Christ's being there, do presuppose
the real presence, denied by the Sacramen taryes: So as to dispute first about
this particular manner of Christ his being there by Transubstantiation, before
yt be discussed whether he be really there or not, is to set the cart before
the horse, and the foot before the head.

6. And yet for that they do persuade themselves, that they have some more
shifts or shows of probability against Transubstantiation, then against the
real presence, or can delude better our arguments in the simple peoples eyes,
they always run to this, and leave the other: And it is, as if the question
being, first whether gold were in a purse, and then whether yt were there alone
or else together with ledd, tynne, or some such baser metal; some wrangeler
would first dispute the second question before the first; or as if two demau^ds
being propounded, first whether in such a vessel (where watter was known to
be before) there be wine put in, and secondly whether this wine have turned
that water into it self or not? or that water and wine do remain together,
and that one would pretermit the first question, to wit, whether wine be
really and truly there or no? and cauil only about the second, whether the
water be turned Two similitudes to express the vain vvta^gling of
Sacrame^taryes about Transubstantiation.
into wine, or remain together with the wine? In which cases you see first,
that this manner of dealinge were preposterous and impertinent wrangling, but
especially, if the wrangler did deny expressly that there was any gold at all
in the purse, or wine in the vessel, for then yt were too too much folly for
him to dispute the secondary questions whether the said gold were there alone,
or with other mettalles; or whether the wine had converted the water into it
self or no; for if neither gold nor wine be really there present, then is
there no place for the second dispute at all. And so fares it in our
co^trouersy of the real presence of Christ's body. For if the said body be not
really and substa^tially in the Sacrament at all, as the Zuinglians and
Caluinists do hold; then is it impertine^t for them to dispute the second
question, whether it be there without bread or with bread, or whether bread be
turned into it or no by Tra^substa^tiation, for so much as they suppose it not
to be there at all; only Luther and Lutherans may have co^trouersy with
Catholics, about the manner how it is there, seeing they believe it to be there
in deed; but Zuinglia^s and Caluinists cannot, but only about the first
question, whether it be there or not; which question notwithstanding, for so
much as they fly and run always to the second, as we have showed; notorious
it is that they run from the purpose, and show themselves not only wra^glers
but also deceauers, seeking to dazell the eyes of the simple in this behalf,
as in this first disputation at Oxford, Peter Martyr begone with
Transubstantiation, and was much longer therein, then in the controversy of
the real presence.

7. And in the second disputation of B. Ridley in Cambridge, two only questions
being proposed; the first was by preposterous order of Transubstantiation, and
the second of the Sacrifice, but the real presence was wholly omytted, and the
like in the rourth disputation under Master Fraudule^t dealing of Protestants,
in disputation.
Pearne for the Protestants, as after you shall see. And when lastly Master
Ridley came to resolve upon all three disputations, held under him in
Cambridge, and the questions handled therein, he quite passes over the
controversy of real presence. And so you shall observe the like trick in
most of the other disputations, and yet (as I say) if there be no real
presence, the question of Transubstantiation has no place at all, no nor the
sacrifice neither, as Ridley confesses in his said resolution, and this for
the first shift of Peter Martyr and his fellows in this disputation.

8. The second shifte is, that he puts down fraudulently the second
question about Fox page 1249.
the real presence, whether the body of Christ be there carnally or
corporally, for albeit we do hold that both Caro and Corpus, which is 2. fraud.
the flesh and body of Christ our Savior, be there truly and really, yet not
after a fleshely and corporal manner, as these words seem to import, but
rather Sacramentally, that is to say though truly, and really, yet after a
Sacramental and spiritual manner, even as our soul is in our body, and an
Angel in a corporal place. And albeit some authors and Fathers do use
sometimes the word Corporaliter, speakinge of the real presence, yet do Fox
and Martyr maliciously every where call yt a carnal and corporal presence,
thereby to deceive the simple reader, See afterward c. 3.
as though yt were there with local dimensions, after the manner of other
bodies, and not after a spiritual manner of being.

9. The third fraud in settinge down this first disputation is, that whereas
Fox does tell Fox page ibid.
us in this place, that the principal disputers against Peter Martyr were
Doctor Tressam, Doctor Chadsey, and Master Morgan, yet does he not tell us one
word what they said against him, nor 3. fraud.
does he relate any one of their arguments or answers, but only the arguments
of Peter Martyr against them with triumph, as who would say, he had gotten the
victory without resistance: but you shall see in the ensuing Chapters, what
manner of arguments Peter Martyrs were, and how easy to be answered, as no
doubt but they were by them, if Fox had thought good to have related both parts
(as he ought to have done) or have left both parts out. But this is his
ordinary custom of dealing. Wherefore that you may understand partly how the
matter went in deed, by the relation of one that was present, to wit D.
Saunders, I will set down breefely his words of the action in general, as yt
passed. Thus then he writes about this first Oxford disputation.

10. Petrus Martyr (says he) etc. Peter Martyr, of Sand l^b. 2. de schism.
Angl.
whom many of the Sectaryes promised to themselves great matters, for that he
was public reader in Oxford, being challenged in those days by many of that
university, to defend his doctrine by disputation, and namely by D. Rich. Smyth
who had been his predecessor in the same chair, never durst to yield there unto,
until he had obtained that D. Cox a sectary of his own side, and a man of
very loose life should be sent from the court, to be moderator and judge in the
same disputation: And that D. Smith was called from the university, etc. But
when the said disputation had endured for three days, and that Cox had seen
his D. Saunders relation of this disputation at Oxford.
Peter Martyr much more pressed then he looked for, and almost hissed out of
the schools by all the scholars and hearers, he was forced to say that he was
sent for away in all have to London, and consequently could no longer attend to
these disputes. Wherefore having given great praises publicly to Peter Martyr,
and admonished the scholars to keep peace, he brake up those disputations, and
so departed with infamy in the sight of all men: yet Peter Martyr afterward set
forth these disputations fraudulently, as heretics are accustomed, and would
needs seem to have had the victory, but by the judgment of that university he
was twice vanquished, first in that he durst not encounter D. Smith, and
secondly for that he could not answer the arguments of the other Cath.
Doctors. Thus he. Whereby we may perceive, the reason wherefore Fox would not set
down at length the particulars of this first disputation at Oxford, as he did
of some of the others after.

Second Disputation.. 2.
11. The second disputation was held at Cambridge about the same time (says
Fox) to wit The second disputation held by D. Ridley in Cambridge.
upon the 20. of June anno 1549. the defendant for the Protestant side was D.
Madew; the opponents D. Glyn, M. Langdale, M. Sedgewike, and M. Young, the
moderator was D. Ridley B. of Rochester at that time, but soon after of London
by deprivation of D. Bonner. The commissionars sent from the King to assist as
judges, besides the said Nicolas Ridley, were Thomas B. of Ely, Sir John Cheke
schoolmaister to the King, a forward Protestant in those days, though under Q.
Mary he left them, D. May a Ciuilian, and D. VVenday the Kings physician. The
questions disputed were two, as before has been said. The first, whether there
were any Transubsta^tiation and the second, whether there be any external and
propitiatory sacrifice in the mass. The question of the real presence, whereof
both these do depend, was not handled at all, for the causes you must think
before mentioned, and he that shall read over this whole disputation, shall
find it a very cold and trifling thing, much of the time being spent in
ceremonial words of courtesy, much in impertine^t Triflinge disputations of
our first Protestants.
excursions from the purpose, out of all scholasticall form of disputing or
strayning the defendant, and when any thing drew near to urge or press,
either the moderator would divert the same by intrudinge himself, or the
proctors by their authority would interrupt yt. Here (faith Fox) the proctors
commanded the opponent to diuerte, etc. And again, here the proctors
commanded Langdale to give place to another. Fox page 1254.
And further; here he was commanded to reply in the second matter. And yet
further, here M. Sedgewike was commanded to cease to Master Young. Which
Young, having scarce made three instances in proof of the Sacrifice against
Ridley, ended all the disputations with these words: Well I am contented, and
do most humbly beseech your good Lorshipp, to pardon me of my great rudeness
and imbecility which I have here showed, etc. Which indeed shows great
imbecility, if he said so in deed, and that Fox has not made him to speak as
best pleases himself.

12. I could allege diverse other simplicityes out of this disputation, if I
would stand upon them, yea on the part of Fox and Ridley themselves; for in one
place Fox makes this note upon a certain answer of Ridley: Here is to be
noted (says he) that Peter Martyr in his answer at Oxford, did grant a
change in the substances of bread Fox page 1255.
and wine, which in Cambridge by the Bishopp Doctor Fox notes the
disagreement of his own men.
Ridley was denied. Behold here the goodly agreement, that was between the
first founders of Sacramentaryes doctrine in England, and how worthy to be
noted by themselves. Friar Martyr in Oxford granted a change in the substances
themselves of bread and wine, by the words of consecration; but Bishop Ridley
in Cambridge denies the same, so great difference is there between Oxford and
Cambridge, the Friar and the Bishopp: and is not he well helped up that hangs
his soul on these men's opinions? this then is one simplicity of Fox, but let
us hear another of Ridley related by Fox his ownepen, in his answer to
Master Sedgewicke, who began thus.

13. Right VVorshippfull Master Doctor I do ask of you first of all, whether
the Greek article (this) Ridleyes fond aunsvveringe.
being of the neuter gender, be referred to the word (bread) or to the word
(body)? to the first yt cannot be, for that it is of the masculine gender, ergo
to the second. This was the objection or demand, let us hear the Bishopps
solution. Forsooth (says Fox page 1256.
he) that article is referred to neither of both, but may signisie unto us any
other kind of things. Thus the Bishopp. So as by this exposition, Christ might
as well fignifie a staff, or a stool, or any garment or thing that lay on the
table, or whatsoever else any man will divise, as well as bread, or his body,
when he said of bread, this is my body. And is not this a Bishopp like
answer? But of the arguments and aunswers of this second disputation, we
shall have occasion to speak afterward, when the controversies themselves
shall be discussed in particular, and so we shall pass forward to recoumpte the
other disputations that ensue.

Third Disputation.. 3.
14. The third disputation was held at Cambridge upon the 23. of June in the
same year 1549. as Fox recounteth, wherein two propositions were held
affirmatively for the Catholics, by the aforesaid D. Glyn defendant, to wit
The 3. disputation at Cambridge anno Domini 1549.
for the real presence and sacrifice of the mass. The opponents for the
Protestants were M. Perne, M. Gryndall B. afterward of London, and Canterbury,
M. Ghest and M. Pilkinton, which last under Q. Elizabeth got the Bishopric
of Durham. The moderator and judges were the same as in the former disputation,
to wit Ridley and his fellows, and the manner and form not much unlike,
though somewhat more disorderly, each one puttinge in his verdict to and fro at
his pleasure. But yet whosoever shall pervse the same with equality, will
easily perceive an eminent difference for learning, discretion and clear
aunsweringe between the said Doctor Glyn and his opponents, which principally
is to be attributed to the difference of his cause from theirs; they never
prosecuting commonly one medium for above one or two instances, but leaping
presently to another: so grave and substantial a disputation was this for
poor people that heard yt, or heard of yt, and followed the resolution therein
set down, to hang their souls upon the certaynty thereof.

15. Master Perne begins with a complaint, D. Perne confesses the
corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
against D. Glyn, that he had left Transubstantiation and taken upon him to
defend the real presence in the Sacrament, vvheras we deny nothing less
(says he) then his corporal presence or absence of his substance in the
bread. Whereby yt is evidently seen, that Master Perne was not of Ridleyes
opinion, but held the real presence, though with Luther perhaps he did not
believe Transubstantiation: and this is evident by his arguments which after he
used, nothing in deed against the real presence, but only to prove that
Christ his body was together with bread. The like manner of impertinent
dealinge used Ridley himself in diverse of his arguments; as for example: this
is that bread (says he) which came Fox page 1257.
down from heaven, ergo, yt is not Christ's body, for that his body came not
from heaven: which proves also that yt was not bread, for that Ridley will not
say (I think) that the material bread which Christ had in his hand, camed
own from heaven. The like argument uses Pilkin^on thus: wheresoever (says
he) Christ is, there be his Fond arguments of Sacramentaryes.
ministers also, for so he promised: but Christ as you hold is in the
Sacrament, ergo his ministers are there also. Which were a foul inconvenience
as you see, if all our English ministers should be in the Sacrament for the
poor people to byte at. And yet this argument seems so grave unto John Fox,
as he makes this marginall note thereon. Where Christ is, there are his
ministers. And the poor fellow has not so much wit, as to see that those
words of Christ were meant of his glory in the life to come, and not of the
Sacrament which is ministered upon earth.

16. But to the end you may the better perceive, how disorderly this and the
former disputation at Cambridge, was made by the new Protestants to ouerbeare
the Catholic cause, I shall set down some lines of a narration of D.
Langdale, Archdeacon of Chichester, a Cambridge man who was present at the said
disputation, and confuted afterward in print the said Ridleyes determination
upon these disputations. Thus then he writes: Vix dum finita Albanus
Langlandus in confut. Determ. Nicol. Ridley.
Collegiorum visitatione, etc. The Colleges of Cambridge were no sooner
visited by the Kings Commissionars, but there appeared upon all the gates two
conclusions set up, the first against Transubstantiation, the other against the
sacrifice of the mass, and presently the bedells of the university went about
to give warning, that if any man had any thing to say against these
conclusions, he should come forth the third day after, (which was
Corpus-Christi day,) to dispute, or otherwise all to be bound to perpetual
silence for ever after. The concourse of noble men, and all other degrees was
great, and scaffolds made for the place of disputation, that the multitude
might the better hear: but all that were indifferent, did see matters to be
handled with great inequality; for that whosoever spoke for the Catholic side
presently his speech was either interrupted, or for breuity shifted of to
another time, and Ridley that was the Captain of all steppinge in at every
turn to assist his defendant, did either with threats or fair words, or by
scoffs and bitter taunts seek to divert the Catholic disputers.

17. And when the first days disputation was in this manner ended, yt was
denounced to the auditory, before the dismission of the schools, that if any
man would come forth The partial dealinge of Protestants in their disputations.
and defend within a day or two, the Catholic part of those questions, he
might, but afterward it should not be lawful for any man to speak thereof:
which unexpected denuntiation being heard, one man looked upon another, and all
for a time were silent, until at length a most learned and grave man, pious
and skillfull, as well in knowledge of the tongues, as also in divinity, whereof
he had bvn there public reader before (to wit Doctor Glyn) stepped forth and
offered himself to the combatt, and performed yt the third day after, taking
the place of defendant without help of any moderator, but all rather against
him, beginning his declaration, (which Cambridge men call his position) with
the words of the Prophett: Credidi propter quod locutus sum. Psalm. 115.
And the Protestants were so urged in these disputations about the real
presence, that notwithstanding they avoided and dissembled that question so
much as they could, yet were they driven to such shifts, to putt of the clear
places and authorityes of ancient Fathers about the same, as was ridiculous to
hear; for that sometimes they said Christ's body was present in the Sacrament
by signification, then by representation, then by meditation, then by
appellation, sometimes by propriety, other times by nature, then by power, then
again by grace, then by memory or remembrance, then by virtue and energy, and
by many other diuises of deluding or shifting of the matter. All which being
done, and another third day of disputation passed over in like manner, Ridley
took upon him to give the determination of all, as though he had gotten the
victory. Thus far out of Doctor Langelands book; whereby may be gathered how
the matter passed in these disputations.

Fourth Disputation.. 4.
18. The fourth disputation was held also in Cambridge soon after the former,
wherein, according The 4. disputation at Cambridge. 1549.
to Fox his relation, the forsaid Master Perne was defendant for the
Protestants, and the opponents for the Catholic part, were Master Parker,
Master Pollard, Master Vauesour, and Master Young: the moderator and judges
Fox page 1257.
was Master Ridley of Rochester together with his fellows aforementioned:
the two questions were about Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice; the other
of the real presence was pretermitted (according to the former declared
slight) though yt were the principal and the ground, whereon these other two
do depend, and concerns the very substance of the Zuinglian and Caluinian
sect, now newly set up and authorized by these disputations, and consequently
should first and principally have been discussed, if either good method or show
of true dealinge had been observed. But D. Perne the defendant believed the
real presence, as in the former disputation you have heard him protest, though
in this disputation he sought to expound himself in these words: I grant that
Christ is in the Sacrament truly, wholly and verily after a certain property
and manner. I deny not his presence, but his real, and corporal presence. But
this is a difference without a diversity (by M. Pernes D. Pearne speaks
doubtfully and doubly about the Sacrament.
license) for if Christ's body be there truly, wholly and verily, he must also be
there really, as to every man's common sense and reason is evident; and so
Master Perne by this distinction shows, that he believed nothing at all
really, truly, or verily at that time, if his heart were according to his
words.

19. And albeit, as I have said, Master Perne propounds The fond manner of
this disputation.
the questions of Transubstantiation and sacrifice of the mass, yet when they
came to join issue, their speech was most of all about the real presence, and
I call yt a speech rather then disputation, for that yt had neither order,
method, nor substance in yt, but was a most ridiculous colloquy of one to
another, without vrginge or answeringe any one argument substantially, but as
little beagles lyinge together, one starteth up and gives a bark or two, and
lies down again; so these disputers, aunswerers, and moderator handled the
matter; as for example, M. Parker being to argue first, began to allege three
vain reasons (as Fox calls them in the margent) for the real presence, to
wit, that yt was prophesyed, promised, and performed as he proved by diverse
places of scripture, which being done John Fox, without tellinge us any
answer at all given by Master Perne, has these words. Here they were
sorced to break of through the want of time, yet Master Parker replied this
with a prayer against Master Perne; we give the thanks most holy Father,
that thou have hidden these Fox page 1260.
things from the wise and prudent, and have reueyled them to babes, for pride
is the root of all heresies whatsoever, etc.

20. Now here I would ask John Fox what he means by this note; that they
were forced to break of for lack of time? and yet that Contradiction in Fox
his words.
Parker replied, and began his reply with a prayer? For if they brake of, how
did he reply, especially his reply being somewhat long? And if he replied in so
large a manner as Fox sets it down, how did they break of? and how
ridiculous a thing is it, that a sollemne disputation being begone in presence
of the whole university, and of so great an audience, and Master Parker being
the first opponent, the matter should be broken of without hearing any one
answer of the defendant? But these are Fox his fooleryes, and these were the
first and most firm foundations of our new Caluinian sect in England. Many
other particulars might be set down, especially of Ridley^ moderatinge, who
at every turn made himself defendant and answered far worse then Perne
himself, but we shall have better occasion to touch the same afterward, when
we shall examine more particularly what passed about every controversy, in
each of these disputations; only Vauesour of all the opponents seems to have
spoken best to the purpose M. Vauesour commended.
(as Fox relates him) for that he alleged an authority of S. Augustine in
Psalm. 98. which Ridley, not able to answer, ridiculously shifteth of as you
shall see afterward, when yt comes in rank to be examined, and in his
preface he cited two sayings of Zuinglius and Oecolampadius, Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius doubtful of their doctrine at the beginning.
of their own doubtfullnesse at the beginning, in the doctrine with they
first broached against the real presence. Zuinglius his words are: Albeit this
thing that I mean to treat of, does like me very well; yet notwithstanding I
dare define nothing, but only show my poor judgment abroad to others, etc.
Oecolampadius his words are wrytinge to his brother. Peace be with thee. As
far as I can conjecture out of the ancient Fathers, these words of Christ
(this is my body) is a figurative locution, etc. Thus they at the beginning
very doubtfully, as you see, but afterward, as those that tell lies so often,
as at length they begin to believe them to be true themselves, so did these
men; and yet others were so foolish as to follow them in their doubtful
fancyes, a pitiful case in the cause of our soul. Well, John Fox concludes
this whole Fox page 1261.
disputation with these words: Here ends (says he) the third and last
disputation holden at Cambridge 1549.

Fifth Disputation.. 5.
21. The fifth disputation was the public determination made by B. Ridley, as
judge and The 5. disputation or determination at Cambridge by M. Ridley.
moderator upon the questions, before handled in the three disputations of
Cambridge, which determination I do reckon among the number of the other
disputations public, and colloquyes, both for that yt was made upon a several
day most sollemnely, and with no less concourse of people then the former, as
also for that yt sets down all the heads of his principal arguments, as
the first disputation does those of Peter Martyr, though without the answers or
replies of his adversaries. And indeed this being a collection of all the
substantial points, of whatsoever had been alleged by the Protestants in all
three disputations, as also whatsoever himself could add thereunto; and being
done with so great study and deliberation, as to be delivered in the greatest
concourse and expectation of people (for the nouelty thereof) that ever perhaps
were seen together in Cambridge before; yt being the first public
determination against the truth of Christ's sacred body in the Sacrament, that
ever that university, from her first foundation had heard of: For all these
reasons and respects (I say) this determination may perhaps be numbered amongst
one of the most sollemne conferences, or disputations held by the Sacramentarye
Protestants in our country.

22. Ridley then began the assembly with these words: There has been an ancient
custom among you, that after disputatio^s had in your common schools, Fox
page 1261.
there should be some determination made of the matter disputed and debated,
especially touching Christian Religion; because therefore it is seen good to
these worshipful assistants, joined with me in commission from the Kings
Majesty, that I should perform the same at this time, I will by your
favorable patience declare, both Ridley his entrance to his determination.
what I do think and believe my self, and what all other ought to think of
the same, which I would that afterward ye did with diligence weigh and
ponder, every man at home severally by himself, etc. This is his preface,
wherein you may note first, what a different assurance it is for a man, to
repose the salvation of his soul upon this new belief and thinkinge of
Master Ridley, which was not yet as yt seems full three or four years old
with him (for until K. Henryes death he was ever held of another opinion) or
upon the general determination, learning, judgment, piety, and consent of
the worthiest in the Christian world, assembled together in counsels,
wheroften, (as in our preface we have touched, and shall again afterward) had
determined for the real presence in the space of the Diverse co^sideratio^s
about the uncertainty of Protestants belief.
last 500. years, before this contrary determination of Ridley, to wit after
the question was once moved by Berengarius, until yt was moved again by
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius; let every discreet man, I say, consider what a
difference this is, for a man to adventure his soul and everlasting
inheritance thereon. For if a man had demanded of Ridley himself 4. or 5.
years before this day, what a man was bound to think and believe in this
point for sauinge his soul, he would have said the quite contrary to that he
determines now.

23. Secondly you may consider another difference in this private
determination, of Ridley and his associates from that of Catholic Counsels,
for that Counsels after enquiry and disputations made for the truth, do
determyne by general consent of the Bishopps assembled, with assured
assistance of the holy ghost; whereas Master Ridley remytteth all to the
private judgment of every one at home, severally by himself; which is as much
to say, notwithstanding all the disputation, and his determination, yet must
every man and woman follow their own fancy at home, and be judge of all that
has been disputed, or determined: and this is the certainty that Protestants
have for common people to rely upon.

24. Thirdly yt is to be noted, that notwithstanding Fox calls this decision,
the determination of Doctor Nicolas Ridley B. of Rochester, upon the
conclusions above prefixed, yet handles he only two questions in this his
determination videlicet; Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Altar,
but the first much more amply and abundantly, pretermitting the very chief
and principal question in deed, whereof all the rest depends, which is of the
real presence, which makes the very essence of Caluinian and Zuinglain sect,
whereby they do differ from both Lutherans and us: of which absurd imposture we
have spoken sufficiently before, and seeing so much had been said in the former
disputations about that point, though greatly against the Protestants
inclination, me thinks he ought not to have left out wholly that question in
this his determination. But as I have often said, their principal shift in
those days was to stepp from the main point, whether Christ were really in
the Sacrament or no; and to leap unto a quiddity of the manner of his being
there, to wit by Transubstantiation. Five pretended heads of Ridleyes
determination.
About which notwithstanding, B. Ridley begins his resolution with great
oftentation of words saying; that he had five principal grounds or head
springs for the same: First (to use his words) the authority, Majesty, and
verity of the scriptures: secondly the most certain testimonies of ancient
Catholic Fathers: thirdly the definition of a Sacrament: fourthly the
abominable heresy of Eutiches, that may ensue of Transubstantiation: fifthly,
the most sure belief of the article of our faith; he ascended into heaven, etc.

25. These be Master Ridleyes five bulwarks or castles of defense builded in
the air, which he handles so fondly and childishely, as after you shall see
in the particular examinations of his arguments. Only here I will say in
general, that the reader shall find his authority, majesty, and verity of
scriptures against Transubstantiation, to be a mere vaunt and vanity, for he
has no one clear or substantial place at all. And as for his certain
testimonies of the ancient Fathers, they will prove so uncertain for his
purpose, as you shall see them most certaynely against him. His third castle of
the definition of a Sacrament, will prove a cottage of no strength at all, for
that the true nature of a Sacrament stands well with Transubstantiation. His
fourth head spring about the heresy of Eutiches, will prove a puddle, and
himself puzzeled therein, for that the heresy of Eutiches confoundinge two
distinct natures in Christ, has no more coherence with Transubstantiation,
then Rochester with Rome. And finally his last ground about the article of
Christ's ascendinge into heaven, has no ground to rest on, but is a mere
imagination in the air, to wit, that for so much as Christ ascended into
heaven, ergo there is no Transubstantiation.

26. Wherefore to leave this first question of Transubstantiation, and pass to
the second of Ridleyes resolution about the sacrifice of the mass.
sacrifice, vow must understand, that when Master Ridley had spent most of the
time about Transubstantiation, he had little left concerning the sacrifice of
the mass, but concluded his said determination in very few words thus: Now for
the better conclusion (says he) concerning the sacrifice, because yt depends
upon the first, I will in few Fox page 1262.
words declare what I think. Two things do persuade me, that this conclusion
(against the sacrifice of the mass) is true, that is certain places of
scripture, and certain testimonies of the Fathers. Lo here the grave and
weighty motives that Ridley had, to adventure upon so great a change in belief
as this was, after so many years, being a Priest and Catholic Bishopp, and
offeringe sacrifice after the manner of the Catholic Church, from the first
day of our contreyes conversion, unto the end of K. Henryes reign. His motives
were, as you hear, certain places of the scripture, which were only taken out
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, talkinge of Christ's bloody sacrifice on the
cross, which was but Hebr. 9. and 10.
one, and certain places of the Fathers, to wit, two or three misunderstood
out of S. Augustine, The miserable proceeding of Ridley.
and one out of Fulgentius, all which notwithstanding prove nothing for his
purpose, as after you shall see declared in their place, and turn. And the
self same Fathers have so many other clear places to the contrary, as we will
desire no better judges for proof of our Catholic cause, then if Ridley would
remitt himself to these two Fathers judgments, by him cyted against us; for
that both of them do profess themselves to be Priests, and to offer external
sacrifice, upon the Altar as our Priests do now.

27. Consider then how wise and constant a man Ridley was, to leave his ancient
faith so generally received throughout all Christendom in his days, and so
many years practiced by himself, upon two such motives, as are certain
places of scripture misunderstood by himself, and certain testimonies of
Fathers, that seemed to him to have some difficulty. Which Ieuity was so
displeasaunt unto almighty God, as by the effects we see, that whereas at the
beginning he seemed to doubt upon these two motives, leauinge other men to
judge thereof, he became by little and little to be so obstinately blinded at
length therein, as albeit some four or five years after, he were openly
convicted in disputations at Oxford, as by his answers you shall afterward
see, yet was he content to burn for the same, which was the highest degree of
calamity that could fall upon him, in body and soul. And thus much of him and
his determination for the present.

Sixth Disputation.. 6.
28. In all the former disputations both at Oxford and Cambridge, you shall
find nothing The sixth disputation at Cambridge by Bucer 1549.
of friar Martyn Bucer, no not so much as that he is once named in all these
conflicts, about the blessed Sacrament. And yet you must remember, that he was
principal reader of divinity in Cambridge at this time, as Peter Martyr was in
Oxford: and therefore as the first place was given to the said Peter in Oxford;
so yt is likely, that the same would have been to Martyn in Cambridge, if they
had found him so pliable to their hands in his opinions about the Sacrament, as
the other was; but in no case would he be induced as yet, to accommadate
himself therein, and therefore had he not any part Martyn Bucer in great
distress.
allowed him in this comedy, either of defendant, opponent, disputer,
counselour, moderator, assistant, or other office or employment: nay yt is
thought that he incurred so great disgrace about this matter, as he could
willingly have departed the realm again, (as Bernardinus Ochinus upon such
like coffeehouse did from London) had not the necessity of his woman, and
other impediments of poverty let him, not knowinge well whither to go, as
being expulsed from Argentina at his coming to England, as Mense December. cap.
16.
before we have showed in the story of his life.

29. Wherefore resoluinge himself at length to pass over this mortification,
and to give our English Protestants some satisfaction, though not in the points
which they desired, he thought it good after Ridleyes departure, to defend
certain other paradoxes, which Fox records in these words: Over and besides
these Fox page 1262 and 1263.
disputations above mentioned, other disputations were holden in Cambridge
shortly after by Martyn Bucer, upon these conclusions followinge: First, that
the canonical books of scripture alone, do sufficiently teach the regenerate
all things necessary belonginge to salvation. Secondly, there is no Church on
earth that erreth not, as well in faith, as in manners. Thirdly we are so
justified freely of God, that before our justification, The questions of Bucers
disputatio.
yt is sin and provoke Gods wrath against us, whatsoever good work we
seem to do. Then being justified, we do good works.

30. These were Bucers conclusions, which well I may call paradoxes, for that
even in the common sense and judgment of every mean capacity, the falsity and
absurdity thereof is apparent. For as touching the first, though we grant,
that the divine books of scripture, if they were fewer then they are
(respectinge Gods holy providence) are sufficient to teach both regenerate and
not regenerate (that believe the verity thereof) the true way of salvation, and
that the said divine providence has, does, and will so provide, that albeit
some parts of these we now have should be lost (as diverse others before have
been) yet should the remnant still be sufficient to that purpose, with such
other supplies of Gods assistance as he would send; yet to say, as this man
does, that the canonical books of scripture How scriptures are sufficient to
salvation.
alone, do sufficiently teach all things belonginge to salvation; if by alone
he will exclude all other helps of tradition, antiquity, testimony of the
Church, interpretation of the Fathers, direction of general Counsels, and
other like aids, yt is a most absurd paradox; for neither can we know which
books are to be held canonical, nor what they teach truly and sincerely, nor
what may be deduced out of them; if we remove the former helps; And the case
is, as if one of the Kings of our country goinge abroad, as some did to
Jerusalem, or other forrayne wars, and intending to be long absent, should
leave with his Counselors for their better government certain laws written
with his own hand, and other directions by word of mouth how to proceed, A
case representinge the heretics of our days about cryinge for scriptures alone.
interprett, and use them, commanding all men to obey them, and that some
troublesome people after many years continuance in their government, should
appeal from them, to the Kings written laws only, prayinge the sufficiency
thereof (for better colou^inge their pretense) and suinge that yt were ^ blott
unto the said laws, and to the Kings wisdom that made them, to acknowledge
any insufficiency at all in them for perfect direction of the commonwealth,
which laws ^et, themselves would expound, as pleased them best for their own
purposes.

^1. In this case, who sees not whereunto this practice tends, and for what
causes so great praises are given to the sufficiency of these laws, used to
make the praisers judges of all, and to exempt them from all controlment of
others? And the very same is seen in the other case of the scriptures, which
being written by the spirit and fingar of God himself, and delivered unto us
by the Church, whose commission also and authority in the same scriptures is
set down, byndinge us under Matt. 18. 1 Timothy 3. Marc. vlt. Matt. 16.
dlamnation to hear her from age to age as the pillar and firmament of truth,
there stepp up together diverse sorts of sectarves in all ages, and of this of
ours, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, and the
like challenged by the said Church of disobedience, and do all appeal jointly
and severally from her, to only scriptures, praysinge highly the sufficiency,
and excellency thereof, and refusinge all other means, either of tradition or
ancient exposition, for understanding of the sense and true meaning. And when
we allege the Catholic Doctors and Pastors of every age, as spiritual
Governors and Conselors under God in the Church, for explaninge his divine
will and meaning in this behalf; they refuse all, and only will be
interpreters and expositors themselves, and this not only against the Catho.
Church, which they ought to obey, but one sect also against another for their
particular opinions, and diuersityes, which by this means are made
irreconciliable, and indeterminable, as experience teaches us. For when, I
pray you, will Luther and Zuinglius or their followers, come to any accord
either with us, or amongst themselves by only canonical scriptures, expounded
after each parties particular spirit, judgment and affection? The like I may
ask of Anabaptists and Arrians, English Protestants and Puritans, or of any
other Sectaryes that you can name unto me, which never agreed by this way, nor
ever will. And this is the first paradox of Martyn Bucer, that only scriptures
are sufficient to teach every man.

32. The second is yet worse (if worse may be) to wit; that there is no Church
on earth, which The second paradox of Martyn Bucer.
erreth not as well in faith as manners. Which if yt be so, then erreth also in
faith the true Church of Christ, and is a lyinge Church, and may lead us into
error and heresy. And of this yt follows again, that we can have no
certainty of any thing in this life, and that almighty God does damn us very
unjustly for heresy, wherinto we may be brought by his true Church, and
spouse, which on the other side, he has commanded us to hear, and obey
Matt^. 18.
under pain of damnation; yt follows also that S. Paul did falsely call the
Church, the pillar and 1. Tim. 5.
firmament of truth; for as much as yt may both deceive and be deceived.
Christ's promise also was false, when he assured his Church, that Marc. vlt.
he would be with her by his spirit of truth unto the worlds end; and that,
the gates of hell should not prevail Matthew. 16.
against her. All these absurdityes, impossibilityes and impietyes, do follow
of this second paradox, besides infinite others, which any mean capacity may
deduce of himself.

33. The third paradox also is no less monstrous to common sense and reason,
then the two former, to wit, that whatsoever good work The third paradox of
Martyn Bucer.
any man does, or may seem to do before justification, a sin, and provoke
Gods wrath. But I would ask this new opiniatour or paradox-defender, how he
would answer to that of Exodus, where yt is said of the Egyptian mid-wyues ^
infidells no doubt) quia timuerunt obstetrices Deum, aedificauit illis domos.
God gave them abundant Exodus 1.
children, for that upon fear of offendinge almighty God, they disobayed their
King Pharao in sauinge the Hebrews children. does God use to reward sin? or
to praise that which provoke his wrath? Again, the Prophett Ezechiell
shows us how God did temporally reward Nabuchodonozor and his army Ezech. 20.
with the spoil of Egypt, for that they had served him faithfully in
chastizinge of Tyrus. And S. Hierome upon that place has Hier. in Comment. in
cap. 20. Ezech.
these words: By that Nabuchodonosor received this reward for his good work,
we learn that gentills also if they do any good thing, shall not leese their
reward at Gods hands; and how can God be said to reward that which offends
him? The Prophet Daniell also to the same Nabuchodonosor an infidel, gave this
counsel, peccata tua eleemosymis Dan. 4.
redime: redeem thy sins with alms, which he would never have done, if yt
had been a sin, and provoked Gods wrath to give alms, or to perform any such
other moral virtue before justification, especially being styrred and helped
thereunto by Gods especial help, which may be before justification, as Martyn
Bucer in this paradox supposes. And lastly not to stand any longer in this
which is of it self so evident; I would ask friar Martyn, whether Cornelius
the centurion being yet a gentile, did sin and provoke Gods wrath in
prayinge, and giuinge alms before his conversion? If he say yea (as needs he
must according to his doctrine) the text of scripture is against him, for the
Angel said unto him: Thy prayers and alms deeds, have ascended up, and have
been called into remembrance in the sight of God* Act. 10.
Upon which words S. Augustine in diverse of his Aug. l. de pradestinat. sanct
cap 7. and lib. 1. de Baptis c. 3. and l. 4. c. 23.
works, does call the said almsdeeds of Cornelius, before he believed in
Christ, Justice, and the gifts of God, which he would never have done, if they
had been sins, and provoked Gods wrath, as this newfangled friar has taken
upon him to defend.

34. And this shall be sufficient for this sixth disputation of Martyn Bucer,
which is five times as much, as Fox sets down of the same, for that he
relates only the time and place of the said dispute, together with the
conclusions before mentioned, and that Sedgewicke, Young, and ^erne were
opponents to Bucer therein; but all the rest he remitteth to a larger discourse
at another time, supplyinge the breuity of this Bucerian disputation, with
another dispute between custom and verity, which he calls: A fruitful
dialogue, gathered out (says Fox) Fox page 1263.
^f the Tractations of Peter Martyr, and other authors, ^^ a certain reverend
person of this realm, teachinge all men not to measure Religion by custom,
but to try custom by truth, etc.

^5. And this was another divise of those ^ayes of Innouations and noueltyes,
to dazell ^^mple men's eyes, as though Custom and Veri^^, An altercation
betvveene custom and verity.
the handmayd and maistresse, were so fallen out, that one impugned the other,
and could not agree or stand together any longer, and consequently custom and
antiquity, must needs ^ue place to nouelty; the fraud and folly of which divise
may in very few words be dis^ouered, and their true frendshipp and agreement
easily be declared; yea their in separable ^^herence to be such, as in our case
of the con^^ouersie about the real presence (for in this ^^int they are made
to braule and full out) they cannot possibly be separated. For if verity in
this matter have not antiquity and custom with yt, yt is nouelty, and by
consequence not verity at all. And on the otherside, custom in points of
Christian faith and belief, if yt be general, and of long time (for otherwise
yt cannot properly be called custom, in the subject we handle) may not
possibly be found in our Christian Church without verity, for that otherwise
the whole Church should universally admit a falsity, and continue yt by
custom, which to imagine were folly and madness, yea most insolen^ madness, if
we believe S. Augustine, whose words are: Disputare contra id, quod tota per
orbe^ Au^. epist. 118. ad Ia^uer.
frequentat Ecclesia, insolentissimae insaniae est. It is a most insolent
madness to dispute against that which the whole Church throughout the world does
practice. And he adds in the same place, though it be not contained in the
scriptures.

36. Wherefore for John Fox, and his reuerenc master Nicolas Ridley, Peter
Martyr and others to come out now with a dialogue or brauling altercation,
between custom and verity about the matter of the Sacrament, and to seek to
set them by the ears, or make a divorce between them, for that custom had
continue^ from the beginning of our conversion to that day without verity, was
a very simple and rediculous divise, and worthy John Fox his wi^^ Custom and
verity cannot be at odds in the Christian Church.
and gravity, for by this he confesses in effect that custom and antiquity
was against him whereof we in this matter do rightly also infer, verity I say
in this matter concerning Christian faith and belief, received in the Church
by custom and tradition of former ages, which our savior Christ did promise
to assist with his spirit of truth, whatsoever Fox or his fellows may object,
or we admit, against Idolatry or other reprehensible customs of former times
amongst the Jews, gentills, nations, contreyes, and commonwelthes different
from the Christian Church; all which had no such assurance of truth, for
beginning and continuinge their customs, as our Christian Church has. And so
much of this feigned fight, between custom and verity in Christian Religion;
whatsoever arguments of moment are alleged in the combatt between them about
the real presence, shall be afterward handled in their due places. So as of this
disputation and Martyn Bucers we shall make but one, to wit, the sixth.

Seventh Disputation.. 7.
37. Hitherto are the public disputations, recorded by Fox to have been held by
Protestants, for establishinge and authorizinge their new religion under K.
Edward, and all within the compass of one year, to wit, 1549. there ensue
now four other, appointed some four years after in the first of Q. Maryes
reign 1553. which albeit they were under a Catholic government, yet were
they for giuinge satisfaction only to Protestants of those days, The 7.
disputation in the co^nocation house armo 1553.
when Catholic Religion was to be restored to the end that the other might see
their own leuity in changinge the same. And the first of these disputations
(being the seventh in order) was held in the convocation house, at Fox page
1284.
S. Paul's Church in London, begone (as Fox says) upon the 18. of October in
the foresaid year, and during for six days together. The questions were the
accustomed about the real presence and Transubstantiation. The manner of
disputinge was not in form or after any fashion of school, but rather of
proposinge doubts, and answeringe the same for satisfaction of them that were
not resolved, and so much less then in the former was any thing pursued to
any point of trial. Doctor Weston deane of Westminster was chosen
prolocutor, M. Doctor Weston prolocutor.
who protested in his preface (as Fox says) that this conference was not held
to call any points of Catholic Religion into doubt, but to solue such Fox ibid.
scruples or doubts, as any man might pretend to have.

38. This convocation consisted for the greatest part, of all those clergymen
that had borne rule in K. Edwards days, exceptinge Cranmer, Ridley, Latymer
and Rogers, and I know not if any other that were committed before. And the
first point that was handled therein, was about a certain Caluinian Catechism,
set forth a little before under the name of that convocation, whereunto the
prolocutor required subscriptions, to testify that yt was not set forth by
their consents, meaning, as yt seemed, thereby to convince Ridley or Crammer,
or both of false dealinge therein. The second point was of subscribing to the
real presence, whereunto all the whole house agreed (says Fox) sauinge five or
six, to wit, Master Philips Deane of Rochester, Master Haddon Deane of
Exceter, Master Philpott Archdeacon Six only of all the co^uocation house
refused to subscribe.
of Winchester, Master Cheyney Archdeacon of Hereford, and Master Elmour
Archdeacon of Stow, and one other whom he names not, and by these were
propounded all the doubts, that were there discussed: and as for the first two
days, there was nothing done at all, but a certain communication. The third
day came the Lord great-master, with the Earl of Devonshire and diverse other
noble men, and Cheiney afterward Bishopp of Gloucester, who M. Cheiney.
confessed the real presence, but not Transubstantiation, proposed some doubts
about the second point, which we shall afterward examine in their place. The
prolocutor appointed Doctor Moreman to answer him and the rest extempore,
whereby we may guess how D. Moreman.
substantial a disputation yt was, for that the defendant came nothing at all
prepared. Pho^ipps also proposed some what about the real presence; Elmour and
Haddon spoke little upon that day, though the next day Elmour, then M. Elmour
Chaplain to the Duke of Suffolk, and after Bishopp of London, read certain
authorityes but of a note-booke, which he had gathered against the real
presence.

^9. But of all other, the most busy was Philpott, M. Philpot.
both that day, and the other followinge, vauntinge and chalenginge the whole
company to dispute. Then quoth Philpott (says Fox) I will speak plain
English, the Sacrament of the Altar, which ye reckon to be all one with the
mass; is no Sacrament at all, neither is Christ any wise present in yt, and
this his saying he offered to prove before the whole house, if they listed to
call him thereunto, and before the Queens grace, and her counsel, and before
the face of six of the best learned men of the house of the Fox page 1285.
contrary opinion, and refused none. And if I shall not be able (quoth he) to
maintain by Gods word that I have said, and confound those six which shall
take upon them to withstand me, in this point, let me be burned with as many
sag gotts as be in London, before the court-gates, etc. This was Philpotts
vaunt, and yet if ye consider the poor arguments he brought forth in this
conference, which afterward shall be discussed, together with his fond answers
that he gave in his 15. or 16. several examinations, before the Bishopps of
Winchester, London, Chichester, Bangor and others (for so much pain was taken
to save him) you will say that his B. Gardener had reason, when he held him for
more then half madd, John Philpotis vau^t in the co^uocation house.
as in his story we have related. Consider also, that his denying Christ to be
present any wise in the Sacrament, is much different from that you heard
Master Perne affirm before, by approbation of Master Ridley the moderator,
that Christ's body was truly, wholly, and verily in the Sacrament after a
certain propriety; but these men must not be taken at their words.

40. And finally, the conclusion of all this conference with Philpott was, that
the prolocutor in the end, seeing him out of all reason to trouble the house,
laid two comaundements upon him; the first that he should not come thither any
more, unless he came in gown and typpett, as the others came: the second,
that he should not speak but in order, and with license as the rest did; whose
answer Fox relates in these words: then quoth Philpott Fox ibid.
I had rather be absent altogether, so insufferable was all order, or
temperate manner of proceedinge to this disorderly man; and so Q. Mary sent a
write the next day to dissolve the convocation: And such as had disputed (says
Fox) on the contrary part, were driven, some to sly, some to deny, and some to
dye, though to most men's judgments, that heard the disputation, they had the
upper hand, etc. These are heretical bragges, as you will better see
afterward when we come to examining of arguments. And as for dyinge, none of
the forsaid disputers died, to our knowledge, but only Philpott in his madd
mood; Cheyney, Elmour, and Haddon got Bishoprics, and other dignityes under
Q. Elizabeth. And so much of this disputation in the convocation house.

Eight, ninth, and tenth Disputation.. 8.
41. These last three disputations I do join together, for that they were
held successively in Oxford upon three several days in the month of April,
anno 1554. with Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer upon the forsaid three questions
Three disputatio^s in Oxford against Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer.
of the real presence, Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of the mass. The
names (says Fox) of the university Doctors and graduates, appointed to dispute
against them upon the said questions, were these of Oxford, Doctor Weston
prolocutor, Doctor Tressam, Doctor Cole, Doctor Oglethorpe, Fox page ^299.
Doctor Pie, Master Harpesfield, Master Fecknam. Of Cambridge, Doctor Young
Vice Chauncelour, Doctor Glynn, Doctor Seton, Doctor Watson, Doctor
Sedgewicke, and Doctor Atkinson, to wit six of each university, all meeting at
Oxford together to this effect. Thus far Fox; who describes also the manner
and form of this disputation, much more reasonable, orderly and indifferent,
then all the former disputations under the Protestants, if we believe Fox
himself, who says; that in the middle of the Doctors, there were appointed
four to be exceptores argumentorum, writers of the arguments (to use his Fox
ibid.
words) and a table set in the midst, and four notaryes sittinge with them;
So as by his relation there were eight indifferent men chosen to register
whatsoever passed: yet if he relate truly, the manner of arguinge, was not so
orderly and schoolelike as might have been, whereby yt came to pass, that scarce
any argument The indifferent dealinge of Cath. in their disputation
was prosecuted to the end; and the answeringe was such, as commonly was wholly
from the purpose, as by diverse examples, you shall see afterward declared; as
also we shall examine what arguments Cranmer could allege against the real
presence, upon the fourth day of disputation, to wit the next day after
Latymer had ended. For that Doctor Harpesfield answeringe for his degree,
defended the question of the real presence, and Master Cranmer was
courteously invited to the said disputation, and suffered to say what he would
or could against that verity, and was fully answered; notwithstanding Fox will
needs bear us in hand to the contrary, as his fashion is.

42. And whereas the said Doctor Harpesfield in his preface, did much commend
the diligent readinge of scripture with prayer, and conferring one place with
another, but yet said that this was no secure way or mean, for every
particular man to resolve himself of the sense thereof, but must rather believe
the body of the Catholic Church therein, then his own judgment. Fox says
that Master Cranmer in The foolish reprehentio^ used by Cranmer and Fox.
his reply reprehended that direction, saying: vvheras you refer the true
sense and judgment of the scriptures to the Catholic Church, as judge thereof,
you are much deceived, etc. And Fox himself adds this marginall note: If
Master Harpesfield (when he says we must not follow our own heads and
senses, ^ut give over our judgment to the holy Catholic Church) had willed us
to submitt our selves to the holy Ghost he had said much better. So John. But I
Fox page 1326.
would ask him, who shall be judge what the holy Ghost teaches us? For that is
the question. For if a particular man readinge the scripture with prayer, and
conferringe place with place only, may be presumed to attain thereby the true
meaning of the holy Ghost (which notwithstanding cannot be certain, for that
an heretic may use the same means) how much more may the universal body of
the Church, using the selfsame means also, as many of her learned members no
doubt do; how much more, I say, may she be thought and presumed to attain to
the true sense of the holy Ghost, seeing that she has a special promise of his
infallible assistance to that effect, which particular men have not, though
heretics are wont proudly to presume thereof? And so you shall see yt appear
also in these disputations, when we come to discuss the particulars.

43. And here it is to be noted, that presently upon the end of this Oxford
disputation, under Q. Mary, it was reported, that others should be held at
Cambridge between the Doctors of that university, and the residue of the
Protestant preachers that were in prison; whereof they being advertised by the
warninge of Doctor Ridley, as yt seems by Fox, and castinge Fox page 1336.
their heads together upon the matter, determined to refuse all disputation,
except it were before the Queen and privy Council, or before The Protestant
Ministers excuse them solues from disputation.
the houses of parliament, to which effect they set sorth a public wrytinge
and protestation, with certain reasons of excuses mouinge them thereunto,
subscribed by Hooper, Farrar, Tailor, Philpott, Bradford, Rogers, Saunders, and
some others. And their chief excuse was, for that matters had been determined
by parliament before they were disputed of, not consideringe that in K. Edwards
days, the same course with far less reason was held and determined by
Parliament, before the Protestants disputations in Cambridge.

Of diverse other Disputations held besides these ten.. 9.
44. These ten disputations I thought good to set down, for that they were
held upon the first chaunges of Religion in England, within the space of 4. or
5. years, as before has been said: diverse others I do pass over, The
disputation of K. Henry wi^h Lambert.
though some of them were as sollemne as these; as that of K. Henry the 8.
against Lambert, vvherin Doctor Cranmer disputed for the real presence, and
the Lord Cromwell gave sentence against him, as we have showed Sup ^^p. 14 di^
4. October.
before in Lamberts story. That also which was held on pretended in the
beginning of the reign of Q Elizabeth at Westminster, between nine persons
of the Catholic part, and as many of the Protestant preachers newly come from
beyond the seas. Those of the Catholic side were sieve Bishopps, to wit Doctor
John White Bishopp of Winchester, Doctor Baynes of Lichsield, Doctor Scott of
Chester, Doctor Oglethorpe or Carliele, Doctor Watson of Lincoln, with four
other Doctors adjoined unto them, Doctor Cole Deane of London, Doctor Langedale
Archdeacon of Lewis, Doctor Harpesfield Archdeacon of A pretended disputation
in the beginning of Q. Elizabethes reign anno 1559.
Canterbury, and Doctor Chadsey Archdeacon of Middlesex. And for the Protestant
part, were Doctor Scory an Apostata friar, and Doctor Cox before mentioned,
that fledd the realm under Q. Mary, with whom joined M. Whitehead, M.
Grindall, M. Horn, M. Sands, M. Ghest, M. Elmour, and M. Jewel, all freshly
come from beyond the seas, who all, except some one or two, were soon after
for their good demeritts, made Bishopps, and accommodated by thrustinge out the
other, in reward of this disputation, wherein notwithstanding there was not one
argument made, nor solution given, but only an ostentation sought to effectuate
that with some color, which otherwise was determined before, and lacked but a
pretense, for that the Queen and those that were nearest about her, having
determined to make a change of Religion, thought they should do yt best, and
most justifiable, if they promised some name of disputation, wherein the
Catholics had been satisfied or vanquished; to which end, there were so many
shifts, partialityes, and diuises used, and so many iniuryes offered to the
Bishops of the Catholic party, as they thought good upon the second days
meetinge, to pass on no further, except more reason or indifferency were used
toward them.

45. For first, in this disputation summoned and denounced throughout the whole
realm, by order of the Queen and Council, Sir Nicolas Bacon lately made Lord
Keeper, took upon him to be president, and chief moderator, The great
inequality and iniuryes offered in this pretended disputation.
whom all men knew to be one of the greatest adversaries to Catholic
Religion, that was in England, violent in condition, and utterly ignorant in
matters of divinity. Secondly the questions appointed to be disputed on, were
not chosen nor assigned by the said Bishopps, but by the same Sir Nicolas and
his adherents in the name of the Council, at the instance or pleasure of the
Protestant new pretenders, whereof when the Bishopps complained, the Lord Keeper
answered: the questions are neither of their (to wit the Protestants)
propoundinge, Fox page 1924.
nor of your divise, but offered indifferently to ^ow both.

46. The questions were three, first whether yt were against Godsword, and the
custom of the primitive Three questions to small purpose.
Church, to use a tongue unknown to the people in common prayer, and
administration of Sacraments. The second, whether every Church had authority
to appoint, take away, and change ceremonies and Ecclesiastical rites, so the
same be to edification. Thirdly whether yt can be proved by the word of God,
that there is offered up in the mass a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick,
and the dead: Which questions were to be handled (says Fox) in the presence
of the Queens Fox page 1919.
Council, Nobility, and other of the parliament house, for the better
satisfaction and enablinge of their judgments, to treat and conclude of such
laws as might depend heerevpon. By which words you may easily conceive what
the drift of this pretended disputation was, and how guilefully these questions
were chosen, and set down, if you mark their words and sense, especially the
former two, which only or principally were to be handled, and how impertinent
these questions were to the great moment of the whole matter and sequel, that
was to ensue thereof, which was no less then the universal change of the whole
body of Catholic Religion, throughout the realm.

47. This then was the first heretical fraud in appointinge this disputation,
and the questions to be disputed, but they were many Diverse frauds.
more and greater in the prosecution thereof; for first the Catholic clergy
lackinge their 1.
chief head, which was the Archbishopp of Canterbury lately dead, the other
Archbishopp of York, to wit, Doctor Heath was entertained with feyre words
for a time, to effectuate with his brethren, what the Protestant party of the
Conncell should think expedient* whereupon he being Chancelour yet in name,
though the effect of his office was given to Sir Nicolas Bacon, under the
little of Lord Keeper, he was brought into the place of disputation, and sat
in his room amongst other Councillors, together with the Duke of Norfolk,
and other of the nobility as one of them, and rather against the Bishops, then
for them, (though no doubt the good man meant yt not so) then was yt appointed
to the said Catholic 2.
Bishopps by the Archbishopp, in name of the Council, only two days before
their meetinge at the conference (for so complayneth Fox page 1923. col. 1.
number. 1.
the Bishop of Lincoln in the second days meetinge) that both they, to wit
the Bishops, should begin to say what they could for themselves, and the
Protestant preachers should answer them. And secondly that the conference
should be in English and not in Latin; and thirdly, that yt should not be by
way of arguinge or disputinge, but only of speech or 3.
readinge yt out of some book or paper: All which three points seeminge
indignityes to Three indignityes o^^ered unto the Bishops.
the Bishopps, they complained grievously thereof at their first public
meetinge, which was in Westminster Church upon the last of March 1559. being
friday; and Bishop White of Winchester being the first to speak for his
side, said that they were ready to dispute and argue, but had not their
wrytinge ready to be read there, but would do it at their next meeting: yet for
giuinge some satisfaction, Doctor Cole extempore alleged some breife reasons
concerning D. Col^.
the former questions or propositions, reseruinge the rest unto their fuller
book or wrytinge.

48. But heerevpon presently the Protestant preachers came out with their
book, or inuectiue against Latin service, fraught with a vain show of many
allegations, Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, and Constitutions of Emperors,
sounding as it might seem somewhat to their party, though nothing at all in
truth, if you examine them, as they ly in Fox himself, An ostentation of the
Protestant side.
but with this ostentation they sought to get the applause of the people, and
heerby well declared that they had more then two days warninge to prepare
themselves; and albeit when this was done, the Bishops offered to refute all
the same clearly at the next metinge, yet could they not be heard or
permitted, as presently we shall show, but that this must needs stand for the
whole resolution in the first question. And Fox like one of his kind, seeks
to prevent the matter in these words: The same being read (to wit the writing
of the Protestant party) with some likelihood as it seemed Fox page 1922.
that the same was much allow able to the audience, certain of the Bishopps
began to say, contrary to their former answer, that they had now much more to
say in this matter, vvherin although they might well have been reprehended; yet
for auoydinge of any more mistakinge, and that they should utter all they had
to say, yt was ordered that upon monday followinge, the Bishopps should bring
their mind and reasons in writing to the second assertion, and to the last
also is they could, and first read the same, and that done the other part
should bring likewise theirs, etc.

49. Lo here the indifferency that was used; the Bishopps are accused of
cauillation, that they offered to answer in wrytinge to the Protestants
libell, which is not only denied them, but yt is ordained also, that after
other Open inequality.
two days, they should bring in whatsoever they have to say to the second and
third questions, and readinge yt first, give their adversaries leave to
triumph in the second place, as they had done upon the first question the day
before. But upon monday, when all the assembly was set, the Bishopps stood
firmly upon this, that they would first read publicly their own vyrytinge,
which there they brought with them upon the first question of Latin service,
in answer to that of the Protestants at the last meeting, but in no case would
yt be granted them. Fox relates the Altercation thus.

50. Winchester. I am determined for my part, that there shall be now read that,
which we have to say Altercatio^ of the Bishops with Sir Nicolas Bacon.
for the first question.

L. Keeper. Will you not then proceed in the order appointed you?

Winchester. We should suffer prejudice, if you permit us not to treat of the
first question first, and so we would come to the second, and I judge all my
brethren are so minded.

Bishopps. We are all so determined.

L. Keeper. You ought to look what order is appointed you to keep, etc.

Winchester. Sith our adversaries part have so confirmed their assertion, we
suffer prejudice if you permit us not the like.

Lincoln. We are not used indifferently, sithen ^ow allow us not, to open in
present vvrytinge that, we ^aue to say for declaration of the first question,
etc. for that which Master Cole spoke in this late assembly, The resolute
speech of D. Watson B. of Lincoln.
^as not prepared to strengthen our cause, but he made ^is oration of himself
extempore, etc. We are all evil ordered as touching the time, our
adversaries ^art having warninge long before, and we were war^ed only two
days before the last assembly in this place, and with this business and other
trouble, we have been driven to be occupied the whole last night, for we may in
no case betray the cause of God nor will not do, but sustain it to the
uttermost of our power, but hereunto we want presently indifferent vsinge,
etc.

L. Keeper. I am vvillinge and ready to hear you, after the order taken for
you to reason therein, and further or contrary to that, I cannot deal with you.

Lichfield. Let us suffer no disorder heerin, but be heard with indifferency.

51. Thus went on that contention, whereof I omit much for breuityes sake; but
by this little, so partially declared by Fox, as may be immagined, and
appears also by diverse circumstances, you may guess how the matter passed,
and which part had more reason. At the length, the Archbishop of York, knowing
belike that this standinge of the Bishopps would not prevail against
designements, already made by the Queen and Council in disgrace of the
Catholic cause, willed the Bishopps to give over in this matter, and to pass
to the second question. But then began a new strife, which party should first
begin to speak in this question also, the Bishops affirminge both in respect
they had begone the other day, and that the Protestant party was plaintiff or
accusant, they should begin, and the Bishopps would answer, but this in no
case would be granted, but that the Bishops must begin again, and the other
have the last word as before: which indignity the Bishop of Lichfield being not
well able to bear, requested humbly the Lords there present, that they might
dispute, and try first which party was Catholic and of the Catholic Church,
for that thereby would appear who had right to the first or second place of
speech, and being somewhat earnest therein, spoke to M. Horn in these words as
Fox relates.

52. Lichfield. Master Horn, Master Horn, there Another altercatio^ with
the L. Keeper.
are many Churches in Germany, I pray you which of these Churches are ye of?

Horn. I am of Christ's Catholic Church.

L. Keeper. You ought not thus to run into wandringe talk of your own
inuentinge, etc.

Lichfield. Nay we must first go thus to work with them if we will search
a truth: these men come in and pretend to be doubtful, therefore they should
first bring what they have to impugn, etc.

Winchester. Let them begin, so will we go onward.

Chester. They speakinge last would depart cum applausu populi, etc. surely
we think yt meet that they should for their parts give us place.

Lichfield. Yea that they should and ought to do, where any indifferency is
used.

Elmour. We give you place, do we not? I pray you begin.

L. Keeper. If you make this assembly gathered in vain, and will not go to
the matter, let us rise up and depart.

Winchester. Contented, let us be gone: for we will not in this point give
over. And so finally after some other like altercation, Bacon dissolved the
assembly with this threat.

L. Keeper. My Lords, for that you will not, that we shall hear you, you may
chance shortly to hear of us. So he. And this hearing was; that soon after
(says Stow) the Bishopps of Lincoln and Winchester were sent to the Towar,
and the rest Stow anno Domini 1559.
bound to make daily, and personal appearance before the Council, and not to
depart the City of London and Westminster, until further order were taken
with them for their disobedience and contempt.

53. And this was the issue of the first disputation The issue of this
disputation with the Bishops.
under Q. Elizabeth, vvherof presently there was a book printed and published,
according to the fashion of the new Doctors, giuinge the victory to the
Protestants, and overthrow to the Cath. Bishopps, who yet, as you see, were
never permitted to propose any one argument, or reason in due place and time.

54. And with this shall we end our narration of public disputations, omitting
many more private and particular, as the conference of Ridley, and Secretary
Burn, Doctor Fecknam, and others in the towar, in the beginning of Q. Maryes
Fox page 1297.
reign: The colloquy of the foresaid Fecknam, with the Lady Jane in the same
place; the particular conferences and examinations of Hooper, Farrar, Taylour,
Rogers, Philpott, Smyth, Bradford, Tyms, Saunders, Blandford, and others of the
learneder sort of Protestants, but many more of craftesmen, artificers, weomen,
and such like of the ignorant sort, in the Bishopps consistoryes and other
places: Out of which also we shall reduce the sum of the principal arguments
or answers, if yt be different from the rest, when we come afterward to their
due places.

55. And now all this being seen and considered, the reader will easily
discern, what ground of certainty may be drawn from all these disputations,
altercations, and conferences, to found thereon the security of his soul in
believing, as the Protestants do: yea and yeldinge themselves to the fire for
yt, as many did in Q. Maryes days, upon the fame The inference upon these
disputatio^s.
and creditt of the forsaid disputations, which yet many of them understood
not, nor ever heard or read, but most of all were not able to resolve
themselves by them, if they had heard, read, or understood them, but only in
general they rested themselves upon this point, that the Protestants were
learned men, and had gotten the victory in disputations against the Catholics,
for that so yt was told them. And this they thought sufficient for their
assurance.

56. But now on the contrary side, if a man would oppose to these ten public
disputations before recyted, ten learned Counsels of the Catholic Church,
that disputed, examined, and condemned this heresy of theirs against the real
presence, within the space of these last 600. years, since Berengarius first
began Ten counsels examined and confirmed the doctrine of the real presence.
yt, as namely those four named by Lanckfranke, to wit, that of Rome under
Leo the 9. and another of Versells under the same Pope; the third at Towars in
France under Pope Victor successor to Leo, the fourth at Rome again under Pope
Nicolas the second; In all which Berengarius himself was present, and in the
last, not only abiured, but burnt his own book. And Laufrane. contra
Berengarium.
after this, six other Counsels to the same effect, the first at Rome under
Gregory the 7. where Berengarius again abiured, as VVald. tom. 2. de Sacram.
cap. 43.
Waldensis testifies: The second of Lateran in Rome also under Innocentius
the third: the general Council of Vienna; the fourth at Rome again under
Pope John the 22. the fifth at Constance, and the sixth at Trent. All these
Counsels (I say) if a man consider with indifferency of what variety of
learned men they consisted, of what singular piety and sanctity of life, of how
many nations, of what dignity in Gods Church, how great diligence they used to
discuss this matter, what prayer, what conferringe of scriptures, and other
means they used, and with how great consent of both Greek and Latin Church
conform to all antiquity, they determined and resolved against the opinion of
Protestants in our days; he will easily discover, how much more reason, and
probability of security there is, of aduenturinge his soul of the one side
then of the other, which yet he will better do, by contemplation of the vanity
of new Protestants arguments and objections, against so ancient founded and
continued a truth. Which objections we shall examine in the Chapters
followinge. And so much for this.

THE STATE OF THE CHIEF QVESTIONS handled in the forsaid disputations,
Concerning the real presence, Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, with the chief grounds that be on either side. CHAP. II.
THE questions that were most treated, and urged on both sides, at the two
changes of Religion under K. Edward and Q. Mary, were principally three, all
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, as before has been showed: The first
about the real presence of Christ in the said Sacrament: the second
concerning the manner of his being there by Transubstantiation: and the third
about the same as it is a Sacrifice. Which three points of Catholic doctrine
being left by K. Henry the 8. standinge in vigor, as he had found them
delivered, and preserved by all his ancestors Kings of England, from the
beginning of our conversion unto Christian Religion, they were all changed
within two years after the said Kings death, by authority of his son, being
then somewhat less then a dozen years old, and by force of a certain act of
parliament, confirmed by his name entitled: An act for the uniformity See the
book of statutes an. 2 and 3. Edou. 6.
of service and administration of Sacraments, etc. Which act though in show yt
contained nothing else, but the admission and approbation of a certain new
book of Common Prayer and administration of Sacraments (for so are the words
of the Statute) gathered together by Cranmer, Ridley, and some others of the
same humor, yet for that in this new communion book, together with many other
articles of ancient belief, these three also of the real presence,
Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice were altogether altered, and a new manner of
faith therein taught, yt was given forth that all was established and settled by
Parliament: and for that How disorderly Catholic Religion was overthrown in
K. Edward's days.
this collection of new articles of belief, passed, as you have heard, in a
bundell or fardell shuffled up together in have, under the name of a reformed
book of Common Prayer, without any great examination or dispute about the
particulars, but in general only taking voices in the parliament house, as
well of laymen as other learned and unlearned, whether the book should pass,
or not; wherein the L. Seymour Protector and his crew, having the Kings
authority in their hands, and gettinge Cranmer and Ridley on their sides for
love of weomen, and other preferment, easily prevailed, as by the statute yt
self may appear: yt was thought expedient, as before has been noted, that
presently after the statute published, two means should be used for
authorizinge and better creditinge the same. The one by persuasion of diverse
meetings, conferences, and disputations of the learneder sort, which before you
have heard related; and the other by imprisonment and depriving such Bishops,
and other chief Ecclesiastical persons, as should show themselves most
forward or able to resist this course, which they began with Winchester,
Durham, and London: And thus passed they on for those 4. or 5. years that
remained of K. Edwards reign after this change, wherein notwithstanding,
almighty God showed wonderfully his hand of judgment and punishment soon
after, upon the principal authors of this innovation both spiritual and
temporal; as of the later, both the Seamours, Northumberland, Suffolk, and
diverse of their followers; of the former Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latymer, and
the like, as to the world is evident.

2. For upon this followed the reign of Q. Mary for other 4. or 5. years, who
seeing so The entrance of Q. Mary.
pitiful a breach made in the realm by this unlucky alteration, she as a
zealous Catholic Princess, endeauored to restore the old faith and Religion
again, to the former unity of the universal Church, and close up the wound
that had been made, vsinge to this effect the self same means of instruction
and correction, by arguments and punishments, but in different manner, and with
far unlike justice of proceeding. For that the arguments were the very same,
which ever had been used by ancient Fathers, against old heretics in the like
controversies: and the punishments were no other then such, as ancient
Ecclesiastical Cannons did prescribe, and were used only toward them, that
either had been chief authors of the innouations, or stood so obstinately in
defense thereof, as by no means they could be recalled.

3. Now then yt is to be considered, which of these two sorts of people had
more ground or reason, either those, that withstood the first change in K.
Edwards days, which was from the old accustomd Religion to a new: or those
that resisted the second change or exchange under Q. Mary, which was nothing
else indeed but a return from the new to the old again. And heerby will
appear the state of the controversy which now we are to handle. For as for
the first sort, to wit Catholics, the historical state of their controversy
The state of the controversy in three questions.
is manifest, concerning these three questions about the Sacrament; for that
no man can deny, but that the doctrine of the first, and third, which is the
real presence, and Sacrifice, had been received and held for true throughout
England, (wherein concurred also the whole Christian world abroad) from the
time before by me prefixed of our first conversion, and more, even from the
Apostles days: neither could any time be appointed, or memory brought forth,
when, how, or by whom, the said doctrines had their beginnings in England, or
else where, which according to S. Augustines rule, and diverse particular
demonstrations laid down by us before, in Aug. l. 2. de baptis. e. 7. l. 4 e.
6. and 24. and l. 5 c. 23.
the first part of the Treatise of three Conuersions, does evidently couuince,
that they came from Christ, and his Apostles themselves; which ought to be
sufficient, though no other proofs of Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors, and
Counsels could be showed in particular for the same, as may be almost
infinite, and some you shall hear a little after in this Chapter.

4. And as for the second question of Transubstantiation, though yt be but a
certain appendix of the first, about the manner how Christ is really in the
Sacrament, as Sup. cap. praeced.
before has been showed, and was not so particularly declared, and defined by
the Church in this very term of Transubstantiation, until some 400. anno
1215.
years gone in the general Council of Lateran, (as neither the doctrine of
homusion or consubstantiality The names of co^substantiality, of Mother of God,
and Transubstanriatio^, determined after one manner.
was, until 300. years after Christ in the Council of Nice, neither the
dignity of theotoces, whereby the blessed Virgin is called the Mother of God,
until the Council of Ephesus above 400. years after Christ:) yet was the
same doctrine ever true before from the beginning, and uttered by the Fathers
in other equivalent words and speeches, of changes, and Transmutations of
natures, conuersions of substances, and the like; and when there had not been
such other evident proofs extant for the truth thereof; yet the consent and
agreement of so great and universal a Council of Christendom, as the said
Lateran was, wherein both the Greek and Latin Church agreed; and after great
and long search by readinge, disputinge, prayinge, conferringe of Scriptures
and Fathers, and other such means, concluded this doctrine to be truth: If
there had been (I say) nothing else for English Catholics to rest upon in this
point, but the general consent, and agreement of so learned, holy, and
venerable an assembly; yt might justly seem sufficient in the sight of an
indifferent or reasonable man to weygh, and ouerweygh, against the particular
judgments of all the innouators of any age to the contrary; and so no
maruayle, though they stood so earnest against that innovation, this being the
state of the controversy on their part.

5. But now for the Protestants, the state of their question was far
different. For first, whereas Martyn Luther about the 9. or 10. year The state
of the question for the Protestants.
of K. Henryes reign, had begone some noueltyes about the second and third
question of Transubstantiation and Sacrifice, holding still the first of the
real presence for firm, and that three of his first scholars Oecolampadius,
Carolstadius, and Zuinglius full sore against his will, taking occasion of his
innouations, had added others of their own, about the said first question,
denyinge the real presnce, though in different sorts: and that after them
again John Caluyn a Frenchman, had divised a third manner of belief therein,
not a little different from them all about the said doctrine, both affirminge
and denyinge the real presence in different manner and sound of words: yt
seemed good to our English Protestants at that time, or the more part thereof,
to choose the last and newest opinion of all, and to establish yt by parliament,
banishinge there upon the old faith, that ever until that day had been held and
believed in our country, as well by themselves as others.

6. And thus came in the first new Religion unto England, by some show of
public authority, which being set forth with so great applause, Motives that
drevv in new Religion.
and ostentation both of public disputations, colloquyes, conferences,
lectures, preachings, exposition of scriptures, and consent of Parliament, as
you have heard, did partly by this outward show and ostentation of authority,
partly by the pleasinge face of ^ouelty yt self, and sweet freedom that yt
brought from all former Ecclesiastical discipline, so infect, and enchaunt the
hearts, judgments, and affections of diverse of the common people, and some also
of the learned, (but the ^ighter, and more licentious sort) as afterward when
Q. Mary came to take accoumpt, and would recall them again to the station
which they had forsaken; they chose rather of ^ride and obstinacy, to suffer
any thing, yea ^o dye, and go to the fire, then to renounce these new fancyes
once fastened upon them: unto which pertinacity the fame of the forsaid
Protestants disputations, did not a little animate them; for that yt was given
out generally (and so does Fox stand stiffely in the same) that the
Sacramentaryes had the upper hand in all, as well against the Lutherans in the
first question of real presence, as against the Catholics in that and all the
rest: which bragg how vain yt was, will appear after when we come to examine
their arguments in particular.

7. But yet before we come to that, two other points seem expedient to be
performed, for better direction of the readers understanding in these high
misteryes of our faith: the first to see what sure grounds the Catholics had,
and have at this day to stand firm, and immovable in their old belief about
these articles, notwithstanding any plausible or deceytfull arguments of sense
and reason, that may be brought against them; and secondly certain
observations, whereby the force or rather fraud of heretical objections may be
discovered, which so beguyled many simple people in Q. Maryes days, and made
them run headlonge to their perdition; the first of these points I shall
handle in this Chapter: the second in the next that follows.

Catholic grounds of these three articles, and first of the real presence..
1.
8. The first ground that Catholic men have of these, and all other misteryes
of Christian faith that are above the reach of common sense and reason, is the
authority of the Catholic Church, by which they were taught the same: as
points of faith revealed from God. And this is such a ground, as we see by
experience, that the most part of people of what Religion soever, being young
or unlearned, can yield no other reason in effect, why they believe this or that
article of their faith, but for that they received the same from their Church
and teachers thereof, being not able themselves to search out any other ground
thereof: yea the most learned of all from their infancy, took all upon this
assurance only of their Church, which Church if they held to be of infallible
authority, so as she can neither be deceived nor deceive (as we do of the
Catholic) then should they rest firm and sure in their opinion upon this
ground; but if they hold that all Churches may err, and bring into error
both in doctrine, and manners, as you have heard Martyn Bucer hold before in
his Cambridge conclusions, and most sectaryes Sup. cap. 1.
of our time do follow him in that assertion, then can they have no ground or
certainty this way, but each man and woman must seek other grounds and
proofs, and stand upon their own judgments for trial of the same, which how
well the most part of people can do, being either young, simple, unlearned, or
otherwise so busyed in other matters, as they cannot attend thereunto, every
man of mean discretion will consider, and consequently they must needs be said
both to live and dye, without any ground of their faith at all, but proper
opinion, and so perish euerlastingely.

9. The famous Doctor S. Augustine handles this matter in a special book to
his friend Honoratus deceived by the Manichies, as himself also sometimes had
been, and he intituleth his book De vtilitate credendi: of the profitt that
Aug. tom. 6.
comes to a man by believing the Church, and points of faith therein taught,
without demaundinge reason or proof thereof, which the Manichies derided, and
said that they required nothing to be believed of their followers, but that
which first should be proved to them by good proof and reason, and not depend
only of men's creditt: but the holy Father scorneth this heretical bragg and
oftentation of theirs, and commends highly the contrary custom of simple
beleeuinge upon the creditt of the Catholic Church, for that otherwise
infinite people should have no faith at all, and exhorts his friend Honoratus
to take the same course; first to believe, and after to seek the reason. His
discourse is this: Fac nos nunc primum quaerere, cuinam Religioni, animas
nostras, Aug. lib. de vtil. cred. tom. 6. cap. 7.
etc. Suppose that we now first of all did seek, unto what Religion we should
commit our souls to be purged and rectified; without all doubt we must begin
with the Catholic Church, for that she is the most eminent now in the world,
there being more Christians in her, at this day, then in any other Church of
Jews, and Gentills put together: And albeit amongst these Christians, there
may be sects and heresies, and all of them would seem to be Catholics, and do
call others besides themselves heretics: yet all grant, that if we consider
the whole body of the world, there is one Church amongst the rest more eminent
then all other, and more plentiful in number, and (as they which know her do
affirm) more sincere also in truth; but as concerning truth, we shall dispute
more afterward; now yt is sufficient for them that desire to learn, that there
is a Catholic Church, which is one in yt self, whereunto diverse heretics do
feign, and divise diverse names, whereas they, (and their sects) are called by
peculiar names, which themselves cannot deny, whereby all men that are
indifferent, and not let by passion, may understand unto what Church, the
name Catholic, which all parts desire and pretend, is to be given.

10. Thus S. Augustine: teachinge his friend how he might both know and believe
the Catholic Church, and all that she taught simply, and without asking
reason or proof. And as for knowing and discerning her from all other
Churches, that may pretend to be Catholic, we hear his marks, that she is
more eminent, universal, greater in number, and in possession of the name
Catholic. The second that she may be believed securely, and cannot deceive nor
be deceived in matters of faith, he proves elsewhere, concluding finally in
this place: Si iam satis tibi iactatus videris, etc. Aug. ibid. cap. 8.
If thou do seem to thy self now to have been sufficiently tossed up and
down among sectaryes, and would putt an end to these labors and tormoyles,
follow the way of Cath. discipline, which has flowen down unto us from Christ
by his Apostles, and is to flow from us to our posterity.

11. This then is the judgment and direction of S. Augustine, that a man
should for his first How a man may know the Catholic Church.
ground, in matters of faith, look unto the belief of the greatest and most
eminent Church of Christendom, that has endured longest, embraces most
people, and has come down from our forefathers with the name of Catholic,
not only among her own professors, but even among her enemies Jews,
infidells, and heretics, and so is termed and held by them Aug. de vera rel. c.
7. and sermon. 131. de temp. and lib. 3. cont. Gaudent. Denat. c. 1.
in their common speech, as the said Father in diverse others places declares
at large. Which rule of direction, if we will follow about these three articles
of faith now proposed, the real presence, Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice of
the mass, yt is easily seen what ground we have for their belief, in this
kind of proof, so highly esteemed by S. Augustine, which is the authority of
the universal Cath. Church. For that when Luther and his followers began to
oppose themselves in our days, no man can deny, but that our belief in these
articles was generally received over all Christendom, as well Asia and Africa,
where so ever Christians be, as Europe, and so upward time out of mind; neither
can any beginning be assigned to these doctrines in the Cath. Church, but only
a certain definition and determination of some Counsels, about the name of
Transubstantiation, as after shall be declared.

12. Now then, having found out this first Grounds about the real presence.
ground which S. Augustine and other Fathers do make so great accoumpt of,
which is the authority and belief of that Church, that generally is called
Catholic: If we pass further, and see what grounds this Church had or has to
admytt the same, (which yet is not needful, or possible to all sorts of men,
for that only can be done by the learneder sort) we shall find that she has
such grounds, as may convince any man that is not obstinate, and indurate to
the contrary. And first to begin with the article of the real presence, what
ground, proof, or Theological demonstration can there be, which the Cath.
Church has not for her belief in that high mystery? which as it was to be one
of the cheifest, most sacred, and admirable of Christian Religion, so was yt
meet that yt should be confirmed, by all the principal ways that any article
of faith could or can be confirmed, that is to say both by scriptures of the
old and new Testament, and the true exposition thereof by ancient Fathers,
that lived before this controversy began with Sacramentarye^; by authority and
tradition of the Apostles and their successors; by testimony of ancient
Fathers from age to age; by consent and agreement, practice and use of the
universal Church; by the concourse and approbation of almighty God, with
evident and infinite miracles, by confession of the adversaries, and other such
general heads of arguments, which Catholic divines do produce for this truth,
for iustifyinge the Churches faith therein.

13. And out of the scriptures their demonstration Demonstrations out of the
scripture.
is not single or of one sort only, but in diverse manners, as to the height and
dignity of so divine and venerable a mystery was convenient. For that out of
the old Testament, they show how yt was prefigured and prophesied, and in the
new both promised again, exhibited, and confirmed, and this not by exposition
of their own heads only, as sectaryes do, but by intendement, and
interpretation, of the grauest and most ancient Fathers, that have lived in the
Church of God from age to age, who understood so the said figures and
foreshewinges of the old Testament. As for example, the bread and wine
misteriously offered to almighty God by Melchisedeck King and Priest, who bare
the type of our Savior Genesis 14. Psalm. 109. Heb. 7. The shewbread among the
Jews, that only could be eaten by them that were sanctified Exodus 40. etc.
Reg. 21. The bread sent miraculously Three figures of Christ's flesh in bread.
by an Angel to Elias, whereby he was so strengthened, as he trauayled 40.
days without eating by virtue only of that bread. These three sorts of bread
to have been express figures of this Sacrament, and of the true flesh of Christ
therein contained, do testify by one consent all the ancient Fathers, as S.
Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. Clem. Alexand. lib. 4. Strom. Ambros. lib. 4. de
Sacram. cap. 3. Hier in cap. 1. ad Titum. Chrysostom. hom. 35. in Genesis August.
lib. 2. cont. litteras Petii. cap. 37. Cyrill. Catechesi 4. Mystag. Arnobius,
Eusebius, Gregorius, and many others.

14. Three other figures there are not expressed in the form of bread, but in
other things more excellent then bread, as the paschall lamb Exodus 12. Leuit.
23. The blood of the Testament Three other signs of Christ's flesh.
described Exodus 24. Heb. 9. And fulfilled by Christ Luc. 22. when he said:
This cupp is the new Testament in my blood, and again: This is my blood of the
new Testament Matthew. 26. The manna also sent by God from heaven was an express
figure of this Sacrament, as appears by the words of our Savior. Joan. 6.
and of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. Out of all which figures, is inferred, that for
so much as there must be great difference between the figure, and the thing
prefigured, no less if we believe S. Paul, Colloss. 2. Heb. 10.
then between a shadow, and the body whose shadow yt is; yt cannot be
imagined by any probability, that this Sacrament exhibited by Christ, in
performance of those figures, should be only creatures of bread and wine, as
Sacramentaryes do imagine, for then should the figures An inference upon the
former figures.
be either equal, or more excellent then the thing prefigured yt self, for
who will not confess but that bread for bread, Elias his bread made by the
Angel, that gave him strength to walk 40. days upon the virtue thereof was
equal to our English-ministers Communion-bread, and that the manna was much
better.

15. And if they will say for an evasion, as they do, that their bread is not
common bread, but such bread as being eaten and received by faith, works the
effect of Christ's body in them, and brings them his grace; we answer that
so did these figures and Sacraments also of the old Testament, being received
by faith in Christ to come, as the ancient Father and Preachers received them:
And for so much as Protestants do further hold, that there is no difference
between the virtue and efficacy of those old Sacraments, and ours, (which we
deny) yt must needs follow, that both we and they agreeinge, that the Fathers
of the old Testament believed in the same Christ to come that we do now, being
come, their figures and shadows must be as good as our truth in the
Sacrament, that was prefigured, if it remain bread still after Christ's
institution, and consecration. But Catholic Fathers did understand the matter
far otherwise, and to allege one for all, for that he spoke in the sense of
all in those days, Saint Hierome talking of one of those forsaid figures, to
wit, of the shewbread, and comparinge yt with the thing figured, and by
Christ exhibited, says thus: Tantum interest, etc. There is so Hier. in (...).
much difference between the shewbread, and the body of Christ figured
thereby, as there is difference between the shadow and the body, whose shadow
yt is, and between an Image and the truth, which the Image represents, and
between certain shapes of things to come, and the things themselves
prefigured by those shapes. And thus much of figures, and presignifications of
the old Testament.

16. In the new Testament, as has been said, are contained both the promise of
our Savior, Proofs out of the new Testament.
to fulfill these figures with the truth of his flesh, which he would give to
be eaten in the Sacrament, as also the exhibition and performance thereof
afterward, the very night before his passion, with a miraculous confirmation of
the same by S. Paul, upon conference had therein with Christ himself after his
blessed assension. The promise is contained in the sixth Chapter of S. John's
gospel, where our Savior foretells expressly, that he would Io. 6.
give his flesh to us to be eaten: for that except we did eat the same, we
could not be saved: that his flesh was truly meat, and his blood truly drink;
and that his flesh that he would give us to eat, was the same that was to be
given for the life of the world: All which speeches of our Savior expounded
unto us in this sense, for the real presence of his flesh in the Sacrament by
the universal agreeinge consent of ancient Fathers, must needs make great
impression in the heart of a faithful Christian man, especially the performance
of this promise ensuing soon after, when Christ being to depart out of this
world, and to make his last will and Testament, exhibited that which here he
promised, taking bread, brake and distributed the same, saying: this is my
body that shall be delivered Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Lu^. 22.
for you, which words are recorded by three several Evangelists, and that with
such significant, and venerable circumstances on our Saviors behalf, of
fervent prayer, washinge his Apostles feet, protestation of his excessive love,
and other devout, and most heavenly speeches in that nearness to his passion,
as well declared the exceeding greatness of the mystery which he was to
institute: whereunto if we add that excellent clear confirmation of S. Paul,
who for resolving doubts as it seemed had conference with Christ himself after
his ascension (for before he could not, he being no Christian when Christ
ascended) the matter will be more evident. His words are these to the Corinth.
Ego enim accepi a Domino, quod and tradidi vobis, etc. For I have received from
our Lord 1. Cor. 11.
himself, that which I have delivered unto you about the Sacrament; and do you
note S. Paul's confirmation of the real presence.
the word (for) importinge a reason why he ought specially to be believed in
this affayre, for so much as he had received the resolution of the doubt from
Christ himself. And then he sets down the very same words again of the
Institution of this Sacrament, that were used by Christ before his passion,
without alteration, or new exposition, which is morally most certain that he
would have added for clearinge all doubts, if there had been any other sense to
have been gathered of them, then the plain words themselves do bear. Nay
himself does add a new consirmation, when he says, that he which does eat
and drink unworthily this Sacrament, reus erit ^orporis and sanguinis Domini,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. And again: Iu^cium sibi
manducat and bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini, he does eat and drink his
own judgment, not discerninge the body of our Lord: Which infers the real
presence of Christ's body, which those, whom the Apostle reprehendeth, by the
fact of their unworthy receiving do so behave themselves, as if they did not
discern it to be present. All which laid together, and the uniform consent
of expositors throughout the whole Christian world, concurringe in the
selfsame sense and meaning of all these scriptures, about the real presence
of Christ's true body in the Sacrament, you may imagine what a motive yt is, and
ought to be to a Catholic man, who desires to believe, and not to strive and
contend. And thus much for scriptures.

17. There follows the consideration of Fathers, Doctors and Counsels,
wherein as The second ground about authorityes of Fathers.
the Sacramentaryes of our time, that pleased first to deny the real presence,
had not one authority, nor can produce any one at this day, that expressly
says, that Christ's real body is not in the Sacrament, or that yt is only a
figure, sign, or token thereof (though diverse impertinent pieces of some
Fathers speeches they will now and then pretend to allege) so on the contrary
side, the Catholics do behold for their comfort, the whole ranks of ancient
Fathers through every age, standinge with them in this undoubted truth: Yea not
only affirming the same real presence in most clear, and perspicuous words
(whereof you may see See Claud. de Xanctes repet. and Bellarm. l. de Euchar. tom
2. and others.
whole books in Catholic writers replenished with Fathers authorityes, laid
together out of every age from Christ down wards) but that which is much
more, yeldinge reasons, and endeavoring to prove the same by manifest
arguments, and theological demonstrations, using therein such manner of speech
and words, as cannot possibly agree unto the Protestants communion of bare
bread and wine, with their symbolicall signification or representation only. As
for example, where the Fathers do show how Christ's true flesh comes to be in
this Sacrament, videlicet: by the true conversion of bread into his body, and
by, that this body The first reason of the Fathers.
is made of bread, and by, that the substances of breat and wine be changed,
and other like speeches, as may be seen in S. Ambrose 4. de Sacram. cap. 5.
and lib. 6. cap. 1. lib. de mist. init. cap. 9. Cypr. Sermon. de Coena. Chrysostom.
hom. 83. in Matthew. and de proditione Iudae. Cyrill. Catec. 4. Mystag. Nissenus
orat. Catech. 37. and others.

18. Secondly, yt is an ordinary speech of the The second reason of Fathers.
Fathers, to cry out and admyre the miracle that happens, by the conversion
in this Sacrament, ascribinge the same to the supreme omnipotencv of almighty
God, as you may see in S. Chrysostom l. 3. de sacerdotio: O miraculum, etc. S.
Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. Justinius Martyr Apolog. 2. saying: that by
the same omnipotency of God, vvherby the word was made flesh, the flesh of
the word was made to be in the Eucharist, which agrees not to a Caluinian
communion.

19. Thirdly, some of them do extol and magnify The third reason.
the exceeding love and charity of Christ toward us, above all other humane
love, in that he feeds us with his own flesh, which no shephards did ever
their sheep, or mothers their children, which is the frequent speech of S.
Chrysostom hom. 83. in Matthew. and 45. in Joan. and hom. 24. in ep. 1. ad Cor.
2. and homil. 60. and 61. ad Pop. Antioch. And to the same effect S. Augustine
ep. 120. cap. 27. and in Psalm. 33. which speeches can no ways agree to the
Protestants supper.

20. Fourthly, diverse of the said Fathers do The 4. reason.
expressly teach, that we do receive Christ in the Sacrament not only by
faith, but truly, really, and corporally; semetipsum nobis commiscet (says S.
Chrysostom) non side tantum, sed and reipsa: Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad Popul.
Ant^och.
Christ does join himself with us (in the Sacrament) not only by faith, but
really. And ^n another De Sancto Phylogonio.
place, he puts this antithesis or opposition betwixt us, and the Magi, that
saw and believed in Christ lyinge in the manger, that they could not carry him
with them, as we do now by receauinge him in the Sacrament, and yet no doubt
they believed in him, and carried him in faith as we do now; to which effect S.
Cyrill Alexand. says: Corporaliter 4. in Joan. cap. 13. and 14. and l. 11.
cap. 27.
nobis filius vnitur vt homo, spiritualiter, vt Deus: Christ as a man is united
unto us corporally, (by the Sacrament) and spiritually, as he is God. Whereunto
you may add S. Hilary lib. 8. de Trinitate, and Theodorus in the Council of
Ephesutom. 6. Appendic. 5. cap. 2. and others.

21. Fifthly the Fathers do many times, and The fifth reason.
in diverse places, and upon sundry occasions go about to prove the truth of
other mysteryes, and articles of our faith, by this miracle of the being of
Christ's flesh and body in the Sacrament, as S. Irenaeus for example, does Lib.
4. cent. haer^s ^. 34.
prove Christ's Father to be the God of the old sestament, for that in his
creatures he has left us his body and blood, and in the same Ibidem.
place he uses the same argument, for establishinge the article of the
resurrection of out bodies, to wit, that he that vouch safeth to nowrish us
with his own body and blood, will not let our bodies remain for ever in
death and corruption. S. Chrysostom in like manner, Hom. 3. in Matthew.
by the truth of his real presence in the Sacrament, does confute them that
denied Christ to have taken true flesh of the Virgin Mary, which hardly would
be proved by the Sacramentary supper of bread and wine, as every man by
himself will consider.

22. Sixthly to pretermitt all other points handled to this effect, by the said
Fathers, as that The sixth reason.
diverse of them do exclude expressly the name of figure, or similitude from
this Sacrament, as S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 1. Damasc. lib. 4. cap.
4. and 14. Theophilact. in Matthew. 26. Others yield reasons why Christ in the
Sacrament, would be really under the forms or accidents of bread and wine, to
wit, that our faith might be proved and exercised thereby, and the horror of
eating flesh and blood, in their own form and shape, taken away, and so the
same S. Ambrose Ibid. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. Cyrill. in cap. 22. Luc. apud D.
Thom. in catena. Others do persuade us not to believe our senses that see only
bread and wine, whereof we shall speak more in the observations following: so
S. Augustine, sermon. de verbis Apost. and l. 3. de Trinit. cap. 10. Others do
prove this real presence by the sacrifice, affirminge the self same Christ to
be offered now in our daily sacrifice upon the Altars of Christians, after an
unbloody manner, which was offered once bloudely upon the Altar of the Cross,
as more largely shall be Diverse evident reasons together.
showed: so S. Chrysostom hom. 17. ad Haebr. and 2. ^^ 2. ad Tim. Greg. lib.
4. dial. c. 58. Nissenus orat. 1. ^^ pascha, etc. All these considerations I
say, and many others that may be taken out of the Fathers wrytinges, I do for
breuityes sake let pass in this place, though most evidently they do declare
the said Fathers plain meaning, and belief in this article, and cannot any
way be applied to the new Communion of Protestants, but by manifest impropriety
and de^ortion.

23. And therefore I will end only with one consideration more, very ordinary
with the The seanenth reason.
said Fathers, which is, the divine reverence, honor, and adoration, that in
all ages the said Fathers have given unto the blessed Sacrament, whose
authorityes were ouerlong here to recyte in particular. The saying of S.
Austen is known Nemo manducat nisi prius adorauerit, no Aug. ^^ne. 1. ^. ps.
^^.
man eats the Sacrament but first adoreth the same, and S. Chrysostom, Adora
and manduca* Chrysostom. hom. 3. in epist. ad Ephesians. Theodor. in 2. dialog.
adore yt and receive yt; And Theodoret to the same effect, Et creduntur and
adorantur, quod easint quae creduntur. They are believed and adored (the flesh
and blood of Christ) for that they are in deed the things they are believed to
be. And to speak nothing of many other Fathers sayings to this effect, S.
Chrysostom his large discourses about this matter may serve for all, Chrysostom.
hom 60. ad Popul. Antioch. and hom. 3. in ep. ad Ephesians. and lib. 6. de
Sacerdotio.
who writes, that at the time of consecration and sacrifice, the very Angels
come down, and with tremblinge do adore Christ their Lord therein present*
which he would never have vvrytten, y^ bread, and wine were only there
present.

24. By all these ways and means then, may easily be seen what the ancient
Fathers in The third ground of Cou^cells.
their ages did think, speak, and believe, of this high and admirable mystery
of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament. And albeit there* were no Counsels
about this matter, for the space of a thousand years after Christ, the cause
thereof was, that in all that space no on* man ever openly contradicted the
same, atleast after the time of S. Ignatius until Berenga^rius, (for if any
man had done yt, we may se^ by the foresaid Fathers speeches, who must have been
the chief in these Counsels, what their determination would have been against
them) and when the said Berengarius had once broached this Sacramentary heresy,
the whole Theodoretus in 3. Dial.
Christian world rose up presently against the same, as against a blasphemous
nouelty, and ten several Counsels condemned the same, as in the former
Chapter has been declared.

25. Wherefore the Catholics having with them all these warrants of truth by
scriptures, The 4. ground of the Churthes consent.
fathers, counsels, tradition of antiquity, uniform consent of all Christian
nations, both Greek, Latin, Asian, African, and other countries embracing the
name and faith of Christ, and that no beginning or entrance can be showed of
this doctrine in the said Church, nor any contradiction against yt when yt
first entered: as on the contrary side the first of spring of the other,
together with the place, author, time, manner, occasion, resistance,
condemnation, and other like circumstances are and may be authentically showed,
proved and convinced, yea that the very face of Christendom from time out of
mind, by their ^hurches, altars, offerings, adoration, and manner of divine
service admittted every where, without contradiction, doubt, or question, do
testify the same: the truth moreover thereof being confirmed by so infinite
con^ourse of manifest miracles, recorded by such authors, as no man with piety
can doubt of their creditt; the Catholics I say having all his main cloud of
witnesses (to use the Apostles Miracles. Hebr. 12.
^ords) for the testimony of this truth, and being practiced and accustomed in
the belief ^^erof for so many ages together without ^^terruption, and seeing
moreover that Luther ^^mselfe, and all the learned of his side that were open
professed enemies in other things to the Catholic belief, yet in this
protested the truth to be so evident, as they durst not impugn it, nay held
the first impugners thereof for damnable heretics, addinge also hereunto that
Zuinglius the first chief author, confesses himself to have been moved
thereunto by a certain extrauagant spirit, which he says he knew not whether
yt was black or white. Zuing. l. de vt Sacramentaria.
All these things, I say, laid together, and the lives and manners considered
of them, that have held the one and the other faith; that is to say the
infinite Saints of the one side, whom the Protestants themselves do not deny
to have been Saints; and the qualityes and conditions of the others, that first
began, or since have defended the new Sacramentary opinions: let the discreet
reader judge, whether the Catholics of England had reason to stand Weighty
considerations.
fast in their old belief, against the innouations of our new Sacramentary
Protestants in K. Edwards days. And the like shall you see in the other
articles that ensue of Transubstantiation and Sacrifice, dependinge of this
first of the real presence, as before you have heard. But much more will you
be confirmed in all this, when you shall have read over the disputations
followinge, and seen the triflinge arguments of the Sacramentaryes in these so
weighty and important articles of our belief and the ridiculous euasions where
with they seek to auovd, or delude the grave tistimonyes of scriptures, and
Fathers before mentioned. For thereby will be seen, that they seek not truth in
deed with a good and sincere conscience, and fear of Gods judgments; but only
to escape and entertayne talk for continuance of their faction, which ought
to be marked by the reader, if he love his soul. And thus much for the grounds
of the reall-presence.

Grounds of Transubstantiation.. 2.
26. Touching the second question about Transubstantiation, though yt be less
principal then the former of the reall-presence, for that yt conteyneth but
the particular manner how Christ is really in the Sacrament, and consequently
not so necessary to be disputed of with Sacramentaryes, that deny Christ to be
there really at all, as before has been noted: ^et shall we briefly discover
the principal ^rounds whereon Catholics do stand, in this ^eceaued doctrine of
the Church against Lutherans especially, who grauntinge the said ^^all
presence, do hold that bread is there together with our Saviors body: which
Catholics for many reasons do hold to be absurd. and albeit the word
Transubstantiation and particular declaration thereof, was not so expresse^ set
down in the Church until some 400. ^cares gone in the general Council of
Lateran under Pope Innocentius the third, as the word Trinity, Homousion, or
Consubstantiality and clear exposition thereof, was not until the Council of
Nice 300. years after Christ; yet was the truth of this doctrine held ever
before in effect and substance, though in different words: to wit mutation,
transinutation, conversion of bread into the body of Christ, transelementation,
and the like, which is proved by the perpetual consent of doctrine, uttered by
the ancient Fathers in this point from the beginning, which are recorded by
Catholic wiyters of our days from age to age: and one only alleges thirty
and two, that wrote hereof before the Council of Lateran, and are ouerlong to
be recited in this place; only they may Fathers authorityes reduced to two
heads.
be reduced for more perspicuitie to two heads: the one of such as deny the
substance of bread to remain after the words of consecration; the other of
such as do expressly avouch a conversion of bread into Christ's body.

27. Of the first sort, that deny bread to remain, is S. Cyrill Bishop of
Jerusalem, whose First head.
words are: hoc sciens, ac pro certissimo habens, panem hunc, qui videtur a
nobis, non esse panem, etiamsi gusts Catech. 4. mystag.
panem esse sentiat, etc. Thou knowing and being certain of this; that the
bread which we see is not bread, not withstanding it taste as bread and the wine
which we see not to be wine but the blood of Christ, though to the taste still
see me to be wine. And S. Gregory Nissen Lib. de Sancto Baptismo non ^o^ge
(...).
Panis iste panis est in initio communis, etc. This bread at the beginning is
common bread, but when yt is consecrated, yt is called, and is indeed the body
of Christ. Again Eusebius: Antequant consecrentur, etc. Before consecration
Hom. 1. de Pasc.
there is the substance of bread and wine, but after the words of Christ, yt is
his body and blood: All which do exclude, as you see, bread after consecration.
And to the same effect S. Ambrose: Panis hic, panis est, ante verba
Sacramentorum, De Sacram. cap. 4.
sed vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane sit ^aro Christi. This bread before
the words of the Sacraments, is bread, but after the consecration, of bread is
made the flesh of Christ. And S. Chrysostom treating of this mystery, asks
this question, and answers the same. Number Hem de Euchar ^n Ence^.
^ides panem? number vinum? absit, ne sic cogites! Do thou see bread? do thou
see wine here? God forbidd, think no such matter. And to this same effect
many others might be cyted, but yt would grow to ouergreat prolixity.

28. The second sort of testimonies that do affirm conversion and change of
bread into 2. head.
the body of Christ, are many more, if we would stand upon their allegation,
and in place of all might stand S. Ambrose, whose faith was the general faith
of Christendom in his ^ayes; and he does not only oftentimes repeat, that by
the words of Christ uttered by the Priest upon the bread, the nature and
substance thereof is changed into the body and blood of Christ, but proves the
same by examples of all the miraculous mutations and conuersions, recorded in
the old and new Testament. Prebemus (says he) non hoc esse quod natura
formanit, Ambros. l. de ijs qui ^^trantur cap. 9.
sed quod benedictio consecrauit, maioremque vim esse benedictionis quam
naturae, quia benedictione etiam ipsa natura mutatur. Let us prove then (by
all these other miracles) that this which is in the Sacrament, is not that
which nature did frame (used bread and wine) but that which the blessinge has
consecrated, and that the force of blessinge is greater then the force of
nature; for that nature herself is changed by blessinge; And again: Si tantum
valuit sermo Eliae, vt ignem de coelo depoueret; non valebit sermo Christi, ^t
Ambros. ibid.
species mutet elementorum? If the speech of Elyas was of such force, as yt
could bring down fire from heaven, shall not the words of Christ (in the
Sacrament) be able to change the natures of the elements? videlicet (as I said
before) of bread and wine. And yet further: You have read, that in the creation
of the world, God said, and things were made, he commanded, and they were
created; that speech then of Christ, which of nothing created that which was
not before; shall yt not be able to exchange those things that are, into
other things, which they were not before? sor yt is no less to give new
natures to things, then to change natures, but rather more, etc.

29. Thus reasons that grave and holy Doctor, to whom we might adioyne many
more both before and after him, as namely S. Cyprian in his sermon of the
supper of our Cyprian. de Cena Domini.
Lord: Panis iste quem, etc. This bread which Christ gave unto his disciples
being change not in shape, but in nature, is by the omnipotency of the word
made flesh. S. Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem proves the same by example of the
miraculous turning of water into wine, at the marriage of Cane in Galeley:
aquam mutauit Cyrill. Catech. mystag. 4.
in vinum (says he etc.) Christ turned water into wine, by his only will, and
is he not worthy to be believed quod vinum in sanguinem transmutauit, that he
did change wine into his blood? For if at bodily marriages he did work so
wonderful a miracle, why shall not we confess that he gave his body and blood
(in the Sacrament) to the children of the spouse? wherefore with all certainty,
let us receive the body and blood of Christ, for under the form of bread is
given unto us his body, and under the form of wine his blood. Thus he of this
miraculous change, whereof Saint Chrysostom treatinge also upon S. Matthew
writes Hom. 83. in Matthew.
thus: Nos ministrorum locum tenemus, qui vero sanctificat and immutat, ipse
est. We that are Priests, should but the place of his ministers: (in this great
change) for he who does sanctify all, and makes the change, is Christ
himself. To like effect writes Eusebius Emissenus; quando Sermon. de corp.
Domini.
benedicendae, etc. When the creatures of bread and wine are laid upon the
Altar to be blessed, before they are consecrated by the invocation of the holy
Ghost, there is present the substance of bread and wine; but after the words of
Christ, there is Christ's body and blood. And what maruayle if he that could
create all by his word, posset creata conuertere, could convert, and change
those things that he had created, into other natures?

30. I might allege many other Fathers to this effect, but my purpose in this
place does not permit yt: this shall be sufficient for a taste, that the doctrine
of conversion or change of bread and wine, into the body and blood of Christ,
which is the doctrine of Transubstantiation, was not new at the time of the
Council of Lateran, but was understood and held ever before, by the chief
Fathers of the Catholic Church, yea and determined also by two Counsels at
Rome: and the first thereof general, wherein was present our Lansrancus
Lanfrant. l. de corp. Domini Guit. l. 3. de corp. Domini and Ansel ep de corp.
Domini.
upon the year of Christ 1060. under Pope Nicolas the second; and the other
19. years after under Pope Gregory the seventh, and both of them above an
hundred years before the Council of Lateran, wherein notwithstanding is
declared expressly this doctrine, of the change of bread and wine into the
body and blood of our Savior, albeit not under the name of Transubstantiation;
and yt is proved expressly out of the words of Christ's institution, This is my
body, which can have no other probable exposition, but that the bread is
changed into his body. And so yt is expounded by all the forsaid Fathers, and
others that, before this controversy fell out, interpreted the same words of
our Savior.

31. These grounds then had the English Catholics in K. Edwards days to stand
in the defense The consent of the vniuer sall Church.
of this doctrine, that is to say, the clear words of scripture so understood
by all antiquity, together with the assertions and asseuerations of all the
Fathers, the determination of Counsels presently upon the controversy first
moved, and namely of that great famous Lateran Council, wherein concurred
Canon. 1. and 2.
both the Greek and Latin Church, there being present, the Greek patriarks of
Constantinople and Jerusalem, 70. metropolitan Archbishops, and above a
thousand and two hundred other Fathers of diverse states, and degrees, (compare
this with a meeting of some twenty or thirty ministers impugninge the same.)
All which having disputed the matter, and considered as well by scripture, and
by ancient The greatness of the Lateran Council.
tradition of the Fathers and universal Cath. Church, what had been held
before, did with full agreement determine and declare this matter, accursinge
whosoever should from that time foreward, deny that doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Which decree of that Council being received generally,
without contradiction throughout the Christian world, has been confirmed by
seven other Counsels since that time, as before we have showed. And let the
discreet reader weigh with himself, which party has more security for yt
self, either the Catholic that followed all this authority and consent of
antiquity, or our new Protestants, that upon fresh imaginations of their own
heads, divised a new doctrine contrary to all this antiquity. And thus much of
this article, for a taste of that which may be alleged for yt.

Grounds for the sacrifice of the mass.. 2.
32. The third question proposed to be handled in the foresaid disputations,
was about the sacrifice of the mass, to wit, whether the selfsame body of
our Lord, whose real presence is proved in the first question, be not only a
Sacrament in the Christian Church, as yt is received under a sign of bread and
wine by the Priest and communicants, but a sacrifice also, as yt is offered to
God the Father by the Priest upon the Altar; and whether this external and
visible sacrifice be appointed by Christ, to be iterated and daily frequented
in the Church unto the worlds end, and this both for an external worshipp
peculiar to The state of the question.
Christians, whereby they are distinguished from all other people, as also for
propitiation of sins, by applyinge the meritt and virtue of the other bloody
sacrifice of our Savior on the Cross once offered for all, and ever
auayleable (as S. Paul at large declares in his epistle to the Hebrews) for
sanctifyinge the redeemed: this then being the question, and this being a
doctrine so generally received throughout the Christian world, both in the
Greek, Latin, Ethiopian, Armenian, and other Christian Churches, as there was
no doubt or question thereof, when Luther and his offspring began; yt fell out in
England, that under the child King Edward his reign, name and authority, that
the L. Seymour protect our and his followers, with some few Priests that were
weary of massinge, and desirous of marriage, but chiefly Cranmer and Ridley,
Hooper, Latymer, and others, bad heads of the clergy in those days, took
upon them to pull down this public use of sacrifice, and afterward to
examine, and call in question the doctrine thereof. At which change and
suddayne innovation, never seen in England before, from the first day that
Christian Religion entered under the Apostles, as all the realiues and contreyes
round about remained astonished: so diverse notwithstanding of the lighter sort,
enclyned to noueltyes, applauded to them, and followed their divise; others
more prudent and respective to their own salvation, consideringe that there
went more in this matter then the pleasure and fancyes of a few particular men,
stood constant in that, which before they had received, and that which
generally they saw, and knew to be in use throughout all Christendom without
co^tradiction, which could not be by S. Austens rule, but that yt must needs
Aug. l. 2. de baptis. c. 7. lib. 4. cop. 6. and 24. and l. 5. c. 23.
come down from the Apostles themselves, for so much as all opposite doctrine
to that, which was first planted by them and received from them, could never be
so generally admitted without contradiction.

33. Wherefore entringe into due consideration of this matter, whilst all the
ruff ran the other way for 5. or 6. years space, under that King Child, and
those other little tyrants that bare sway, and one destroyed the other by Gods
just judgment under him. These good men (the Catholics I mean) fell to
search what grounds they had, or might find out for this so received a doctrine
and practice, as this of the mass and sacrifice was. And first they The search
of Catholics under K. Edw. for the grounds of the mass.
found, that whereas the first insult of heretics was against the very name of
the mass, as a new divised thing without reason or signification; they found
(I say) that it was a very ancient and usual word, for the external sacrifice
About the name of mass.
of Christians upon the Altar, in the Latin Church, for twelve hundred years
past and downward; in place whereof the Grecians have used the word Liturgy,
Synaxis, and the like, and this use is not only to be showed by the testimonies
of particular Fathers, as Saint l. 5. ep. 33.
Ambrose, S. Sermon. 91. and 251. de se^p and sermon. 237. in domin. 19. post.
Pentecost.
Augustine, S. Ep. 81 ad D^oscor and 28. ad episc. Germ
Leo, S. 1. ep 12. and l. 4. c. 10.
Gregory, Lib. 2 hist. Uandal.
Victor Vticensis, Lib. 3. de cant. ps. ord.
Cassianus, and other; but by whole Counsels also, as by that of Can. 1.
Rome, under Pope Siluester the first of 275. Bishops, held almost 1300. years
gone; the second and fourth of In 2. Conc. can. 3. and 4. Ca. 84.
Carthage held the next age after, and the Council of Can. 47.
Agatha in France the same age; the Council of Can. 4.
Ilerdum and Can. 1.
Valentia in Spain, and of Can 28.
Orleance in France, all above 1000. years gone, which was sufficient matter
against the vanyty of heretics, that condemned the name and the words: for
example of S. Ambrose saying Missam facere coepi, orare in oblatione Deum. I
began to say mass, and to Ambros. ibid.
pray to God in the oblation of the sacrifice, and those of S. Austen: In
lectione quae nobis ad missas legenda est, audituri sumus. We shall hear or
Aug. ibid.
this matter more in the lesson which is to be read unto us at mass. These
speeches I say, and this practice of so old learned and holy Priests, as these
and their fellows were, did prevail more with the grauer sort of English
people, then the lightness and inconstancy of Cranmer Ridley, and such other
licentious Priests, as for liberty fell to Apostasy.

34. And this for the name of the mass. But for the nature and substance
thereof, which conteyneth the external true and proper sacrifice of the
Christian Church, they found such store of evident proofs, and most grave
authorityes, as might stay, confirm and satisfy any man's mind, that were not
wilfully bent to the contrary. And whereas I do use the words of external,
true and proper sacrifise, you must remember thereby the fraud of these new
heretics, who, as before about the real presence, did go about to delude all
the sayings of holy Fathers, and other testimonies of Antiquity, that spoke of
Christ's real being in the Sacrament, by running to the words spiritually,
sacramentaly, by faith, and the like: so here fyndinge the whole torrent and
stream of Christian antiquity to stand for this Christian sacrifice, and to
mention, reverence, and avouch the same; these fellows for auoydinge their
authorityes do run from the proper external sacrifice, whereof we treat,
unto the internal, and invisible sacrifice of the mind, whereof K. David says,
that a contrite spirit is a sacrifice to God. And when this cannot serve, they
run also to improper and metaphorical externe sacrifices, such as are,
mortification of the body Romans 12. sacrifice of thankesgeuinge. Psalm. 49.
Sacrifice of alms deeds. Hebr. 13. and other such good works, which by a
certain analogy or proportion with the nature of proper sacrifices, are called
also sacrifice in scriptures and by the Fathers, but improperly. To these then
do our Protestants run, when they are pressed with the authorityes of
ancient Fathers, that name the use of Christian sacrifice in the Church, and
will needs make us believe, that the Fathers meant not properly of any true
visible or external sacrifice, but either of inward or invisible sacrifice of
the heart, mind, and good desire; or else of outward metaphorical sacrifice of
pious and virtuous works.

35. But all these are fraudulent shifts to overthrow one truth by another. For
as we do not deny, but that there is an inward and invisible sacrifice of our
mind, in dedicatinge of our selves to God, and to the subjection of his
Majesty, without which the external sacrifice is little worth to him that
offers the same: And as we grant that all good works be sacrifices in a
certain sort, by some similitude they have with true and proper sacrifices,
for that they are offered up to God in his honor; yet do we say, that this is
from our purpose in this place, who talk of a true proper external sacrifice
offered up to God, after a The description of a true external and visible
sacrifice.
peculiar sacred rite, or ceremonies, by peculiar men deputed to this office in
acknowledgement of Gods divine power, majesty, and dominion over us, and
protestation of our due subjection unto him, such as were the external
sacrifices in the law of nature, offered up by patriarks and heads of familyes,
and by Priests of Aarons order under the law of Moses, and by Christ and his
Priests according to the order of Melchisedech in the new law; and for so much
as both the internal, and metaphorical sacrifices before mentioned of good
affection, desires, and holy works, are not peculiar to any law, but were
lawful and needful under all laws, and in all times, and require no
particular kind of men or ministers to offer them, but may be offered up by any
man or woman whatsoever: therefore do we exclude all these from the name of the
sacrifice, which here is meant by our description, and comprehends as you
see an external visible oblation, made by him or them, who are peculiarly
deputed by God to this office, which are Priests: So as when soever our
adversaries do slipp from this proper signification of a sacrifice to the
other, either internal or metaphorical, which may be offeted by all sorts of
people, and thereupon do say that all men are Priests, they run, as vow see,
quite from the purpose, as they do also for examples sake, when to avoid the
necessity of external fasting, they run to the internal fasting An
example of an heretical fraud about fasting.
of the mind, saying that true fasting, is to fast from sin, which as we
deny not in that sense of spiritual fasting; so is it notwithstanding a
plain shift, and runninge from the purpose, and cannot stand with many places
of the scripture, which must needs be understood of the external fast; as when
Christ is said by the Evangelists to have fasted 40. days together; and S.
Paul affirms that he and his fellow Apostles fasted frequently; It cannot be
understood (I say) of fasting only those times from sin; for that Christ
fasted always from sin without exception; and so do all good men both fast
and facrisice also, by offeringe up good desires and pious actions to almighty
God, daily and hourly without distinction of men or times.

36. But this is not the proper, visible, and external sacrifice which here
we mean, which was instituted by God, as peculiar to Christian people under
the law of the gospel, for an external worshipp unto him (besides the
internal) and testification of their inward subjection, love, and piety
toward him; which sacrifice coming in place of all others that went before,
both in the law of nature and of Moses that prefigured and foresignified the
same; and being but one and singular The excellency of the Christian and
external sacrifice.
instead of them all, and their great variety, is to be esteemed so much more
excellent then they all, as the law of the gospel is more excellent then
those laws, and truth above shadows, and the sacred body of Christ God and
man himself, to be preferred before the bodies of beasts, byrds and other such
creatures, which were but signs and figures of this.

37. And in this sense do both scriptures, fathers, counsels, and all holy
Christian antiquity speak and treat of this most divine, venerable and
dreadful sacrifice, whereof, as of the highest and most principal mystery and
treasure, left by our Savior in his Church, there are so many testimonies, as
before has been signified, that yt shall not be possible for me in this place,
and with the breuity which is necessary, to allege the least part thereof; yet
some few general heads shall I touch, which the learned reader may see more
dilated, by diverse Catholic writers of our days, and he that has not
commodity or time to do that, may give a guess by that which here I shall
set down.

38. First then, for that this holy sacrifice of the Christian Church was so
principally intended by almighty God for the new law, as has been said, many
things were set down by the holy Ghost in the old Testament, both
prefiguringe and prophecyinge the same, as first the sacrifice of the King and
Priest Melchisedech in bread and wine, Genesis 14. which all the ancient Fathers,
by general consent, do apply to the sacrifice used now in the Christian
Church, and yt were ouerlong to allege their particular authorityes, let. S.
Augustine speak for all: Primum apparuit (says he) sacrificium Aug. l. 16. de
ciuit. cap. 22.
(Melchisedech) quod a Christianis nunc offertur Deo toto orb terrarum. The
first sacrifice appeared in Melchisedech, which now is offered to God by
Christians throughout all the world. And in another place: Vident nunc tale
sacrificium offerri Deo toto orb terrarum: Christians Lib. 1. cont. aduers.
leg. and Prophet. cap. 20.
do see the like sacrifice (to that of Melchisedech) to be offered to God, over
all the World. And all the other sacrifices, signs and oblations mentioned
before, as prefiguringe the real presence of Christ's sacred body, and true
flesh in the Sacrament, are applied by the self same Fathers, whom before we
have named, to the prefiguration also of this divine sacrifice, conteyninge the
self same thing, which the Sacrament does, but in a different sort, in
respect of diverse ends, the one as yt is received by the communicants; the
other as yt is offered unto God the Father.

39. After these prefigurations there follow the predictions of Prophetts as
that of Esaias 19. and 66. where is forteold the reiection of the Aaronicall
priesthood and sacrifice, and a new promised under the Christians. The prophesy
of Daniell also, where it is foretold, that in the last age of the law of
grace, by the coming of Antichrist, judge sacrificium, that is the daily Dan.
8. and 11.
sacrifice shall cease. Of this (I say) is inferred by the ancient Fathers,
that until Antichrists coming there shall be a perpetual and daily sacrifice
among Christians; which is most of all confirmed by the prophecy of Malachias
in Malach. 1.
these words: Ad vos o sacerdotes, etc. To you o priests, that despise my name,
and do offer upon my Altar polluted bread, and do sacrifice the beasts that are
blind, lame and weak, I have no more likinge of you, says the lord of hosts,
and I will not receive at your hands any gifts, for that from the east to the
west my name is great among the gentills, and they do sacrifice unto me in
every place, and do offer unto my name a pure oblation, for that my name is
great among the gentills, says the lord of hosts. Out of which place the
Fathers do show first, that here the priesthood and sacrifice of Aaron was to
be rejected, and a new priesthood and sacrifice, according to the order of
Melchisedech, erected amongst the gentills, whereby ordinarily are understood
the Christian people converted chiefly (from gentility) who were to succeed in
their place, and that with such certainty, as the present tense The opposition
of the prophecy of Malachie.
is put for the future, according to the manner of prophesies; and the
Antithesis or opposition between the two sacrifices, the one rejected, the
other promised, does make the matter more plain; for that as the Jews
sacrifice could not be offered but in one place, to wit, in the Temple of
Jerusalem: so shall the Christian sacrifice be offered up in omni loco, that
is every where without respect of places from the east to the west. The Jewish
sacrifices were many and of diverse sorts, but the Christian sacrifice that
should succeed in place thereof was to be but one. The Jewish sacrifices were
polluted, not so much in respect of great quantity of beasts blood powered out
therein, and for that they offered defectuous beasts, as for the wickedness of
them that offered the same; but the Christian sacrifice was to be clean and
unspotted, not only in respect of the unbloody manner, wherein yt was to be
offered under the forms of bread and wine, but especially for the excellency
of the thing yt self offered, being the most precious body of Christ
himself, and for that the demeritt of the offerer cannot take away the worth
of the offeringe.

40. These circumstances then considered, and that the heretics here cannot
run to their shift of inward, and invisible sacrifices, (for that these could
not be understood by the Prophett as new sacrifices, that should succeed to
the old, for that these were always in use with good men, duringe the time of
the old sacrifice also, and were lawful, yea commanded Circumstances that
prove the sacrifice of the mass to have been fore prophesied.
in all times, to wit, to have inward piety and devotion, give alms, and the
like) these things I say considered, together with the expositions of holy
Fathers, as well upon these as upon other places of the old Testament, there
can be no probable doubt, but that this external sacrifice of the Christian
was prophesyed by the holy Ghost long before the coming of Christ.

41. Secondly, the same is proved out of diverse places of the new Testament:
And first out of S. John's gospel, where as our Savior promised in mysterious
words the institution of this blessed sacrifice, as before has been seen; so
also did he signify that this sacrifice should succeed in steed of all
sacrifices that went before. For whereas the Samaritan woman Joan. 4. and 6.
Joseph. lib. 10. de Antiquitat. Iudaic. c. 8.
at the well, speakinge of the schism between the Jews and Samaritans about
adoring in the Temple of Jerusalem, and in the hill Garizim of Samaria (which
word of adoringe must needs in that place signify sacrifycinge, as yt does
also in other places of scripture, as Genesis 22. Act. 8. and else where, for that
the controversy between the Jews and Samaritans was about the use of
sacrificing, as the highest external act of adoration) our Savior answers
to her question, that the hour was now come, when neither in that hill of
Samaria, nor in Jerusalem they should adore; that is to say, use any more
sacrifice, but that a new adoration in spirit and truth should succeed the
former; which adoration being understood The explication of the place of S.
John ca. 4. about Sacrifice.
of sacrifice, as the circumstance both of the place and matter do enforce, yt
follows that Christ did here promise a new sacrifice, that should be
spiritual and true: spiritual, both in comparison of the bloody sacrifice
that went before, and for that the consecration of Christ's holy body in this
sacrifice, is made by special work and operation of the holy Ghost; true also
and in truth it may justly be said to be, for that yt is the fullfillinge of
all precedent sacrifices, and the truth of all former figures.

42. There ensue the places of Saint Matthew, Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1.
Cor. 11.
S. Mark, S. Luke, and S. Paul about the institution and first celebration, of
this unbloody sacrifice of Christ in his last supper, where if we admit that,
which all the circumstances of the places themselves do plainly insinuate or
rather enforce; the continual exposition and tradition of the ancient Church
does teach us, to wit, that Christ our Savior having consecrated his sacred
body, did offer the same unto his Father as a most grateful sacrifice in his
last supper; then must yt follow, that the words hoc facite in meant
commemorationem, do this in remembrance of me, employed a precept not only of
receauinge and communicatinge the body of Christ, but to offer up the self
same also to God in sacrifice, after the example of Christ himself; which is
that we call the sacrifice of the mass, and to prove that the Apostles
understood these words (I mean, Proof of the sacrifie by Christ's Institution.
do this in remembrance of me) so; and in this sense, not only the most ancient
Fathers, as has been said, do testify the same, but the ancient liturgies or
ritualls also of the Apostles and their scholars, as namely of S. James, S.
Clement, and S. Dionysius Areopagita, do make the matter manifest, concerning
the Apostles practice in this behalf, to wit, that they did offer up this
Christian external sacrifice in all places of the world, where they lived, and
that from them the Church ^ooke the same precept and use, according to the
testimony of old Irenaeus Bishopp and Martyr, that lived above 1300. years
gone, whose words are: Eum qui ex creatura pa^u Iren. lib. 4. adu. haeres. cap.
32.
est, accepit, and gratias egit, dicens; Hoc est corpus meum; and calicem
similiter qui est ex e^ creatura quae est secundum nos suum sanguinem confessus
est, and noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Christ took that bread which was a
creature and gave thanks saying: This is my body; and that cupp or wine in
like manner, which according to us, is of a creature, he confesses to be his
blood, and heerby taught a new oblation of the new Testament, which the Church
receauinge from the Apostles, does offer the same to God, throughout the whole
world.

43. Here now are touched all the points that might be doubted of by
sectaryes, to wit, that this bread and wine being first creatures, are
confessed by Christ, after consecration, to be his body and blood: secondly
that this was A most clear place of S. Irenaeus for the daily sacrifice.
not only an institution of the Sacrament, and communion, but of a new oblation
and sacrifice for the time of the new Testament: thirdly that yt was not only
to be offered once and in one place, as Christ's bloody sacrifice was upon the
Cross, but throughout the whole world by the whole Church. And fourthly that
this manner of oblation was taught the Apostles by Christ himself, and by them
delivered to the said Church. What can be spoken more clearly or distinctly by
so ancient a witness? neither can heretics here have any refuge to internal
or invisible sacrifices of the mind, or to improper external sacrifices of
thankesgeuinge, almesdeeds, and the like, for that they are many, and were
before also lawful under the law of Moses, as often has been noted, and here
is said to be taught a new particular and singular oblation of the new
Testament, in steed of all the sacrifices of the old Testament, which
Irenaeus confirms presently in the next words after, by the prophecye of
Malachye before mentioned saying: Malachias sic praesignificauit, etc. Malachy
the Prophet did so foretell us, (that this new sacrifice Iren. ibid.
and oblation of the new Testament, should thus be instituted by Christ, and
frequented by the Church) when he said to the Jewish Priests, I have no will or
likinge in you, etc. Manifestissime significans, quoniam prior quidem populus
cessauit offerre Deo; omni autem loco sacrificium offertur Deo, and hoc purum
in gentibus; most manifestly signifyinge, that the former Jewish people (being
rejected) have ceased to offer sacrifice unto God; but that among the gentills
(to wit, Christians converted of them) a pure sacrifice is offered in every
place of the world, that is to say, without respect of any certain place, as
the Jewish sacrifices were.

44. With S. Irenaeus Bishop and Martyr, concurreth in the same age, and
somewhat before him, S. Justinius philosopher and Martyr, who speakinge of the
self same thing, and of the Jews reprobation, and of the sacrifice of the
new Testament ordained by Christ in place thereof, writes thus in his dialogue,
entitled, Triphon against the said Jews: A nemine Deus Justin. dial. Triph.
hostias accipit, nisi a sacerdotibus suis, etc. God does accept hosts and
sacrifice of none, but of his Priests; wherefore he preventing all those that do
ofter such sacrifice unto him in Christ's name, as Jesus Christ has delivered
to be made in the Eucharist of bread and wine, and are made by Christians in
every place, does testify that they are grateful unto him: but your sacrifices
(o Jews) he does reject. Thus he. And these two testimonies, of two so famous
Martyrs and Doctors, are sufficient for witnesses of the first and next age
after the Apostles, to declare what the said Apostles both taught and practiced
in this point of public sacrifice, and what the Church of that time understood
Christ himself to have done in that behalf, though I might adioyne other
four testimonies more ancient yet then these; which are S. l. 5. Constable.
Apost. c. 18. and l 8. c. 5. and 36.
Clemont, scholar to S. Peter S. l. de Eccl. Hier. cap. 3.
Dionysius Areopagita, scholar to S. Paul; S. epist. ad Burdegal. cap 3.
Martial Bishop of Bordeaux, and S. ep. 1. Deeret. ad Orthodox.
Alexander Bishop and Martyr of Rome; All which do no less clearly then these
two, declare unto us the doctrine and practice of their times under the
Apostles.

45. But for auoydinge prolixity I must passo them over, aduertisinge only by
the way, that where in the Acts of the Apostles yt is written by S. Luke,
concerning the mission of S. Paul, Act. 13.
and Barnaby to preach, Ministrantibus illis Domino, and ieiunantibus, dixit
Spiritus Sanctus, segregate mihi That the Apostles did sacrifice.
Saulum and Barnabam, etc. They ministering unto God, and fasting (to wit,
Barnabas, Simon, Lucius, Manahen and Saul, that were Prophetts and Doctors
says S. Luke) the holy Ghost said to them, take out for me Saul, and Barnabas,
to the work that I have chosen them for. Now as concerning the mynistery which
these men were performing, when the holy Ghost spoke unto them, the Greek word
used by S. Luke, Litourgounion.
imports rather sacrificing, and so does Erasmus translate yt, who was no
evil Grecian, nor of small creditt with our adversaries: and of that word
proceed the names before mencyoned of Liturgy, conteyninge the order of this
sacrifice in the Christian Church.

46. But howsoever this be, you have heard the judgment of the first age,
after the Apostles, by two witnesses of singular credit, S. Justinius, and S.
Irenaeus: for the second may speak S. Cyprian to the same effect: Jesus
Christus Dominus and Deus noster, ipse est summus sacerdos Cypr. lib 2. epist.
8.
Dei Patris, and sacrificium Deo Patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc sieri in
sui commemoratione praecepit. Jesus Christ our Lord and our God, he is the high
Priest of God the Father, and he offered up first of all to God his Father a
sacrifice, and commanded this to be done in his commemoration. Lo he
commands us to sacrifice as he did sacrifice. And for the third age after
the Apostles S Ambrose may only speak: Ponti fex noster ille est, (says he)
qui obtulit hostiam nos Ambros. com. ent. in cap. 10. ad Hebr.
mundamem ipsam offerimus nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem, consumi non potest. He
is our high Priest that offered the host which made us clean, the self same
do we offer now, which then was offerred, and cannot be consumed. Behold that
we offer the self same host that Christ offered, and cannot be consumed. And
for the fourth age S. Austen may stand for all, who answering Faustus the
Manichee, that objected, that he and other Catholics did offer sacrifice unto
Martyrs; the holy Father denies yt saying: Sacrificare martyribus dixi, etc.
I said that we did not sacrifice unto Martyrs, but Aug. l. 20. contr. Faust.
Manich. cap. 21.
I said not, but that we sacrifised to God in the memoryes of Martyrs, which we
most frequently use to do, after that only rite, which God in the manifestation
of the new Testament has commanded us to sacrifice unto him.

47. By all which testimonies is evident, that the Church of God, in the first
four ages after the Apostles, did both offer an external sacrifice, which was
the same that Christ had offered before, and this after a peculiar rite
insinuated by Christ to the Apostles, and delivered by them to their posterity
(which peculiar rite is more expressed in the liturgies before mentioned) and
that all this is done by the authority and example of Christ himself in his
last supper, and by tradition of the Apostles, which is enough to settle any
pious man's conscience. Now then thirdly, whereas I should by order pass to the
consideration of ancient Fathers sayings and testimonies about this matter,
they are so many and copious, as I should be prolix and weary to the reader in
producing so many as may be alleged, no one article or mystery of our faith,
being so often handled or inculcated by them, as this of the Church sacrifice.
For better comprehendinge whereof, I shall, as for the mystery of the real
Diverse heads of Fathers authorityes.
presence before, here note only unto thee certain general heads, whereunto
the said Fathers 1.
testimonies may be reduced; as first, that every where in their wrytings,
speakinge of this oblation made in the mass, they use the words sacrificium,
hostia, victima, offerre, immolare, sacrificare, all which are words that
peculiarly and properly do signify sacrifice; which is certain that the said
Fathers would never so commonly have used, no more then the Protestants do use
them now of their supper, if they had meant no otherwise then the Protestants
do for other Sacraments; as Baptism for example they do not call either
sacrifice, host, or victime, nor that the act of Baptizinge, is offerringe,
immolation or sacrifice, as they do the act of celebratinge mass, whereof you
may read all the Fathers generally, as S. Hyppolitus Martyr, Orat. de
Antichrist. S. Ambrose in psalm. 38. Nissen. orat. de resurrect. Chrysostom. hom.
24. in 1. Cor. and hom. 17. in epist ad Hebraeos. Cyrill. lib. de adorat. Aug.
l. 2. quaest. Euang. q. 8. and l. 4. de Trinit. cap. 14.

48. The second head is of those authorityes, 2.
that do compare this Christian sacrifice with the sacrifices of the Jews,
affirminge the one to be of the flesh of beasts and spotted, the other of the
pure, and immaculate flesh of Christ, which they would never have done in like
manner, if they had not meant properly of true external sacrifices, offered by
Christians in the new law, whereof you may see at large Tertullian lib. contr.
Iudaeos cap. 1. Justin. in Triph. Chrysostom. in psalm. 95. Cyprian. lib. de
vnitat. Ecclesiae Ambros. in cap. 1. Lucae. Nazianz. orat. 2. de paschat. Aug.
lib. 17. de Ciuitat. Dei cap. 20. S. Leo. sermon. de passion. and many others.

49. The third head is of those authorityes, 3.
that compare this daily sacrifice of the Christian Church, offered in every
place throughout the world, with the only sacrifice of Christ, offered once for
all upon the Cross, wherein for difference sake they use the words, cruentum
and incruentum sacrificium, that is bloody and unbloody sacrifice, for
distinguishinge the manner of the oblatio^, the one upon the Cross, the other
upon many Altars in the Church at once, till the worlds end, otherwise holding
the thing it self offered to be the very same in the one and other sacrifice.
See S. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. and hom. 2. ad 2. Tim. Cyprian. lib. 2.
ep. 3. Ambros. in psalm. 38. Nissen. orat. 1. de resurrect. Aug. lib. 3. cont.
Donatist. cap. 19. and lib. 20. contr. Faust. cap. 21. Isichius in Leuit. cap.
8. and others.

50. The fourth head is of those, that affirm 4.
this our daily sacrifice to be propitiatory both for the live and dead, as
well those that are absent as present, and that for both these sorts of people
yt ought, and was accustomed to be offered in their days, which does evidently
prove yt a true sacrifice, for that a Sacrament only does profitt only those
that do communicate and receive the same, and no Protestant will say that their
communion is offered up for those that are absent, quick or dead, as the
ancient Fathers do every where say, that our host and Eucharist was offered up
in their days, and consequently they held yt not only for a Sacrament, but
also for a sacrifice; whereof you may see S. Chrysostom hom. 79. ad Pop.
Antiochen; where he says yt was offered for Bishopps and Governors of the
Church; and hom. 72. in Matthew. for sick men, and lib. 6. de Sacerdotio for the
dead. For which effect see S. Augustine lib. 22. de ciuit. cap. 8. and in
Enchirid. cap. 110. and lib. 9. Confess* cap. 12. where he professes to have
offered sacrifice of the mass for his mother S. Monica.

51. The fifth head is of those places wherein 5.
the Fathers do use the words Altar, Priests and Priesthood, as proper,
peculiar, and appropriated to true sacrifices; For as the Protestants of our
times do not use these words, for that they hold not their supper to be a
sacrifice, but rather do fly them, though never so much used by the said
Fathers, and in place thereof do use the words, table, minister, mynistry, and
other such like of their new Religion; so neither would the Fathers have used
the same words, if they had had the same meaning that Protestants have; For
that well knew the said Fathers how to express their meaning in proper words,
and therefore when they say that Altars among Christians, are, seeds Optat. l.
6. cont. Par^^.
corporis Christi the seats of the body of Christ, and that in their days
Christians did Tertull. l. de Pen^te^t.
adgeniculare aris Dei, knele down at the Altars of God, and quod Ambros. l.
5. ep. 33.
obsculabantur altaria, that they kissed the Altars, and that the office of
Christian Priests is to sacrifice upon the said Altars, yt is evident what they
meant, to him that will understand them, whereof more may be read in S. Cyprian
lib. 1. ep. 9. Eusebius. lib. 1. demonstr. Euang. cap. 6. Athan. in vita Anton.
Nazianz. orat. in Gorgon. Nissen. lib. de baptisimo. Chrysostom. hom. 53. ad Pop.
Antioch. and hom. 20. in 2. Cor. Hieron. lib. cont. Vigilant. and dial. cont.
Lucifer. Aug. lib. 8. cap. vlt. and others.

52. The sixth consideration out of the Fathers, 6.
may be their lyturgyes or form of divine service or mass, for offeringe of
this sacrifice in those days, of which sort of liturgyes there are extant unto
this day diverse, as that of S. James the Apostle, S. Clement scholar and
successor of S. Peter, of S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, which albeit
in all particular form of prayer, do not agree with our form and canon of
mass at this day, yet in the substance of the sacrifice they do, as also in
many other particular circumstances, vsinge the words of oblation, sacrifice,
victime, signs, singings, blessings, eleuations, and other such rites which
Protestants cannot abide. And for the cannon, and form of our mass, which is
used at this day in the Latin Church, most parts thereof are to be seen in S.
Ambrose his books de Sacramentis, and the whole order as now yt is has endured
without alteration from S. Gregory the first downward, whereof you may see
Alcuinus, Amalarius, VValfridus, and other ancient authors in their books de
diuinis officijs.

53. By all which general heads, you may Luther rejects all Fathers about
the mass.
easily see the multitude of testimonies, that may be alleged out of the
Fathers, if we should prosecute every one of these in particular; and how great
reason Martyn Luther had to except against them all, or rather to defy them
all, when first he began to write against this sacrifice, Hic non moramur
(says he) si clamitant Papistae, Ecclesia, Ecclesia, Patres, Patres; here we
care Lib. de Messa and l. deaurogand. miss. and lib. contr. Angliae hegem.
not, though Papists cry, Church, Church, Fathers, Fathers; And again: Here I
do profess against them that will cry out, that I do teach against the rite
of the Church and ordinances of Fathers, that I will hear none of these
objections. And in another place against our K. Henry of England, much more
immodestly and wickedly, when the King alleged the authorityes of ancient
Fathers for the mass, this shameless fellow answered: Thomisticos asinos,
etc. I say that these. Thomisticall asses have nothing to bring forth, but
only a multitude of men, and use of antiquity. And a little after he says
expressly; that he cares not though a thousand Augustines, and a thousand
Cyprians be brought against him. So as this first Father and chief Captain of
our Protestants, did easily grant, as you see, that the whole consent of
ancient Fathers was against him.

Ponderations Upon the Premises.. 4.
54. All which being considered, there remains only to weigh, what a discreet
man Import^^ considerations.
may think or do in this important case: For first here is all the antiquity
of the Christian 1.
Church on the one side, that testifyeth unto us not only what was believed and
exercised in their days, but upon what grounds also, both of scriptures of the
old and new Testament, and by Christ's own institution, fact and ordination,
and by the practice and tradition of the Apostles themselves. Then is there 2.
the continuance of all ages since, throughout all countries and nations of
Christendom, as has been said. There is the agreement of all 3.
general Counsels: The consent of all Ecclesiastical 4.
historyes, wherein as there is continual mention of both public and private
exercise of this external Sacrifice: So is there 5.
no memory at all, of any time since the Apostles wherein yt began, or that ever
any contradiction, doubt, or question was about the same, for 1200. years
together after Christ's assension, which must needs have happened, if the use
thereof had not been prescribed and left by Christ and his Apostles themselves.
For what men or people would have attempted to begin, or bring in so great a
matter as this? or who would have received yt without opposition, if yt had not
been established even from the beginning? I add also another consideration of
no little importance, 6.
which is, that if Christ had left his Church and people without a particular
external sacrifice, whereby they should be distinguished from all other people;
the Christian Church under the law of grace, should be inferior to the Church
of the patriarks under the law of nature, and unto the Prophetts under the law
of Moses: for that both of those Churches and people had an external daily
sacrifice, whereby to honor God, besides the internal sacrifice of their mind:
neither can yt be said, that Christ's own sacrifice on the Cross, once offered
for all, is this daily sacrifice apprehended by us in faith, for that they also
believed in him, and their sacrifices were acceptable only by faith in him to
come. And therefore as Christ's one sacrifice then to come, was no impediment,
why their daily sacrifices, which took their valor from this one of Christ,
should not be daily offered among them: so the same sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, being now past, should not take away our daily sacrifices offered
in remembrance thereof, and for the applying of the infinite valor of that one
sacrifice unto us, from which this other daily sacrifice takes his sufficiency.

55. Furthermore the very outward form of all Christian Churches, there
buildinge 7.
with Crosses, Altar, Isles, and the like, the foundinge of monasteryes,
Chappells, oratoryes, the ceremonies in foundinge them, their statutes for
saying of masses for the dead, which were in Britany both before our nation
was converted, and much more after; the whole Canon of our Latin masse-booke
which is granted by our adversaries, and evidently proved to have been, as yt
is now, for above a thousand years together, and brought in by S. Augustine
our first Apostle: All these things I say, do show whether this were a matter
to be called in question by a few libertyne Priests, and auaritious noble men,
and to be banished the realm upon a soddayne, under the name of a child King,
that knew not what yt meant, as yt was in K. Edwards days in our miserable
country.

56. Moreover if you ponder with your self, what manner of Priests they were
for 8.
life, learning, and virtue that acknowledged themselves to have offered
sacrifices upon Altars in their days, as S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose,
S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Gregory. and others of the first ages, yea and
for these ^ater ages, since Berengarius moved first the question about the
real presence, as S. Anselme, ^. Bernard, S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Dominicke,
and The comparison of Priests that offered or impugned the sacrifice of the
mass.
almost infinite other Saints, and holy men, of whom all historyes do report
wonderful extraordinary tokens, of almighty God his special favors toward
them; and do compare them with the first married Priests and Apostata friars,
that were the first impugners of this sacrifice in England or round about us,
we shall find a great difference. And then if we consider, by what good spirit
or motive 9.
Luther began the first contradiction in Germany, which was by the devils own
persuasion and personal appearance unto him, and disputinge against yt (for yt
seemed that he esteemed so much both of the man and the matter, that he would
not send an Ambassador unto him, as he did soon after to Zuinglius, for
impugninge the real presence, but go himself in proper person) and that all
this is confessed by themselves, and testified by their own wrytings: All
this, I say, being laid together, may strengthen him that has any faith at
all, to stand constant in the belief of the Catholic Church concerning these
articles: For if there be any certainty or ground in Christian Religion at all,
yt must needs be in these, wherein authority, learning, antiquity, consent,
continuance, universality, miracles, and all other sorts of theological
arguments, both divine and humane, do concur and nothing at all with the
impugners, but only self-will, passion, and malicious obstinacy, as you will
better see afterward, when you come to examine their objections.

57. Furthermore yt is to be pondered, what miserable men they were that first
in 10.
our days, against the whole army of God Church did presume to impugn this
blessed sacrifice, upon such simple and fond reasons a^ before you have heard,
to wit Luther in Germany, upon the motive laid down unto him by the devil,
in his disputation with him, recorded by himself in his wrytings, and Nicolas
Ridley in England, upon certain places of the scripture, and certain
testimonies of Fathers (to use his own words) which made nothing at all for
his purpose, as after most clearly shall be showed in due place, and we may
easily guess by that, which has been alleged before out of scriptures and
Fathers: for that scriptures cannot be contrary to scriptures; nor are Fathers
presumed to impugn Fathers, in so great a point of faith as this is.

58. Wherefore miserable and twice miserable were these men, that first upon so
small grounds adventured to make so fatal a breach in Gods Church; and thrice
miserable were other, who upon these men's creditts, ran to adventure both
body and soul everlastingly, in pursuit of this breach and contradiction
begun, as were the most of Fox his fantastical Martyrs of the ruder and
unlearned sort, who in all their examinations and answers, were most
blasphemous in defiance and detestation of this blessed-Sacrament, as you have
seen in their historyes; and thereby did well show that they were governed by
his spirit, that above all honors does envy this that is done to almighty
God, as the highest, and most pleasing to his divine Majesty of all others.
And so much for this point.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS To be noted, for better aunsweringe of heretical
Cauillations, against these articles of the blessed Sacrament. CHAP. III.
HAVING exhibited a taste in the former Chapter, of the many great and
substantial grounds, which Catholic men have to stand upon, in these high and
divine misteryes of Christ's sacred body in the Sacrament and sacrifice, and
showed in like manner that the faithless and infidious Sacramentary, that
wrangeleth against the same, has no one plain place indeed, either of
scriptures or Fathers for his purpose, but only certain objections, founded
for the most part upon sense and humayne reason against faith, and answered
ordinarily by our schoolmen themselves that first objected the same, and out
of whose books the heretics stole them; I have thought yt best for more
perspicuityes sake, and for helpinge their understanding, that are not
exercised in matters above sense, to set down a few observations in this very
beginning whereby great light will grow to the reader, for discovering
whatsoever shall after be treated about this matter. But yet before I enter
Two things diligently to be noted.
into the observations themselves, I would have the reader consider two things;
first the inequality between our adversaries and us in this case, for that
their arguments against these mysteryes, being founded almost all in the
appearance of common sense (as has been said) the unlearned reader is capable of
the objection, but not of the solution, which must be taken from matters above
sense, as presently you shall see.

2. The second point is, that if any of the old heretics, or heathen
philosophers should rise again at this day, and bring forth their arguments
of sense and human reason against such articles of our faith, as in old time
they did impugn, for both improbable and impossible in nature; as namely the
creation of the world out of nothing; three distinct persons of the blessed
Trinity in one, and the self same substance; two distinct natures in one
person conjoined by the incarnation of Christ; the resurrection of our
putrifyed bodies, the self same substance, qualityes, quantityes, and other
accidents, and such like points: Against which, I say, if old philosophers,
and heretics should come forth again in our days, and propose such arguments
as in their days they did, which seem invincible and unanswerable to common
sense and human reason; do you not think that they should have infinite
people both men and weomen to follow them, especially if they were countenanced
out with the authority of a potent Prince and Kingdom, and suffered to speak
their will, as our men were, that first impugned the real presence, and
sacrifice in England; and yet as the ancient Fathers in their times, did not
abandone these articles of faith for those difficultyes, or appearance of
impossibilityes; no nor the common Cacholike people themselves, that could not
reach to the understanding thereof; so must not we do now, though we could not
answer in reason the adversaries arguments, which yet by the ensuinge
observations, you will easily be able to do, And this for an entrance; now to
the observations themselves.

First Observation. That we are not in this mystery to follow our sense, or
Imagination.. 1.
3. The first observation is taken out of the ancient Fathers wrytings, who
treatinge of this mystery of Christ's being in the Sacrament, do expressly
warn us to beware, that we judge not of the matter according to sense or
humayne imagination: So says S. Cyrill B. of Jerusalem, whose words are:
Quamuis sensui Cy^ill. Catech. 4. mystag. prope enitium.
hoc tibi suggerat, etc. Albeit external sense do suggest unto thee, that this
Sacrament is bread and wine; yet let faith confirm thee to the contrary;
neither do thou judge by the taste, knowinge most certainly, that this bread,
which seems so unto us, is not bread in deed, notwithstanding the taste does
judge it to be bread; but is the body of Christ; and that the wine, which so
appears to our sight, and by the sense of our taste, is judged to be wine, yet
is it not wine, but the blood of Christ. Thus he, near thirteen hundred
years gone. And the like aduertisment gives in the same matter S. Ambrose,
somewhat after him, who having determined most clearly the truth of the real
presence, saying: Panis iste, panis Ambr 1. 4. do Sacram. cap. 1.
est ante verba Sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane sit corpus
Christi: This bread is bread, before the words of the Sacrament be uttered (by
the Priest) but when the consecration is added thereunto, the bread is made the
body of Christ: He frames an objection of the senses in these words:
Fortedicas, aliud video, etc. Perhaps Ambr. l. de myster imitiand. c. 7.
thou will say, I see another thing (to wit bread, and not the body of
Christ) and how then do thou say that I receive his body? To which question
S. Ambrose answers at large alleaginge many other miracles, wherein our
senses are deceived.

4. The like observation has S. Chrysostoine in sundry places, talkinge of
this mystery: Credamus (says he) vbique Deo, nec repugnemus ei, etsi Chrysostom.
hom 8 ^. in Matthew.
sensui and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse videatur, etc. Let us always
give creditt to God, nor let us resist him, albeit the thing seem absurd to
our sense and cogitation, for our sense may easily be deceived; and therefore
for so much as he has said; This is my body, let us not doubt thereof at all,
but believe him. Saint Epiphanius stands also upon the same aduertisment,
reprehendinge them grievously, yea condemninge them that dispute and frame their
arguments, from the testimony of their senses against the real presence, whose
words he brings in thus: Et videmus (say they) quod non aequale Epiph. in
Ancoras. circa medium.
est, etc. We do see with our eyes, that this which we do receive in this
Sacrament (to wit, the host) is neither equal nor like the image of Christ in
flesh, nor to his invisible deity, nor to the forms or lineaments of his body,
for yt is of a round form, etc. So they; but S. Epiphanius his conclusion is
against them thus: qui Epiph. ibia.
non credit esseipsum verum, excidit a gratia and salute; he that does not
believe Christ himself to be truly there (under the round form of bread that
is given) is fallen both from Gods grace, and his own salvation.

5. And finally not to enlarge my self further in this behalf, Eusebius
Emissenus, or who else was the author of that excellent sermon de corpore
Domini, concurreth also in this note against the judgment of our senses
saying; Vere vnica and persecta hostia side aestimanda, non specie, non
exteriori consenda visu, This only and perfect Eusibius Emiss sermon 5. de
Pasehat.
host is truly to be esteemed by faith, and not to be judged by the external
shape or veiw of our eyes. Thus he; whereof S. Chrysostom gives an example
when he writes of this mystery: O quot modo dicnns, vellem formam, and speciem
cius, vellem vestimenta ipsa, vellem calce amenta videre. Chrysostom. hom. 51.
and 83. in Matthew.
O how many are there (videlicet of the simpler sort, and not so grounded in
faith) that say, I would I could see Christ, his form and shape in the
Sacrament, I would see his apparel, I would see his very shoes. Thus said
some in those days, upon simplicity perhaps; but so say many more in our
days, upon heresy and infidelity. And truly if we consider most of the
arguments of all Fox his artificers, or weomen Martyrs, they were such as these
here mentioned, and deryded by S. Chrysostom, and upon these arguments went
they to the stake: Let your God in the Sacrament (said Alice Driuer and her
fellows) shedd some blood, and we will believe. The like cried out many
other simple and rude people; we see bread, we see wine, we see a round cake,
we will never believe yt to be God, except we see him work some miracle. What
would S. Chrysostom (think you) and other Fathers before mentioned have said'
to these people, if they had heard them sound out such blasphemous cries of
infidelity, and unbelief in their days? And so much for this first
observation, which is usually to be found in all ancient Fathers wrytinges.

The second Observation. That not only sense and common Imagination, but
neither philosophical reason is necessary to be followed in these mysteryes..
2.
6. The second observation is much like to the first, but passes some degrees
further, and is taken out of the ancient Fathers aduertisments in like manner,
to wit, that not only sense, and sensual imagination is not to be followed in
these divine mysteryes, of our Saviors body; but neither natural, or
philosophical reason it self, is always to be followed, notwithstanding yt
reaches far higher then sense can attain to: which is proved first by the
general definition of faith, used by S. Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews,
where yt is said to be argumentum rcrum non apparentium, an argument or assent
of things, that do not appear by reason, which yet is more explicated by Saint
Gregory, when he says: sides non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio praebet
experimentum; Greger. hom. 26. in euang.
faith has no meritt, where humane reason does yield a proof: Saint Augustine
also says: This is the praise of faith, if that which is believed Aug. tract.
79. in Joan.
be not seen, for what great matter is it, if that be believed, which is
evident? And this is universally in all points of our faith, the belief whereof
must not depend of the euidency of reason, for then yt should be science (as
philosophers term yt) and not faith, which faith depends on the authority,
trust and creditt we give to the reuealer, which is God himself.

7. But especially is this to be done in this high mystery of the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, which is not only a mystery, but a miracle also, and
such a miracle, as requires no less power then the omnipotency of God to
perform the same: Necessarium est (said S. Chrysostom to his people of
Antioch) mysteriorum Chrysostom. in sermon. ad Pop. Antioch.
discere miraculum, etc. It is necessary for us to learn this miracle of
mysteryes, what it is, why it was given us, what vtility comes therewith unto
us and the like: And again the same Father in his books of Priesthood,
descending to treat more in particular one point of this mystery, which is, how
Christ's body is at one time in many places, he cries out; O miraculum! o Dei
benignitatem! O miracle! o goodness of God! and why? qui cum patre Chrysostom.
l. 3. de Sacerd.
sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis articulo omnium manibus petractatur, he
that sits above with his Father, in that very instant of time is handled by
all Priests hands: And S. Cyprian to the same effect: Panis quem Dominus
discipulis porrigebat, non Cypr. sermon. de cana Dominj.
effigy sed nature a mutatus, omnipotentia verbi sactuiest caro: The bread
which our Lord gave to his disciples (at the last supper) being changed not in
outward show (for yt appears bread still) but in nature, by the omnipotency
of Gods word is made flesh.

8. Thus thought and spoke the ancient Fathers of this high mystery, and
miracle in the Sacrament. And conform to this, they called us always from
reason to faith, from contention to humble belief, when they treated thereof,
for so writes among other ancient Fathers S. Hilary speakinge of this matter:
non est humano aut saeculi sensu in Dei rebus loquendum. Hilar. lib. 8. de
Trinit.
We must not talk of works of God according to humayne and wordly reason,
etc. touching the natural verity of Christ in us (by this Sacrament) that
which we affirm except we have learned yt of himself, we do affirm the same
folishly, and impiously, but he has said: my flesh is truly meat, etc. Unto
whom S. Ambrose agreeinge, says of the same Joan. 6.
mystery: Quid hic quaeris natura ordinem, etc. Why Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap.
4.
seek thou here the order of nature (touching the body of Christ in the
Sacrament) for so much as our Lord Jesus was borne of the Virgin beside the
course of nature. Here you see he compares this mystery, and miracle of
Christ's being in the Sacrament, with the miracle of his incarnation and
myraculous birth, of the blessed Virgin. The very same judgment held S. Ephrem
equal in antiquity Ephrem. lib. de natura De^ minime scrutan da cap. 5.
to S. Ambrose. Quid scrutaris inscrutabilia. etc. What do thou search after
things unsearchable? If thou examine these things curiously, thou will seem
not to be faithful but curious: be faithful and simple, and so participate
the immaculate body of thy Lord, beleeuinge most certaynely, that thou do eat
the very whole lamb yt self, etc. So he.

9. Saint Augustine also in many places does beat earnestly, against this
standing upon reason in matters of faith, but especially in his epistle to
Volutianus, saying: Quae sibi quisque fatilia, August. op. ad Volutian.
etc. The things which each man esteems easy for him to conceive, though he
cannot make them, he is content to believe them, but all that is above his
capacity he holds for false and feigned. And again: Si ratio quaeritur non
erit mirabile, if you seek reason for every thing, yt will not be marvelous,
Demus, Deum aliquid posse quod nos fateamur inuestigare non posse: Let us
grant that God can do Aug. ibid.
somewhat, whereof we cannot seek out the reason; in talibus rebus tota ratio
facti est potentia facientis; in such matters all the reason, that can be
alleged for the fact, or for that which is done, is the power of the doer. And
in another place the same Father having spoken of the blessed Sacrament and
how Christ our Savior is therein sub aliena specie, under another form of
bread and wine, as the Angels also appear unto us under assumpted bodies, he
concludes thus: Mihi autem omnino vtile est, etc. It is very profitable for me
to remember my Ibidem.
own feeble forces, and to warn my brethren that they also be myndfull of
theirs, to the end that our humayne infirmity do not pass further (in search
of these mysteryes) then is safe for us to do. So blessed S. Augustine.

10. And finally S. Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria handlinge those words of the
faithless Capharnaites, Joan. 6. How can he give his flesh to be eaten. etc.
reprehendeth greatly such curious inquisition saying: Numquam in tam
sublimibus rebus illud (quomodo) aut cogitemus aut proferamus. In Cyrill. Alex.
l. 4. in Joan. cap. 12.
so high matters (as these of the Sacrament) let us never think or allege
this word (quomodo) that is, how yt can be? And in this manner did the ancient
Fathers proceed about this mystery, by way of faith and humble submission of
their judgments and understandings, and not by feeding their imagination with
probability of humayne reason against faith, as the sectaryes of our time do,
yea and placinge so much confidence therein, as they were content to die for the
same (as after you will see by experience, when we come to handle their
arguments in particular, whereof the greater part (yea almost all) relied either
upon common sense, or some little show of humayne reason. And thus much for the
second observation.

Third Observation. That reason is not contrary to faith, but inferior unto
it.. 3.
11. The third observation may be, that though yt is justly accoumpted a fault
of folly, pride, heresy, or infidelity by the foresaid Fathers, to stand too
much upon sense and reason in these mysteryes, which do surpass them both; yet
are they not contrary to reason, for that one truth cannot be contrary to
another, and God is the author of both lights, the one as a lower, the other
as a more high and eminent light, so as, though this lower cannot reach to
discover that, which the higher does disclose and comprehend; yet is not this
extinguished or violated by the other, but rather perfected and strengthened.
Reason reaches only to things that are probable in nature, faith ascends to
all that is possible, and not only possible to man, but even to God himself,
which so far exceeds both the power and understanding of man, as S. Paul
speaking but of one point only of our faith, which is the joys of heaven,
says that the heart of man could not comprize the same.

12. And yet if we would enter into the search of what is possible to Gods
power and omnipotency, the scripture in few words sets yt down: Non est
impossible apud Deum Luc. ^.
omne verbum: there is nothing impossible to God, which is as much to say,
that all things are possible. And again our Savior speaking to his Father
said: Omnia tibi possibilia sunt: All Marc. 14.
things are to thee possible. And if we would require examples, the creation of
the heavens, and of all things both in and under them, will minister thousands,
whereunto humayne reason cannot reach. And S. John Baptist gave an example to
the Jews, that God of stones Luc. 3.
is able to raise up children to Abraham; but this also is nothing in respect
of Gods infinite and incomprehensible omnipotency, which is above the reach of
our understanding.

13. No limitation then at all is to be laid to Gods almighty power, but that
he may do whatsoever he please, except only one, according to divines, which
is, that the thing do not imply contradiction in yt self, as that yt should
be and not be at once, which is impossible, D. Tho. 1. part. q. 14. art. 3.
or that yt should import any imperfection or impotency in God, as to sin, or
dye, which are effects rather of want of power, then of omnipotency. And in
this do the more learned Protestants also agree in word with us, saying, that
if yt were clear that God would have yt so, or had said yt, that of bread
should be made his flesh, and that one substance should be turned into the
other, they would grant that he could do yt by his omnipotency. Thus they say
in, words, to avoid the odious note of infidelity, or limiting Gods power; but
when they come to the point indeed, they found all their greatest arguments
upon the impossibility thereof, as though God could not do yt. And so shall you
see afterward, when we come to discuss their strongest arguments. And their
great Grandfather John VVikliffe, or rather VVicked-beleefe, as Walsingham
calls him, did absolutely deny that God was able to do yt, VValdens. tom. 2.
cap. 72. and 73.
as Thomas Walden testifies out of his own wrytings. And John Caluyn his
scholar in this point calls us madd-men, for that we believe that God was
able to make bread his flesh in the Sacrament, and yet not to have the
external form, nature and propriety of flesh: Insane (says he) quid a Dei
potentia postulas, Calu. lib. 4. Institut. cap. 17.. 24.
vt carnem faciat simul esse, and non esse carnem? Thou madd-man how do thou
demand of the power of God, that he should make flesh to be flesh, and not
flesh at one time? But how does Caluyn prove (think you) that our belief of
the Sacrament implies this contradiction of flesh and no flesh? Forsooth (to
use his words) for that we grant, that God can make, that the selfsame flesh
of Christ can occupy diverse Calu. ibid.
places at once, and that yt be contained in no certain place, and that yt
lacks both the outward shape of flesh and proper manner of being, etc. And
for beleeuinge of this he counts us madd-men, as you have heard, and so must
he account also of necessity all those holy Fathers before mentioned, who
believed the same mystery, as we do, notwithstanding the outward appearances
of impossibility, for comprehendinge whereof they fledd from sense and reason to
faith and belief.

14. And yet further then this the reader must understand, that for so much as
the said reason and faith, are not contradictory the one to the other, but more
eminent the one above the other, as before has been showed, Catholics do take
upon them to prove, that no one of these difficultyes objected by faithless
Protestants, is impossible, or implies contradiction in reason it self, as by
the ensuing considerations shall more particularly be declared; notinge only to
the reader by the way, that if the particular intrinsecall natures and essences
of every thing were clearly known unto us, ^s they are for example unto
Angels, and other Saints, that be in glory, we should easily see what does
imply contradiction to the said natures, and what does not, but for that God,
for our humility and greater meritt, would have us not always to see this;
therefore are we forced to guess at the same by way of discourse and reason,
and by one example to another, as you shall see in the ensuinge observations.

Fourth Observation. How a body may be without an ordinary natural place.. 4.
15. One of the greatest difficultyes therefore objected by the adversary, is,
that a true and natural organicall body, such as Christ's is confessed to be in
the Sacrament, cannot be without the ordinary dimensions of a peculiar place,
which we deny in such sense, as here we shall declare. For better
understanding Three vvayes or manners of being in place.
whereof is to be noted, that three ways a thing may be in a place, first
naturally and ordinarily by extension and commensuration unto the said place,
so as every part 1.
and part cell of the thing placed, do answer to each 1.
part of the place yt self, which manner of being in place, philosophers do
call circumscriptiuely, for that all places of the body so placed are so
limited and circumscribed by the part of the place, as neither that body can be
i^ any other place, nor that place admit another body, without penetratinge
the one of the other, which by ordinary course of nature is held for impossible.

16. Another manner of being in place is more spiritual, and hard to conceive,
to wit, 2.
when a thing is so in a place, as the parts thereof are not extended to the
parts of the place, as in the former example, but yet that the whole thing is
so defined and limited within the compass of that whole place assigned
thereunto, as naturally yt cannot be in any other, whilst yt is there, as for
example, the soul of a man in the body thereunto assigned, is so contained
therein, as yt is not elsewhere, and yet is it not so extended by commensuration,
as in the former example, that one part of the soul answers one part of the
body, and another, another part, but the whole soul which is indivisible, and
has no parts at all, is wholly in the whole body, and wholly in every part and
parcel thereof, which is a miraculous strange being, if yt be well considered,
and notwithstanding natural as all philosophers do grant, for that the whole
soul of man is as wholly (for example) in the singar and foot, as in the
breast and head, and yet is but one soul in all, and nether many souls nor
one soul divided into parts. And after the same manner, is an Angel also in a
place definitiuely, and not circumscriptiuely, that is to say wholly in the
whole place, which he occupies, and wholly in every part thereof, without
multiplication or division in himself, or extension unto the parts of the
place wherein yt is. But for that the example of the soul, is more familiar and
evident to our sense and reason, it does better express the matter. And yt is
to be noted, that yt does somewhat imitate the being of God himself wholly, and
without division in all parts of the world, and in all creatures thereof without
limitation, change, or multiplication, but only yt differs in this, that the
soul, or an Angel, being both creatures, cannot be every where, as the
creator naturally is, and he cannot be otherwise; but yet by his divine power,
the said creatures may be in diverse places at once, as after shall be showed.

17. These two ways then of being in a place, as I have said, are natural;
the first circumscriptiuely, the second definitiuely. But besides these two,
there is a third supernatural, and possible to Gods divine omnipotency, and
not repugnant to reason yt self, as after shall be showed; which is, that one
and the selfsame thing, may by Gods divine power, be placed in two different
places at once, that is to say, that the selfsame soul, as yt is naturally,
wholly, and entyrely in the head, for example, and in the foot; so yt repugneth
not to the same nature or essence of the soul, to be putt in two different
bodies at once. The like of an Angel in diverse places, and the same also may
be held of a natural body, is God will have yt so, as in the next observation
shall be proved. And this way or manner of being in place, for that the Cath.
Church does hold yt to be in the body of our Savior in the Sacrament, is
called by divines a sacramental being in place, nor for that the true body is
not really there, as some hearing the word Sacramentally, used sometimes by
the Fathers and Doctors, do fondly apprehend, but for that it is there after
this special manner, as we have declared, that is to say, so as yt is also in
other places at the same time.

18. Now then, these three ways or manners of being in place declared, yt
remains, that we show how yt is possible to Gods power, and not repugnant to
natural reason, that a true body, which of his own nature is in How a body
may be definitiuely in place.
place, only after the first manner of circumscription and commensuration, or
extension, may, by Gods power, be in place also after the second and third way,
that is difinitiuely and Sacramentally, without the first way of commensuration
and extension to a place. And first here we shall show the said possibility in
the second way, and then of the third in the ensuinge observation.

19. The only chief ground, or reason objected by the heretics, why it may
seem to repugne or imply contradiction, that a true organicall body together
with his quantity, such as Christ's is in the Sacrament, should be definitiuely
without extension in place, is, for that yt appears contrary to the nature of
quantity to be without such extension; but this ground Cath. Philosophers and
divines do easily overthrow, shewinge that three things do agree to quantity or
magnitude, whereof the first is to be extended in yt self, and to have distinct
parts one from the other among themselves, though not ever visible, or
perceptible by our sense; and this first point is so essential to quantity and
magnitude, as yt cannot be imagined separable, so as it remain quantity. And
therefore this is granted to be in the body of our Savior in the Sacrament,
though our sense does not comprehend yt. The second property of quantity or
magnitude, proceedinge from this first, is; not only to have parts distinct in
themselves, but to have them extended also in place, according to the
commensuration thereof, as in the first way of being in place we have declared.

20. And for that this second condition, or propriety, is later then the
former, and ensues thereof, yt is not so intrinsecall to the nature and essence
of quantity, but that by Gods divine power yt may be separated, without
destroyinge the said nature, which our divines do show by examples of other
things, where God has separated such secondary proprietyes, without
dissoluinge the natures, as heatinge, for example, from fire in the furnace of
Babylon, which heatinge notwithstanding is as natural to fire, as yt is to
quantity to occupy place. Christ also in S. Mathewes gospel, having said to
his disciples, that yt was easier Cap. 19.
for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich-man to
enter into the Kingedome of heaven, and the Apostles wondringe thereat, and
saying: who then can be saved? our Savior answered, that, that which was
impossible to men, was possible to God, which yet could not be possible, but
by separatinge from the camel all his natural extension, and commensuration
of place. Wherefore all the ancient Fathers upon this place attributing this to
miracle, do affirm, that by Gods divine power yt may be done, to wit, that a
camel remayninge in the nature of a camel, may pass through a needles eye:
quid prohibet (says S. Gregory Nazianzen) quo minus hoc siat, si voluntas it a
tulerit? What lets but that this (of Nazianzorat. 36. quae est quarta de
Theolog.
the camel) may be done, if Gods will be to have yt so? Some Protestant will
stepp forth, and say that yt cannot be done, for that the Camel should not in
that case have quantity and be organicall (for so they say of our Saviors body
in the Sacrament), but Nazianzen was of another opinion: And so may you read
Origin, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Hilary, Matthew. 19. Luc. 18. Marc. 10.
S. Chrysostom, and other Fathers in their commentaryes, and expositions upon
this place of S. Mathewes gospel.

21. The third natural condition or propriety of quantity (proceedinge of this
second) is, that for so much as by the forsaid second propriety, The third
condition or propriety of quantity.
the thing placed does fill up the place which yt occupyeth, every part thereof
answeringe to every part of the said place only, and one place conteyne one
body; so as naturally yt is no less impossible for two bodies to be in one
place, then for one body to be in many. Yet notwithstanding supernaturally, and
by Gods omnipotent power, both the one and the other may be without
implication, or contradiction of the essence, or nature of a true body. The
reason whereof is this: for that this third propriety in quantity or magnitude,
flowinge of the second, as has been said, may much more easily be separated
from the essence of the said quantity and body, then the second, and
consequently the former being separable, this is much more, whereof our divines
do give diverse most evident instances, out of scripture yt self. As for
example out of S. John's Gospel, where twice yt is said, that Joan. 20.
he came in to his disciples, when the gates were shutt. And in S. Matthew, and
S. Mark, Math. 28. Mare. 16.
where yt is showed, how Christ after his resurrection came forth of the
sepulcher, the stone also being shutt; and in his nativity he came forth of his
mothers womb, without violation of her virginity, and in his assension Ephesians.
4.
he passed through all the heavens with his natural body. In all which
myraculouse examples Se S. Aug. ep. 3. ad Volus. and l 22. de Ciuit. Dei cap.
8. and Chrysostom. Euth^m Cyrill. etc In cowmentavijs.
(for so do the ancient Fathers hold and affirm them to be) there must needs
be penetration of bodies, or two bodies in one place, which is no less
repugnant to the ordinary nature of quantity (as has been said) then for a body
to be without certain dimension of any place.

22. Besides this our divines do allege the examples of the damned spirits,
miraculously tied to certain local places in hell; and that which is more
marvelous, that the damned souls being spiritts, should suffer, and be
tormented by corporal fire, whereof S. Augustine treats at large lib. 21. de
Ciuit. Dei cap. 1. 2. and deinceps, which is no less against the ordinary
nature and propriety of spiritts, to suffer corporally, then yt is against the
nature of a body, to be after a certain spiritual manner without his local
dimension; by all which we may perceive, that although yt be above natural
reason, that organicall bodies should want these external local positions;
yet is yt not contrary, or contradictory thereunto, but subject to Gods
omnipotent power, when, and where yt pleases him to make yt so, and
consequently yt may be so also in the blessed Sacrament, without destroyinge
the nature of a true body, as fondly Protestants do pretend.

23. And heerby now falls to the ground, a whole main multitude of vain
arguments, brought by Fox his Martyrs, as after you shall see, against the
real presence, all of them founded upon this ground, that a true organicall
body cannot, by Gods power, be either without local dimensions, or in more
places then one at once. The first of which two assertions has now ben
improued, and the second shall be in the next ensuinge observation.

The fifth Observation. How a body may be in diverse places at once.. 5.
24. As the weak faith and learning of the Sacramentaryes of our time, cannot
reach to conccaue, that a body can be without an external place; so much
less, can they comprehend, that yt may be by Gods omnipotency placed in diverse
places at once, for that yt seems to their sense, and humayne reason to be
impossible; but the ancient holy Fathers, more wise and learned then our said
Sectaryes, took another course in this point, which was to asscribe yt to
miracle, and to Gods infinite power, which they could not by reason arrive
unto: I might cite diverse Fathers, but one or two shall serve for all;
Omiracle! (says S. Chrysostom) o goodness of God! that Shrysost. lib. 3. de
Sacerdotie.
the same Christ who sits in heaven with his Father, is conversant at the
selfsame time, in the hands of all that receive him on earth! And the same
Father, wrytinge of the same sacred body of our Savior, as yt is a sacrifice,
says: Vnum est hoc sacrificium, etc. This sacrifice is but one, for that
otherwise, because yt is offered in many places, there should be many Chrysostom.
hom. 17. in ep. ad hebr.
Christ's, which is not so, but one, and the self same Christ is in every
place, (when yt is offered) here yt is whole Christ, and there it is whole
Christ, and yet but one body: for as every where one body, and not many bodies
are offered, so is there also but one sacrifice, etc. In which places you see
S. Chrysostom to hold and to affirm, that Christ's true body, without
division or multiplication, is offered up in many places at once, yea
innumerable places, if we believe S. Gregory Nissen whose words are: As Christ's
divinity does replenish the world, and yet is Nissen. orat. de Paschate.
but one; so is his body consecrated in innumerable places, and yet is but one
body. So he. And do you observe, that the Father says not, that Christ's body
is every where, as his divinity is, as the Lutherane Vbiquitaryes of Germany,
do absurdly affirm; but that yt is in innumerable places by consecration.

25. Well then these Fathers denied not the real presence, as our
Sacramentaryes do, for that they conceived not the reason, how one body might
be in diverse places at once, but mounted by faith above reason, asscribing the
same to miracle and Gods omnipotency, as you have heard: and so do Catholics at
this day. Hear the pious speech of a great learned man above 400. years gone.
You will say to me Hugo de Sa Victor. l. 2. do Sacram. p. 8. cap. 11.
(quoth he), how can one and the self same body, be at one time in diverse
places, etc. Do not maruayle, he that made the place, made the body, and the
place for the body, and the body in the place; and when he ordained that one
body should be in one place, yt was as pleased him, and if he would, he could
have made yt otherwise, etc. Thou have seen only that which he has made,
and not that which he can make, and heerevpon do maruayle when thou see
any other thing, then that which thou art accustomed to see; but do thou
think upon the matter, and yt will cease to be maruaylous, or at leastwayes,
yt will not seem to be incredible. Thus he.

26. But our divines do go yet further, shewinge that this is not impossible,
even in nature yt self, for God to perform, as you may perceive by that we
have declared in the former observation: For if yt were repugnant and
contradictory to the nature of a true body, to be in diverse places at once,
this must be either in respect of the unity thereof, for that Two difficultyes
solued.
yt should thereby be divided from yt self, or multiplied in yt self, and so
not be one but many bodies; or else secondly yt should be impossible to be in
diverse places, in respect of the quantity, which a true body has, whereby yt
should be limyted to some certain space or place; but neither of these two
difficultyes do impossibilitate the matter, as now we shall declare.

27. Not the first about unity, for that God The first difficulty about unity.
being a substance indivisible, is every where wholly, and in every one of his
creatures, and yet remains one still, nor can be divided or multiplied: which
is so wonderful a consideration, as S. Augustine says thereof: Miratur hoc
Aug. ep. 3. ad Volus.
men's humana, and quia non capit, fortasse non credit. Man's mind does wonder at
this, and for that yt conceaueth yt not, perhaps yt does not believe yt. Some
likeness also of this admirable being is in an Angel, which though it cannot
be every where at once, as God is, yet has yt a wonderful being in place;
notwithstanding, as before has been touched, being placed within any compass
or circuit, as for example in a house or Church, yt is wholly in all that
space, and wholly in every part thereof, and yet remains one and simple without
division in himself: which example is more evident also in our soul; as
before we have declared, for that the selfsame soul in a body, when yt is an
infant, and when yt is at his full grouth, is wholly in the whole body, and
wholly in every part thereof, and yet is yt not multiplied thereby, nor divided.
Whereby is made manifest, that yt repugneth not to the essence or unity of any
one substance, to be in diverse places at once, and this naturally, but much
more supernaturallye, by the omnipotent power of God.

28. There remains then the second difficulty The second difficulty about
quantity.
about quantity, or a body endued with quantity, how yt is not let thereby to
be in two places at once, whereof we have treated in the former observation,
shewinge how actual locality by circumscription, being but a secondary
propriety, following and flowing from the nature of quantity, may, by Gods
power, be separated from the same, so as the said quantity may remain with her
true essence, of having distinct parts in yt self, and yet no extensiue
location, or commensuration of place, in which case yt repugneth no more for
the selfsame quantity to be in many places at once, then yt does unto a
spiritual substance without quantity, such as is an Angel, or the soul of
man, and consequently the substance of Christ's body, together with the
quantity in this manner, may by Gods power be put in many places at once, as we
see by course of nature it self, that the substance of man's soul without
quantity, is put in many particular places of a man's body, without division or
multiplication, remayninge still but one only soul, as has been declared. And
this shall suffice for explication of this possibility, how yt does not imply
contradiction, and therefore is not impossible to God.

29. Neither do our divines show only, that Diverse articles believed by
Protestants are more hard then this.
this is not impossible in our Saviors body, but further also, that we do
believe diverse other mysteryes of our faith as hard or harder then this, yea
much more impossible to sense and reason, if we consider well the difficultyes
thereof, as the creation of the world of nothing, the mystery of the blessed
Trinity, the belief of Christ's incarnation, our resurrection, and the like,
for yt is much harder by humayne reason and natural philosophy, to conceive
how the world could be created of nothing, and how one and the selfsame
nature can be wholly in three real distinct persons, without division or
multiplication in yt self, and how one person can be in two diverse distinct
natures, as yt is in our Savior, and how one, and the selfsame thing being
perished and corrupted, may be raised again with the selfsame accidents that
perished before. These points I say, and diverse others which both we and
Protestants do confess to be true, are more hard, and impossible in natural
reason, then yt is to be believe that one body is in diverse places at once.

30. Furthermore there be certain familiar Natural examples inducing us to
this manner of being of Christ's body in diverse places.
examples in nature yt self, that do resemble somewhat the matter, and may
induce a man that is not obstinate, and has any mean capacity to conceive
somewhat of the possibility thereof, as when a great lookinge-glasse that
represented but one face unto you when yt was whole, being broken into many
parts every part will represent wholly the selfsame face. The voice also of
him, that speaks to a great multitude, though yt be but one in yt self, yet
comes yt wholly to every man's ears, which S. Augustine alleged for a
wonderful thing toward the prouinge of Gods being wholly euery-where: Omne
quod sonat (says he) and omnibus totum est, and singulis totum Aug. ep. ^^ ad
Volus.
est. All that sounds is heard wholly of all, and wholly of every particular
man. And though these examples be not like in every respect, yet may they serve
for a certain induction to make us comprehend the other, whereof we now speak.

31. Last of all, Catholic divines do not only show the possibility of this
point, that our Saviors Examples of the being of Christ's body in diverse places
it once.
body may be in diverse places at once, as also that sundry other mysteryes of
our faith are believed, of more difficulty then this, if we regard common sense
and reason, but do show also out of the scriptures themselves, that Christ
after his assension has been in more then one place at once, as is manifest by
that famous apparition of his to S. Paul, recorded Act. 9. and 22.
in the acts of the Apostles, when he appeared unto him in the way near to
Damasco, environed with a great light, and talked with him in such sort, as
both the light and words were seen and heard by his companions, and many other
apparitions to S. Peter himself, testified Egesipp. l. 3. de excidio Hierosol.
Ambr. orat. cont. Auxentium Athan. in vita Anton. Greg. lib. 4. dial. c 16.
Paul. ep. ad Macarium. Joan. Dia^. l. 2. de vita Greg. c. 22.
by Egesippus, and S. Ambrose; to S. Anthony also testified by S. Gregory, and
besides diverse others recorded by S. Paulinus, Ioannes Diaconus, and other
authentical writers, from whom, except we will derogate all creditt and
authority, we may not doubt, but that Christ remayninge still in heaven (for so
hold both we and Protestants together, that he departed not from thence)
appeared also in diverse places of the earth to his Saints, and consequently
Mare. 16.
his body could be in diverse places at once, whereby is broken and dissolved
another squadron of arguments, framed by the Sacramentaryes How Christ is in
heaven and in the Sacrament after a different manner.
of our days to the simple people, as though Christ's real body could not be
in the Sacrament, for that yt is in heaven; whereas we affirm, that both may be
and stand together, though in different manner, for that in heaven he is
circumscriptiuely, and in the Sacrament sacramentally, which terms we have
before declared.

The sixth Observation. How Christ's body in the Sacrament, may be now under a
greater form, now under a loss, and the least, that may be discerned.. 6.
32. By this also which is said may be conceived, how the sacred body of our
Savior, in the Sacrament under the accidents of bread, is sometimes in a
greater visible quantity, and sometimes in a less, according to the external
forms and accidents under which yt is, yea and in the least part and parcel
of the consecrated host, that is perceptible to our sense, for that the said
body being removed by Gods omnipotent power from all local extension, it may
be under a greater or smaller external quantity, without alteration of the
body yt self, as we see in the soul of man, which is the selfsame in the
least part of the body wherein it is, as in the greatest, or in the whole body,
yea when the said body is changed, or grows from a lesser to a greater
quantity, as in an infant, who after comes to be a great man, the selfsame
soul replenisheth the one and the other without grouth or diminution in yt
self, and so the body of Christ in a great host or a little, or in any least
part thereof, when yt is broken, is wholly, and the selfsame body, with the
selfsame internal organicall quantity, which yt had under a great host. And
this point that the quantity of a substance may be increased or diminished
externally, in respect of place, without alteration Note this example.
of the inward quantity, or substance, is evident by many examples, which we
see daily of rarefaction and condensation. As for example when a gallon of
water is put in a great vessel over the fire, yt comes by boylinge to fill
the whole vessel, that is capable of many gallons, and yet as the inward
substance is not increased, so neither the quantity in yt self; and contrary
wise, when the said water is again cooled, it returns to occupy as small a
place, as yt did at the beginning, and yet retayneth always the self same
both quantity and substance.

33. By which example, and many other that may be alleged, some kind of notice
may be gathered unto our common sense and reason, how the substance of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, together with his internal quantity, may by his
omnipotent power, be sometimes under a great external quantity, or extension
in place, and sometimes under a lesser; yea the least, that by our senses may
be perceived: and yet is Christ's body wholly and entirely there, according (in
some proportion) to the lookinge-glasse before mentioned, which being broken
into diverse small pieces, each one represents the whole visage severally,
which before was exhibited by the whole: And so, when any consecrated host is
broken into many parts, that which was contained before in the whole host, is
now contained wholly under every particular parcel thereof, as yt was also
before. And to this effect, are those words of S. Epiphanius before alleged,
against them that said: Videmus quod est aequale, etc. We see that the host
received in the Sacrament, is Vli supra.
not equal or like to the figure of Christ's body, but is round, etc. Wherefore
all the arguments of Fox his Martyrs, that were founded on this improportion of
the host to Christ's natural, and external quantity, have no ground at all,
but a little fraudulent show and appearance of sensible improbability, and yet
were many of their cheifest arguments builded on this only foundation, as you
have seen readinge over their historyes before recyted, and shall do more
afterward, when we come to examine their arguments severally; and in the meanee
space this shall suffice for an aduertisment about this observation.

The seventh Observation. How accidents may be without a subject, and of their
operations in that case.. 7.
34. The seventh observation may be, about the accidents or forms of bread
and wine, that do remain by Gods omnipotent power without a subject, after the
words of consecration, as they did before in the substance of bread, whereupon
the more simple sort of Sacramentaryes following sense, will needs argue, that
the substance also of bread and wine, do remain after the said consecration;
and those that be more learned, do go about to prove the same by philosophical
reason, for that the nature of an accident is to be in another, as the nature
of a substance is to be in yt self, whereof ensues, that for so much as no
Aristot. 5. Metiph. ^ext. 35.
accident can be in God, as in a subject, (neither are they in Christ's body, as
we also do confess) they must needs be here in their proper subject and
substances of bread and wine: but all this is founded upon a false ground, for
albeit naturally an accident cannot be but in a subject, yet supernaturally,
and by the power of God susteyninge yt, and supplyinge the place of a natural
subject, yt may be, as we do confess on the contrary side by Christian faith,
that the humayne nature of Christ in the mystery of the incarnation, has not
her proper subsistence in yt self (which yet is as natural to a substance to
subsist in yt self, as yt is to an accident to be sustained by another) but is
sustained by the divine person of Christ.

35. And the reason of this, concerning accidents, is, that albeit the
intrinsecall nature of an accident is to be imperfect, and to depend of
another, and thereby to have an aptitude to be in another, yet the act thereof
may be separated by Gods power, from the said nature, as a thing posterior,
and followinge from the said nature, as we have she wed before in the natural
propriety of quantity, to have commensuration of place; and this to be, true
that this actual inherence of accidents, may be severed from the essential
aptitude thereunto, without destroing the nature of the said accident, many
philosophers both Christian and heathen do affirm, whose sentences you See
Auer^. in cpitom. Metaphys. tract. 2. Aui^e^bron. l. font. vitae tract. 2.
Waldensis tom. 2. cap. 76.
may see gathered by diverse learned men, as well of ancient as of our times.
Sundry Fathers also are of opinion, that this case happened de facto in the
creation of the world, when the light being made upon the first day, as the
book of Genesis recounteth, which being but a quality and accident, remained
without a subject unto the fourth day, when the son and moon wear created.
And of this opinion expressly was S. Basil, in his explication Basil. he. 2.
and 6. de oper. sex die^um Damascen. l. 2. cap. 7.
of the works of God in those six days. And the same holds S. John
Damascene, Procopius in his commentary upon the first Chapter of Genesis, and
Saint Iustine in the explication of our faith.

36. This then being so, that these accidents of bread and wine may remain, by
the power of God, in the Sacrament, without their proper subjects, yt follows
to consider, what actions they can have: And first yt is to be noted, Of the
actiuity of accidents being separated from their substance.
that whatsoever actions, or operations are proper to them, as accidents, when
they were in their proper subjects of bread and wine, before consecration, the
same they may have afterward, when they conteyne the body and blood of Christ,
without inherence therein, for that God supplyeth all by his power, which their
said subjects or substances did perform, when they were present. So as the
effects, for example, that the accidents of wine and bread did work in our
senses before, by mouinge our sight by their colors to see, our taste by their
savor, and other like effects: the same do they perform also afterward: So
as, for example sake, by drinkinge much consecrated wine, though there be no
substance of wine therein, but only the proper accidents of wine, as heat,
smell, and other qualityes and proprietyes of wine; may a man be incensed, or
distempered, as much as if the substance of wine were there in deed, for these
are the proper actions and operations of the said accidents themselves; but
where the concurra^ce of substance is necessary to any action, as in nutrition,
generation, or corruption of one substance into another, there does God supply
the matter, that is necessary to that action, when the body of Christ does
cease to be there, which is, when those accidents of bread and wine are
corrupted and not otherwise: As for example, in the resurrection of our bodies,
where every body is to receive his own proper flesh again, which yt had in
this life, if some one body having eaten another body, or parcel thereof in
this world, and converted the same into his proper substance; in this case (I
say) almighty God must needs supply otherwise, by his omnipotent power, that
part and matter of substance, that wants in one of these two bodies, for that
else one of them should be imperfect, and want part of his substance in the
resurrection. And after the like manner we say, that when a consecrated host
is eaten, and afterward is turned into the natural norishment of the eater,
which norishment requires a material substance, God does supply that
substance in that instant, when the forms of bread and wine perishinge, the
body of Christ cease to be there.

37. And this appertains to the providence of almighty God, for supplying the
defects of particular natural causes, when any thing fails, that is
necessary for their natural operations. The very same also is to be observed
in generation, and corruption, as for example, when the accidents of the
consecrated host perishinge, and some other substance should happen to be
engendered thereof, as worms, or the like, there the body of Christ cease to
be, when the said accidents do perish, and for the new generation insuinge
thereof, God supplyeth fit matter, as in the example before alleged of the
resurrection of our bodies, whereof the one had eaten part of the other. By
which observation yt will be easy afterward to dissolve many cauillations,
proceedinge either of ignorance, heresy, or both, and objected by
Sacramentaryes against this mystery.

The eight Observation. About the words Sacrament, sign, figure, type,
commemoration, memory, etc.. 8.
38. For so much as the Sacramentaryes of our time, did forsee that they should
be forced to oppose themselves, for defending their heretical noueltye,
sagainst the whole stream of scriptures, expositors, fathers, counsels,
reasons, practice, antiquity, and uniform consent of the vnhole Christian
world, they thought best to divise certain terms and distinctions, which
should serve them for euasions or gappes to run out at, when-soeuer they
should be pressed by our arguments: and these their shifts do consist
principally, in the fraudulent use of these terms of Sacrament, sign,
figure, type, commemoration, memory, sacramentally, spiritually and the like.
Wherefore we think yt needful to explane and declare in this place, the
natures, uses and abuses of these words.

39. First then a Sacrament, according to the common definition asscribed to S.
Augustine, is a visible sign of an invisible grace, as in baptism, The word
Sacrament explicated.
the external washinge by water, is the sign of the internal washing of the
soul by grace: So here also in this Sacrament of the Eucharist, the external
and visible sign are the consecrated forms of bread and wine, as they
conteyne the body of Christ; the internal or invisible grace signified, is the
inward nourishinge and seedinge of our soul: And this is the first and chief
manner how this Sacrament is a sign, that is to say a sign of grace, and not
of Christ's body absent, as Protestants are wont most fondly and fraudulently to
infer.

40. Secondly these external forms and accidents of bread and wine, are also
a sign of Christ's body contained under them. And in this sense is the
Eucharist called sometimes by the Fathers, the sign of Christ's body, but of
Christ's body present, as has been said, and not absent. Thirdly this Sacrament
is a sign of Christ his death and passion, and of the union of his mystical
body the Church with him: For that as bread and wine represented by these
forms, are made of many grains and many grapes; so is Christ's mystical body,
consistinge of many members united to him; so as by all these ways may this
Sacrament be called a sign, to wit, a sign of the inward grace, and
norishment of the soul obtained thereby, a sign of Christ's true body present,
a sign of Christ his death, and mystical body, and yet do none of all these
figures exclude the true real being of his body in the Sacrament, but do
rather suppose the same.

41. And the like may be said to the other words, or terms of figure, type,
commemoration, The other words of tipe figure etc. explicated.
or memory, all which, when they occur, are to be understood in some of these
senses, without prejudice of the reality, or truth of our Saviors being in
this Sacrament, as for example, this Sacrament is a form, type, commemoration
and memory of Christ's death on the Cross, and yet this excludes not his
reall-presence from hence. As for example, if a Prince having gained in proper
person a great and singular victory, should institute a sollemne triumph, to be
made every year in memory thereof, and some times should go in that triumph
himself also, yt might be truly said, that this triumph is a figure, Note this
example.
type, commemoration, and memory of the other victory, and of the Prince, yet
is the Prince truly also in yt himself, and so may be said in like manner of
this matter of the Sacrament, wherein Christ in different manner, is a figure or
type of himself. And the like may be said of the daily sacrifice also, which
sacrifice is a commemoration or memory of the other bloody sacrifice, once
offered on the cross, and yet conteyneth the same real body of our Savior,
which the other did, after another manner. And by this will the reader easily
discover diverse poor shifts and fallacyes of our modern heretics, especially
of Ridley before named, who as you have heard him profess, was moved to leave
his ancient faith of the mass, and his practice therein, for that in some
certain places (for sooth) of the Fathers, he found that this sacrifice (of
the mass) is called a commemoration of Christ's passion; a strong argument, no
doubt, to move him to so great a resolution. And so much of this.

42. Now then are to be examined the other words, sacramentally, really, and
spiritually: and as for the first, the common sense, and meaning Two
significatio^s of the word sacramentally and both against the Sacramentaryes.
of school divines is, that divised this word, to signify thereby a peculiar
manner of Christ's supernatural being in the Sacrament, different from his
natural and circumscriptiue being in heaven, and from the natural being of an
Angel definitiuely in a place, whereof we have spoken before. So as, when they
say that Christ is sacramentally under the forms 1.
of bread and wine, they do not deny his true and real being there in flesh,
the very selfsame that is in heaven; but he is there in another manner. And
this is the chief proper signification of the word sacramentally amongst
schoolmen, for which the word was invented.

43. But in the common use, and sense of our speech, sacramentally signifies,
that Christ's 2.
body is there under a Sacrament or sign, which are the forms of bread and
wine, and not in his own proper shape, even as an Angel, when he appears in
a body, he may be said to appear bodyly, for that the body is the figure or
form, under which he appears; and conform to this sense, we are said to
receive Christ sacramentally, when we receive him truly and really, but yet not
in his proper form, but under another form, that is to say of bread and wine,
whereby the fraudulent dealing of our modern Sacramentaryes may appear, who
deceauing the people with this word sacramentally, do oppose yt to really and
truly, as though when any author says, that we receive Christ sacramentally in
the Eucharist, yt were to be understood, that we did not receive Christ's body
in deed and really, but only a sign thereof, and by this they endeavor to
delude all the places, though never so evident, of holy Fathers affirminge,
that Christ's true flesh and body, the very same that was borne of the virgin
Mary and crucified for us, is received in the Sacrament, these good fellows
answer that yt is true, sacramentally, which we also grant, if
sacramentally, do not exclude really, according to the true signification of
the word: But if by sacramentally, they mean as they do, that only a sign is
received of Christ's body in the Sacrament, then is their deceyt manifest as you
see; for that sacramentally, has no such signification at all among divines,
but only is divised among them for a shift.

44. The like fraud they use about the word What the word spiritually
signifies in this mystery.
spiritually, which in the sense of holy Fathers, being opposite to carnally
and corporally, in their ordinary material signification, is by sectaryes also
wrested, as though yt were contrary to the word really, so as whenever they
are forced to grant Christ's body to be spiritually in the Sacrament (by which
phrase the said ancient Fathers do mean only, that he is not there after a
carnal, or common manner, as he lived upon earth) they will have yt
understood, that he is there only by faith, and not in deed really and
substantially. They abuse also the signification of the foresaid words
carnally and corporally, which having a double sense, the one that Christ's body
is naturally and really in the Sacrament, the other that he is there after the
external being of other bodies, they deceytfully do take them now in one
sense, and now in another, and always oppose them to the word spiritually,
which in the former sense are not incompatible, but may stand together, though
not in the later. And for auoydinge of this equivocation, divines do wish those
two words, carnally and corporally, though true in the foresaid sense, yet to
be more sparingly used, then the other words really and substantially, that are
equivalent in sense, and less subject to equivocation and mistaking.

45. Wherefore to conclude this observation, all these words are to be noted,
and their true use and signification remembered by him, that will not be deluded
by heretical sleights and impostures in this high mystery, but especially are
to be observed these three, whereby our Sacramentaryes do most of all deceive
the vulgar people, in their assertions and answers to our arguments, to wit,
sacramentally, spiritually and by faith, as though they did exclude the real
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament; which is most false, for that in the
true sense we admit them all. For example, we grant that Christ is
sacramentally in this Sacrament, both as sacramentally signifies a distinct
manner of Christ's being there, from that in heaven, and as yt signifies his
being there under a Sacrament or sign, but yet really, we grant also that he
is there spiritually, that is to say, after a spiritual, and not corporal
circumscriptiue manner, yet truly and really. We grant further, that he is in
the Sacrament by faith, for that we do not see him, but apprehend him present
by faith, but yet truly and really, and not in faith and belief only. And by
this you may perceive our Sacramentaryes manner of disputinge, Our heretics
cavil like to that of the Arrians.
just like the Arrians of old time, and of our days, who seek to enacuate all
places alleged for the unity and equality of Christ with his Father, by one
only distinction of will and nature: So as when Christ said for example Joan.
6. my Father and I are one, yt is true said they, they are one in will and
love, but not in nature; and thus they deluded all that could be brought for
natural unity, except only the authority, and contrary belief of the
universal Church, whereby at last they were ouerborne.

46. And the very same course held the Sacramentaryes of our days; for
whatsoever plain and perspicuous places you bring them out of antiquity,
affirminge the true natural substantial body of our Savior, to be in the
Sacrament, they will shift of all presently, by one of these three words; yt is
true, sacramentally, yt is true spiritually, and yt is true by faith only, as
though these could not stand with really or truly; and here of shall you have
store of examples afterward in the aunswerings of Doctor Perne, Cranmer, Ridley
and Latymer for the Sacramentary party to our arguments, taken out of the
ancient Fathers. For when the said Fathers do avouch, that Christ our Saviors
true natural body is in the Sacrament, they answer, yt is true sacramentally,
and think they have defended themselves manfully thereby, and when in other
places the same Fathers do profess, that the very same flesh that was borne of
the virgin Mary and cruicified for us, is there, they answer, yt is true
spiritually and by faith, but not really. And thus they do euacuate and delude
all that can be alleged: But if they cannot show (as they cannot) any one
Father that took or used the words sacramentally, spiritually, or by faith, in
this sense, as opposite to really and truly in this mystery, then is it
evident, this to be but a shift of their own invention, to escape thereby. And
so much of this observation.

The nynth Observation. How Christ is received of evil men in the Sacrament,
and of good men both in, and out of the same.. 9.
47. It follows upon the former declaration of the words, sacrament, sign,
and the rest, that we explane in this place, a certain distinction insinuated
by the ancient Fathers, and touched in the Council of Trent, of three Council.
Tr^ dent. sess. 13. Can^^.
sorts of receauinge and eatinge Christ by this Sacrament: First sacramentally
alone, the second D. Them. 3. part q. 80. art. 1.
spiritually only, the third both sacramentally and spiritually together. An
example of the first is, when evil men do receive the Sacrament unworthily,
for that these men, thought they receive the very Sacrament, to wit the true
body of Christ under the forms of bread and wine, yet do they not receive the
true spiritual effect thereof, which is grace and nourishment of their soul,
and of these does S. Paul speak expressly to the Corinthians, when he says:
He that eats and drinks unworthily (videlicet the Sacrament) does eat and
drink judgment to himself, not discerninge the body 1. Cor. 11.
of our Lord. And in this sense do the ancient Fathers upon this place,
expound the Apostle, as you may see in the commentaryes of Saint Chrysostom,
S. Ambrose, S. Anselme, and other expositors Aug. l. 5. de ^apt. cap. 8.
both Greek and Latin; and S. Austen in many places of his works does
expressly show the same, alleaginge this text of the Apostle for proof
thereof, Corpus Domini (says Aug. epist. 162. and in psalm. 10.
he) and sanguis Domini nihilominus erat illus, quibus dicebat Apostolus, etc.
It was notwithstanding the body and blood of our Lord, which they took, to
whom the Apostle said; he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation. And to the same effect he says in diverse other
places, that Judas received the very selfsame body of Christ, that the other
Apostles did; and the same affirms S. Chrysostom in his homily entitled, of
the Treason of Judas; and generally it is the uniform opinion of all the
ancient Fathers, whenever any occasion is given to speak or treat thereof.

48. The second manner of receiving Christ by this Sacrament, is termed
spiritually only; for that without sacramental receauinge of Christ's body and
blood, a man may in some case receive the spiritual fruit or effect thereof,
as if he had received the same really, and this either with relation to the
Sacrament, videlicet, when a man has a desire to receive yt actually, but
cannot; or without reference thereunto, when by faith and grace good men do
communicate with Christ, and participate the fruit of his passion. In which
sense of spiritual communion, or eating Christ, S. Austen Aug. tract. 25. in
Joan.
writes upon S. John's gospel, Creed and manducasti; believe, and thou have
eaten. And to the same effect do our Fathers often speak, when they treat of
this spiritual and metaphorical eating only without relation to the Sacramet:
which manner of speeches the Sacramentaryes of our days do seek to abuse, as
though there were no other eatinge of Christ in the Sacrament, but by faith
alone, which is furthest of from the said Fathers meaning, though sometimes
they had occasion to speak in that manner.

49. The third member of our former division is, to eat Christ both
sacramentally and spiritually, as all good Christians do, when with due
preparation and disposition, they receive both the outward Sacrament and inward
grace and fruit thereof: by observation of which threefold manner of receiving,
many objections and heretical cauillations will easily afterward be discerned.
And so much for this.

The tenth Observation. Touching indignityes and inconveniences objected by
Sacramentaryes against us, in holdinge the Real presence.. 10.
50. As by the former objections of natural impossibilityes, you have heard
this sovereign mystery impugned, both by the learneder sort of old and new
heretics; so do the more simple and ignorant insist and insult most, upon
certain inconveniences, indignityes, and absurdityes, as to them do appear.
As for example, that Christ in the Sacrament, should be eaten with men's teeth,
go into the belly, not only of men and weomen, but also of beasts if they
should devour yt, that yt may putrify, be burned, cast and fall into base and
unworthy places, be trodden under men's feet, with the like, which is a kind of
argument plausible at the first sight unto vulgar apprehensions, and such as
seemed to move principally the most part of John Fox his artificers, and
spinster-martyrs, as may appear by their rude clamours, and gross objections,
exprobrations, irrisions, jests and scoffs at their aunsweringe before their
ordinaryes.

51. And heerin also they showed their spirit of derydinge and blaspheminge
that, which they understood not, to concur with that of the pagans and Jews
against the whole body of Christian Religion, and of ancient heretics against
the principal articles thereof. Of the pagans S. Augustine writes thus: In
ipsum Christum non crederemus, si fides Christiana cachinnum Aug. ep. 49. q. ^.
metueret paganorum: We should not believe in Christ himself, if Christian
faith did fear the scoffinge of pagans. S. Paul also writes both of Gentills
and Jews, that the Cross of Christ (that is to say, that God should be
apprehended, beaten, wounded and crucified) was to these a scandal, and folly
to 1. Cor. 8.
the others, though unto the elect, yt was the very wisdom, power and virtue
of God himself. We read also in the gospel, that the Saduces amongst the
Jews, scoffed at the resurrection of bodies, by asking Christ a question
Matthew. 22.
of a woman that had seven husbands, whose wife she should be in the
resurrection, purposinge thereby to have inferred an absurdity against the said
article, to wit, that either seven men should have striued for one woman, or
one woman have been wife of seven men. And the Marcionists infamous heretics,
that took the same heresy from the Sadduces, as also the Originists
concurringe therein against the said belief of our resurrection, went about to
disgrace the same, as both Tertullian, Tertul l. de resur. caro. ^^ter. in ep.
ad Pamachi^m.
and S. Hierome do testify, by certain absurd indignityes, which they
imagined would ensue thereof, as for example that difference of sexes
procreation, mydwyues, nurses, priuyes, and the like, must needs be in heaven,
but the ancient Fathers answered them with the words of our Savior to the
said Sadduces, Erratis, nescientes scripturam, and virtutem Dei. You do err,
Matthew. 11.
not knowinge the scriptures, nor the power of God.

52. And the same answer was given by Catholics to the first Sacramentaryes,
that ever publicly appeared, to wit the Berengarians above 500. years past,
who objected the very same absurdityes, that our hereriks do at this day, as
testifies Guitmundus and Algerus, Guitmundus lib 2. and Algerus leb. 2 cont.
Berengarium.
that lived in that age and wrote against them; they were answered (I say)
that their error proceeded of not understanding the true meaning of
scriptures, nor the power of God, which in the Sacrament conserueth his body
without all leasion, hurt, indignity, or inconvenience, whatsoever happens
unto the forms, under which his body is, and that it is nothing so base and
unworthy a matter, even in our sense and common reason, that Christ our Savior
being impassible in the Sacrament, should under another form be said to fall
on the ground, to be burned, to be eaten, etc. then in his own proper form,
when he was passible, and sensible to ly in his mothers womb, or to cry and
weep in the cradle, or to suffer hunger, thirst, and other humayne
necessityes, and to be whipped, wounded and put to death, all which
indignityes, supposing that he was the selfsame God that created the world,
might seem more absurd, and improbable in common sense and reason, then this
of the Sacrament, and so they did seem to old heretics, who objected and
derided the same, as the forsaid Marcionists, that God should be in a woman's
belly, and in a maunger; and Nestorius the heretic, that God should be two
months old for example, and two cubitts bigg, and other such jests and
scoffs, as you may read of them in Tertullian, Theodoret, Euagrius Tert lib.
do carn. Christ's and Theod. l. 4. haeret. faehul. and Euagr. l. 1. hist. c. 2.
and other writers.

53. Wherefore to conclude this observation, two points are to be noted in this
whole matter: First that many things that seem to happen to Christ in these
cases, do not touch him indeed, but only the external forms of bread and
wine, as when they are burned for example, do putrify, or the like, Christ's
body is not burned, or putrified, but cease to be under them, when the said
forms or accidents are corrupted, for that the substance of Christ's body,
supplyinge the substance of bread, is no longer there then the substance of
bread would have been there, if yt had not ben converted into Christ's body, but
if bread had remained, yt would have ceased by any kind of corruption, as
burninge, putrifyinge, or the like, and so does Christ's body, though in a
different sort, so that the substance of bread might, by the said corruption,
be changed into some other substance, which Christ's body cannot be, but only
ceasseth to be there, God supplyinge some other matter for production of that,
which is brought forth of new, as in the former observation has been declared.

54. The other point, that those other conditions which by reason of the forms
are asscribed unto Christ his body in the Sacrament, as to move from place to
place, when the forms are moved, to be seen, touched, eaten with our teeth
and the like, which are frequent phrases among the Fathers, have no Notethese
two examples.
inconvenience among them at all, no more for example, then when our soul is
said to be moved with the motion of the body, which soul notwithstanding of
his own nature is not moveable: so as an Angel being a spirit, may be
handled, seen, or stricken in the body which he takes to appear in, as is
evident by the whole story of Tobias and other places of scripture, which
Angel of himself notwithstanding, is not capable of such things; and
finally Gods eternal divinity and majesty is present in all places and things,
the most basest and horrible that can be divised, and yet suffers no
inconvenience thereby: For though he be for example in the dunghill, yet he
cannot be said to have any evil smell thereby, neither to be burned in the
fire, though the forms of bread and wine be burned therein, nor to putrify,
though he be actually present in those things that rott and putrify. And by
this may you see the vain calumniations of fond heretics, against the power of
almighty God, out of their senses and foolish imaginations.

The eleventh Observation. About the nature of a sacrifice, as it is ordained
to different effects, and how that of the Cross stands with that of the
mass.. 11.
55. The eleventh and last observation shall be peculiarly about the last of the
three questions proposed, which is sacrifice of the mass, notinge therein two
ends, offices, or effects to be considered: First that yt is ordained ad cultum
externum, to an external worshipp of God peculiar to himself, in the highest
degree of honor, called by the Gretians Latria: secondly ad propitiationem pro
peccatis, for pacifyinge of Gods wrath for sins, and albeit both these
effects may be in one and the selfsame sacrifice (and so we hold them to be
in the sacrifice of the mass, for that yt was ordained by Christ, as well for
a perpetual outward honor and worshipp to be exhibited unto God in the
Christian Church unto the worlds end, as also for remission of sins by
application of the meritt of Christ's bloody sacrifice on the Cross) yet may
they be separated of their own natures, so as a sacrifice may be ordained only
ad cultum, that is to say, for an external worshipp only, without power to
remitt sins: And so in a manner were the sacrifices of the old law, which
little or nothing auayled for sins. And again, sacrifice may be ordained
only or principally to satisfy for sins, without relation thereof ad cultum,
to persevere in any state of men, to be often offered by them, and such was
Christ's on the Cross, which is not reiterated again in the same bloody and
passible manner, as then yt was, but in another far different sort in the
mass, which is capable of both these effects, as has been said.

56, Now then in the first sense, as a sacrifice is ordained ad cultum, to an
external worship The first effect of sacrifice.
of God, yt conteyneth an outward protestation of our knowledge of Gods supreme
Majesty, power, and absolute dominion over us, and in our subjection thereunto,
which is the highest honor that can be given by a creature unto the creator,
and is so particular to God alone, as has been said, as yt cannot be imparted
to any creature, without the horrible sin of Idolatry, and is so conjoined
with the nature of Religion yt self, as no true Religion has ever been without
this degree of external honor, exhibited unto God by his people; and so we
see that all good men in the law of nature, by Gods instinct, did sacrifice
unto him, as Adam, Abell, Noe, Melchisedecke, and others, as afterward also in
the law of Moses, the same was expressly ordained by Gods own commandment;
and the Gentills did the same, though not to one true God, but to many idols,
by suggestion of the devil, that therein emulated Gods honor exhibited unto
him by sacrifice. And this for the first effect or office of sacrifice.

57. The second is propitiation, or pacifyinge The second effect of sacrifice
with 3. degrees thereof.
of Gods wrath for sins, as has been said. Wherein for more perspicuityes
sake, three degrees may be observed. First of such sacrifices as were so weak
and imperfect in themselves, touching this point of propitiation and
satisfyinge for sins, as they profited little or nothing, except only as
they were moral good works; and according to the piety of the offerer, they
might help somewhat; but they had neither sufficient force in themselves to
remitt sins, neither to apply the virtue and satisfaction of any other
sacrifice, already exhibited, to the remission thereof, but were only figures,
and shadows of things to come: and such were the sacrifices of the old law of
Moses.

58. The second degree is quite opposite to this for excellency of perfection,
power and meritt, being in yt self of so infinite valor, as yt is sufficient
not only fully to satisfy for the sins of all the world; but also to give
vigor to all other sacrifices, both internal, and external; And this was the
sacrifice of Christ our Savior on the Cross; and between these two
sacrifices, to wit the weakness and imperfection, multitude and variety of
the one under the old law, and the singularity, excellency, force and infinite
power of the other, is the large antithesis and opposition, used by S. Paul in
his 9. and 10. Chapters of his Epistle to the Hebrews, showing, that as the
Jews sacrifices were many in number, and of diverse sorts and infirm of
themselves, and therefore offered up in great multitudes and often; so the
sacrifice of Christ for the excellency thereof, and infinite force and valor,
was single, and but one, and once offered for all, and not iterable for
acquiringe the price of man's redemption, and perfect sufficiency for the
sanctifyinge of all, though yet he affirms not, that yt may not be iterated
in another manner, and to another effect, to wit for applyinge the sufficiency
and meritt of this one sacrifice offered for all, to the vtility of particular
people: For albeit Christ has satisfied for all quoad sufficientiam (to use
the terms of school) yet not quoad efficaciam, which is as much to say, as
albeit Christ has redeemed all and paid the price for all, yet all are not
saved thereby, nor do receive the efficacy or benefitt thereof, for that they
apply not to their own vtility that which is gained for all.

59. Now then for applyinge this treasure unto people in particular, our
adversaries do confess, that some things are necessary of our parts, as faith
and baptism, but we do ad more means, as ordained by Christ himself, and
among other the sacrifice of the mass, not for acquiringe any new price or
sufficiency of our salvation, but for applyinge the effect or efficacy of that,
which already is gotten by Christ our Savior, through his passion on the
Cross, and heerof resulteth a third degree of propitiatory sacrifice, that is
neither so infirm as the sacrifices of the old law were, that remytted not
sins, nor yet in a manner of so potent effect, as to acquire the price of our
salvation, for that yt is not offered up to that end, but only to apply the
virtue of the other sacrifice already gotten, and so may be iterated, not for
any defect in it self, but for that sins daily growinge have need of daily
application of the said sacrifice, as has been said.

60. And in this sense do all the ancient Fathers, in the places before
alleged, call this sacrifice of the mass judge sacrificium, a daily sacrifice,
and iterable, notwithstanding that the other on the Cross could be offered
but once, as S. Paul proves. And now these observations being premised, we
shall pass to examine and answer the arguments of our adversaries, in all
the former disputations brought forth.

THE EXAMINATION OF SVCH ARGVMENTES As in the former disputations were alleged
by the Zuinglians and Caluinists, against the reall-presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament. CHAP. IV.
Now then to join more nearly with our Sacramentaryes, and to come to the
Two things to be considered.
view of particular arguments, brought forth against the article of the
reall-presence, yt is to be held in memory, that which before we have noted:
first, that these new Doctors having no one direct place either of scriptures,
or Fathers for their purpose, that expressly denies the said reall-presence
(as we have for the affirmative) they are forced to run to certain
inferences, as for that Christ is in heaven, he cannot be in the Sacrament, and
such other like of no validity, as presently you shall see. And secondly it is
to be remembered, that these arguments (the most whereof are founded on sense and
humayne reason against faith) are ordinarily to be found both alleged, urged
and answered in all our schoolmens books at large, before our Sacramentaryes
were borne, and consequently these men bring no new things, as worthy of a new
labor. But yet for better satisfaction of them, that have not read the said
schoolmen, nor are of sufficient learning to see the solution of themselves, we
shall breefely run over in this place, whatsoever was objected by the said
Sacramentaryes, of any moment in all the former disputations, or other
conferences, colloquyes, or examinations, reducinge all for more perspicuityes
sake unto certain heads or grounds in manner followinge.

The first head or ground of Sacramentary objections; for that yt seems
impossible to them, that Christ's body can be in many places at once.. 1.
2. This is the first principal ground of all the Sacramentaryes unbelief,
and out of which they draw the greatest squadron of all their arguments and
objections, as presently you shall see, for that yt is a point very plausible
to comon-sense and humayne reason, that a natural body naturally cannot be but
in one place at once: but he that shall read our observations in the precede^t
Chapter, where we have showed, that not only supernaturally and by Gods
omnipotent power yt may be done, but that it comprehends not so much as any
contradiction in nature it self; and further shall consider, that alboit
Christ's true and natural body be in the Sacrament at many places at once, yet
not after a natural manner, but supernatural and miraculous, as every where
the ancient Fathers do admonish us (and we have alleged many of their
admonitions before) he I say that shall consider this, will easily contemn and
laughe at the vanity of so many Sacramentary arguments, founded upon this weak
ground and principle only, that a natural body cannot be in more places then
one at once, which is true naturally, that is to say by the ordinary course of
nature, but by the power of God, that is above nature, yt may be, and this
without an essential contradiction, as I have said, in nature yt self.

3. Well then, now will I set down the whole squadron of arguments, which out
of this false principle, or rather true principle misunderstood, John Fox
lays forth with great ostentation out of Peter Martyr his Oxford
disputations, which arguments are 8. in number, and did seem so insoluble unto
Fox his divinity, and philosophy, as he puts no answer at all given by the
Catholic defendants to the same. I shall deliver them also in dialecticall
form, as they ly in Fox this once, together with his foolery of cytinge the
moods and figures of sophistry in the margent to every argument, a thing
known to every child that begins logique, and consequently is ridiculous to
men of learning, though strange to the ignorant people, that may imagine great
secrets to ly hidden in those words of Disamis, Darij, Baroco, Festino,
Bocardo, and think that John Fox does go about to conjure us his readers, by
settinge them down: but now to the arguments themselves.

1. Argument.
4. Di-
The true natural body of Christ is placed in heaven. It is granted.
Matthew. 24. and 26. Joan. 12. and 16. Act. 3. Colloss. 3.

sa-
The true natural body of man can be but in one place at once, where he is. It
is true naturally.
August. ad Dardanum, propter very corporis modum, says he, that is for the
manner of a true body.

mis.
Ergo the true natural body of Christ can be in noe place at once, but in
heaven where he is. But ye may be supernaturally.


2. Argument.
Da-
Every true natural body requires one certain place. That is by course of
nature.


ri-
Christ's body is a true natural body. True.


j.
Ergo. Christ's body requires one certain place. True naturally.


3. Argument.
It is true according
Augustine gives not to the soul of Christ to be in more places at once then
^^ the ordinary nature of a soul.
one. Aug. ad Dardan.

The one and the other may be by Gods omnipote^cy.
Ergo. Much less yt is to be given to the body of Christ, to be in more places
at once then one.

4. Argument.
True according to their ordinary course of nature.
The nature of Angels is not to be in diverse places, but they are limited to
occupy one certain place at once. Basil. d^ spiritu sancto. cap. 22.

Christ in the Sacrament fills no place.
Ergo. The body of Christ being the true natural body of man, cannot fill
diverse places at once.

5. Argument.
Ba-
Whatsoever is in many and diverse places at once, is God. This is fall for Fox
his soul was in his foot and head, and yet not God.


to-
The body of Christ is not God, but a creature.

co.
Ergo. The body of Christ cannot be in more places together. Naturally.


6. Argument.
Fe-
We must not so defend the divinity of Christ, as we destroy his humanity.

sti-
If we assign more places to the body of Christ, we destroy his humanity. This
is false.


no.
Ergo. We must not assign to the body of Christ plurality of places.

7. Argument.
Fe-
Whatsoever thing is circumscribed, that is to say, contained in the limitts
of any peculiar place, cannot be dispersed into more places at once. This
granted.


sti-
The body of Christ is a thing circumscribed. It is true de facto in heaven,
but not in the Sacrament.


no.
Ergo the body of Christ is not dispersed into more places at one time. True as
it is circuscribed.


8. Argument.
Da-
Every quantity, that is every body having magnitude, length, and other
dimensions, is circumscribed in one peculiar place. True naturally but not
supernaturally.
Cyrill. de triuit. lib. 2.

ri-
The body of Christ has his dimensions, and is a quantity. True, though a body
is (...) quantity, but a substance that has quantity.


j.
Ergo the body of Christ is circumscribed. Non soquitur.


Answer.
5. These are the doughty arguments, which Fox affirms their great Patriarch
Peter Martyr to have alleged against the reall-presence, out of this first
philosophical ground, that one body cannot be in many places at once; Whereunto
I might answer in the words of S. Augustine, to such kind of men, as measure
Gods power by their own imagination: Ecce qualibus argumentis, Aug. l. 21 de
Ciuit. D^^ cap. ^1
omnipotentiae Dei, humana contradicit infirmitas, quam possidet vanitas:
behold with what kind of arguments, the infirmity of man, possessed by vanity,
does contradict Gods omnipotency. If you read the fourth and fifth observations
set down in the former Chapter, you will easily see both the infirmity, and
vanity of all these arguments, and how this great variety upon one ground, are
but m^ncedmeats guised in diverse sorts and fashions, by the art of Fox and
Peter Martyrs cookery, and yet are they held for great demonstrations, and
strong fortresses of the Sacramentary faith, or rather infidelity, and urged
every where by their followers.

6. John Rogers used the same argument in his defense before the Bishops, as
you may see in Fox page 1251. Christ is corporally (says he) in heaven only,
ergo not in the Sacrament, where he uses an equivocation also in the word
corporally, for that we do not say, that Christ is corporally in the Sacrament,
if by corporally he mean not only really and substantially, but also after a
corporal manner, according to external dimensions. Thomas Tompkins the
weauer of Shordich, uses the same argument against his Ordinary in like
manner, to wit, that Christ body cannot be in the Sacrament, for that yt is in
heaven. Fox page 1395. Master Guest in his Cambridge disputations against
Doctor Glyn, leaned principally to this argument, and B. Ridley, his moderator,
or president of these disputations, urged a place of S. Augustine ad Dardanum
to the same effect. Toll spatia corporibus, and nusquam erunt Take away the
spaces from bodies (says S. Austen) and they shall be no where. But D. Glyn
defendant answered him well, that S. Augustine spoke expressly of the natural
being of bodies, according to their ordinary external dimensions, and not how
they might be by Gods supernatural power and omnipotency.

7. But above all others, Philpott did keep revel Phil^ of his styire in the
convocation house about this argument.
in the convocation house about this argument, against Master Morgan, and
Master Harpesfield, alleaginge diverse places of scripture for the same, but
little to the purpose God wooteth, as that of S. Paul: Christ is like unto us
in all points, except sin. And therefore said he, as one Fox page 1288.
of our bodies cannot be at Paul's, and at Westminster together; so cannot
Christ be in heaven, and in the Sacrament. But yt was told him, that these
words of S. Paul, were true in S. Paul's sense, but yet that Christ's body was
unlike also unto us besides sin, in diverse other points, as for example, in
that he was begotten without the seed of man, and that his body was invisible,
when he would have it so, and that he rose out of the sepulcher the same being
shutt, and diverse other like points, which our ordinary natural bodies have
not, though God of his omnipotency might give the same to our bodies also. Then
he alleged the savinge of S. Peter in the Acts: Whom heaven must receive
until the consumation of the world. Whereof he would infer a necessity of
Christ's remaining in heaven, until the day of judgment. Then Morgan laughed
at this (says Fox) Harpesfield stood up, and asked him how he understood that
place, Oportet Episcopum 1. Tim.
esse vnius vxoris virum, A Bishop must be the husband of one wife. And whether
this be of such necessity, as he may not be without a wife, one at least? With
which demand Philpott was so entangled, as he could not well go forward, as
there you may see, and refused to answer Master Morgan, as the prolocutor
would have had him.

8. Well then, this is the first and principal ground and bulwark of all
Sacramentary unbelief in this article, that Christ's body cannot be by Gods
omnipotent power in two places at once, to wit both in heaven, and in the
Sacrament, which we have showed before in our fourth, fifth and sixth
observations, to be a fond and temerarious position, whereunto we refer the
reader to see the grounds more at large, and here only we shall say a word or
two to the former eight arguments, as they lie in order. Yet first it shall be
good for the reader to remember that, which we have noted before in the story
of Melancthon, who Melancth. Epistola ad Mart^^um (...).
says, I had rather offer my self to death, then to affirm, as the
Zuinglians do, that Christ's body cannot be but in one place at once. But yet
Peter Martyr, Philpott, Cranmer, and their fellows would dye, and some of them
also did dye, for the contrary, so as Saints of one Calendar, do here dye for
contrary opinions one to the other. But let us answer the arguments.

8. To the first we say, concerning the minor To the first argument.
proposition, that a true natural body, naturally, and by ordinary course of
nature, cannot be at one time, but in one place, and that means S. Augustine
ad Dardanum, but supernaturally, and by Gods ommpotent power, that exceeds
nature, yt repugneth not to be in diverse places at once, if God will have yt
so: as in our fifth observation is proved. To To the second.
the second argument we say, that every true natural body requires one
certain place by ordinary course of nature, and not otherwise. To the third,
that souls and spiritts by their To the third.
natural course have but one total place, wherein they may be said to be, as
one soul in one body, and one Angel in the place, that it pleases to
occupye, or to have operation therein: albeit if we respect partial places of
the same body, as head, foot, fingar and the like, the selfsame soul is
wholly in diverse places at once, which is no less wonderful and incredible to
our sense, then for a bodily substance, to be in two distinct places at once.
And the like is in the Angel, who may occupy, for example, a whole house or
town for his total place, and yet be in every particular and partial place
thereof wholly and entyrely, which is granted both by all philosophers and
diuynes, though vulgar sense cannot apprehend yt.

9. To the fourth may be answered the very To the fourth.
same, as to the former, that the being of Angels in place definitiuely, is
like in all respects to that of the soul. Read our fourth observation in the
precedent Chapter. To the fifth To the fifth.
argument the answer is easy, for we deny that whatsoever is in diverse places
at once, is God, for that by his omnipotent power a creature may be: yt is Gods
privilege that he is every where wholly and entyrely, ex vi naturae diuinae, by
force of his divine nature, that is to say, he is so euery-where, as he cannot
be but every where, which is not true either in a spirit, or in Christ's body,
or in any other creature whatsoever; for that all creatures, as they have
limited natures, so are they limited also in place, and restrained from
vbiquity, or being every where, which is proper and peculiar to almighty God
alone: and so to speak of the body of Christ in particular, yt is not
euery-where; and we detest both the Eutichian vbiquitaryes, that held Christ's
body to be euery-where, as confounded with his divinity; and no less the
Lutheran vbiquitaryes of our days, that hold Christ's body to be every where,
by reason of the conjunction with Christ's divinity; the Catholic faith
affirming only, that Christ's body, though naturally it be but in one place, yet
by Gods omnipotency it may be in more.

10. To the sixth argument we deny the Minor, To the sixth.
to wit, that we destroy Christ's humanity by grauntinge, that yt may be in
diverse places at once; for that yt repugneth not to a humayne creature, to be
in more places then one by Gods omnipotency: this we have showed more largely
in our fifth observation. To the To the seventh.
seventh we deny also the Minor; that Christ's body in the Sacrament is to be
circumscribed, or circumscriptiuely there, as yt is in heaven. The differences
between three manners of being, to wit, circumscriptiuely, definitiuely, and
sacramentally, you may see more at large declared in our fourth and fifth
observations. To the eight and last, we say that the mayor is To the eight.
to be understood naturally, and not supernaturally by divine power: to the
Minor, we answer, that Christ's body has not external dimensions in the
Sacrament, though yt have in heaven: and in the Sacrament yt has only
internal and invisible quantity, without extension to place; whereof you may
read more in the fourth and fifth observations. And this shall be sufficient for
this first ground of philosophical arguments. Now will we pass to the second.

The second head or ground of Sacramentary arguments, drawn from contrary
qualityes or quantityes, etc.. 2.
11. This second ground is not much different from the former, for both of them
are founded on sense, and humayne reason, and here I will not conioyne all the
arguments together, as before I did, but set them down severally, as Fox
records them out of Peter Martyrs disputation.

1. Argument.
Ba-
If Christ had given his body substantially and carnally in the supper, then
was that body either passible or impassible.

to-
But neither can you say that body to be passible or impassible, which he gave
at supper: not passible for that S. Austen denies yt Psalm. 98. not
impassible, for that Christ says: This is my body, which shall be given for you.

co.
Ergo he did not give his body substantially at supper.

Annswere.
12. And this same argument used others after Peter Martyr, as Pilkilton
against Doctor Glym, and alleges the same place of S. Austen, as you may see
in Fox page 1259. But the matter is easily answered, for that the minor or
second proposition is clearly false, for that Christ's body given in the supper,
though yt were the same in substance, that was given on the Cross, the next
day after, yet was yt delivered at the supper in another manner, to wit in
manner impassible, and under the forms of bread and wine, so as according to
the being, which yt has in the Sacrament, no natural cause could exercise any
action upon yt, though being the self same which was to dye upon the Cross,
yt is also passible, even as now in heaven it is visible, and in the Sacrament
invisible, though one and the self same body, and now in both places glorious
and immortal, and this means expressly S. Austen in the place alleged,
whose words cited by Fox are: You are not to eat this body that you see, nor
to drink the blood that they are to shedd who shall crucify me. Which words
being spoken to them, that were scandalized at his speech about the eatinge of
his body, do show that we are in deed to eat his true flesh in the Sacrament,
but not after that carnal manner, which they imagined: carnaliter cogitauerunt
(says S. Austen in the S. Augustines sentence of drinkinge Christ's blood.
same place) and putauerunt, quod praecisurus esset Dominus particulas quasdam
de corpore suo, and daturus ^^is. They imagined carnally, and thought that
Christ would have cut of certain pieces of his body, and given unto them;
which gross imagination our Savior refuteth by tellinge them, that they
should eat his true body, but in another form of bread and wine.

13. And yet that yt is the selfsame body and the selfsame blood, the same
Doctor and Father affirms expressly, both in this and many other places.
Vere magnus Dominus, etc. he Aug. in exposit. Isalm. 33.
is in deed a great God, that has given to eat his own body, in which he
suffered so many, and great things for us. And again talkinge of his
tormentors: Ipsum sanguinem quem per insaniam In Psalm. ^5.
fuderunt per gratiam biberunt. The selfsame blood which by fury they sheed,
by grace they drunk. And yet further of the same: Quousque biberent sanguinem
quem fuderunt; Tract. 31. in Joan.
mercy left them not, until they beleeuinge him, came to drink the blood,
which they had shedd. And finally in another place: Vt eius iam sanguinem
nossent bibere credentes quem fuderant De vtil^t paenit. c. 1.
saeuientes; that coming to believe in him, they might learn to drink that
blood, which in their cruelty they sheed. And last of all, in another place
explaninge his own faith, and the belief of all Christians in this behalf,
he says against heretics of his time; Mediatore^* Lib. 2. contra aduers. leg.
and proph. c. 9.
Dei, etc. We do with faithful heart and mouth, receive the mediator of God and
man Christ Jesus, giving unto us his flesh to be eaten, and blood to be
dronken, though yt may seem more horrible to eat man's flesh, then to stea the
same, and to drink man's blood, then to snedd the same. Consider here the
speech of Saint Augustine, whether it may agree to the eatinge of a sign of
Christ's body or blood; what horror is there in that? And thus much to this
first argument.

2. Argument.
Fe-
Bodies organicall without quantity, be no bodies. VVithou^ all quantity.


ri-
The Popes doctrine makes the body of Christ in the Sacrament to be without
quantity. Not without all quantity.


^.
Ergo: the Popes doctrine makes the body of Christ in the Sacrament to be no
body.

Answer.
14. We grant that bodies organicall, without all quantity are no bodies; but
Catholic doctrine does not teach, that Christ's body in the Sacrament, is
without all quantity, but only without external quantity, aunswering to local
extension, and commensuration of place, which repugneth not to the nature of
quantity, as before is declared at large, in the fourth observation of the
precedent Chapter; whereby you may see both the vanity of this argument, as also
the notorious folly and ignorance of Fox, who by occasion of this argument of
an organicall body urged, by Cranmer in Oxford, against Master Harpesfield
when he proceeded Bachler of divinity, brings in a whole commedy of vain
diuises, how all the learned Catholic men of that university, were astonished
at the very propoundinge of this grave doubt, to wit; Whether Christ has Fox
pa^. 1327.
his quantity, quality, form, figure, and such like propertyes in the
Sacrament. All the Doctors (says Fox) fell in a buzzinge, uncertain what to
answer, some thought one way, some another, and thus Master Doctors could
not agree. And in the margent he has this note: The Rabbyns could not agree
amongst themselves: and then he prosecuteth the matter for a whole column or
page together, making Doctor Tressam, to say one thing, Doctor Smith A
Comicall divise of John Fox.
another, Harpesfield another, Weston another, M. Ward philosophy-reader
another, whose philosophical discourse about the nature of quantity, Fox not
understanding, neither the other that were present, as he affirms,
concludes thus: Master Ward amplified so largely Fox ibid.
his words, and so high he clymed into the heavens with Duns ladder, and not
with the scriptures, that yt is to be maruayled, how he could come down again
without falling. So John according to his skill; but Master Ward and the
rest, that understood philosophy, knew well enough what he said, and you may
easily conceive his meaning, as also the truth of the thing yt self, by
readinge my former observation; for I think yt not convenient to repeat the
same again here.

3. Argument.
Da-
All things which may be divided have quantity.

ri-
The body in the Popes Sacrament is divided into three parts. False and foolish.


j.
Ergo: the body in the Popes Sacrament has quantity, which is against their
own doctrine.

Answer.
15. We deny that it is against our doctrine, that Christ's body in the
Sacrament has inward quantity, but only external and local. We deny also,
that Christ's body is divided into three parts in the Sacrament, or into any
part at all, for it is indivisible; only the forms of bread are divided. And
this is the ignorance of the framer of this argument, that understands not
what he says; for it is ridiculous to affirm, that when the consecrated host
is divided into three parts, that Christ's body is divided also, which is no
more true, then when a man's fingar is cut of wherein the soul was wholly
before, that she is also divided therewith.

4. Argument.
Ee-
No natural body can receive in yt self at one time contrary or diverse
qualityes. Vigil. cont. Eutich. lib. 4.

ri-
To be in one place local, and in another place not local, in one place with
quantity, and in another place without quantity, in one place circumscript, in
another place incircumscript, is for a natural body to receive contrary
qualityes. False, nor are these properly qualityes.


^.
Ergo: they cannot be said to be in Christ's body.

Answer.
16. To the first proposition of this argument, I say, that the sentence of
Vigilius, alleged by Fox in this place, is nothing to his purpose: For that
Vigilius dealinge against the heretic Eutiches, that would have Christ's
humanity confounded with his divinity, says, as Fox alleges him: These two
things are diverse, and sarre unlike, that is to say, to be contained in a
place, and to be every where, for the word is every where, but the slesh is not
euery-where. Which sentence of Vigilius makes against John Fox his friends, and
some of his Saints also the vbiquitaryes, that hold Christ's body to be every
where, as his divinity is, of which heresy you have heard before Su^ra m^^se
decembri.
Melancthon to be accused by Coliander one of his own sect, but Catholics do
not hold this vbiquity of Christ's body, but that yt may be circumscribed in a
certain place, and so yt is de facto in heaven, though otherwise by Gods
omnipotency, the same body may be and is in diverse places; which this sentence
of Vigilius nothing impugneth, and consequently is nothing to the purpose.

17. To the second or minor proposition, I say that Fox is a simple fellow,
when he calls contrary qualityes to have quantity local and not local,
circumscript and vncircumscript, whereas these do appertain to the predicaments
of quantity and vbi, rather then to quality, and are not so contrary or
opposite to themselves; but that in diverse respects they may be in one, and the
selfsame thing, as Christ is locally in heaven, and not locally in the
Sacrament; with visible and external quantity in heaven, but with internal
and invisible in the Sacrament.

The third head or ground of Sacramentary arguments, concerning the receauinge
and receauers of the Sacrament.. 3.
18. Another company or squadron of arguments against the reall-presence,
though less then the former, is framed by our Sacramentaryes against the
reall-presence, concerning the receauers, or manner of receauinge the same. You
shall hear them as Fox lays them down.

1. Argument.
Fe-
The wicked receive not the body of Christ. It is denied.


^i-
The wicked do receive the body of Christ, if Transubstantiation be granted.
And the like follovveth of the real presence without Transubstantiation.


son.
Ergo. Transubstantiation is not to be granted in the Sacrament.

Answer.
19. Do you see a wise argument? and why leapeth Fox (think you) from the
real presence to Transubstantiation, but that he is weary of the former
controversy, for that Transubstantiation has a proper place very largely
afterward, so as here yt is wholly impertinent. And further, if you consider
the matter rightly, you will see that the same follows as well of the
reall-presence, as of Transubstantiation; for if Christ be truly and really in
the Sacrament, either with bread, or without bread, then whosoever receaueth
the said Sacrament, must needs receive also Christ's body. Wherefore this skipp
of Fox from real presence to Transubstantiation was needles, and helps him
nothing; besides that, the whole argument is foolish; for that his Mayor or
first proposition; that wicked men receive not the body of Christ, is wholly
denied by us, and not proved by him, but presumed; and how fondly yt is done,
shall appear presently in our answer to his other arguments of this kind,
and the whole matter is discussed more at large in our ninth precedent
observation.

2. Argument.
Ca-
To eat Christ is for a man to have Christ dwelling and abiding in him.
Cyprian. de Cana Domini and Aug. lib. de ciuit. Dei 21. cap. 15. True,
fruitfully.


^es-
The wicked have not Christ dwellinge in them. Frui^tefully they have not.


tres.
Ergo the wicked eat not the body of Christ.

Answer.
20. The whole answer of this argument is set down more at large in our
foresaid ninth observation, where yt is showed, that there are three manners of
receauinge Christ sacramentally only, spiritually only, and both sacramentally
and spiritually, and that evil men do receive him ater the first manner only,
that is to say, they receive Christ's true body in the Sacrament, but not the
spiritual fruit thereof, which S. Paul expresses most clearly, when he says;
that an euill-man, receauinge the Sacrament, Iudicium sibi manducat, non
dijudicans 1. Cor. 12.
corpus Domini, Does eat his own judgment and condemnation, not discerninge,
or respectinge the body of Christ which he eats. And this is the assertion of
all holy Fathers after him, to wit, that vvicked-men do eat the body of
Christ but not the fruit, and namely the two here cited by Fox to the
contrary, S. Cyprian and S. Augustine do expressly hold the same: For that S.
Cyprian upon these words of the Apostle, making an inuectiue against them that
receive Christ's body unworthily, says: Antequam expiantur delicta, ante
exhomologesin factam Cypr. sor^^. de lapsis.
criminis, ante purgatam conscientiam sacrificio, and manu sacerdotis, etc.
Before their sins be cleansed, before they have made confession of their
faults, and before their conscience be purged by the sacrifice and hand of the
Priest (this was the preparation to receive worthily in S. Cyprians time) they
do presume to receive the body of Christ. Whereof the holy Father inferred:
Spretis his omnibus atque contempt is, vis infortur corporieius and sanguini.
These due preparations being contemned, violence is offered by them to the body
and blood of Christ, which he would never have said, if those wicked-men had
not received the body and blood of Christ at all, as Protestants do hold.

21. S. Augustine is frequent also and earnest in Aug ^ cont. Fulgent.
Donatist. cap 6. lib. 2. cont. Pet^lian. cap 11. and in psalm. 10. and sermon. 11
de verbis Domini and 1. de adulter. con^^g c. 17. and trast. 50. in Joan.
this matter: Corpus Domini (says he) and sanguis Domini, nihilominus er at
illis quibus, etc. It was no less the body and blood of Christ unto those
(wicked-men) to whom the Apostle said: he that eats unworthily, eats and
drinks his judgment, then yt was to the good. And the same Father in diverse
places affirms, that as well Judas received the true body of Christ, as the
rest of the Apostles, though yt were to his own damnation: Nam and Judas
proditor bonum corpus (says he) and Simon magus bonum baptisma ^ Christo
accepit, sed quia bono been non sunt vsi, mali male vtendo deleti sunt. For
that Judas the Traitor also received the good body of Christ, and Simon Magus
the good baptism of Christ, but for that they used not well that which was
good, they being euill-men perished accordingely.

22. The other places cyted in the margent, I pretermitt for breuity sake to
set down at large, this being known to be the general Catholic sentence of
all ancient holy Fathers, concerning Judas and other euill-men, that they
receive Christ, but to their own damnation; and the sentence of S. Paul before
cyted is so clear, and evident, as no reasonable doubt can be made thereof. And
when Fox does here allege certain places of S. Cyprian and S. Augustine,
affirminge that the eatinge of Christ is dwellinge in him and he in us, and
that those that dwell not in him, do not eat him, yt is to be understood of
spiritual and fruitful eatinge of Christ's body, which agrees only to good
men and not to evil, which evil do only receive sacramentally the body and
blood of Christ, as before we have said, and more at large is doclared in our
ninth observation; yea the very words alleged here of S. Augustine by simple
John Fox, that Aug. l 2^* de Cu^t. des cap. 31.
discerns not what makes for him, and what against him, do plainly teach us
this distinction. For that S. Augustine upon those words of Christ in S. John's
gospel; he that eats my Ican. 6.
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, infers
presently these words: Christ sieweth what yt is, not Non Sacrament* tenus.
sacramentally, but indeed to eat his body and drink his blood, which is when
a man so dwells in Christ, that Christ dwells in him.

23. So he. Which words are evidently meant by S. Augustine of the fruitful
eating of Christ's body to our Salvation, which may be said in effect the only
true eatinge thereof, as he may be said truly to eat and feed of his meat, that
profits and nourishes thereby: but he that takes no good but rather hurt by
that he eats, may be said truly and in effect not to feed in comparison of
the other that profits by eatinge, though he devour the meat set before
him; and so yt is in the blessed Sacrament, where the evil do eat Sacramento
tenus, as S. Augustine says, that is sacramentally only, and without fruit;
not that they receive not Christ's body, but that they receive yt without fruit
to their damnation; which distinction is founded in the scriptures, not only
out of the place of S. Paul before alleged to the Corinthians, but out of
Christ's own words in sundry places of the gospel, as that of S. Matthew:
Venit filius hominis dare animam suam redemptionem pro multis. The son of man
came Matthew. 20.
to give his life for the redemption of many, whereas indeed he gave yt for all,
but for that not all, but many should receive fruit thereby, yt is said to have
been given fruitfully only for many and not all. And again in the same
Evangelist: This is my blood of the new Testament Math. ibid.
that shall be shedd for many. that is to say fruitfully, and to their salvation,
but sufficiently for all, and so in like manner all men good and badd, do eat
Christ in the Sacrament, but euill-men sacramentally only, without the
spiritual effect thereof, but good men both spiritually and sacramentally
together.

24. And to this end appertain also those words of S. Augustine, alleged by
Bradford, Ridley and others, that wicked-men edunt panem Domini and non panem
Domini, they eat the Lords Box page 1466.
bread, but not the bread that is the Lords; that is to say, they eat not the
bread, that brings unto them the true effect and fruit of the Lords body,
which is grace, spirit, and life everlasting, though they eat the body it
self, which is called the bread of our Lord only in this sense, that it has
no fruit nor vital operation, but rather the contrary.

3. Argument.
^a-
If the wicked and infidells do receive the body of Christ, they receive him by
sense, reason, or faith.

^^-
But they receive him neither with sense, reason, or faith, for that the body
of Christ is not sensible, nor the mystery is according to reason, nor do
infidells believe.

^^.
Ergo. Wicked-men receive in no wise the body of Christ.

Answer.
25. This argument is as wise as the maker; for first we do not always join
wicked-men and infidels together, as he seems to suppose, for that an
infidel (their case in receauinge being different) when he receaueth the
Sacrament, not knowinge or beleeuinge yt to be the body of Christ, he receaueth
yt only materially, no otherwise then does a beast or senselesse-man, without
incurringe new sin thereby: wicked-men receive yt to their damnation, for that
knowinge and beleeuinge yt to be the body of Christ (or at leastwise ought to
do) they do not discern or receive yt with the worthynesse of preparation,
which they should do: and as for sense and reason, though Christ's body be not
sensible, yet are the forms of bread, under which yt is present and received,
sensible, for that they have their sensible taste, color, smell, and other
like accidents, and though the mystery yt self stand not upon humayne reason,
yet are there many reasons both humayne and divine, which may induce Christians
to believe the truth thereof, even according to the rule of reason yt self,
which reasons we call arguments of credibility: So as in this Sacrament, though
yt stand not upon sense or reason, yet in receauinge thereof is there fraud
both in sense and reason, which is sufficient to show the vanity of him that
urges it: now shall we pass to the last argument of Peter Marty^ though
drawn from another ground.

4. Argument.
Bo-
The holy Ghost could not come if the Sea this argument urged by Causton,
Higbed, and other Foxian Mar^yrs page 1400. etc.
body of Christ were really present, for that he says: Joan. 16. unless I go
from you the holy ghost shall not come.

car-
But that the holy ghost is come, yt is most certain.

do*
Ergo: yt cannot be that Christ himself should be here really present.

Answer.
26. First neither Fox, nor his Martyr can deny but that the holy ghost was
also in the world, whilst Christ was bodyly present, for that yt descended
visibly upon him in the form of a dove, and after he gave the same to his
disciples saying: accipite spiritum sanctum; receive Joan. 20.
ye the holy ghost; whereby is manifest, that there is no repugnance, why
Christ's bodyly presence may not stand together, with the presence of the
holy ghost. Wherefore the meaning of those other words Joan. 16. that except
Christ departed, the holy ghost should not come, Joan. 16. 7.
must needs be, that so long as Christ remained upon earth visibly, as a
Doctor, teacher, and external guide of his disciples and Church; so long the
holy ghost should not come in such abundance of grace, to direct the Church,
either visibly, as he did at pentecost or inuisibly, as after he did. But this
impugneth nothing the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, where he is
inuisibly, and to feed our souls, not as a Doctor to teach and preach, as in
his bodily conversation upon earth he was; for this he asscribeth to the
holy ghost after his ascension: Ill^ spiritus veritatis docebit vos omnem
veritatem, that spirit of truth shall teach you all truth.

27. And these be all the arguments of Peter Martyr registered by Fox, who
concludes in these words: And thus briefly we have run over all the
arguments, and authorityes of Peter Martyr in that disputation at Oxford with
Doctor Tresham, Fox page 11^1.
Chedsey and Morgan, before the Kings visitours above named, anno 1549. So he.
And for so much as he sets down no solution unto these arguments; we may
imagine that he held them for insoluble: and then if you consider how weak and
vain they have been, and how easy to answer; you will thereby see how sure
grounds, this poor Apostatafriar Martyr had to become a sacramentary, and to
leave his former Religion, which had endured in Christ's Church for so many ages
before; yea and to oppose himself against Doctor Luther in this point of the
reall-presence, who was their Prophet, and had first of all opened unto him and
others the gapp to his Apostasy. And finally what good assurance a man may
have, to adventure his soul with these companions in such a quarrel, as
Cranmer, Ridley, Latymer, Rogers, Hooper, and others did, who having been Cath.
Priests for many years, did first of all others embrace in England these new
opinions of Peter Martyr, which yet were so young and green, as himself was
scarsely settled in them, when he first entered in to that Island, as in his
Me^s^ Decem^r.
story more particularly we have declared. Wherefore to leave him, we shall now
examine some other arguments, alleged by others after him, especially by those
that were actors in the former ten disputations at Oxford, Cambridge and
London, which are not much fewer in number, then these alleged already of
Peter Martyr.

The fourth sort of arguments alleged by others after Peter Martyr.. 4.
28. And of these the first shall be that of Causon and Higbed, in their
confession to B. Bonner ^nno Domini 1555. The flesh profits nothing (says
First objection.
Christ) Joan. 6. Ergo Christ has not given his flesh to be eaten in the
Sacrament; and diverse others do Fox page 1400.
object the same, as a great argument; yea Zuinglius himself calls this
argument: A brazen wall, Zuingl. l. da ver^ and falls. Religcap. de Euchar.
and a most strong adamant, that cannot be ^oken. But the ancient Fathers,
tha^ knew more then Zuinglius, did easily break this adamant, and brazen wall,
giuinge diverse solutions The au^svvere.
thereof: as first, that if we take these words of our Savior to be spoken
properly of his flesh; then must the sense be, that his only flesh, without his
soul and divinity, prositeth not to our salvation: and so do expound the place
both S. Augustine and S. Cyrill, for that Aug. and Cyril. in Joan.
otherwise no man can deny, but that Christ's flesh with his soul and divinity,
does profitt greatly even in the Sacrament yt self; for that Christ in the
selfsame Chapter of Saint John says: he that eats my flesh has life
everlasting. Joan. 6.
Secondly, other Fathers more to the literal sense do interpret those words:
(the flesh profits nothing) not that Christ's flesh does not profitt, but
that the carnal understanding of that speech of Christ, about his flesh, to
be eaten in the Sacrament (such as the Capharnai^e had, whom he refuteth)
profits not to ou^ salvation, but requires a more spiritual and high
understanding, to wit, that yt is to be eaten in another manner under the
forms o^ bread and wine. And this is the exposition both of Lib. 3. in ^p. ad
Romans cap ^.
Origin, Sermon. de Caena Dom.
S. Cyprian, On^^es
S. Chrysostom ^^hunc
^heophilact, locum 6. loan.
Eu^himius, and others, and is the more plain and manifest sense of that place.

29. Master Guest (one of the Protestant opponents) in the first Cambridge
disputation M. Guests argument against the real presence.
against Doctor Glyn, urges again and again^ this argument: That which
Christ took, he blessed that which he blessed, he brake: that which he brake
Fox page 1258. col. 2. number. 80.
he gave: but he took bread: ergo he gave bread: T^ which argument Doctor Glyn
answered by a lik^ Collection out of the scripture: That which Go^ G^n. 2.
took out of Adams side, was a ribbe; but what he took that he brought and
delivered to Adam for his wise ergo he delivered him a ribbe for his wife.
Which answer, though yt made the auditory t^ laugh: yet Master Perne
coming to answer^ D. Perne.
for the Protestant party; upon the third day o^ disputation, would needs urge
the same argument again in his preface; which Master Vauisour, that disputed
against him, repeating publicly, gave the like answer about the ribb^ out of
Genesis: vvherwith Fox being angry makes this note in the margent: An vnsauer^
comparison: perhapps for that he holds the Fox pa^. 1261. col. 1. number. 8.
ribbe for rotten, which so long ago was taken out of Adams side: for that
otherwise I d^ not see what evil savor Fox can find therein but the effect of
the answer stands in this: that as God took a ribbe, and made thereof our
mother Eua: so Christ took bread, and thereof made his body, though in a
different manner, the matter or substance remayninge in the one change, but not
in the other.

30. The same Guest in the same disputation makes this other argument against
the reall-presence. Guests second argument.
The body of Christ is not generate, or begotten in the Sacrament; ergo, yt is
not in the Sacrament. Fox page 1259.
Whereunto Doctor Glyn answered: You impugn a thing you know not: what call
you generation? Guest. Generation is the production of accidents. Glyn. A new
definition of a new philosopher. Thus they two, and no one word more about this
argument: nor did Guest reply, either in jest or earnest, but leapt presently
to his former argument again: That which he took he blessed; that which he
blessed he brake; that which he brake, he gave, etc. Wherefore to answer
Guests objection we say: first that generation is not the production of
accidents, as fondly he affirms, which production of accidents appertains
rather to alteration, augmentation and local motion, as Aristotle teaches,
Lib. primo Generat. and lib. 3. Phys.
whereas generation is the production of a substance and not of accidents:
Secondly we say that Christ's body in the Sacrament is there, not by generation
nor creation, but by another miraculous operation of God, called
Transubstantion, which is a conversion of the bread and wine into the true body
and blood of Christ. And thus much in earnest to M. Guest.

31. After Guest there comes Master Pilkinton, as wise as the other in
matter of disputation, though afterward by the creditt of his manhood therein,
he got the Bishoppricke o^ Durham. He began thus against Doctor Glyn. This one
thing I desire of you most worshippfull Master Doctor, that you will answer
me with breuity as I shall propound and thus I reason: The body of Christ that
was broken on the Cross, is a full satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world. But the Sacrament is not the satisfaction of the whole world. Ergo,
the Sacrament is not the body of Christ.


To this argument Doctor Glyn answered, that he used an equivocation in the
word Sacrament: for that if the word Sacrament in this place, be taken for that
which it conteyneth to wit the body of Christ; then is the minor proposition
false; for that the body of Christ as yt was given on the Cross, is the
satisfaction for the world: But if he take the Sacrament for the outward signs
only of bread and wine, them he grants both the conclusion and the whole
sillogisme to be true, that the Sacrament is not the body of Christ. Whereunto
Pilkinton makes one only reply, and that most fondly, out of the same
equivocation, saying: that the Sacrament has not satisfied for the world, and
that men may be saved without the Sacrament, as many were before yt was
instituted: Whereunto Doctor Glyn very learnedly answered: that if he took the
Sacrament, as before he had distinguished, for Christ contained in the
Sacrament, then had the Sacrament, that is to say Christ therein contained, both
satisfied for the whole world, and none were ever saved without him, for that
all were saved by faith in him to come.

32. The same Pilkinton leaping from his former argument, without taking his
leave, falls upon another medium in these words: The body of Christ is
resiant in he auen. Pilkinton^ second argument.
And the body of Christ is in the Sacrament. Ergo: the Sacrament is in heaven.


This argument you see is as good and no better, then if we should say: The
soul of a man is in the fingar. And the soul of a man is in the foot. Ergo,
the foot is in the fingar.


But yet Doctor Glyn declared there further, after he had iested at the
argument, that Christ was in one sort in heaven, and after another sort in the
Sacrament; in heaven locally, visibly and circumscriptiuely, but in the
Sacrament inuisibly and sacramentally: which differences being not found in the
soul, being in the foot and fingar, makes our argument more heard to
answer, then that of Pilkinton.

33. There follows a third argument of Pilkinton thus: In the body of Christ
there be no accidents of bread. But in the Sacrament there be accidents of
bread. Pilkintons third argument.
Ergo: the Sacrament is not the body of Christ.


Here you see is the same fond equivocation and doubtful sense of the word
Sacramen^ before expounded, and poor Pilkinton can not get out of yt: For if
he take the word Sacrament, for the only body of Christ contained therein, then
is the minor proposition false; for that the Sacrament in this sense has no
accidents of bread in yt. But if he take the Sacrament for external signs,
then we grant both his minor and conclusion to be true, and nothing against
us, to wit, that the Sacrament in this sense is not the body of Christ, though
commonly in our sense the Saerament comprehends both the one and the other.

34. But further Master Pilkinton had a fourth argument, and with that he was
briefly dispatched: he proposed the same in these words. Wheresoever Christ is,
there be his ministers also, for so he promises. Pilkintons fourth argument.
But Christ, as you hold is in the Sacrament; Ergo: his ministers are there
also:


This argument is worthy of Master Pilkinton and his ministers, for yt proves
by like consequence, that they should have been in Pilatt^ palace with him, and
on the Cross. And y^ may be argued also, that for so much as they are n^ with
him now in heaven, ergo: he is not there. Wherefore the meaning of that place
in S. John gospel: Where I am there shall my minister be; (h^ Joan. 12.
says not wheresoever as Master Pilkinton puttet^ yt down) is to be
understood of the participation of Christ's glory in the next life, a^ himself
expounds in the 17. of S. John, where he says to his Father, that he will
have the^ Joan. 17.
to be with him, to see his glory. And in the mean space we see how these
fellows, that glory so much of scripture, do abuse the true sense of
scripture, in every thing they handle. And thus much do I find objected
against the reall-presence in the Cambridge disputations.

35. There ensues another disputation houlden in the Conuocation-house, in the
beginning of Q. Maryes reign, which in our former order or Catalogue of
disputations is the seventh; M. Philips his argument.
wherein Maeister Phillips Deane of Rochester, did argue against the real
presence in this sort. Fox page 1283.
Christ says, you shall have poor people with you. But me you shall not have.
Matthew. 11. Iean. 12.
Ergo. Christ is not present in the Sacrament.


Whereunto Doctor Weston prolocutor in that conference answered, that Christ is
not present in that manner of bodyly presence, as then he was, so that good
people may use works of devotion and piety toward himself, as then S. Mary
Magdalen did, in whose defense he spoke those words: But Phillips not
contenting himself with this answer, alleged a long discourse out of S.
Augustine in his commentary upon S. John's gospel where the holy father says;
that Christ is present with us in Majesty, providence, grace, and love now,
but not in Aug. tract. 50. in loan,
corpotall presence. Whereunto answered D. Watson afterward B. of Lincoln,
expoundinge that place by another of the same Father upon the same Evangelist,
where he says: that Christ is not now present after that mortal condition,
which then Tract. 70 in lea^o
hirras, etc. Which nothing lets his being after another manner in the
Sacrament. Nay S. Augustine in the very same Treatise, not ten lines before the
words alleged by M. Philipps, has these words: Habes Christum praesentem,
peraltaris Aug. ibid.
cibum and potum. Thou have Christ present in this life, by the food and
drink of the Altar: which is another distinct way of presence from those two,
named by him in the former place, of grace and corporal conversation. And y^
may seem that this Philipps was not only satisfied by this answer, for that
he replied not; but further also was converted upon this conference, or
disputation in the conuocation-house, or very soon after: For that Fox Page
1283. in margin.
affirms that he continued Deane of Rochester, all Q. Maryes days, which no
doubt he should not have done, if he had not subscribed, as all the rest did,
to this article of the reall-presence.

36. Next after Philips Deane of Rochester, stepped up Philpott Archdeacon of
Winchester with great vehemence, and took upon him Fox page 12. 4. ^l 2. number.
10.
to pioue, that Christ in his last snpper did not eat his own body by this
argument: that sor so much as remission of sins was promised unto the
receauinge Phil^otts first argument.
of Christ's body, and that Christ did not receive remission of sins, ergo,
Christ did not receive his own body. Whereunto Master More-man who, extempore
was appointed to answer him, and Doctor Weston the prolocutor, gave this
answer; that as well he might prove that Christ was not baptized, for that he
received no remission of sins therein: but as he received that Sacrame^ for
our instruction and imitation only; so did he this other. Wherabout though
Philpot made agreat stir, as not content with the answer; yet could he
reply nothing of any moment, and so ended that days disputation. The next day
he returned again, and would have made a long declamation against the real
presence, but being restrained he fell into such a rage and passion, as twice
the prolocutor said, he was fitter for Bedlam, then for disputation.

37. After Philpott, stood up Master Cheney Archdeacon of Hereford, another of
the six which did contradict the mass and real presence in the
Conuocation-house, who was after made B. of Gloucester, being that time perhapps
inclyned to Zuinglianisme, though afterward he turned, and became a Lutheran
and so lived and died in the late Queens days. There is extant to this man an
eloquent epistle in Latin of F. Edmund Campian, who unhappily had been made
Deacon by him, but now being made a Catholic, exhorted the Bishopp to leave
that whole ministry: This man's argument against the real presence, being taken
out of the common objections of Catholic writers and schoolmen, was this,
that for so much as it is clear by experience, that by eatinge consecrated
hosts for example, a man may be nourished, and that neither Christ's body nor
the accidents and forms alone, can be said to norish ergo besides these two
there must be some other substance, that nourishes, which seems can be no
other but bread: And the like argument may be made of consecrated wine that
also nourishes. And further in like manner he argued, concerning consecrated
bread burned to ashes, demaundinge whereof, that is to say, of what substance
these ashes were made, for so much as we hold no substance of bread to be
therein: and Fox would make us believe, that all the Catholics there present
could not answer that doubt, and amongst others he says of Doctor
Harpesfield: Then was Master Harpesfield called in to Fox page 1287. and 1288.
see what he could say in the matter, who told a fair tale of the
omnipotency of almighty God. But Fox understood not what Doctor Harpesfield
said in that behalf, as may easily appear by his fond relatinge thereof: We
have set down the answer to these and like objections, before in the 7. and
10. Observations, and yt consists The aunsvvere to M. Cheneyes argument about
mitrition and generation.
in this; that in these natural actions, and substantial changes of nutrition
and generation, wherein not only accidents are altered, but new substances also
are produced, and consequently according to nature that operation does require
not only accidents, but also substantial matter whereof to be produced; God by
his omnipotency does supply that matter, which is necessary to the new
production of that substance, either by nutrition or generation.

38. And albeit the unbelief of heretics does not reach to comprehend and
acknowledge, that God should do a miracle or action above nature every time
that this happens out, yet can they not deny yt in other things: As for
example, that every time, when any children are begotten throughout the world,
God immediately creates new souls for them, which needs must be thousands
every day, yet none of our sectaryes will deny or scoff at this, or hold yt
for absurd, the like may be said of all the supernatural effects and
benefits which God bestoeth daily and hourly upon us in the Sacraments or
otherwise.

39. There remain only some few places out of the Fathers to be explaned,
which were objected in this article, partly by Master Grindall against Doctor
Glyn, and partly also by Peter Martyr in the end of his Oxford-disputation,
Certain places of Fathers explaned.
but related by Fox in the question of Transubstantiation, and not of the
reall-presence, though properly they appertain to this, as now you will see.
The first place is out of Tertullian against Marcion the heretic, where he
has these words (says Fox): This is my body, Fox page 1250. col. 2.
that is to say, this is the sign of my body. Whereunto I answer, that Fox
deals here like a Fox in cytinge these words so cuttedly, for that
Tertullian in this very place (as in many others) does most effectually, not
only say, but prove also, that bread is turned into Christ's true body after the
words of consecration; and so do Tert. lib. 4* cont. Marcion. c. 40. Magd.
c^nt. 2. cap. 4.
the Magdeburgians affirm expressly of him: his words are these: Christ
taking bread, and distributinge the same unto his disciples, made yt his body;
saying this is my body, that is the figure of my body, and immediately
follows: Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus: but yt had
not been the figure of Christ's body. if his body had not been a true body or
truly their present. In which words Tertullian affirms two things, if you
mark him; First that Christ made bread his true body; and then that bread had
been a figure of his body in the old Testament, which could not be, if his body
were not a true body, but a fantastical body as Marcion did wickedly teach:
for that a fantastical body has no figure. And this much for the true
literal sense of Tertullian in this place; who goinge about to show that
Christ did fulfill all the figures of the old Testament (and consequently was
son of the God of the old Testament, which Marcionists did deny) fullfilled
also the figure wherein bread presignified his true body to come, by making
bread his body: saying, this bread that was the figure of my body, in the old
Testament, is now my true body in the new, and so does the truth succeed the
figure. And this to be the true literal sense and scope of Tertullian in this
place (as before I have said) every man may see plainly, that will read the
place.

40. The other places are taken out of diverse other Fathers, who some times do
call the Sacrament, a figure or sign, representation, or similitude of Christ's
body, death, passion, and blood, as S. Augustine in Psalm. 2. Christ gave a
figure of his body, and lib. cont. Adamant. cap. 12. he did not doubt to say
this is my body, when he gave a figure of his body. And S. Hierome: Christ
represented unto us his body. And S. Ambrose lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. As thou
have received the similitude of his death, so drinkest thou the similitude of
his precious blood: These places I say, and some other the like, that may be
objected, are to be understood in the like sense, as those places of Saint Paul
are, wherein Christ is called by him a figure, Figura substantiae Patris: A
figure of the substance of his Father. Heb. 1. And again; Imago Dei. An Image
of God. Colloss. 1. And further yet; Habitu inuentus vt homo. Appearinge in the
likeness of a man. Old hetetikes have framed some particular heresies out of
the Fathers by their misvnderstandinge their meaning.
Philipp. 2. All which places, as they do not take from Christ, that he was the
true substance of his Father or true God, or true man in deed (though out of
every one of these places some particular heresies have been framed by ancient
heretics, against his divinity or humanity) so do not the forsaid phrases,
sometimes used by the ancient Fathers, calling the Sacrament a figure, sign,
representation or similitude of Christ's body, exclude the truth or reality
thereof, for that there is as well, signum and figura rei praesentis quam
absentis, A sign or figure of things present, as well as of things absent, as
for an example, a firkyn of wine hanged up for a sign at a Tavern door, that
there is wine to be sold, is both a sign of wine, and yet conteyneth and
exhibiteth the thing yt self: And so yt is in the Sacrament, which by his
nature being a sign, figure, or representation, does both represent and
exhibitt, signifies and conteyneth the body of our Savior.

41. And as it should be an heretical cavil to argue out of the said places
of S. Paul, as the old heretics did, that Christ is called a figure of the
substance of his Father, and the Image of God, or the similitude of man: ergo,
he is not of the real substance with his Father, nor really God, nor truly
man: so is it as heretical to argue as our Sacramentaryes do; that Tertullian,
Augustine, and some other Fathers do sometimes call the Sacrament a similitude,
figure, sign or remembrance of Christ's body, his death and passion, as in deed
yt is; (for that otherwise yt should not be a Sacrament) ergo: yt is not his
true body, that is contained therein, especially seeing the same Fathers, do in
the selfsame places, whence these objections are deduced, expressly and
clearly expound themselves, affirming Christ's true real body to be in the
Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine: as for example Saint Ambrose
here objected in the Ambr. l. 4. de Sacra^^. cap. 4.
fourth book de Sacramentis cap. 4. does expressly and at large prove the
reall-presence, as exactly as any Catholic can write at this day: saying:
that before the words of consecration, yt is bread, but after yt is the body of
Christ. And again. Before the words of Christ be uttered, the chalice is full
S. Ambrose expounds himself against the Protestants.
of wine and water, but when the words of Christ have wrought their effect,
then is made that blood which redeemed the people. And yet further. Christ
Jesus does testify unto us, that we receive his body and blood, and shall we
doubt of his testimony? Which words being so plain and evident for the truth
of Catholic belief, let the reader consider, how vain and fond a thing yt
is for the Protestants to object out of the selfsame place, that we receive
the similitude of his death, and drink the similitude of his precious blood,
for that we deny not, but the body of Christ in the Sacrament is a
representation and similitude of his death on the Cross, and that the blood
which we drink in the Sacrament, under the form of wine, is a representation
and similitude of the sheddinge of Christ's blood in his passion. But this
lets not, but that it is the selfsame body and blood, though yt be
received in a different manner, as it lets not, but that Christ is true God,
though he be said, to be the Image of God, as before you have heard.

42. There remains then only to be answered, that speech of S. Augustine
objected in these disputations. Quid paras dentes and ventrem? creed and
manducasti: Why do thou prepare thy Aug. tract. 25. in Joan.
teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten. Whereunto I answer, that
this speech of S. Augustine and some other like, that are found in him, and
some other Fathers, of the spiritual eatinge of Christ by faith, do not
exclude the real presence, as we have showed before in our nynth observation.
It is spoken against them, that come with a base and gross imagination to
receive this divine food, as if yt were a corporal refection, and not
spiritual; whereas indeed faith and charity are those virtues, that give the
life unto this eatinge: faith in beleeuinge Christ's words to be true, as S.
Ambrose in the place before cyted says, and thereby assuringe our selves,
Christ's true body to be there: and charity in preparing our selves worthily, by
examinations of our conscience, that we do not receive our own damnation, as
S. Paul does threat. And this is the true spiritual eatinge of Christ's body by
faith, but yet truly and really, as the said Fathers do expound unto us, whose
sentences more at large you shall see examined in the Chapter followinge.

43. These then being all in effect, or at least ways the most principal
arguments, that I The conclusion of this chapter.
find objected by our English Sacramentaryes in the forsaid ten disputations,
against the article of Christ's true and real being in the Sacrament, you may
consider with admiration and pity, how feeble grounds those unfortunate men
had, that were first dealers in that affair, whereon to change their faith and
religion, from that of the Christian world, from time out of mind before them:
and to enter into a new sect and labyrinth of opinions contradicted among
themselves, and accursed by him that was their first guide to lead them into
new paths, to wit, Luther himself, and yet to stand so obstinately and with
such immovable pertinacy therein; as to offer their bodies to temporal fire,
and their souls to the evident peril of eternal damnation for the same; but
this is the ordinary enchauntement of heresy founded on pride, self
judgment, and self-will, as both by holy scriptures and ancient Fathers we
are admonished.

44. One thing also is greatly here to be noted by the careful reader, upon
consideration of these arguments to and fro, how uncertain a thing yt is for
particular men, whether learned or unlearned (but especially the The miserable
case of sectaryes, with out any sure ground to Icane unto.
ignorant) to ground themselves and their faith upon their own or other men's
disputations, which with every little show of reason to and fro, may alter
their judgment or apprehension, and in how miserable a case Christian men
were, if their faith (whereof depends their salvation or damnation) should
hang upon such uncertain means as these are, and that God had left no other
more sure or certain way then this for men to be resolved of the truth, as we
see he has, by his visible Church, that cannot err; yet thought we good to
examine this way of disputatio^s also, and the arguments thereof used by
Protestants against the truth. But now follows a larger and more important
examen, of the Catholic arguments alleged by our men against them, in this
article of the reall-presence. And what kind of aunswers they framed to the
same, whereby thou will be greatly confirmed (good reader) if I be not much
deceived, in the opinion of their weakness, and untruth of their cause.

WHAT CATHOLIC ARGVMENTS Were alleged in these disputations for the
reall-presence; and how they were answered or shifted of by the Protestants.
CHAP. V.
AS I have briefly touched in the former Chapter, the reasons and arguments
alleged for the Sacramentary opinions, against the reall-presence; so now I do
not deem yt amiss, to run over in like manner, some of the Catholic
arguments that were alleged against them, though neither time nor place will
permit to recyte them all, which the discreett reader may easily imagine by
the grounds and heads thereof, set down in the second Chapter of this
Treatise, though many and weighty they were or might be. Wherefore to speak
breifely somewhat thereof, and for more breuity and perspicuity, to draw the
matter to some kind of order and method: you must note, that of these ten
disputations, only four were in time of Catholic government, as before I
signified, that is to say; the six-dayes conference in the Conuocation-house,
in the beginning of Q. Maryes reign, and Disputation in the conuocatio^ house.
the three-dayes several disputation at Oxford with Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latymer, some months after. And as for the first in the Conuocation-house,
the Protestants only did dispute, for three continual days together, to
wit, Phillips, Haddon, Cheyney, Elmour, and Philpott, and several Catholic
men were appointed to answer them. And when in the end the Protestants were
required to answer according to promise, in their turns, the Catholic
opponents for other three days, they refused Fox page 1287. col. 2. number. 30.
yt all, saving Philpott, upon certain conditions to be heard yet further, but
Doctor Weston the prolocutor rejected him, as a man fitter to be sent to
bedlam (says Fox) then to be admitted to disputation, etc. For that he both
was unlearned, and Philpott.
a very madd man in deed. Wherefore out of this disputation, little or nothing
is offered about this article of reall-presence, for that the Catholic party
disputed not at all.

2. And as for the other three days disputation in Oxford, the last, which was
with Latymer, was very little, for that he fledd disputation, as there you
shall see; and the few arguments that were made against him, were rather in
proof of the sacrifice of the mass: so as most arguments were alleged in the
former two-dayes conflict against Cranmer and Ridley, which presently we shall
examine, though under K. Edward also, one day of the Cambridge disputations was
allowed to Catholic opponents, to propose their arguments, Doctor Madew being
defendant for the Protestants, and Doctor Glyn, Master Langdall, and Master
Sedg-wicke opponents for the Catholics: to as out of these four disputations,
we shall note breifely some Catholic arguments, that were alleged,
aduertisinge the reader first to consider with some attention the points
ensuinge.

3. First that we have nothing of these disputations, First point to be
observed.
their arguments or aunswers, but only such as pleases John Fox to deliver and
impart with us, which most evidently do appear to be mangled and imperfect in
many places, without head or foot, coherence or consequence, which must
proceed either of purpose to make matters obscure, and thereby to bring the
reader into doubt and confusion, or of lack of good information; and that the
former is more credible then the second, may be gliessed by the variety of
impertinent notes in the margent, scoffs, and jests in the text yt self,
often times putt in to deface the Catholic party, and to give creditt to his
sectaryes: And consequently what faith may be given to his narrations (but only
where they make against himself) is easy to be seen, especially in that
himself confesses, that Ridley wrote in prison his own disputations after
they were past, and the same we may presume of the rest, and then no man can
doubt, but that they would putt down their own parts to their uttermost
advantage, or at leastwise with the smallest loss, that they could divise.

4. Secondly yt is to be considered of the The second point to be observed.
precedent reader, that must adventure his soul euerlastingely by taking one
part or other in this controversy here in hand, how much yt may import him to
stand attent to the places and authorityes, alleged out of scriptures and
Fathers for the truth, and to consider them well, reading them over again, and
again and weighing the true meaning and sense of the writer, and not how
slightly or cunningly they are, or may be shifted of by any witty wrangler,
for so much as this may be done with any wrytinge or evidence never so
manifest, if the defendant will list to cavil, and the reader be so
inconsiderate or careless of his own peril, as to be delighted or abused
therewith.

5. Thirdly in the allegation of Fathers testimonies, The third point
considerable.
which here are to ensue, yt is to be weighed, not only what they say, but
also how they say, what phrases and speeches they use, and to what end, and
whether if they had been of the Protestants Religion, they would have used those
phrases or no, more then Protestant writers do themselves at this day,
especially so ordinarily and commonly as the said Fathers do, they being men
both learned, wise, and religious, that well knew how to utter their own mynds
and meaning, what is proper and improper speech, and withal not being
ignorant, how great inconveniences must ensue of improper speeches in matters
of faith, where men are bound to speak precisely and warily: and on the other
side is ^o be considered also, if they were of contrary opinions to the
Protestants, and of that faith which we affirm them to be in this point of the
real presence, what more effectual speeches could they have used to express
yt, then they do, calling yt the true body, the real body, the natural body
of our Savior, the same body that he took of the blessed Virgin, and gave
upon the Cross, the body vvherby he is united unto us in humanity; and
denyinge it expressly to be bread after the words of consecration, though yt
seem to be bread to our eyes and taste, and that we must not trust our senses
therein, but yield to Gods omnipotency, and believe, that as he has wrought
infinite other miracles, so has he done this; that we must adore yt, with the
highest adoration; and other like phrases, which neither Protestants can abide,
or ever do use in their wrytinges; nor could the Fathers, if they had been
expressly of our Religion (as we say they were) divise words more significant,
proper, or effectual to express the truth of our Catholic faith, then if of
purpose they had studied for yt, as no doubt they did; So as if the ancient
Fathers did understand what they spoke, and that they spoke as they meant; then
are the Protestants in a pitiful plight, whose salvation or damnation
depends in this, whether we must understand them, S. Paul, and Christ
himself literally, as they spoke, or by a figure only; so as if they used no
figure, then is the Sacramentary opinion to be held for heresy.

6. Fourthly is to be considered also in this The 4. point of note.
matter, as els-where we have noted, that when any one of these ancient
Fathers, in what age soever, is found to use these effectual words, for
uttering his meaning about this high mystery of Christ's being present in the
Sacrament, he is to be understood to express not only his own judgment, and
belief therein, but the judgment also and belief of the whole Church of
Christendom in that age, for so much as any Doctor, neither then nor after,
did note him for error, or ^emerity in speakinge and wrytinge as he did, which
no doubt would have happened, as in all other occasions of errors or heresies
yt did, if his speech had bin unsound, improper, or dangerous; so as when we
find but one Father vncontroulled in these assertions, we are justly to
presume, that we hear the whole age and Christian Church of his time speak
together, and much more when we see diverse Fathers agree in the selfsame
manner of speech, and vtteringe their meaning. And whosoever is careful of
his soul in these dangerous times of controversies, ought to be mindful of
this observation, and so shall we pass to the disputations themselves.

Out of the first Cambridge-disputation in K. Edvvardes days, wherein the
defendantes were D. Madevv, and B. Ridley high Comissioner. 20. Iunij. 1549..
1.
7. Albeit in this disputation matters were but slightly handled, and no
argument urged to any important issue, by reason of the often interruptions of
the Cambridge-proctors and sleights used by Ridley himself; yet do I find that
Doctor Glyn, being a very learned man indeed, did touch diverse matters of
moment* though he prosecuted not the same, if Fox his relation be true, and
much less received he any substantial solution thereof. As for example, in the
beginning he made a very effectual discourse how this divine Sacrament
conteyninge Christ's real body, was not only prefigured by diverse figures in
the old Testament, as namely the Paschall-lambe, the manr^ and shewbread
(which signified the great importance and moment thereof when yt should D.
Gly^^e his first discourse.
be performed) but also was so peculiarly and diligently promised by our
Savior, in the six of S. John, comparinge yt with the said figures and showing
how much yt was to exceed the same, and namely the manna that came from heaven,
and finally expoundinge yt to be hi^ own flesh which he would give us to eat
in fullfillinge those figures: Panis quem ego dabo ca^o mea est, the bread that
I will give you shall be Joan. 6.
my flesh, and that truly and indeed: caro enim ^uea vere est cibus; for my
flesh is truly meat, etc. Ibidem.


8. This promise then, and this prefiguration was not (quoth he) performed by
Christ, but in his last supper when he took bread and de^iuered it saying:
this is my body: which performance, if yt must answer either to Christ's
promise in the gospel, or to the figures in the old Testament, must needs be
more then bread, for that otherwise yt should not be better then the manna,
that was bread from heaven, which Christ in S. John's gospel expressly
promised, should be changed into his flesh. And if Christ in his last supper,
had but given a figure of his true body; then had he fullfilled the figures of
the old Testament with a figure in the new, and so all had been figures contrary
to that of S. John: Lex per Moysen data est, veritas autem per Iesum Christum
facta est. The Joan. 1.
law was given by Moses (in figures) but the truth thereof was performed by
Jesus Christ, etc.

9. Thus began Doctor Glyn, but I find no solution The Jews equal to us by
the sacramentary doctrine.
given thereunto, but that Doctor Madew being asked whether the Sacraments of
the old law, and new were all one? he said: yea indeed and effect: Doctor Glyn
inferred, that then they were not inferior to us; for that they had bread that
signified Christ's body as well as ours, and they by eating that bread with
faith in Christ to come, did eat Christ's body, and participate his grace
thereby, no less then we, which is a great absurdity, and contrary to the whole
drift of S. Paul speaking of that matter, and extollinge the dignity of this
Sacrament, yea contrary to the express discourse of Christ himself, saying:
not Moses gave you bread from Joan. 6.
heaven (meaning the Manna) but my Father gives you true bread from heaven.
And to this discourse also you shall find nothing answered in effect.

10. From this Doctor Glyn passes to show out of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and
S. Basil, that Fox page 1253.
the body of Christ must be adored before yt be received; whereunto was
answered: that only a certain reverent manner of receauinge vva^ thereby
meant, but no adoration; but the other replied, Adoration of the Sacrament.
that the Fathers spoke of proper adoration; yea S. Austen went so far therein
in his books De ciuitate Dei, that he affirms the heathens to have esteemed
the Christians, to have adored Ceres and Bacchus, Gods of bread and wine, by
the adoration which they used to this Sacrament of bread and wine, which they
would never have suspected of the Protestants, by their behavior toward their
supper of bread and wine. Whereunto another answer was framed, that Saint
Augustin^ meant only of adoringe Christ's body in hea^^n and not in the
Sacrament; and this answer was confirmed by Ridley very sollemnely, saying
for his preface: For because I am on^ that does love the truth, I will here
declare vvha^ I think in this point, etc. I do grant a certain honor and
adoration to be done unto Christ's body, but then the Fathers speak not of yt
in the Sacrament, but of yt in heaven, etc. Neither is there any other answer
given. And yet who sees not, that this is but a plain shift? For when S.
Augustine for example says: Nemo illam carnem manducat, Aug in Psalm. 98.
nisi prius adorauerit: No man eats that flesh (in the Sacrament) but first
adoreth yt. And Saint Chrysostom: Adora and communica, dum proseratur
Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad Pop Antioch.
sacrisicium, adore and communicate, whilst the sacrifice is brought forth; yt
is evident by common sense, that the adoration is appointed to that body, which
there presently is eaten, and not to Christ's body absent in heaven; for by this
kind of their adoration, we adore also our ordinary dinners, to wit by
adoringe God in heaven, and saying grace etc. And he that shall read the place
of the Fathers themselves, will wonder at this impudency, for Saint Austen does
expound those words of the Psalm Adorate scabellum pedum eius, and applies
Psalm. 9^.
yt to his flesh in the Sacrament, and S. Chrysostom speaks expressly of
Christ's flesh, as yt is in the Sacrament, and offered as a sacrifice.

11. And yet does Fox make Doctor Glyn to have replied never a word, nor so
much as produced the textes themselves of the Fathers named by him, but giuinge
yt over passed to another argument, saying: If yt please your good Lordshipp,
S. Ambrose and S. Augustine do say, that before the consecration yt is but
bread, and after the consecration yt is called the body of Christ; Whereto was
S. Ambrose and S. Austen handsomely shifted of.
answered: Indeed yt is the very body of Christ Sacramentally after the
consecration, vvher as before yt is nothing but common bread, and yet after
that yt is the Lords bread, and thus must S. Ambrose and S. Augustine be
understood. So said the aunswerers, and Doctor Glyn was by the procters
commanded to cease, and pass to the second question; but he obtained by
entreaty to go foreward an instance D. Glyns reply.
or two more, showing out of the words of S. Ambrose, that Ridleyes answer
could not be true; for that S. Ambrose said; that after the Fox page 1254.
consecration, there is not the thing that nature did form, but that which
the blessing does consecrate. And that if the benediction of Elias the
Prophett, could turn the nature of water, how much more the benediction of
Christ, God and man can do the same, ergo there is a greater change in the
natures then of common bread, to become the Lords bread.

12. To this reply there was no other answer given, but that S. Ambrose his
book d^ Sacramentis was not his, and Ridley affirmed that all the Fathers did
say so: which was a shameless lie in so great an auditory, nor could he bring
forth so much as one Father that said so, nor alleged he any one argument to
prove yt to be so; and if he had, yet S. Ambrose repeating^ again the very
same sentence in his book de initiandis is sufficient for the authority of the
place, but Glyn is made to pass away the matter with silence, saying: Well
let this pass, etc. And then goinge to other authorityes of Fathers, is
^^yped of with like shif^^; as when he cyteth S. Cyprians words: Panis non A
strange shiftinge of the authorityes of Fathers.
effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Dei sit caro: the bread by
consecration being changed not in shape, but in nature, is by the omnipotency
of God made flesh; they answer that by nature is understood a natural
property or quality, and by flesh, a fleshly thing or quality, and not the
substance, so as the sense must be, that bread is changed not in outward shape,
but into a natural property of a fleshly thing, etc. And when Doctor Glyn
replied to overthrow this invention out of S. Ambrose, who affirms this
change of bread to be made into the flesh, that was taken of the Virgin Mary,
ergo yt was not only into a fleshly thing, quality, or property, but into the
true flesh of Christ; Ridly gave an answer, that I understand not, nor
himself I think, but only that he must say somewhat in so great an audience,
and expectation; or Fox understood yt not that sets it down: for these are
his words:

13. When Doctor Glyn urged the saying of S. Ambrose, that bread is changed
into the body taken from the virgin Mary, that is to say (says he) that by the
word Fox pa^. 1^54 col. ^. number. 3.
of God, the thing has a being that yt had not before, and we do consecrate
the body, that we may receive the grace and power of the body of Christ in
heaven by this Sacramental body. So he. And does any man understand him? or is
his answer any thing to the purpose for satisfyinge the Fathers? S. Cyprian
says: that the bread by the omnipotency of God is changed in nature, and made
flesh and S. Ambrose says: yt is the flesh taken from the Virgin; and Ridley
says here; that yt has a being, which yt had not before, and that, they do
consecrate a sacramental body of Christ, thereby to receive the grace and power
of Christ's body in heaven; but howsoever they do consecrate that body: (which
is a strange word for Sacramentaryes to use) yet do they grant that this
Sacramental body is but bread; and how then can yt be flesh, and flesh of the
Virgin; were not the Fathers ridiculous, if they used these equivocations, yea
false and improper speeches?

14. Well Doctor Glyn goes foreward, and alleges S. Chrysostom upon S.
Mathewes gospel, where to persuade us the truth of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, he says: that we must Fox page 1254.
believe Christ's words in these mysteryes, and not our senses, for that our
senses may be deceived; but Christ saying this is my body cannot deceive us;
and that he made us one body with himself, not through faith only, but in very
deed: and further, that the miracle which he wrought in his last supper, he
works daily by his ministers, etc. Whereunto Ridley answered nothing S.
Chrysostom shifted of.
but these words: Master Doctor, you must understand, that in that place S.
Chrysostom showed, that Christ delivered unto us no sensible thing in that
supper. So he. Which notwithstanding is evidently false, for he delivered
sensible bread and wine, according to the Protestants faith, and according to
outs, the forms of bread and wine, which are also sensible: and if there were
no sensible thing, then could there be no Sacrament, which must conteyne a
sensible sign. And to refu^e this shift of Ridley, Doctor Glyn objected
Theophilact, expoundinge S. Chrysostom, and vsinge the same words that he did,
to wit, that the bread is transelemented, and transformed. He alleges
another place or two of S. Augustine together with S. Irenaeus: Matthew. 11.
To all which Rochester answers resolutely: Well say what you list; yt is
but a figurative speech, as S. John Baptist was said to be Elias for a
property, etc. How S. John Baptist was Elyas.
But who does not see the absurdity of this evasion; for so much as the meaning
of Christ, about Elias his spirit in S. John Baptist, is evident, nor ever
went any ancient Fathers about to affirm or prove by arguments, that S. John
Baptist was truly Elias in person (himself Joan. 1.
expressly denyinge yt) or that yt was meant literally, as they do of the
words of Christ in the Sacrament: And this could not Ridley but see, but that
he was blinded in pride and passion, for that otherwise he would never have
gone about to answer the Fathers by evident wranglinge, so contrary to their
own sense and meaning.

15. After Doctor Glyn was putt to silence in this order, succeeded Master
Langdale, Master Langdale disputes
Sedgewicke and Master Young, but very breefely concerning this article of
the reall-presence, not being permitted to speak more, and the most part of
the time trifled out also, with courtesyes of speech, the one to the other; My
good Lord; good Master Doctor; pleases yt your good Lordshipp; likes yt your
good Fathershipp; honorable Father, and the like ceremonies, for they durst do
no other, Ridley being then high commissionar; yet Master Langdale urged a
place of S. Chrysostom, where he brings Christ, savinge these words: I
vrould be your brother, I took upon Fox page 1256. col. 1. number. 43.
me common flesh and blood for your sakes; and even by the same things that I
am joined to you, the very same I have exhibited to you again; meaning in the
Sacrament. Whereof Master Langdale inferred, that seeing Christ took upon him
true natural flesh, and not a figure of flesh only, or remembrance thereof,
therefore he gave us his true natural flesh like man in the Sacrament, and not
a figure. Whereto Ridley answers in these words and no more: We are not
joined Fox ibid.
by natural flesh; but do receive his flesk spiritually from above. Which
answer is not only contrary to the express words and meaning of S.
Chrysostom in this place, but of Christ himself also brought in here by S.
Chrysostom to utter his meaning, as you have heard. I took upon me common
flesh for your sakes, and by the same things that I am joined to you, the very
same I have exhibited unto you again. Where you see that he says, he gave the
very same in the Sacrament, which he had taken upon him for our sakes, and that
by the same he was joined to us again; and now Master Ridley says; that we
are not joined to him by natural flesh. These be contraryes, which of two
shall we believe? Christ, and S. Chrysostom expoundinge him, or Ridley against
them both?

16. Master Sedg-wicke disputed next, but has M. Sedgewicke his disputat^^n.
not half a column or page allowed to the settinge down of his whole
disputation; yet he vrginge diverse reasons in that little time out of the
scriptures, why the Sacrament of the Altar cannot be in the new law by a
figure, but must needs be the fullfillinge of old figures, and consequently the
true and real body of Christ; he brought Master Ridley within the compass of
a dozen lines, to give two aunswers one plain contrary to another, as his
words do import: for this is the first: I do grant yt to be Christ's true body
and flesh, by a property M. Ridley his own contradiction.
of the nature assumpted to the God head, and we do really eat and drink his
flesh and blood, after a certain real property. His second answer is in
these words: It is nothing but a figure or token of Fox ibid.
the true body of Christ, as it is said of S. John Baptist, he is Elias, not
that he was so indeed or in person, but in property and virtue he represented
Elias. So he. And now let any man with judgment examine these two aunswers:
For in the first he graun^eth at least ways a true real property of Christ's
flesh, assumpted to his Godhead, to be in their bread, whereby we do really eat
his flesh, and drink his blood. And in the second he says, yt is nothing but
a figure, and consequently excludes all real property; for that a figure has
no reallity or real property, but only represents and is a token of the
body, as himself says; which is evident also by his own example, for that S.
John Baptist had no real property of Elias in him, but only a similitude of
his spirit and virtue. And so these people, whilst they would seem to say
somewhat, do speak contradictoryes among themselves.

17. There followed Master Young, who as breefly as the other, touched some
few places of the Fathers (though they be not quoted) M. Yonges disputation.
where they say that our bodies are nourished in the Sacrament by Christ's
flesh, and that truly we drink his blood therein, and that for avoiding the
horror of drinking man's blood, Christ had condescended to our infirmityes, and
given yt to us under the forms of wine; and other like speeches, which in any
reasonable man's sense, must needs import more then a figure of his body and
blood, or a spiritual being there only by grace, for so much as by grace he is
also in Baptism and other Sacraments: and finally he urged again the place of
S. Cyprian: That the bread being changed not in shape but in nature, was by
the omnipotency of the word, made flesh. Whereto Ridley answered again in
these words: Cyprian there does take this word nature for a property of
nature, and not for the natural substance. To which evasion Master Young
replyeth; this is a strange acception, that I have not read in any authors
before this time. And so with this he was glad to give over (says Fox) and
askinge pardon for that he had done, said: I am contented, and do most humbly
beseech your good Lordshipp to pardon me of my great, rudeness, etc. Belike
this rudeness was for that he had said, that vt was a strange acception of S.
Cyprians words, to take change in nature, for change into a property of nature,
and flesh for a fleshely thing or quality, as before you have heard, and that
this should answer S. Cyprians intention: for let us hear the application:
Bread (in the Sacrament) The confutation of ^ after Ridi^yes evasion about
Saint Cyprian.
being changed not in shape but in nature (says S. Cyprian) by the omnipotency
of the word is made flesh; that is to say, as Ridley will have yt bread, being
changed not in shape, but in a property of nature, is made a fleshely thing,
or fleshely quality: What is this? or what sense can it have? what property of
fleshely nature does your communion bread receive? or what real property of
bread does it leese by this change mencyoned by S. Cyprian? We say, (to wit S.
Cyprian) that our bread retayning the outward shape, does leese his natural
substance, and becomes Christ's flesh, what natural property of bread does
yours leese? And again. What fleshely thing or quality does yt receive by the
omnipotency of the word in consecration? And is not this ridiculous, or does
Ridley understand this his riddle? But let us pass to the next disputation
under Q. Mary, where we shall see matters handled otherwise, and arguments
followed to better effect and issue.

Out of the first Oxford-disputation in the beginning of Q Maryes reign,
wherein D. Cranmer, late Archbishopp of Canterbury, was defendant for the
Protestant party, upon the 16. of April anno 1554.. 2.
18. When as the Doctors were set in the divinity school, and four
appointed, to be exceptores argumentorum (says Fox) set at a Table in the
midst thereof, together with four other notaryes sittinge with them, and
certain other appointed for judges (another manner of indifferency, then was
used in King Edwards days under B. Ridley, in that disputation at Cambridge)
Doctor Cranmer was brought in, and placed before them all to answer, and
defend his Sacramentary opinion, given up the day before in wrytinge,
concerning the article of the real presence. Fox according to his custom
notes diverse grave circumstances, as among others, that the beedle had
provided drink, and offered the aunswerer, but he refused with Fox page 1300.
thanks. He tells in like manner, that Doctor Weston the prolocutor offered
him diverse courtesyes for his body, if he should need, which I omit for that
they are homely: against which Doctor Weston notwithstanding he afterward
stormeth, and makes a great inuectiue for his rudenes, and in particular for
that he had (as Fox says) his Theseus by him, that is to say a cup of wine
at his elbow, whereunto Fox ascribes the gayninge of the victory, saying; yt
was no maruayle though he got Fox page 1326.
the victory in this disputation, he disputinge as he did, non sine suo Theseo,
that is not without his ^plingcupp. So Fox. And yet further, that he holding
the said cup at one time in his hand, and hearing an argument made by
another that liked him, said: urge hoc, nam ho^ facit pro nobis: urge this,
urge this, for this makes for us. Thus pleased it John Fox to be pleasant with
Doctor Weston; but when you shall see, as presently you shall, how he urged
John Fox his three Martyrs, and rams of his flock (for so els-where he
calls them) in these disputations, not with the cup, but with substantial,
grave, and learned arguments, you will not marvel that he is so angry with
him: for in very deed he brought them always to the greatest exigents of any
other, and more then all the rest together: Now then let us pass to the
disputation.

19. Doctor Chadsay was the first that disputed against Cranmer, beginning
with the institution of Christ's Sacrament, recorded by S. Matthew, Matthew. 2^.
Marc 14. Luc. 22.
Mark, and Luke, shewinge out of them by diverse plain clauses and
circumstances, that Christ in his last supper, gave unto his disciples, not
bread, but his true natural body, which was given the next day on the Cross,
to all which Cranmer answered thus: If you understand by the body natural,
Organicum, that is having such proportion of members, as he had living Fox
page 1 302. col. 1. number. 70.
here, then I aunsivere negatiuely. By which answer we may perceive, that
this great Doctor, who had written a great book against the reall-presence, by
which Latymer amongst others was made a Sacramentary, and stood therein unto
death upon the creditt of this book (as after you shall hear him often ^.
Chadsoys first argument.
profess) understands not the very state of the question between us, for
that we hold not Christ's body in the Sacrament to be Organicall, in that
manner as Cranmer here imagines, with external dimensions and proportions of
members as he lived upon earth, Sup. cap. 3.
though truly organicall, in another manner, without extension to place, as in
our fourth and fifth observations before set down we have declared; so as he
erringe in the very grounds and first principles of the controversy, you may
imagine how he will proceed in the rest.

20. It was objected unto him next after this, that as a wiseman lyinge on his
death-bedd, The second argument.
and having care that his heirs after his departure do live in quiett, and not
contend about his Testament, does not use tropes and figures, but clear and
plain speech in the said Testament; so must we presume of Christ, and for the
confirmation of this, Doctor Weston alleged Fox page 1302.
a place out of S. Augustine, De vnitate Ecclesiae vrginge this very same
similitude; that if the last words of any grave or honest man lyinge on his
death-bedd, are to be believed, Aug 1. ^^ vnitat. Ecil. cap. 10.
much more the last words of our Savior Christ in his supper, to which
argument I find no effectual answer given at all, but only that Cranmer
says: that he which speaks by tropes and figures, does not lie; but he
answers not to the other inconvenience, that his heirs may fall out about
his Testament, the one understanding them literally, the other figuratively,
as we and they do the words of Christ about this Sacrament.

21. Next to this is brought in a large testimony of S. Chrysostom, out of his
homily unto 3. Argument.
the people of Antioch, which begins: Necessarium est, dilectissimi,
mysteriorum discere miracu^um, Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad Pop. Anti^ch.
quid tandem sit, and quare sit datum, and quae rei ^tilitas, etc. It is
necessary, most dearly beloved, to know this miracle of mysteryes, what yt is,
and why yt was given, and what profitt comes to us thereby, etc. And then S.
Chrysostom declares at large, how Christ most myraculously above all human
power, gives his body to be handled and eaten by us ^n the Sacrament; so as we
fasten our teeth in his flesh, and that he did more then ever any parents did,
who many times give their children to others to be fed, but Christ feeds us
with his own flesh, and with that very flesh by which he is our brother, and
united unto us in flesh. Out of which discourse D. Weston ^rged, that for so
much as Christ is made our brother and kins-man, by his true, natural and
organicall flesh; erge he gave the same his true natural and organicall flesh
to us to be eaten in the Sacrament. Whereto Cranmer answered: I grant the
consequence, and the consequent: Fox page 1303 col 2. number. 1.
Which is contrary to that he said a little before, (if you mark yt) that his
organicall body was not there.

22. But Doctor Weston went further, that seeing he granted this, then did yt
follow also, that his true organicall flesh was received in our mouth, which S.
Chrysostom calls our teeth. But this Cranmer denied, and said, he was eaten
only by faith: Whereupon Weston came on him again saying, that for so much as
he gave us the selfsame flesh to eat in the Sacrament (and this with our
teeth, as S. Chrysostom says) whereby he became our brother and kins-man, yt
must needs import a real eatinge: Whereto Cramner answered: I grant he took
and gave (in the Sacrament) the same true natural and organicall flesh,
vvherin he suffered, but feeds us spiritually, and his flesh is received
spiritually. This was his answer, and this he repeateth often, and from this
he could not be drawn: And here now you see, the practice of that shift,
whereof we have spoken before in our eight and nynth observation, whereby these
wilful people, under the terms of spiritually and sacramentally, do delude
them selves, and their readers, as though they said somewhat to avoid Catholic
arguments, taken out of ancient Fathers plain and perspicuous authorityes,
whereas indeed they say nothing in substance at all, but do turn and wynd and
hide themselves under the sound of different words without sense. For if yt be
true as Cranmer here granted, that Christ gave his true natural and
organicall flesh to be eaten ^n the Sacrament, and that with our teeth or
corporal mouth, as S. Chrysostom says, how can yt be denied, but that we eat
his flesh really, and not spiritually only, if spiritually be opposite to
really, as in Cranmers sense yt is, which understands, spiritually and
figuratively to be all one: but in our sense spiritually stands with really,
for that we hold Christ's body to be received really and substantially in the
Sacrament, but yet after a spiritual manner, different from that which the
Capharnaits did imagine of a gross carnal eatinge of Christ's flesh, as other
flesh is accustomed to be eaten, wherefore to imagine that Christ's true natural
or organicall flesh is eaten truly in the Sacrament, and yet only absent, by
faith, spiritually and in a figure, is to speak contradicto^yes with one
breath.

23. Diverse other texts and testimonies of (...). Chrysostom were alleged by
Doctor Weston 4. Argument or reply.
^o confute this ideacall fiction of Doctor Cranner, as that for example
homilia 83. in cap. 26. ^atth. Where he says among other things: ^eniat tibi
in mentem, etc. Let yt come into thy remembrance with what honor thou art
honored, (in the Sacrament) what table hou do enjoy, for that we are
nourished herin with the selfsame thing, which the ^ngells do behold and
tremble at, etc. Who shall speak the powers of thy Lord? Who shall declare
forth all his praises? What pastor has ever nourished his sheep with his
own flesh, etc. Christ feeds us with his own body, and conioyneth and
unites us to him thereby. And again upon the 50. Psalm: Pro In Psalm. 50.
^bo carne propria nos pascit, pro potu sanguinem suum nobis propinat. In steed
of meat, he feeds us with his own flesh, and in steed of drink he gives
unto us to drink his own blood. And again, homil. 83. in Matthew. Non side
tantum, sed Chrysostom. hom. 38. in Matthew.
reipsa nos corpus suum effecit, etc. Not only by faith, but in deed he has
made us his body. And finally for that yt was denied expressly, Saint
Chrysostom to mean that we received Fox page 1303.
Christ's body, with our corporal mouth, Doctor Weston urged these words of
Saint Chrysostom: Chrysostom. hom. 29. in 2. Cor. 13.
Non vulgarem honorem consecutum est os nostrum excipiens corpus dominicum. Our
month has gotten no small honor in that yt receaueth the body of our Lord.

24. But all this will not serve, for still Cranmer answered by his former
slight thus: With our mouth, we receive the body of Christ, and tear it
with our teeth, that is to say the Sacrament of the body of Christ. Do you see
the evasion? And what may not be shifted of in this order, does any minister in
England use to speak thus o^ his communion-bread, as S. Chrysostom in the
place alleged of the Sacrament, after the words of consecration? or do any of
the ancient Fathers write so reverently of the water Fox page 1233. col. 1.
(...). 74.
of baptism, which they would have done, and ought to have done, if Christ's
body be no otherwise present in this Sacrament, then the Holy Ghost is in that
water, as Cranmer oftentimes affirms, and namely some few lines after the
foresaid places alleged? But Doctor 5. Argument.
Weston seeing him to decline all the forsaid authorityes by this ordinary
shift, of the words spiritually and sacramentally, urged him by another way out
of the same Chrysostom, concerning the honor due to Christ's body upon earth,
quod summo honor dignum est id tibi in terra Chrysostom. hom. 34.
ostendo, etc. I do show thee upon earth, that which is worthy of highest
honor, not Angels, not Archangells, nor the highest heavens, but I show unto
thee the Lord of all these things himself. Consider how thou do not only
behold here on earth, that which is the greatest and highest of all things,
but do touch the same also, and not only touchest him, but do eat the same,
and having received him, returnest home.

25. Thus S. Chrysostom. Out of which place Doctor Weston urged him eagerly,
excludinge all figures, and eatinge of Christ's body absent by faith; for that
S. Chrysostom says not only Ostendo tibi, I do show unto thee, that which is
D. Weston does vrg^ eagerly. vrgo hec, vrgo h^c.
worthy of highest honor above Angels, and Archangells, but ostendo tibi in
terra, I show yt to thee here upon earth, which signifies the presence of a
substance, whereto this highest honor is to be done, and that this thing is
seen, touched, and eaten, in the Church, which cannot be a figure, nor the
sacramental bread, for that highest honor is not due to them; nor can vt be
Christ absent only in heaven, for S. Chrysostom says, I snew it thee here on
earth, etc. To all which pressinges. when Doctor Cranmer had no other thing in
effect to answer, but these phrases often repeated; that it is to be
understood sacramentally, and, I answer that it is true sacramentally, etc.
The hearers fell to cry out, and hiss at him, clappinge their hands says Fox)
and calling him, indoctum, imperitum, impudentem, unlearned, unskillful and
impudent. And Fox to help out Cranmer in this matter, besides all other
excuses, makes this learned gloss in the margent upon S. Chrysostomes words:
Ostendo tibi in terra, etc. I do show unto thee upon earth, what is worthiest
of highest honor, to wit, Christ's body. The body of Christ (says Fox) is
showed forth unto us here on earth diverse vvayes, as Fox page 1233.
in readinge scriptures, hearing sermons, and Sacraments, and yet neither
scriptures, nor sermons, nor Sacraments are to be worshipped, etc. So he, which
is as just as Germans lips. And I would aske^ this poor glossist, what
makes this note to the purpose of S. Chrysostom? for neither does he speak
of the different ways, whereby Christ's body may be showed forth upon earth, but
says that himself did show yt in the Sacrament upon the Altar, to all that
would see it. Nor does he say that the means or ways, whereby Christ's body is
showed, are worthy greatest honor or worshipp, but that the thing that is
showed forth, is worthy of highest honor. And how then stands Fox his gloss
with this sense, or whereunto serves it, but only to show these wreched-mens
obstinacy, that one way or other will break through, when they are hedged in
by the Fathers authorityes most plain and manifest.

26. After this assault given by Doctor Weston, the first opponent Doctor
Chadsey returned to 6. Argument.
deal with Cranmer again, and by issue of talk, D. Chadsey.
came to urge these words of Tertullian; Caro corpore and sanguine Christi
vescitur, vt animade deo Tertull. l. de res^^^ct carne^. c. 8.
saginetur. Our flesh is fedd with the body and blood of Christ, to the end
that our soul may be fatted with God; which is as much to say, that our mouth
does eat the body of Christ, and our mind thereby receaueth the spiritual
fruit thereof. Out of which words D. Weston ^vrged, that seeing our flesh
eats the body of Christ (which cannot eat, but by the mouth) Christ's body is
really eaten and received by our mouth, which so often by Cranmer has been
denied, but now his words are: Unto Tertullian I answer, that he calls that
the flesh, which is the Sacrament. Of which answer I cannot understand what
meaning yt has, except Fox do er^e in settinge yt down; for if the flesh be
the Sacrament, then must the Sacrament Cranmers shifting of Tertulli^^.
feed on the body and blood of Christ, according to Tertullian which is
absurd. But ^ suspect that Cranmers meaning was, that the body of Christ was
called the Sacrament, for so he expounds himself afterward, when he says:
The flesh lives by the bread, but the soul is inwardly fedd br Christ: so as
when Tertullian says; our flesh is fedd by Christ's body and blood, he would
have him to mean, that our flesh eats the Sacramental bread and wine, that
signifies or figureth Christ's body and blood, and our soul feeds on the
true body of Christ by faith: but both Doctor Chadsey and Doctor Weston
refuted this shift presently by the words immediately ensuinge in Tertullian:
Non possunt Tert. ibid.
ergo separari in mercede, quas opera coniungit: Our body and soul cannot be
separated in the reward, whom the same work does conioyne together; and he
means evidently by the same work or operation, the same eatinge of Christ's
body. Wherefore if the one, that is the soul, does eat Christ's true body, as
Cranmer confesses, then the other, which is our flesh, eats also the same
body as Tertullian says; and for that Doctor Weston liked well this argument
out of Tertullian, and said to Doctor Chadsey, stick to those words of
Tertullian, as Fox Fox page 2305.
affirms, yt is like that the foresaid tale of urge, urge, feigned of him was
meant at this time. But if yt were, the reader may easily see that he had more
to urge against his adversary, than a port at his elbow; and so shall you see
by that which is to ensue; wherefore let us pass yet somewhat further in this
combatt.

27. Doctor Cranmer having breathed a little 7. Argument out of S. Hilary.
upon the former sharp on-sett of Chadsey and Weston, one Doctor Tressam began
very gravely and moderately to urge a new argument and discourse, which seemed
very important, and after yt was urged, did more strain and press the
defendant, then any thing before disputed. The argument was founded upon a
place D. Tressa^.
of S. Hilary, in his eight book de trinitate against the Arrians, which both
for the great at authority and antiquity of the Father, and cleernes of his
words and reason, seemed to all there present to convince; nor could Doctor
Cranmer any way handsomely ridd himself of this place, but by his ordinary
shiftinge interpretation, as ptesently shall be seen. Doctor Tressam his
discourse was this, that whereas the like controversy for diverse points, had
been between the old Catholics and Arrians in Saint Billaryes time, as now is
between us and Doctor Cranmer, and his fellows, the Catholics houldinge in
that controversy, the union of Christ with his Father to be in nature and
substance, and the Arrians in will only and affection: Whatsoever authorityes
the said Catholics alleged out of scriptures or ancient Fathers, for the
natural union between Christ and his Father; I and my Father are one. Such
other places: the Arrians shifted of by saying: that is true in will, but not
in nature, yt is true in love and affection, but not in substance; even as our
Sacramentaryes do now, when we allege never so clear authorityes, for the
true real nature and substantial presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and
thereby of his real union also with us by eatinge the same; they delude all
with saying only; yt is true by grace and not by nature; yt is true by faith,
but no^ in substance; yt is true figuratively and sacramentally, but not
really; yt is true in a sign, by a trope; after a certain manner of speech;
yt is true spiritually, and by a natural property, but not indeed
substantially: and such aunswers; but all these shifts (says Doctor Tressam)
did S. Hilary cut of so long ago, for that he proves the true natural
conjunction of Christ with his Father, by our true natural conjunction with
him, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament; so as except we deny the true
essential, real and substantial unity of Christ with his Father, we cannot
according to S. Hilary deny the true, real and substantial unity of us with
Christ, by receiving his true natural flesh in the Sacrament.

28. The place of S. Hilary is in his 8. book of the blessed Trinity against
the Arrians, as has been said, where he expounds these words of Christ in S.
John's gospel: As the living Father Io^n. 6.
sent me, so do I also live by the Father, and be that eats my flesh, shall
also live throw me: upon which words of our Savior S. Hilary says: This truly
Fox page 1306.
is the cause of our life, that we have Christ dwellinge by his flesh in us,
that are fleshye, which also by him shall live in such sort, a^ he lives by
his Father. Of which was inferred, that Christ dwelled in us in flesh by the
Sacrament, and not only in spirit. For better declaration whereof D. Tressam,
before the allegation of these words, alleges a larger discourse of the same
S. Hilary, against the said Arrians upon this point in these words: I demand
of them now (says Hillary) who will needs have the unity of will only between
the Father, and the Hilar. l. 8. do Trunt.
son, whether Christ be now in us truly by nature, or only by the agreement
of vvilles? if the word be incarnate in very deed, and we receive at the
Lords table the word made flesh, how then is he to be thought not to dwell in
us naturally, etc. Out of which words of S. Hilary Doctor Tressam urged, that
Christ's flesh was not only imparted unto us in faith and spirit, but also
really and naturally, according to S. Hilary, and that as his conjunction was
natural with his Father, and not in will and love only: so is his conjunction
with us in flesh truly natural, substantial, and real, and not only in
spirit and faith. For more confirmation whereof, Doctor Tressam alleged also
the Bucer. l. cont. Abrincensem
words of Martyn Bucer, their late Protestant-reader in Cambridge, who writes
that according to the holy Fathers meaning Christ dwells in us (by the body
given in the Sacrament) not only by faith and love, as absent, but naturally,
corporally, and carnally, etc. To which authority of Bucer Doctor Cranmer gave
no other answer but this jest. I know that Master Bucer (says he) was a
learned man, but your faith is in good case which leans upon Bucer, etc.

29. But he could not so easily shake of the authority of Hilary, but was hardly
pressed therewith, as you may see readinge over the place yt self of this
disputation, as also by that his advocate John Eox is constrained to make
sundry large notes, and glosses in the margent to help him out: For Doctor
Tressam urged, that we are not only united to Christ by faith and spirit, but
carnally also: Whereunto Cranmer seekinge an evasion answers: I say that
Christ Fox page 1306.
was communicated unto us not only by faith, but in very deed also, when he
was borne of the Virgin. Behold the shift, we talk of Christ imparted to us
in the Sacrament, and so does Hillary; he answers, that Christ was imparted
to us in the incarnation; and yet if you consider, our flesh was then rather
imparted to him, then his to us. And again, Turks and Infidells have as much
conjunction with him by the incarnation as we, for that they are men, and the
flesh that he took, was common to all; So as here you see nothing but
euasions sought for; and Doctor Tressam perceauing that he could get no more
of him to the purpose, fell to pray for him; but Doctor Weston followed the
argument much further, as there you may see, for yt is ouerlonge to be alleged
here. The principal point is, that S. Hilary auoweth: That our conjunction
with Christ is not only by will, affection, and faith: but natural also and
real, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament, as himself is naturally united
to his Father and not only by will. And when Doctor Cranmer sought many holes
to run out at, Weston presses him again with other words of S. Hilary
explicatinge himself, which are these.

30. These things (says he) are recited of us to this end, because heretics
feigninge a unity of will only, between Hilar. ibid.
the Father, and the son, did use the example of our unity with God, as
though we being united to the son, and by the son to the Father only by
obedience, and will of Religion, had no propriety of the natural conjunction
by the Sacrament of the body and blood. Lo here yt is accoumpted a point of
Arrianisme by S. Hilary, to hold that we are united to Christ only by
obedience and will of Relilion, and not by propriety of natural communion with
him, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament of his body and blood. Whereupon
Doctor Weston urged often and earnestly, that not only by faith, but by the
nature of his flesh in the Sacrament, we are conjoined not spiritually only,
and by grace, but naturally and corporally; Whereunto Cranmers answer was in
these words: I grant that Cyrill and Hilary do say that Christ is united to
us, not only by will, but also by nature, he is made one with us carnally and
corporally, because he took our nature of the Virgin Mary, etc. Do you see his
runninge from the Sacrament to the nativity; but hear out the end. West.
Hilary, where he says Christ communicated to us his nature, means not by his
nativity, but by the Sacrament. Cran. Nay he communicated to us his flesh by
his nativity. West. We communicated to him our flesh, Fox ibid.
when he was borne. Cran. Nay he communicated to us his flesh when he was
borne, and that I will show you out of Cyrill. West. ergo, Christ being borne
gave us his flesh. Cran. In his nativity he made us partakers of his flesh.
West. Write syrs. Cranm. Yea write. And so ended this Encounter, brought (as
you see) to two absurdityes on Cranmers side; the one, that where S. Hilary
speaks of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, he flies still to
the incarnation: the other, that he says; Christ to have imparted his flesh to
us in the incarnation, wherein he took ours. Wherefore Doctor Chadsey seeing the
matter in this state, interrupted them by accusing Cranmer to have corrupted
this place of S. Hilary, in his book against the real presence translatinge
these words: Nos vere sub mysterio carnen^corporis sui sumimus, we receive
under the true mystery the flesh of his body; whereas he should have said: We
do receive truly under a mystory (or Sacrament) the flesh of his body; which
^raud Cranmer could by no other ways avoid, but by saying, that his book had
Vero and not vere, which John Fox says was a small fault; and yet you see yt
alters all the sense, as if a man shauld say Pistor for Pastor.

31. The next conflict to this was between Doctor Young, and Doctor Cranmer,
wherein Young accusinge him first for denyinge of principles, and consequently,
that they could hardly go forward with any fruitful disputation, except they
agreed upon certain grounds, he made sundry demands unto him, as first,
whether there were any other naturally true body of Christ, but his organicall
or isntrumental body? Item whether sense and reason, ought not D. Young
disputes.
to give place in this mystery to faith? Further, whether Christ be true in his
words, and whether he minded to do that, which he spoke at his last supper? And
finally, whether his words were effectual, and wrought any thing or not? To
all which Doctor Cranmer answered affirmatively, granting that the said words
of Christ did work the institution of the Sacrament, whereunto Doctor Young
replied, that a figurative speech wrought nothing, ergo yt was not a
figurative speech when he said: Ho^ ^st corpus meum. And albeit D. Cranmer
sought b^ two or three struglinges to slipp from this inference, saying that
yt was sophistry, yet both Doctor Young and Doctor Weston, who came in still
at his turn, said; stick to this argument. It is a figurative speech, ergo yt
works nothing, that quickly they brought Doctor Cranmer in plain words to
grant, that a figurative speech works nothing: Whereof they inferred the
contrary again on the other side: A figurative Fox page 1307. col. 2. number. 30.
speech (say they) works nothing by your confession, but the speech of
Christ in the supper, as you now granted, wrought somewhat, to wit the
institution of the Sacrament, ergo the speech of Christ in the supper was not
figurative, which is the overthrow of the foundation of all sacramental
buildinge.

32. And here you must note by the way, that Fox does not crown the head of
this syllogism with any Baroco, or Bocardo in the Fox angry with a syllogism.
margent, as he is commonly wont to do with the rest, for that yt pleased him
not. Wherefore ^o leave him, we shall pass to Doctor Cranmer himself, whose
answer you shall hear in his own words: I answer (says he) that these
are mere sophismes, for speech does not work, but Christ by speech does
work the Sacrament, I look for scriptures at your hands for they are the
foundation of ^isputations. So he. And you may see by this his speech, that he
was entangled, and would gladly be rid of that he had granted, for that both
the mayor and minor propositions were of his own grauntinge, and the
sillogisme good both in mood and form, though the conclusion troubled both
him and Fox, and the refuge whereunto both of them do run in this necessity,
the one in the text, the other in the margent, is very fond, sayinge^ that not
the speech of Ghrist, but Christ did work, as though any man would say, that
a speech works, but by the virtue of the speaker: and consequently if Christ
do work by a figurative speech, then does a figurative speech work by his
power and virtue, and so wa^ yt fondy granted by Cranmer before, that the
figurative speech of Christ, in institutinge the Sacrament (for of that was the
question) did not work; and yt is a simple evasion now, to run from Christ's
speech to Christ himself as though there could be a diversity; every man may
see these are but euasions.

33. But now further Doctor Young refuted largely this assertion, that Christ's
speech works not out of diverse and sundry plain testimonies o^ the Fathers,
which there openly he caused to be read and namely S. Ambrose, as well in hi^
book de initiandis, as de Sacramentis, where he handles this matter of
purpose, to prove that the speech of Christ in the Sacrament, to wit^ hoc est
corpus meum, did work and convert brea^ and wine into flesh and blood, and
prouet^ the same by many other examples of scriptures Sermo Christi (says he)
(...) nihilo facere, Amb. de e^ qui initiantur.
and non erat, non pot^st ea, qu^ sunt in id mutare, quae ^n erant? The speech
of Christ which was able to make of nothing that, which was not before, shall
yt not be able to change those things that were before, into things that are
not? And to the same effect in his book de Sacramentis: Ergo sermo Christi hoc
conficit Sacramentum; Ambr. l. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4.
Qui sermo? nempe is, etc. Therefore the speech of Christ does make this
Sacrament; but what speech? to wit, that whereby all things were created: the
Lord commanded and heaven was made, the Lord commanded and earth was made,
the Lord commanded and the seas were made, etc. Vides ergo quam operatorius
sit sermo Christi: si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini, vt inci^^rent esse
quae non erant; quanto magis operatorius erit, ^^ sint quae erant, and in aliud
commutentur? You see S. Ambrose most clear against Cranmer and F^x.
therefore how working the speech of Christ is; and if then there be so much
force in the speech of our Lord, as that those things which were not, took
their beginning thereby; how much more potent is the same speech in workinge,
that those things which were before, be changed into another? And presently he
adds: the heaven was not, the sea was not, the earth was not, but hear him
speak: he said the word, and they were done, he commanded and they were
^^eated; Wherefore to answer you I say, that it was not the body of Christ
before consecration, but after consecration, I say unto thee, that now yt is
the body of Christ. So S. Ambrose.

34. And here now (good reader) I doubt not, but you see the fond evasion of
Cranmer and Fox his advocate, clearly refuted by S. Ambrose; where they say,
that the speech or words of Christ work not; but Christ by the words; as
though there were a great diversity in that point. But now let us see, how
they will scamble over this authority of S. Ambrose, that says expressly,
both that the speech of Christ did work potently, and work the conversion of
bread and wine into flesh and blood: first Fox has this note in the margent
against S. Ambrose, as though he had miscompared the words of creation, with
the words of the institution of the Sacrament. The Lord Jesus (says Fox) used
not here commandment in the Sacrament, as in S. Ambrose corrected by Fox.
creation, for we read not Fiat hoc corpus meum, as we read Fiat lux, etc. Do
you see the man's subtle observation, or rather simple and sottish cauillation
against so grave a Father? The words: Hoc est corpus meum, this is my body,
imployeth somewhat more then Fiat corpus meum: let yt be my body; for that yt
signifies the thing done already, which the other wills to be done. And so
for this we will leave John Fox to strive with S. Ambrose, about the vsinge or
abusinge of scriptures alleged by him. And so much of Fox.

35. But how does Cranmer himself avoid this plain authority of S. Ambrose,
think you? You shall hear yt in his own words, for they are very few to so
large an authority. All these things (says he) are common, I say that God
does chiefly work in the Sacraments. Do you see his breuity and obscurity?
but his meaning is, that whereas before he had denied, for a shift, that Christ's
words did work, but only Christ by his words (a difference without a
diversity) now seeing S. Ambrose so plain to the contrary, in settinge forth
the workinge of Christ's words, he seeks another shift in this answer, which
is, that albeit Christ's words do work in the Sacraments, yet Christ chiefly;
as though any controversy were in this, or any man had denied yt. But what
says he to the main point, wherein S. Ambrose affirms not only How Cranmer
shifteth of Saint Ambrose.
Christ's words to be Operatoria, vvorkingewords, but that their work is to
make bread, the true and natural body of Christ after they be uttered by the
Priest? nothing truly in substance does he answer hereunto, but after his
shifts he says only, that yt was called the body of Christ, as the holy ghost
was called the dove, and S. John Baptist was called Elias (which are but bare
signs and representations, as every one sees) hay he goes again presently
from this, which here he had granted, that God works in the Sacraments: For
when Doctor Young urged him thus: If God work in the Sacraments, he works in
this Sacrament (of the Fucharist) Cranmer answers: God works in his
faithful, not in the Fox page 1308 col. 1. number. 7^.
Sacraments. And thus he goes forward grauntinge and denyinge, turninge and
wyndinge, and yet poor miserable man he would not turn to the truth, nor had
grace to acknowledge the same laid before him, but toyled himself in
contradictions, endeavoring to shift of most evident authorityes of ancient
Fathers, by impertinent interpretations. As when Doctor Young urged him with
those clear words of S. Ambrose: Before the words of Christ be Ambr. l. 4. de
Sacram. cap. 5.
spoken, the chalice is full of wine and water, but when the words of Christ
have wrought their effect, then is there made the blood that redeemed the
people. Cranmer answered: that the words of Christ wrought no otherwise in
this Sacrament, then in baptism. Ambrose said (quoth he) that the blood is
made, that is, the Sacrament of the blood is made, fit sanguis the blood is
made, that is to say ostenditur sanguis; the blood is showed forth there.

36. These and such like were Cranmers sleights to ridd himself that day, and
yet did not Doctor Chadsey and Weston leave him for these starts, but followed
him close with other clear places of S. Ambrose, the one expounding the other.
As for example, Forte dicas, etc. Perhaps Ambr. l. 6. de Sacram. cap. 1.
you may say, how are these things true? I which see the similitude, do not
see the truth of the blood: First of all I told thee of the word of Christ,
which so works, that yt can change and turn the kinds ordained of nature,
etc. And again in another place. Ergo didicisti, etc. Therefore thou have
learned that of bread is made the body of Christ, and that wine and water is
putt into the cupp, but by consecration of the heavenly word it is made blood.
Sed forte dices speciem sanguinis non videri, sed habet similitudinem: But
perhaps you will say, that the shape or form of blood is not seen; but yet it
has the similitude. So S. Ambrose, and for that he says, as you see, that
albeit the blood after consecration, has not the show or form of true blood;
yet has yt similitude, (for that the form of wine comes nearest to the
likeness of blood) heerof Cranmer layinge hands, could not be drawn from
affirminge that S. Ambrose meaning is, that it is not true natural blood
after the consecration, but bears a similitude only, representation, or ^ipe
thereof, which is quite contrary to S. Ambrose his whole drift and discourse, if
you consider yt out of passion.

37. After these bickerings about S. Ambrose, were urged against him, by the
two Doctors, Chadsey and Weston, diverse other Fathers, as Justinius Martyr
above 14. hundred years gone, The testimony of S. Iustine examined.
who in his Apology for Christians writes: that as by the word of God, Jesus
Christ our Savior being made flesh, had both flesh, and blood for our
salvation: so are ^e taught, that the meat consecrated by the word of prayer
instituted by him (vvherby our blood Justin. Apol. 2.
and flesh are nourished by communion) is the flesh and blood of the same
Jesus, that was made flesh. Out of which place they urged; that as Christ is
truly and really incarnate, so is he truly and really in the Sacrament,
according to S. Justinius, and that our flesh and blood is nourished by that
communion, and consequently in Saint Justinius time, yt was not held that
Christ's body was received only by faith.

38. The words of Saint Irenaeus were urged in like manner, he being another
Martyr of the same age with S. Iustine, who writes thus: Eum calicem, qui est
ex creatura, suum corpus confirmauit, Iren. lib. 5. cap. 2. cont. haeres.
ex quo nostra auget corpora, etc. This is the cupp, which being a creature, he
confirmed to be his body, by which he increases our bodies, when both the cupp
mixed and the bread broken, has joined to yt the word of God, yt is made the
Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ, of which the substance of our flesh
is increased and consists. By which words the said Doctors proved, that the
flesh and blood of Christ was otherwise held by S. Irenaeus to be in the
Sacrament, and received by us, than only by faith, seeing our bodies also are
nourished therewith; yea the very substance of our flesh is increased and
consists thereby, as his words are. To all which Cranmer had no other
answer, but his old shift, that the Sacrament of the body and blood, was
called the flesh and blood of Christ though really yt be not. And from this he
could not be drawn: And so finally the time drawinge late, they urged him
there Diverse corruptions objected to Cranmer.
publicly with certain falsityes, used in his book against the real
presence, and besides those that had been objected before, as for example.
Doctor Chadsey objected a manifest corruption in translatinge the foresaid
place of S. Iustine, which Cranmer excused no otherwise, but that he translated
not Iustine word Fox page ^309.
for word, but only gave the meaning; but the other, as also Doctor
Harpesfield, showed that he perverted the whole meaning, and so yt is evident
to him that reads Iustine.

39. Doctor Weston objected a place corrupted in Emissenus by putting in the
word spiritualibus, Cranmer answered, that yt was so in the decrees, Doctor
Weston replied, that he had left out diverse lines of purpose, which made
against him in Emissenus for the real presence, Cranmer answers: this book
has not that. Weston objected another place falsified, where for Honora
corpus Dei tui, honor the body of thy God, to wit of Christ, Cranmer had
translated yt thus: honor him which is thy God. Whereto he answered, that he
did it not without a weighty cause, that men should not think that God had a
body. Doctor Weston objected also, that alleaginge a sentence out of Scotus,
he had left out a clause, that made much to the purpose in the matter handled,
to wit secundum apparentiam, as may appear. Cranmer answered iestingly: that
is a great offense I promise you. Another place in like manner was objected, as
perverted by him in Scotus words, as also one or two in S. Thomas, Aquinas,
whereto I find no answer; but disputation is broken up with this cry of the
auditory, in favor of the Catholic party, vicit veritas, the truth has had
the victory; and with this we shall also end this first disputation against
Cranmer, having been forced to be longer then we purposed at the beginning,
and therefore we shall be so much the shorter, if it may be, in that which ensues
with Ridley and Latymer.

Out of the Disputation with D. Ridley in the same dininity-schoole at Oxford,
the next day after Cranmer, to wit, the 17. of April 1554.. 3.
40. The next day followinge (says Fox) was brought forth Doctor Ridley to
defend in the same questions of the r^all presence, Transubstantiation, and
Sacrifice; against whom Doctor Smith was the first and principal opponent,
for which cause Fox, before he begins D. Smith opponent.
to relate the combatt, makes a particular inuectiue against him, for that he
had been unconstant in Religion, the simple fellow not consideringe that if yt
had been true; yet that the same might be objected with much more reason,
against these his chief champions, Cranmer, Ridley and Latymer, that had been
Catholic Priests for many years together; But Fox his great anger against
Doctor Smith was, ^on that he pressed hardly B. Ridley in his disputation, and
so did Doctor Weston also, as after you shall see, for that upon all occasions
he came in with Urge hoc, urge hoc; but for the rest Ridley was most
courteously used by them both and offered to have his opinions taken in
wrytinge, and that he should have space till saturday after to consider of
them, and that what books soever he would demand, should be delivered to
him, and that he might Two notaryes chosen.
choose any two of the whole company to be his several notaryes, and he took
Master John Jewel afterward made B. of Salisbury by Q. Elizabeth, Fox page
1311.
and Master Gilbert Monson, that had been notaryes unto B. Cranmer the day
before.

41, But the greatest difference, and difficulty fell out, for that Ridley
having brought thither with him his opinion, and large explication thereof
already written, would needs read the same openly to the whole auditory, which
was penned in such bitter, spiteful and blasphemous terms, with such
abominable scoffs, and raylinge contemptuous speech, against the sacred
mysteryes, and the use thereof, as the commissionars were often-tymes forced to
interrupt him, and command him to silence, or to begin disputation, neither
whereof would he do, but with an obstinate face go foreward in readinge his
declarations, whereupon, Doctor Weston calling unto him said, as Fox relates:
You utter blasphemies with Fox page 1312.
an impudent face. Wherefore finally they made him break of, promisinge that
they would read and ponder all themselves, not being convenient to infect men's
ears with public readinge thereof, but that he might defend the fame, as
occasion should be offered in his answers and disputations.

42. The first argument brought against him by Doctor Smith was, for
ouerthrowinge that principal foundation of the Sacramentary heresie^ Christ's
body is inheauen, ergo yt is not in the Sacrament. Whereof you have heard often
before, for that both Peter Martyr alleged yt, as a The first argument about
Christ's being in many places.
chief fortress of their faith, though Philipp Melancthon, that is a
Calendar-saint together with Peter Martyr, as before you have heard, did say,
that he had rather offer himself up to death, then to affirm with the
Sacramentaryes, that Christ's body cannot be but in one place at once. And this
was See of Melancthon supra mens^ Decomb.
a principal ground also of John Lambert, burned for Sacramentary opinions
under K. Henry the eight, against whom Doctor Cranmer, then Archbishopp of
Canterbury, was the first and cheifest disputer after the King, and specially
took upon him to confute this reason of Lambert as vain and false, and
contrary to scripture, as before you have heard in the story of Lambert. And
the same reasons, and arguments, which Cranmer used against Lambert out of the
scriptures, does Doctor Smith use now against Ridley, to wit that Christ
appeared corporally and really on earth, after his assension, to S. Paul and
others, ergo, his being in heaven is no let to his real presence in the
Sacrament. The antecedent he Act. 9. and 26.
proved out of the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Paul's Epistles, where yt is
showed, that Christ appeared unto him after his assension; but Ridley did not
answer this argument, as Lambert, and other Sacramentaryes before him had
done, denyinge that Christ appeared corporally and really upon earth, but
rather that his voice was heard from heaven, but he said, that Christ left
heaven for a time, and came down. I do not (says he) so straightly tie Christ
up to heaven, that he may not come into earth at Fox page 1314. col. 2. number. 28.
his pleasure, howbeit I do affirm, that yt is not possible for him to be in
earth and heaven at one time. So he, whereunto Doctor Smith replied: ergo yt is
lawful for Christ to be here present on earth when he will. Ridley. Yea when
he will yt is lawful. Smith. Ergo his ascendinge to heaven, does not restrain
his real presence in the Sacrament. Ridley. I do not gainsay, but that yt is
lawful for him to appear on earth, when he will, but prove you that he will.

43. Lo here another starting hole: but yet first you see the great
Sacramentary bullwarke, so much stood upon by others, that Matthew. 14. Act. 3.
Coloss. 3.
Christ is in heaven at the right hand of God, and that the heavens must
receive him, until the day of judgment, and consequently cannot be upon earth
or in the Sacrament; is quite forsaken by Ridley, grauntinge that this argument
proves nothing: he is ascended to heaven, ergo, he is not on earth; for he
may leave heaven and come down, according to Ridley. Yea Ridleyes own
principal ground is forsaken by him, for that among his five principal
grounds and headsprings (for so he calls them) set down by him in his
Cambridge disputation, Fox page* 1261.
why he did inclyne to this sentence and judgment, (for then he was but
inclininge) the last was (if you remember) the most sure belief of the article
of our faith, he ascended into heaven, which now you see may stand without this
doctrine. Secondly, whereas he denies that Christ will depart from heaven at
any time, saying: prove you if he will, yet very soon after being pressed by
Doctor Smith out of the scriptures, that Christ after his assension was seen
visibly, really, and corporally upon earth, he answered in these words: I
grant the antecedent; (that is Christ did appear on earth). Smith. Do you
grant the antecedent? Ridley. Yea I grant the antecedent, because I know that
there be certain ancient Fathers of that opinion. Here you see that Ridley,
by grauntinge this antecedent, to wit, that Christ after his assension, did
appear really and corporally upon earth, either does contradict himself, when
he denied before, that Christ would ever come out of heaven (notwithstanding
he could) or else he must grant, that Christ appeared upon earth against his
will, or without his own will, which were a greater absurdity, then any of the
other.

44. And furthermore he contradicts himself again, in that he said a little
before, that Christ may leave heaven, and come down into earth when he will:
For being asked by Doctor Smith this question: Does Christ so sit at the right
hand of his Father, that he does never foresake the same? Ridley answers in
these words: If you understand his sitting to be after a corporal manner of
sitting, so is he always permanent in heaven: Which if yt be true, then is
that false which before he said, Fox page 1315. col. 1. (...). 40.
that Christ's body is not so tied to heaven, but that he may come down into
the earth when he will. And much more false is yt, that Christ did really and
corporally appear upon earth to Saint Paul, and others as a little before he
granted: so as by these you may see the briars wherinto Ridley was driven
about this argument.

45. The third point to be noted in these inconstant speeches of Ridley, is,
that yt is not possible for Christ's body to be in heaven and earth at one time;
and yet when we urge them with impiety for laying impossibilityes to Gods
omnipotency, they will presently run to that answer, as Ridley also
afterward does: that they dispute not what God can do, but what he will do.
Wherefore to return to our disputation; when Doctor Weston heard him talk of
this impossibility, and that Christ if he would appear in earth, must leave
heaven, he took upon him to convince this falsity, out of two authorityes, the
one of S. Chrysostom, the other of S. Bernard. S, Chrysostom his place, is
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, talkinge of the daily external sacrifice of
Christians, offered throughout the world in many churches at once, says thus;
vna est haec oblatio, non multae, etc. Chrysostom. hom. 17. in ^p. ad Hebr.
this oblation we offer is one and not many; and how is it one and not many,
which being once offered up in sancto sanctorum (to wit, upon the Cross)
notwithstanding is offered by us daily? This sacrifice (which daily we offer)
is a pattern of that (once offered on the Cross) and always we offer the
selfsame, not offeringe now one lamb, and to morrow another, but always the
selfsame; wherefore here is but one sacrifice, for that otherwise by this
means, if there be many sacrifices in many places, there should be many
Christ's, which is not so, but one Christ in all places; qui and hic before,
and illic plenus, vnum corpus, which Christ is fully here, and fully there,
being but one body, etc.

46. Out of which place Doctor Weston did urge B. Ridley very straightly, who
first, would seem to make light of the place, saying: these things make
nothing against me: but Weston urged: how say you then, one Christ is in all
places, here fully, and there fully. Ridley. One Christ is in all places, but
not one body is in all places, etc. And this evasion pleases so much John Fox,
as he writes in the margent, one Christ, but not one body in all places, as
though Christ could be separated from his body, or as though S. Chrysostom did
not expressly talk of one body: Here Christ fully, and there Christ fully
one body; and the very next words of Chrysostom immediately followinge are
these; even as then Christ offered in many places, is one body, and not many
bodies, so is the sacrifice also but one. But let us hear Doctor Weston urge
the same: Weston. One body says Chrysostom. Ridley. But not after the manner
of bodily substance he is in all places; not by circumscription of places: for
hic and illic, here and there in Chrysostom do assign no place as Augustine
says: Sursum est Dominus, and vbique est veritas Domini. The Lord is above,
but the truth of the Lord is in all places. Weston. You cannot so escape, Saint
Chrysostom says, not the verity of Christ is one, but one Christ is in all
places both here and there. Ridley. One sacrifice is in all places, because of
the unity of him, whom the sacrifice does signify, not that the sacrifices
be all one and the same.

47. Mark now here gentle reader, what An observation of Ridleyes shifts upon
one place only of S. Chrysostom.
yt is to dispute with these people, that seek after nothing but shifts and
holes to run out at, or stipp away? Consider how many they be upon this only
place. For first when Ridley was pressed with S. Chrysostomes authority, as you
have heard, prouinge evidently, that Christ could be at one time in diverse
places, his first shift was, that yt makes nothing against him; and then,
that albeit Christ be in many places, yet his body cannot be in many places, as
though Christ were in any place without his body: And then again yt being
showed, that S. Chrysostom speaks expressly of Christ's body, the next shift
was, that his body is not there after the ordinary manner of bodily presence,
to wit, by circumscription of place, which is quite from the purpose, for that
we hold this also, as before you have heard in the fifth and sixth
observations, to wit, that Christ is not circumscriptiuely in the Sacrament.
And further yt is another absurd shift, or rather ignorance in Ridley (and may
be the fifth or sixth about this matter) to affirm as here he does, that
Christ's body is not by circumscription euery-where, or in all places: for we
hold also, not only, that which he says, by circumscriptio^, but that no
ways, either circumscriptiuely, or definitiuely, or sacramentally is Christ's
body euery-where, but only in many distinct places, by Gods omnipotent will.
The other of vb^quity being a property of Gods divinity only to be in every
place at one time, as before we have showed. And lastly to follow Ridley and
his riddles no further about this matter, the words of S, Augustine are
foolishely alleged by him; that the Lord is above, but the truth of the Lord
is in all places: For as Doctor Weston well notes and tells him, we talk
not here, how the Lords truth is eueryvvhere, but whether Christ's body be in
diverse places or not: for Christ's truth is euerywhere, where his faith grace or
power is, but not his body. And albeit his truth admit not the circumstances
or proprietyes of places sursum and deorsum, yet his body does: which Ridley
considered not, when he brought this example, but only desired to say
somewhat, though never so much from the purpose.

48. And the like shifts he shows in his last answer about this place of S.
Chrysostom, when Doctor Weston vrginge, that one Christ and one body is in
all places whersoeuer his sacrifices are offered, he answers not to the
words of Saint Chrysostom at all, but says only at random, that one
sacrifice is in all places (S. Chrysostom says one body) because of the unity
of him whom the sacrifice does signify, which is as much to say in his
sense, as the sacrifice being but a sign or signification of Christ that is
one, is multiplied in diverse places. And what great miracle is this I pray you,
to multiply many figures in diverse places of one thing, who may not do so? and
yet Saint Chrysostom s^^teth yt down for a wonderful strange and admirable
matter, that one Christ the selfsame lamb, one body, fully here and fully
there, should be offered at one time in many places, which miracle in Doctor
Ridleyes sense is both easy and no miracle at all, and so much about this place
of Saint Chrysostom.

49. The second authority out of S. Bernard is in these words: Vnde hoc nobis
pijssime Jesus, etc. Bern. s^r^^, de Cana D^^^.
How comes this unto us, o most pious Jesus, that we seely worms creepinge on
the face of the earth, that are but dust and ashes, should deserve to have thee
present in our hands, and before our eyes, who sits both whole and full at
the right hand of the Father, and who in the moment of one hour, from the
risinge of the sun, unto the goinge down thereof, art present one and the
selfsame in many and diverse places, etc. To this place D. Ridley gave diverse
answers: First (says he) these words of Bernard make nothing for you at all.
This is very confidently spoken as you see, no less then to the place of S.
Chrysostom before; and I believe he will not stand long unto yt: For if Saint
Bernard does mean as he says, he must needs make much for us in the words now
recyted, wherein I refer me to the judgment of the reader. Wherefore Master
Ridley not trustinge much to this answer, passes to his second saying: I
know that Bernard was in such a Fox page 1315.
time, that in this matter he may vvorthily be suspected. So he. And yet least
he might seem to leese some creditt in reiectinge S. Bernard, he has a third
answer thus: notwithstanding (says he) I will so expound him rather then
reject him, that (...) shall make nothing for you at all. Lo here his last
cast; and this he learned of his Master Caluyn, not so much to reject in words
the Fathers, as Luther did, but rather by false and crafty interpretation,
slightly to avoid them, which indeed is not humility but double impiety; and
more impious to the Fathers themselves, then to be utterly denied, for by this
means they are made coadiutors of heretics: let us hear then S. Bernard
expounded by Ridley to his purpose: S. Bernard (quoth he) says, that we have
Christ in a mystery, in a Sacrament, under a veyle or cover; in the mean time
here now he says, that the verity of Christ is euery-vvhere. So he. And is
not Ridley ridiculous here? let the reader compare S. Bernards words before
alleged, with this exposition of Ridley, and he will say that the commentary
hitteth as right the text, as the blynd-fold-man does hitt the hens head on
the ground, when his face is another way from her. And thus much of Doctor
Ridleye^ three aunswers to this place of Saint Bernard.

50. After this Doctor Smith urged him again with another place of S.
Chrysostom, where he Another place of S. Chrysostom urged about Elias.
making a comparison, between Elias the Prophett and Christ, says, that
Elias left his cloak to Elizeus with his double spirit, when he went up to
heaven; but Christ did much more miraculously, for that he left us his flesh in
the Sacrament, and yet took the same up Chrysostom. hom. 2. ad Pop. An^^ch.
with him: Helias quidem melotcm discipulo reliquit; filius autem Dei
ascendens, suam nobis carnem dimisit; Helias quidem exutus, Christus autem and
nobis reliquit, and ipsam habens ascendit. Elias indeed at his departure, left
his cloak or hearcloth unto his disciple Elizeus; but the son of God
ascendinge up to heaven left his own flesh unto us: Elias left his cloak, but
Christ both left unto his his flesh and yet carried the same with him. Which
plain place when Ridley went about to delude, as he had done other former
places, by saying that Chrysostomes meaning was, that he left his flesh upon
earth not really and substantially, but to be received after a spiritual
communication, by grace, addinge this example: as we also (quoth he) by hearing
the gospel, and by faith: So as by this answer we have Christ's flesh no
otherwise present by means of the Sacrament, then we have him present by
hearing the gospel, or by beleeuinge in him, which is to euacuate wholly the
speech and comparison of S. Chrysostom. Wherefore to overthrow this shift,
Doctor Smith alleged another plain place of the same Chrysostom in
confirmation of this where he says: O miraculum! o Dei benignitatem! qui sur
sum sedet, Chrysostom. l. 3. de. Sac^rdoti^.
tempore sacrificis hominum mantbus continetur, etc. O miracle! o goodness of
God! that he which sits above, is contained in men's hands in the time of the
sacrifice. But all this would not serve, for he auo^ded this as he had done the
other, saying: he that sits there (to wit in heaven) is here present in
mystery and by grace, and is holden of the godly, etc. And finally though there
were diverse boutes in this matter, yet could nothing be gotten more.

51. But to this sense, Doctor Smith, Doctor Seton, Doctor Harpesfield and
Doctor Weston, urged him much about the place, asking him where was the
miracle, if Christ left his flesh here only in mystery and by faith; how could
the comparison stand between Helias and Christ? for Christ must do more then
Elias; Elias left his mantle and could not carry yt up with him, Christ not
only left his flesh, but carried up the same, ergo he left the same that he
carried up, etc. But he carried up his true and natural flesh, ergo he left
the same; to all which he answered again: He took up his flesh with him to
heaven, and left here the communion of his flesh on earth. With which
shiftinge answer Doctor Weston being moved, began after his fashion to urge
the matter earnestly saying: you understand in the first place his flesh for
very true flesh, and in the second place for grace and communion of his flesh,
I will make yt evident how blockish and gross your answer is: As Elias left
his cloak (says S. Chrysostom) so the son of God left his flesh; but Elias
left his true substantial Chrysostom. hom. 2. ad Pop. Antioch.
cloak, ergo Christ left his true substantial flesh: and heerin he spoke in
English. Ridly. I am glad you speak in English, and surely I would vvish all
the world might understand your reasons and my answers: Reliquit nobis carnem,
Christ left unto us his flesh. This you understand of flesh, and I understand
of grace: he carried his flesh to heaven, and left behind him the communion of
his flesh unto us. Weston. Ye judges what think you of this, answer
Judges. Judges. It is a ridiculous, and very fond answer. Ridley. well I
will take your words patiently for Christ's sake.

52. And this was the end of the controversy about this place of S.
Chrysostom, to wit, that we must take grace for flesh, and when Christ is
said to have left his flesh here with us, we must understand his grace: Yet
Doctor Weston alleged also another place out of the same Father, where he
says: Spargimur, etc. We are sprinkeled with the very selfsame blood, Fox
page 1317. col. 1, number. 80.
that Christ carried up with him, etc. Whereunto Ridley answered after his
fashion: yt is the same blood, but spiritually received. Then urged he Saint
Bernards words again; the selfsame Christ is present wholy in diverse
places, even from the west to the east, from the north to the south, etc.
Whereto Ridley answered; that God according to his Majesty and providence, as
S. Augustine says, is euery-where with the faithful, and so must Bernard be
expounded. Do you see this exposition? Read Saint Bernards words before set
down, and you shall see, that he speaks of Christ, as sittinge in heaven,
and yet present wholy in the Priests hands, etc. And not of his Majesty and
providence, whereby he is euery-where, as before has been declared: So as this
is not to expound, but to confound the Fathers, and I think verily that Ridley
was much troubled, when he gave such impertinent aunswers and expositions.

53. And with this would I pass over this whole strife about Saint
Chrysostomes places of Elias, but that I must let you know, that there had been
some years before, a great stir and altercation in the conuocation-house
about the same, for that Philpott hearing that place alleged against him, as
his fashion was, vaunted wounderfully, that this being the Papists chief and
principal foundation, he would so beat them from yt, and (as Fox adds) give
such a pluck at yt, as yt should never sorue their turn more: and when yt
came to the trial, he said that he had two ways to beat them from it: The
first was, that Christ goinge up to heaven carried his own flesh with him, and
e^t the same behind him, in that he left us behind him, Two pluckes of
Philpott praised by Fox.
that are flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones. This is the first blow and
pluck, whereby you see, that Christ's progatiue is plucked also; for Helias as
well as he left his flesh behind him in this sense, for he was of our flesh:
and Philpott also left his flesh behind him in us, though his own were burned
in Smith-field. And finally S. Chrysostom speaks expressly of the Sacrament
of the Altar, saying: that therein Christ left his flesh, but he did not leave
all mankind in that Sacrament; wherefore this first pluck is to small purpose.
But let us see his second.

54. The second is, that Christ (says he) lest his flesh in the mysteryes,
that is sacramentally; and that this mystical flesh, Christ leaves as well in
the Sacrament of baptism, as in the sacramental bread and wine. So he. Wherein
(if you mark) he gives not only the ordinary old pluck of other
Sacramentaryes, to the verity of Christ's flesh, making that mystical, which
S. Chrysostom speaks expressly of the natural flesh left by him, and
thereby plucketh out of joint all Saint Chrysostomes whole meaning and
discourse, The absurdityes of Philpott.
but gives a new pluck also to the whole Sacrament of the Eucharist,
affirminge Christ's flesh to be as much in baptism, as in the other, and
consequently that both Saint Chrysostom, and other Fathers, do in vain
trouble themselves, with so much extollinge the excellency of the Eucharist for
having Christ's flesh in yt, for that the water of baptism has the same, and
so you see the whole Sacrament plucked up by these pluckes of Philpott, and yet
(says Fox) that he did s^rewdly shake our real presence, Fox page 1294.
by giuinge such a pluck to one of our chief foundations. You see how one of
these men do flatter the other.

55. Next to this entered one Master Ward to dispute that had been Philpotts
reader, and seeing M. Ward disputes.
D. Ridley to have doubted so much in grauntinge and denyinge Christ's body to
have appeared upon earth, as in the former disputations of Doctor Smith, you
have partly heard, though much be omitted for breuityes sake, he began to urge
him again in that point, alleaginge against him the authority of a Catechism
Fox page 1317.
set forth by himself, in the name of the whole conuocation-house in K.
Edwards days, where the selfsame point is granted, which here he denied;
but Ridley for two or three abouts, would not yield that the Catechism was his,
though the judges said that Cranmer had confessed the matter the day before,
and Master Ward avouched to his face, that he being Bishop of London, and in
his ruff, compelled him to subscribe thereunto; yet at length he confessed,
that both he and Cranmer had approved the same under their hands, and that the
place alleged against him, might easily be expounded without any
inconvenience; and so they slydd away from that matter, and a place of
Theophilact came in question, where he writes, that Christ in the institution
of the Sacrament of the Altar non dixit, hoc est figura corporis mei, sed hoc
est corpus meum: he said not, Theoph. comment. in 36. Matthew.
that this is the figure of my body, but this is my body: which authority
Ridley wiped of by saying his meaning to be, that yt was not only a figure of
his body. Whereunto Doctor Weston replied, that this only was one lie put in by
him, for that Theophilact had no such word, nor could yt stand with his sense,
for that he did not make the opposition between figure, and only, but between
the body and figure, saying; yt was his body, and not a figure of his body.
And for proof of this, another place of Theophilact was alleged upon Saint
John, where his words are: Theoph. in ^ap. 6. Joan.
quoniam infirmi sumus, etc. for that we are infirm, and abhor to eat
raw-flesh especially the flesh of man, therefore yt appeared bread, but is
flesh: what can be more plain, and perspicuous then this? and yet do I not
find any annswere to have been given by Doctor Ridley to this place, but that he
passed to another matter, to expound the word Transelemented used by
Theophilact. And I pass over diverse other places, as that of Tertullian,
acceptum panem corpus suum illud fecit: he Tert. lib. 4. cont. Marcion.
taking bread made yt his body; and that of Justinius Martyr, saying: That
Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, is the same that was taken of the blessed
Virgin. Just. Mart. in Ap^l. 2.
And that of S. Augustine upon the Psalm; Aug. in Psalm. 96.
that he gave us to eat the self same flesh, wherein he vvalked upon earth. All
which places being objected before to Cranmer, and read both then and now out
of the authors themselves, by Doctor Weston that had the books by him, were no
otherwise answered here, then by the same shifts which Cranmer had avoided
them before, yt appearinge evidently that they had agreed upon certain
distinctions, and common euasions, whereby to delude all the Fathers authorityes
that might be brought against them, though they were never so clear or
pregnant for the purpose.

56. It follows, that by order of disputation the turn came to Doctor Glyn
to dispute against Doctor Ridley, who made (says Fox) a very contumelious
preface against him, which Ridley D. Glyns argument about vvorshippinge the
Sacrament.
took the more to heart, for that he had always taken him to be his friend.
And albeit Fox does not set down the same preface, yet by Doctor Glyns
entrance to his argument, a man may see, that the chief point was in
reprehendinge him, for deludinge and shiftinge of both scriptures and fathers
so shamfully, as he had heard him do, for he says: I see that you euade or
shift away Fox page 1319.
all scriptures and fathers. And Ridley answered: this is a grievous contumely,
that you call me a shifter, etc. And finally Doctor Glyn endeauored to draw him
to yield to the Catholic Church, which being the pillar of truth, could not be
thought to have fallen to such Idolatry, as for many ages to have worshipped
erroneously bread and wine, for the flesh and blood of Christ in the Eucharist,
and for proof thereof he alleged Saint Augustine against Faustin the Manichec,
where he says, that this use of adoring Christ's body in the Sacrament, was so
ancient and public, as some pagans did think that Christians Aug. cont.
Faust. Manich l. 20. cap. 13.
did adore Ceres and Bacchu^ the Gods of bread and wine. He alleged also
Erasmus authority, who affirms that this worshipping, and adoration of the
Sacrament of the Altar, Erasm. in ep. ad frat. Infer. G^r^^.
was in use before the time of S. Augustins and S. Cyprian; which is not so in
the Sacrament of Baptism, though Ridley affirm there is as much the flesh of
Christ, as in the other, and consequently, there is some special cause in the
Eucharist above other Sacraments. To which two authorityes I find nothing
answered particularly; (as neither to Erasmus) but to the thing it self
Ridley answered: We do handle the signs reverently, etc. And again: There
is a deceyt in this word Adoramus, we adore, for we vvorshipp the symbolls,
when reverently we handle them: we vvorshipp wheresoever we perccaue
benefitts. Whereunto Doctor Glyn answered: So I might fall down before the
bench here, and worshipp Christ therein, etc. For a bench also is a beneficial
creature to them that sit on yt. But for all this no further satisfaction
could be had, but that all the ado which the Fathers do make, about the
highest honor in earth to be given to the Sacrament of the Altar, comes to no
more by these men's interpretations; but that the signs of bread and wine must
be reverently handled, and Christ absent must be worshipped therein, as in
other things, vvherin we perceive or receive his benefitts: which indeed are
all his creatures made and ordained for our profitt, for by them all, we
perceive and receive Christ's benefitts: So as all these great admirations of
the Fathers, about the honor, worshipp and adoration due to this Sacrament,
come to no more in effect, but that we must reverence Christ therein, as in
other his beneficial creatures, and vvorshipp the symboll of bread and wine,
as much as you do the water in baptism: which yet never any of the Fathers
said was to be adored by us (as they do of the Eucharist) though Baptism be a
most necessary and profitable Sacrament.

57. Then disputed one Doctor Curtopp, alleaginge D. Curtopp argued.
a place out of S. Chrysostom, affirminge: that which is in the cupp, or
chalice, to be the same blood (after the words of consecration) that flowed
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10.
from the side of Christ, whereof he inferred, that true and natural blood did
flow from the side of Christ, ergo true and natural blood was in the chalice.
To this Ridley answered in effect Fox page 1319.
after his old fashion, that yt was true blood, that is to say, the Sacrament
of his blood. Curtopp. The Sacrament of the blood is not the blood. Ridley. The
Sacrament of the blood, is the blood, and that is attributed to the Sacrament,
which is spoken of the thing of the Sacrament. At which answer D. Weston
being moved, as yt seemed, argued in English (says Fox) thus: That which is
in the chalice is the same that flowed out of Christ's* side, but there came out
very true blood, ergo there is very true blood in the chalice. Ridley. The
blood of Christ is in the chalice in deed, but not in the real presence, but
by grace and in a Sacrament. Weston. That is very well; then we have blood in
the chalice. Ridley. Yt is true, but by grace, and in a Sacrament; and here
the people hissed at him, (says Fox) whereat Ridley said: O my masters I take
this for no judgment, I will stand to Gods judgment. This was his last refuge
and further then this, nothing could be had at his hands.

58. There rose up after this Doctor Watson, D. Watson disputes.
who after a long altercation with Ridley, whether after consecration the
Sacrament might be called true bread: Ridley alleged this place of S. Paul.
The bread which we break, is yt not a communication 1. Cor. 11.
of the body of Christ? As though yt had made for him. But Watson brought S.
Chrysostomes exposition: Quare non dixit participatione^ etc. Wherefore did not
S. Paul say here, that yt is the participation (of Christ's body) but the
communication? Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 11.
because he would signify some greater matter, and that he would declare a
great conuenience between the same, for that we do not communicate by
participation only and receiving, but by co-vniting or union; for even as the
body is co-vnited to Christ; so also are we by the same bread conjoined and
united to him. Out of which place of S. Chrysostom, yt appears evidently,
that his bele^fe was; that as his body and flesh was really united to his
person, so are we unto him in flesh, by eatinge the same in the Sacrament,
which is another manner of union then by faith and general only. But to this
let us hear Ridleyes answer in his own words: Ridleye. Let Chrysostom
have his manner of speakinge, and his sentence, if yt be true, I reject yt Fox
page 1320.
not, but let yt not be prejudicial to me, to name yt bread. So he. And thus
was S. Chrysostom shifted of, neither admitted, nor fully rejected; but if he
spoke truly, then was he to be credited, which was a courteous kind of
reiection; for Ridley would have the reader believe, that he spoke not truly.
And so much for him.

59. And so when nothing more could be gotten by Doctor Watson from Master
Ridley in this argument, Doctor Smith stepped in to him again, and urged a
place of S. Augustine upon the thirty and third Psalm: Ferebatur in manibus
suis, etc. He was carried in his own hands, applied by S. Austen to Christ:
his words are: Hoc quo modo fieri possit in homine, quis intelligat? 1. Reg. 21.
Who can understand how this can be done by a man? for that no man is borne by
his own hands, but by other men's hands, neither can we find how this Aug. in
Psalm. 33* contion. 1.
was fullfilled literally in K. David, but by Christ we find it fullfilled, for
that Christ was borne in his own hands, when he said this is my body, for he
did become that body in his own hands, etc. And again in another sermon upon
the same place, he repeateth again the very same thing saying: How was
Christ borne in his own hands? for that when he did Aug. ibid. cont. 2. ^^
commend unto us his body and blood, he took into his hands that which the
faithful knew, and so he bare himself after a certain manner, when he said
this is my body. Out of which places appears evidently, that S. Augustine
believed, that Christ after the words of consecration uttered, did bear his
own body in his hands, and that this in his judgment was so miraculous a
thing, as neither King David, nor any other mortal man could do yt, but only
Christ, which yet is not so in a figure (for every man may bear a figure of
his own body in his hands) and furthermore yt is clear by these authorityes,
and by those words (norunt fideles) that this was the belief by all faithful
people of S. Austens time. Which argument being much urged against Master
Ridley, both by Doctor Smith and others, he sought to declyne the force thereof
dyuers-wayes, as saying first; that S. Augustine went from others in this
exposition, (but yet named none) and then, that this place of scripture was
read otherwise of other men, according to the hebrew text, and other like
euasions, which yet prove not (as you see) but that Saint Austen was of this
opinion and belief himself, (which is the question in this place) and after
all this he passed to his ordinary refuge, that Christ bare himself
sacramentally only, and not otherwise; layinge hands, for some show of reason,
upon the word quodammodo used in the second place by S. Austen, that is, after
a certain manner. And when it was replied to him, that S. Austen used that
word, to show the different manner of his being in the Sacrament, and out of
the Sacrament, but that otherwise all parts and circumstances of S. Austens
speech do show, that he believed Christ to have holden really, and truly his
own body and flesh in his hands, they could get no other answer from him
but this: He did bear himself, but in a Sacrament. Fox page 1321.
Whereat men maruaylinge, Doctor Smith said: You are holden fast, nor are ye
able to escape out of this labyrinth. And then began Doctor Tressam to pray for
him with a sollemne prayer, which being ended he said: If there were an Arrian
here that had this subtle wit, that you have, he might soon shift of the
scriptures, and Fathers as you do. Whereat Doctor Weston, seeming unwilling
that time should be spent in prayinge and not in disputinge, said: either
dispute, or hold your peace I pray you. And with this they passed to another
disputation, whether evil men do receive the true body of Christ or not: But
S. Austens authority of bearinge himself in his hands, gatt no other solution,
but that Christ bare himself in his hands, that is the figure or
representation of himself, which neither David, nor other mortal man could
do: At which absurdity most of the audience did laugh.

60. But concerning the other questions, whether eu^ll men do receive Christ,
Doctor Tressam D. Tressam disputes.
brought two or three places out of S. Austen concerning Judas, that he eat
the true body of Christ, as the other Apostles did, and then again of wicked
men in general: Quia aliquis Aug. lib ^. cont D^nat. cap. ^.
non ad salutem manducat, non ideo non est corpus: because some do not eat to
salvation, yt follows not therefore, that yt is not his body: but to all this
Master Ridley answered by his former shift, that yt is the body to them, that
is, the Sacrament of the body. Do you see the fond evasion? there was no doubt
or question whether euill-men did eat the Sacrament, or external form, (for
every man does eat that, when they receive) but the question was and is of the
true body: and therefore when Saint Austen speaks of this body, yt is madness
to understand yt of any other thing, then the real body. But let us hear
what was replied: Doctor Weston said: I bring Theophilact against you: Judas
(says he) gustauit carnem Domini: Judas did eat or taste the flesh of Christ.
Ridley. Fox ibid. number. 49.
That is the Sacrament of the Lords flesh. Doctor Watson replied out of the
Council of Nice: Exaltata mente fideliter credamus, iacere in illa sacramensa
Council Nico^ primum tit. de diuina m^nsa, etc. vlt^m. editionis.
agnum Dei tollentem peccata mundi, a sacerdotibus sacrificatum. Let us
faithfully believe with an exalted mind, that there lies in the holy table the
lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, which is sacrificed by
the Priests. Ridley. That Council was collected out of ancient Fathers, and
is to me of great authority, etc. Fox ibid.
the words make for me: the lamb of God is in heaven according to the verity
of the body, and here he is with us in a mystery according to his power, not
corporally. Watson. But the lamb of God lies on the table. Ridley. Yt is a
figurative speech, for in our mind we understand him which is in heaven.
Watson. But he lies there, the Greek word is KEITA. Ridley. He lies there,
that is, he is there present, not corporally, but he lies there in his
operation, etc. And by this Fox page 1321.
you may see, to what purpose yt was to dispute with this man; for that God by
his power and operation is every where, and in every creature. And if Christ be
no otherwise here, but by his power and operation, as in baptism, what an
impertinency is this of the Council of Nice, to use so many and significant
words, that we must faithfully believe with a high mind and courage, against
sense and reason, that the lamb of God lies on the table sacrificed by
Priests, and the like; Is there any Protestant that speaks thus* or can the
like words be verified in the Protestants communion, of signs, figures,
representations and symbolls?

61. Lastly to skipp over diverse other things, Doctor Weston pressed him with
two other places of S. Chrysostom, so clear, as nothing can be spoken more
cleerer. The first is in these words: we vvorshipp the selfe^ same body in the
E^charist which the wise men did vvorshipp in the manger. And then again:
we have not here the Lord in the manger, but on the Altar; here a woman
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor.
holds him not in her hands, but a Priest. These are the words. Let us hear
his answer. Ridley. I grant the Priest holds the same thing, but after
another manner. She did hold the natural body, the Priest holds the mystery
of the body. So he. And Fox writes in the margent. The some thing, Fox page
1322.
but the manner diverse. But who sees not, that our contention is about the
thing, and not the manner; for we teach also that the manner of Christ's being
in the Sacrament, is different from the manner of his being in heaven, but the
thing really is all one. And so if Ridley do grant the same thing to be
holden by the Priest hands, which the blessed virgin held in Ridloy in words
vvil seem to agree.
her hands, as here you see him grant in words, then the controversy
between us and him is ended. But presently he leapeth from his grant again,
saying she did hold the natural body, and the Priest holds the mystery of
the body, which are different things, and not only different manners of
holdinge. Wherefore Doctor Weston repeatinge again this argument out of S.
Chrysostom to the multitude in English (says John Fox) and consideringe the
manner of Ridleyes aunsweringe, and that nothing more could be had of him, he
dissolved the disputation in these words: Videtis praefracti hominis animunt,
gloriosum, vafrum, inconstantem, etc. You see the stubborn, vauntinge,
deceytfull, and inconstant mind of this man. And with this Encomion departed
Doctor Ridley to his prison again, and the other Doctors each man to their
own lodginges.

Out of the Disputations with M. Hugh Latimer, together with the conclusion of
the whole trial in this article.. 4.
64. Upon the third day being wednesday the 18. of April, was brought forth
Master Hugh Latymer to answer as the former had done, but the disputation
was much more shorter then the other, and in English, for Master Latymer
(says Fox) alleged that he was out of use with Latin, and unfit for that
place. He gave Fox page 1323.
up his confession about the three articles in wrytinge, after the imitation of
Cranmer and Ridley, full of scoffs and bitter taunts, as his vein was, and
rested most upon the mass, and the four marrow-bones thereof (for so
blasphemously he called them) which were (forsooth) Latymers 4. morrow. bones
of the mass.
consecration, transubstantiation, oblation, and adoration, of all which you
have heard the ancient Fathers speeches before, how different they are from
these of Latymer, as was also their spirit.

63. The first entrance to talk between Master Latymer, and the Doctors was,
for that he saying in his wrytinge, that nothing was to be received
concerning the Sacrament, which was not expressly set down in the
institution of Christ, Doctor Weston inferred, that then weomen must not
receive the communion, for that no express mention is made in scripture of
their receauinge; and when Latymer answered, that S. Paul said: Probet autem
seipsum homo, which signifies said he both men and weomen, yt was replied,
that in Greek yt was anthropos that was proper to man, etc. Then Doctor
Weston asked him, how long he had been of this opinion? he said about some
seven years (he being more then seauenty of age) and that my L. of
Canterburyes book had specially confirmed his judgment therein. And if (quoth
he) I could remember all therein contained, I would not fear to answer any
man in this matter. So he. And many times after he ran still to this book of
Cranmer. My Lord of Canterburyes book (says he to an argument of Doctor
Cartwright) handles this very well, and by him could Fox page 1325.
I answer you, if I had him. And again in another place to another argument.
The solution of this (says he) is in my Lord of Canterbury his book. And yet
further to another. I remember I have Latymer foundeth himself on Cranmers
book.
read this in my Lord of Canterburyes book. Whereto Doctor Tressam answered,
that there are in that book six hundred lies, but Latymer replied nothing,
etc.

64. Then said Doctor Weston: You were once a Lutheran. Latimer. No I was a
Papist, for I could never perceive how Luther could desend his opinion,
without transubstantiation. The Tygurines once did write a book against
Luther, and I often desired God that he might live so long as to make them
answer. So he, whereby is seen, that he favored Luther more then the
Tygurines at that time, for that he would have had them answered. But Doctor
Weston said further: Luther in his book de priuata missa, testifies that the
devil reasoned with L^^h. l. de inissa Priua^a fol. 14. Contigit
him, and persuaded him that the mass was not good, vvherby yt appears that
Luther said mass, and the devil dissuaded him from yt. Latimer. I do not take
in hand here to desend Luthers sayings or doings: is he were here, he would
desend himself well enough I trow. So Latymer, leauinge Luther to himself,
but Fox will needs defend him with this marginall note saying: In that book,
the devil Fox page 1324.
does not dissuade him so much from saying mass, as to bring him to
desperation for saying mass, such temptations many times happen to good men.

65. And will you consider the gravity and verity of this note; first he says
that the devil did not so much dissuade him from saying mass, as to bring
him to desperation: then somewhat he did dissuade him, though John Fox excuses
the devil and accuses Luther.
not so much as to the other; which I believe, for that the one was his
damnation, and his leauinge of mass was but the way to yt. Secondly if the
devil did endeavor to bring Luther to desperation for saying of mass, he
must needs persuade him first, that the mass was naught, as if he would draw a
man to desperation for using alms deeds, he must first persuade him, that
almsdeeds are naught and wicked, and as wise a man as he should show
himself, that at the devils persuasion will believe that almsdeeds were
naught, and leave the same; so were Luther and Latymer as wise to believe this
suggestion of the devil against the mass. And where Fox says, that such
temptations of the devil do happen The devils impugningo of the mass as
evil, proves yt to be God.
many times to good-men. I grant yt, but not that ever any good man did yield
thereunto, or judge a thing evil, for that the devil did say yt was naught,
but rather to the contrary, his impugnation of yt is always a sign, that the
thing is good and pleasinge to almighty God, whose adversary the devil is; yea
the greater his impugnation is, the better must we presume the thing to be, and
consequently when he would make the mass to seem so heinous a thing to
Luther, as that he should be damned for saying the same, yt is a good proof
that the mass is an excellent thing, and displeases the devil, and that
Luther and his followers leaving to say mass, do please much the devil in
followinge his suggestion therein, as good and obedient children, to so holy a
ghostly Father, and so to him we leave them.

66. There follows, that albeit Latymer was loath to dispute, yet some few
arguments were cast forth against him, but all in English, for so he would have
yt. And first Master Doctor Tressam alleged an authority of Saint Hilary,
affirminge a natural unity to be in us with Christ by eatinge his flesh. Which
place, for that yt was alleged before against his fellows, I will not stand
much upon yt, but only note this man's evasion: Latymer. I can not speak Latin
so long, etc. But as for the words (says he) of Hilary, I think they make
not so much for you: but he that should answer the Doctors, had not need to
be in my case, but should have them in a readyness, and know their purpose:
Melancthon says, that if the Doctors had forseene, that they should have been
so taken in this controversy, they would have vvrytten more plainly. This was
his answer, and more then this you shall not find, and in this, there is a
notable imposture of an old deceauer, for that Melancthon being of opposite
opinion to him in this article, and wrytinge a whole work of the Doctors
sentences for proof of the reall-presence, against the Sacramentaryes, as in
his Mens^ Decembri.
life we have showed, what he speaks of this mystakinge the Fathers and
Doctors, he speaks expressly of the Sacramentaryes, and not of those that
defend the reall-presence, which he also, being a Lutheran, defended, and
affirms plainly that all the Fathers are of the same opinion, though if they
had foreseen, that such heretics, as are the Sacramentaryes, would have risen
up, and have wrested their words and meaning (as you have heard both Cranmer,
Ridley, and Latymer to have done) they would have spoken more plainly in the
controversy, though hardly they could have spoken more clearly against them.
And by this first entrance, you may mark the plain dealinge of old Father
Latymer.

67. Doctor Seaton Vice-chauncelour of Cambridge, seeing these sleights of the
old fellow, begins thus with him: I know your learning vvoll enough, and
how subtle you be: I will use a few Fox page 1325.
words with you out of S. Cyprian, who says, that the old Testament does
forbidd the drinkinge of blood, and D. Seatons argument Cypr. de Can. Dom.
the new Testament does command the drinkinge of blood. Out of which words he
framed this argument. That yt was true and real blood, which the old
Testament forbadd to drink, ergo yt is true and real blood which the new
Testament commands to drink; for that otherwise the antithesis or
opposition of the two Testame^ts in this point can not hold, if the one forbidd
the true drinking of true and real blood, and the other commands the
figurative drinking of spiritual blood by faith, for that these things are
opposite, and that the Jews also in the old ^estament did drink Christ's blood
by faith, etc. To which argument Latymer answered nothing in effect, but
this; we do taste true blood, Fox page 1325.
but spiritually, and this is enough. And then proves he the same by those
words of S. Augustine before answered by us; creed and manducusti; believe,
Aug. tract. 25. in Joan.
and thou have eaten, as though the words credere and edere, were all one in
the scriptures. Whereupon Doctor Weston recyted a story that passed between
Master Hooper and B. Gardener; for when Hooper would needs hold, that to cate
was to believe, and that an Altar signified Christ in the scriptures, B.
Gardener inferred, ergo, when S. Paul says to the Hebrews, that we have an
Altar, vvherof the Ieuwes must not eat: the Heb. 13.
sense is, we have Christ; in whom the Jews must not believe. And after this
he retourne^ to press Latymer strongly again upon this place of S. Cyprian;
saying: that is comusaunded in the new S. Cyprians Place urged by D. Weston.
Testament, which is forbidden in the old, but true blood was forbidden in
the old, ergo true blood also is commanded to be drunken in the new. Whereunto
Latymer aunsweringe twice, uttered two contraryes: for first his words are: It
is true as touching Fox page 1325. col. 1. number. 27.
the matter; but not as touching the manner of the thing, where he grants
(as you see) that true blood is meant in both Testament, but the manner of
drinkinge is different, which also we grant and teach: but hear his second
answer upon the other instance.

68. Weston. The old Testament does forbidd the tastinge of blood, but the new
does command yt. Latymer. Fox ibid. number. 70.
It is true, not as touching the thing, but as touching the manner thereof.
Before he said: yt is true touching the matter, but not touching the manner;
now he says; yt is true touching the manner and not touching the thing: so
as if the thing and matter be all one, as yt is, he speaks contraryes.
Whereupon Doctor Weston opened the whole argument to the people in English, and
the absurdity of his answer, but Latymer replied again and again; that true
blood was commanded spiritually to be dronken in the new Testament. Whereunto
one Doctor Pie replied, D. Pie disputes.
and objected, that yt was not forbidden to be dronken spiritually in the old
law: for that (says he) they drink spiritually Christ's blood in the old law,
ergo, the drinkinge thereof in the new must be more then only spiritual. To
this Latymer answered, the substance of blood is dronken, but not in one
manner. So as here you see, he grants also the substance of blood to be
dronken, though in a different manner from that of the old Testament. But being
pressed by the said Doctor Pie, that we require not the same manner of
drinkinge blood in the new law, which was forbidden in the old; but only that
yt is as really and truly blood, as the other was; his final answer and
resolution is this, It is the same thing, but not the same manner, I have no
more to say. Here then is his last detertermination, and consider I pray you
the substance thereof; if yt be the same thing, then must yt needs be really
and truly blood; for this is the thing or matter whereof the question is, for
that otherwise we know that the blood forbidden in the old Testament, is meant
the blood of beasts, and the blood commanded in the new, is meant of the blood
of Christ; So as in this, Latymer cannot grant them to be one thing, but only
in the reallity and truth of blood, that is, as the one is true and real blood
of beasts: so is the other true and real blood of Christ; which if he grant
(as here in words he does) then cannot the different manner of drinkinge the
same alter the substance of the thing yt self; or if yt do, then is yt false,
that yt is the same thing; and so every way is old Latymer taken, but let us
pass foreward.

69. Doctor Weston to confirm the reallity of Christ's blood, received in the
Sacrament, alleged another place of S. Chrysostom, where Chrysostom. sermon. de
Prodit. Iudae.
talkinge of Judas he says, Christus ei sangninem quem vendidit offerebat.
Christ gave him (in the Sacrament, to wit, to Judas) the blood which he had
sold. Can any thing be playner spoken. Latymer answered: he gave to Judas his
blood, in a Sacrament, and by this thinks he has said some what to the
purpose, whereas indeed he says nothing. For we say also, that he gave him his
blood in a Sacrament, as we say, that we give wine in a cup, but this
excludes not the reality of the blood, no more then the giuinge in a cupp, or
under a veyle, takes away the true reality of the wine; yet is this the common
hole for Sacramentaryes to run out at, when they are pressed; for both they
and we do agree, that Christ's blood is given in the Sacrament under a sign
sacramentally, and the like phrases; but the difference between us is, that we
by this do not exclude the truth and reality of the thing therein contained, as
they do, and thereby delude both themselves and others, speakinge in such sort,
as they cannot be understood, but only that a man may easily understand, that
they seek thereby euasions, and ways to slipp out at.

70. I pass over diverse other authorityes of Fathers alleged by the Doctors,
as those words of S. Cyrill: Per communionem corporis Christi, Cyrill. l. 10*
in cap. 13. Joan.
habitat in nobis Christus corporaliter. By the communion of Christ's body, he
dwells in us corporally, ergo, not spiritually only and by faith. Latymer
answered; first that (corporally) has another understanding, then you do
grossly take Fox page 1325.
yt. And then being pressed again, he said: The solution of this is in my Lord
of Canterburyes book. So he. But Fox not contented, (as it seems) with this
answer, puts down a larger, though without an author, whereby we may
conceive yt to be his own. Corporally (says he) is to be taken here in the
same sense, that S. Paul says, the fullnes of divinity to duuell corporally in
Christ, that is, not lighty, nor accidentally, but perfectly and substantially,
etc. Which answer if Fox will stand unto we are agreed; for we require no more
but that Christ by the communion of his body in the Sacrament, does dwell
perfectly and substantially in us, for that imports also really, as the
fulness of divinity is really in Christ incarnate, and not by union only of
will, as the Arrians said, and as our Sacramentaryes do talk of Christ's union
only by faith in us. And let the reader note by the way John Fox his wit, and
deep divinity, who knowinge not what he says, grants by this example more
then we require; for he grants the same substantial unity to be between
Christ and our soul, which is between Christ's divinity, and his humanity;
which is false; ours being accidental and separable; the other substantial
and inseparable, for that yt is hypostaticall. But these things John had not
learned, and so we pardon him, and do return to Latymer again, who being
urged hardly by Doctor Smith about Saint Cyrills words; that Christ by
communion of his body in the Sacrament dwells corporally in us, ergo, not
only spiritually by faith; he answered: I say both that he dwells in us
spiritually, and corporally, spiritually by faith, and corporally by taking
our flesh upon him; for I remember that I have read this in my Lord of
Canterburyes book. Here now you see another shift different from that of Fox,
authorized by my L. of Canterburyes book, but shaken of by S. Cyrills book,
which says expressly as you have heard, that Christ dwells in us corporally
by the communion of his body in the Sacrament, and talks not of the
incarnation.

71. Wherefore Doctor Weston seeing that more could not be had of Latymer in
this point, he passed to another matter, which was to deal with him about the
Sacrifice of che mass. In scoffinge against which, Latymers grace, or disgrace
rather and sin, did principally consist; and so alleaginge many ancient
Fathers authorityes against him for this purpose, and reading the places at
length, having the books there present, Latymer was quickly driven to a
nonplus, as may appear by Fox his own narration, though he sets yt down
like a Fox indeed, suppressinge all the particulars of the said places, but
only the names of the authors, and the first words of the texts, and not them
also in all. And then touches he the aunswers of Latymer, and the Catholic
Doctors replies so brokenly and confusedly, as may easily show that he would
declyne the tempest of that combatt from Latymers shoulders, and not have the
matter understood, insinuatinge only some 8. or 9. authorityes alleged for
proof of the propitiatory sacrifice, whereas more then 8. or 9. score might
have been cyted to that effect. And finally though Latymer muttered out two or
three particular aunswers here and there, saying; that S. Chrysostom had
Emphaticall locutions, and the like; yet his last rest was set upon this; that
the Doctors might be deceived in some points, though not in all things: Whereof
Fox well allowinge, makes this scoffinge comment in the margent, Doctores
legendi sunt cum venia; the Doctors are to be read with pardon, which can have
no other sense, but that either we must pardon them when they speak not truth,
or we must ask pardon of them, not to believe them when we mislike them; for
other sense I cannot make of this comentary.

27. Doctor Cole replied; is it not a shame for an The last colloquiu^* with
Latymer.
old man to lie? you say you are of the old Fathers faith. Latymer. I am of
their faith when they say well, I refer my self to my Lord of Caterburyes
book wholly (...) ibid.
herin Doctor Smith. Then you are not of S. Chrysostomes faith, nor S.
Augustines faith. Latymer. I have said, when they say well, and bring
scriptures for them, I am of their faith, and further Augustine requires not
to be believed, etc. Weston. Forty years gone, whether could you have gone to
have found your doctrine? Latym. The more cause we have to thank God now, that
has sent the light into the world. Weston. The light? ney light and lewd
preachers, etc. remember what they have bin, that have bin the beginners of
your doctrine, none but a few flyinge Apostataes, runninge out of Germany, etc.
remember what they have bin, that have set forth the same in this realm, a
sort of flyinge brains, and light heads, which were never constant in any one
thing, which was well seen in the often alteringe of their communion-booke,
and turninge their table one day west, and another day east, they got them a
tankerd, and one says I drink and am thankful, the more joy of thee, says
another, etc. You never agreed with the ^igurynes of Germany, or with your
selves, your stubburnesse is of vain glory, and we all see by your own
confession, how little cause you have to be stubburne, your learning is in
feoffers hold, the Queens grace is merciful, if you will return. Latymer.
You shall have no hope in me to return. And thus ended that disputation.

74. And here John Fox is very angry with Doctor Weston for this speech, and
for revenge thereof, makes this note in the margent: Blasphemous lies of Doctor
Weston sittinge in the chair of pestilence, and then presently he makes the
narration of him, which before we have related about Urge hoc, urge hoc, and in
the margent he has this other Notandum, urge hoc quod Weston, with his
beere-pott in his hand: which notwithstanding is more modest, then if yt had
been a wyne-pott. And I maruayle much why the wisdom of Fox should object this
beerpott so often and eagerly against Doctor Weston, seeing his own great
chair, which is yet kept for a relic of his holiness in London by the
sisters, has two places made on both sides thereof, the one for the
Candlestick, the other for the ale-pott and nutmegges, which Father Fox is
said to have loved well, and so do his wrytings also show, and yet no Catholic
man I think has ever objected the same unto him before this, as he does the
beer-pott to Doctor Weston. But these are trifles. Let us pass to more
serious considerations.

The Conclusion, with some Considerations thereon.. 5.
75. By the re-view then of these three days disputations, a conjecture may be
made, how matters did pass then, and how they stand at this day betwixt us and
Protestants in these articles of controversy: You have heard before the great
vaunts that Doctor Ridley made in his disputations at Cambridge under K.
Edward, how evidently forsooth and apparently the truth stood with him and his
fellows, and this upon sieve principal grounds and head-springs Fox page 1261.
as he calls them; which are the Majesty and verity of scriptures; the most
certain testimony of the ancient Fathers; the definition of a Sacrament; the
ab^ominable heresy of Eutiches, and the most sure beleese of the article of
our faith; He ascended up to heaven. B. Cranmer also after that again in the
beginning The vau^ts of Ridley and Cranmer how well performed.
of Q. Maryes reign, settinge forth a certain vauntinge schedell, which Fox
called a Purgation of Thomas Archbishopp Cranmer, has this challenge therein: I
with Peter Martyr (says he) and other four or five which I shall choose,
will by Fox page 1261.
Gods grace take upon us to desend all the doctrine and Religion, set ^orth by
our sovereign Lord K. Edward the sixth to be more pure, and according to Gods
word, then any other that has bin used in England these thousand years, so
that Gods word may be judge, and that the reasons and proofs of both parts
may be set out in vvrytinge, to the intent as well, that all the world may
examine and judge thereon, as that no man shall start back from his vvryting^.

76. Thus he. And now you have seen more or less by the former disputation,
how he, and his fellow Ridley were able to perform their bragges, and though
you have seen them brought to the exigents, which before has appeared: yet if
you will believe them or John Fox their Chronicler, settinge forth their Acts
and Monuments, they were so far of from being conquered, as the adverse part
was rather putt to the foil, for that they could say nothing in effect
against them. And for example, Fox writes of Doctor Weston (who most of all
other urged them with many good arguments as you have heard) that Fox page 1326.
not only he had his Theseus there by him to help him out (to wit his
beere-pott) but moreover that he said never a true word, nor made never a true
conclusion almost Ibid. page 1330.
in that disputation. Which how true or false yt is, the reader himself may be
judge, that Impudency of Fox.
has perused over the same in this our review: And the very like in effect
writes B Cranmer Fox page 1331.
in a certain letter of his to the Council, upon the 23. of April 1554.
immediately after the disputation ended, complayninge greatly of the disorder
and iniquity therein used, which yet by that we have examined before out of
their own words, I mean set down in Fox, his pen being bent wholly to their
favor, there could not be great iniquity or inequality, the combatt
consistinge in discussinge authorityes of ancient Fathers; but yt is the
nature of this people as always to be contentious, so ever to be clamourous,
and never satisfied except they have their will, but especially to write and
speak both contemptuously and partially: you shall hear how Malster Ridley
relates the event of this disputation; for that having set down his own
disputations and aunswers in the prison, and this with the greatest advantage,
you must imagine that he could divise, after much gall uttered in the preface
thereof against this disputation, concludes the same with these passionate
words, as they are in Fox.

77. Thus was ended the most glorious disputation of the most holy Fathers,
Sacrificers, Doctors and Masters, D Ridleyes passionate speech of the
disputation.
who fought most manfully for their God and Gods, for their faith and
felicity, for their country and kitchen, for their beuty and belly, with
triumphant applauses and famous of the whole university. So he. And by Fox
page 1330.
this you may know the man, and how much his words are to be credited; you
having considered what has been laid down before, by Fox his own report,
touching the substance of the disputation and authorityes of Fathers, alleged
and examined and shifted of, though in the form of scholasticall disputation
and urging arguments, yt may be there were some disorders; yet that makes not
so much to the purpose, how arguments were urged against them, as how they were
answered by them; and yet could not the disorder be so great, as it was under
Ridley himself in the Cambridge-disputation, as is most evident to the reader
by Fox his own relation, who as before I have noted, is always to be presumed
to relate the worst for us, and the best for himself in all these actions.

78. Wherefore yt is not a little to be considered, what was the difference in
substance or substantial proofs, brought forth in the Cambridge
Protestant-disputations under K. Edward, and these Oxford
Catholike-disputations under Q. Mary; and whether Doctor Ridley that was
moderator of those, or Doctor Weston prolocutor in these, did best urge or
solue arguments against their adversaries; for that this consideration and
comparison only, will give a great light to discern also the difference of the
causes therein defended. One thing also more is greatly in my opinion to be
weighed in this matter, which is, that the said ancient Fathers having to
persuade so high and hard a mystery as this is, that Christ's true and natural
flesh and blood, are really under the forms of bread and wine, by virtue of
the Priests consecration, they were forced to use all the manner of most
significant speeches, which they could divise to express the same, and to
beat yt into the peoples heads and mynds, though contrary to their senses and
common reason, and thereby to fly from the opposite heresy and infidelity of
our Sacramentaryes; lurkinge naturally in the hearts of flesh and blood, and of
sensual people; but since that time by Satan's incytation, broached and
brought forth publicly into the world. For meetinge wherewith the holy
providence of almighty God was, that the forsaid Fathers should by all sorts of
most significant speeches and phrases, as has been said, so clearly lay open
their meanings in this matter, as no reasonable man can doubt thereof, and not
only this, but also that they should use certain exaggerations the better to
explane themselves, such as they are wont to do in other controversies also,
when they would vehemently oppose themselves against any error or heresy, as
by the examples of Saint Augustine against the Pelagians in behalf of Grace,
and against the Manichees in the defense of Free Will. And of S. Hierome
against Iouinian for the privilege of Virginity above marriage. and other like
questions, wherein the said Fathers, to make themselves the better understood,
do use sometimes such exaggeratiue speeches, as they may seem to inclyne
somewhat to the other extreme, which indeed they do not, but do show thereby
their fervor in defense of the truth, and hatred of the heresy which they
impugn.

79. And the like may be observed in this article The Fathers effectual
speeches to persuade the reall-presence.
of the reall-presence, of Christ's sacred body in the Sacrament of the Altar,
which being a mystery of most high importance, and hardest to be believed, as
above humayne sense and reason, and therefore called by them: the miracle of
mysteryes: yt was necessary for them, I say to use as many effectual ways,
Chrysostom hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. and ^lij.
as they possible could for persuadinge the said truth unto the people, and for
preventing the distrustful cogitations and suggestions both of humayne
infirmity, and diabolical infidelity against the received faith and truth of
this article; and so they did, not only vsinge most clear, plain, effectual
and significant manner of expounding themselves, and their meaning, but many
such exaggerations also, as must needs make us see the desire they had, to be
rightly and fully understood therein. For better consideration of which point
(being of singular moment as has been said) the reader shall have a little
patience, whilst I detayne my self somewhat longer, then I meant to have done,
in layinge forth the same before him.

80. And first of all, concerning the effectual speeches for vtteringe the
truth of their belief in this article, you have heard much in the former
disputation, and here we shall repeat some points again, which in effect are,
that whereas the said Fathers founded themselves ordinaryly upon those speeches
of our Savior: This is my body which shall be given for you: my flesh is truly
meat, and my blood is truly drink. Matthew. 26. Luc. 14. Joan. 6.
The bread which I shall give you is my flesh for the life of the world, and
other like sentences of our Savior; the Fathers do not only urge all the
circumstances here specified or signified, to prove yt to be the true natural
and substantial body of Christ (as that yt was to be given for us the next
day, after Christ's words were spoken, that yt was to be given for the life of
the whole world, and that yt was truly meat, and truly Christ's flesh) but do
add also diverse other circumstances of much efficacy to confirm the same,
affirminge the same more in particular; that it is the very same body which was
borne of the blessed Virgin, the very same body that suffered on the Cross,
corpus affixum, verberatum, crucifixum, cruentatum, lanceae Chrysostom. hom. 24.
in 1. Cor.
vulneratum (says S. Chrysostom) the selfsame body, that was nailed,
beaten, crucisied, blouded, wounded with a spear, is received by us in the
Sacrament. Whereunto S. Austen adds this particularity, that yt is the
selfsame body that walked here among us upon earth. As he vvalked here in
flesh (says he) among us; so Aug. in Psalm. 98.
the very self same flesh does he give to be eaten, and therefore no man
eats, that flesh; but first adoreth at; and Hisichius adds; that he gave
the selfsame H^sich. in cap. 22. Leui^.
body, vvherof the Angel Gabriell said to the Virgin Mary, that it should be
conceived of the holy Ghost. And yet further; yt is the same body (says S.
Chrysostom) that the Magi, or learned men did adore in the manger. But thou
do see him Chrysostom. hom. 2. in 2. ad Cor.
(says he) not in the manger, but in the Altar, not in the arms of a woman,
but in the hands of a Priest. The very same flesh (says S. Austen again) that
sat at the table in the last supper, and vvashed his disciples Aug. in Psalm.
33. contion. 1. and 2.
seet; The very same (I say) did Christ give with his own hands to his
disciples, when he said; take eat, this is my body, etc. And so did he bear
himself in his own hands, which was prophesied of David, but fulfilled only
by Christ in that Supper.

81. These are the particularityes used by the Fathers for declaring what body
they mean; and can there be any more effectual speeches then these? but yet
harken further. Thou must know and hold for most certain (says S. Cyrill)
that Cyrill. Hi^vos Cathec. 4. mystagog.
this which seems to be bread, is not bread but Christ's body, though the
taste does judge it bread. And again the same Father: Under the form or show
of bread, is given to thee the body of Christ, and under the form or snape of
wine, is given to thee the blood of Christ, etc. And S. Chrysostom to the same
effect: We must Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad Top. Antioch.
not believe our senses eaysie to be beguiled, etc. We must simply, and
without all ambyguity believe the words of Christ saying: This is my body,
etc. O how many say now adays, I would see him, I would behold his visage,
his vestments, etc. But he does more then this, for he gives himself not only
to be seen, but to be touched also, handled and eaten by thee. Nor only do the
Fathers affirm so asseuerantly, that yt is the true natural body of Christ,
though yt appear bread in form and shape, and that we must not believe our
senses heerin; but do deny expressly that yt is bread after the words of
consecration, whereof you heard long discourses before out of S. Ambrose in his
books de sacramentis, and de initiandis. Before the words of Ambr. l. 4. de
Sacram. cap. 4. and l. de initiand.
consecration, it is bread (says he) but after consecration, de pane sit caro
Christi, of bread yt is made the flesh of Christ; And note the word (fit) yt is
made. And again. Before the words of Christ be uttered (in the consecration)
the chalice is full of wine and water; but when the words of Christ have
wrought their effect, ibi sanguis efficitur qui redemit plebem, there is made
the blood that redeemed the people. And mark in like manner the word
efficitur, is made, and consider whether any thing can be spoken more plainly.

83. But yet the Fathers cease not here, but do pass much further to
inculcate the truth All doubts about this matter condemned.
of this matter, reprehending sharply all doubt, suspicion or ambiguity, which
the weakness of our flesh or infection of heresy may suggest in this matter.
S. Cyrill reasons thus: VVheras Cyrill Hier. catech. mystagog. 4.
Christ has said of the bread, this is my body, who will dare to doubt
thereof? and vvheras he has said of the wine, this is my blood, who will
doubt or say yt is not his blood? he once turned water into wine in Cana of
Galiley by his only will which wine is like unto blood, and shall we not
think him worthy to be believed, when he says, that he has changed wine
into his blood? So he. And S. Ambrose to the same effect. Our Lord Jesus Christ
does iestifie unto us, that we do Ambr. l. 4. de Sacordot. cap 4.
receive his body and blood, and may we doubt of his creditt or testimony? And
the other Saint Cyrill of Alexandria says to the same effect; that in this
mystery we should not so much as ask quomodo Cyril. Alex. l. 4. ^nc. 13. Joan.
how yt can be done? Iudaicum enim verbum est (says he) and aeterm supplicij
causa: For ye is a Jewish word, and cause of everlasting torment. And before
them both Saint Hilary left written this exhortation: These things* says he)
that are written, let us read, and those things that Hilar. l. 8. de trinit.
cont. Arrian.
we read let us understand, and so we shall perfectly perform the duty of
true says; for that these points which we affirm of the natural verity of
Christ's being in us. exceptive learn them of Christ himself, we affirm them
wickedly and foolishly, etc. Wherefore, vvheras he says my s^e^h is truly
meat, and my blood is truly drink, there is no place left to us of doubting
concerning the truth of Christ's body and blood, for that both by the
affirmation of Christ himself, and by our own belief, there is (in the
Sacrament) the flesh truly and the blood truly of our Savior.

83. So great S. Hilary: and Eusebiu^ Emissenus brings in Christ our Savior
speakinge in these words: For so much as my flesh is truly meat, Eusebius.
Emissenus. hom 5 de s^^ch.
and my blood is truly drink, leit all doubt fullnes of in fideli^y depart;
for so much as he who is the author of the gift, is vvittnesse also of the
truth thereof. And S. Leo to the same effect: Nothing at all is to be Leo sermon.
6. de (...) 7. (...).
doubted of the truth of Christ^ body, and blood in the Sacrament, etc. And
those do in vain answer amen (when they receive yt) if they dispute against
that which is affirmed. And finally S. Ep^p^anius concludes Ep^ph. in An^^r.
thus: He that believes it not to be the very body of Christ in the Sacrament,
is fallen from grace and salvation.

84. And by this we may see the earnestness of the Fathers in vrginge the
belief of Christ's true flesh, and blood in the Sacrament; But they cease not
here, but do prevent and exclude all shifts of Sacramentaryes, which by Gods
holy spirit they forsaw, even in those ancient days, affirminge that not by
faith only, or in ^igure, or image, or spiritually alone Christ's flesh is to be
eaten by us; but really, substantially, and corporally: Not only by faith
(says S. Chrys^stome) but in very deed he makes us Chrysostom. in ^om. 87. in
cap. 21. Matthew.
his body, reducing us as yt were into one mass or substance with himself.
And Saint Cyrill: Not only by says and charity are we spiritually conjoined to
Christ Cyril. Alex. l. 10. in cap. 17 (...).
(by his flesh in the Sacrament) but corporally also by communication of the
same flesh. And S. Chrysostom again: Not only by love, but in very deed are
we Chrysostom. ^b.
converted into his flesh by eatinge the same. And Saint Cyrill again: We
receauinge in the Sacrament Cyril. Alex. ib. l. 11. in Joan. c, 27.
corporally and substantially the son of God united naturally to his Father,
we are clarified and glorified thereby, and made partakers of his supreme
nature. Thus they. Whereunto for more explication adds Theophilact: When
Christ said: This is my body; he showed that it was his very body in deed, and
not any Theophil. Alex. in cap. 10. Mare.
figure correspondent thereunto, for he said not; this is the figure of my body;
but, this is my body; by which words the bread is transformed by an
unspeakable operation, though to us it seem still bread. And again in another
place. Behold that the bread which is eaten by us in the mysteryes, is not
only a figuration of Christ's Idem in ca. ^. Joan.
flesh, but the very flesh indeed, for Christ said not, that the bread which I
shall give you, is the figure of my flesh, but my very flesh indeed, for that
the bread is transformed by arcanis verb^.
secrett words into the flesh. And another Father more ancient then he, above
twelve hundred years past, handlinge those words of Christ This is my body,
says: It is not the figure of Christ's body and blood; vt quidam stupida mente
nugati sunt; as some blockish mynds have Magnesl. 3. ad Th^ostinem.
trifled; but it is truly the very body and blood of our Savior indeed. And
finally the whole general Council of Nice the second, above 800. years past,
has these words: do you read, as long as you will, you shall never find
Christ or his Apostles, or Conc. Ni^en. 2. act. 6
the Fathers to have called the vnhloudy sacrifice of Christ offered by the
Priest, an image (or representation) but the very body and blood of Christ it
self. And could the ancient Fathers speak more effectually, properly or
clearly then this?

85. And yet he that will examine and weigh their sayings, a man exactly shall
find them to speak, in a certain manner more effectually: for that they did
study, (as we have said) how Emphaticall and effectual speeches of the
fathers. Hilar. lib. 8. de Trints. Cy^^l. l. 11. In Joan. ^. 26
to utter their meaning with emphasie. S. Hilary uses this kind of argument:
if the word of God were truly made flesh, then do we truly receive his flesh in
the Lords supper, and thereby he is to be steemed to dwell in us naturally: S.
Cyrill proves, not only a spiritual, but a natural and bodily union to be
between us and Christ, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament. Theodorete does
prove that Christ took flesh of the blessed Virgin, and ascended up Theod.
dial. 2. ^nconfus.
with the same, and holds the same there, by that he gives to us his true
flesh in the Sacrament; for that otherwise he could not give us his true flesh
to eat, if his own flesh were not true, seeing that he gave the same that he
carried up, and retayneth in heaven. S. Irenaeus, S. Iustine, and S.
Chrysostom do prove not Iren. lib. 4. cont. hares. cap. 3. Justin apol. 2. ad
An. tonin Piu^ Imp. Chrysostom. hom 60. and 61. ad top. Antioch.
only this, but the resurrection also of our bodies by the truth of Christ's
flesh in the Sacracrament, for that our flesh ioyninge with his flesh which is
immortal, ours shall be immortal also. And the same Saint Irenaeus also does
prove further, that the great God of the old Testament, creator of heaven and
earth, was Christ's Father; for proof whereof he alleges this reason; that
Christ in the Sacrament did fulfill the figures of the old Testament, and that
in particular, wherein bread was a figure of his flesh, which he fulfilled
(says Irenaeus) making yt his flesh indeed.

86. I pass over many other forms of speeches no less effectual; which do
easily declare the Fathers mynds and meaninges in this point, as that of
Optatus Mileuitanus, who Optat. l. 6. contra Donatist.
accused the Donatists of sacrilege and horrible wickedness, for having
broken down Catholic Altars, whereon the body, and blood of Christ had been
borne: What is so sacrilegious (says he) as to break down, scrape and
remove the Altars of God, on which your selves have sometimes offered, and the
members of Christ have been borne, etc. What is an Altar, but the seat of the
body and blood of Christ? and this monstrous villainy of yours is doubled,
Chalice-breakers.
for that you have broken also the chalices, which did bear the blood of
Christ himself. So he. And is there any Protestant, that will speak thus at
this day? or does not this reprehension agree fully to Protestants, that have
broken down more Altars, and chalices, then ever the Donatists did? Saint Leo
the first says: that the truth Lee sermon. 7. de pas. chate.
of Christ's true body and blood in the Sacrament, was so notorious in his
days; vt nec ab insantium linguis taceretur. That very infants did profess
the same. And in the same sermon he says: that the body of Christ is so
received by us in the Sacrament; vt in carnem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus
est, transeamus, that we should pass into his flesh, who by his incarnation is
made our flesh. Saint Chrysostom in many places of his works, does use such
devout, re^orent and significant speeches of that, which is contained in the
Sacrament under the forms of bread, and wine after consecration, as no doubt
can be of his meaning, whereof you have heard diverse points before in the
disputations, as that it deserved the highest honor in earth; that he did show
it lyinge upon the Altar, that the Angels descended at the time of
consecration, and did adore Christ Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. and hom.
6. d^ virbis I sa^a and hom. 3. de inc^mprahens. Dei natura.
there present with tremblinge and sear, and durst not look upon him for the
Majesty of his presence. And other such speeches, which is conform to that
before cyted in the disputation out of the Council of Nice: Credamus iaecere
in illa mensa sacra, agnum Det a Sacerdotibus sacri^icatum. Let us believe to
lie on that holy table, the lamb of God sacrificed by Priests. And is there
any Protestant that will speak thus?

87. But above all the rest are those speeches, which before I said to tend to
a certain exaggeration, as that, our flesh is turned into his flesh
Exaggeratiue speeches of the Fathers to utter their minds the more clearly.
by receauinge the blessed Sacrament: that our flesh is nourished by his; and
that of two fleshes there is made but one flesh; Whereunto do appertain not
only those former phrases, which already you have heard of the natural and
corporal unity; which the Fathers do so often inculcate to be between Christ
and us, by eatinge his flesh in the Sacrament, and that we are brought thereby
into one mass, or substance of flesh with him; but many other like significant
manners for vtteringe their mynds, as that of S. Chrysostom: he nourishes us
with his own body, Chrysostom. hom. 61. ad Pop. Antioch. and hom. 45. in loan.
and does join and conglutinate our flesh to his. And again: That by his body
(given us in the Sacrament) Se nobis commiscuit, and in vnum nobiscum redegit.
He has mixed himself to us, and brought himself and us into one body and
flesh. And yet further: he does permit himself not only to be handled by us,
but also to be eaten, and our teeth to be fastened upon his flesh, and us to be
filled with the same flesh; which is the greatest point of love (says Saint
Chrysostom) that possible can be imagined. So Cyrill. Alex lib. 4. in loan.
cap. 17.
he. And conform to this S. Cyrill of Alexandriae utters himself after
another sort, for he uses the example of leven, which Saint Paul does touch in
his epistle to the Corinthians, when he says; that a little leven does leven a
whole 1. Cor. 5.
bach; even so (says S. Cyrill) the flesh of Christ joined to our flesh, does
leven or pearse through it, and convert it into it self. And in another place
he uses Idem. l. 10. in loan. cap. 13.
this similitude; that as when you take a piece of wax melted at the fire,
and do drop the same upon another piece of wax, these two vvaxes are made
one; so by the communication of Christ's body and blood unto us, he is in us and
we in him.

88. Another ancient Father also upon the point of 1200. years gone had this
similitude: As wine (says he) is mixed with him that drinks Marcus
Anac^oreta in 1. ad Cor.
the same, in such sort, as the wine is in him, and he in the wine: so is the
blood of Christ mixed also with him that drinks the same in the Sacrament.
And S. Irenaeus, Tertullian, and S. Justinius Martyr, all of them elder then
this man, do use commonly this phrase of nourishinge, and feedinge our flesh by
the flesh of Christ. How do they affirm (says S. Irenaeus against certain
heretics that denied Iren. lib. 4. cont hares. cap. 34.
the resurrection) that our flesh shall come to corruption, and not receive
life again, which is nourished by the body and blood of Christ? And again.
Ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostrae substantia. Of Ibid. lib. 5.
cap. 2.
which body and blood of Christ, the substance of our flesh is increased and
consists. And Tertullian, caro, corpore and sanguine Christi Tert. lib. de
resurrect. carnis.
vescitur, etc. Our flesh does feed on the body and blood of Christ. And mark
that he says the flesh, and not only the soul. And Iustine in his second
Apology to the Emperor Antoninus talkinge of the Sacrament, says, it is,
cibus quo sanguis carnesque nostrae aluntur. The meat wherewith our blood and
flesh is fedd; and to this manner of speech appertain those sayings of S.
Chrysostom: Altar meum cruentum sanguine, Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10.
my Altar that is made redd with blood. Where he speaks in the person of
Christ. And again to him that had received the Sacrament, dignus es habitus
qui eius carnes lingua tangeres: Thou are made worthy to touch with thy tongue
the flesh of Christ: And yet further Hom. 27. in c. 11. ad Cor.
in another place: Thou see Christ sacrificed in the Altar, the Priest
attendinge to his sacrifice, and pouring out prayers; the multitude of people
receauinge the Sacrament, praetioso illo sanguine intingi and rubefieri. Ibid.
l. 3. d^ Sacerdot.
To be died and made read with that precious blood. All which speeches and many
more, that for breuity I pretermitt, though they tend to a certain
exaggeration (as has been said) yet do they plainly declare the sense,
judgment and belief of the Fathers in this article, and so albeit literally,
and in rigor, they be not in all respects verified: yet need we no better
arguments to certify us of the Fathers meaninges then these, to wit, how
far they were of, from the Protestants opinions in this mystery.

89. And truly if we would now put down here on the contrary side the
Prorestants assertions, and their cold manner of speeches in this behalf, and
compare them with this vehemence of the Fathers; we should presently see a
wonderful difference. I will touch some few only contained in this book.
First they say (and yt is a common refuge of Cranmer and 1.
the rest in this disputation as you have heard) that their communion-bread is
Christ's true body, as S. John Baptist was true Elias.

Item. That yt is Christ's body, as the dove was the holy ghost. 2.


Item. That the body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament of the Altar, no
otherwise 3.
then yt is in baptism.

Item. That infants when they be baptized do eat the body of Christ also. 4.


Item. That Christ's body is in the Sacracrament, as when two or three are
gathered 5.
together in his name.

Item. That the body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament, as yt is eaten, when
we read 6.
scriptures, or hear sermons.

Item. That the breakinge of Christ's body is nothing but the breaking of the
scriptures 7.
to the people. And these are the common phrases of all lightly. For I let
pass many particular assertions of some, much more cold and contemptible then
these, whereby you may easily se^ the difference of estimation, reverence,
respect, and belief between them and the ancient Fathers.

90. And on the other side, he that will consider the great care and warynesse,
which the The great vvarynesse of the Fathers in speakinge of articles of faith.
said Fathers did use in speakinge properly and exactly, as well in other
mysteryes and articles of our faith, as in this, shall easily see, that they
could not fall into such excess of speech, with open reprehension and
contradiction of others, if their meaning had not been evident, and the
doctrine Catholic and generally received, which they endeavored to inculcate
by these speeches; for so much as we are taught by all antiquity, that there
was such exact rigor used in this behalf in those days, that a word or
syllable could not be spoken amiss, without present note or check. And S.
Hierome says: that sometimes for one only word heretics Hier. lib. 3. Apol.
cont. Ruffin,
have been cast out of the Church. And Saint Basil being entreated and urged by
a Governor of Constantius the Arrian Emperor, to accomodate himself in
manner of speech only about two words: homiousion, and homousion (which are
not, said the governor, found in scripture) he answered him noe: and that for
one Syllable he would offer his life, if it were need. And the like
exactness Theodore^* lib. 2. hist. c. 18. and 19.
did the ancient Fathers, of the Counsel of Ephesus, show afterward in
standinge so resolutely Council. Ephesians. act. 1. and 2.
for the word Deipara, mother of God against Nestorius, and refusing the use of
the other word Christipara, mother of Christ, though the one and the other of
the words refused, to wit, homiousion and Christipara in their senses are
true; but for that some heretical meaning might lurk therein, they were
refused.

91. And to conclude, if antiquity was so careful and vigilant, to exclude
dangerous and incommodious speeches in other articles, how much more would yt
have been in this also of the real presence, if the said Fathers speeches
before rehearsed had not been true, as in the Protestants sense they cannot be,
but must needs tend to most dangerous error of misbeleefe and idolatry? And
consequently there is no doubt, but that they would have been reproved by other
Fathers, if the Protestants opinions had been then received for truth. And this
shall suffice for this Chapter.

OF THE TWO OTHER ARTICLES ABOUT Transubstantiation, and the Sacrament, what
passed in this Disputation. CHAP. VI.
HAVINGE handled more largely, then was purposed at the beginning, so much as
apperteyneth to the first article of the reall-presence, as the ground and
foundation of the other two; I mean to be very brief concerning the rest, as
well for that in the Oxforddisputations there was scarce any thing handled
thereof; but only some demonstrations out of the Fathers alleged to Latymer
(which he as you have heard could not answer) about the third and last point;
as also for that whatsoever was treated thereof in the disputations at
Cambridge, and in the Convocation house, especially about Transubstantiation,
has been answered for the most part in our former treatise about the real
presence. And albeit it was some art of the Sacramentaryes, in the beginning
of these controversies under K. Edward, to run from the discussion of the
principal point, as more clearly against them, unto the question of
Transubstantiation, for that might seem to yield them some more show of matter
or objections to cavil at, as before we have declared: yet when the matter
comes to examination, they have as little for them in this as in the other,
or rather less, for that the other, to wit, the reall-presence, or being of
Christ really and substantially present in the Sacrament, having been so
evidently proved against them, as before you have seen; this other of
Transubstantiation, being but modus essen^i, the manner how Christ is there,
little imports them; nay themselves do grant, that if Christ be there really
present, yt cannot be Real presence cannot be granted without
Transubstantiation according to Latymer.
denied but that he is there also by Transubstantiation of bread into his body:
for so Father Latymer, if you remember, affirmed before in his disputations,
when he was said once to have been a Lutheran (which Lutherans do hold both
Christ's body and bread to be together in the Sacrament) he answered, I say,
that he could never perceive, how Luther could defend his opinion without
Transubstantiation, and Fox page 1324.
that the Tygurynes, being also Sacramentaryes, did write a book against him
in this behalf, prouinge belike that in grauntinge the real presence, as he
did; he must needs grant Transubstantiation also, wherein they had great
reason: for that in truth the imagination of Luther, and Lutherans, that
Christ's body and bread do stand together, under the same forms and
accidents, and be received together being so different substances, is a most
gross and fond imagination; so as the Lutherans granting the one, and denying
the other, are condemned of absurdity even by the Zuinglians themselves, as you
see, and as we say also justly.

2. And on the other side we say in like manner, as before has been noted, that
the Zuinglians and Caluinists, and other Sacramentaryes denyinge wholly the said
real presence, do in vain wrangle about Transubstantiation. For as he that
should deny (for example sake) that any substance of gould were in a purse, or
any substance of wine in a barrel, should in vain dispute whether the gold
were there alone, or together with some baser metal, as silver, tynne, or
copper, or whether the wine were there alone, or in company of water; so in
this controversy yt is an idle disputation for Sacramentaryes to discuss,
whether the substance of Christ's real flesh be alone in the Sacrament, or
together with the substance of bread, for so much as they deny yt to be there
at all.

3. Yet notwithstanding, for that their chief altercation is about this point,
as by their disputations may appear, I shall breefely examine their grounds,
which, according to Ridleyes five grounds against Transubstantiation at
Cambridge. anno 1549.
B. Ridleyes ostentation uttered in Cambridge out of the divinity chair, under
King Edward the sixth, as before you have heard, are five in number set forth
in these vauntinge words: The principal grounds or rather head-springs of this
Fox page 1261.
matter are specially five. First, the authority, majesty, 1.
and verity of holy scriptures: the second: the most certain 2.
testimonies of the ancient Catholic Fathers: the third, The definition of a
Sacrament: the 3.
fourth, The abominable heresy of Eutiches, that 4.
may ensue of Transubstantiation. The fifth: the most 5.
sure belief of the article of our faith: He ascended into heaven. And then a
little after he concludes thus: These be the reasons which persuade me to
en^lyne Fox ibid.
to this sentence and judgment.

4. Here you see the principal grounds, or rather head springs, that
persuaded Ridley to inclyne, or rather declyne, for yet he seemed not fully
settled in this article of belief. And albeit these grounds may seem to
conteyne somewhat, in show and sound of words: yet when the substance thereof
comes to be examined, they are found to be idle, and puffed up with words
indeed. For first what authority, majesty and verity of scriptures does this
man bring forth; trow you, for confirmation of this his vaunt? truly nothing in
effect, The first ground examined.
or of any show or probability, but only that yt is called bread and wine in
the scripture, after the words of consecration: For which purpose he having
alleged the words of Christ: I will not drink hereafter of this fruit of the
vine, until I do drink yt new with you in the kingdom of Matthew. 26. Marc.
14.
my Father: he infers that the fruit of the vine is wine, which we grant
unto him, and do hold is called wine by him after the consecration, as his
flesh after the words of consecration is called bread by S. 1. Cor. 11.
Paul, S. Luke, and other Apostles, affirming yt notwithstanding to be his own
true body and flesh, but retayninge the name of bread, for that yt was made of
bread, and was bread before, as the serpent was called the rodd of Aaron, for
that yt was Exodus 7.
made of that rodd, and not because yt was not a true serpent afterward,
though yt were still called a rodd, and to signify this, that bread converted
into Christ's flesh is not really bread afterward, but the true flesh of Christ,
though yt retain the former name of bread, yt is not simply called bread but
with some addition; as bread of life: bread of heaven, this bread, Joan. 6.
and the like. And finally Christ himself does expound what bread yt is in S.
John's gospel when he says: The bread that I shall give you, is my flesh for
the life of the world.

5. Here then you see, that Ridleyes text of scripture; I will not drink
hereafter of the fruit of the vine, until I drink yt new with you in the
Kingdom of my Father; does not prove that yt was material wine which he
drunk, for that he should then drink material wine also in heaven: And yet
as soon as Ridley had brought Fox page 1261.
forth this place, as though he had done a great feate, and fully performed his
promise, for proof of the authority, majesty, and verity of scripture, he
begins presently to excuse himself, for that he has no more store,
saying. There be not many places of scripture, that do confirm this thing;
neither is yt greatly material, for yt is enough if there be any one plain
testimony for the same. Lo whereunto this vaunt of the authority, majesty, and
verity of holy scriptures is come, to wit, to one place, understood and
interpreted after his own meaning alone, against the understanding of all
antiquity. And though he go about afterward to scrape Impertine^t places
alleged against Transubstantiation.
together diverse other parings of scripture, nothing at all to the purpose,
as, You shall not break any bone of his: Do you this in my remembrance: labor
for the meat that perishes not: this is the work Exodus 12. 1. Cor 11. Joan. 6.
of God, that they believe in him whom he has sent: he that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him; and some other like places:
yet as you see by his own confession, they are not plain places, and
consequently his vauntinge of authority, majesty and verity of scriptures,
comes to just nothing indeed, but only to words and wind. Let us see what
he brings for his other four grounds and headsprings.

6. The second is, the most certain testimonies of Ridleyes second ground of
fathers.
the ancient Catholic Fathers. This we shall examine afterward when we have
considered of the other three, yet may you mark by the way, that he uses
here also the superlatiue degree, of most certain testimonies, which
certainty of testimonies you shall find afterward, to be like his majesty of
scriptures, already alleged. Wherefore let us see his third ground. The third
ground (says he) is the nature of Ridleyes 3. ground. The nature of a
Sacrament.
the Sacrament, which consists in three things: unity, nutrition and
conversion. And then he explaneth himself thus: that as in bread one loaf is
made of many graynes, so signifies this Sacrament, that we are all one
mystical body in Christ. And again. As bread nourishes our body; so does the
body of Christ nourish our soul. And thirdly. As bread is turned into our
substance, so are we turned into Christ's substance. All which three effects
cannot be signified (says he) by this Sacrament, if there be
Transubstantiation, and no nature of bread left, and therefore there can be no
Transubstantiation.

7. This is Master Ridleyes deep divinity about the nature of this Sacrament:
but if you read that which we have noted before in our eight observation,
concerning the true definition Sap. cap. 3.. 8.
and nature of a Sacrament in deed; you will see that this was great simplicity
in him (though according to his heretical ground, that the Sacraments do not
give grace) to leave out the principal effect signified in the Sacrament,
which is grace, for that a Sacrament is defined: A visible sign of invisible
grace received thereby. This Sacrament also is a sign of Christ's body there
present under the forms of bread and wine: yet deny we not but that these
other three effects also of unity, nutrition and conversion may be signified
thereby, as in like manner the death and passion of our Savior, whereof this
Sacrament is a memorial and commemoration: neither does the Transubstantiation
of the bread into the body of Christ, let or take away these significations,
for so much as to make this Sacrament, there is taken bread and wine, which
naturally does signify these effects of union, nutrition, and conversion,
which Ridley here mentions, though yt be not necessary, that the substance
of the said bread and wine should still remain, but only there forms and
accidents, which do signify and are signs to our senses, as much as if the
substances themselves of bread and wine were present. As for example the brazen
serpent, did as Fox page 1261.
much represent, and was a sign of Christ in respect of the analogy between
Christ and a true serpent, as if he had had the substance of a true serpent,
whereof he had but only the form and shape; and so are the outward Exodus 7.
forms of bread and wine, after the words of consecration, sufficient to
represent unto us the Analogy that is between feedinge the body, and feedinge
the soul, unity of grains, and unity of Christ's mystical body which is his
Church.

8. And thus much of Ridleyes third ground which impugneth Transubstantiation;
which ground (as you see) is so weak and feeble, as he that shall build
thereon, is like to come to a miserable ruin of his own salvation. But much
more ridiculous is his fourth ground, uttered in these words: The fourth
Ridleyes 4. ground about Eutiches his heresy.
ground (says he) is the abominable heresy of Eutiches, that may ensue of
Transubstantiation. Thus he says in his position, but let us hear him
afterward in his probation, which is not much larger then his proposition, for
thus he writes: They which say that Christ is carnally present in the
Eucharist, do take from him the verity of man's nature. Eutiches granted the
divine nature in Christ, but his humayne nature he denied. And is not this a
goodly proof of so great a charge? Nay is not this a goodly ground and
head-springe of proofs? Consider I pray you how these matters do hang
together. Eutiches heresy was, as you may see in the letters of Saint Leo the
first, and in the Council of Calcedon; Leo ep. 12. ad Theedos. Conci^. Cal^^d.
sess. 5.
that Christ's flesh being joined to his divinity was turned into the same, and
so not two distinct natures remained, but one only made of them both. And how
does this heresy I pray you, follow of our doctrine of Transuostantiation!
Eutiches said that the divine and humayne natures in Christ were confounded
together, and of two made but one: we say that they remain distinct, and do
condemn Eutiches for his opinion, and by our Church he was first accursed and
anathematized for the same: Eutiches said, Christ's humayne nature was turned
into his divine; we say only that bread and wine is turned into Christ's flesh
and blood: what likeness has this with Eutiches heresy? But (says Ridley)
we do take from Christ the verity of man's nature. This is a fiction and
foolish calumniation, as before you have heard, and consequently deserves no
further refutation.

9. The fifth ground, is (says he) the most sure belief of the article of our
faith: He ascended into Ridleyes 5. ground concerning Christ's assension.
heaven. This ground if you remember has been overthrown before, and abandoned
by Ridley himself in his Oxford-disputation, where he granted; that he did
not so straightly tie Christ up in heaven (to use his own words) but that he may
come down on earth at his pleasure. And again Fox page 1314. and 1515.
in another place of the said disputation: What lets but that Christ if yt
please him, and when yt pleases him, may be in heaven and in earth? etc. And
yet further to Doctor Smith that asked him this question: Does he so sit at
the right hand of his Father, that he does never foresake the same? Ridley
answered: Nay I do not bynd Christ in heaven so straightly. By which aunsweres
you see, that this whole principal ground and head-springe of Ridleyes
arguments against Transubstantiation, is quite overthrown. For if Christ in
flesh after his ascension may be also on earth when he will, as Ridley here
grants, then is it not against the article of our Creed (He ascended into
heaven,) to believe, that not withstandinge his ascension, he may be also on
earth in the Sacrament. And albeit Ridley do cite here certain places of S.
Augustine, that do seem to say: that Christ after his ascension is no more
conversant among us upon earth; yet that is not to be understood of his being
in the Sacrament, which is a spiritual manner of being, but of his corporal
manner of conversation, as he lived visibly among his disciples before his
ascension. And this is sufficient for discussion of this fifth ground, whereof
the chief particulars have been handled in diverse places before.

10. Now then will we return to his second The discussion of the Fathers
authorityes alleged by Ridley. Dionys. Areop. in Eccles. Hictarch.
ground again, of the most certain testimonies of the ancient Catholic
Fathers. And first he alleagath Saint Dionysius Areopagita, for that in some
places of his works he callerh yt bread And the like of Saint Ignatius to the
Philadelphians, which we deny not, for S. Paul also calls yt so, as before we
have showed: but yet such bread, as in the same place he declares to be the
true body of Christ, saying: that he which receaueth yt unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and 1. Cor. 11.
blood of Christ, addinge for his reason non dijudicans corpus Domini, for not
discerninge the body of our Lord there present. And so S. Ignatius Ignat. in
epist. ad Philadelph.
in the very selfsame place says: that yt is the flesh and blood of Christ,
as you may read in that Epistle.

11. After these he cites Irenaeus whose words are: Eucharistia ex duabus
rebus constans, terrena and calesti, which Ridley translateth thus:
Sacramental bread consistinge of two natures earthly and heavenly: But by
Master Ridleyes leave Eucharistia in this place is fraudulently translated by
him Sacramental bread, except he mean as we do, and as Irenaeus did, that yt
was the body of Christ, but called bread for that yt was made of bread: For
that Irenaeus in the very same place, writing against heretics asks this
question: Quomodo constabit eis, eum Iren. lib. 4. cont. haeres. cap. 34.
panem in quo gratiae actae sint, corpus esse Domini sui? How shall yt be made
evident to these heretics, that this bread, in which thanks have been given, is
the body of their Lord? Whereto he answered, and proves the same by diverse
arguments: so as no place of any Father could have been alleged more against
himself, then this is by Ridley. And as for that he says, that the Eucharist
consists of two natures, earth-ly and heavenly, he means evidently, by the
heavenly nature, the true body of Christ, and by the earthly nature, the
external symbolls, forms, and accidents. And so much of him.

12. And the selfsame thing do mean both Theoderete and Gelasius, here
also by him Theod. dia^. 2. Gelas. ^. de duabus nature.
alleged, as vsinge the like phrases; that the natures of bread and wine do
remain, which they understand of the external symbolls, forms and accidents.
For as for the real presence, they do both of them affirm yt in the same
places by Ridley alleged. And so this shall suffice for this place, there
being nothing else worthy aunsweringe. And now if you consider, what variety of
plain and perspicuous authorityes have been alleged by us before, both out of
the disputations and otherwise, for confirmation of the Catholil belief of the
real presence and Transubstantiation, you will easily see what broken wares
these be, which Protestants bring forth to the contrary, and how fondly this
second ground of Ridleyes proofs is entitled by him; the most certain
testimonies of the ancient Catholic Fox page 1261.
Fathers: who after my judgment (says he) do sufficiently declare this
matter. And I will not greatly stand against him, for that the man's judgment
being perverted by heresy, faction and ambition of those times, any thing
would seem sufficient to him to draw him to that byas, whereunto himself
inclyned. And thus much of this article.

About the third Article of the Sacrifice of the Mass.. 2.
13. For that there was little or nothing disputed of this third article,
either in Cambridge, Oxford, or London, except only a little against Latymer,
as presently we shall see, I have thought best to betake me only to Ridleyes
determination in this matter: he begins the same thus: Now in the later
conclusion, concerning the sacrifice, because yt depends upon the first (to
wit of the reall-presence) I will in few words declare Fox page 1262.
what I think; for if we once agree in that, the whole controversy in the
other will soon be at an end. Mark here good reader that Ridley confesses
this controversy of the sacrifice to depend of the reall-presence, which
reall-presence being so substantially proved before, as you have heard, little
doubt can be made of this; yet will Ridley tell us what he thinks (a goodly
ground for us to hang our souls on) which is, that there is no sacrifice at
all, but that of Christ upon the Cross, and he will tell us also his grounds
for so thinkinge: Two things (says he) there be, which do persuade me, to Fox
ibid.
wit, certain places of scripture, and certain testimonies of the Fathers.
So he. And as for scriptures, he alleges no one, but out of the Epistle to
the Hebrews; that Christ entered once for Heb. 9.
all into the holy-place, and obtained for us eternal redemption. And again.
That Christ was once offered Heb. 10.
to take away the sins of many. And yet further: that with one offeringe he
made perfect for ever those that are sanctified. And having cyted these
places, he makes this conclusion. These scriptures do persuade me to believe,
that there is no other oblation of Christ (albeit I am not ignorant there are
many sacrifices) but that which was once made upon the Cross.

14. Here now you may see the force of a passionate judgment, and how little
does suffice to persuade a man to any heresy, that is inclined thereunto of
himself. I would ask of Ridley here, how chances yt that S. Chrysostom,
S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Cyrill, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and other Fathers
cyted before so abundantly, and perspicuously affirming the daily sacrifice of
the mass, and distin guishing between Cruentum and incruentum sacrificium, he
bloody sacrifice of Christ on the Cross once offered up for all; And the
selfsame sacrifice daily reiterated, and offered again in many places
throughout the world, after an unbloody manner: how these Fathers, I say, had
not been persuaded, as Ridley was, by these places The difference betvveene
Ridley and the ancient Fathers in their persuasions.
of scripture to deny the Sacrifice of the Masses had they not read (think
you) the Epistle to the Hebrews; or did they not understand yt as well as
Ridley? and how then was Ridley persuaded, and not they? there reason is, that,
which he touched before, when he said: after my judgment, etc. For that he
followed his own judgment, blinded by his own affection in this point
against the mass, and they followed not their own judgment, but the
universal judgment and belief of the Catholic Church in their days, and so
must Ridley give us leave to follow them, rather then him.

15. As for his second motive of certain testimonies of the Fathers, yt is so
weak and broken a thing, as he dares not come forth with yt, but only
quoteth certain places of Saint Augustine, whereby he says that the Christians
Aug. ep. 23. and l 43. 9. 61. and l. 20. co^r Faust. Manich. c^. 2 and 20.
keep a memorial of the sacrifice past; and that Fulgentius in his book de
fide calls the same a commemoration. And these be all the Fathers, and their
authorityes which he alleges for his second motive: whereby you may see, that
he was moved by a little against the mass: For we deny not but that the
sacrifice of the mass is a commemoration also of the death, passion, and
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and he that in steed of these impertinent
citations out of S. Austen nothing at all to the purpose, would lay down on
the contrary side, all the clear, evident, and effectual places, sentences,
discourses and asseuerations, which this holy Father has in proof and
confirmation of the visible external sacrifice of the mass, wherein Christ's
sacred body, the same that was offered on the Cross, is offered again daily
both for quick and dead by Christian Catholic Priests on the Altar, might
make a whole Treatise thereof, and I remitt the reader to Hieronymus Torrensis
his collection, called Confessio Augustiniana, Torrens. in Confess August l. b.
3. cap. 7.
where throughout a 11. or 12. paragraphes, he does set down large
authorityes, most plain and evident out of the said Fathers works. And yt is
enough for us at this time, that Latymer being pressed in his disputations with
diverse of these authorityes answeted: I am not a shamed to acknowledge my
ignorance, and these testimonies Fox page 1325.
are more then I can bear away, and after again, being further pressed with
the most evident authorityes of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostom in particular,
affirminge that the sacrifice of the mass is propitiatory both for quick and
dead, he answered: The Doctors might be deceived in some points, though not in
all things: I believe them when they say well. And yet further: I am of their
says when they say well. I refer my self to my L. of Canterburyes book
wholy Fox page 1326.
heerin, And yet again. I have said when they say well and bring the
scriptures for them, I am of their faith. And further. Augustine requires not
to be believed. So he. And by this you may see, what account they make both of
S. Augustine and other Fathers, notwithstanding for a show, sometimes they
will cite some places out of them little to the purpose, but being witting in
their own consciences, that really and substantially they make against them,
they shift them of finally in this order as you have heard, and will believe
and teach only as pleases themselves, which is the peculiar pride and
willfullnes of heresy, from which God deliver us. And with this I end this
whole Treatise.

FINIS.

