A MORAL Method of civil Policy* CONTAYNINGE A learned and fruictful
discourse of the institution, state and government of a common Weal. Abridged
out of the Commentaries of the Reverend and famous clerk, Franciscus
Patricius, Bishop of Caieta in Italye.

Done out of Latin into English, by Richard Robinson, Citizen of London.

Seen and allowed. etc.

Anno Domini. 157^. Imprinted at London in Fleetestreate near to S. Dunstans
Church by Thomas Marsh.

Cum Priuilegio.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and his singular good master Sir William Allen
Knight, Alderma^ of the City of London: Rychard Robinson his humble servant and
faithful Orator, wishes long life, prosperous health, increase of worship,
and perpetual felicity.
SOLOMON that pereles prince of prudence (right Worshyppfull) among his pithye
Parables persuading to the searchi^g forth of wisdom and her fruits, says:
The path of the Righteous shines as the light, that is ever brighter and
brighter, unto the perfect day: But the way of the ungodly is as the
darcknesse, they know not where they fall. Doubtless as every Age has either
had his integrity or imperfection, wherein as well the felicity, as indempnitie
of humane estate has appeared, more or less, to be praised for the
worthynesse, or pitied for the wretchedness: So is it a true testimonye of the
inestimable love of Godlent toward those which being duly directed in the
path of perfection do nothing digress there from, but persist constant unto
the end, rather encreasinge then empairing their felicity: And on the other
part, where such as either reiecte their calling, or withstand the wisdom
of God, do walcke in bywayes, and wander in wilful darcknesse. Who has not
seen that the indignation of God has been euidentlye poured upon them,
scattringe them, and overthrowing them even in their own wickedness? the proof
whereof approaches even until these present days, in such sort among
Christians, that if Heraclitus the heathen philosopher were now again living,
and should but once step out at his doors, to view the state and condition of
the time present (whereas in his days he wept but hy fittes, to see the
infelicitie of that age) I verily suppose he would now continually shede tears
abundantly without stinting, to see the ruinous decay of Christianity in this
later age: and I doubt also, if Democritus were again living, and did behold
the doings of both sorts of people in the world, whether he would laughe for
joy in contemplating of the prosperous estate of the best christians, or
deride the froward fortune of the most wicked and ungodly at this day. Albeit
throughout Christendom now, what kingdom, country or common weal appears
altogether so peaceable and prosperous, which has not been lately, or is not
presently enco^bred with obscurity and absurdity of life, and manners? as some
walking in the righteous path, have their light emblemished by others of the
house of Iniquity: some feign would walk the true path, and with civil
dissension are separated from their godly purposes. But the greater part no
doubt, refusing light for dirknesse, do so nuzzle themselves in wickedness,
that they labor with malignitie, to work a confused Chaos of christianity
in general. In the midst of whom, behold (right Worshipful) greatly to
thadmiration of the rest, about us* but more to our private consolacion, and
most of all to the glory of thimmortal God, the unspeakable love and eternal
good grace of his blessing, appears in most bright beams of his blisful
bounty, ouershadowing this our native country of England, with far more
superabundant felicities, then many other nations: namely by so long, peaceable
and prosperous course of Christ's Gospel, that infallible lamp of light,
directed and protected by so pereles and precious a pri^cesse, so godly and
gracious a gouernesse, our most christian and dearest sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, assisted with so many crystal stars of stately light under her,
garnishing and sauegarding the good government of this her majesty's Realm and
dominions of the same, with most wholesome, godly, and politic laws, and
constitutio^s, for the continual co^seruatio^ of the public weal thereof
universally, free from all private prejudice and public perturbation. This
then so surpassing felicity dulye considered, what subject is not thoroughly
enforced, freely to utter and express the received comfort which he feels
inwardly and sees so apparauntly? Verily when I the meanest member of
thousands, reuolue this benefit in my mind, and see how far beyond the
expectation and deserts of man, the providence of God deals with us, thus
still preserving us, and sufferig others to quayle in their froward fortunes and
calamities: being inwardly lightened with a certain secret consolation in the
one respect, and outwardly with painful pen pitying and deploring the state of
the other: As duty chiefly byndeth me, I have at this present enforced my
study (though as a Pigmeian in simple power) to practice somewhat with
Hercules, or as otherwise desirous to travel with Ulysses, to win (albeit with
wearines) somewhat if it were possible by any good means, to benefit this
bulwark of beatitude (this my native country I mean) which with such multitude
of worthy practisioners notwithstanding, is already made famous, yet ceased I
not with Sysiphus to roll the stone, but in such penury of power as, Architas
the Philosopher attributinge to be the appropriate discommoditie to dexterity
of wit, which I deny to be remayni^g in me, I have hazarded my pore hap in
such simple ha^diworke (as I could, though not so well as I would) in
translating out of Latin into English, nine Books of the Godly, reverend and
learned FRANCIS PATRICIVS Bishop of Caieta in Italy: whose works in the
worthiness thereof reuiuinge the aucthor, dead three score years ago and
vpwardes, were in the Latin tongue by him left and entitled by the name of
Commentaries of the institution, state, and government of a common Weal.
Which albeit it contain profane principles of old time, enterlaced with the
actions, opinions, examples, Counsels, Sentences, and Sayings of Heathen
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Captains, Orators, Philosophers, and such like,
for the direction of Mundane matters, in Ciuyll gouernmente, with the Learned
opinion of the Aucthour discoursing^ vppon-euerye particularitye: Yet therein
is Copy of matter worthy Memory and Imitation for every estate and member of
a good christian common weal at this day. And because it briefly so touches
good order, in mayntenaunce of a Monarchye, and the government thereof: I have
entitled it, A Moral Method of civil Policy, prefixing the particular
contents before every book, with annotatio^s in the Margin^, reducinge the
same into one Table Alphabeticall, for the more direct assertion of the
particularities in every several book. But this ^y my rash atte^pte at the
first so boldly begone, in continuance so bluntlye done and finished, neither
beautified nor burnished with any buxomnes of apt and eloquent English phrase:
fearing much mine own imperfection therein, I labored not only, to have the
same surueig head, but also supplied, with more learned skille and aucthority,
before I would hazard the publishing thereof. Which when I had obtained, even
then bethinkinge me on who^ I might best bestow the benefit of this my simple
travel: beyond the deserts of all others, consideringe with my self the
manifest benefits which I have received from time to time these twelve
years at your worshippes bountiful hands: I deemed my self a debtor even in
duty to dedicate the same unto you, as a testimony of my thanckefull,
seruisable, and well wishinge heart toward you, as a pledge of the faythefull
zeal that I bear to this famous Cittye of London, whereof you are an ancient
Magistrate, and I your poor servant a simple member of the same: and
consequentlye, as an earneste token of my unfeigned good will and true meaning
toward this my native country. Beseeching your Worship, and all other well
meaning Magistrates to pardon my bold rudeness herein, and to accept well in
worth my poor good will, and well meaning mind, as wishing unto you
especially that this my simple Myte, were in value more worth the^ Midas his
golden Diadem, to be thrown into the treasurye of your worthy deserts: and
as if this my pore present, were more in price, then a purchased prize of
precious Smaragdes from India (had they so luckely light in my lot) I could
willingly at this present vouchesafe to thenriching of this my native cou^trye:
yet nevertheless (such as it is) pretending simply and syncerelye, wishinge
herein to profit, and pleasure all men, and not to disprofite nor displease
any, I yield the same to be shielded under Gods good pleasure and your
worthy patronage. Co^cluding with dutiful and hearty prayer unto the almighty,
for the long and prosperous preservation of our most gracious sovereign Lady
the Queens majesty, and her honorable Counselors: for the florishinge
estate of this our Public weal in every degree, where, including the
welfare and felicitye of this honorable City: by duetifull remembrance I
pray especially amongst all others, that your Worship, my good Lady and
Mistres, your loving wife, and al your Children, may enjoy long and happy
days on earth, and in fine, the most assured habitacle of perdurable
felicities. Amen.

Your worshippes most humble servant and faithful Orator. Richard Robinson.

Thomas Newtonus.
Quantas Patritio debet Respublica grates,
Cui suus hoc studio vindice constat honos,
Aureus hic monstrat (vel me reticente) libellus,
Ingenio, genio, diuite et art scatens.
Hinc morum species, hinc dogmata pura petuntur,
Hinc vitae elicitur ciuica norma piae.
Historiae quicquid Latiae, memorantue Pelasgae
Vtile, Patritius sedulus exposuit.
Dia celebratur dignis Concordia phthongis,
Dissidij hicque lues pingitur atra trucis.
Hic been perspicimus vestigia trita Sophorum,
Quamque malea priscis degeneramus auis.
Qui praesunt summae rerum, et moderantur habenas,
Ex isto exugent co^moda magna libro.
Primates Regni, Symmistae, bella gerentes,
Artificesque etiam hic quo doceantur, habent.
Denique Rex et Grex, populus, promiscua plebsque
Permagnum hinc possunt conciliare decus.
Ifoelix Liber, i, dextra contexte Minerua,
Digne teri a cunctis clima per omne viris.
Thomas Newton, Cestreshyrius.

Certain notes selected out of the Preface of Franciscus Patritius Senensis,
Bishop of Caieta, into his Book of the Institution, State and Government of a
Commonweal.
THe pleasauntnes of the Soil wherein the City Caieta stands, the merueilous
fruictfulnes of that country, and the wonderful holsomnes of the air,
fostereth and nourishes men long and many years in health: Therefore the
words of Scipio Affricanus are the less to be merueyled at, in saying, that
he became young and waxed (as it were) a child again, when he together with
his friend Laelius gathered and picked up little round smoth stones at Caieta.

Nothing better shows what a man is, then his speech: for it opens the
sense or meaning of his mind, and expresses the devises of the same, which
both is divine, and is also confessed and known to be the best and chiefest
part of man. Hereunto tends y^ wise saying of Socrates, when as he said
these words unto a youngman that held his peace: speak (said he) that I
may see what thou art. Meaning hereby that a man is not to be considered and
deemed by the outward lineamentes and feacture of his body and face, but by
the inward disposition and quality of his mind.

As it is gladsome and acceptable for wayfaringe men to tread in their steps
which have walked well before them: so is it unto a good governor to direct
his course that way, whereby many before have easily arrived to the haven of
their desires.

We see al y^ best writers in every excellent Art have be^e as it were
spighted, il reported and torn in pieces by backebsters: And namely^ Homer who
notwtsta^ding he was ye father of al Poets and the grau^d capitayn of all
disciplines, yet had he many enemies, and spightful carpers, especially one
Zoylus of Macedonia, who presuming to prefer his own rustie wit before the
golden vain of that divine Poet, saucelye inueighed by writing against the
Iliades and Odisseas, of the same Homer: affecting thereby the syrname to be
tea^med Homeromastix, Homers whippe.

It is the custom of all writers almost, to enterlace other men's doings into
their own: both because they may write things more certain, and also because
their writings should be y^ more acceptable and pleasant unto the Reader. And
as Flauius Albinus says, this is one kind of fruit gotten by readinge, that a
man may imitate that which he lyketh and allows in others: and such special
points and sayings, as he is especially delighted and in love withal, by
apt and fit deriuation may wrest to serve his own turn and purpose.

Afranius also an excellent writer of Comedies, in the answer that he made to
them which laid to his charge that he had taken many things out of Menander:
I confess (says he) I have not only received and taken out of him, but also
out of every other, as they seemed to have any thing that made for my purpose:
Yea out of Latin also have I excerpted and gathered whatsoever I thought my
self could not do better. Quintilian geeueth us in precept, (which Macrobius
also aduoucheth and labors to persuade), that we should imitate ye little
Bees, which do wa^der ^fly abroad to seek their honey out of many flowers, and
then dispose they in order, whatsoever they bring home and couche the same in
their Combs and hyues, and convert the diverse juice thereof, with the breath of
their mouths, unto a most surpassinge sweet honey, the pleasant relishe
whereof surmounteth all other. Neither may this seem new or strange, when we
see y^ al Authors both Greek and Latin do usually enterlarde their own
works, with other men's doings. For from Homer not only all Poets, have
recourse even as all Rivers from the Ocean sea, but also the writers of all
other matters: for we see that Strabo of Crete is altogether Homerical: and
Cicero also, who for a great part deriueth and fetches his matter from Plato
and Demosthenes, and translated into the Latin phrase the virtues of all the
Greeks y^ he lyked. And so did Quintilia^ issue from Cicero, and all that have
since his days studied eloquence and purity of the Latin tongue. Virgil also
was not ashamed to translate into his works, thousands of Homers verses, and
lively to imitate his affections. So also borrowed he many things out of
Hesiodus Apollonius and Theocritus. He took also much out of Latin writers,
and when he mislyked and disallowed of some, and was asked why he read them
and noted any thing out of them, he answered, That he gathered Precious
stones out of the mire.

Notwithstanding I think it the part of a thanckfull mind, franckly to
profess their names whom were do imitate, and of who^ we have borrowed any
thing: for as Plini says, it is an honest tha^kfulnes to confess by whom a
man has profited, and this recompense (as it were an hyre) is payable unto the
Aucthour by good right: least otherwise we should seem to be unjust or
deceiptfull in our dealinges. Which thing also Thales Milesius has taught us,
for when as he being very old, had devised a wonderful reason concerning
the Sun, and had taught the same unto Mandritus a Philosopher of Cyrene, the
said Mandritus being greatly delighted with the novelty and straungenes of
thinuencion (after great thanckes first given to Thales therefore) wylled him
to choose what reward, he would have in recompense of that so worthy a
lesson* I shall think my self well and sufficiently recompensed (says he to
Ma^dritus) if whensoever thou vtterest this knowledge that thou have learned at
my hands, thou do not arrogate and challenge the invention thereof to thy
self, but declare and report me to be the inuentour and deviser thereof,
rather then any other man.

A MORAL METHOD of civil Pollicye.
Whereof this first Book entreats: Of the Royal and prayseworthie
gouernmente of one sole Prince. Of original conservation of Humane society.
Of prescribing politic laws and ordynaunces. Of maintayning husbandry,
trades of merchandise, and handycraftesmen.
IT has been a very old and published argument disputed upon amongst
excellent writers in Philosophy: whether it were better to live well, and
safelye to be governed by a good Prince, and to obey him rulinge in Justice
and equity, or else to live in a free city and Communaltye established by
good laws and traditions. For unto some it seems moore meet to obey one
man rulinge justly, and lawfully, then many and almost infinite persons, and
(as for the most part it falls out) unskillful in handling affairs, and
matters of gouernmente. For it chances I know not how, yt those several
persons, who^ as it were workme^ or porters we have had in contempt, being
lincked or knit together in unity of mind, the same afterward hardly can we
in assemblies reverence. For they confirm this Sentence by the testimony of
Homer, who (in his second Rhapsodie) says.

A matter cannot well handled be,
UUhere as commanders are many.
Moreover unto this happens the imitacion of nature, Imitacion of Nature unto
Obedience of one Supe^io^^
for as we see and behold one God the creator and fashioner of all things,
by whose rule and commandment all things are governed: So seems it meet
and convenient unto us al, to incline unto and regard the commandment of one
most excellent Prince, and to obaye the same. We see the Sun in his nature, is
as it were the only Lord of the day, and the Moon to be the Lady of the
night, whom we behold to rule and reign in the skies among the planets and
stars, and the greater that their light is, the darcker do they make the
lesser Stars.

But that we may descend unto less matters, are there not some brute beasts
which live subjects to the rule of some one king, they disdain not their
obedience nor to do their duties and commandment enjoined them, and fight
as it were under a General. Who doubt the that the Bees have their King
which Governs his people, and brings the other Bees to do their duty and
to gather honye. For there can be nothing more sweeter or better to be wyshed
unto mortal men, then to lead a private life under a good king or prince
without injury or ambicion of the people. But because nature has so ordained,
that Princes are not immortal or immutable persons, but some being brought up
very delicately, giving ear to flattering parasites do for the most part
prove worse and worse in their governing: Therefore I judge, that the life of a
Civil and well instituted common weal is to be thought far more safer, then
of every Prince, for that is a continual and almost an immortal state of
life. But this is finished in a small course by old age and death.

Uerye seldom it has happened that a Prince governed and ruled still his common
weal, in that mind as he did when he began first to take the government in
hand. For of so great and almost infinite multitude of Caesar's, He means
of such as are careless for the common weal.
which were all made worse by their continual reigns, only Vespasianus of
all the Princes that were there before his time, was changed better and better,
as Cornelius Tacitus makes mention. For their beginnings were easy and gentle
until such time as they had got unto theymselues the love of their people,
but when they had obtained their purpose, they made havoc of all things by
their cruelty and lust. No fear of god, no religion could restrayn the^,
neither ceased they to rage until they were subdued and subverted, yea even by
their own subjects.

Thales Milesius who was called the chiefeste of all the What thing most
difficulte in the life of man.
Sages, being asked of a certain familier freende of his what thing he had
seen to be most difficult or hard in his life time: Says he, a Tyrant, an
old man. And in good faith, not without a cause did he say so, for there is
no rule or gouernmente exercised more hard then upon men, as Xenophon makes
mention.

Undoubtedlye there is no brute beast so sedicious or rebelling against his
keeper or feeder, that he will not obey him, or refuse to yield his commodity
unto him. But (alas) man is grudging always at the^ which seek to have
domination over him, deuiseth deceiptes and inuenteth new matters or causes of
disobedience. One Prince which The praise of a Prince.
embraces all virtues (or has all good qualities in him) is not at all to be
found lyuinge upon the earth. Some one is commended for his Justice, some
other for his fortitude, or magnanimity, some other for his liberality or
gentleness of nature: but when there are many in a common weal, every one of
them has some part of virtue and wisdom. Wherefore the Citizens being
gathered together into one societye do make as it were one man, Society of
Citisens.
which with diversity of wit and memory does excel, with many eyes sees,
with many hands wor^keth, and with almost infinite feet endeavors
himself in his affairs. Xenophon when he would praise the civil society of
the Persians, affirmed that even their children among them did so learn
justice, that they both attained unto good letters and also unto the studies of
good arts and sciences.

It seems unto Plato a hard thing to be done, to persuade those Citizens to
Justice, which were not from their tender infancy, as it were trained up in
the same. And undoubtedly if the just and perfect volumes of the lawyers were
extant and abroad to be had, and that they were not so broken and mangled
as they be, they would geeue us most clear and ample light not only how
to keep and preserve this civil society, but also they would teach us
moral wisdom, and how to attain unto the use of the greatest affairs in a
common weal.

Man is a Creature far more fellowlye and sociable, then Bees, Antes, or
Cranes, and such kind of creatures which are fostered and nourished by
flocks and do defend them selves by troops and companies. The first
society is of the Male and Female for procreacion sake: which cannot be,
except they be both together: and scarce Society humane profitable by
procreation.
is the one withdrawn from the other except by the ordinance of nature: for
the pledges of the younglinges do so greatly cause mutual Love, that they
are careful to live together, and are affectioned toward their fruict, as
they be unto themselves. For it happens not unto man and woman as it does
almost unto all other living creatures, amongeste whom the female sex do
take on them the charge to feed and foster their young children, and for a
small time it is that they stand in need of the mothers Example of society
in birds.
help. For we see that birds do bring up their young ones so long as they be
unfeathered, and not able to fly: But so sone as they perceue them able to use
their wings, straightwayes they bring them forth of their nestes and go
before their young ones, which flicker round about them, until such time as
with a stronger endeavor they be better able to shift for them selves, which
when the old ones do see, they geeue those their young ones liberty, at their
adventure to haunt the free scope of the air, neither have they afterward
any further care over them, or at any time thence forth do acknowledge them
as their own, but do take their flight to seek after the male bird, and give
their endeavor unto a new increase or breed.

But man when he sees his children borne and comen into this world, is
affected toward them with such love that he studieth or cares for
nothing more then to get lyuinge for them and such large patrimony and
Inheritance, Human care for his posteriti
that for ever there be no lack of any thing to the^ and their posterities. Of
this did proceed and rise the ple^tifulnes and frutefulnes of Cities inhabited,
because when man and wife had edified for them selves a dwelling house and
replenished the same with increase of children and nephews, they were driven
to make other houses, because one house could not hold one lynage or
ofspringe: and so they began to erect villages in the country and to
establishe society by means of many houses.

And when they did plainly see what commodity was in the society of man and
woman: and how more easlye and better very many lived together, then a few:
yea more safer from the invasion of wild beasts: they began to join
Lordshippe to Lordshippe, and lay Familye to The first reason of Society
instituted.
Familye, and also to join in neighborhood for their own common utility.
The first reason of the^ which instituted civil society, or established
cities, was yt they might live safely, and that they might be defended from
violence and assaults. For tranquillity or peaceablenes was a guide of their
life, to find out innumerable commodities. And yt is credible that man's
speech or language, wherein surely he does excel other living creatures, was
not distinct and severed, before humane society was first founded.

Certainlye we have a common voice, as well as other lyuinge creatures have,
which does either specially demonstrate and show forth joy or sadness,
either else sometimes desire, and sometimes fear, which is in us. But for to
know and discern things by their proper names by plain and perfect speech,
to finishe or conclude as well our cogitations as our effects and meaninges,
that for certain could not be but invented by civil society Studies of
virtues and disciplines.
of men. Mooreouer the studies of virtues and disciplines, or rudimentes of
good Arts, and sciences, was not found out nor invented by men which lived in
solitarines, and of them which after the manner of savage beasts led their
lives in the wooddes: but by the civil man, which was conversant in company
of men which heard many things, which discussed many things, and by whom
they were invented and first had in use. For in such Cities as were well
instructed and ordered: there were Rewards bestowed on them which excelled in
any manner of virtue and such as were also thereby preferred to high promocion
and adorned or made famous, with praise and commendation for their excellence.
For honor as Cicero says, does foster and mainteyne Arts and sciences, and
we all Honos alit arts.
are inflamed to endeavor our selves for prefermente and prerogative by praise
and commendatio^ in our travails. Finally what excellent exploite so ever
mortal men have by their study and diligence in this life put in ure, it
either had first issue and original practice from the Cities, or else took
the vfe and grace thereof, in the same cytties.

Man which is brought up or trained in common society, differs very much
from him that lives in a rude cottage, either else in a hilly wilderness, or
wood: for this Difference of Society humane.
man seems to be borne as it were unto cruelty, among wild and brute
beasts, but the other seems to be borne amongst men unto Justice and
humanity. For it is true that Aristotle says.

He is a beast and not a man which forsakes civil society: and he that
refuses to be any part or member of a city, he must needs be a wicked and
ungodly person. For he shunneth the company of men because he would not be
compelled to obaye the laws and Judgment, and to obaye him that is a
rightful Ruler: then the which thing surely there can be nothing more
pernicious or hurtful. For of all good civil order the chief thing is
Justice, which no doubt lays the foundation and ground work of humane
society and without the which there can be no civil congregation. For as
the said Philosopher says, as man is the best living creature of all others
which lives perfectlye. so is he worste and naughtiest of all living
creatures, which is sequestered from the law and judgments.

The Laws of the Persians, (as Xenophon writes) do especially ordain
thobedience due to Justice, and in such Obedience un to Justice.
manner even from their Childehoode, (as we have said) the Citizens did
learn to desire nothing that was filthy or unlawful for man to do, which
persuasion surely me thincketh is the best of all others. And if it might by
any means be brought to pass, that all men might live instructed in this
doctrine, we should be exonerated and discharged of a great part of our
labor otherwise. For if every man would prescribe what were needful to be
done, and being so lincked and joined together were not affected or moved
with covetousness, nor other perturbations of the mind: they should do
rightewell. Ambicion should not catch hold upon any man, covetousness
should not snare any man, dissencion or mutine should not entrappe any man,
neither should envy circumuente any manne, to withdraw him from the reason
of that wherein truth and equity consists: neither should he pursue and
seek for his private proffyte or inordinate pleasure, rather then a public
weal, or that reason order, truth, and equity requires.

Anacharsis when he had heard say that Solon had given himself to the study
of publyshynge Laws at Athens, exceedinglye deryded and scorned his industry
and diligence, affirminge that those laws should in time to This is meant of
laws made and not observed.
come be like unto Spiders webbes, which did catch and keep fast the small
flies, but were broken and burste in sonder of the great flies: which
sentence also Solon him self would use and not without a cause: for oftentimes
in great Cities (and wherein the studies of good arts and scienees do
florishe) we se there are very many which live worse, then as if they had
been brought up in the woods, and w^elde countries. Dion in his books which
are entitled, Of the state of a Kingedome, did say that weighty matters were
far better handled by the council of a few persons then with multitude and
power of most strong and lustye young men: which in deed is ratified by the
sentence of Homer, where as he brought in Agamemnon as pertinent to his
purpose, affirminge that he could far moore easlye destroy the Troianes
common weal, if he had ten such as Nestor, or Ulysses were, then if he had so
many such as Ajax, and Achilles were, fyghtinge stoutly and valiauntlye.

That state of a Common weal wherein few do govern, differs very little
at all from the state of Tyranny, for by their wealth and their riches, the
magistrates Oligarchia.
are chosen, and only wealth bears swaye. Neither does this prescribe
liberty or end of virtue, but only how to get riches, which Cicero
affirms: Are the subsedies of warfare and the ornaments of peace. But the
matter goes ill with the rich men, when no place is reserved for virtue, and
the common people be as it were altogether brought under foot and subjection.
And it coms to pass now and then that in some cities, only ha^dycraftesmen and
husbandmen do bear a sway, which because they are moore in number, they do
decay those that be more noble of birth and calling, yea and have such in
derision and contempt which are zealous in any kind of virtue and learned in
good arts or sciences. It may be brought to pass by fortune that such a
Cittye which is so governed, may stand in safetye and quietness for a certain
time, but fortune frowning on them, it is sone perceived, how hard a matter it
will be to live well amongst such manner of men. For they that are brought
up in fields, or in shoppes are void of experience in all things, and do
bear authority with a servile mind, neither are they furthered or furnished
with doctrine, noblenes of race or with thexperience of weighty affairs. And
while they stand in fear of the nobler sort, they do all things either
rashlye without aduisemente, or cruellye without measure: for every
co^munaltie either serves in obedience with humility, or rules with great
cruelty.

Furthermore it seems contrary to equity ye whereas the city cannot consist
of Nobles only, but far greater must be the rest of the multitude, or
communaltie, that only the Noble men should bearerule, and all the Noble men
ruling, the resi due duly obeyinge cause the city to florishe.
rest obaye.

For tillage of ground and husbandry brings unto us, natural nourishement,
and merchandise does bring unto us; all other things necessary for our use:
Whereby it comes to pass that neither without husbandme^ nor without
merchants, can civil society be amongeste men.

They therefore are not to be exempted away from public offices, whose service
is seen to be necessary in a Common weal, least they thinkinge theymselues
to be had in contempt, shrincke away and withdraw theymselues from the
Rulers and Governors. For so often as the people of Rome did separate
theymselues from the Senators, they were never without great peril and
danger eftsoon renewed.

Surely the mean sort of men, which are neither to much abject or base,
neither yet boaste theymselues in the wealth of their nobilitye, do far more
modestlye bear rule. But if it must needs ^ee that either the nobility, or
communalty only, should bear auctority, I think it far more safely
should the matter be handled, by government of the Nobles, then of the commons:
for seeldome against comlynes or honestye does ^ee any thing, which sees
that by his doings he shall hazard the praise of his ancestors with himself,
but he that being of himself base and obscure has his ancestors far more
obscure, seems to make unto himself a very small loss if sometimes he do any
thing amiss: And if there want no examples of rusticall persons, and men
unknown which have fought valiantly for their country.

For we read, that some have been called from the plowe, other some from the
flock of sheep or other heardes, which have obtained great victories unto yt
Romans. But I am one of that number which account that to be the best common
weal which is intermixed with al kind of people.

That is counted the best common weal wherein not The best common weal.
every man that lists or the more part do bear auctoritye, at ye Beck and
Check of will, but that Common weal wherein the Law only shall bear a
swaye: for equality of justice amongst citizens makes a stable and fyrme
society, which even then greatly florisheth when as all things are judged and
ordered with equal right and Justice. For it chances for the most part,
that affections do trouble the judgments of men: some one, fear appaulleth:
some others, hatred: some hope: some other, awe and dread: and some other,
ambicion or covetousness co^pelleth to judge those thigs which are not only
contrary to equity: but also contrary to yt mind of him which judges. For we
see oftentimes, the Judge moved with a certain affection, does determine those
things which within a short space after he would willingly alter and change.

Equality amongst Cytyzens causes concord, without the which, ciuyll societye
is seen to be neither firm nor Aequalitie in a Cytty causes concord.
stable at al. For no force or strength can sufficie^ily preuail, no sauegard,
no riches, no reuen^es can suffice those cities which are disquieted or
troubled with intestine wars. And again also, neither shall that ^yty be
sclender in power nor of small continuance which is enuyroned and fortified with
co^corde of the Citizens. Therefore there must be great forecaste had, yt the
Citizens may live with equal Justice and that some do not always bear rule,
and that other some do not remain alwais as inferiors, for all society is
unstable there, where all men do not live in indifferencye of Justice.

Man (forasmuch as he loves and favors his own kynne, and is congregable
or geeuen to company, and sociable or given to fellowship more then other
living creatures: and seeing no society can be firm or stable without justice)
appears to be thereunto especially born, which he favors and is affected
most unto.

And the first duty of Justice is Piety or godly zeal toward God: pertaker
of which virtue doubtless there is no living creature else seen to be, but
only man. For man only does acknowledge God, and him as the aucthour and The
first duty of Justice
creator of the world, and worckmaister of all things does renerence and
worship, by whom surely he acknowledges himself to be made pertaker of reason,
in whom he saying that Justice is all in all, it behooves that he show himself
a follower of Justice, if he would have himself to be counted like unto himself.

It bredeth great disse^tio^, where, amongst the^ which are found guilty in
crime alyke, some are grievously punished, and other some escape untouched
altogether: it should be otherwise if thoffences were not a like. For far more
grievously is that governor or shypmaister to be punished, which ouerwhelmeth
the same being laden with gold and silver, the^ he which has lost or
perished a Ship laden with Sande^or Potcers claye, and yet either of these
has neglected his duty. For things of more value semes iustlye to require
more diligence. For there can be no better persuasion in civil society, then
yt which touches the fredom of the city, whereunto the mind of every Cytizen
is to be dyrected, which surely shall be an easy matter to be done if in manner
all men will hope and trust well that sometime they may supplye the function of a
magistrate: for every man labors for renown, which when he shall se himself
prevented of, and that he is frustrate of hope, he is never at quiet in his
mind, and either shall he be the more negligent in a common weal, or appear
altogether evil affected toward the same. Hereupon do sedicions grow
amongst Cittyzens, from hence do also rise factions and Enimities, which
things surely do weaken the state of a public weal: therefore a magistrate
ought to have a determinate and prefixed time appointed for ye government and
exercise of his office. For, to bear authority continuallye in a free city
is hateful: it must also be wisely forsene yt the Cytyzens be found just
among the^ selves, directyng all their doings unto virtue, and y^ being
content with their own goods that they do not desire other men's.

Let there be no place for idle personsin a common weal, No place for
loyterers in a common weal.
for, surely by means of slowth and sluggishnes, they do commit all wickedness:
whereupon true is that Oracle of Marcus Cato,

By sloth and doing nothing at all,
Men learn to do evil: great and small.
They do always envy at the paynfull travel of the good cityzens, unto whom
when they can not be like, they labor with hartburning and hatred how to
weaken and disturb their estate. Such therefore as live ydlye must be
excluded from public offices, because neither can they rule worthily, and
also do withdraw their duty from obedience. In which matters all ciull society
is contained.

Their opinion is not to be commended which say that by the fault or
offense of the parents, their posterity should be for ever excluded out of
the public weal, for in so doing they shall despair altogether of
felicity when they see that all hope of pardon is debarred: and that they
cannot redeem themselelues by any virtue, or worthynes. For it oftentimes
chances yt their minds are most ready and prone, to innovation, and
desperation sometime is turned into mighty courage: for they which are in any
extremity, do easelye take hold upon the sentence of the most learned Poet
Maro,

Una salus victis, nullam sperare salutem.
It is only compted a safety unto those which be vanquished or convinced, not
to hope for any safetye at all.

Of al things, (as Cicero writes) whereof there is any Husbandry profitable-
commodity to be gotten, nothing can be better or more commodious then
husbandry or tillage of ground. Then this, nothing is more plentiful,
nothing sweeter, neither yet more worthy for the state of a fr^man in a
common weal: for only husbandrye is such as unto whom gentlemen and others
ought to set to their hands, both for y^ necessity of sustentacion unto our
life, (forasmuch as with out the same we cannot live) and again because it
yeldes us a most honest gain without deceit or syinge.

Surely young men are made strong with the exercise of tillage of y^ ground, and
be far more healthy then such as are trained up in Cytyes, where as they vsinge
sleep and lusts of the body, are enfebled and vnhealthie.

Yt is not therefore to be meruayled, if the Romans brought forth youngmen
hardened in the fields, when they conquered the whoole world, not by Idleness
and sloth, but with stength and fortitude.

But we in thesedayes do shonne the trade of husbandry as a fylthy lucre, yea
and have the husbandmen in derision, and do dispyse them as slaves or bondmen,
and such as are borne to perpetual drudginge, and do esteem Brokers, Pedlers,
Cooks, and Cobblers, more then we do of a good husbandman, whose industrye we
then do say excedeth the industrye of al other worckemen, when the common
people ready to sterue for hunger earnestlye craves their help and
nourishement, and when they being hungersterued and pynched with Famyne
becomes unruly and paste all fear: For husbandrye only yeldes unto us
nourishemente, it helps and furthereth buildinge, and almost finds
sufficiency also of apparel: only the Husbandman is a breeder of Cattle:
which thing was of such estimation among the ancient people that Cato being
demanded, in what thing doing a man might be quickly made rich: if (says
he) a man feed well. And being again demanded what thing else? (says
he) if he feed well. By the which answer he shows us, that even a mean
dylygence of the master in feedinge his Cattle excede the other profytes. For
in deed there is no Art or Science nor any industrye of men sooner makes a
man rich, then husbandrye.

Hesiodus and Homer, did more allow of the instruments, and necessaries
pertayninge to husbandrye and of husbandmen, then of warryors or warlyke
affairs: for the one promyseth unto men life and felycicye, the other death
and myserye.

Good householders ought to take account of their Sernauntes and Familyes
Idleness, rather then of their business: and the most learned of the aunciente
fathers Good householders what they ought to do.
judged that there was nothing more odyous and hateful then slouthe and
drowsiues of the mind: wherefore before they should eat their meat, they
called the young men and seruaunes to the table, and took account of the^ what
duty or what business they had done that day: and before them only they set
meat: whose dylygence they lyked and allowed, and those they thrust out of the
place accustomed to suppe in, which by their slouthe and sluggishnes had done
nothing: and commanded that they should labor hard in some dutiful business to
earn their own food. Let those take upon them this charge which (especially,
in a common weal do bear rule: to see that young Good arts or scyences to
be cared for.
men do apply their minds unto the study of good arts or Scyences. For in
every free City there ought to be a special care for the mayntenaunce of
good arts and scyences. For Plato said: Blessed are those commonweals which
of wise and learned men are governed.

Or at the least (sythens we all cannot prove learned) wherein Marchaundie,
seafaring trade, and other Scientes profitable unto civil societye were
frequented and used.

Every man ought to labor as much as he may, to profit himself, his famylye,
and other Cytyens. For amongeste those most streite Laws which DRACO made,
there was especially one, that, they which were condemned for Idleness,
should be punished with death.

DIOD ORVS wrytethe that there was a Law among A law among the Egiptians for
due knowledge in order of lyuinge.
the Egiptiaus, whereby all men were compelled to declare their names unto
their rulers, and to show by what art, or by what manner of gain they lived.
And if any man lied or lived by unjust Lucre or gain, the same was adjudged
to dye: and truly not without a cause: for those that be idle and slouthful
youngmen, are the poison of the cyttye: they are apt and prove to lust and
pleasure, they do envy those that be good, they cauet and desire other
men's goods, and finallye they prove sedicious and troubles me, insomuche as
the greatest troubles rise upon them.

Marcus Cato wrote very well in his books of Manners, that man's life was as
Iron, which if a man Exercise of man's life what it is
do exercise and put in use, is in wearinge made bryghte, but being
vnexercysed and not put in use, is with Ruste consumed and canckered. So men
with honest exercise are in like case tried and worn and if they be not
exercysed, slouthe and drowsines does bring to them more detrymente and
damage, then dylygence or pains taking, does good.

For very well does Cato touch the same in his Oration made at Numantia to the
Horsemen. saying: You Soldiers, consider in your minds if you shall do
any thing well by Labor or Travail, the labor and trauail does quickly
depart but the good that you do in the same labor and traueil, still does
remayn for ever: but if you take any pleasure in doing evil, the pleasure
quickly departs, but the evil that you do, remainethe for ever: which
sentences declare that there is nothing worse then ydlenes, neither any
thing more prayseworthy then industry and traueil. Merchants and
handicraftesmen are to be favored, which with their labor Merchaunts and
workmen in a city.
and industry get their living, and do make the cities far more abundant in
things which may profit al men: for, merchaunts are necessary which do carye
away from us such things as we have superfluous or to much store of, and by
exchange, and sales of their commodities do bring us those things which
shall be necessary for us.

The custom of the Belgians and low countryemen, does seem* to me very
allowable, because they will* not suffer Merchauntes to come and traffyque with
the^ Vain traffiques.
which shall bring unto them those things that may cause them to be
effeminately minded. For it chances in our times that the prouocations of
venery and lusts, as entysementes to vain pleasures, on every side are
brought us from the furthest part of the Ocean sea. Certainly such manner of
navigations or trafyque cannot be necessary, and as I judge must needs be
less commendable, but only that which makethe exchange with superfluous
things for such kind of commodity, as may be most for our proffyte.

A certain Laconian did say (as it is reported) yt there is an A measure and
mean in merchants gain.
end or measure to be prescribed unto lucre or gain, for and in co^sideracion
of the diverse chances of fortune: least yt in a small momente of time the
merchaunte do loose and let slyppe that which in all his life time he has
gained and be compelled of necessitye to consume and waste, the same in
expenses, which thing undoubtedly, cannot come to pass without reproach and
dishonestye, although the party be nothing faultye. Therefore to the end
that Merchauntes may live without such reproach, let them prescribe unto them
selves a measure and end in their covetous attemptes, least they be
compelled to suffer poverty in their oulde age, with derision also.

And yet notwithstanding, Socrates judges them that buy of those great
Merchauntes to the intent to sell the same again, to be worthy of disprayse,
except by weakness of age or by reason of their vnhealthfulnes of body they
cannot put in practice any other kind of trade to live upon.

The law of Solon is praised especially wherein he ordained, that, that child
was not bounden unto his father, in any necessary duty of life, of whom he had
received no Art, Science or Trade, to get his living withal.

Handy crafts men or worckemen which provide those things that are profitable
unto us, and without whom Certain han dicraftesmen necessary in a commonvveal
we may less commodiously live, are not only to be borne withal: but also
are to be taken and reputed amongst the most honest Citizens. Smithes,
Fou^ders, Caruers, Engrauers, Printers, Potters, Glasiers, Shoomakers,
Curriours, Taylers, Weauers, Ioyners, Masons, Clothiers, Pargeters,
roughmaso^s, Ironmo^gers, and very many other such like faculties are to be
admitted, partly because they prouid such things as be necessary. Partly because
they make their city more noble with diverse ornaments.

The Lacedaemonians, to the end they might withdraw their Cittezens from all
filthy gain, and provoke them unto Husbandrye, Huntinge and warrefare. did
cast out of their City as well their Gold as their Silver: coumptinge it a
pestilence or plague unto the Cittezens. And ordained to be made a certain
coin of Iron which was more weighty, to the end they might be extruded and
sequestered from al company of their neighbors, and live witheout the tradinge,
to or with any forrayne Countries. They which trade in Merchaundice with
modesty and do take no usury (which thing Marcus Cato declared was the next
poinct to a murderer? for to one that demanded of him, what it seemed unto
him, to be an vserer, he Usury forbidden.
answered, what is it to kill a man* And they which do not lie, neither
deceive others, with perjury, orlyinge I deem them worthy to be enryched with
the benefittes of of a commonwealth.

Worckemen given to filthy gain and which are the ministers of pleasures, and
do provide for the prouocations of gluttony, and lechery, are not only not to
be admitted, into a common weal, but also to be thrust out of a City: for
with their typling houses and places of riot, they do hurt unto many, and
profyt to no man.

And those that exercise or use light arts and faculties, whereby rises no
profit, are to be neglected and had in contempt and rather to be derided
then esteemed or rewarded.

The first respect or regard of geuinge our voices is to be had of honesty,
and virtue. And the second of lyberall sciences which in a City bring with
them most plentiful profit. The third consideration is to be had of
Nobilitye, for they whose ancestors have flourished famous Reasons of regard
in a common weal.
with some kind of praise, their children and posterity are not to be
neglected, except by their reproach or ignominye, they do darken and emblemish
the praise and commendation of their ancestors. And the fourth consideration,
ought to be had of them, which profet the Citizens by trade of Merchaundice,
worckmanship and industrye, making the City therebye more wealthye and
renowned.

Uulcane who was most skillful in the art of Astronomy, and which was also
the successor of Mercury in the kingdom did invent the mines of silver, gold,
and iron. The Grecians hold opinion that he first made and devised the fire
tongues of brass or copper, and other necessaryes touching husbandry.

And they say that in the Art of war he could do very much: and that he
was, made lame, by reason of a wound which he received in his foot: he also
held opinion, that the Planets and stars were fyery, and that all things
were made and created of fire.

It shall therefore behoue them (which bear rule in a common weal, to be
careful yt there want no deuisers or chief Workmaystero and deuisers of Works.
worckmaisters in a city: for when the sacred or public buildinges, are by
evil measure and proportion framed, yt ministers occasion to strangers to
think, that the chief princes and rulers of that common weal are clean void
of elegancy: but pryuate men's houses being evil tymbred, unhandsomely severed
with windows and lights, and beautified uncomely, are for habitacion nothing
handsome and expedient. Let the chief master of the work therefore respect and
look well to the form and fashion of houses in the city, and to the co^moditye
of the buyldings and houses, in time of peace and quietness: but in time of
wars an Architecte or chief deviser of works shall stand in so good steed
for engines, gonnes and other municions, that he cannot but he worthy of great
preferme^t, honor, and public offices: for we read of some cittyes that
have been delivered from the siege of their enemies, only by the skillful
dylygence of the chief deviser or workemaister.

Amongst other spectacles which throughout al y^ world Thebes aspectacle
are praised: the city of Thebes in Egypt was cou^pted for the greatness thereof,
for the walls and for building, most worthiest of admiration: for it had. C.
gates by situation distinct and severed one from another, with notable and
artificial workmanship, whereupon it had so glorious a name, and was of such
excellency, yt all the whole province there was called by the name of the
Citizens of Thebes: and yet the same was subverted before the Empire of Rome.

The brick walls of Babylon which Semiramis builded, Babylon.
contained in compass. 385. f^^ longs in height: between the towers fyfty
cubits, and in breadth thirty foot.

The Art of payntyng she weth in it self great ^rudicion and learning and
much resembles poetry: For Sextus Empiricus (after the opinion of Symonides
the poet) said yt a picture is a still or sile^t Poesy, and the poesy to be a
talking picture: And certaynlye it is an art of great wisdom and The art of
paintinge.
does touch near unto divine knowledge so to conceive in mind the diverse
forms oflyuing creatures and other things, so to express them with pencill,
and diverse coullours that there seems nothing wantinge unto them, but life
and breathe.

For we read that an Ox did low at the beholding of a certain pyctured Ox:
and that not a few have been deceived with the sight of grapes pictured. And
that birds have also been styrred up to rejoice at the painted proportion or
similitude of their kind.

For a pycture has not only a grace with it, and geeueth wonderful
delectacion: but also reserueth the memory of things that are done and past,
and shows perpetually before our eyes, the bystorye of things that are done.
And moreover in reading of painted stories wherein notable exploytes are
expressed, we are excited unto the studies of praise, and to the endeavor of
accomplishinge weighty and great matters. Wherefore it shall not be feared least
yt the hands of young men be stained, or spotted with coullors, sythens
payntinge commethe nearest unto learning it self.

Julius Caesar being sent as Ouestor or Threasurer into Spain, when he came to
Gades, marking well and beholdynge The noble mind of Iuli us Caesar.
the Image of Alexander the great in the Temple of Hercules, sighed, and as it
were bewailed his own sloth and negligence, that as yet in those years of
his, he had not done any thing worthy praise: whereas Alexander before he
attained to that age, had conquered the greateste part of the world.

He required of the Senate that he might have free lyhertye to ease himself of
those their affairs: and being pricked forward with memorial of such like
praise, within a small time he excelled and surmounted, the deeds and prowes
of Alexander of Macedonie,

Cato Censorius seemed scarce quiet in mind because there was no Image erected
for him: and unto one that demanded him why he had not his picture or image
as well as a great sort of others: he answered, I had rather that good men
should muse and doubt, why I have it not, then (which is worse) to murmr in
their mynds, why I should have it.

FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK entreatinge of careful regard for the supportation of
learning, the necessary vfilitie of liberal Arts and Scyences, and ex amples
persuading to the use of other exercises corporal profitable to a weal
public.
THE kings of Egipte, Kings of Aegipt only bent to learning and knowledge.
far more esteemed the praise of good disciplines, and Sciences, then of
Warfare. And therefore they all with a wonderful dylygence bent theymselues to
the studies of wisdom, neither did any of them think himself able or
sufficient enoughe to bear rule, unless he surm^unted and excelled the
residue in some kind of doctrine or learning, and employed his whole endeavor
to the furtheraunce and profitinge of many others.

With this industrye Ptolomeus being incited, furnished The Lybrarye of
Ptolomeus.
and made that famous Library at Alexandria, to the end he might thereby sow
the seed of wisdom unto his Posteritye, and profit both the Cyttizens, and
also strangers.

He also instituted plays unto the Muses and unto Apollo: and ordained unto
Poets and Dratours at their disputations, as unto Champions in their
Combattes, great rewards and high dignities, that they might the more
diligently take pains in the studies and exercises of learning.

Learning (doubtless) was most ancient among the Egiptians, whose priests
which were conuersaunte about their Kings and rulers, were accounted the
first of all others that were notable in the Mathematical sciences, and unto
them also did resort thick and threfolde, Egiptian lore.
scholars out of all nations of y^ world to learn: neither was any man thought
sufficiently learned, which was not skilful in the Egiptian lore or discipline,
to the attayning whereof (as Diodorus Siculus makes mention) Orpheus Musaeus,
Melampus, Daedalus, Homerus, Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, Eudoxus,
Democritus, Euripides, and many others went thither, who have made famous al
disciplines of all other nations.

I deem it best first and especially: that al men (if it were possible) should
be learned, neither am I of their opinion which say that learning is the
plague and destruction of wit and memory, amongst whom was Plato, who affirmed
that the use of letters was a hinderaunce unto memory, because those things
(which we have laid up in writing) we (as it were) cease to keep in memory:
even as those things which we have laid up in strong chestes, under lock and
key we think to be sure enough, and take no more care therefore:
notwithstanding amongst all the devises of me^, I doubt whether ever any thing
were devised or uttered more excellent: for it seems a thing strange and
miraculous how in a few notes or Letters, so infinite speches of men, and
innumerable words, and se^tences should be comprised and comprehended: for all
kind of doctrine and learning should be mortal and subject unto decay, yea the
acts and gestes of men should be sone buried in obliuio^, if they were not
registered and reserved in monumentes of learning: which have been so highely
accounted of, that many both people, and most excellent personages do
challenge to them selves, the invention thereof.

Those letters, therefore do I deem not only to be No Wytty Citizen
without learning.
thoroughly learned: but also scarcely can I think any man in a free cytty can
or may deserve the name of a witty Citizen without the knowledge of learning:
for how without learning can we attain not only unto the high knowledge of
liberal sciences, but also thereby learn many small arts or faculties
neither can merchandise it self or husba^dry, be in sufficient sauety without
them: for these do keep the memory of things past, they instruct posterytye:
they annexe and compare things done and past, unto things yet to come, and do
keep a perpetual reckoninge of all our whole life.

The best way here in to be done therefore, is to train young children
herunto before they apply any other matters: if in time to come we desire to
have them prove men, or to be reputed and taken in the number of Cytyzens: for
surely the Greek proverb is:

A man void of skill and wantinge learned lore,
To a tree unprofitable, comparde is evermore.
Governors therefore of commonweals ought to be Care for scholemasters
careful and diligently to foresee yt for every liberal Art or good learning,
there may be assigned y^ best scholemaisters to be mayntayned with a public
stipend, which may teach openly: for every private person cannot maintein
living for their Children, and recompense their Scholemaisters with convenient
stypende* and ordynary salary. And especially let the Scholemaisters teaching
Grammar be excellent and notable, yea not only in learning but in manners
also most approved: for it is most dangerous as it is spoken in the Proverb:
To betake a sheep into the custodye of a wolf. And to find him whom thou
put in trust as scholemaister to thy cihldren, a corrupter and marrer of
them, For the vices wherewithe Children at that age are polluted, do either
remain perpetually, or else with great diffycultie are they withdrawn from
them.

The Romans so greatly esteemed Grammar, that by decree, they ordained the
same to be taught with a common Grammar.
salary, in the open streets or high ways, by means whereof it was called
long time the common Science: many affirm that this Art was first devised,
and invented at Memphis, a cyttye in Egypt.

Pythagoras, the Prince of Italian Philosophy (whom Plato does in all points
for most part imitate) thinks the scyences Mathematical to be most
necessary for the civil man: In vain (as he judges) shall a man study
Philosophy, which has not tasted of the same* not as they say superficially,
but even thoroughly and effectually.

Lucius Columella would have every day to be observed by the rules of
Astronomy, both for profit in husbandrye, and again, for the avoiding of
manyfold dangers whereof we may be warned to take heed by them that be
skylfull.

Anaximander Milesius forewarned the Lacedaemonians that they should look
well to their Cyttye and houses: for he foresawe by this Science, that there
was an earthquake at hand, which thing doubtless came so to pass: and a
great part of that Cytty and of the hill Taygetus fell flat to the ground.

So Hyppocrates did foreshewe a plague or pestilence which should come from
the Illyrians, and dispersed his Scholars round about the Cytties of Greece, to
succor Astronomy.
and relieve them that should be diseased.

Pericles general of the Athenians, when as his host was astonished at the
Eclipse of the Sun, and ready to yield the victory to their enemies, whom
they thought y^ gods more favored, deliured the^: from their perplexity,
disclosing the cause namely that it was the natural order of the Sun, and
that it came not to pass by any displeasure of god or any unnatural event.

In the discipline or doctrine of Astronomy, and in other sciences
Mathematical, Publius Nigidius did very greatly excel among the Romans: to
whom was attributed for a Surname, Potter, by reason of his excellent devise
and invention of that knowledge: for when it was proposed and argued, why two
Twins both borne at one birth should have diversity of destenie, saying
they were both begotten and borne under one Planet, and be defending his Art,
denied, y^ yt could not be, by reason of y^ swift mouinge of Celestial Orbs,
shewinge the same by this means, he styrred about the wheel, that bare about
the Potters Claye, with great force, and upon the same did cast two drops
of Incke, and after a pawse made Example of des^eny in two Tvvynnes.
from turning the wheel, the drops were found a good way a sonder, in the
vttermoste parts of the Wheel: how now (says he) can they think that
Twynnes be a like destenied, and borne under one planet, when as the heavens
are moved and whirled with so swift mouinge and turning: seeing the wheel of a
Potter being turned about with a small course, does manifest before your Eyes,
the two drops of yncke at one time to be shaken and sprinkled into two several
places: surely this devise was so well lyked of the Audience, that it yielded
unto the Aucthoure the palm and vyctorye of the disputacion, and a perpetual
Syrname.

Lycurgus did so allow, and esteem the Science of Music: that he affirmed
the same to be geeuen unto Music.
men by nature, to the more easy bearing and tolleration of their labors and
trauayles: and be ordained the use of playinge on the shalmes in warfare,
whereupon they should play both at their marchynge forwards, and at their
retire also: and so stir up and encourage the minds of the Soldiers that
even the most cowardly person being pricked forth with y^ sound thereof, did
sometimes prove the most valiaunte, and achieved the vyctorye for their
country. The people of Creta also, when they were about to assault their
enemies, were excyted and encouraged to fight, by the noise of the Harp. The
Argiues with Shaulmes as the Latins with Trumpettes, and the Frenchemen with
Cornettes, were encouraged and anymated.

Tymotheus the most excellent Musician when he was disposed to advance
himself any time before Alexander the King, tuned his instruments so
cunningly and musicallye, that the King having mind of none other thing but
that only, and being therewyth pierced and penetrated to the heart, as it
were by some deuyne admiration would straight lay hand on his weapon and take
thereby occasion to overcome his enemies.

Music in a free Cytty is to be allowed, yea although it brought no other
thing else then pleasure and delight: for we cannot always be busied in
affairs: and this kind of oblectation even in our business and dealings is
most honest: for as CICERO says very well: It is the part of a free manne
sometimes to do nothing, and to wythdrawe bys wearyed mind from long care
otherwise. Which thing especially music brings to pass, making us
thereby to forget our Labors, Trauayles, and myseries.

Plato devised three sorts of Music, the one he said was manifest,
consistinge only in voice: as we see is used when men sing: the Second
as well with the voice, as with the hand: as when with the strykinge upon
the strings, we use to sing to the Instruments: and the third (says he)
is only fynyshed with the hands and fingers: as when the voice being sylent
and still, we stryke and play upon an Instrument.

PYTHAGORAS thincketh that Music was not the invention of men but of the
first worckemaister of the The invention of music after the opinion of
Pythagoras.
universal world, which made the Celestial Orbs, to yield and make a
certain harmony in their distinct motions, whereout proceeds the first
invention of humane music: which music doubtless is profitable unto a
civil person, and does not only delighte the mind, but also nourishe the
wit, making men more prompte and courageous, not only in warlyke affairs,
but also to atchieue every waightye matter.

And moreover we read of PAEON and diverse other Physytians, whose Pacientes
almost dispayrynge of recouerye, have been healed and recovered by the
delyghtes and pleasures taken in Musycke and that certain mad men have been
brought to their right wits again, by the same mean.

If we will have any regard of the health of our bodies and tranquillity of
life (which without prosperous Physic.
health can scarcelye be had, we shall confess y^ Physycke is the most
excellent and necessary Art pertayninge unto mortal men: For as Cornelius
Celsus makes mention, who has written most excellent books of this
discipline: Husbandrye afoordeth nourishement to our bodies when they be
healthful, and Physic promises health unto persons diseased: and therefore
we ought to render thanckes to the living god, who has granted us life: next
of all unto the Phisician who does conserve the same unto us, and makes it
healthfaller and of longer continuance. For to prove that this Art of all
other Sciences is most ancient, y^ best learned Greek Authors do testifye:
for the inuenter bereof was Apis the son of Phoroneus, and Pytho king of
Egypt.

The ancient writers divided Physic into three parts, Diet, medicin, and
manula cure.
the one to consiste in diet, another in remedies or medicines, and the third
in artificall cure of the hand: and unto this part, did the inventions of
Alcmaeon Crotoniata scholar to Pythagoras the Phisician much help, who
searchinge every member of man's body, and cuttinge up all and every ioynte
and inward article, of all the vytall parts, was the first that devised and
invented the dissection or Anatomy of man's body.

If medicine for the body be necessary in a good common weal, for the sondrye
kinds of diseases, which chance daily unto mortal men, to thend with strong
and sound bodies we may live well: how much more necessary shall y^ physic
of the soul and mind be, without the which the bodies themselves cannot be
in good health or lyking? For man is subject unto many diseases, by reason of
the diverse kinds of meats whereof ^e feeds, as Homer says: yet
notwithstanding the diseases of the mind are not fewer, then the diseases of
the body, and wherewyth we be far more vexed and indaungered: what disease
seems anger to be, wherewith when we be throughlye chafed, little or nothing
do we differ from mad and furious frantic persons? What disease seems
covetousness to be? wherewith when we be thoroughly enflamed, we cannot be
grateful unto our own Country, not to our Parents nor children, neither yet
unto our selves: What does fear? what does tremblinge? what does sloth and
sluggishenes work, and bring to pass in us? and other perturbations of the
mind innumerable, which when they seyse upon us, we are not only in
mynde-but also in body disquieted: but the Medicine or Physic for the mind
is specially Eloquence, which by the reasons and arguments of Philosophy
represseth or keeps under, such persons as would be to much puffed up with
vices, lifting Eloquence.
up those that are cast down, and making very dasterdes to become valiant
persons: for what other force or power can there be better, then by the force
of eloquence, to bridle the raginge and furyous common people, when their
courage fails them for fear, and to stir them afreshe to valiauntnes.

Ancient writers say that Eloquence was the lady and Mistress of matters,
nether is it only accoumpted profitable in peace and quietness, but also in
wars and tumultes excellethe all other strength and force: which thing to
be true Pyrrhus king of the Epyrot^s affyrmed. For when he did make wars in
Italye, he retained as his compaygnion of his exploites Cyneas the Thessalian
an Orator and disciple of Demosthenes, vsinge his help and service, at each
pyyche most earnestlye: for unto the cities which he could not subdue by
force and armor, he sent Cyneas his Orator: which Cities for the most part
he persuaded to surrender, even as he desired: insomuch that Pyrrhus used often
times to say that m^ cities were won and brought under his power and
subjection by the Eloquence of Cyneas, then were by himself vanquished by
force of arms.

The Art of Oratorye consistethe in three Sorts of causes: Whereof the first
conteyneth Persuasion, and Dysswasion: for what things soever are in a common
weal advised or deliberated upon, they have need of persuasion and
disswasion, to the intent the truth may be boulted out: Wherefore an
Oratoure, that is to say a good man, skillful and flowinge in vtteraunce, shall
persuade such things as shall be thought profitable, least the People slide
or fall away by a sinyster and false opinion, and allow well of that which
within a little space after, they shall either be compelled to alter and
change or with repentaunt minds, bear and suffer the same vnpaciently^. The
second is called the kind Demonstratiue, consistinge either in praise or
disprayse: And the third kind is that which in Judgments is exercysed, and
this fallethe out into Accusacion and defense.

But many cities now a days are noseled in an ill error, because either Lawyers
are altogether ignoraunte of pleadi^g causes, or rather because light disposed
brab^ers, as the ancient writers did call them, do plead and handle matters
only for lucre sake bablingly, and therevppon delayinge Suites, make the same
to hang in strife and varyaunce very long, which thing in Cities is very
dangerous: for pryuye grudges and hatred bredeth discord among Cityzens.

Among the Venetians, whose common wealth is for The noble persons among
the Venetians do plead causes.
Justice, Government, Wealth, and nobility of the Cyttizens, accoumpted not
only throughout all Italye, but also through out all the world most famous
and excellent: the most learned persons of all others, in the art of oratorie,
and such as by come of a noble race, do plead, and handle their causes: by
which means through contynuall exercise, they do attain to that perfection
that very many of them prove cunninge and eloquente men in their common
weal.

Poets are to be mayntayned in a Cyttye, and to be made famous as well with
honor, as with praise: which Persons surely ought to be most cheryshed
and Poets necessary in a common Weal.
welcomed unto all men, as well for the rarytye of them, (for nothing in all
ages of man can be sound more rare, then a good Poet) as also for the
abundaunce of their wit, and their divine Nature, neither shall Poets be
exiled from a good Cyttye, whatsoever Plato shall say, since they are well
known to be very profitable unto their Country: For, what learning has
Grammar in yt contained, without the pertractation of Poets? The Elegancye or
Fynenesse of words, the proprietye of the Tongue, the sweet translations or
Metaphors, the lybertye of Speech and Sentences, which do beautyfye the
Oracions, as it were with certain Stars werr they not invented only by
Poets, and aptlye placed and dystynguyshed by them, in their right places.

Socrates the Philosopher was wont to say, it smallie fancied or lyked him, to
behold the secrets of Nature, and to neglecte the reason and order of man's
life: for what profits it us to search out certain hydden Secrets of
Nature, to measure the stars and skies in our minds, if we know not our
selves, and neglecte the reason or order which ought to govern our
appetyte, and whereby we dyffer from brute Beasts.

What may be more vile or filthy then to see a man that is well learned, to
be with Lust enflamed, furyous, or Angry, Covetous, or insatiable without
Measure insomuche the more he has, the more he seems to lack, surely unto
such a man that happens, which unto Thales y^ philosppher, one of y^ seven
sages, happened: for he on a time in the night season walking abroad did behold
the heavens very earnestly, by means whereof he fell into a dytche, or pytte
that was in his way where he went, whereat he cried out: a certain old wife
lookinge out at her wyndowe, and hearing him cry, asked him what he went about
to do, that he so fell into the pytte, where upon he answered, that his
meaning was to behold the heavenly planets: but the old woman smyling said,
thou see not those things which are before thine eyes, and yet will thou
seek to know heavenly matters?

The Oracle at Delphos (which they say was fixed before the doors of the
Temple) ought to be prefixed before all men's eyes, which desire to be right
wise: which is Know thy self: for he knows not himself which does not
know how to use the virtue of his mind, which is broken or shaken with
fear, which does advance himself beyond measure in reioysinge, who is
inflamed with covetousness, tormented with lusts: against which euylles
Philosophy armeth us, and does not only pluck up the roots, but also every
little string or fiber of perturbations. To this philosophy will every good
Cytizen endeavor himself, that desires to profit not only himself and his,
but his native country also.

Philosophy teaches us throughlye that Justice is it, Philosophye.
which contains and keeps together humane society: without the which there
can neither cytty, neither yet any house be rightly governed: For she
persuades us to use and enjoy our own right, and not to injury any man, to
live content with our own goods, and to abstayn, not only our hands, but
also our eyes from other men's goods.

The knowledge of Philosophye is not only pleasant unto Cytizens, but also to
Kings, Princes, and governors, and does much avail in thenterprise of great
or weighty matters: for Philip of Macedonie when news was brought him, that
his son Alexander was borne, he dyrected his letters unto Aristotle saying:
that he gave hartye thanckes to the Godds, not only for that he had a Son
borne, but because yt was his fortune to be borne in the time of Aristotle, of
whom undoubtedly he hoped he should be instructed, and that he should
prove a Son both worthy for him, and the succession of his Crown: and
therefore so sone as this his Son could speak, he gave charge that he
should be brought up at the beck or commandment of Aristotle, committing
him in his lustye green age unto his charge to be further trained in
disciplines, and learning: and when his master Aristotle by reason of
sickness, could not well attend and follow him in his wars, he resigned
his rowme unto Calysthenes his scholar, that he might ever be at hand and
ready with the King, and further him in the studyes of Philosophye.

Pericles who had done so many famous Exploytes amongst the Atheniens, had for
his Scholemaister Anaxagoras, whose precepts he is reported very often to have
put in use, not only in cyuill and domestical, but also in forreyne and
warlike affairs, wherein he being studiouslye bent to take pains, and
hearing that Anaxagoras being weary of his long life went about to famysh
himself to death, with all expedicion came to him and as a peticioner with
prayer and tears desired him, that if he had no mind or joy to live unto
himself: that yet at least he would live for Pericles sake, whose conference
and Counsel in matters tendinge to the Common weal, he greatly wyshed to
have.

Julius Caesar was a man most exquisite in all kind of Praise of Julius
Caesar his bounty to wards learning and learned men.
learning, and enriched all the best learned men in his time with rewards,
and promotions: By whose example also, Octauius Augustus retained Athenodorus
as* his Scholemaister in Philosophy, a man as learned as any in his time.

The Frenchemen which are called Celtae affirm that they whom they called in
their mother tongue Druydes, The first invention of philosophy among the
Frenchmen.
were the first inuentors of philosophy: for these persons, inhabiting the
woods: not only in contemplation, but also in life showed themselves precise
philosophers, and disputed many things of virtue, and of the immortal God,
very godly: and belde opinion, that death was no other thing, then a
certain flittinge unto a better and more lasting life: who being induced with
that persuasion, fought valiantly and without fear against their enemies,
thinckinge that man altogether a dasterde and fool, which feared death:
since even forthwith they should by death pass into a far better life.

We have already told that first especially the civil man must labor to
furnishe his mind with disciplines, and studies of good Arts: for the
excellencye of the mind, does not only help the body, but also makes it
most ready to the atchieuinge of all and every great labor: for there can
no body be strong and healthye enoughe, when the mind languysheth: for in the
wars we do often see that some little men and small of stature do fight with
a good courage, and those which are bigger, to be very cowardes: and therefore
it is better to help and fortifye the mind with virtue, and wisdom, if we
desire to have the right strength of the body.

The exercise of men's body is altogether coumpted Corporal exercise.
necessary: for Slouthe does dull the body and makes men geeuen to too much
tenderness, but industrye or labor does strengthen the body, and makes men
more lustye and strong.

For the Lacedaemonians nourished their children in the country, and used to
wrestle naked, to thend they might accustom themselves, the better to endure
travel and labors: Hard bringing up of youth profitable.
They lodged abroad under the open air, as well in time of cold, as in time of
heat, and hardened themselves in the dust, in running, shoting, wrestling,
casting, and leaping. To set before valiant persons and stout warriors, y^
sweet delights of boys and gyrles, seems to me no other thing the^ to weaken
strength and to have all virtue in contempt and derision. Let children therefore
be so exercised, that they may accustom themselves to take pains and labor,
but yet not in outrageous sauagenes: for as industrye and honest exercise does
strengthen the body, and make it more apt unto labor and travail: so too
much exercise, and continual Continual toy linge.
travel, does break, cut of, and shorten a man's days, with untimely old
age. Aristotle witnessethe that with such kind of toil, the grouth of the
body is hyndered, and the members wrenched and disfashioned. Celsus says that
we see many times men of great toil and labor, to become in the end, most
crooked and benommed in their members.

Julius Caesar commanded that young warriors should not be trained or taught
neither in the schole, nor by masters The commandment of Julius Caesar for
trayning of young soldiers.
of defense, but at home, in their dwelling houses, by y^ horsemen and
Senators, skillful in feats of arms, in wrastlinge, runninge, casting of the
balle: in which practices, he lyked well to have them exercised, yea, he thought
it would do them much good to be enured in swimminge, leapinge, skirmishing
and making a show of a right battle in deed: for they chat accustom
themselves to such exercises, come more cheerfully, and with better courage to
the wars, and are both in body and mind stronger. Epaminondas, exercised
vvrasteling.


Epaminondas the most worthy captayn of the Thebanes, enured himself much with
wrestling, not so much to get a corporal strength, as for the agilitye and
nimblenes of his body: also Plato yt gretest of al philosophers exercised
wrestling with Aristo Argiuus, by reason whereof it is said yt for ye notable
habit of his body, he was called Plato: for before he was called Aristocles,
after yt name of his graundsyre.

The Lacedaemonians commanded their women to wrestle among the^, and affied in
marriage, the man co^queror with the woman co^queresse together: yt the issue
afterward coming of strong and lusty parents, should be likewise stronger the^
others: but this custom is altogether to be refused and refected: Let women
therefore keep them selves at home and apply Women by nature more tymerous
and fearful then men.
their huswifelye affairs, whom nature has made and ordained weak and
fearful persons, that by means of fear and awe they might be the fitter and
apter to keep home.

Let first the wit of a child be nourishte and trained unto wisdom* if it
may be: which of all other things is the best and chiefest: let him be
exercysed in body but yet so as he hinder not thereby the gifts and
dexteritye of his wit: for it is hard for a child to be exercysed in body
and mind together at one time, whereof there would be diligent consideration
and reason had: for they need bodylye exercise but a small while, least they
should be therewythe to much delighted: for they are made thereby more dull
of capacity,, and scarcely know how to provide for them selves: as we
read of Milo Example of the great strength of Mylo.
Crotoniates of whom it is reported that he did all things beyond the strength
and hability of man, and often winning the best game and victory, was crowned:
and kyllinge an ox with one blow of his Fyste, sacryfysed him, but at length
trustinge to much to his strength, he came to a most miserable death and
doleful end: for espyinge a tree where into wedges were driven, but not yet
cloven asonder, and laughinge at the sloth of them that had left the same
tree, in that case so remayninge, he went about to Miserable end of Mylo
tear it asonder with his hands, but when the wedges were lowsed and fallen
out, and that the tree came together again to his proper nature, he was taken
fast by y^ arms in that desert and unable to help out himself, was devoured
of wild beasts, and fowls of the air.

Polydamas an other famous Champion enteringe on a time into a certain Cave,
and willing to sit down, his Example of polydamas,
froward fortune was such, that the upper part of the Cave over them opened
wide, and fell down upon them. Polidamas therefore goinge about with his
arms and shoulders, to bear up the weight, all his companions, leauinge him
distressed fled away, and he thereby fondlye enforced to make for himself
his grave there not without the great derision of all the company.

Secundi libri.

FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK entreats of the election, and choice of Magistrates, in a
common weal: of moral examples in furderinge their offices and duties in
several: Of discussing and redressing causes in variance: of reforming
enormities and controversies: of needeful ordinances: of accustomed watches
for defense and save guard, of the city or country: of careful provision for
corn and victualles, needful as well in peace as in wars for the
publiquesustentation.
AL governance of a common weal, consists in the description and choice of
Magystrates, without whose aucthoritye, wisdom, and diligence, a cyttye
cannot flouriste nor be: For *amongst People that live in Freedom, there is
nothing well done without magistrates: for even as a ship without a Pylot can
never be brought into the haven of tranquillity: and as an Host of men,
without a captain, is always in great danger, and scarcely ever wins the
victory: in like manner eiuil society seems, to be objected and ^ayd open unto
Fortune: neither can be in any part quiet or fortunate, except (by the
aucthority, and council of the Magistrates) it be governed. And yet
notwithsta^dinge multitude of Magistrates troubles and perturbeth How a
common weal prospers without Magistrates.
the order of a Cyttye. For as in seafaring and warlike business, regard must
be had that there be but sewe commanders, and many obayers: so also judge I
it meet and requisite to be observed in the state of a co^monweale:

Ancient writers commend the Massilians whose common weal for order sake and
equitye, they prefer before all others: for they had Senators, in number (as
Strabo makes mention) 600. of whom fyftene every year by turns bore
greatest aucthoritye: and of those fyftene, also three were appointed to decide
laws, and matters in co^trouersy, and these few only, governed the civil
society very well but in time of wars and vprores, these Massilians did chose
such Generalles and Princes as were sufficient and well able to take some
wayghtye charge of wars in hand: for very many Phisicians being brought
unto one sick person, do rather strive among them selves by way of vain
ostentation: then minister those things which may heal, or remedy the
paciente: And diverse counselles or opinions in greatest dangers do rather
hazard and endamage a matter then help it: these and many others, are to be
considered in the ordayninge of Magistrates.

But this again and again, I deem worthy to be Who be mete persons for to
be made magistrates in a common weal.
spoken, that very well it is, and most meet, that the administration of the
Common weal should be committed unto old men, which both by reason of
their age, and experience in matters have most skyll: for true is that
sentence of Plato, and which of Cicero is holden as it were for an oracle,

Blessed may that man be coumpted, to whom even in his old age, it has
chanced, to obtain both wysdom and true opinions. Crantor, an ordynary
scholar of Xenocrates, and most excellent Philosopher, reckoninge the state of
man's life, and descypheringe by most wise division our actions, and Four
special regardes to be taken in man's life.
cogitacions: affirmed that the first part of our life is to be employed unto
virtue: the second to good health: the third to honest pleasure: and the
fowerth as he thought unto riches. For doubtless, nothing that good or pleasant
is, can happen unto us without virtue: next unto this (as the best companion of
virtue) he deemed to be good health: For scarcely can it be well with us in
our mind, when it is evil with our body: and scarcelye can the grief of
the body be without the grief of the mind: Moreover he that is in good
health, enjoys freeer mind, and is not frustrate of the quietness of his
wit, and senses: next unto these twain, let honest pleasure come as a third
co^paignion, which then doubtless is chief and best, when the mind enjoys
it self: it measures all things unto the tranquillitye and pleasures of the
mind* it is not delighted with the tickling of the senses, or allurementes of
the body, but in contemplation of great and waightye matters, which surely
be the food of an honest mind, well furnished with liberal studies: That
fourth part whyth has society with the former three, although it be the least
of all, yet when we respect human necessity, and when we consider, that
man has need of meat, drink, apparel, and dwelling house, it cannot be
accou^pted otherwise then necessary: For as Callymachus says, without riches
virtue aduaunceth no man: and that virtue without riches, does little or
nothing adorn any man. Theognis the true Poet, testifies, that for fear of
poverty we go headlong even into the Seas: for penury now and then urges
excellent persons, and compels them to attempt very hard enterprises.
Plantus the most pleasant among comical Poets, for want and scarsitie of
victuals, placed himself for hyre to grynd in a Myll, and there so often as he
had any vacant time from his work, he accustomed himself to write Comedies
and to sell them.

Cassius Seuerus also an excellent Orator, having continued for the space
of. xxv. years a vanished man, died in great penury, scarcelye having rags
wherewith to cover his priuities. And Valerius the compaignion in office of
Brutus dyed so pore, that he was buried at the common Pinchinge pouertye
puts men to their shifts
costs of the Cyttye: And the legittimate son of king Perseus (as
Marcellinus writes) after his miserable calamity and frowning fortune, was
glad to practice the Smythes occupation to get his living withal: these
cogitacions ought oftentimes to be reuolued in mind of all them that will
rightlye constitute humane societye.

They that take upon them the office of a Magistrate: A Magistrate
let them know that they bear a majesty of the common weal, and let them
forget themselves so long to be pryuate persons, as they execute or use the
administration of a public office: let the magistrates evermore have before
their eyes, the laws of the common weal, whereunto in all points, let them
know that obedience is to be given. For as the laws do govern the
magistrates: so the magistrates ought to govern the people. For true is that
Prouer be pronounced by Tully:

The Magistrate is law, that does speak and dispute:
But the Law is a Magistrate silent and mute.
For this happens in a good common weal, that he which modestlye obeys,
may seem worthy, and meet sometime to bear aucthority: and it is expedient,
that he He that obeys well rules well
which obayeth the Laws, should hope to bear rule in time to come: and he
that is in office, and has Jurisdiction or governance, let him think that
not long after, it may come to pass that he must obey others: let the first
retain virtues, as their guides, to direct and rule them: Virtues are the
guydes of civil magistrates.
without the which nothing is well done, whereof the first and principal
is Justice, which lays the foundation of humane society and conteyneth in
it godliness: which S^xtus Empiricus teaches to be the knowledge of Justice.
worshipping God aright: For this virtue especially respects the deuyne
reverence, mysteries and ceremonies: without the which nothing orderlye,
neither any thing ^olilye or godly can be done in a common weal.

It is the nature of Justice to hurt no man, nor to iniurye any: to geeue to
every man that which is his right: to reward those that deserve well, with
favor, praise, and gifts, and those that deserve evil, with losses, reproach
Duties of Justice.
shame, punishementes, and death: but moreover a right excellent duetye of
Justice is in word and deed to keep faith and promise: for nothing can be
more filthye, in those which bear sway in the public weal: then to break
promise which reproach doubtless is never blotted out with oblivion, as we
read of the Carthaginians, whom To keep touch and perform promise is
commendable.
Ennius the Poet called faythlesse, or leaguebreakers, because they started
from their leagues and promises: which (certes) was the only and chiefest
cause, why that cittye which (for the Empire of the whole world) contended so
many years with the People of Rome, (the chief Prudence
vanquishers of all other Nations) was destroyed.

Prudence the second virtue consists in choice, or discerninge of good and
badde and is the ryngleader or chief of other virtues: insomuche that
Apollophanes a worthy Philosopher said: that this only was the virtue upon
Temperance
whom all the rest were attendaunt. Temperaunce (notwythstandinge) helps
very much, and so shinech in all our doings: that she is thought to be the
moderatrix or directresse thereof, this is she which with so long continued
praise, has extolled that worthy sentence of Solon, warning us to do:
Nothing to much.

The Children of the Persians were carefully taught, and trained to learn
temperance, which to thend they should An example of Temperance.
the more diligently observe, their rulers appointed and commanded certain of
the discretest old men in their cytties, to be present at their daily
exercises: to t^^ end they fearing the looks and grave countenaunces of their
ancient ouerseeers, might in all their doings be governed and directed by
modestye and temperance to frame the^ Constancye.
selves thereafter in althinges, from time to time, accordingly. Constancy must
also be therwt lyncked and annexed, namely that which is of words and deeds
cou^pted the most faithful obseruer or keeper: She causes that the secrets
of the public weal be kept close and in silence, then the which there can be
no better thing: for which virtue the Persians especially are praised, which
Persians trusty in keeping counsel.
do use to keep all their secrets most faithfully: neither fear, neither
hope, nor any other fair promise, can aliure them to utter any secret matter,
that is to be concealed: for they have an old lesson or rule among them,
whereby they are advertised: that silence is kept with danger of life. Neither
are they thought able to atchieue, any great exployte, which are not able to
bridle their tongues, which member nature has ordained, as the easiest of al
others: thereby to show that silence is no hard virtue to be kept and observed:

Aristotle says yt there be three things necessary in a Magistrate: Three things
necessary in a magistrate.
first that he embrace Justice and the other virtues, thereby to direct all
those things which are profitable for 1.
the common weal: Next, that he do love the present state of his cittye,
and being therewith content enterprise to do nothing either new fangled or
strange, but to go that way which their ancestors have instituted: and 2.
which by the treadinge Steppes' of others, was worn plain: for desire of
new alteracions and things, is rather wont to wearye and weaken the common
weal: then to make the same better by any means.

Thirdly that magistrates should have power of yt people, sufficient to execute
those things, which appertain 3.
to their function, or office: which thing doubtless causes that they
themselves, with greater courage bear out their office: and those again, shall
more diligently obaye them, unto whom obeisance is to be geeuen.

All Magistrates which have the decidinge of laws, and which do exercise any
kind of revenge or punishment against offenders, ought as some bold opinion
to be strangers: for as they themselves say: private grudges, enimities, and
hatred do arise amongst citizens, when as one citize^ punishes another: but on
the other part, fellow citizens, are more tractable and prone to show favor
one toward other then as if the matter were in the dealinge of a stranger: by
the reason whereof many people of the Italians, have accustomed to send for
such Magistrates from other places: but to be short, I am of opinion, that in
a well governed common weal, wherein all men be obedient to the laws and
customs of their country: citizen Magistrates are far better, and govern
much more honorably then strangers: which thing doubtless, not only by
the Romans, Carthaginians, Athenians, and Lacedaemonians: but by diverse others,
which commit all offices unto their Citizens, may be perceived: but especially
it is evident by the noble common weal of the Uenetians, wherein there is no
place given to Strangers: and yet Venetians admyt no no stranger to bear rule
among the^
notwithstanding, there is neither severity wanting, nor by such manner of
judgments, any discordes do arise, neither any sedicions, or enimities grow.

And one thing concerning that common weal of the Uenetians, we may well
say, which I cannot remember that ever I read or saw elsewhere: for the order
of that city never swarued and altered from the order and state wherein by the
first founders thereof it was constituted and ordained: but has always
remained in one state of government Venetians alte nothing before time ordained
by their predecessors and elders.
immutable: for they that builded that city devised amongst themselves, and
their Magistrates, a reward (as it were) for their trauayles: and this
inheritance left they unto their posteritye, that no Alien or denizen, born in
any other country should be admitted, to bear any office or aucthoritye
amongst them: and so since that time, perpetually has this order been
observed, almost a thousand years, until this day: wherefore the posteritye
of them that first bulded the city, have always been rulers Seigniorye of
Venice.
in the same city, and were called Senators, Seigniors, fathers and nobles: and
all the rest Commoners.

The chief and principal care for the common weal consists in Senators,
which ought to have aucthority, as well in time of wars, as in time of peace:
unto whom also from the other magistrates men may appeal: these Senators also
(according to the institution of Lycurgus) are the keepers and reformers of the
laws, and as often as need shall require do constitute new, by certain
learned lawyers of their Seigniorye: for it is a very hard thing to compass
and comprehend all things in written laws: for new affairs oftentimes
happen and occur through the disorder of men, for redress whereof new laws
are expedient, and all things daily prove, worse and worse, which by the laws
are to be punished.

Solon the Philosopher decreed no law against Parricides Manquellinge now a
common practice in Solon his days not thought that such could be.
and murderers: being demanded, why he had omitted the same: he answered,
that he never thought, that any such mischievous and wicked act, could be
committed or done by any man.

All order of the Public weal, and all Counsel, ought in doubtful cases
and adverse affairs, to come from the Senators, and counselors, who be called
fathers of their country, because even as parents provide of duty for their
children, so ought the Senators for their citizens and countryme^: let these
grave Counselors (as it A good councellor the father of his cou^trye
were grow together into one body, which sees with many eyes, works with
many hands, and stands upon many feet, which thing, surely brings to
pass that ye common weal is far better governed, then the state of one
Prince, for he alone, forecasteth and foreseeth what he can: yet cannot he
measure, and compass all things by counsel and reason: for no one mortal
man has the knowledge of all things: And he is counted and reputed for the
wyseste, who is ignoraunte in fewest matters: for many learned, wise, and grave
wen, laying their heads and devises together, do foresee all things, nothing
is to them obscure, nothing happens sodayn and unlooked for, nothing new,
nothing strange, nothing great, or wonderful.

There if the Senators theymselues do trespass, they seem to offend more by
their example, then by the crime it self: for all the inferiors, do follow
their steps, and Example of Superiors is a president for inferiors to follow
think themselves scarcely to transgress, when as they se any Senator
guylty of the same crime: let them therefore be firm and constant, not vain
and lyinge, neither given to filthy lucre: let them not only banishe away all
filthy usury, but also all gain, wherein may be any suspicion Usury.
of filthynes.

Publius Scipio Nasica unto whom the surname of a good man, was by the senate
bestowed: who did so many notable Vndecente gesture in a Senator put to
reproach.
exploytes for his country, on a certain time standi^g in ye election for y^
office of AEdileshippe, took a certain country fellow by his hard and rough
hand, and feeling the same so hard, demanded of him in sport, whether he
used to walk upon his feet, or upon his hands: which thing was so grievously
taken of the country fellow, and other standers by, that it came to the
knowledge of the common people, and was ye cause yt this excellent Senator
Scipio had a repulse in his suit: forasmuch as all the country people, thought
the^ selves hereby to be had in derisio^ and made flouting stocks.

Uery little or nothing do laws and institucions profit God is the principal
aucthor and fautour of al good laws and procedinges.
except they be grounded upon yt sacred scriptures, the aucthor whereof is
almighty god himself: for if those ancient people which knew not god, but
were led with certain supersticions, and false religion did nothing apertayning
to the common weal, without auctority of their high bishops: what behooves us
christians to do, which only embrace the true religion and which have Christ yt
son of God for the fou^der and author of our religion: surely we ought to
endeavor with all care and diligence, yt nothing be done, nothing thought That
thing which to the honor and praise of god is begone continues in force and
felicity.
upon, or devised, except god his assistance. aid and good will be thereto
favorable, and that al our purposes, mysteries or devises, tend to his honor
and glory, by whom we attain life everlasting: therefore gods divine operations
ought to go before the ordinances of man: according to this saying: Imprimis
venerare Deos, first above al things worship God. The senators charge and
duties therefore shall be diligently to watch and care, that no laws be
established and enacted, but such as he consonant and agreeable to Gods good
pleasure, for if he be ayding and well pleased with our christian rites, and
ordinances* there can nothing go amiss in the common wealth, neither can there
any sinister thing or mishap chance herein.

At the beginning, y^ governance of humane affairs was in ye authority of ye
bishops: and kings being initiate in sacred lore, took charge, both of divine
and humane things, neither thought they y^ any man could possibly rule well,
which was ignorant in sacred matters and estrau^ged from god: therefore in those
days either the prieests themselves did govern, or else, the princes did
attempt nothing without their advise and auctority: for Romulus at yt first
foundacio^ and beginning of Rome, called the bishop which had charge in the
temples, and Bishops named kings by Romulus.
holy ceremonies by the names of kings, and reigning as it were with a mutual or
associat aucthority, would have him to be the keeper of ye laws and traditions of
their country: and not without cause, for the Prelates being inspired with the
holy ghost, do teach and instruct us thoroughly in the precepts of holiness and
immortality.

There are two times to be considered upon: the one of peace, ye other of
wars: and as in time of wars circu^spect care for peace may not be omitted:
so in time of peace such Times to be considered in peace and War.
things ought to be forsene which in time of wars may serve and be most
necessary: for surely it is a point of great wisdom, to haste^ and have in
redines, in ye time of peace, such things: which fear of wars should co^pel us
spedely to have Time of peace
in use and to ocupie: both these co^sideratio^s therefore must be carefully
looked to, by the^ y^ bear chief rule and auctority, yt with warlike municions
they may defend, and maintain y^ sweet joys of peace: and that y^ municio^s
of wars be not Time of War.
prejudicial or hindering to ye maintenance of peace: for the Romans, ye most
excellent of all others, unto the chiefest office appointed two Co^sulls: y^
one to deal in thaffayres for the cities behoof, and the other in warlike
matters: for smally should it prevail the^ to live at rest and quietness wtin
the walls of the city, if in the fields al were in hurlyburly and uproar, or
if their enemies were not kept back from inuading their terretories: and on
the other part to hold wars abroad, and at home to want advise or council,
were very dangerous. Time does alter both the person and his propertye.


That promocions, or offices should be perpetual in the common weal, I think
it to be perrillous: for the long continuance thereof, does often alter men's
manners: and now and then gives them occasion of tyrannous practizes, as we
may well see of Julius Caesar, who being continual Dictator, invaded the
Public weal: For yt is much more harder in prosperity to observe modesty,
the^ in adversity* and therefore, that custom is to be commended and allowed,
whereby two Consulles be appointed for no longer space then one year. The
Cousull ought diligently to be careful in musteringe for the wars, that in
every precinct, the wealth, number, and age be regarded: for those soldiers
obey vnwillinglye, and are negligent in their duty, which are forced beyond
their abilitye, and power: and very ill fares it with that army which
thinks themselves without just occasion forced to warfare and when this
Consul has mustered soldiers, let him not suffer them to harbor or lodge in
their wyntringe places, under Covert, but let them lodge abroad in the open
field, yea if it were in a peaceable time: and let him teach them, y^
soldiers are of no more force then their captains and Generalle: for all men
affirm that this sentence of Homer is true:

More safer is an host of Hearts, a Lion being guide: Then is an Host of
Lions which an Heart have on their side. Special consideration and care must
be had for the due Overseers of the laws.
administering and execution of Laws in a good Common weal, which surely
causes, that men do live without violence or Iniurye: for it is impossible for
a multitude to live without ^^ryfe, specially in that City where all things be
common: albeit we say it is much better for every man to have his own: for we
see that fields which are in common amongst many, lie untilled, and grow
full of* brambles and briars: but private fields, far more neat and trimlye
husbanded: but private patrimonies be they which make men diligent and
attendant, and measure herein is to be prescribed unto them, least richemen
inioye al, and y^ porer and weaker sort clean thrust out and defrauded.

Varro says, that variaunce at the beginning took his first name of
contencion for lymits or bounds: which thing in deed Virgil seems to affirm
where he says:

Limes agro positus, litem vt discerneret aruis.
There was set and ordained a lymyt or bound,
To avoid contention in fallowed ground.
For now and then contention arises for debarringe or stopping ye course of
rain water or of other matters which Occasions of contentions for small
matters among Citizens to be reformed.
daily happen in Fyeldes, or else in the Cyttyes, when men do argue and
stand in contencion, for the walls of their houses: for droppinges of their
h^use eues and of Rafters not fastened: and oftentimes it comes to pass that
amongst merchauntes, contentions may arise and specially when many are found
vain, and double dealers, with whom a man must not deal in secret means,
but before some arbitrators, or convenient witnesses, and Judges: Such manner
of stryfes whereby enimitye and hart^urninges may grow, ought straightwayes by
composition to be determined and ended, that y^ citizens may be brought into
concord, which then is brought to pass when every man enioyes his own,
obteyneth his due right, all variaunce or dissension set aparte.

Upon holidays and such days as are appointed either for Fayres or feasts,
it shall be good to stay prosecution of causes and matters judicial, which
thing also is customablye frequented in any public joy or mourning.

A Praetor amongst the Romans was so called, because he bare rule: and he
was called Urbanus amongst the citizens administered the laws: It was in the
power of y^ Praetor to minister both public and private aucthority, therefore
it is nedeful yt the Praetors be men of upright dealing, and A Praetor.
well deserving of the public weal: who ought in no part to be ignorant
of the laws and customs of the common state, but plainly and absolutely to
be so skillful in laws both public and private, that nothing appear un to
them either obscure or doubtful: Let good and conscionable lawyers plead
causes, and handle nothing with Lawyers.
craft and maleengine: but let them speak all things truly, and let them not
leave a lie unpunished: for there ought to be nothing in a common weal so
vncorrupt and sincere, as judgment: which surely is more often corrupted with
speech then with money: whereupon very well said Cicero, yt he understood not why
he y^ corupteth judgment with money, should be worthy of punishment: and he
that corrupts it with eloquence, should have praise: to me (says he) it rather
appears yt he offends more in this point, which rather with speech then with
money, corrupts the judge: because no man with money can corrupt a wise judge,
but with smothe and Corruption of Judgment.
disse^bling speech any man may: for how are yt corrupters of causes worthy to
be hated, and how grievously are they to be punished? for they do sell the
patronage of Justice and forsake the best office in the world, which is,
defendinge right: sometime they pynch and get money from the defenda^t, sometime
again poule the plaintiff, and in ye end delude them both: and many do very
il, which take on them the patronage or office of defe^ding ye client, and do
handle y^ same so coldly, yt they differ smallye from forgers of causes: for
true is the sentence of Cicero which says: perhaps men ca^ not be defended
without dispraise, and that negligentlye to be defended, could not be without
great wickedness.

Let lawyers therefore and patrones of causes plead their clients causes, and
that for duty sake, yt they may deserve Vnsaiiable Lawyers.
well of the citizens, and let their reward be, to have a good report in all
men's mouths, and let it not be lawful for them if by any means it may, yt
they take any bribe or gift, for handling the cause, as it was established by
the law called Cincia: for a filthy thing it is and not worthy any man, to
Bribcry is a filthye thing.
set out the tongue, for gain or lucre in pleading causes. Surely Antipho
Rhamnusius (as antiquity reports) was the first yt ever for defense of any
cause took reward, whose example long times after, the Grecia^s, and Latins,
followed: saying that the merchandise of the tongue, was of far other sort, then
any other merchandise whatsoever: but the Romans from whom all good examples,
as well of honesty, as of virtue, are to be taken, by the law Cincia prescribed
Good examples, given by the Romans.
an order unto the covetousness of orators, and pleaders of causes, and because
young men puffed up with hope of gain, should not be permitted neglige^tly to
handle matters, at the request of Appius Claudius, they suffered the law
Cincia to be moderated.

Unto those Magistrates which we aucthorize to have Consideratio^s vpdon the
travels of the magistrates.
thadministring of justice, we rather ought to impart some standing fee or
public stipe^d, then private gain: least thereby the judgments of the law be
set to port sale, which thing no doubt is prejudicial unto al people: and for
the most part the common decay of the public weal: whether the judgment be
corrupted or whether else any thing be done by deceit or violence, by them
which be judges, and have jurisdiction in executing Justice.

Overseers of shamfastnes and modesty, are so necessary in a common weal,
that without them, little or nothing do other magistrates prenaile: for there
cannot be a more comodious Tribes or War d^sin a c^tye.
thing the^ to have people well manered, with ciuility: wherefore ye most
grauest persons and most approved in virtue (some out of every several tribe or
ward) are her unto to be admitted: which may reform and redress the manners of
the city, lest thereby there crepe in pieuesh customs, pernicious both to the
people and to yt whole city: therefore great diligence is to be required, yt the
manners of ye people be most sincere and perfect: and then again, yt no
pernicious custom do invade the citizens, then the which there can nothing in
cities happen worse: and lastly yt the religion and ceremonial orders, which
have been by our elders well established be also well observed.

The Romans called the Censure of shamefastnes and modesty, the Lady and
Maistres of discipline,: and them which bore offices, in the common weal,
they called Ce^sors, Censor was he which could by his Wisdo^e and knowledge
execute his office viz. to constitute, co^mau^d and comptrolle.
which took their name of judging, comptrolling, co^stituting, or commanding:
of what effect it is, very well to discharge and execute this office, even
hereby-may we perceive, in that this office or dignytye of Censor, did geeue
the surname unto Cato Censorius, who very well executed this same function: The
Infamy which we call the Censors check, was far more greuouslye taken of yt
Romans, then any other punishmente, and sometimes yt rygour thereof stretched
against the magistrates: for the Senators were cast out of the Senate house, by
the Censors check, as we read of Lucius Antonius, because he put away from
him a yo^g Uirgine whom he had married: none of his friends being called to
council: so read we also of Lucius Flaminius, who caused certain to be put
to death, for looking lasciuiouslye at certain women, whom Infamy of Ce^sors.
they loved: also Caius Fabricius the Censor, removed out of the Senate house
Publius Cornelius a noble personage, because he brought ten pounds worth of
plate to a certain Senators discharged for excess riot.
banquet. Fat and corpulente Souldyers, perfumed with ointment, were noted with
this check, their horses taken from them, and they dismissed and discharged
out of the hoaste.

In judgments of life and death, great care and head ought to be had: for
cyuil hatreds and priuye conspiracies then burst forth unto revenge, when as
the magistrates have power of life and death: and therefore the Romans, when
they had appointed their Consulls unto whom they committed, the special
charge, of the common weal: yet was it not lawful for them to execute or put
to death any citizen of Rome, and truly not without good cause: for nothing
more procurethe the destruction of the weal public, then the punishment by
death, of those which specially have but smally dealt with others, or whose
crimes or offenses have not so far came to light as by no means they can or
may be denayed, or else that they be Innocents wrongfully condemned make
people repyne at magistrates.
aparantly known unto all men: for that works a perpetual iniurye, when
suspicion of innocencye remaynethe in the peoples heads, of them which
through false or rash judgment are said to be unjustly condemned, for
innocencye caryeth with it great favor, and the rumor or mutteringe of the
people stryketh fear into the^ which have condemned innocents: And moreover
the forre of conscience bringes to pass, that such persons, as have so
ouerreached themselves, are thought never to live in securitye, but appoint
unto themselves, present punishment before their eyes: How notable is that
sentence of Julius Caesar, which with often repeticions he would use?

A wretched companion of old age truly,
Is the memory of ancient crueltye.
And therefore, they that must geeue sentence and judgment, of the life and
spyrite of man, which is part of the world, and has a mind by the special
gift of God, partakinge of reason, and fills up the number of the lyuinge,
ought carefully to advise and consult with deliberation and not to do any
thing with rash judgment, because such a Deed once done, cannot be
called back again.

Alexander king of Macedonie unto his mother Olympias, vrginge him greatly,
to kill a certain guyltlesse person, requestinge the kings consent thereto,
in consideration Pity in the heart of Alexander toward one that was like
to have been put to death.
of that nine months space which she bore him in her womb: most gently
thus answered. O good mother, rather request or demand any other reward at my
hands: for man's life cannot be acquitted or recompe^sed with any good turn,
or benefit.

Sabacus, moreover king of the Egiptians (a man for godlynes and religion
famous) as Diodorus Siculus makes mention did so much abhor sheding of
blood, that he commanded the convict and condemned persons, being bound with
chains, to become slaves for the city, rather then that they should be put to
death: doubtless true death redeemed by thraldom.
is that tragical sentence, and in heart and mind, evermore to be recited,
and recorded of them, which do bear rule. viz.

UUhat ever thou be that do rule or raygne:
From sheding blood, leave and abstain.
There was wont to be amongst the Romans Eight special kinds of
punishments used by the Romans.
eight kinds of punishments, that is to say: amerciame^ts, banishment,
imprisonment, whipping, recompense of as much for trespass made, reproach,
bondage, and death: yet seldom with death did the Romans accustom to pursue,
except against Parrycides, murderers, rebels, and such like wicked persons,
whose lives was not to be spared. But now an ill custom has taken place, yt
thieves even for small matters are executed by death, and so they take away
that which can never be restored unto mortal men. The great consideration for
the common treasure in a common weal ought to be had: for treasures, and money
are compted the sinews or strengthes of the city, without ye which it can
scarcely be preserved: for these things do beautifye a city, in prosperity,
and bring ready succor in adversity: wherefore there are to be ordained
treasurers, which may have the aucthority of receiving, keeping, and layinge
out of the common treasure: these men ought to be grave and upright, and ought
to abstayn their hands from public and private corruption: not dishonest
troublesome persons, but which can diligently measure the rate of fortune, and
of such persons, as they shall have to deal withal, and besides this let the^
take heed that publicanes and tollers, extorte nothing by violence or craftye
collusion from them over whom they have rule: for that kind of people is
odious, and now and then, by reason of their dishonest dealing, and lewd
demeanor, provoke rnd stirs the common people to desire of new fanglenes.

In leuyinge of Tributes and Taxacions, treasurers Leuving of tributei.
ought to be gentle and seeldome times to do it: for it greueth the
citizens, to have their proper private stock and substance imployde on
public affairs: except in great distres, or time of danger, for then all
good cityzens do of their own good accord fall in consideration hereof, and
willing be contributory to payment: but if they may spare their private
substance, they live better contented: and if there be no other remedy, but to
do otherwise, then ought they to entreat all men gentlye, thereby the more
easily to raise their tributes, and win the peoples hearts withal: for far
more is the good will of citizens to be esteemed then any mass of substance of
treasures. Noble was the saying of Alexander the great, when on Alexanders
friends were his tresures.
a time being demanded, where he had his treasures laid up, answered: he had
laid them up with his fryndes, and welwillers, and that they were well and
warely kept to his use there: for good will and good love is the lady, both of a
man's own substance, and of another man's also: Tyberius Caesar also unto
his Lieutenauntes, receyuers, or treasurers, which counseled him to exact
trybute of his provinces and countries, answered, yt it was the part of a good
shepeheard, to sheare his sheep: and not to flea the^.

The tyhat be aucthorised to coin money, ought to obey the commandment of the
treasurer, least they forge or embase the coin: or mingle it with any other
base metal, for it is most dangerous to make counterfeicte Monye, of less
value then it should be: the consideration Moneta a monenda.
whereof is most diligently to be ouersene of the treasurers: some do suppose yt
the word Moneta is called so properly, Pecunia a Pecore.
because it gives warning, yt no deceipte in money, stamp or weight be made or
used, but yt name of Pecunia, as Varro says took his beguning of Pecus: for y^
riches and substance of men in times past consisted in Pecoribus: yt is to
say, in Cattle. And this thing does Lucius Columella testifye to be true,
and Ovid. libro 5. Fastoru^, makes mention where he says:

All other Instruments as yet, were not for use out found, The first earthlye
treasures of men.
The wealthy, Cattle did possess, or else great store of ground. And hereupon
were richmen calde, hereof has money name: But now unlawfully each man, to
seek for wealth does frame. Cambyses the father of Cyrus, king of Persia,
being asked by what means cities might be kept in best sauegar,
answered: if they which keep the same cities do think they can never be
wary enoughe of their enemy. The saying of this most wise king, is alwais to
be reuolued of them, which bear aucthority in a common weal: for what
avails armor? what municions? what are ye walls annd towers profiting unto
them which neglige^tlye Sauegarde of a cittye.
keep and look to their watches and wards? for we see very many cities
by negligence of their watches, and scoutes, (with the sodayn coming of their
enemies) put to the spoil and sacked: and moreover as touching night watches,
to whom citizens trustinge, and sleeping soundly, have not known any thing
of the coming of Night Watthe
their enemy, until the scaling ladders have been set up to their walls, and
they thrown down headlong, from the tops of their turrets.

Spargapyses the son of Tomyris queen of Scythia, being together with all
his host of men druncke with wine, and slumbring or slepy, were in that estate
altogether destroyed: and doubtless, no Scoutes, nor watches, can Scoutes,
Watchers and Warders.
more safelye or diligently be exercised, then of them which bear the
chiefest aucthority, whether the same be in the Tents, or within the walls,
certes it is scarce safe enoughe for the Cytizens to sleep soundlye when they
shall perceive the chief overseers of the watchmen to be wantinge: and a
Captain seems to commyt his host to the hazard of fortune, so long as he
sleeps. Alexander of Macedonie has left us a good lesson for this matter,
who, because he would not be deceived by means of sleep, used as he lay in his
bed to stretch out his arm, (having under the same a brazen bolle or basin
standing) and to hold in his hand a balle of silver, to the intent that when A
Wise example of Alexander in vvatchinge.
sleep had weried and taken away the force of his fingers: hearing the fall of
the silver ball into the bolle or basin he should straight way by the noise
and sound thereof, awake again out of sleep: surely this lesson I thinck that
most excellent king learned of the Cranes which do use a nightly watch among
themselves always, and because they would not be deceived or betrayde by any
mishap in their sleep: they stand upon one leg holdinge a little stone in the
other, which when it falls from them by hitting the other standing leg, or
making a noise with lighting on the ground, they are thereby awaked out of
their sleep.

Even so with no less care ought they to watch, which bear aucthority in a
common weal, that in such manner they may set in order their watches and keep
the holds of their cittye, that the common weal sustain no discom modity nor
dishonor thereby neither in time of wars, neither yet in time of peace:
doubtless Socrates in Plato used great diligence and care, in ye choice of such
as should Who are meetest for vvatchchers and Warders.
keep watch and ward: and surely the better and more well their citizens be,
the more fitter persons are they to keep watch and ward: which otherwise we
see falls out in rude or barbarous cities, wherein laborers, worckemen,
porters, and pore men are put to scoutes, and watch: but the richer men cocker
themselves and live at ease within their own houses: Sometimes watches are
committed in charge unto the Soldiers only, which now and then being wearied
with their daily travail, either watch rechleslye, or else sleep so
soundlye, that they are not to be awaked with any noise at all: as it chanced
unto those Romans which kept their Capitol, when it was befieged by the
Frenchemen: which Romans had not they been awaked out of their sleep by the
gagling of a goose, had been utterly undone, and the common wealth of the
Gaglinge of a goose saved Rome from being taken.
Latins, for ever extinguished.

Let there be placed orderlye upon the Walls in places fit for that
purpose, two warders which must have geeuen them a Watch word, least
they be deceived: and let them be called upon and punished which sleep
in their watch time: Let the Scoutes in the day time watch before the Gates,
on the towers, at loupe holes, or at other chosen places, least that a
multitude of guestes unlooked for, come as it were between them and home, and
take away booties, carrye away Captyues and invade the Cittye: with no less
care also let the night watches be placed in the cyttye, then upon the walls:
for most myschieuous deeds are rather put in practyse by Night then by Day.
Thieves, Harlottes, Cutthroates, and robbers are no less to be restrained,
then Public Enemies, against whom doubtless Night vvatchers charged.
needful it is that the Overseers of the Watch, should extend Punnishmente
with great seueritye, if they will rightlye provide for the good estate of
their Cyttye: For worste of all fares it with that city wherein Harlots and
night Thieves, raunginge in the same be not sufficientlye met wythall.

It was lawful among the Romans by the Law of Twelve Tables to kill a
night thief: So has yt also been lawful to do, to an Adulterer taken with
the manner, and also to a woman committing Fornication: These notwythstandinge
I judge are not to be permytted, but in such manner to be handled, that for
fear of punnishmente, all men keep theymselues at home from doing evil
abroad: For he louethe to do nothing that is good or right which shonneth
day light, and he that steals in lurckynge manner, is afraid least some
should see him and bewraye him, and so thyncketh the night more safer for him
then the day time.

It was not wont only to be the charge of them that Night vvatchers preuente
and vvithstand many dangerous chances in a Cyttye.
had the ouersighte of the Watches amongeste the Romans to exercise watches
and wards upon the walls, ^ut also it was enjoined that they should be
vigilant against all night Traueylers: whereby the Public quietness of the
cyttye might be preserved and mayntayned: moreover these and such like
watches do help in many other matters, and especially in auoydyng casualties
of Fire, which surely are seen to be most dangerous in cytties: for both do
they quench casual chau^ces of fire within the Cyttye happeninge, and also
often times do catch in a tryppe subtle Fyrers of houses, whose offense
therein is to be accoumpted capital and worthy of death: and them also
which negligentlye rake up their Fyers, they ought to punish by whippinge and
cudgellinge.

Dinocrates an excellent Architecte of Macedonie having promised unto
Alexander the great, to raise up the Hill called ATHON in THRACIA, of a
monstrous height, unto the similitude and resemblaunce of a man, whose left
hand should supporte the walls of a most large Cyttye, and the right hand
should hold a bowlle, which should receive the flouddes descending from the
Hill, and pour them into the Sea: Alexander (being delighted with the devise
of this figure) asked him whether there were any fields near unto it to
nourishe and mainteyne the Cyttye with Corn and victual, yea, or no?
DINOCRATES answered: that yt must have Succor and relief from beyond the
Seas: The king said that such a deuyse was not to be allowed at all* for
(says he) as the infant lately borne into the world can neither live nor
prosper without the milk of the Nurse: So neither can a Cittye be sustrayned
or cherished without the fruits of the fields.

The example of this noble king ALEXANDER ought to exhort all builders of
cities, to appoint the situacion Al princes or magistrates may here ymy tate
the care of Alexander for his subjects in prouidinge corn and victuels.
thereof in plentiful and fruiteful places, and that they which have charge over
the people do especially provide corn, and victuals for their suste^tacion:
for smally should the defense and sauegarde of the city prevail, to small
purpose should the laws, rytes, and order of a city serve, if the people
should sterue for honger: for what can be more dangerous among that people,
whom neither armor, magistrates, neither Gods Justice, nor man's Laws,
neither any shame can keep in straight order, then dearth and famine: for
very aptly hereunto says Lucanus the Poet.

Nescit plebs Ieiuna timere.
Let therefore first and principal care be for competent provision of victual,
namely bread corn, the use whereof is seen to be far more necessary, then
any other thing and let there be made three Purueyghours, or principal
victuallers, to have the ouersighte, and surueighe of all victual, and make
provision of the same accordinglye: let the corn be kept for common use,
either in deep trenches, clean fa^ned from the chafe, and covered over,
whereby for seven years store, it may be well reserved, Good order for corn
to be kept.
or in broad graners, with little wyndowes, on the north end thereof, wherein
for three years space it may be preserved from the mothe, wyuell and all
noisome vermin: and let them have a special care that there be no corn or
grain carried forth of the city, but in great store and plenty thereof,
least it become mustye: but let it rather be brought in by exchange, and
rechaunge made from y^ countries near adioyninge, for it were far better to
have store enoughe at home sufficiently not only to serve them and their
country: but also if need were to help our distressed neighbors: And let
them set a rate or price of things, least they being bestowed at the will of
them that shall sell them, they be rated and esteemed, as it shall seem good
unto them at all times.

Regard also must be had that not with a little care and Good order for the
church
diligence the temples and churches of the immortal god (which with such
great costs and charges are edefied, and which make the cities, specially
thereby far more gorgeous) have such officers and overseers for the
government thereof, least otherwise by negligence and slouthe they fall to
ruin or decay: wherefore AEdiles are to be appointed, which thereupon were
called by the Romans, by that name AEdiles, because (as Varro says) they had
the ouersighte of sacred and private houses: It was also the charge of the same
Officers, amongst the Romans, Good order for stretee and highvvayes.
to see that the common streets, and highwayes, should be well leuelled and
made even, and that ye same, should be kept in decent order, and that thereupon
no buildinge should be erected and set, which either might hinder the commodity
or comlynes of the same: also they had a charge enjoined them, to see that the
water conduites, common sewers, and sinckes, should be cleansed and scoured, and
that the bridges should be repaired and amended: Good order for conduites and
common Sevvers.
moreover, there is nothing in a free cyttye which does more breed envy or
hatred, then to see certain fellow citizens in a short time enryched with the
common money, or treasure whereas the same could not suffice them all.

THE FOVRTH BOOK entreatinge of mutual Societye in Marriage: mayntenaunce of
housekeeping: ordering of a household, with moral examples of necessary duties
in each degree.
ADRIANVS Caesar was a Prince of excellence wit, and exquisite learning: for
often times he Praise of Adrianus Caesar.
both wrote, spoke, heard others speak, and talked with his friends at once,
and would do all this at one time: he was also greatelye geeuen to Poetrye,
and a favorer of all good Sciences: in Arithmetique, Geometrye, Music, and
Payntynge, most skillful: he often was wont to say that the Common weal is so
to be regarded of them which bear rule in the same, that every one should
know how that he had to do for the common weal and not for his own proper
and private estate.

Phocion the Athenian (when as abundance of treasures was sent unto him of
gift, from Philip king of Macedonie) Phocions modest answer in refusinge
gifts and tressures sen^ him.
would not take any of it at all: and to the kings ambassadors exhorting him
that if he himself could easelye lack the same treasures, yet at the least,
to take it for his childrens use: for whom (said they) it was very hard
being in such penury and distress as they were, to maintain their fathers
dignitye: he answered, if my children do resemble and be like to me their
father in condition, this little plott of ground which has brought and
maynteyned me to this dignitye, shall also suffice to bring up and mainteyn
them: but if they do not resemble me, sure I will not mayntaine their ryotte
with these Treasures and riches.

In no place at these days is found that land which of it own
frutefulnesse nourishes the Cyclopes without tyllage and sowing: neither is
that Erithrea of Lusitania which men say Gerion sometimes possessed, being
of so rank, and fruitful soil, that when once the corn is cast upon ye
ground, the new sprouting seed eftsoon bringethe forth new blades, and
bears Seven or rather more haruestes one after another: neither flows in
our Lotos, some do suppose to be a tree.
coasts that flood Nylus, which of it self brings forth an Herb called
Lotos, whereof men in those parts do make bread to eat, and whereof with
such gredynes (as Homer says) they do eat, that they altogether forget y^
ordering of their household affairs: wherefore men must provide to have
possession of Lands, that prouysion of victualles may be reserved from time to
time.

Marcus Curious has by his wysdom taught us to have great store of public
lands: and that private men Possession of lands in common weal.
should have so much thereof, as to the meynteyninge of their life and
lyuinge, should be necessary: for when as he out of his tryumphes had
adjudged innumerable acres of Land to the common weal, to every manne in
several he only allotted Fowertye, neither* reserved he any greater portion
thereof unto himself then the rest had: He was blamed of certain persons
because he had geeuen himself the least part, and had entytled the common
weal to the most part: he said unto them, that no man ought to think
that ground to be a little or vnsufficiente which should suffice his own
use and his families.

As it behooves civil Societye to have few to bear An ouerseer to order
household affairs.
aucthoritye, and many to obey, so in household affairs there ought to be
one which should have chief rule, and he to be ancient in years, and all
the residue to obey. And as in a city by due obedience to laws, the magistrate
is said to govern others iustelye, so in Commaundynge and obayinge, we have
accustomed to govern domestical dealinges, let them which bear aucthoritye
or office in a common weal, know that the laws do govern and are above them,
and let them that are the chief of an household follow the rule of a good
husband or householder: There is therefore a good order in some cities, yt none
may be chosen into the Senate which has not the charge of house and family.

He that is the Governor of an household, ought always to remember that he
has sometimes been a servant, that he do rather correct offenses with
words, Householders.
then with stripes, and had rather that his family should fear his seueritye
and Justice, then tremble at his crueltye: for it goes worste of all with that
familye which rather with fear then with zeal, goes about their business.
And furthermore in great trauayles, and in executinge weighty offices or
duties, it behooves the householder to show himself, the first man, officious,
and dilygent: for the Inferiors will be ashamed of sloth and sluggishenes,
Such masters such familye and servants.
when they shall see the elder, to be diligent and paynefull: so on the other
part, he shall beware and take heed, that he do nothing filthyly, which his
household may have in suspicion: for they do far more offend by example,
whithe bear aucthority, then in committing ye offense.

Amongst the ancient in times past, there was such multitude of Slaves, that
they by violence thruste the freemen, out of certain cities, and now and then
rebelliously received and wtstode their masters coming homewards by force of
arms: for we read that ye people of the cou^trye of Scythia were a nation
almost invincible, for they did not only wythstand Darius king of Persia from
enterprising upon their coasts and borders: but also put him to a vile and
shameful flyghte: moreover they overthrew the hoastes of Alexander, they
established the Empire of ye Parthians, and people of Bactrians, they had Asia
tributarye unto them. 1500. years, from which country, when as these
Scythians returned with conquest in their third expedicion (for they had been
eyghte years absence from their wives) they were at the first driven back,
and forcyblie repulsed from coming home, by their own servants and bondmen.
For their wives weryed with long loking for their husbands, new married
themselves to their bondslaues which were left at home to keep their Cattle:
which slaves not without slaughter and bloodshed, wythstoode and would not
suffer their masters at their return to come home into their own countries and
houses: And although in the end the victory fell to their masters, yet
notwythstandinge they bickered and skyrmished together so doubtfully, that hard
it was to discern who in the end would get the upper hand: but at ye last the
bondmen being utterly vanquished, were hanged upon gibbets, and the women
stryken with remorse of their guylty and filthy consciences, dispatched and
murdered themselves, partly by the halter and partly with the sword: Amongst the
notorious wars of the Romans, is not also the servile wars recoumpted and
reckoned, which took the name of Bondmen vanquished?

But sometimes slaves have showed forth Examples of most tried faith and
trustines, as Caius Plotius Plancus witnesses, for he being by the Triumuiri
proscript, and appointed, to have been executed, for fear hyd himfelfe
priuelye, in a Ferme nere Salerne, when the Soldiers that were sent to search
him out, having by the savor, of his Perfumes smelled him out, caught his
servant, who Remorse of the master toward his servants fidelity.
being much and long time evil entreated, and tormented, would not
disclese their master. Plancus pytyinge and having compassion on the
fidelitye of his own servants, came for the, amongst the myddest of them,
and offered his throat into the hands of the soldiers, thereby to deliver
his servants from present torments.

Marcus Antonius also an excellent orator, being accused of incest, had
experience in the fidelity of his servant who being brought unto judgment,
even he which bore the La^terne, to that ungracious act, being also tormented,
scourged, rackte, with burninge plates schorched and half burned to death,
would never declare his masters incest, whereunto he was priuye, and of
council: So have there been also others in like manner approved: but the
trustines of servants to their masters is not always to be assayed.

The freeman which has under him the government of servants, ought specially
to think that they are men, and not brute beasts, and that he should not
rage with crueltye against them, in scourging, evil entreating, or chayning of
them (for by scourging their hearts are made obdurate and hardened) nether do
they any thing but with evil How the may ster ought to entreat his servants.
will: but the master ought to deal more gently with the^, exacting their daily
taskes, and that not without mercy: their diligence and good endeavor is to be
commended, whereby they may apply themselves with cherefulnes in their labors and
business: They ought also to have such food and sustenance geeuen them which
may strengthen their bodies without curyositye and costlynes: Let their
Apparel be such as may cover their bodies decentlye in Somer, and defend
them from cold and rain in winter: for Servants pynched with cold, over
awed with fear, and hongersterued, cannot perform any manner of office or
duty ofseruice.

We must also take heed, least through strayte lookinge to our servant
they become desperate: for now and then they are geeuen to be cruel, against
those that be weaker then theymselues: and the blows or strypes of the master
are sometimes revenged upon their children and wives.

We have yet fresh in our memory a Servant of a wicked wit and cruel
meaning: this fellow had a very A wicked example of a wicked servant.
rygorous master, that often cudgelled and bet him cruelly, where at this his
servant being angry, and not knowinge how to be revenged upon his master, on a
time caught two infantes (which were his said masters children) the one of a
years age, the other of two years, and with them ascendinge up into a
certain high Turret, called his master, and wylled him to take his young
babes up into his lap: whom so sone as he had squatted to the ground he cast
himself headlong after them, because he would not come alive into the danger
of his master again.

Bondmen enthralled and endaungered unto us by the law, by reason they are to
us indebted, are more gently Welvsinge of hired servants.
to be entreated, till they have paid their duty: for we ought to remember
that so sone as they have recompensed their debt with their bodily traueyle,
that they are fre borne, and not of servile condition, as are those franchised
bondmen (who although freed) yet after fredome, do owe some service unto us:
wherefore we must accoumpt them as Iournymen or laborers hired, and we must in all things use them as freemen with curtesye, we must require their work and
allow also reasonable wages, and truly pay the same to them: for to have their
good report it shall much profit whenever we shall be driven to hyre other
laborers.

Of al societies or felowships, there is none more agreeable unto nature, then
y^ society of man and woman: for there is engraffed by nature in every living
creature a love and zeal to their like of kind, and a reason of conservation
by conjunction of male and female: for there can be no wild beast so cruel,
so solitary, and alone wa^dring, which in their time do not seek, a mate of
their own kind and condition for procreatio^ sake: seeing the^ there is no such
society or fellowship more according to nature, then that of the male and
female: it be houes us to write of matrimonial co^iunctio^ especially when as
citizens do match theymselues with Citizens in marriage by a long continued
good will, and so reconcile and make atonement between grudging enemies.

As we read of IVLIVSC AES AR and Pompeius, whose affinitye so long as it
flourished, did subdue and repress ciuyll discord, and reduced all the civil
wars, unto unity and concord.

For had not the ravished virgins of Sabina appeased y^ minds of their
Parents and husbands by the Law of Example of matrimony.
matrimonye, the common weal of the Romans, had been utterly destroyed:
very necessary therefore is it to in treat of marriage and natural amitye: for
man does not only marye and take a wife for procreation sake, but also, to
have a companion of life, with whom he may live together, and participate
either fortune, both prosperity and adversity: for he that is led by reason,
does seek for y^ commodities of his life, neither sees he that he can
sufficientlye provide for his own estate, except he take a wife: therefore
man when he has provided him of a dwellinge house takes a wife, that he may
procreate children, to the end to live more commodiouslye, and the better
bear the chances of either fortune.

It is especially necessary for a man to seek a trade Trade of lyuinge.
whereby to live, that he may be the better provided for in his old age and
sickness: wherefore it is either requisite for him to exercise husbandry, or
seafaring, or some other kind of honest trades, thereby to get conueniente
stay whereof to live.

Therefore our careful mother, dame nature, parent of humane kind, has
ordained wedlock, to the end that not only the most pleasant, but also the
most profitable societye of life, might thereby be put in ure: therefore as
Xenophon has left in writing in his book of household affairs, the divine
providence of God made women to be more fearful creatures then men, because
the same fear and awe, in the woman should frame her the better to keep home
and to be diligente: for awe and fear help much to the diligence of keepinge,
and natural effeminacye or tenderness has delivered unto them trades, and
faculties wherein they may be exercised, and find theimselues occupied even
within their own houses: furthermore for as much as meat drink and clothe,
must needs be had, and cared for, not in every place openly, or in wild
woods but at home under the roof of the house, and in the inner The man to
bring in the maintenance of houskeping by trauayl abroad.
parts of the same, it has been necessary for men to be occupied abroad in
company and assemblies of men, where they meeting together may devise means, by
labor and industrye to get such things as being brought home, should be
laid up in store, in some convenient place of y^ house: the charge of
dispensacion or bestowing whereof, is more convenient for the woman then for
the man.

Aristotle did very well assign the cares of all such matters as are to be
done abroad unto men, and of things to be done at home unto women: and he
thincketh it very The woman to save and keep that is brought and to ouersee it
at home.
uncomely and not fitting, that women should deal in matters which are to be
done abroad, as also for men to have the orderinge and disposinge of things
within doors, for all helps and defenses of man's life are more easily
procured and gotten, by marriage, then by singlehood.

We ought to restore that unto nature which we have borrowed, as to geeue unto
others life, which our parents have geeuen unto us, by reason whereof we
obtain, that our children should restore that unto us in our extreme age and
weakness, which they have received of us, Nature in the child ought to be
careful for co^fortinge the parents in old age.
when they were not able to help theymselues: let them I say nourish and
mainteyn us, in our decrepicie, when we lean upon our staff and be weak and
feeble: even as we brought up them in their tender age, when we sustained and
embraced them in our arms, when they first learned to creep: and by these
means, the interchaunge of nature is perpetually fulfilled, and that which it
cannot do in the simple generalitye is co^serued and kept in spece and kind.

Furthermore, the discommodities hapninge in our old age (which surely are
innumerable) and the manyfolde kinds of diseases which do vex and torment
barren old age and as it were by conspiracies fall upon old men at once: by
what other reason may they be suffered, or by what comfort else may they be
mitigated or assuaged, but by y^ hope and help which we have or ought to have
inour Comfortable to have chyldien.
children: for far less grievous do those evils seem, which happen unto the
father stricken into extreme age, when he himself deelining toward decay, sees
his sons grow lustye of body, and every day more strong: then those things
which unto a man without children do happen, which see leth and perceyueth the
powers both of his body and mind to decay, and therwithall at once al hope of
help, and posteritye to come to an end: but death it self (which unto all
men is most grievous) does bring somewhat the less Death. to them that leave
children behind them is less grievous
grief unto them: who knowing themselves to be mortal persons, and that they
can live no longer then humane condition or state will suffer them, do behold
their children by them begotten, resembling them, to be called by their proper
names, whereby they are as it were reserved still alive in the fame and report
of men, even after their disceasse: For they that depart this world, leaving
bebynde them Death of the that want Issue brought in oblivion.
no children, do carrye with them the ruin of their race and offpringe, and
deserve evil of the common weal, yea of mankind also are they wrapped in
perpetual oblivion, neither leave they any step or imitacion of their life
afterward amongst men at any time.

Therefore I think best for a ciuyl man to take unto him a wife, not only for
necessities sake: but also to the end Causes necessary why the civil man
should mary a Wy^e.
they may live with more Pleasure and profit, with whom a thanckefull,
pleasant, and atceptable societye of life, must be framed, not to fulfill the
lust of the flesh, but to procreate and increase Issue, thereby to replenish
the civil common weal, which in deed is the proper respect and duty of
marriage.

AElius Commodus Uerus Emperor of Rome, is said to have answered his wife
very notablye, when as she seemed to be offended at the filthiness of his
Life, and complained of his forreyn pleasures: Suffer me, wife (says he) by
other women to exercise my Lust and sensualitye, for a wife is the name of
Dygnytye, and not of pleasure.

Socrates the Philosopher when he had long time and much suffered his first
wife XANTIPPA to be Socrates and his cursed Wife
both angrye and churlishe against him (to Alcibiades meruaylinge that he
could bear with such a shrewde, and bitter woman, and not banishe her out
of his house) made this answer: that in sufferinge such a Uixen in her
behavior at home: he enured himself the better to putt up those Injuries and
reproaches which were done to him abroad by others: For Socrates had two wives
at one time the better thereby to perform throughlye the effect of patience.

METELLVS NVMIDICVS the great and Metellus bys oracion co^cerninge marriage.
eloquente Orator: while he was Censor discoursinge of the Marriage of Wives
in his Oration, spoke these words: My Lords if we could be without wives
we should all easelye lack and be without that molestation? but because
Nature has so ordained, that neither with them can we live commodiouslye,
and without them we cannot live at all: I think it better rather to provide
for a perpetual sauetye, then for a short or momentanye pleasure.

Which manifest confession of the care and molestation of wyuing, was
mysliked of many of the Cytizens of Rome, for they said that METELLVS the
Censor whose purpose should have been to exhort the common people unto
Matrymonye) could not confess or utter any thing touching the griefs and
discommodities thereof least in so doing he should rather seem to dissuade
the People from Matrymonye, then exhort them thereunto: For so much as
almost there is nothing throughoute the whole life of man, can be found,
which in every part of it self is absolute and perfect, that no stable
amitye could be found, nor more aboundaunt in all duty, and godliness, then
in matrimony.

Tiberius Gracchus wyllingly and of his own accord saved and redeemed his wives
life with his own death, for he finding at home, two snakes, in this sort
destyned, that Example of husband his faithful love toward his Wife.
unless he killed one of them, he and all his household should perish and
dye, if he let the male escape, it should then be his chance to escape alive:
but if the female, the^ should his wife Cornelia escape alive: he so entierly
loved his wife, and so much esteemed matrimony, that he rather chose to dye
himself, then to survive his wife,

The wives of the Mynia^s have left us an example of admiration: for their
husbands heinge imprisonned by the Lacedaemonians, and judged to dye for
conspiringe against the state, looked for present execution, according to the
custom, in the night season: but their wives making a pretense or excuse, to
go to speak unto their husbands, Example of the Wives faithful love
toward their husbands.
and take their last leave, obtained license of the kepers to go unto them,
where chaunginge their apparel and dissemblinge their sorrows, with their heads
covered, suffered their husbands to depart, and gave themselves to the death,
to the end that they might deliver and set at liberty their husbands.

Moreover the too much cherishing that Augustus used toward his daughters,
made them more wanton and lascivious, whereupon Iulia, when a certain severe
and grave friend of hers, went about to persuade her to follow the example of
her fathers frugalitye, she scornfullye Example of too much cherishing and
cock^ing of children
answered: my father forgets that he is Caesar, but I remember that I am
Caesar's daughter: she outraged so far in dissolute lyuinge, that she
prostituted her body to all men: and when as men that knew well her filthy
life, meruayled how she brought forth children so like to Agrippa her
husband, seeing she had to do with so many men: she answered that she
could lawfullye entertayne and admit adulterers after that she was great
with A shameless* aunsvvere of a shameless stro^pet.
child by her husband: for seldom does the woman keep shamefastnes that has
once lost her chastity.

There are some women which take pleasure to talk of their filthy demeanor,
and declare the blemish or disease of their mind and body with filthy speech,
thereby Some Women delightinge in filthy talk declare the filthiness of their
poluted mind.
to appear more pleasantly conceyted unto the world: as Popilia the daughter
of Marcus, to a certain man which meruayled what should be the cause: that all
beasts do never admit the male to cover them, but at due seasons when they
would be made great with young, and women at all times desire the societye of
man: she answered: because, they are beasts.

But let the husband look to it, that he geeue no occasion of filthynes or
offense, unto his wife: and let her take The husbands words levvdlye uttered
corrupt the lewd disposition of the Wife.
heed that she do not speak any filthye thing, at any time in the presence
of her husband, wherein some men do much offend, which allure their wives with
vncleanlynes of words and filthynes of speech unto lust and concupiscence,
and do instruct them in Fables, whereby they are made more ready to
venerous dalliaunce, and inflamed with strange lou^s: and the men now and
then speak those things which are able enough to inflame even those women
that be otherwise very cold affected.

Furthermore let the husband, far more diligently abstayn from having to
do with any other strange person, if he desire to have a chaste wife: for no
injury does more diminishe or sooner break the holy society of marriage, then
for the one party, I will not say to be only taken in adultery, but also in
any slender suspicion thereof.

The Persians therefore very well did greuouslye punish Adultery sharply
punished by the Persians
adulterye, to then tent that the societye of matrimonye might be made the more
firm and stable.

The continency of the husband for the most part keeps his wife in
chastitye, and makes the man himself to be far more commendable: Laelius
the friend of Scipio, is counted the happier in this one respect, that in all
his life time he had but the company of one only woman that is to say, his own
wife, whom he had and no more: for there are very few wives so modeste, and so
louinge to their husbands, that they can willingly and patiently suffer and
bear with their husbands harlottes.

I remember that I have read (not without meruaylinge) Women stomach much to
have their husbands keep an harlot.
of one woman even Tertia, wife of the former AEmilius mother to Cornelia, who
was of such gentleness, and patience, that when she knew her husband (being
the conqueroure of Africa) to be hotelye enamoured of her handmayd a beautiful
piece, and knew well that he used her too familiarly: she always dissembled
the matter, least otherwise she should accuse her husband (that most excellent
Gentleman) of Intemperancye, and that which is more: she was so far from
revenge, yt when AEmilius was dead, she set her handmayde at lybertye, and
freely placed her in marriage (to one that served her husband) with no small
dowrye.

Surely a man shall find very few women in all the memory of man, of this
nature, that can sufferor bear with their Husbands Strumpettes: therefore
that good reason or argument used by the lawyers, is to be openly fixed in
the houses of men: wherein is geeuen us for precepte:

What ever Law a man would have
an other to observe:
From that let not himself digress,
nor once aside to swerue.
For what is more reprochefull then for a man to be condemned by that law
which he himself has made, Solon his law for punishinge adultery.
and to reprehende that in others, wherein himself likewise trespasseth: to
me therefore that ancient Law of Solon, seems altogether unjust: wherein is
said that if the man take his wife in adultery, let him kill heri but if she
take the Husband in adulterye, let her not once touch him, with her finger:
for once that Law being recited amongst a company of matrones one of them
(courteously smylinge upon the rest) said: I see plainly that Women were
excluded out of the council of men when those laws were ordained: for if
there had been any woman there, they would never have suffered this Law to
have passed being so injurious to our sex.

Also that Law was unjust which was had in use among the Egiptians, as
DIODORVS makes mention: For it appointed the man taken in adulterye, to be
fcourged or whipped: but the woman to have her Nose slyt and disfigured, to the
intent she might in that part be An hard thing to chose a wife well.
punished wherewt the face is most comely garnished to the sight of the
world: notwithstanding in matters touching Wyuynge: there is nothing more
harder then to make a good choice, for maidens are brought up at home wtin
doors, and do very seldom go abroad to be seen: For the which cause it is
almost impossible for a man to search out their Beauty, Manners, and
Conversation, which matter surely makes men doubtful what to do: for it is a
thing of no small effect, to marye a wife, and with her to frequente
perpetual Societye of Life, which in all poynctes is unknown unto him at the
first.

The manners and conuersacions of Maidens cannot be better ghessed at, and
perceived by any other reason, then by the similitude or likeness of their
parents: for Good parents bring up good children.
it is very like that of good Parents, there can no evil children be gotten:
A chaste mother brings up chaste daughters, and she that in heart never
committed shame, will not wyncke nor bear with any fault of her daughter. All
young men for the most part do desire to mary a fair wife: but yet it is (by
the opinion of Theophrastus) less grief for a man to have a foul, the^ to
keep a fair wife: For he thinks that no thing is there safe, which al men do
desire, because some one man does entyse her by beautye, some by wisdom, and
some through eloquence, and some by bounty and gifts, and that which is
assaulted in every part, is vanquished on some part: This much does Saint
Jerome discourse upon, after the mind and opinion of the Philosopher
Theophrastus.

Ennius the Poet said that we must marrye wives, y^ are of a sound
chastitye, and which are seen to be of a portly favor: Aulus Gellius
expounds this sentence, and shows that those women be of portly favor,
which are Choice of a Wife.
neither of the fairest, not yet of the fowleste feature, but mean between
both: which mediocrity surely is in all things best and chiefest: for this
reason is sufficient to y^ procreation of issue: for pleasant beautye in the
woman helps much, as in the men worthynes or dignitye is most acceptable:
these and many other things are to be thought upon, in the choice of a wife,
and namely this, that a man choose one that in goods and feature is like to
himself: for inequality breeds contempt, and perpetual brawlinge, but
equality knytteth together the minds with most firm love and affection: It
is also good for a man to take such a wife as has not been touched Equality
in choice.
nor married to another man before: for there is a double labor and trouble to
him that marieth a wydow, first to vnteache her the manners of her former
husband, and secondlye to enure, and acquainte her, with his own fashions.

Aristotle thincketh the best time for maids to be married, at the age of
eightene years, and for a man at thirtye and six years of age: for those
ages are ripe and perfect The age for man and woman to marye
for procreation of issue: but as touching the trayning of them up in
fashions, if they were a few less years younger, I would think it more
commodious, specially in this our time, wherein vices (as the Satyrist says)
do swarm: Lycurgus also affirmed that it was a shameful thing for man and
woman to pass beyond those years unmarried: For he ordained that those persons
should be noted with infami^, and expelled the Theaters, who at y^ age of
xxxvii. years were found to have lived without a wife: The Romans also
debarred al them from bearinge any public office, and esteemed them as
unworthy to be honored any way by the common weal, which would not help
and further the same with augmentation of Issue.

Let the husband instruct his wife with the best manners, neither with
threateninges, reproach, nor stripes: for it is a servile thing and not mete at
any hand, for familier Societye: and in deed wives become obdurate with
Orderly instruction to be given by the man to the wife.
beatinge even as naughtye servants, and bondmen become worse and worse, and
with stripes are daily more and more given to follow their own w^lf^ll ways*
So women are less obedient to their husbands, and do all things peuishlye
against the grain, when they are vngentlye entreated of their husbands, and
getting at any time occasion for their purpose, run^e head long into al
filthynes without either awe or reverence of matrimony, thinkinge that they
make none offense at all, when they may lay for their excuse yt they do it in
reuengeme^t of their strypes before received: therefore with reason must we
deal with them, yt they may understand all things to be done, for the common
profit of their whole householde, for the honestye of theimselues, and of
wedlock: the secrets also y^ are and ought to be between man and wife, let
them be included within the walls of their chamber and no further: for that
man takes an ill way both for himself and his wines honesty which blabbeth
out those things that are to be kept in silence: for we must so cast in our
minds des to live in Wedlock, that we be not as laughinge Secrets of
Wedlock between man and Wife ought not to be revealed.
stocks to any abroad, for any matters done within our own houses: therefore
in matrimonye all things ought to be kept secret: for what can be more lewd
and shameful, then either the husband amongst his friends, or the wife
amongst her neighbors, to chatte and babvle out such matters, as ought in
all points to be concealed.

Candaules King of Lydia, had a wife, upon whose beautye he greatly doted:
neither thought he it sufficient The doting so^dnes of Ca^ daules, over ^is
fair wife how he was for the same slain.
to blae abroad her Feacture and Beautye unto all men, and to manifest unto
the world, such matrimonial secrets as were to be kept close: but also
would have one to be a witness of his Pleasures, and therefore brought her
forth naked, and showed her to his companion Gyges (as Herodotus says) whom
as soon as Gyges had seen, he was so inflamed with love toward her, that he
thought upon, ne cared for any other thing more then how to obtain her to
his own will: and she throughlye knowing the matter, and supposing her self
to have been of her husband thus betrayed, as one that alienated his
dealinges and love to another, devised with the adulterer Gyges to murder her
husband, and thereupon bestowed both her kingdom and herself upon y^ same
Gyges: by this means did Candaules lose both his life, and his kingdom, when
he thought his pleasures to be less, so long as they were kept in silence and
unknown.

Cleobulus Lyndius (accoumpted one of the seven sages of Greece) geeueth us
two good lessons touching wyuinge: Two precepts to be observed by the
husband toward his wife.
the one is that we should deal with them by flatteringe. The other that in
presence of strangers, we should never chyde them: for the one he said,
was a point of foolishenes, the other of madness.

Furthermore let the husband commytte in charge unto his wife, al things
domestical and within doors, and let him suffer her to have the dispensation
of the same:

Let her perform her dilygence at home, and let the husband employe his
industrye abroad: let her nourish and foster their children, and let him
instruct and teach The husbands charge abroad
them: let the goodman of the house* as need requires know to seek after
such things as appertain to the use of the familye, and this not by vsurye,
or any filthye lucre, but either with tyllinge the ground and fruictes of the
earth, which is never covetous, nether dissembleth with her tyllers: but
evermore restores the Seeds to her committed, with most plentiful fruit
and gain: for it is meet and conueniente, that the common mother of all men,
should nourishe and bring up her children as it were with her dugges and
increase, either with liberal Sciences, or Merchaundye, or navigations, in
traffic, in Sellinge and buyinge, without lyinge or vanitye, or in other
honest trades, tendinge to the profit, and ornament of the cyttye.

Furthermore it behooues him to spare and save that he gets: for in vain
do they take labor to get Riches, where is no regard of sparinge: and
where the expenses do still run out, without any coming in: neither is
this proverb of drawing up water in a pitcher yt is full of holes any other
thing then first to get, and then prodigally and ryotously to lavish out: Yet
would I not yt the householder should be a myser and steyned with pinchyng
covetousness, then the which plague, there can be The covetous man good to none,
but hur^ full to all.
none more pernicious: neither yet more discrepante, or further of from al
humanity: for the covetous man hurte^th all men, is odious to all men, neither
doing good to himself or to any of his friends: He never reioyseth at hearts
ease, he is always sad, churlishe, pensive, and crabbed, he only cannot
find in his heart to love, and cherishe his wife, and children, nor depart
with any thing unto them, to live merrily wtall, but always is found a steruer
of him self, an oppressor of his own nature, is always hungrye, always
thirstye, and continually vexed with an insaciable gredye desire, neither can
any thing suffice him: Uery aptly did the rich Attalus compare a covetous man
to an hungry dog that snatcheth up fragmentes A covetous man compared to an
hungrye dog.
of bread and meat at his masters table, which slappeth up streightwaies
whole and vnchawed gubs without any taste, and streightways with open mouth,
lokes still for more, standinge at receipt of further hope for more to come.

Let a man thanckefullye enjoy his goods, and estate present, and with well
doing, let him hope still for better: for it is the part of a faint hearted
person, too much to fear penury, and for that cause not to dare to use those
things which are present: because (forsooth) he fears that he shall
hereafter lack.

The charge of all dealinges within the house belongs unto the wives: and it
were very hard dealing that the goodman, who trauayleth and takes pains
abroad to seek thrift, when he comes home into his own house as it were
into the port or haven of tranquillitye, after a most dangerous and hard
voyage, should also be busied and trobled with ordering household affairs at
home, when he surceassinge all care, and desiringe to be at quietness and
rest, repayreth home, for ease and succor: therefore let the wife perform her
diligence, and let her take upon her the charge of all things which are at
home to be ordered, according to the prescribed ordinances of ye husband,
unto whom in all points, she ought to be obedient, for it goes very ill
in that household where ye wife bears al rule, and the husband obeys, and
is made as one of the meigniall folk.

Let the wife especially set in order her household stuff and those necessaries
that are neat, and of value, and which Ordering of household necessaries.
are to be reserved to ye use of a better life, whether the same belong to
woma^ly furniture, or to man's apparel: let her dispose and order them within
secret rooms, in the house, that when soever occasion happens to occupye
them, they may be in a readynes, and not to seek: for it is a Safe laid up
sone found.
most certain pouertye, when a man lacks that thing which he has, and
stands in need of the same, knowing not in what place it is laid up.

Moreover such things as duly concern meat and drinck, and which are
prepared for dinner and supper, let her so day ly dispend and besow, that they
be neither wastfully gourmaundised, and swilled up in gluttony and dronkennes,
by the folks of the house: neither by reason of too much nyggardy and
pinching, let them not be hungerbytten and sterued: Therefore let her keep a
mean, and so shall she at one and the self same time, both rightlye provide A
moderate diet and measurable apparel.
for their health, and also for the private affairs of their familye, as well
at one time as at another: and let her with great moderacyon qualesy her self in
those things which appertain to her own self, especially for apparel and
ornaments for her own body, which greatly consume her husband^s substance:
For they cost dear at the first and in small space are either by use clean
worn, or else sold for a great deal less then they were bought. Wise
Women fear evil ^eportes.


An honest manered woman ought to fear nothing more, then evil report:
for she that once has an evil name, whether it be rightlye by her deserved,
or that she be wrongfully slaundered, hardly can recover her good name and
fame again: for a woman suspected of vnchaft living leads a miserable and
wretched life.

The true ornaments of women are Modestye, chastetye, The true ornaments of a
Woman.
shamefastnes and praise, which cannot be purchased, with any gold, pearls,
or precious stones: but seeing it is so, that all these cannot be seen in any
one good woman, although very honest: Chastitye yet is that only ornamente,
which may supply whatsoever lacks in the Chastitye the special o^nament in
a Woman*
others: for this enlarges the dowrye, when it is not of it self sufficient,
it not only adorneth and makes come lie that which is deformed, but also
reduces a woman to the similitude of beauty it self, it enobleth
ignobilitye, and finally fulfilleth all things, which in any part may
otherwise be wantinge.

The fiftye Uirgines of Sparta have eternized their names unto all Posteritye:
for they being by their Parents sent to do sacrifice among the Messenians,
thinking Example of chastitye.
to be entertained after the manner of friendly hospitality: the Messenians with
such impaciencie and concupiscence, lusted after them, that dispisinge the law
of hospitalitye, they sought means by sollicityng their consentes to carnail
knowledge, and so to deflo wre their virginitye: which filthy motion the
virgins denyinge, and they importunatelye vrginge to dishoneste their bodies,
yet was there not one found of all those virgins, that would consent unto
their wills: but chose rather to dye then so to loose their mayde^hode, whose
blood yt Lacedaemonia^s, through the great help of God, revenged afterward by
a notable victory.

The second ornament of a woman is to have pretty children, A second ornamente
of women is to have pretye and tovvardly children.
and of an excellent towardness: which ornamente how much it is to be esteemed
of, Cornelia the wife of Paulus AEmilius has taught us: for when a certain
woman of Campania coming unto her, and showing outin a brauerye her pearls,
gold, and precious apparel, requested the same Cornelia in like manner to
bring forth and show her ornaments, and jewels, she fooded her out with
words, until such time as her children returned home from the schole, whom
she shewinge unto the other woman, said: Behold my delicate store and
treasures, all Virtuous children the righ^e Ievvelles of dearest estimation
unto pare^tes.
mine ornaments, all my Iewelles and all my delights: which persuasion is the
best that can be unto all matrones, that in respect of their children they
should despise al other iewelles, and ornaments, and repute their chief
attire in the hope and towardnes of their Children.

Besides this let the Wife take heed, that she use no dissymulation, nor
cloaked Iuggelinge with her husband in any matter: for what thing can be more
dishonest in a woman, then to show her self not to be the same which she was.

Pompeia the wife of Nero the Emperor, was not only made a jesting stock to
the world, so long as she lived, because she prancked herself too much in
curyous trymminge up herself to the best show of all beautye, but also
purchased unto her name perpetual ignominy. For not Poets only, but
Historiographers also, not Curiosity of a simpering p^ik medayntye.
a few do write, that she not in covert manner, and claselye, but apertly and
manefestlye fancied this curiosity, and they affirm, that she had always in
a readynes, where. soever she went, whole heardes of Asses, that she might
continually cherishe her delicate face, and rynse her mouth with the milk of
them daily, thereby to appear the fayrer and beautifuller: for there is no
good hope to be had in that woman which seeks to be praised abroad for her
beautye: It was lawful for the Spartane virgins to go with their face bare,
till they were married, that Woman sha^ fast.
they might thereby the better get them husbands: but after they were
married they courred does their head and their face, as those then that sought
after no Husbands, but only cared to retain such as they enjoyed: But
Gorgias Leontinus opinion is, that men's wives should be kept at home from
goinge abroad: which thing surely likes not me: but for them to go
abroad Women ought to be restrained from much fi^ king and gadding abroad.
very seeldome, that truly do I greatly commend: For a woman that is a
walker, and a traueiler from her own house abroad, can seeldome be chaste:
let the wife show her self of one mind and concord, with her husband in
all things, for there can be nothing more pleasant among mortal men,
then when the man, and wife do govern their Household with concord, and
mutual good will together: and on the other part nothing Domestical discord.
worse, then mutual discord, and domestical brabling.

The Athenians have taught us that silence in matters between man and wife,
ought to be used: for when as Philippe king of Maoedonie warred against the
Athenians, and that their scoutes had intercepted letters of Olympias sent from
her unto king Philippe her husband, they commanded those letters to be
redeliuered whole vnopened, and untouched, because they thought it was not
lawful (no not for the enemy) to know and understand the secrets passinge
from the wife to her husband.

In wedlock also let all anger and stomackinge be far absent, which makes
love many times more slack and slow, and altogether diminishes the same,
disorderinge all domestical affairs, and causing the state of wedlock to be
more unpleasant.

The most ancient Romans, did adorn that woman with a crown of chastitye,
which was only contented with one husband, and with continual wydowhood, to
The wife no stomacker or resister.
profess and show forth the sinceritye of her incorrupte mind: for she
seems to be of an unbridled lust, which maryeth again, especially if she
have children, which are the pledges of matrimonye, and express the lyuelye
image of her late deceassed husband, both in countinaunce and name: moreover
she that maryeth again, is seen to be cursed, and wicked toward her
children, because Wydovves'ma ^yinhe again make men judge them to do it for
lust and lecherye.
they are deprived of their father, and forsaken of all men: neglectinge them
as it were in the entrance of their life, even at that age and time when they
have most need of their parents help: which reason (undoubtedly) ought to
persuade all wydowes to keep their chastitye, together with their children,
that they make no further trial of fortune, of whom they being once deceived
may scarcely hope for better lotte or fortune afterward.

Annia, a woman of noble race among the Romans, when her neighbors and
friends p^rswaded her in her wydowhood to mary with another husband, seeinge
she was yet of alustye age, and excellent beautye: made answer that she
would not any wise so do: for says she if I find a good husband as I had
before, I will not be Annia a worthy vvydovv her aunsvvere touching marriage
the second time.
always in fear least I should forgo him: but if I should match my self with
an evil husband, what need have I to try an evil man, when I have once
already had experience of a very good man: for she that is disapointed by the
destenye of her first husband, seems to be wise if she no more commit her
self unto the Fortune of Marriage.

The daughter of Demotion the Athenian, although she was a virgin, yet
hearing of the death of Leosthenes her espoused husband, who was slain at the
battle of Le^nos, First love is most steadfast.
killed her self: affirming that although she never had any carnal or
matrimonial copulation with her husband, yet if she should be compelled to
take another man, she should deceive the second, seeinge that in heart she was
married to the first: notwithstanding those women deal a great deal better:
who in the first flower of their years do hap to marye the second time,
namely if they be then without children: for all living creatures desire to have
and begette Issue: and for procreation sake, rather then for lust to join
together, seems a thing much more fit and reasonable.

Hiero of Syracusa, being on a time chidden by a certain familier friend of his
because his breath did slincke, and he for helping thereof had used no
remedies: said, yt he never knew so much in himself before that time, and
blamed his wife, in that she had never admonished him thereof: to whom his
wife modestly excusinge herself: said, husband be not angrye with me, for I
thought yt all men's mouths had smelled so, and therefore I kept A modest
aunsvvere of a chaste Lady.
silence. Armenia also coming home from a royal feast made by king Cyrus,
when all men for the comlynesse of his person highly praised Cyrus, she being
demanded, by her husband, what she thought of the dignity and feature of yt
king: husband (quod she) I never turned mine eyes from you, and therefore what
an other man's feature is, I am utterly ignoraunte.

In the education or bringinge up of children there are two things especially
to be considered, whereof the one Consideratio^s in the education of children
chiefly appertains to the mother, the other unto the father himself, the
first reason concerns the means to live, the second to live well: the
first because it is and falls for Home, belongs to the duty of the mother
which ought to be the gouernesse of the household matters according to the
prescribed ordinances enjoined her by her husband: The matrone therefore that
is with child, ought to forecast and consider that she must bring Matrones
with child.
forth a child, and great dyligence must she take that in no respect she
hurt the child within her body, before it be brought into the world, and
especially she must cherishe her own body, and take her meat with
modestye, feedinge upon such kind of food, as may nourishe and strengthen
her young one, and not that which may weaken it, and she shall shun to
much Slouthe: a moderate Walkinge for her is profitable and healthful, and
causes far more easy deliverance in childebyrthe: She shall also beware
of all vehemente A wicked demand of a Woman in an ungodly practice.
labors, especially daunsinge, which thing by example HYPPOCRATES
confirmed: For when a certain woman could not avoid the received Seed of
man, she desired his devise to help her that the Seed should not prosper,
whom he counsayled every day, by iumpinge, and daunsinge, to stir the
Seed, and so the seventh day by means of her leapinge and daunsing she
brought forth an imperfect conception, covered over Daunsinge dangerous for
Women that ^^e with child
with a little thin rymme or skin, such as we see is in an egg between
the shell and the yolke: Some women keep such Revel rexe and coil in
daunsinge and leapinge, at banquettes and feasts, that for very pain they
either procure abortion before the time, or else bring the same forth very
weak and feeble: other to the end to seem pretye and slenderer unto their
lovers, do gyrd themselves so straight, that they hurt themselves, and their
bellies also thereby very much: some cramme and fill Strait gyrding Tospotvvome
their bellies with dayntye fare and wine, even till they surphet again: and
very many women use to cloye their stomachs with sower fruit, and unripe
apples. I let Fruit eaters.
pass to speak of their lusts, and certain beastly pranckes, not by speech
to be uttered, whereby they do not only travail before their time, but also
do bring forth into the world lothesome monsters.

After that the little infant shall be borne, which not long agone the mother
knew not, because it was closed in her womb: let her with her Dugges, and
with that Fountain, nourishe and foster it, which provident Nature has with
such plentifulnes prepared in her breast: Worst of all (in mine opinion) do
such women deserve of their children, which put their babes out to noursing,
Natural mothers are natural nurses.
and at that time when they have most need of their mothers help, committinge
them unto young huswyues and country nourses, such unto whom in deed, some
would not commit a young kytlinge, if they had any pleasure in it:
furthermore they are not whole mothers, but rather appear to be half mothers,
which straight way put out to nursinge, their own natural child, and deny
to geeue it suck, whom even now in their own womb, with their own blood
they nourished: do they persuade theimselues that their neepples and duggs are
by nature geeuen them for an ornamente, or beautifiynge of their breast, and
not to the nourishmente of their children* But we do know some women which
with slybbersauces and medecines do dry up and stop that most sacred
Fountain, the nourisher of Mankind, yea not without great danger of their
own healthes, to the end (forsooth) they may appear the more beautiful and
in the eyes of their Lovers more pleasant and acceptable. Let no good mother
suffer her child to be infected with the contagion of mylcke drawn from
another woman's breasts, and let her in so doing perform the point of a
whole and entiere parent, deserving well of her child: Good mother good nurse.
whom she shall thereby make more ready to requite and reco^pe^ce her when it
shall grow to further years of discretion, if it shall perceive that it has
not at any time been defrauded of the mothers fosteringe, and nourishemente, in
the first beginning of life: for the benefit of the mothers breaste, was
among the Auncientes had in such reverence and regard, that what soever hard
or difficulte, request the mothers were to crave at the hands of their
children, their fashion was to request the same, for and by the mylcke which
they gave unto them in their Infancye, and babeshippe. For what pleasaunter
delights or pleasures can there be, then a young sucklinge child whose
lispinge speech, and pretty endeuouringes to bring out his words, his sweet
laughter, and the pleasant mothers speech again used to her said child,
seems to me far to surpass all other counterfeict scoffers or iesters.

Neither need Apes, or little dogs, to be sought for there, to sport
themselves wythall, where little babes do creep about the house.

The members and tender parts of young children are to be fashioned by the
Nourses hands, and the little Orderinge and tendering the members of children,
Infantes body to be wrapped and bound with a swathinge band, from the
shoulders, even down to the ancle, but yet somewhat looser about the breaste
and bulk: for the breadth or largenes of those parts, do make very much to
the dignity and strengthninge of a man, and somewhat straighter about the
stomach, and about the nether parts of the bellye, the better to confirm and
strengthen the same: and that the Bellye bear not out above comlye proportion:
Aristotle also affirms that cryinge is profitablie geeuen by nature unto
children, for he thinks that it is an endeavor or striving used by the
child, to his encreasinge, and that it helps much to stretch out the breast,
and heart stringes: wherefore he prescribes the Nurse not to force the child
from cryinge. Women conceived with child ought to have great care of themselves
least that they be delivered before their time, or miscary in child bearing,
which thing yt we may have foreknowledge of, Hyppocrates teaches: for either
he says ye infant moves For Women to know the full time of goinge with
child, and when to be delivered.
and styrreth in the mothers womb, upon the 70. or else 90. day, and it
expresses y^ it is either the seventh or nynthe month, wherein she shall be
delivered of her child, so shall a careful mother be skilful of her time of
deliverance, before it happen.

We must take heed (as Celsus says) least in time of prosperous health we
do consume and waste away such things as should be sauegardes and
preseruacions unto us in sickness: wherefore a lustye healthefull man, who is
at his own disposition, will refuse no kind of meat that the common people
uses, and twyse a day rather then once desires to eat meat: neither takes
he any less the^ will satisfy his stomach: he uses also diverse kinds of
life, as sometimes to be in the country, sometimes in the city, but more
often in the fields. To sail upon the Seas, to How a lustye, and healthful
man disposes his time.
hawk,, and to hunte, and sometimes to take his rest, but yet most often to
exercise himself: for certainly Idleness enfeebleth the body, but labor
strengthens it, ye one hasteneth vntimelye old age, the other makes a man
to have a long and lustye young age.

We must deal with children by a little and little to teach them, even as
when we would fill a vessel which has a narrow mouth: for if we pour water
fast, it fylleth and runs over: but if we drop it in by a slender funnell,
we shall fille it top full. To praise the industrye and diligence of
children in their exercises, does unto How to deal with children in teachig
the^.
them much good, and to chyde them for their sloth, is unto them profitable
also: for, to be preferred before their equalles, and to be praised for well
doing by their masters, does much sharpen childrens wits, and quickneth
their courage in all their studies and exercises.

The mothers discipline and correction, for children in their first tender
years of Infancy is very profitable, and makes them more prone, docible
and apt to learn and compass greater studies: Now when they shall come to
seven years of age, let the father take care of them, and instruct them
with a certain greater diligence, whose charge is to train up his children to
live well and vertuouslye, Infancy of the children is the mothers charge to
look unto
then which discipline, none surely can be more profitable, or of greater
effect geeuen from mortal men. For Alexander who for his wisdom was surnamed
the great, was wont to say, that he was no less bound unto Aristotle his
Scholemaister, then unto king Philip his father: for albeit his father had
begottt him into this world a living creature: yet Aristotle was he that
taught him the way to live well, which knowledge he in deed thought, was to
be preferred before bare life.

The chief and special token of wit in children says Fabius Quintilianus
is memory, when as the child learneth Memory in children is the best token
of Wit.
easlye, and remembers surely: It shall therefore be best in the first years
of their youth, to exercise memory for the more perfecting and thoroughly
furdering the vigor and force of their wytt, and either by ambition or rewards
and gifts to allure them, to the end they may keep many things in memory,
and not be ashamed or abashed, to utter and recite the same in any great
assembly of people. For the propounding of reward, and allurement, sharpeneth
Cherishing of children.
the wit, styrreth up the memory, and makes yt minds of Children more
cheerful, and prompte to any matter. There are some writers which suppose
that blushinge in a child is a very good sign of shamefastnes, and better
then palenesse: for palenesse argues to much fearfulnes, theother pretends
and shows a very good towardenes, Blushing in children a sign of good nature
as Diogenes witnesses: for on a time he seeing a child to blush: be of good
cheer my son (quod he) for such a kind of color, is the color of
virtue. If the father understand, or perceive his son to be docible, and of
excellent wytt, no covetousness ought to let or stay him whereby he should
frustrate his son of so great a commendacion: let him therefore so sone as he
can, betake his child unto good Scholemaisters, that he may The fathers care
to provide a good Schole master for his children.
in those liberal Arts, be taught and instructed, whereunto nature herself
has most adapted him: for nothing ought more to be wished for unto the
Parents, then to have their children learned, of whom surely, to be
vanquished and overcome, in all kind of praise, they ought not only to
suffer, and take in good part, but also to esteem the praise and reward of
victory gotten by their Children, to appertain unto theymselues.

There is nothing that causes Children to prove more obediente to their
parents, then when as they understand that they have profited in studies of
good Arts by the furtherance, and diligence of their Parents bestowed upon
them: Neither ought the Child so much to consider of his Parents substance,
which truly are but things transitorye, frail, and in the hands of
Fortune, and which do only garnishe and set out the A rich man un* learned.
body, but do not increase the mind or furnishe it with perpetual goods:
wherefore very well said Diogenes that a rich man being unlearned, is as a
sheep with a golden fleece.

Parents ought also to commytte the custody of their children unto their
friends to bring up, as well for that they do less cocker them being
absent, and again because they will be the less wanton in other men's houses,
being nourished at an other man's table, and cherished by another man's fire,
and they greatly fear left they should be very ill thought of, and thrust out
of doors by the^, unto whom their Parents had betaken and committed them in
governance, upon great trust and diligence. For it has been seen, that even
great Princes, under Tutors, and overseers, have many times proved more
excellent then under their own Parents. I think it profitable for the
child to be taught and instructed in two kinds of discipline at once,
neither is it to be feared, that the wit of the child should be ouercharged
by two scholemaisters Two kinds of lerning not preindicial for the child to
practice at one instante.
of several arts or Sciences: for he is put to no more pay nes, but his
diligence is divided, and tediousnes removed: for when the child is wearye of
one kind of teachinge, he goes straight to an other, even as it were unto an
Haven or restinge port of his travails, and the inconstancy of those young
years which hardly perseuereth long in one and the self same thing is not
altogether unprofitable: Nothing more famous can be geeuen from parents to
their children, then the studies of good disciplines and sciences which are
therefore called Lyberall Sciences, because they make me^ free from al vile and
loathsome lucre, and from all voluptuousnes, and loose dishonestye: for they
reduce and bring us to wisdom: then the which there can be nothing more
excellent unto mortal men, by reason Commodities proceeding of Learning.
whereof we seem to approach, and to be conjoined with the lyuinge God: the
reward of which sciences, if there were none other to be had among mortal
men, verelye virtue only of it self is sufficient: which yet always is
accompanied with Renoume, and Honor, even as the body is with the shadow:
If it be so that Children be somewhat of a dull capacity or otherwise less
fyt or apt to receive learning, let them be put to learn the practice of some
other trades, and occupations, especially such as Children of dull and mean
vvytes how to be emploid
come uearest in goodness unto learning, least that they remain unprofitable by
means of Idleness and slouthe: for true is that sentence of Marcus Cato:

By sloth, and doing nothing at all:
Men learn to do evil, great and small.
Therefore diligent and paynful cytizens, ought to drive sluggishe and
slothful people out of their cities, even as the diligent Bees do the Drones
or Dorres, which will Solonsla we, for the child that is not nur tered and
vv^l instructed by his father.
not take pains, for the common Honnye: and we must esteem as most holy,
that ordinance which Solon enacted, affirming that:

That child to his father is nothing bound,
In any respect of duty natural:
If that for him he has not found,
Some kind of trade to live withal.
But if all other disciplines and Arts should be lacking, yet ought they to
foresee and regard, that their children be not brought up without the rule of
good manners: for it is far better for men to be without children, and to
Better to be unborn then untaught.
be for ever barreyne and berefte of all progenye or Issue, then when men have
children, to bring them up evil nurtured, or of sewde behavior. Epaminondas
the Thebane a worthy man, and of great wisdom, never married any wife:
which thing his friend Pelopidas reprehending Epaminondas.
because he left not the Seed or succession of his valiantness, unto his
children, and therefore that in so doing he did ill provide for the
commoditye, or profit of his country: Epaminondas thereupon (smyling)
answered: take you heed friend Pelopidas, least you do worse provide for the
public utility of your country, which may happen to leave such a son
begotten by you, whose life perhaps hereafter may be wished of some to be
better: by which saying, this most wise Gentleman shows, that Pare^tes
ought to fear nothing more, then least they have such children, as may
degenerate from their steps and qualities.

Neocles the Athenian, a man noble, and excellent, had a son called
Themistocles, whom in his youth he disherited, because he was mislyked and
thought to live very lewdely, wastinge his substance, and in every point
disobayinge his fathers commandment: this severe and hard dealinge did not
discourage the sonue, but did rather far more encourage him to remember
himself: for he thinkinge that such a manifest blemish of misdemeanour
could not be extinguished without some singular industrye and praise, from
thence forth wholly vent him self to thexercise of virtue, and by all care and
study, that in him was possible, endeavored to traueyle for the commoditye of
his common weal: and with all dyligence that he could, protected and
maynteyned the causes of his friends, and private judgments: and within short
space so amended his faults, and reformed the vices of his youth, that there
was no one man in his time preferred before him, and very few were thought
to be found equalle unto him: therefore the seueritye of a father toward
such a Son, was not to be found fault wythal, who in deed of a most naughty
and lewd person, reclaimed him to be a man in all kind of praise most
commendable.

Polemon, the Athenian lyuinge unchaste in his youthful years, was wanton and
geeuen to filthy behavior, sometimes also ouerseene with drink, and having a
Garlande Example of a ryottous person reclaymed.
(as the custom was for the stoutest drincker to have (rushed with his
companions into Xenocrates school, only to floute and mock, and to play
some pageant of knavery: at that time as it chanced Xenocrates was
discoursinge amongst his scholars touching modesty, temperaunce, and
chastitye: which purpose for all this, he changed not, but plainly converted
his meaning, even upon Polemo^ there present: by which oration made, he so
reformed himself, yt without any more ado, forsaking there his companions, and
chaunginge his former old life, he yielded himself scholar unto Xenocrates,
and within a short space excelled all his scholefellowes: and besides this, so
nerelye expressed his scholemaister in all matters that after his deceasse this
Polemon, being then left his successor, so learnedly behaved himself after
thimit a cio^ of y^ other, that the Scholemaister was thought one still, and not
scant perceived to be changed. Young men also are to be enured with bodily
exercises, both for their Young men must be exercised.
better health, for (as Celsus satih) sloth enfebleth the body, labor
strengthens it, the one causinge vntimelye old age, the other long and
lustye youth, and also for that they might be made more proiftable members for
y^ commonweal in time of wars, wherein they are more pro^pt and active, if
they come thereunto with a body exercised rather then vy sloth effeminated:
in which thing the Lacedaemonians did very much excel: whose children, in
runninge, leapinge, and castinge the dart, were daily exercised and practiced:
from who^ Diogenes on a time returning and goinge to Athens, was asked whither
he went, and from whence he came: I come (says he) from men, and am now goinge
to women.

THE FIFTH BOOK EFfectuallye discoursinge upon the ENDEVOVRS, TRADES,
OFFICES, DVEties, and several vocations: as well of the civil citizen as of
the vplandish countreyman: also the discouerye of vices, with the dangers that
in every realm and country thereby ensues.
RApine promises Idleness and rest: but virtue shows before her, labor and
sweat. Evil manered persons, and such as in their speech and gesture be
gross and unnurtured, be termed uncivil: because they rather seem to have
been brought up in the country then in the Cytties. From hence is derived the
word, and Ciuilitye.
phrase of speech called Ciuilitye, or Urbanitye: because it does appertayn
both to speech and manners, and is so called by the name of the latin word
Vrbs, a cyttye: because through cyuil companying or meeting together of wise
and learned men, a certain knowledge and learning is gotten, which dyrecteth
and trayneth up men in gallant courtesy, pleasant order, and comelye grace,
the contrary whereof, is called Rusticitie.

If a man would in few words determine and define what a Civil man is, he
shall say that he is a good man, and one that is profitable to his common
weal: for first, What a civil man is.
and specially he ought to have before his eyes that sentence of Plato where
he says:

Men are of God created, not only
To profit themselves in this life present:
But that they should their native country
Study to profit with honest intent:
Partly again that they be styllbent,
To profit friend, children, and kinsfolk natural:
To this end to live well ought all men mortal.
And by good right, humane societye is instituted and Society humane vvherun
to it tends*
appointed to live together, for one to profit another: These things when we
shall consider upon, we shall well perceive that we ought to help and
provide for our native country.

The little Bees, and Antes, being creatures not only the least of all others,
but also dumb and deaf, ought to be examples unto us, which undoubtedly do
labor one for another: they swarm together, they keep them Examples of
Bees.
selves together, they are preserved altogether, with like defe^ces and
succors, they drive away their enemy with common danger, and maintain their
store, their young ones and all their company: for who can be counted a good
Citizen which is good for none but himself only, gathers riches to serve
his own turn without imparting any thing to others, and scarcely for
covetousness sufferi^g his children and wife to have so much as may conuenientlye
serve them meat and drink. For we ought to esteem the state of a common
weal, as a ship which has need of the helpinge hands and diligence, of
all them which are within it: every maryner ought to endeavor Comparison of
the state of a common weal unto a Ship.
himself to the uttermost of his power, not only to save it, from being over
whelmed and drowned: but also that she may arryue at some safe port, or haue^.
And as in it, some holds the rother or helm, another directs the
Sayleyardes, another looks to the Cables, and others about other matters as
the case requires, and they have alone mutual or common care for the
preservation of the ship: So ought all citizens to work and traueile, and some
with council, some with diligence, some with riches, and some with paynfulnes
and industrye, to help the common weal, that not only it be kept in good
estate, but that it may every day increase better and better: for those
Citizens that be thus minded, are coumpted best, and by these means, do
they make the public weal most wealthye, For surely no riches, no revenues
do more enlarge the state of a Cittye, and make it safer, then when as the
Cytizens Concord in a r^a^me.
among themselves, be at unity and concord, and join together for the honor
of their country: And on the other part no power nor riches are strong
enoughe where as the minds of the cytizens are factious and iarringe. Which
thing Scilurus by a merueylous example taught: for he being by reason of
sickness and age now come to decrepicie, caused his sons being fowerscore
and ten in number, to be called before him, and holdinge in his hands a bundle
of Spear staves, which he had bound up together, in number so many as he had
sons, raught forth the same to every one of his sons seuerallye,
commaundinge them to burst them asunder, which Co^moditye by concorpe.
thing they affirminge to be impossible* the old father drew them out one
by one, and burste them asunder al, and thereby took occasion to admonish them
that while they agreed and were at unity among themselves they should not be
overcome by any force or power, but that the longer they lived, the stronger
they should be: contrarilye he told them that they should be weak, and of
no force, if they disagreed and were at discord among themselves, and that
every little enemy should the^ easily enough overcome them: for true is that
ancient sentence wherein is said, that

The common weal is a continual living creature,
Which is never killed, nor dies at any time,
Except to it self it iniurye procure:
And be the sole causer of proper ruin.
The Romans possessed the Empire of the whole world, so long as they
abstayned themselves from civil bloudshedde and intestine wars, but when the
ambicio^ of Cinna, the infamous table of Sylla, the bloody slaughter of Marius,
and the wars of the Son in law, against Example of civil discord.
the father in law, enkindled and invaded the weal public, the^ ye Romans
(before) the chief rulers of the whole world became laughinge stocks unto
their Rascal people, and unto their barbarous enemies: wherefore in a free
cittye there can be no better persuasion, then yt which trayneth every one
unto concord and unity, wherewith even the least cities are increased, and enjoy
the benefit of perpetual liberty: for this is a sure and safe wall of
defense: these are the Adamant towers, which with no force, no warlike engine,
neither with any tho^derclappes of Jupiter, can be destroyed and thrown down:
By this means shall this our cittyzen, whom we would have accoumpted very
good be minded to unity, if he folowinge the opinion of Pythagoras and
Plato, consider that our mind does consiste in three parts, whose
principality, and reason they do show to rest in the head as in the tower or
castle of the body, that this our mind being immortal, should always be
nourished with the Food of contemplation of greatest and wayghtiest matters.

Let our citizen frame his mind, to execute the Talente or gift wherewyth
he is endewed: for the office of the mind is to use reason, which ought
always to bear Reason ought to rule our affections.
rule, and to have our appetite or desire so inclineable and obedient
thereunto, that we covet not any thing filthye or indecent: and even as an
horse unruly and tramplinge, is governed by the Bridle and Bytte, of a good
ryder: so let the Appetite or affection of the mind, be lead by reason, to
whom let him always obays, and never obstinately resist, if he desire to be
accou^pted a good and a wise man: for true is that sentence of Marcus Fabius
Quintilianus:

As the bird to fly the horse to run,
And wild beasts by nature to cruelty
Are given, to live under the Son:
Even so, man has actiuitye
Of mind and wit to live wythall,
As creature with reason imbute:
That it is believed, the original
Of his soul is celestial institute.
Fortitude, Temperance, Prudence, and Justice, are four Sisters lincked
together in mutual bands, they are never separate, for surely one of them
alone without ye others cannot be perfect, but seems altogether maimed and
imperfect: Fortitude without wisdom is counted rashenes. Prudence without
Justice is deemed craftines, Four e^ardinal virtues.
and an evil kind of mallyce: Temperance without Fortitude is reconed
cowardice, and Justice without Te^perance, is thought to be cruelty. Whereupon
Ennius y^ Poet says: Su^mum Ius, su^ma In^uria* Extreme rygor Concord in
music.
is extreme wrong.

Let therefore these four virtues agree among themselves in a concord, even
as it comes to pass in music, and instruments, that they may make a perfect
concord, Good report and fame for well doing.
consonancie, and harmonye.

It is ye common profit which makes men to gain good report for their well
doing, and well deserving of all men, which the Auncientes in time paste so
highlye esteemed, that they vouchsafed those persons of divine honors of whom
they had received commodities and profit. Worthy acts of Hercules.
For Hercules (although a mortal man) yet was thought to be in the number of
the Gods, for no other reason, but because he bestowed many great
commodities upon many nations: for either he busled or contended with wild
beasts destroying countries, or with his arrows, killed the lothlome filthye
fowls, or slew the perilous pirates and common robbers which kept the Seas,
and befet the ways with such dangerous stales, y^ no trauailers might pass*
or else did some other such kind of worthy exploites: doing therein much
ease andprofite to mortal men, and making their life more safe and happy.

Dyonisius also called Bacchus, was counted a God, because How and why
Bacchus was deified and made a God.
amongst the Thebanes, he taught the use how to make wine, and was reputed
not only Noble and famous in warlike affairs, ^ut a very good searcher out
of hidden secrets, for he first playde the Philosopher in Triptolemus.
Europa, and then in Asia: So was Triptolemus honored for a God, because he
taught the use of corn amongst ye Isis.
Athenians: and Isis a goddess because she taught the order how to sow corn
and flax: Therefore doubtless they are worthy of rewards and dignities, which
do profit, men with their inventions.

It was the point of a noble mind, not to permit in A wise man vvil
neither do ill, nor suffer any to be done by his will.
any wise, that a man should deceive himself, which thing by a pretye
example Carneades does admonish us in this wise.

If thou knew a serpent lurking priuilye
Under a place, and wouldste have any man:
Unawares to sit do wne even there presentlye,
Whose death might redound to thy profit than.
Thou should do very ill, except with warninge
Thou did dehort him thence from harminge.
A Good man is always one and the same, he never swar^eth from himself, and
had rather be honest in deed the^ so to be accounted, he is not covered with
any cloak of dissimulatio^, keeping inwardly privy hatred, and hartburning, and
yet outwardly prete^ding a fair face: but has always one cou^tenau^ce, his
eyes always after one manner, his look always one, and his speech in like
manner always true.

A citizen must always beware that no notable vice reygne in him: he shall
exercise those arts and sciences wherewith he may be able to live honestly,
with out iniurye and to bring up his familye: For he ought to have regard of
his domestical matters, to the end he may help his children, kinsfolks, and
friends: but especially The citize^ careful for himself and his family
the common weal of his country, when time shall require: for as Cicero
says, the private possessions and riches of every man, are the riches and
wealth of the city. Let them gain, but without iniuryinge or hurtinge of
others: for as the Poet says.

Goods that are gotten by sinister mean*
Are in like sort consumed again.
Architas of Tarent a noble Philosopher of Pythagoras sect, when sent letters
unto Plato, that he should beware and take heed of Dionisius the Tyrant of
Syracusa, if he loved the sauetye of his own life: was had in admiration
amongst all men, because he was skylfull almost in all arts: this man was of
such dexterity of wit, that he made and framed by a certain wonderful
reason, and artificial worckemanshippe the proportion and Image of a Dove,
which Dove as Fauorinus the philosopher reports did fly: it was contrived
with such equal peyze or wayghte, and in the same was a wind enclosed, which
with a temperate spirit, caused it to fly.

Amongst the most noble praises of Affricanus, whereof Praise of Africanus for
his bounty.
both Polibius and other writers made mention: This one was accou^pted great,
that he daily went down into the judgment hall, and from thence did not
return homewardes again, until he had gratified and done good, to some one
or other: And Titus the son of Uespesian Praise of Titus Vespasianus.
(who after his father was Emperor of Rome three years) was of such gentle,
and courteous nature, that at supper time remembringe that he had pleasured and
done good to none that day, said these words: Friends this day have I
lost.

It shall be the duty of a civil man to use liberalitye, and franckenes, in
gratifiyng with requital and thanckes unto Liberality and thankfulness.
others, and never to forget a good turn received: which respect of curtesye
was so highly in the old time regarded, y^ not only persons living, but even
the very persons already dead could not neglect it: For Simonides the Poet,
seeinge as he iourneyed, a certain man (unknown to him) lyinge dead and rast
out unto the birds, and beasts of the field, did straight way burye him,
but when he came to the place where he thought in his mind to have taken
shippinge, he then again saw in his dream, the same party whom he had
buried, warninge him not to enterprise his voyage as he had determined: for if
he did, he told him that night he should suffer shipwreck: Gratitude.
when Simonides had told his dream unto his companyons, they laughed him to
scorn, and he alone remained on the shore, the rest of his other companions
not creditinge his words: but as soon as the Ship was gone a little from the
land, there arose a tempest incontinente, that brake al their tackling, and al
to squatted their ship, that they were drowned every mothers Son: And so
Simonides, for the good turn that he did in buryinge the dead man, received
thereby the benefit and sauegarde of his life.

Let every good Citizen take heed, that he be not found a blabbe, or liar
in his talk: for to lie is the property rather of a servile, then of a free
mind: for Aristotle Periurye.
very pretelye to a certain person, demaundinge him, what Liars gained by
their lyinge? answered: that they cannot be believed an other time when they
tell truth: but yet it is a far worse thing for any man to forswear himself:
which fault was so odible among the Egiptia^s, y^ all perjured persons suffered
punishment of death as they which neither regarded religion toward god nor
faith toward man: let the honest citize^ moreover bridle in himself a
certain braynsicke sauciness, and brablinge in speech: for as it is a praise
to speak lively and boldly if at any time a man have need to speak: so is it
worthy of disprayse not to have a stay of the tongue if silence be
necessary: for Cato in his adolescencie studying eloquence Rash speech
and Philosophy, used a certain wonderful silence of speech, and when on a
time a certain familier friend of his said unto him: Cato, many men do find
fault with thy silence, be aunsweered saying, I will then speak when I have
thoroughly learned to speak such things as are not worthy of silence.

Pythagoras also the most wise prince of Italique Philosophy, taught his
scholars to be silent before he taught them to speak, thereby shewinge, that
a man's words Cato used restraint of speech.
are first to be premeditate or thought upon, ere they be uttered. For to
bridle, and restrayn the tongue, which nature (meaning Scilence) has walled
about with a trenche of teethe, is a point of no small wisdom: therefore
Silence.
the said Philosopher restrained tal^katiue young men, enioyning unto each of
them five years silence.

Aristotle when he sent his scholar and kinseman Calisthenes ^
unto king Alexander among many other precepts gave him this one, that he
should use to speak very seeldome, but yet very pleasauntlye before him,
that Aristotle's advise to Calisthene* touching silence.
had both the power of life and death, in the sharpenes of his tongue: such
persons also as have diligently searched the natures of living creatures, do
write that certain living creatures lacking reason, do maintayn their sauetye
with much silence: As geese which by reason of too much heat forsakinge the
east* and flyinge westward, in their flight over the hill Taurus, where many
Eagles breed (which ravenous fowls they greatly dread) do use to fill
their beakes with little stones, least that the force of custom, or
necessity should move them to gaggle, and there bewray themselves unto the
Eagles, to the great hazarding of their lives: but after they have sile^tly
passed the top of that mountayn and hills thereabout: they let fall the
little stones out of their bylles, and with a more careless flight, hold on
their course alonge the air with loud noise, and far clearer voices: Let
therefore the Citizen learn to keep silence and to consider with whom he
does talk, and let him observe opportunity in speech: for sure according to
the old proverb: A word once past, cannot be called back. And therefore let
them rather use the example of the Geese, then of Calisthenes: for they by a
little silence saved their lives, but this man even with a small liberty of
speech lost the same, when as he would not geeue ear unto the saying of his
good master: for greater is the praise of a seasonable silence, then of talk
out of due time used.

And furthermore let the good citizen be ignorant in glosing and flattring:
for neither can the glosers or flatterers in any respect profit either kings
or princes. And Flattery must be eschevved.
true is that sentence of Quintus Curtius mentioned in his most excellent
books of the Acts of Alexander, where he says.

More often is a kingdom spoyld through clawbacks flattery:
Then by main force of forreyne foe, or homish enemy.
Aristippus the Philosopher did earnestlye sue to Dyonisius the Tyrant for a
certain thing in the behalf of his friend* which when he saw he could not
obteyn, straight way he humbly embraced the Tyrauntes knees, and by and by
obtained his desire: and when this thing was laid in his dishe for a reproach
(by such persons as were present) he pleasauntly said these words: I was not
the aucthor of this kind of flatterye, but Dyonisius himself, Diogenes.
who has his ears in his knees: and Diogenes being demanded what Beast did
byte cruellest, merely au^swered,

Of wild beasts a backebyter,
Of tame beasts a flatterer.
For in deed flatterers do very much hurt not only amongst princes whom
they do provoke to tyranny and cruelty, but also in a free cittye oftentimes
(to creep into Hurt of slatterers.
the favor of the common people) do geeue advise upon things which are
against a common weal, and now and than, make the foolish multitude of people
stark mad.

Moreover let not a good citizen be hastye, or rash to anger: let him at no
time speak anyethinge in chydinge mood or rage: for anger proceeds of the
weakness of man's mind, and that by a probable argument or reason Rasnnes of
anger.
is showed: because angrye persons are, to them that be in good case, fayntye
and cold, unto men they are women, to youngmen old men, and to persons in
prosperity, miserable: yet notwithstanding many things are now and than done
by anger, which in the end (after the parties have paused, and come to
theimselues) do make Inconuenie^ce of anger.
them sorrowful and repentaunt of that which they have said and done:
Alexander oftentimes showed examples of an inuineible mind, but because he
was rash and hasty to anger, he emblemished and made his other Example of
furious anger in Alexander.
virtues in some part more obscure: for he killed Clitus his friend being an
aged man, and giltlesse: and a little while after, when he was come to
himself again, he would have thrust the weapon which he took out of Clitus
his wound into his own body, had it not been for his friends, that were then
about him.

Dyonisius also the Tyraunte (being on a time dysposed to play at y^ Tenys)
laid down his coat and sword wta Dyonisius.
young man to keep, in whom he took great delight: here at wha^ as a certain
familier of his (iestinglye and thincking no harm) said: Dyonisius, thou
put thy life into this man's hands, and the young man laughing at the
same words, the Tyrant commanded both of them out of hand to be slain: ye one
because he had showed a way to kyl him, and the other because he allowed and
took pleasure with laughter at ye saying: for ye which act certainly he was
afterward so sorry, that he never took any thing more greuouslye in all the
days of his life: For in such kind Not good to do any thing while anger
losteth.
of anger when the mind is kyndled and enraged, we must surcease from all
manner of dealinges, till the heat of choler be assuaged, following herein the
example of Architas, who being on a time some what moved with anger toward
his Servant, said these words: with what How Architas qual ified his anger.
mind should I entreat the, or how would I deal with thee now if I were not
angrye?

Demosthenes that most excellent Orator seeing ye nature and disposition of
Phocion, which was of contrary opinion to al other citizens of Athens, said on
a time to him: Phocio^ y^ Athenians will kill the, if a madness once take them in
ye heads, to who^ Phocio^ answered: nay they will kill thee Demosthenes if they
ever chance to be wise. Furthermore a civil man ought so to dispose and frame
al ye ages of his time y^ in eueryone of the^ he may exercise himself in y^
which shall then best become him, neither let him do any such things in his
childhoode or youth, whereof he may afterward repent when he is grown to
further years: on y^ other part to omit nothing which he ought to bring to
pass at those years: For in Childehoode is praised that towardness of Wit,
which fore shows hope of honest life in time to come: In Adolescencie
Disciplines of good Arts: wherein, who so excel, do seem presently right
excellence men: then in the rest of the Ages of man, the fruictes of works
are looked for: that is to say, some conformity of sayings and doings:
again on the other part, a child is commended for simplicity, a young man for
ge^tlenes, and an oldman for gravity: in which point there is mutche amiss
eue^ at those first years which are more apt for learning, which surely many
in playinge and lewdness, do lose: for growinge to bigger stature for shame
fastenesse they are ashamed to learn, whereas rather they ought to be ashamed
to be ignoraunte: Undoubtedlye that is true which was holden as a Proverb
amongst the ancient learned men.

So long our selves to learn we must employe.
As in this world we any life enjoy.
Yet notwithstanding there are some which will not stick to mock and floute
men that are given to study, and learning in that age.

Themistocles the Athenian, a most excellent gentleman, being an hundredth and
seven years old, and perceiving that he must then needs depart out of
this world, is reported to have said that he was very sorye that he must
then dye when he first began to taste of learning and wisdom: what then
shall others do, whose life is far shorter and less exercised in studies of
good discipline? seeinge that he which had run beyond the bounds of
nature, did think himself not to have lived any long time, to thattayninge
of perfect wisdom.

The longest space of man's life which by his birth and death is defined,
some have run in long race, and Manns age by the opinion of Philosophers.
some in a short. Plato affirms that Lxxxi. years is the laufull bound,
and end of man's life: Solon affirms lxxx. years iumpe, many threscore and
fyftene: and some the threescore and tenth year: for they do divide our age,
or time of life by the number of seven, whereunto the Pythagorians attribute a
certain perfection, and do show, that in every seven years, some change
and alteracion happens in the bodies of men: wherefore they affirm that every
seventh year of our life is dangerous, Manns age divided by seven years.
which the Grecians call (...), The Latins Iudicialem seu decretorium,
Judicial or decreiorye: and this do they show by this means. First because
in the first seven years childrens teeth fall out or do lowse, geuinge place
to other teeth coming up more fit, and ready to chawe the meat: and at
that time the perfect pronunciation of their mother tongue is perfect and
plain: In yt second seventh year the soft hairs or mosinesse in young
Springaldes appearethe, in the third the Bearde begins to burgein and grow,
and is the full accomplishment of height in man's stature: in the fowerth he
begins to spread and enlarge in breadth and thickenes of stature: In the
fyfthe the strength of man is fully perfected and made ripe and able for the
procreation of Issue: In the sixte man stays his pleasure and voluptuousnes:
and in the seventh rests wisdom and eloquence, yet now his strength does
by little and little secretly decay. And in the eight there is a certain
concinnitie or aptnes of the virtues of the mind, which remains in ye ninth
septenarie or seven years: finally in the tenth by little and little he grows
toward his end.

Pythagoras said that fowerscore years was the prefixed time for the length
of life, and deuideth it in ages Man's life divided into four equal numbers
compared to the four seasons of the year.
by twentye, allottinge unto childehoode twenty years, to adolescencie as
many: as many to youth, to manhhode other twenty, and to old age as many,
comparing ma^ns life unto the four seasons or quarters of the year: As to the
spring, chyldehoode: to summer youth. To Autumn manhood, and unto winter
old age: But Uarro a most excellent Philosopher among the Latins, thincketh
Children.
that chyldrens age continues till they be fyftene years old, because so
long they are Impuberes: that is Yongmen.
to say vnhearye and not apt to generation, from thence till thyrtie they are
counted young men or lusty youths, because the body does grow lustye large
and strong till Manhood.
y^ age: until the age of xlv. they are called men, because at that age they
are best able to defend and help their common meal with armoure and weapons:
Till threescore Oldemen.
years they are called grave and aunciente, because then especially man's
body begins to draw toward old age: and from thence, until the end of
each man's Extreme old age.
life, he affirms the fifthe degree to reach: unto the which age who so
does attayn, he calls them very old men, because then the Body becomes
vnwieldye, by reason of age: but Staseas the Neapolitane, an excellent
Philosopher in his time and a rare Phisltio^ determines and concludes man's
life at lxxxiiii. years.

We ought not to desire to live long, no not although the destinies do seem to
smyle upon us, or to favor our peticions. by reason of the sundry chances
of fortune, and Man may not vvish for long ^yfe.
doubtful health of our body: for a certain wiseman, being demanded how
long a man should wish to live, made this answer: so long as the
commodities of this life be mo then the discommodities thereof.

Theophrastus (as Cicero says) was w^nt to accuse nature, for that sheee had
geeuen unto Crows and Hearts, long life, whose life was altogether
unprofitable, and unto men very short and swyfte, who both might benefit
theymselnes and others, if they might have time of life fully to drink of
wysoomes Well.

Possidonius a notable Philosopher said, that one day of a learned man's time,
was more worth then never so long an age of the ignorant: let therefore our
civil man live Moderation in diet.
very moderately, and let his diet and table fare be according to frugality,
and temperaunce: for intemperancye and gurmaundise enfebleth the body and
dulleth the mind: for as temperancie makes a man long young, and preserves
the body in health and good lykinge, so the other does hasten old age
before the time, and makes the body weak, takes away color, and
cheerefulnes of countenance: for it is true which was wont to be in this
respect, even by the Phisicians themselves, that:

Many mo persons by glotony are slain,
Then are by war, famine, or any other pain.
For men not able fully to digeste that which they receive Gourmandise surphet
and belly cheer.
into their stomachs, are given to be of unlusty health, they are evermore
sick, seldom whole, and sone com to their end: and furdermore there is no goulfe
or whirlpole which does more swallow up and waste a man's substance, then
gluttonye, which the more it is filled and fed, y^ more is it still an
hungered, and the better it has dyned, the more it studieth and takes care how
to suppe: There are surely no riches so large and copious, no household
treasure so notable, nor wealth so great, which in a small time are not
swalowed up into the bellye.

Diogenes on a time readinge in a paper set on the door Ryotous persons.
of a certain ryotous person, that was driven to sell his house, merilye and
pleasauntly said these words.

I well perceived this building sumptuous,
Beset with wine, and cates so curious,
Would vomit out his master shortly
That kept such reuellrexe through follye.
Glotony does not only waste and consume the substance, but brings very many
Gentlemen into servitude: do we not see y^ smelfeastes, and ieasters, become
perpetual bo^d Smelfeases.
slaves for their bellies sake? are there not many which as it were buy their
dynner and supper not only with flattringe services, but also with most vile
and absurd offices? for whom it were a great deal better to feed up on the
very mast and Acornes shaken from the tree, and to live with wild beries and
apples, then at another man's table to be fed with peacocke and the dayntie
Acipencer. Surely greatly are they to be blamed, which sekee the^ selves
masters for good cheer sake, forgetting the state of Liberty.

Albidius a certain citizen of Rome devoured and consumed all his goods or
substance in eatinge and drinking, and Prodigality and riot of Albidi us.
finally even ye very house it self, wherein he dwelt, which was then even all
the substance he had left) was by casualtie of fire consumed and brent: this
thing when Cato heard of, he sportingly said: that Albidius had sacrificed his
re^naunts and fragmentes: by the which saying Cato, quipped the glotony of the
said Albidius, and showed yt thereby he was become an open pray, and laughing
stock unto fortune: for yt thing which he could not eat, he burned. And that
which he could not revel, devour, and swyll, y^ had he committed into the
hands of Fortune to sport wythall.

Exercise is called the best sauce for meat, and hunger is coumpted a delicate
or daynty dishe fynely sawced, for the prouocations of gluttony and curious
cates and iunkettes, sought for both out of the air, the heavens, earth
Exercise and la ^^ur a good s^^^ for meat.
and the Sea, do not sauou^e or relice, better with an idle slothful person,
then bread does with him that labors and is an hungered: Ptolomeus the king
wanderinge through Egypt, and his soldiers having not overtaken him with
victuels, being very hungrye, did eat course bread (which he got out of a
shepeheardes cottage) greedely, and with great appetite: swearing, that in all
his life time he did never eat any thing more sweet and delicate then that
bread was: Also Darius flyinge from Alexander (being sore athirste) did with
great Darius.
lust and greedines drink muddye and troubled water, taken out of the next
river, which was soylled and stenched with dead carcases thrown into it,
saying that he never tasted any thing sweeter in all his life.

A certain swyllinge dronckarde given to gullinge, and quaffinge, was wont to
say in sport, that he never thursted because he did with oftentimes
drin^kinge preuente Good way to procure a stomach.
his thirst: But the civil man must expect and look, that nature will require
meat, which (by walking, laboring, and exercisinge himself) is to be
provoked: by the example of Socrates the Philosopher, who^ on a time walkinge,
a certain man asked why he so did, he answered:

UUith walkinge, honger buy would I feign
Good appetite, for my supper to gain.
The ancient Romans for no other cause used to sup in their open courts,
and under the open air: but to the intent to show their continency, and
frugalitye, unto the people whose care and study, was not so great to pester
their table with many dishes, as it was afterward to their posterity: for
the Epicure who was the auoucher, and meinteyner of pleasures, despised fine
and dayntie dilicates, and filled the barks of trees, which he used for
dishes, with Herbs and Apples, and would say that a man should feed upon
homely meat, because they are the more easily to be had: for delicate dishes
and exquisite brothes are prepared and dressed with great care, and excessive
cost, and do make a greater grief and trouble before a man can find them
forth, then they bring pleasure in eatinge. Hippocrates also writes, that
such persons as are careful for Gluttonye and Bellycheare, Epicure. Belly gods.
are never in sound health, neither can be long lived, and that their spirits
are so incombred with to much blood, and too much ^ramminge, as if they were
wallowed and soused in the mire: and therefore they have no mind upon any sober
or heavenly thing, but always frame theymselues to think upon their dishes,
and how they may fill their bellies: It is a thing profitable so to dispose yt
mind with something, that thereby at all times and seasons, fruits may be had
and reaped: for few things can be wantinge Husbandrye purueyghour of many
neces saries.
for daily expenses unto a civil man, if he will have diligente care, to look
to his husbandrye, and the feedinge of his cattle: a very mean diligence
wherein, Cato said did increase, a man's substance: neither ought any man to
be ashamed to feed flocks of beasts or herds of cattle, for even most noble
persons of all the aunciente people before time, did use to feed and keep
Cattle.

Let banquettinge be seeldome haunted of a good citizen: for it is uncertain
whether the same banquets purchase a man favor or displeasure: for although
those that Banqueting
are bidden guestes, be bound to requite the same with like again, yet there are
many which being neglected and unbidden do take disdain thereat, and
practice against the same either reproach or Iniurye: for, to keep Bankettes
or feasts is thought to belong unto kings, princes, and most wealthiest
personages.

Riot and covetousness, are two plagues which (as Titus Liuius says) have
oftentimes subverted, and utterly Riot and covetousness: vvo plagues.
destroyed, whole cities and Empyres.

Let the good Citizen keep a mean in his apparel, and observe a measure in
his degree and ability: for in deed, as it is a foul thing to wear ill
favored and vndecente garments, so is it subject to envy, to wear that
which is to gorgious and fine, and especially, when as a man's substance will
not stretche to mainteyn the same, or whereas he being indebted to others,
braues it out upon other menns purses: for in apparel this is to be
considered yt a man wear nothing but such as he may lawfully, Manner of
apparel.
and that it do not differ from the customable order, and usage of his
country: let it be such as may become both the person that wears it, his
stock, and kynred, his yearees and manners: for as fine brave apparel (so far
forth as it becomes) does add dignity and aucthority unto me^: so nyce,
womanish, and ryotous apparel, does not commend and set out the body, but
discovers the vanity of ye mind. Adrianus Caesar herin purchased to himself
praise because he ordained ye the Senators, and the worshipful persons of
Rome, should not go abroad, but in their gowns, except when they returned
home from suppers.

Al necessary expenses, are to be restrained, as ye charges of funeralles,
which bring no commodity to those yt are dead, and are chargeable to the^ that
are alive: and yet their fame and good report which lived with praise, and
honestye is not darkened with modest funeral ceremonies: but on ye Vnnecessarye
expenses must be forborne. Funeralles.
other part their funeral po^pe, shall not make the memory of them to be famous
among posterity, whose life having been lose, and inglorious, has left
nothing behind the^ worthy of memory.

Cyrus king of Persia commanded by his last will and testament, yt there should
beno other Sepulcher or tomb erected for him, then the earth only which
brought forth grass, and flowers, then which there can nothing be found
more noble, neither any thing that may more beautifye ye grave: surely me
thinks the reason of ye ancient Egiptians is to be deryded, whereof Dyodorus
makes mention, because they dispisinge ye time of this present life, did
Costly funeralles of the Egiptians reproved.
call their dwelling houses, by the names of Innes as the which they coumpted
their harbors and lodginges. for a small time, but most vaynlye and fondlye
they lashed out lustely, and spared no cost, in erecting of sumptuous To^bes,
and burialls: for they thought that the graves were ye perpetual and
everlasting dwelling places of them yt dyed, and were therein buried.

The Scythians (as Plutarch mentioned) did bury with Scythians absurd manner of
burying their kings.
their dead kings, their butlers, cooks, yea and harlotts: to that end as I
think, yt their kings should want no necessary service after they were dead:
and certain countries of India with their dead husbands, either burn or
bury their beloved wives, or others who^soeuer they best loved in their life
time: Oh a matter not only horrible in India^s savage manner in burialles.
sight, but also to be spoken of, to kill a living man, because the dead man
should not lack a friend or servant, when as in deed he can never want or
stand in need of any such, who has no feeling at all.

Little differs from this madness of the Indians, the people called
Massagetae, and those called Derbites, which do kill their kinsfolks and
friends, when they wax old, or by any casualtie draw nea^e unto death, maki^g
thereat great solempnitie and feasting, and there eat them together with other
meat: and this they say they do, because they suppose it to be the worst
fortune that may happen unto men, to be devoured with worms.

Essedones philosophers of Europe, which dwelling near to the river Danow,
used to celebrate ye funerals of their Parents, and neighbors, with merry
cheer, and ^ocund rejoicing of their friends and familiers together: ye dead
corses being mangled and mixed with the intrayles of their slain beasts, they
do feed upon, and eat up in ba^queting: but the Heads, or Skulles, of their
dead Bodies, they keep to serve them in steed of Drinckinge Cups,
Semiramis.
garnishing them with gold and silver.

Semiramis a Queen of a most haughty, and excellent mind, causing a
sumptuous Sepulcher or Tomb, for Covetousness.
her to be made, wherein she would lie after her death, commanded these words
to be engraven thereuppon:

What king so ever shall have need
of money, wealth, or treasure,
Let him pull open this tomb with speed,
and take thereof at pleasure.
These words Darius the king reading, and thinkinge there had been treasures
hid there in deed, commanded the stone of the Tomb to be taken away, which
being rowlled aside, be saw other words ingraued unto this effect and purpose:

Except thou had been a king covetous Couetusnes of king Darius reproved.

Of money: insaciable, and desirous,
Thou would never have broke up, and violate
The graves of them, that are extinct by fate.
This most excellent Lady by a civil derision, did thus taunt the vice of
covetousness.

Sertorius having won Thing, a town in Maurisia where (as thinhabitants said)
the noble Sepulcher of Antheus was being of wonderful yea incredible
greatness, gave commandment that it should be razed and thrown to the
Monument reverently pre scrued.
ground, and therein found a body of lxx. cubits long (as Plutarch makes
mention) which he bebolding, meruayled greatly thereat, and commadu^ed yt the
same Tomb should be streightway reedified and restored, and greatly enryched
the fame thereof, least otherwise he should have emblemished his honor, by
defacinge and violating, so notable a monumente.

THE SIX T BOOK ENtreatinge of Nobility defined by the opinion of
Philosophers, the commendation of their bountifulnes, liberality, and
francknesse toward all men: how some are thought meet to supplye functions,
by reason of their Ancestors before time aucthorised to bear like offices: of
good provision for the suste^tation of the commons: Of such as having houses in
the city, and also in the country, cannot be so careful, for the common
vtilitye of both places. The description of the venomous vice Envy: of severe
Justice upon male factors, injurious to the state of the common weal.
HIPPODAM US Mylesius a man desirous of glory, a worthy warrior, and
excellentlye well learned in the studies of good arts, purposing to write of
the good estate of a common weal, first and especially, thought it convenient
and necessary to divide and distinguishe the cittye and country in several:
for it seemed unto him a thing very hard to compass, to make a common rabble and
multitude of men gathered together within the walls of one city, to live
quietly together, except there were aseperation made between them: therefore
he distributed and divided the people into three sorts, one to be Artificers,
another husbandemen, and the third warriors: and he thought it good reason
that the magistrates should be appointed and chosen by all these persons
indifferentlye.

Cicero unto Salust who taunted him as a new made Cittyzen, and one come of
base Degree, boastinge himself Cicero and Sa lust at dissension.
to be of most noble dissente answered on this manner: I have by my virtue,
worthynes, and service to my country shyned before, and geeuen light to all
mine ancestors, yt if they were not known before, they might yet of me
receive a beginning of their memory: thou by means of thy lewd life which
thou have lead filthelye, have unto thy ancestors, brought great clouds of
darcknesse, so that although they of themselves, were famous and notable
citizens, yet by means of the, they shall be brought into obliuio^: wherefore do
not thou object unto me men of ancient race: for it is better, yt I do
florishe in mine own acts that I have done, the^ to lean upon the reputacion
Cicero his au^svvere unto Salust.
of auncestrie, and so to live that I may be an original or beginning of
nobilitye, and an example of virtue unto al my posterity: for Cicero might well
bring proof of ye progenye or offspring of his nobility, because he was lyneally
descended of the Uolscian kings.

Plato wysest of all Plilosophers, and his folowers (from whom Aristotle does
smally differ, makes four kinds of nobility: ye 1. was of the^ which proceeded
from noble stock Nobility.
and ancient race of honorable elders: the second was of the^, whose parents
were me^ of aucthority, princs, or chief rulers: the iii. was of the^ whose
rulers excelled others in any kind of notable praise or co^mendacio^, either at
home or abroad in the wars: the iiii. kind of nobility* he makes that,
which he shows to be most excellent of all ye rest, when as any man
excels others, either in worthynes, wysoome, or magnanimity of the mind,
and leans only to the virtue of his own commendation: And this man he
judges worthy to be coumpted noble, who^ not other me^ns worthiness ennobleth,
but whom his proper virtue and valiauntnes, does advance to honor and
renown: but unto these four kinds of nobility, Aristotle also added the v.
yt is of them which famously excelled in any notable discipline: and this did
he by good right: for they there by do not only ennoble themselves, and their
lignage, but likewise ennoble the Cities, and countries wherein they were
borne.

Iuba the son of Iuba king of Numidia, being but a child, and taken
prisoner by Julius Caesar, did follow his triu^phe into Africa: and although he
had lost both kingdom Example of Iuba.
and liberty, and also despoyled of his honor and dignitye, yet he betoke
himself unto learning, and within a small time, proved so well, that he was
coumpted amongst the best learned writers in Greece: and whatsoever nobility
Fortune had taken from him, ye same did the discipline of good sciences, more
abundantly restore in him: whereunto also Hanniball gave himself, even in the
desperate and troublesome broils of the Carthaginenses, and being somewhat aged
in years, did learn the greek tongue and therein became so eloquent, yt he
wrate the acts of certain Emperors, and certain excellent books of the
orderinge of warfare and martial affairs.

It seems mete that they, whose parents, grau^dsires, and ancestors have
before time been honored, and endowed with public offices, should also have
charge of the common weal, as it were by a certain rightful inheritance:
and thereupon let them employ all their diligence, and care: for as a field is
very well committed into the hands of country borne persons, which know, and
can skill of the Succession of offices.
air and soil: even so they that are come of ye race of Senators, have
learned to execute those public offices, as it were by natural discipline,
devised to them by their auncestrye: for all the common people will bear and
obey more willingly and patiently, their rule or aucthority, neither think they
it amiss, for ye son to bear office, when they call to mind that all his
ancestors have executed ye same office aforetime. They which bear rule in a
common weal ought to have a diligent care, that the people be not oppressed,
pinched, and famished with want of corn or grain, and y^ they may (as far as is
possiible) enjoy a perfect peace and tranquillity: for surely all common people
(although they be ready, and pro^pt to reuengement of wrongs, for y^ which it
is seen now and the^, y^ they do enter into arms and wars: yet
notwtsta^ding, they expect some eue^t and end, and if fortune favor them not,
they fall to brablinge with their Rulers, by swearing, wresting, and turninge
all the fault in their necks: and more over we must not rashly credit the
opinion and rumor of the common people, for as Maro says:

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.
The co^munaltie unstable, is dispersed in opinions variable.
The opinions of which common people, are slippery, wavering and mutable, and
not only for a day but notso much as for one hour, steadfast and firm:
wherefore it may be spoken of ye common people which we do use in y^ proverb.

Of Sand an infinite quantity take,
And yet impossible it is a coarde to make.
Religion, ceremonies, mysteries, and al divine honor whereby we make the
living God merciful, and at one with us, requires men holy and innocent: who
being endowed The spiritualtye ought to be mayntayned by the lyuinges of the
Church.
with the zealous study of sacred and divine scriptures, do wype away the
clouds of blyndenes and error, from the eyes of men: for these men (to the
end, they may live modestlye and keep in good order, the temples and sacred
houses, with great costs and charges, edified) have need of wealth, riches, and
fruits of the earth, which in deed do never or seeldome fail, neither have
they need to make any marchaundize, by buying and sellinge.

Without sauegardes, and defenders of the same, a common weal cannot be. For
what should the Citizens do within the walls, if they had no other defense,
but within Poverty not relieved.
the walls of their Cyttye? In what wealth does that City stand, or how are
the pore relieved there, whereunto the husbandmen of the country do run for
succoure, when as in the fields adiacente, there is fear on every side? In
what hope, or in what diligence, do the husbandmen toil or moyle, if they see
their Summer, or harvest corn, and fruictes to become an open pray or spoil,
for Husbandmen.
the enemy: and without keepers geeue over all things in their fields unto
Fortune in every place.

The corn which is reaped, in the common fields, may be kept and reserved,
until such time as there happen a dearthe or scarsitie, or that the
difficulty of War do urge, in hollow trenches covered in chafe, and very
well fenced and made safe from all and every kind of vermin for seven years
store, as Lucius Columella makes mention: which thing surely if it were
diligently looked unto, and that in his due season the old fruit were spent,
and the new fruict laid up in store, it should preserve the people from all
siege and famine of the enemy. and with most safe and sure defense protecte
them from the annoyaunce of their enemies: for little preuayleth armor or
weapons of defense in fight, where the people do famishe, for want of
sustentation: and a famished communaltie is evermore studious, and bent to
newfanglenesse and tumulte.

He that will have a well tylled ground, let him sell his houses in the
city: for he that takes more pleasure A good citize^ a good husband*
or felicitye to dwell in his house within the Cittye, then in his house in the
country, has no need at al of any ground: for he cannot well handle civil
affairs, which takes especial pleasure in husbandrye, and country
dealinges: for truly it cannot be but he must needs neglect the one of
these twain, which coueteth to satisfy his mind with both these benefits.

Gardens planted with herbs and trees, be made for pleasure and recreation:
for in the^ are borders of Roses, beds of violettes, Fishepondes, and such
other like commodities of pleasure: for Graners, Barnes, and storeHouses,
Gardens and Orchardes.
wherein Corn is laid, which do increase both profit and living unto
manne, do rather serve for the masters wealth, then for his diligence: yet
notwithstanding it shall not be impertinent for a Citizen, or civil person to
have pleasure, and practice in husbandry.

And as he growethe in more wealth, to have many servants for the
orderinge of his husbandry, and such as be mere strangers, borne out of
that country (unto whom he may prescribe thoffices of that which pertayneth
neth unto husbandrye.

Strangers and foreyners being merchauntes, are friendly to be entertained
when they come into the city for good and honest purposes: for the Societies,
and entercourses Merchaunt strangers how they are to be entertained in a
cittye
of traffic with strangers, help the trade of merchaundise among citizens,
and do make them wealthier and furnish the city with store of that, which it
wants, and caryeth away from hence those things, whereof we have superfluous
store and abundaunce: yet is it expedient, that there should be but few of them
denized with the freedom of the city: for certainly the multitude of
Inhabitaunts out of sundry places is dangerous, in every nation: for the
common people, gathered together out of sundry countries, seldom agree well,
and there can scarce be unity or concord, among men of sundry nations: and
we may well so think that strangers, will but a while continue in that
zeal and good will, or natural affection, which free borne people do, that have
received from their Ancestors as it were y^ seed of love toward their
country, and have even with their mothers milk, a tender good will and affection
toward their citizens. Of the true citizens that may be spoken, which in
lovely speech, wives are wo^t True Citizens
to complain saying:

A Lover that already has fixed his good will
Toward one, cannot be lured by good or by ill:
Entyste by flattring speech, nor vrgde to that end,
To change for a new, and forget his first friend.
So greatly is the love of our natural country engrafted in us, even by nature,
that we cannot want or be with out the same, for any contynuaunce of time or
distaunce of places, for no reproaches, neither yet for any injuries.
Strangers.
Therefore we must warely deal with strangers: For Aristotle affirmethe that
all Nations which retained many strangers, and Inhabitants of foreign
countries to be resident among the^, were disquieted with discordes.

We must especially take heed that nothing be done, in the common weal by
violence or fraud: for what things so ever are done by vyolence, are weak and
unstable, and not only provoke the multitude unto envy, but also unto
revenge. Appius Claudius the Decemuir, by violence challenged Virginia to be his
bondwoma^, which thing her father Appius Claudius.
not suffering, thrust his daughter through the body with his sword, and with
embrewed hands returned to his host, exciting up the common people against
the Senators, which thing brought no small plague unto ye common weal.

There be some that are sorye to see others surmounte, Repyners at others well
doing.
and excel in virtue: there was sometimes amongst y^ Ephesians a certain
excellent man called Hermodorus, who excelli^g others both in learning and
honesty was nevertheless banished out of his country: and unto certain men yt
meruayled thereat, and asked those people why they had banished so worthy a
man, they au^swered: there was no other cause, but that in virtue, and
integrity of life, he did to far excel y^ rest of his fellow citizens: for
unto all good men does ever chance common backbyters, and evil willers:
wherefore now and then we must dessemble if we desire to fly envy: assuredly
wisdom must sometime give place unto rashness, for envy does not only cast
under foot very many notable personages, but also does subvert the state of
cities, yea and utterly destroy the cities themselves.

The Poets fables of Envy are notable affirming, that Envy described.
it is a plague feeding upon Serpents: meaning thereby to show that envious
persons do swalow poison, and vomit up venime again: for an other man's
felicitye is poison unto the envious person: neither can he take any joy of
himself, except he infect others with his poison: and certes, there can be
nothing more filthy, or more unfitting a man then to rejoice at an other man's
evil and to be vexed or ill apayd for other men's good fortune, both which
things y^ envious man uses to do.

Tymon the Athenia^ did once make an oration at Athe^s in a great asse^blie of
people, in the which he said yt he had one only little Orcharde wherein was a
great figtree, upon Example of envye.
which many citizens had hanged themselves, and because in that place he
purposed to build a wall, he said he must needs cut down the same fig
tree: and yt therefore he was come to tell them, that if any would hang
themselves, they should make haste and come quicklye, while the figgetree were
yet standinge.

Every man maintayneth his private Substance although it be small: Neither
does the poor man less esteem of his small pittaunce, then the rych of his
great Wealth: and if any Contencion happen to arise, beetweene a poor man and
a rycheman, although the rich man (in deed) be wronged, yet because he is
mightier, and wealthyer, it will be thought that he does ye wrong and iniurye,
and thereby purchases the envy of many others: but yet if any man do say
that the pore man's patrimonye is taken from him, by extorcion and violence,
or strong hand, every man begins to fear his own case, deayseth new fangled
alteracions, rayleth at his betters, favors the oppressed, bends himself
unto Sedicions, and can never be quiet in his mind, till he see that he has
safelye, and warelye enough provided for his own safety.

Periander practiced Tyranny in Ambracia, and customablye committed buggerye
with a certain boy, whom Periander a buggerer.
on a time as he was Drinckinge in presence of many others, he merely asked
whether he was at any time great with child by him or no: the boy was
throughlye enraged with anger, and could not abide that those filthy things,
which he had suffered before, should have been once named and spoken of: and
thereupon found he means, to kill and destroy this Tyraunte. Pausanias also
Pausanias.
of Macedonie a youngeman in beautye and nature most excellent, was likewise
violently and forcyblye abused in his body by Attalus, and by him was made
drunk with wine, and brought in at a banquet, and offered as a common strumpet
unto the lust of the guestes there: Pausanias stomacking this shameful
villanye, told the whole matter to king Philip, but the king with sundry
delatory words, seemed to have thereof no care, but rather made thereat a
laughinge game, preferring. Attalus unto better place and rowme in warfare then
he: which injury so thoroughly touched Pausanias. that he converted his
displeasure toward the king, and the revenge which he could not take of his
aduersarye, he extended upon the unrighteous Judge: for as he sat at the
marriage of Cleopatra the daughter of Attalus between both the Alexanders, the
son and the son in law, Pausanias slew Complaints, of pore oppressed
suitors must not be rejected
him, fearing no such matter and by killing the king turned into sorrow and
heaviness that day which should have been a day of joy or gladness, plainly
hereby shewinge, that the complaints of subjects are not to be disdayned,
nor contemptuouslye be rejected.

It goes not well in that common weal, where a man must live by prayer or
intreatye, where Citizens must live in that case, that they dare not speak
frankly or boldlye those things which they think to be for their profit:
Philip king of Macedonie, under a certain pretense of liberty inuadinge a
great part of Greece, besieged Athens, excusing himself by letters, and
Ambassadors, sent unto the Senate and people of Athens, that he did not those
things, to the end he would take away from the^ their liberties or
Franchises, or to bring the City into bondage, but because he had a grudge
against ten of their Citizens, which in the Senate house had always bareked
Fair and smoth Words.
against him, and did not cease to rail upon him with reproachful words: and
therefore if those few might be yielded unto him, he said he would reyse
his siege and depart, and deliver the people from war, and famine. Namely
and especially be required to have that most excellence orator Demosthenes
delivered unto him, upon whom all the cou^tenaunces, and favors of the
Grecians were at that time bent and cast, and besides him nine others of y^
eloquentest, and notablest persons, both for talk and aucthoritye: hereuppon
the Senate was in great perplexitye, and many of them agreeing upon this
point, cried The Senate in d^^bt.
out, that it were much better, to save a multitude, then a few persons: these
few were shrewdely afraid, whom the king had requested thus to be yielded
into his hands to death, and scarcely durst they speak their minds, seeing
that by their deaths all the residue, hoped for peace and lyberty, and it had
come to pass in deed, that these few had then been yielded, had not
Demosthenes displayde y^ craft and dereiptful fetch of the king by this wittely
devised fable vttred unto them.

The wolf on a time (says he) persuaded certain sheepeheards (whose diligence
he had a desire to deceive) to enter friendship and amity with him,
condicionally y^ the shepeheards should deliver unto him (as hostages or
pledges) their Dogs which were his hateful enemies, and gave al y^ cause of all
the strife and debate: the shepeheards gave ear unto this tale, asse^ted to
his request, and for better assurance of their faithful meaning, delivered
their dogs, which were the most diligent garders of ye sheep: the^ the Wolf
when al fear was taken away, not only at his fill, but also at his pleasure
devoured and tare in pieces the sheep, and killed the shepeheardes themselves.
Even so (O ye Athenians) does Philip yt king at his present mean and go about:
who desires to have al their heads under his gyrdle which have impugned his
doings and which do manifest and bring to light his secret treacheries, and
colorable dealings: because he may the more easlye invade, and sack the city,
when it is bereft and spoils of the sauegarders thereof: for doubtless yt
cittye must needs perish, whereas me^ may not speak their minds freely in such
matters as concern Abstlnence from ciuyl bludshed
the vtility of the weal public.

Let ye good citizen greatly abstain from civil blood, being ever mindful of
this tragical sentence,

Who so ever he be that does rule or reign
From sheding of blood let him abstain.
But if necessity constrain, and that the city cannot otherwise be set in good
state, except by sheadinge of y^ blood of some naughty lewd person: let them
deal as good Phisians use to do, who after yt they do plainly see (yt the
troubled and infected members of their Patientes, cannot by any manner of
remedies be restored to perfection or recovery) although it be against their
wills, and to the great grief of all the whole body: yet do they not let to
cut of ye same Naughty members in a common wealth must be cut of
corrupt members, least they should infect all the rest of ye body: for we
must not favor or spare any person, there by to bring ruin or decay to the
whole Common weal: but we must use revenge, that the same may be preserved
insafetye.

Amischiefe new hatching and but now in the pryme,
Is sone to confusion suddenly brought:
But that which is old, and lasted long time
Is often incurable, though al meaues be wrought.
To give as spoils unto the common people the goods of such as be proscript
and out of the Princes protection, is against Comunalty of Rome refrayned from
spoylinge one an other.
all equitye, and therefore the Comunaltie of Rome deserved great praise, and
favor, when Marius and Cinna, proponed the richemens houses to be spoiled by
the Cyttizens: for there was no man found so needye and so bare which at that
time spared not from despoylinge and purloyning of that which an other man had
sore sweat and labored for. Neither was there any man amongeste them which
could find in his heart, to reap any commoditye unto himself, in the time
of that civil sorow^,

As severity in a city is sometime wholesome, so cruelty is always pestiferous:
For the Severity of Lucius Sylla was a beginning of all euilles amongst the
Romans: for that same most infamous table wherein were fourscore Seueritye of
Justice.
thousand Persons proscribed, and of them four that had borne the honorable
office of Consul, to wit, Carbo, Marius, Norbanus, and Scipio, and amongst
them also at that time Sertorius (a man in those days greatly feared) wrought
much mischief unto the common weal: for other men taking hereat example, in a
small time, subverted the whole Empire.

But yet the multitude of people, yea though they do some what trespass,
must be mercifully spared: Julius Caesar after that he had vanquished the host
of Pompeius the great, spared the Citizens: and them whom he had by force
of arms subdued, he rewarded with benefits bountifully: and glorying in
himself, wrate letters unto his friends at Rome, therein mentioninge that he
took great and most sweet pleasure because he had preserved in safety
those Citizens, who^ he always reputed for his adversaries and enemies, and
had made them to become as it were bound in tender affection, and good will
toward him.

The nature of cruelty does make the praise of victory far less: for greater
had the praise of Octauius been toward Antonius, if he had not commanded
A^ilius, being the^ but a Child most Innocent, and the son of Antonius,
Favor and mercy of the conquerours and victors tovvordes them that be
overcome.
and of Fuluia, to be beheaded: and yet not with standing Octauius streightway
showed the evident tokens of repentance, for that which he had done: for he
straight ways revenged the death of Attilius: for Theodorus the scholemaister
of y^ child who betrayed him unto Octauius, privily took from the child when
he went unto his death, a precious stone which he ware about his Neck,
whereof Caesar having intelligence, commanded the same Theodorus to be
condemned and hanged upon a gibet, and so revenged the vilanye of that
traiterous ver let, showing there in plain profes of his channged mind,
relenting in that which he had before done.

No man can patientlye brook to be flouted, contempned and to be had in
derision: for we read of Manlius Torquatus, the Son of the most valiaunte,
and noble Lucius Manlius, was even from his childehoode of a dull and blunt
w^tte* in so much that he was se^^ away by his father into the country* as one
that seemed neither fit nor profitable either (...) ^^ for private offices:
but he within a small time after, as one wearye of his slothful life,
delivered and preserved his father being accused from a great and weighty
matter of a judicial controversy: and in the Battle fought by the Latins
brought away the tryumphe and vyctory, to the great reioysinge of the people of
Rome. Neither may Themistocles be pretermitted with silence, whose lewdenes of
life his mother dispayring (for thamendment or reforminge) hanged her self:
but when he came to be of more discretion, he proved to be of such
excellency, in all his doings, that Cicero the most excellent orator, called
him ye prince of Greece.

The age of twentye and four years is lawful and allowable for any man to
a^^^e and attain unto an office: and let no man therefore (...) if ^ee ^^ not a
magistrate At what years an officer may be chosen
before those years: moreover let no man disdain that any more ancient
person then himself is preferred in office before him, both because the envy
is greater among those that be of equal vocatien, and also because, every man
does hope when he comes to that age, that then he shall attain unto the like
preferment.

It stands with the honor of the cytty when the Citizens are called by
honorable and goodly names: for an uncomely manner of nomination or tearming of
them seems Apt names for Citizens.
so to take away somewhat of the dignitye of the person, as an honest or decent
calling of a man, seemethe to add worship, honor, or dignitye: In which
thing, the diligence of the parents in naming their children, is to be
praised, and especially seeinge that in that point they bestow no cost, and
yet do not a little adorn their children therewith: Wherefore some are
worthy of disprayse: who having Parents and Ancestors ill named would
never leave or dygresse from the same names, even as if they were loath to
defraud their posteritye of the reproach or ignominye of their Ancestors.

THE VII. BOOK DEscribinge the Natures, Uses, Profits, and choyses, of all
sorts of grounds* The sundry dispositions and inclinations of Persons,
according to the quality of the soil where they be bredde. The commoditye of
woods, and the orderinge thereof. The great necessity and benefit of
Waters, Fountaynes, and Springs, with the strange virtues of sundry Welles in
foreign Countries.
MArcus Cato said that in buyinge of Lands, two things especially are to be
considered, holesomenes of air, and plentifulnes of the soil: whereof if the
one were Choice in buyinge of Lands.
lacking, he judged that that ground was not to be areou^pted of and to be
tilled. And not without a cause, for he that buyeth barren ground, and
fruitelesse soil, buyeth to himself and all his posteritye after him,
poverty and perpetual labor. And he that buyeth ground situate in a
pestilent air, buyeth unto himself and to his succession continual sickness,
untimely oldeage, and hasty death. For fruitfulnes of the ground, does not a
little further and help toward living well and pleasauntly. Whereupon the
Arabians are called happy, because they a^ound and are enryched with corn,
fruits of the earth, vynes, and sweet od^urs.

Good choice must be had for the buylding of any City, that it be set and
builded in a very ^olsome pla^^e, and that is, if it stand upon some what high
ground^* For champane and p^a^^ ground, is s^eldome in every ^^y^^ found Choice
of ground in building of a City.
safe, and ^al^eyes are subject ^^^^ fulsome fogges, and dangerous mistes, but
this high place, shall neither ^^specte the h^ate regions of the air, nor those
that be to much told and fros^ye, but those that ^ee temperate, prosper^^ge
toward the East, or toward the Sowthe. Except it be such a country as
is near the Sea, for y^ has commonly the Southern, and Western wyndes
hurtful, especially if there be ^ennye ground nere there unto, which have not
their course and issue into the Seas or Ryuers: for out of the standinge
water, so sone as the morning gleames of the son appears upon the same,
there arises cold wyndes or dampishe clouds, infecting Discommodi^y of
standing, waters.
the spirits of the Cattle feeding in those fenny places: with the contagion of
that foggye mystinesse, they do also infect the place, and make it pestilent,
especially in Somer and Autumn, what time the Southern parts of the world be
far hoater the^ at other seasons. A^^^ it al fenny and marshye soil is to be
eschewed, and shonned, because, it always venteth out a most poysonned air,
being in somer darkened and dymmed with vaporous fogges, and in winter with
cold exhalacions and mystes: moreover by reason of fervent heat it
engenders* gnattes and other stinging^ and odious vermin, which do at such
times flock together in swarms, and infect the city, and be very ^o^s^m both
unto man and beast.

Many writers do agree in opinion, that Italye, of all other countries is most
temperate: and even as the Planet Italye a temperate nation.
Jupiter, having his course, in the midst* between the most hoate and fervent
planet of Mats, and the most cold planet Saturn, by reason of diversity in
qualities, receives temperatenes: so it, stretching and lying bet^^n the
North and South receives a temperate ^irture* therefore innumerable praises
does this country deserve, as Marcus Vitruuius says: for it brings forth
men of body and me^^ers in proportion most excellent and which in fortitude of
courage, wisdom and discipline, are able to surpass all other nations. Let
the ^uncient Romans ^^^ witnesses herein, which with their warli^e forecaste,
and prowess, ^amed and dau^ted the outrageous fiercenes; of all the
Barbarians, and which (as Cicero sayt^) by their own industry either inverted
al things better the^ al other Nations, orells whatsoever they receuied of
other countries, the same they made much better and perfecter. And in small
time subdued they all Nations, and obtained the Jurisdiction and Empire, of the
whole world.

Natural Philosophers, affirm that some Bodies, brought out of cold
countries into hoate regions, can not endure and continue, but are sone
dissolved: Contrarily, persons brought out of hoate regions into cold and
northernly countries, are not only not hurt, endamaged or diseased, by the
change of the air, but are made more lustye, healthful, and longer lived.
Aristotle witnesses that those people which inhabit cold Countries, do
rather abound in courage, stomach and strength of body, then in wisdom or
knowledge, and that their Bodies are far taller and fayrer: the same country
people are also of a white complexion, of a straight flaxen hair, graye^ed,
and full of blood, gross wytted, but very mighty and strong, venturous and
without fear, but in time of sickness they are fearful and fayntharted: as the
Fre^them^^ People bred up in cold cou^tryes.
which because they excelled in largenes of body, deryded and scorned the
hoastes of the Romans, saying: Lo, what little fellows be yonder, of so small
stature, of whom Caesar makes mention, in his most excellent Commentaries,
where he says: the short and low stature of our countrymen was had in
contempt amongst yt Frenchmen in comparison of the largeness of their own
bodies: and a little after as touching their wit he adds thus: as the
Frenchmen are ready, and courageously minded to take wars in hand at the
first: so is their mind very People of the Southpartes.
tender, and nothing able to resist adversities: But co^trary^wyse men borne
in the Southe parts, and being moresubi^ ^^ unto the heat of the Son, are
less of per^^age, and slendere^ of stature, of brown or swart color, ^urle
hayred, black eyed, their legs crooked, and bendinge, weak and nothing
strong: for these men, by reason of their small store of blood, and subtilitie
of the air, do excel in wit, and are notably ingenious, wherefore they do
quicklye conceive and attain the knowledge of things, and are more prompt for
devises and cogitations: in sickness they do show themselves to be of a
right stout stomach, but in battle very dasterds, and cowards.

Cato distinguishes a good ground by nine several differences, The first part
he says is, where Uyneyardes may bring forth abundaunt store of good wynes:
the Second Cato his distictions of good ground.
he appoynteth for an orcharde, that may caslye be watered: the third for
Osyers: the fourth for Olive trees: the fyfte for medowe: the sixte is arable
ground, apt to bear Corn: The Seventh for Wooddes, that may be felled and
lopped at their increase: The eyghte for shrubbes and Bushes: The nynthe for
woods that bears Maste: For it must needs be a good ground which has
the more part of all these commodities.

The Juniper Trees do with their Beries nourishe the winter Fowls; where with
also Capons being fed Iumper.
and crammed, do now a days furnishe out the Tables and make the same more
elegante: and the W^o^thereof being burned, sends forth a sweet smelling
Smoke, and odoure most wholesome in Summer to expel, and drive away all evil
and noisome airs.

No man can deny, but that the maste of Chestnuttes is profitable: For it is
not only good for beasts to fe^de upon, but also for a man's whole
household. This Chestnutte.
Nutte is so covered and harnessed as it were with a prickinge shelle, that it
can scarce be taken out of the same without hurtinge of a man's hands: and
therefore the country people, were wont to burye the same certain days in
pyttes or hoales, within the earth, till suchtime as the utter most pylle of
the Nuttes opened of it self, and so out of every Shell, there comes ^woor
three Kernelles. This Tree grows very bygge, and is profitable almost in
every respect for buyldinge: and of it are made very good Tubbes, and Wine
or Oil Uesselles, which the Carpenters of our time do call the Queen of
all Trees, because it is coumpted good almost for all purposes and uses:
wherefore not only for fruit and wood, but also for timber, it is to be
accoumpted a chief and special wood.

How necessary Fire is, not only to the nourishment of man's life, but almost
unto al uses, every man may easelye judge: Therefore very ill should any choice
of habitation be, if it either stand far distaunt from Woods, Wooddes and
vvood ground necessary.
or altogether lack the commoditye thereof. For we have read and seen in our
time, that cities by the enemy besieged, have been forced of necessitye to
yield, for default and want of wood.

Therefore that Country soil is to be chosen for habitation, which
abounds with fire wood, which is so to be used and appointed, that every
Seventh year, part of the same Trees may be cut down and lopte, and that
there may be enoughe to suffice the use of all the whole people: for that
which is cut down, had need Fyrevvvod.
to have Seven years growth, before it be cut again, that the young
Setttes, and shrubbes thereof may grow fresh again, to their full Syse and
Skantlinge.

The Wood which serves for Timber to Build Houses, and Ships wythall,
must more diligently be looked unto, preserved and kept, and to be cleansed
every year from Thorns, Briars, and Brambles, that they hinder not the new
Gryffes, and springing plants from growing to their full height, syse, and
^ignesse.

At the Spring of the year Trees do burgein, and be stow all their Sap and
strength, upon bows and buddes: and therefore become they weak and exhausted,
as Main timber trees for buyldinges and ships
the bodies of women that are great with Child, are feebler, weaker, and
slenderer of strength then others, and when their time of labor, or
chyldebirth comes, they become for a time unweildy and weak, till they have
with good Cawdels, and nourishments, recovered their former strength again.
Even so trees while they burgeyn and bear leaves, and afterward while they
nourishe their fruits yet unripe, are of less strength and force: but when in
Autumn their fruits or beries are shaken of, and that their leaves do fall,
the roots do take again unto them all their whole sap, and strength, and so
are restored unto their former perfect soliditie.

Thales Milesius preferred water as the principal and chiefest of al other
elements: for man's nature can eas^yer bear with the want of any thing, the^ of
water: for admit y^ Water.
corn fayl and be not to be had, yet ye profitable increase* coming of young
setts, and trees, may supply and administer sufficient provision wherewith to
sustayn life. We may defend life with flesh, by hauking, by fishing, with
herbs and roots: but where water is wantinge, there can no food neither be
had nor preserved, fit for man's sustentacion: and therefore we account that
country altogether unhappy, which either lacks water, or has water
unwholesome and corrupt.

Moreover it was a manner among the Egiptians, and of the^ very streitely for a
long time observed, that before Ceremonial custom of the Egiptians touching
water.
all the houses and temples of their gods, there should be set a pot with
water, to the end that they that went into the Temples might therewith be
sprinkled, and falling down to the ground with their hands (lift up to heaven)
might give thanks unto the majesty of God, who had bou^tifully blessed and
relieved them with most holsom water. And furthermore we read of certain
countries by means of waters only ennobled and made famous, as the mountain
Thiliadus amongst the Molossians, which Theopompus extolleth, and says, had an
hundred bridges. Countries famous through waters.
Magnesia is coumpted far more famous, by reason of the excellency of a Well,
which the Poets do there testifye to be dedicated unto the Muses, because
whosoever drank out of y^ same, became thereby sweet breasted and clearer to
singe. Neither is it to be mernayled at forasmuch there be found innumerable
virtues of waters, partelye by apparaunt, and partly by secret and obscure
reason: Of the Sringe in Arcady, which the Inhabitauntes called Clitorius,
which makes such as taste of the Liquor thereof, straightways to abhor al
drinking of wine, forever.

Uitruuius says that there is a Well in Paphlagonia, which seems as though
it were myxt with wine, insomuch that they which drink thereof are made drunk:
The like Springes of vvonderfull qualities.
Nature and quality the river Licesius in Thracia, is reported to have, on the
banckes whereof many times the traueylers and wayfaring persons are found
dronken, and sleepinge. The city of Ephesus also has Springes, not far from
it, the waters whereof seem mingled with vynegar, and therefore are most
acceptable unto sick persons. And Strabo the Geographer, writes that there is
a water at Hieropolis, so apt for dyinge of Wolle, that if y^ roots of herbs
be stieped and mixed therein, it makes as Orient and gorious a color, as if
it were Scarlet, or purple.

There be also which write that at Tharsis, a Cyttye in Cicilia, is a River
called Cydnus, where persons Bathes.
that are bathed, and a certain time washed, are eased of the gout. Moreover
Pomponius in his Cosmographye writes, that one of the two Islandes called
Fortunate, is notable and famous through ye singular virtue of two several
springs, of whom who so tastes of the one, cannot but laughe continuallye, and
the only remedy for them that be in that case, is to drink of the other.
There is also another Spring at Susis, in the country of Persia, which
loses, and shakes out the teeth of those yt drink thereof: but to such
persons as do wash themselves therewith it is most wholesome: And so they say
there is a Lake in Assyria, near unto the which grows a slimye, glewishe,
and bytuminous pytch^ earth, of the same quality: whereupon if a bird light,
she is streightwaye lymed and tied fast, from flyinge any further. This kind
of Lyquor if it once be set on fire, can never be extinguished, nor quenched
but only by throwing dust therevppon.

A^l whot waters have a medicinable force and virtue above other waters,
although they be of their proper nature cold: but because they do flow or have
course through Hoate water.
the hoate and ardent veins of the Earth, therefore they come for the warm,
which notwithstanding, cannot long remayn so, but be in short space cooled: for
if by Nature they had heat in them, they would not so sone become cold.

And surely unto me it seems a thing wonderful, that there are waters
ordained by the providence of god, medicinable, and able to cure all diseases
incident unto mortal men, which do not in their curing, vex the diseased
persons with sly^er sauces, Receipts, druggs, and bitter dilutions, neither
torment them, with fire or tool: but with a most sweet bathe and washing, do
restore them into their pristinate health. Neither have y^ Springs, which rise
from sulphereous or brimstony soil, these virtues only: but those Springs
also, with pass and have their course through allomye soil, which does cure the
laske, and resolucion of y^ sinews: they are very good als for them that have
ill digestio^, and ill stomachs: Finally they do perform that thing which
Asclepiades said, was the office of a right good phisician: y^ is to say, to
cure safely, spedely and pleasantly: and bituminous waters also have their
virtues: which rather by drincking, the^ by bathing, do help y^ diseased
persons, for they do make the belly soluble, without any pain or grief, and do
cure almost all the inward diseases of the body by purgation: and sometime the
paynfull wringinge of the intrayles and guts, when they be ex^lcerated, and
when that excoriacion or bloudynes flows from the^, are herby restored unto
their former health. There is also a Nitrous kind of cold water, the drinking
whereof does purge, and diminisheal unnatural accesses of the body and
specially the humors or swelling of the throat, or the kings evil: such
allomy, and saltish nitrous Springs yield forth for the most part an evil smell
and relish: for their ori ginall, being from the very lowest parts of the
earth, do pass through, the boat ardent haynes of the same.

Those that have written of husbandry, do say that every kind of pulse, being
cast into water, and set upon the fire, does try the same water very well,
they be quickly and speedely boiled. Certain of the ancient Phisicians
affirmed that kind of water to be best, which is lightest, or else y^ which
being set on the fire, will soonest be boat, so that it be clean and pure,
and vnmossye. Al water that is fetchte from the moorish or fenny grounds, is
unwholesome, and so is al y^ does not run, but stands still, or else y^ which
runs through shaddowye places, and darcke canes, where the Son geeueth no
shine: but worst of all is snow dryce water, as certain ancient wrytens,
have holden opinion. Cornelius Colsus does thus write of waters: Rayn water is
the lightest water y^ is: next is Spring or Well water, What kinds of waters
be best.
then river water, and last of all is pytte water, then describes he snow or
ice water, and that standinge water is heavy, but the heauiest of all others
(says he) is that which is taken out of a moorish or fenny ground. He that
throughlye considers the nature of these things, will wyllingly provide
wholesome liquor for the use of himself, and his fellow Citizens.

The best situacion for a City is y^ which is not far distant from the sea,
or from some great and nauigable river, through which may be transported and
carried out those things, whereof we have to great store, and such things may
be brought unto us, whereof we stand in need. Surely the mouths or entries
of ryuers, have great oportu^^^ye (...) their flowings and pleasant tides, do
not only enere^^^ pleasure, and become most holsom for all cattle, sithe^s they
may go easly, without any coursing, and vebeme^t resista^ce* (...) water, but
also do make the fields and pastures theru^t^ adjoining more rank and
fruictfull. There is great diversity in ryuers, and every of the^ has not
commodity alyke: for y^ river Nilus is cou^pted y^ most fertile and
fruitfullest river of al others, it flows through Egypt, with great fertilitye:
for when it ^o has over flowe^ the whole Land all y^ Somer time, it goes
back again into his Channel, and leaves the fields fatted wit^m^dd^* and
very fruitful for any tillage, insoma^h that the inhabitauntes there have
scarcelye any need of the labor of Oxen, or of the help of any hus^a^^men,
to manure the same any further, then only to cast their see^e theruppon. And
this do I judge, is to be attributed unto Nature her self, the best Parente of
all things: For since Egypt was destitute of ^eawe, and rain, Nature in
supply thereof gave thereunto this river, which should be able to geeue
nourishmeutes unto Corn and Plants. For the divine providence of God, has
appointed innumerable courses of rivers, for the vtilitye of the Land, and
Soil, through which their course lies: because no country should be
altogether without the help and furtherance of nature. For the increase of ye
river Nilus, does greatly benefit and help that country, because through
the great ouerflowing thereof, many hurtful beasts breeding there, are thereby
dispatched and drowned, except they spedely fly for refuge unto y^ higher
places: unto which Country alone, these profits and commodities are
incident, that it neither has any clouds, nor cold winds, or any thick
exhalacions: the water thereof is very sweet, insomuche that the Inhabitants
there, can easily live without wine, and can drink the same water with great
pleasure.

I suppose the vicinitie or nearenes of the Sea makes much better for the
preservation and safe keeping of a cittye, Nearenes of the Sea unto a City
commodious.
both for the use of civil life, and also for the gathering together of riches,
wherewith cities are merueylous^ye en^^eased: but those Cities are far more
harder to be besieged, which the Sea washes upon, seeing that to the siege
and expugnacion thereof, is required not only a great power by Sea, but also
a great Army by land. Whereof i^ the one be wanting, the Citizens may easelye
ou^^come the other hoaste, when as it shall be hard for y^ army by land to
send any succoure, unto the Nauye by Sea: on the other part, the multitude or
company of sea Soldiers may easily be profligated, and vanquished by
horsemen. Therefore convenient and oportune havens, must be carefully, and
wisely chosen out, by all the^ that would found and stablishe a Cittye.

Small fields and little Arable grounds, easily brings dearth of Corn,
which surely is the cause that thither is small recourse of people: for people
pynched with penury, and famine, be afraid to mary, neither desires Penurye.
to have any children, wherefore in such a country they do nothing increase:
yea rather the poorer sort, having respect to their needines and famine, do
forsake their country, and seek to plant themselves in some pleasant and
fruitfuller soil elsewhere, especially if their own country, be so streite and
narow, that it be not able to feed cattle: for next unto corn, cattle which
greatly increases flesh, Milk, and Cheese, do best nourishe. As for
fishing me thinckes is not greatly to be wished for, partly because that
fishes do geeue ill nourishement to the body, and Fyshinge.
again do make men's bodies weak and sickelye, which thing I may prove by
Homers testimony, who never made his warriors, and Soldiers, which encamped
by the Sea shore, to taste or feed upon fish at any time: and again because,
I do always see the Fysherman to be chillinge cold, bare and needye.

THE VIII. BOOK, DIScoursinge of Buyldings, Wales, Gates, Castles,
Fortresses, Garrisons, Lybraries, Churches, and other Monumentes of a Cittye.
AUngells which from the very nativity and birthe are appointed unto all men,
are called the messengers of truth, which do sometime forshew and tell unto
holy and innocent men, either sleeping or waking, such predictions and happes
of things to come, as by event after wards are found true.

A place that stands high, or which has ready wyndinges and turninges, or
which stands either upon the Sea, or some great river, needs far less
labor and cost: for where as the place is well defended by the natural
situatio^ of it self, it needs the less walls: but plain countries or
places not high, must be succored, and helped with labor, and charges
otherwise for defense. Regard also must be had of the height, and thicknes of
the walls: for when the walls be very high, they are easly Fortifications.
shaken, and battred down with engines and Gonnes: again where they are too low,
they are easily conquered, and skaled by the enemy with ropes, and skaling
ladders. Forty or fyftye cubits high is of many cunning Architects, and
skillful fortifiers allowed: in the top whereof, that thicknes is said to be
sufficient, which may serve for two armed soldiers to go side by side,
without hindering, one the other in meetinge,

Moreover also there must be had very diligent consideration of the Gates of a
city, for by means thereof it cha^ceth sometimes, y^ by sodeyn vprores ye
towns be taken, and sacked, or when the townsmen, and citizens return or
fly, the enemies being mingled among the^ may surprise the Gates.

As Romulus at one incursion invaded and took ye City of the Fidenatians, for
he was purposed after that he had spoiled their fields, to harrye the
country, drive away his pray, and so to have discamped with his host: but when
the Fidenatia^s issued out of their city, there was between the^ a skirmishe,
wherein they being weaker were discomfited and put to flight. And thereupon
Romulus pursuing and chasing them, rushed into the city together with them
that fled, as if they had been al of one company: and so wan ye city which he
planted with Romans, and brought under his own subjection: Regard therefore
must be had, that the ways of the Gates be not direct or straight and
forthright, but turning and wynding many ways to deceive ye enemies.

There has been no small disputation amongst them which have written of
civil society, whether any tower or Castles in cities.
Castle, be fitly to be placed in a free city, in which thing this is to be
considered, whether it do more good or evil, amongst free citizens, to have a
strong Fort committed to the credit, and keeping of a few: And if we will
truly judge of and thoroughly reuolue the monumentes of old histories, we
shall find, that moco^mon weals, and estates have been subverted, and
overthrown, by negligence and treachery of them y^ have been the rulers, and
captains thereof, the^ have been preserved: and yet notwtitsta^ding, Rome was
taken, and fired by the Frenchmen, but by y^ defense of the Capitol was in
part saved, and at length with gold boughte peace. But Aristotle affirms, yt
a castle is unto a good common wealth, unprofitable and dangerous: and yt it
gives opportunity unto Tyranny, who doubts* Tymotheus that notable Orator
of Corynth plainly affirmed that, y^ city which is kept by the garriso^ of a
castle, cannot lightlye be without tyranny.

Pyrrhus king of Epyrotes on a time came to Athens, and was with courteous
hospitality of the citizens received: he after view taken of that cittye,
abou^dinge with exceeding great riches, and which was the mother of all
laudable Arts and Disciplines, was brought into the castle of Pallas, and
there did his solempnities with devout reverence, beholding with great
admiracion the Castle how strong and impregnable it was both by natural
scituacio^, and also by artificial fortification: at length when he was ready
to depart, and was now come into the market place, he rendered great thanks
unto the Rulers of the Cittye, which accompanied him, for the confidence and
fidelity, which they reposed in him: and finally warned them that they
should never thence forth, geeue liberty and leave to any king to enter
into their castle, least after such entrance and view, some peradventure
vsinge that good opportunity and hold, should take the vauntage, and there upon
invade their city: This counsel was very well lyked of the Athenians, as
they which well knew, how dangerous a thing it was for Citizens to
suffer, stout and valiant men to enter into their chief fortress: and so
from thence forwards, they kept the Gates thereof more diligently.

Private houses are to be builte, if it may be along the high streets, on a
row, and of like proportion and making: Order of buylding private houses
for so they beautify and adorn the city. Neither let them build any
thing too much outward, thereby to hinder any high ways: for we must so
live, that a pryuate house must be described to serve the use and commeditye of
the whole familye. Neither let any vacant or unprofitable place be therein, and
so the very view and sight thereof, shall bring the more ornament thereunto:
for as Cicero says: The gorgeousness of a man's house augmenteth the
dignitye of the person dwelling in ye same.

And I judge the covetousness of them to be worthy of great reprehension, who
flowinge and aboundinge in Comely buylding in a cittye
great wealth and riches, never bestow any cost in buildinge, because they
would spare their money, and fill their Chestes for their posterity: whereas if
our Ancestors had followed any such order, we should until this day in our
Cities have had sheperdlye cabins, and rusticall Cotages.

A Lybrary ought to be erected in some wholesome and quiet place, neither ought
we to suffer our Citizens to be Libraries.
defrauded and disappointed of such benefit: for if places of exercise which
make for the health of men's bodies, be in many cities with such carfulness
and cost erected and appointed, how much more ought a Lybrarye to be
furnished and set forth, which is the food of a well nurtured mind, and the
exercise of a freee or well inclined nature. And if they that got the
maysteries or prises in games, deserved great honors (insomuch that standing
in the company, they were crowned with the garlande and crown of Uictorye,
and at their return into their own country, were like triumphant victers,
carried in chayres or Wagons, and were also demed worthy to be maynteyned with
meat, drink, and apparel, at the public charges of ye cities perpetually)
how much more are excellent learned men to be had in estimacion, which do
further and help the common weal as well in discipline and manners, as also in
their wrytinges, by committinge all things unto memory, which in time to come,
may profit their posterity*

Let such a place be chosen for a Lybrarye, whose prospect may be Eastwarde,
for the eyesight requires morning light: for if it should either have prospect
southward or westwarde, the wyndes blowinge from thence, would with their
moist heat, and warmenesse, corrupt volumes, and engender Moothes, which
consume, and eat Books. Let the walls within the same be handsomely
polished and trymmed, and let them be set out and beautified with green
color, for all green things are good for the eyes, and make the sight
thereof sharp, and quick.

Ptolomeus king of Egypt is highly commended, who finished The Lybrarye of
Ptolomeus had 40000 volumes.
and furnished a Lybrary at Alexandria, to his inestimable charges and
industrye, in which librarye, there were forty thousand volumes: al which
books, were destroyed stroyed by casualtye of fire in the battle that Caesar
had against Achiles lieutenaunt of the kings wars: for when as the kings
Navy being by chance withdrawn, was commanded to be fyred and burned: the
flame thereof catched into a part of the cittye, and ragingly burnt all y^
houses wherein the books were laid. In which fire good learning and
disciplines doubtless had a miserable and lamentable wrack. For the writers of
all Nations and countries did earnestly endeavor and strive to conueygh their
books thither, as it had been into a Theater and Mansion of wisdom and
learning: of which librarye, if so much as the steps were extant, they should
surely ease us of great labors and traueyles, and with the light of
Antiquity, would clarifye and lighten the obscure darcknes of lettres and
disciplines.

We must also with great regard foresee, that sacred houses or churches be
edified and builded, in ^itte, and oportune Churches.
places of the city, wherein we must first and chieflye consider this, that of
churches and temples, some be made for the most commodity of the citizens, some
for the use of them that forsaking the world, give themselves only to
contemplacion, which houses would be in some out Corner or solitary place,
where they may not be interrupted and troubled with the busy tatlinge and
civil tumulte, of the multitude, and therefore must be set out of ye company
and resort of men, and out of the sight of private houses: and either be buylt
in the territories, or else without the walls of the city. But those that are
ordained for the public vtility of the Citizens, ought to be situated in a
fair rowme and place, either in the heart of the Cittye, or in the places that
be best inhabited and peopled, to thintente the citizens may conuenientlye
thither repair daily with their wives and children: but those churches which
they Cathedral churches.
call Cathedral churches, whereof the bishopp of the Sea has the rule and
aucthority, all Architectes thinck most expedient to be builded upon an high
ground in the midst of the cittye, that out of it the greatest part of the
walls of the cittye may be viewed every where round about: for within the
guarde and protection thereof, the whole cittye, seems to consist, and thither
upon holy days all men flock together as it were unto a spectacle of divine
and special matters. As for places in the churches and houses of prayer or
preachinge, where divine mysteries are to be celebrated, let them be ordained,
so far as may be, best for the ministers and congregation: and if it may
conveniently, Eastwarde: but if the nature of the place will not so suffer it,
let it be so and in such sort, that it may stand in the full fight of the
greater part of the church, wherein if they take advise of the skilful
Architectes to ouersee the workemanshippe, they shall build all things
commodiouslye, and orderlye: neither shall they greatly stand in need of any
my writing or precepts thereto, since the devise and reason of buyldinge
requires rather a liuelye instructor, then a dead directer: moreover yt is
true, which as a common proverb is wont to be spoken, that an unskillful
master or owner, ca^ a great deal better build in his own court, or upon
his own ground, then a most learned and skilful worckmaister in another. For
man's diligence and long consideration of y^ owner or master, surpasses the
devise and skill of the Artificer.

THE NINTHE BOOK entreating of wars, and Martial discipline, Of Municions,
Ordenaunce, Artillery, Victuals, Musters, Lieutenantes, Generalles, Captains
and Soldiers: Of peace and War with the circumstances thereof.
THere is nothing unto man's nature better then to be wyllinge, neither any
thing greater, the^ to be able to benefit and help many* But forasmuch as ye
several wealth of many persons particulerly is but sle^der and small, y^
although they would never so gladly, yet can they not extend liberalitye and
requital toward them that well deserve: Only kings and princes may be
liberal, bountiful and nobly minded.

Chilo the Lacedemonian, who was one of the seven wise Sages of Greece was
abundantly enriched, in a manner with all kinds of virtues, yet in nothing
more, then in beneficence and liberality: and therefore when as he was come to
extreme old age, oftentimes (as it were reioycingly) Liberality in Captains
and Generalles most commendable and expedient.
he was wont to say, yt in all his life time, he did never any thing
ingratefully: No virtue does more commend and adorn Capitaines, Generalles,
and Governors of Armies, then Liberality, whereby they keep their Soldiers
constant and obedient in perfourminge their duties, and also thereby allure
and win their very enemies unto them, through hope of Benignitye, and
francknesse.

The first onset and clasping together of the Armies in fight, is always
coumpted dangerous, and difficulte: for true is that sentence of Scipio: That
there appears greater courage and hautines in him that infers peril and
aduentureth to geeue the onset, then is in him that redefendeth: But after that
open war be denounced, and that every man prepares home ward out of his
fields, to stick to his safety, and to stand circumspectly upon his The first
onset in battle most dangerous.
guard: then they come together in their warlike order, and then they appoint
their scoutes, and marshall their soldiers, every man takes stomach and
courage unto him: he beholds and sees his enemy, neither thincketh he it
good and convenient to bicker disorderly, and Skirmishinglye, but orderlye and
in good arraye: and then those matters which fear ymagined to be dangerous,
reason does teach to be far less, and not so much to be doubted: then
every man determines with himself what is needful to be done, neither be
they taken unprovided, nor rceiue the foil at their enemies hands, but are
every day more and more emboldened and encouraged, and by these means they
commonly carry away the victory, which were provoked with iniurye before: and
thus do they many times revenge themselves upon their enemies, and deliver
their country from all thraldom and Bondage.

But the order of waging battle is far more streite, and needs deeper
council: Neither is it enough for us Waginge battle.
to consider that we go to fight in a righteous quarrel, and for iustlye
demau^ding our own right: and yt for good causes war may well be waged and
proclaimed: But we must also consider what our power is, and of what power and
strength, our adversaries and enemies are, what manner of Soldiers we have,
what partakers and confederates, what tributaries we have, and how they be
affected toward us: to what sum our common stock or treasury amounts to:
for it is a thing odious and hateful, to levy tribute upon private persons,
and is a thing that very soon breeds and gets the envy of the citizens.
We must also consider how strong, how well fortified, and how well victualled
the ritty is, with what garrisons the towns and Castles within our
Jurisdiction, be maynteyned and kept, and what store of municion and
ordinance we have in our armary: these and many such like, are before hand to
be perpe^ded and waighed, and which are the^ chiefly acknowledged and best
known, when the gates of the city being shut, the enemy is kept out, and
driven back from the walls with slings, arrows, and gonshot.

Advise, valiauntnes, and knowledge in matiall matters, be of great force and
do much good in wars: but Assured peace better then conquest hoped for.
fortune, chiefly excels all the rest, wherefore that sentence of Hannibal
unto Scipio is true, where he says: that the euentes of things never less
agree and fall out, according to our purposes then in war: and therefore an
assured peace is better and safer, then a victory, which we do but hope for:
also we must yield somewhat unto ye multitude and vulgar sort, whose credence
always hangs upon fortune, and many times follow the minds of men mingled
and gathered together, out of sundry countries, whom no zealous pietye or
affection toward their country, no fear of god nor religion keeps in awe,
but are only there to allured with hyre, and stipendary wages.

All consultation of wars to be made upon others, although it be good for
many purposes, yet in a free Cittye it is dangerous: for when the matter is
referred to the Senate, they do not all agree in one opinion, some follow the
truth, and some frame themselves according to thopinion of the common people,
and be people pleasers, aduau^cinge and setting foreward ye side, which the
vulgar sort best allows, and therefore the most part are deceived: for there
is nothing amongst mortal men so unstable and waueringe, as the minds,
wills, and opinions of the citizens, which not only being disalowed of (as
Cicero says) are angry or grieved, but also oftentimes do repine and grudge at
things, yt be well done and by right and equity: therefore a wise man will
advisedly deliberate, and consider each circumstance, before he absolutely give
his consent, to thenterprising of making wars, least that he lay such a
burden upon his shoulders under which he may fall down.

Labienus a man fortunate, and rich, who of his own proper costs and charges
builded out of the ground, the town called Cingulum in Pice^^, took part too
earnestlye with Pompeius, wherefore he could not hope for any favor or pardon at
ye victors hands, although (in deed) most merciful. For whe^ther was an
emparle and treaty of peace between the Soldiers of Caesar, and the soldiers
of Pompei, this Labienus with a loud voice, exclaymed and cried out saying:
Sirs, leave of to make any further taulke of entreaty for peace: for except you
first have Caesar's head from his shoulders, there can be no peace at all
amongst you.

Nothing can be more dangerous in a free city, then for a man to promise that
he will be the aucthour and ryngleader of wars, which thing surely even they
in mine opinion seem to do, which openly in the counsel chamber auerre yt
wars are expedient to be taken in hand. Solon Aucthors of Wars.
was accoumpted a very wyseman, yet be (because he would not freely give
sentence, yt it was requisite to make wars againg the Megarians, for the
recovery of Salamine, sode^lye feigned himself mad, and being disguised in
apparel like a fool, provoked the Athenians to fight. When ye matter fell out
well, and that they had won Salamyne, they al commended and well allowed of
his counsel, and devise in yt behalf: Now Solon all this while, under ye
shield of feigned madness shrouded himself, that if the matter should not have
come to pass as he before had told them, and as he would have it, yet thereby
he might purchase pardon for his words and deeds.

It is oftentimes called in question, whether it be good Warring for enlarging
Empyres.
to make wars, for y^ increase and propagation of dominion and Lordshippe,
when any occasion of conquest is offered: or else whether, it be better to
be quiet, and to live in peace: many arguments may be brought and alleged
on both parts. But we rather incline unto peace.

Glorious truly is Martial dealinges, and I cannot tell whether there be
any thing more noble: and no man can deny but all great dominions and noble
Empires Praise of War fare.
have been purchased and gotten by the attempt of wars. Without all doubt the
renoume and names of all most noble and flourishing cities, should for the
most part be buried in darcknes, were they not made famous by martial Rome
and Athens.
feats: Neither has the City of Athens attained so great fame or renown,
which has merited to have ye name of the mother of all Arts and disciplines,
as Rome has done: which was in times passed, the Imperial seat of the whole
universal world, although neither of the twain would seem to lack the
others praise and commendation. For Rome it self excelled in the studies of
all good Arts and Sciences, and Athens lacked the glory of warfare: for
either of these Cities bare great Reverence unto the studies both of war,
and peace, and honored Minerua both armed and unarmed: but we (as I said
before) do rather commend peace, and do especially desire to Peace better then
War.
instruct our citizens in the same, because it leads more safelye and surely
unto the tranquillity of mind: And therefore living content with the
territories and countries which we already enjoy, let us not enter into any
wars but only such as is necessary, or if at any time we do enter into the
same, let us as spedely as we can, seek some way to bridle and qualefye our
desires: which thing even armed Hanniball seems to ratify, when as he said
unto Scipio in this manner: It had been very good if the Gods had geeuen that
mind unto our predecessors, that you might be contented with thempires of
Italy, and we of Afrique.

Uayne glory and vain desire of soueraignitie, many times so enflameth men,
that they be contented with no Vain glory, and ambition.
territories or bounds, neither take they any felicitye in peace.

Curtius writes that them bassadours of Scythia spoke these words unto king
Alexander: If the Gods had Vain glory and ambition noted in Alexander.
geeuen unto the a body, agreeable to the great greedines and ambition of thy
myude, the whole world it self would not suffice to conteyn thee, thou would
with the one hand touch the East, and with ye other, the West: and having
obtained all this, thou woldst yet moreover know where and in what place, the
renoume of such a stately majesty should be enthronized, and thus desire
thou ye thing, which thou can not comprehend: From Europa thou traueylest
into Asia, and out of Asia again into Europa, finally if thou get the upper
hand, and overcome all humane creatures, and men living, then will thou make
wars with wooddes, clouds, ryuers, wild beasts, and dumb creatures: what
think thou? do thou not know yt great trees do grow long time, and yet
in one hour space they are plucked up by the roots? He is a fool that
looks after the fruits of them, and measures not the height of the tree,
whereof they grow: take heed least whilst thou stryuest to come to the top
of the Tree, thou fall to the ground with the same boughs, which thou layest
hold upon.

Oh miserable state and condition of man. Oh deceivable expectation, which
mortal natures have in this world Why are we seduced and carried away with such
greedye ambition, sythens we evidently see that all our goods, and whatsoever
worldly benefits else which we possess and enjoy, are mutable, tra^sitory and
frail, and yt nothing is to be desired sauinge only virtue.

What do the subuersions of Cities gotten by conquest, or otherwise avail?
what do whole Empyres themselves profit us? but that only when we enjoy
them, we do always live carcking and careful? For true is that sentence of
Iulianus Caesar, who at the beginning of his reign being troubled with
tumultuous ruflyng in France, said: That he had gotten nothing by being
Emperor, but only that he lived thereby, ever busy and occupied.

If we take in hand any wars, we must first forethincke whom we may
auctoryze, and make the chief Generalle Governors, and generalles in^ Wars.
and Captain: for if we will judge arighte in this behalf, truly there can
be nothing found more rare or difficulte, then a good General and Captain.

Philip king of Macedony said that he meruayled why the Athenians did every
year chose new Generalles, and Captains of their wars, since he in all
his life time had found but one good Captain, namely Parmenio.

Cicero supposes that four things ought to be in a Four special things
requisite in a chieftayne.
chieftayn or governor of wars: y^ is to say, knowledge or skyll in Martial
matters: Ualiaunce: Aucthoritye: and felicity: and unto these he adds
further: Uertues (says he) appertayning unto a General or chief Captain,
are Travel and Labor, Fortitude, and Courage in dangers, industry in his
dealinges, quick dispatche in bringinge things to pass, and aduisement in
forecasting with providence, which way to work his matters.

All men know that Fortune lies not in our power but is to be craved by
prayer, at the hands of God: but virtue and wisdom, ought we to have at our
selves.

Cambyses (as Xenophon reports) advertised his son Cyrus, that Captains of
wars over and above alother soldiers, should enure themselves to abide
heat and droughte, and in winter the storms and cold: and to be always at one
end in all labors and dangerous adventures: for as much as the trauelles
are not so grievous unto the Captain, as to the common soldier: for he that
is a Chiefetain or General, ought to measure and by due consideration to
weighe in his mind, that fame and comme^dation in doing of exploytes, does
very much appertain unto him.

And it is expedienc for him that has the Government of an armed hoaste, to
enure young men to exercise, some times to go about the watches: to see his
soldiers victualled: to see the Corn tried: to punish fraud and deceit in
y^ measure thereof, ^o punish faults, to be always present at the beginning:
to hear y^ complaints of his soldiers: and to see the sick and diseased to
be looked and preuided for. There are also other virtues almost innumerable,
appertayning to a General, mentioned by such persons as have written of war
like affairs.

Soldiers that transgres or make offenses, are to be punished, and with fear
of the laws to be restrained: as those which skatter and wander abroad at
randon from the Camp, and so come again to their tents, and such Soldiers
offe^dinge how to be punished.
as give the slyppe and go their ways, rau^ging abroad a long while, and
afterward are brought again: For as y^ soldier which first flees is to be
executed and put to death for example of the rest: so likewise is he to be
punished which shall do a thing in wars, that his Captayn shall prohibit, or
which observes not y^ charge enjoined him, yea although he otherwise worthily
behave and acqui^e himself: in which respect Manlius Torquatus in all ages is
commended, who commanded his own son to be beheaded, because he presumed
to fight against his commandment, and yet he fought stoutly and valiauntly in
defense of the common weal.

Generalles and Captains, shall do much more good, with good example of their
life and conversation, then with the Censure of manners, or with any kind of
crueltye. For Xenophon bringethe in Cyrus discoursinge by way of oration, in
manner to this effect; The chief work or part of a prince or governor is to
show himself a man of honest conversation, and moreover to look that ^u^h as
^^ under his charge, and at his commandment* may prove virtuous and good men:
and it is the duty of a Soldier to obey his captain* willingly to take in
hand al labors al adventures, and dangers, not to fight but in array, and
according to prescription, to love his weapon, to have ^^yll in warfare* and to
set more by his honor, dignitye, and good fame, then by any thing under the
Son.

The laws of the Lacedaemonians were very severe and sharp in martial
matters, wherein (as Marcellinus declares) those Soldiers were sharply
punished, which when the army was rancked, and set in array, durst be seen to
shroude themselves elsewhere, under any roof or shead.

Writers report that Scipio walkinge about with his friends, used to eat
only cheat bread without any thing Hardness of fare.
else: and so do Historiographers write y^ M^sinissa king of Numidia used to
dyne, who being lxxxx. years of age, used to dine standing or walking before
his te^te or pauilio^. Such crimes specially have their original from the
chief Governors, and them that be in aucthority: for ye soldiers do imitate
the fashio^s and natures of those that have chief rule and governance over
them: for if ye captains be good, they train their soldiers to goodness, but
if they be ill, they then make their soldiers apt and prone to ill: for the
multitude of the common soldiers, are sone infected.

Soldiers are to be taught (by the example of Marcus Cato) to be fierce and
courageous against their enemies, and to show themselves gentle toward their
friends and Confederates, fearful to do injuries, but ready and prompt to
revenge wrongs to them offered, and to desire nothing more then praise and
glory, which in deed is a very goodlye persuasion: for those that be
desirous of praise, do not shonne nor refuse any trauelles, neither shrincke
they or withdraw themselves from any perilles or dangers, but being inflamed
with desire of glory, do nothing doubt to hazard themselves in all great
adue^tures and dangers. Soldiers also must be punished that have done amiss:
for too much lenitye and favor Offenses to be p^rdoned, and how to be
punished.
does make them more procliue and prone to offend: and if it fall out that very
many have offended, yet must we not for fear, pardon or dispense with all,
but must punish those that are in the greatest fault: for if many be punished,
they are to be sent and distributed to receive their execution in diverse places.

Marcellus upon a time openly perceived and saw Lucius Bantius Nolanus, a man
very bold and factious, soliciting and stirringe the townsmen there, to
reuolte and turn unto Hanniball, and yet durst he not put him to death, for
fear of the Nolanes: wherefore he called him unto him with fair words,
praising him openly as a worthy soldier, and exhorting him, to hold on and
continue his good service and faithful loyalty, and to be willing still to bear
out that warfare with him. And that the citizens should y^ better credit y^
he was in such favor with his captain, Marcellus gave him a goodly fair
Courser, by means of which courtesy and gentleness, he changed and altered
the evil mind and treacherous disposition of Lucius, and thence forward found
both him and all his retinewe and crew, trusty and faithful.

Many hold opinion y^ a General of an Army ought not to combat and fight
hand to hand with his enemy, Combat how it is allowable in a captain.
except in time of great necessitye, and that it is sufficient for him to
perform thoffyce of a Capitayn and leader, and not of a common soldier. For
they say y^ cities have been utterly sacked, and whole hoastes slain down
right, or at least discomfited and put to flighte, by the rashness of their
Capitaynes and Generalles: for while they pursue after every particular enemy,
they forsake and leave the mayn hoaste at all adventures, and while they study
to take heed of one man's blow, they pull upon their own heads, the whole
main force of their enemies, not consideringe how that their own dangers
bringes with it the general calamitye and spoil of the whole host.

Scipio Africanus to certain men which said that he One politic and skilful
captain more worth then a great sort of common soldiers.
was no great fighter, wisely answered saying: My mother brought me forth
into this world a Captain and a General, not a fighter or common Soldier:
thereby meaning that victory and conqueste, consists rather in thexperience
and wisdom of one, then in the weapons, and strength of many: Cyrus (as
Xenophon mentions) asked Cambyses how a victory might best be gotten, to
whom he thus answered: he that would win and have the upper hand and
victory, must entrappe and take his How to overcome the enemy.
enemies by all manner of policy whatsoever, either by secret ambushes, or
deceipte and fraud, yea by rapine, theft, and pylfery they must be spoiled,
robbed and impouerished: for nothing is to be pretermitted, which may in any
respecttend to the subduing, and vanquishing of a man's enemies: a very lie in
convenient time by the chief captain made, has suddenly obtained the
victory: as that of Ualerius Leuinus, who with a loud voice cried out A
very. Lie sotime auailable
that he had slain Pirrhus, and therewithal to make the matter more credible,
held up his sword all bloody, with the blood of a certain Soldier whom a
little before he had killed, with which surmised lie, the Epyrotes being
suddenly astonished, ran away as fast as they could, weping and tremblinge into
their tents.

Demosthenes the greatest orator among the Grecia^s, Demosthenes wise excuse
for his runni^g away.
achieved many wars, and was in a great battle at Cheronea, wherein
Philip of Macedonie overcame the Athenians, out of which conflict Demosthenes
by flight and running away saved himself: this thing being by way of reproach
afterward laid in his dishe, after the death of Philip, he excused himself,
by reciting this notable verse.

The party vanquished weeps and wayles,
But the party vanquishing by death quayles.
Julius Caefar as he in worthy exploytes surpassed all Julius Caefar valiant
and learned.
men, so also did he excel almost all the Romans in Latin eloquence. The
knowledge also of histories is commodious and profitable for them which have
the conduction and governance of armies, both because in taking counsels and
aduises, by the event and Fortune of other men's former happes, most firm
examples are learn, and again because the virtue that is praised in others,
does allure and move us to obtain the like: and fearful Cowardice being
reproved does make men become more valiant: and I cannot tell whether the
knowledge of warfare may by any other discipline be better helped, then by
perusinge historical Monumentes, by which we are taught and instructed to do
all things well and orderlye, which may either be spoken or thought by man.
Nothing new and strange, nothing wonderful, nothing unheard or uncouth,
can happen unto the Chieftayne, which has very good knoweledge and
experience in Hystories.

Warlike order and arraye, Discipline of Soldiers, good respect and study in
inuadinge, and bewaringe the Sundry good points incident and mete to be
known of a good Captain.
enemy, skyll in Marshallinge the army in right order of arraye, knowledge
when to begin the Skirmish, when to leave, how to plant Ambushes and stales,
and how to take heed of the like, which place is fit to be chosen, which
platte is most commodious to be first prevented and gaygned, which again is
to be left unto the enemy, how and which way to geeue the onsette and
charge, and how to resist and stand at defense, with innumerable other
poynctes, which scarce be comprehended in long discourse, by what other
means can they more easily be learned, then by perusinge over Monumentes
and records of Hystories.

Among all sorts of men, there can be nothing found Nothing more rare then a
perfect General.
more rare then a perfect Captain and General, which if he be not to be
found in the City, he must be sent for from other places: for it is better to
fight well and fafelye protected under a stranger Captain, then in danger
and hazard of life under the government of our native Citizen.

He that has the charge and aucthoritye over a city, and in the time of
war is also to look to vrbane affairs and ought to employ employ very great
diligence, and to look narowly unto his charge, that the Cittye do not
sustain any detrime^t or damage: and as (like a capitayn in ye camp) he ought
to perform his office, so like a wise governor ought he to exercise and
train his soldiers within the walls of the cittye, that with idleness,
niceness, sittinge in the shade, and other delicate and tender cockrings of
the city they be not effeminated. And so^times it shall behoue himself in
person to visit the wards, and go through the watches, and not to commit
all things to the disposition of them whom he makes masters of the watches
under him, who in deed shall keep their watch much more diligently and
carefully, if they stand in fear and awe of him that is chieferuler over them
al, and see him to be watchful and vigilant. For there be which suppose, that
those persons are most sharply to be punished, which neglige^tlye look to
their watch and ward, least by sleep, sloth and negligence of one man, the
whole city should perish, Punishmente for the vvatch
which commits all things to the diligence of those few persons: wherefore
histories do highly commend Epaminondas the Thebane, who in time of great
distress and danger, viewing and surueighing in proper person the watches,
thrust his sword through one of the watchmen whom he found sleeping, saying
these words: A deadman I found him, a deadman I leave him.

Neither is it to be meruayled at, that Epaminondas being otherwise a
captain gentle and merciful, did use and praccise such severity upon a man
sleeping, seeinge yt we do see how through such negligence, whole cities
have been sacked, spoylde, and burnt. whereupon Virgil says:

Inuadunt vrbe somno vinoque sepultam.
With wine and sleep, the City careless made,
The enmies do with force af arms invade.
By reason of this policy and diligence Alcibiades above others is praised:
For when the Athenians were by the Lacedemonia^s be sieged, he gave warning
unto y^ watchmen that they should well mark the light which he in the night
season out of the tower or Castle, would show them, and yt at the sight and
beholding thereof, they should also hold up an other light: and if any were
found remiss^ or negligent in doing accordingly, he should assuredlye suffer
punishment therefore, by means whereof he made the watchmen to become most
diligent and warye.

Also there ought always to be scoutes and espialles to give Scoures of a
Cittye.
warning in the night season by some becon or flame of fire when the enemies
approached, and in the day time by smoke. Neither ought men to be suffered to
go out at y^ gates, into their fields, till yt scoutes have throughlye searched
and tried, yt they may safely go about their husba^dry. Neither let the same
Scoutes continewe in their turns, any long time, but daily let fresh me^
succeed in their rowmes, least with too much traueyle and tediousness, they
happen to handle their charge more negligently.

It is also very commodious and profitable that chief rulers, and such as be
in aucthoritye, either at home or in wars abroad, where some dangerous matters
do chance, should go forth abroad in their own persons to see the state of
things: by the example of Marcellus, who to his College or fellow in office
said these words: Let us our selves go with a few horsemen to make search
how the case stands, for the thing manifested unto our eyes, shall more
certainly direct our advise and counsel what is best to be done: For Plato
wylleth Princes* of commonweals to go forth and see how things frame
abroad, and with them to lead their children on horseback, thereby to enure
them with less fear to abide the view and sight of their enemies.

The ancient custom that the Frenchmen used is very profitable, to learn
and understand of al things which the enemy does and pretends: which
custom many nations and princes in our time also do use to put in practice,
which is y^ some witty persons may be appointed to learn Espialles abroad very
necessary.
what fame and common report goes abroad, and to make wayfaring persons (will
they or nil they) to stay, and of the^ to learn and sifte out what news every
one of the^ has heard or known: let them enquire of them, out of what coasts
or countries they came, and whither they mean to go, and let them compel them
to declare as much as they know^ of their pretense to come. But yet such
news, flying* tales and reports, they may not always credit: for many do
tell lies, and do faigninglye answer according to the will and humor of him
that asks the question, and so leave the demaunders as wise (for any
certaintye) as they were before: but if the demaunders, and sifters out of
these matters be circumspecte and wise, they shall easily be able to boult and
try out the truth, and thereby their councelles and aduises, which are to be
daily taken in hand, shall by such examinacion be much the better furthered.

Let also the Lieutenant or Governor of a City and Citizens, be very
diligent and circumspect in the safe kepinge and gardinge of the Gates, the
Reyes whereof let him keep himself, and let him set in good order the watches
Gates must diligently be looked unto.
and wards dulye: let him also take heed, that he be not deceived and
dissembled withal, under the color of his own soldiers, or beguiled by the
counterfeicting of an other known speech. For Ha^nibal surprised many cities
in Italy by apparelling and arming his soldiers like Romans, sending before
him such of his Soldiers as by long continuance in the wars could speak
the Latin tongue. Many subtle shifts and deceipts are devised in the
entrance of the Gates of a Cittye, which are to be taken heed of. For
sometime the Enemies for the nonce and of set purpose, do make their Beasts
and Cariages to fall down, or else their Waynes that carye great huge
Stones, to break and fall in pieces, and thereuppon the Enemies being
sydaynlye at hand (while the Gates cannot well be shut) the towns are
easelye taken. The Massilians fearing this thing, by the good Instytucions and
Ordynaunces of their Common wealth, did so keep and ward their Cities in
time of Peace, as if they had then been continuallye vexed and troubled with
wars: Wherefore upon the holy days they were wont to shut the Gates of
their Cities, to keep their Watches, to see their Soldiers in good arraye
standinge upon the Walls, to muster and take a note of their Strangers, and
other war like affairs beside.

Reuoltes and Runnagates, are not to be received or intertayned into the
Cittye: for Synon the Grecian, being gentlye interteyned, was destruction of
the Troianes. And Zopirus the friend of Darius king of Persia, perceyuinge
Fugit^ues and runneavvayes.
the King to wax wearye with his long besieging of Babylon, and being
without all hope of wynninge it, cut of his own nose and his own ears, and
fled away thence unto the Babilonians, where he vttring many slanderous and
reprochefull words, against his king, promised them that he would deliver
into their hands the victory, and be avenged on him. They believing his
Cloaked treason under flattring vvoides.
smothe words, made this Zopirus their General Captain, and delivered unto
him their power, which when he had received, incontinently he betrayed and
delivered both the Cittye and the whole hoaste unto Darius. So also Sextus
Tarquinius fayning himself to have fled away from his fathers Hoaste,
because he was (as he fayde) beaten with rods, and coming to the Cittye of
Gabij, (then besieged) persuaded them to join in like hatred with him against
the king his father, and being by them appointed chief Captain, he
straight ways betrayed the Cittye, into the hands of his said father.

It is also dangerous to retain many strangers and Aliens into the cittye:
both because every multitude of people, that is gathered and peeced together
out of sundry nations, is unquiet and oftentimes, of a small matter or
quarrel stirs up ^umults and hurlyburlies: but also because it is the part
of a mad man, to divide there Dangerous to have many strangers in a cittye.
those things amongst many, which he knows not whether they will suffyce to
the mayntenaunce of a few.

Unto this Sentence may be aptly applied that same precept of Cambises king of
Persians, which he gave unto Cyrus his son, where he says.

No man ought to stay till poverty oppress,
But rather to provide in time of wealthynesse.
Alexander of Macedonie besieginge Leucadia, suffered all the borderers and
neighbors thereaboute to fly thither for refuge and succor, that they being
many, might ye sooner consume the victuals, which being spent, he ease lie
obtained the victory. Antigonus seems to have used the like devise against
the Athenians, who having destroyed their Corn fields, departed thence, and
went away in the time of seed sowinge, that if they had any remaynder of
Corn yet left, they might bestow ye same upon sowinge: and so making his
return thither again ye next spring, over came and spoiled all the Corn
being now sprouted and shot up: and so by famine brought them to agree to
any thing, even at his own pleasure. Foreign soldiers untrusty.


The multitude also of soldiers is greatly to be feared, this have the
Carthaginians apparently taught: for when they had made peace with the
Romans, the mercenarye soldiers, which were in number about 20000. which
fought against the Romans, conspired together, and revolted and fled from the
Carthaginians, and beside this, e^ueygled and seduced all Africa: and there
upon besieged Carthage, and could not be kept from scaling the walls, had not
the great labor and industry of Hamilcar then chief Captain of Carthage
been the greater.

Let a Chiefetayne make dispatche and haste in those matters that he is bent
and fullye persuaded to do: For speedye expedition is the best compaignion in
warfare: in which thing Alexander of Macedonie is especially commended,
because in expedicion and spedinesse, be surpassed Speed and expedition a
nottable furtheraunce to vva^ like affairs.
the celerity and haste of all other Capitayns: and he had so framed his
footmen, that they were as swyft and nimble on foot as horses: wherefore
Darius the king being by him pursued, chased and persecuted, greuouslye
complained that he had no time of respite geeuen him to pawse and consider how
to withstand the alacrity of Alexander, who oftentimes courageously traueyled,
with great Iourneys night and day to entrappe his enemies at unawares, and to
set upon them suddenly and unlooked for.

Let also the chief Capitayn of the wars do his matters closely and
secretly, and let him not open and disclose his secrets unto any man, by
thexample of Metellus, who Secret hand linge of affairs.
(as Plutarch me^cioneth, thus answered a certain fre^d of his, which demanded
of him what he would do y^ next day followinge: If this my coat which I
wear (says he) could utter forth and openly declare my secrets and
determinations, I would straighte ways put it of, and burn it to ashes. And
Julius Caesar purposing to tra^sporte and send his army another way, took his
Journey secretelye, and diliuered to some one man his tables, signed with his
hand, dyrectinge them at a certain time and place to be ready, and in good
array of battle to do what he should command them: and now and then
commanded he notes to be written upon stones lying in y^ high ways, where his
soldiers must pass, where by he gave them by certain watchwords, directly to
understand what way was nedeful and best to be taken.

As it is the part of a good physician to leave no hurtefull thing in the
body of his Patient: so is it the part of a good General to remove and take
away whatsoever shall hinder the prosperous estate and preservation of this
his aucthoritye: for oftentimes it falls out that a small sparcke of fire
being neglected and not looked unto, causes a great flame, as the proverb
says. And that sentence of Marcus Cato is to be holden for an Dracle, wrytinge
thus in his Book of Warfare: In other matters Two specialle precepts in
dy^ecting vva^e fare.
(says he) whatsoever is misdone, may be redressed or afterward at more
leisure, amended: but in war, we must not admit the promise of any
ame^dement, for faults committed: because present punishment ought out of hand
to follow the offense. For the revenger of slouthe and Ignorance is evermore
at hand ready and pressed, which is never fauouringe or pityfull toward the
enemy that offends.

There are two precepts which seem to conteyne in them the whole discipline
or Art of Warfare, the one is that there be but few Governors and
Commanders and the same able well to govern, and the^ also such as have passed
through al yt degrees of warfare, whereby by obeiinge aforetime theymselues,
they have the better skyll to command others. They which have these things, it
cannot be chosen, but that they shall either obtain the victory, or else an
honest and honorable peace: but to them which fail in these things, no
power or Force can suffice for their defense, but they shall be carried headlonge
with a blind rage to their utter ruin and destruction, even like brute
beasts.

Clemency and mercifulness toward their Subjects and underlings, both
greatly set forth the commendacion of Generalles and Captains, and makes
their Clemencye in Generalles most commendable.
noble acts more famous: Cicero affirms that, they are to be received into
favor and protection which with submission cast down their weapons and betake
themselves to the mercy of the General, yea although the Ordynance and
Engine have shaken or battred down the wall. And Caesar was wont to say, yt
nothing pleased him better then to spare the simple sort of people, neither is
this virtue to be omitted toward those which are overcome and vanquished:
For slaughter, Lust, Crueltye, and every example of outrageous Pride toward
those that be in distress and miserye, has been always accoumpted
detestable and horrible: great commendation did Marcus Marcellus wyn, who
before he would gra^^ the Spoil of the wealthy Cyttye Syracuse, unto his
Soldiers, wept, and by an Edict commanded that no man should hurt or
Iniurye any Freeman of the City. Liuius makes mention that the Spoil of that
Cittye was so exceeding great, that there would have been scarcelye the like
in CARTHAGE, which was of Power and equal Strength always to encou^tre with
them.

In mine Opinion this note or Precepte is expediente to be geeuen, that we
should far more esteem of a Fevv well trained better the^ a great number
of unskillful peasauntes
small Number of Soldiers, being trained up and exercysed in the Feats of
War, and sooner should they gain the Uictorye, then of a great multitude
which are both unskillful and Ignoraunte, who do open and as it were make a
ready way to their own destruction, who are afraid of every Tryfle, and
rather take care for flight, then for glory or renown: therefore the old
precepte wills a man that lacks an old beaten soldier, to take a Nouise,
as yet vntrayned.

For ALEXANDFR after the death of his father PHILIPPE, with Fourtye Thousand
tall armed Soldiers, that had been by his father notablye and skilfullye
trained in Feats of Wars, overcame sundry and innumerable Hoastes of his
enemies, that wythstode him, and subdued very many Regions and countries of
the world under his Subjection, and compelled them to become vassayles unto
him.

What shall we say of the Romayues, who being disce^ded from mean
beginnings yet by virtue and prowes only and by Martial skill, did conquer
all the whole world? Is it not a thing to be meruayled at, that a number of
heardmen and sheepeheardes should invade Italy, a country most mighty above
all other Regions, and daunte and subdue the Germaynes, and all France:
dispising the largenes of their Bodies, and the number of their hoastes, and
besides this shculde also ^ame and bring in subjection the Spaniardes, which
were right fearce and cruel warrioures, and should conquer and vanquyshe yt
Africanes, which were the wyliest and wealthiest persons under the son: and
moreover should ouerreache ye wisdom and cunninge of the Greeks, and
finallye become Lords of the whole world?

In the choice and mustering of persons apt for ye wars, we must first and
foremost have a respect unto yt age of the person, which ought to be young and
tender: For boys and stripelinges, do far more easelye learn those Yongme^
most aptest to be taught and trained invvarfare
things which are expedient: and do better frame themselves to things
wherein is no difficulty, while their members are not yet styffe and hardened,
neither grown to their full strength and perfection: for they ^itte a horse
better, and they handle yt raynes nymbler then aged persons with stowpinge
bodies, whose lymmes be stiff and hardened. And furthermore lightsomnesse in
leapinge up and down, swyftenesse in running, and quickness in casting, is
more easy for the body, which yet is tender and gren^, then for a body that
is grown unto full strength.

Surely Plato prince of al Philosophers held opinion that young men were to
be chosen for the wars, at the Age of Soldiers.
age of twentye years, and Seruius Tullius King of the Romans, was of
opinion to choose them at seauentene years old, at which age he called them
Iuuenes, because they were person^sable to help, and aid their Country and
common wealth. Some others do write that the firsteyeares of Pubertie, that is
when the hayres do begins first to grow* is the best time to choose one y^
we would have to prove a worthy seruitour* But the soldiers which are taken
up being above the age of (...) years, are seldom commodious. And when they
handle Unfitness of Soldiers.
their weapons, (because they do it vnhandsomelye) they are but made laughing
stocks unto others, and oftentimes because of their vnweildynesse, they are by
y^ old (...) quipped, which says: that they be as fit for warfare as an
Ox to bear a Packesadle: therefore it were (...) to exempt such, and remitte
them to such Arts as they have been brought up in, then to press them to
the wars, where they will serve to small purpose, except it be in great
necessity: for then we read that prisoners and malefactors have been lou^ed
out of prison and set at liberty, and bo^dme^ also in this case to have served
for ye present turn. Cornelius Celsus writes, that a square bodyed personage
is most seruisable, and he prayseth a mediocritie of breadth and length:
because tallness which in youth is comelye, Stature* ^^s^^ commendable for a
Soldier.
is by nature sone consumed and brought to an end by Old age. But as ye stature
which tends unto mediocritye is firmer, stronger, and of longer continuaunce^
so on the other part, a slender body is coumpted weak and seeble* and a fat
body is thought to be dull and vnweildye: not withstandinge I know that some
do heste allow of ta^nesse in a Soldier* wherup^^^ the Romans a (...)
their liuelye and courageous ho^semen^ and in their first Ba^des and Cohortes,
suffered ^one to serve but those that were in stature six foot, or very near
there unto.

Neither am I ignorant that Alexander and his hoaste by reason of their small
stature, were at their coming into Small stature of Alexanders Soldiers.
that country, derided and laughed to s^o^n^ of the Scythians, which were very
tal persons, but win a small time after, the Scythians learned, that manliness
and courage, and not talnes and height was to be considered in the estemie. For
it many times comes to pass that little persons, and men of small stature,
prove and are found y^ best warriors. Therefore we must not stand upon this
point, to consider how tall a man be, but how strong he is* yet notwith
sta^dinge the confirmation and well knitting of the members together, may geeue
great tokens of strength in man. Let therefore a young man, that is to be
employed this Best bodilye proportion and ^eacture for a Soldier.
way, be well vi^aged, and straight bodied, round necked and handing some what
downwarde, quick eyed and watchef^ll* chearely countenau^ced, broad breasted
and broad s^ouldre^, strongly drawned in his arms, and firmly co^pact in the
joints of his fingers, long armed, strong Elbowed, slender be^lyed, bygge
hypped, his legs rather slenderlye then ro^udlye Cau^fed, and Strongelye
fo^^ed.

Moreover in leuyinge and musteringe Soldiers, we must consider in what
country they were borne and brought up. For albeit in every place there be
borne as well Dast^rdes as valyaun^e and stout persons, yet notwithstanding
the aspect of the Heavens, furthereth much The country must be res^ected
where a soldier has hene bred and borne.
unto the Courage and Strength of the person: and the North countries are
better in this respect, thethe Easterlye: But every temperate Country is
reputes and taken as best.

A Soldier is better to be taken out of the Country then out of the Ci^^ie*
as all the ancient writers which have written of Warrefare do hold Opinion:
and not without good cause^ for the Country youth being hardened, and Sun
burned, suffering and enduring duste, Rain, and Snow, feedinge upon brown
Bread, and wild bearyes, can abide far more easily to lie abroad, City
soldiers
can suffer rain, showers, and storms, can continewe to rume, through the
stippery and durtye fields al bare footed, which no horse can pass for mire
and fowlnesse, much better then tenderly brought up yongmen can, which have
bane cockered and nycely effeminated with town delicacies, and pleasures of the
City, who cannot sleep except they may lie upon a soft feather bed, where no
noise must disquiet or trouble them, and being no^hable to endure either heat
or cold, are ever p^wling in their stomach, they never have good appetite to
their meat except they may have the delicate dishes of the City fare, and
dressed after the City fashion, ever seeking for the finest brothes and viandes,
neither can they be at hearts ease if they want their old domestical
blandimentes. Furdermore nature her self prescribes this unto mankind, that
be less fears wounds or death which has least knowledge of delyces and
pleasures in this life.

The Lacedaemonians deserved great praise and commendation in warfare, whose
life if we do ^e hold, we shall find y^ they even till the age of (...)
state* were Lacedemonia^s how they lived.
occupied and busied in the fields and in hunting and always lived very
strictlye and hardelye.

The Ancient Romans esteemed the care of warrefare and husbandrye as one:
and the self same persons y^ in time of Peace played the Husbandemen, did
(...) time Romans esteemed warfare and husbandry both a like.
of War serve for Sauldiers: Whereupon (...) Cincinnatus, was called from
the Ploughe, ^bee Dictator, and after the victory gotten over his enemies, he
surre^dred his rowme and dignity, and returned to his Oxen* and small plotte
of Land which he had at home. So like wise Fabricius after he had exp^^^ed
Pirr^^^ our of the Coasts of Italy, and Marcus curious* S^^named De^tatus
having vanquished the Sab^^es betook themselves again to their fields. Also
Curious Marcus long time after, was a Captain chosen out of the Country, and
yet was he seven times Cosull* and with many and greac victories was his fame
ennobled* and so hard^ned was he in labor and pains taking y^ when he
offered his legs (being swelled) to the Surgeon to be cut of and launced,
he did it with no more fear, t^rn he would have given a Carpenterr a piece of
Timber to be squared: This last of all is to be concluded, y^ the harder and
pain fuller that the Trades be which men do commonly practice and follow,
the stronger and stouter do the same make the Soldiers: and the nycer and
finer that they be, the more do they weaken courage and abate valiau^tnes.
For it is not to be looked for, yt cur dogs which come peaking out of Tauernes
and Typling houses, should give the onset upon a Lybbard or Lion, nay, they
will rather streightway return to y^ licking of their dishes again.

The exercise of hunting is very good, which differs much from rusticall and
warlike affairs: for Xenophon when he determined to follow the wars of
Cyrus, did Hunting a good exercise.
first with great care and diligence learn to ride, and hunt, affirming that
he was an unprofitable Soldier, which was not in both these exercises greatly
enured and practiced. For the Romans (because their Yongmen should not geeue
themselves too much to pleasure, or be marred with idleness and ease in
corners and bynookes) made a goodly field for exercise, which they called
Campus Martius, wherein the Games and exercises of Arms were celebrated and
kept, not only for the Spectacles and sights of Fencers, and swordplayers, but
also for the use and exercise of Soldiers: and thereat were present certain yt
instructed and trained the same soldiers, which were with the common charge
and provision reco^pensed with double shares of grain and corn: because they
should y^ better and diligentlier (being enflamed with reward) trayn and teach
the same Soldiers.

It would ask a long discourse to make rehearsal of all Martial exercises,
and orderly to discribe ye rules and methodes Trayninge of Soldiers.
thereof, to set down precepts how young soldiers should be trained, how
they should behave themselves in avoiding and declining weapons coming
toward them* and how to deal prudentlye and manfullye in stryking again,
how they ought to play the parts of Soldiers thoroughly in every point: how
they shall handle the shield or Target: how to set and pytche their stakes,
observe their array in marchinge, and keep their standinges, all which things
rather seem to appertayn unto him that writes of warfare, then unto him
which entreats of civil societye.

Plato sets down in order, that no man should have What age is lavvful for
one to be a General.
aucthoritye in the wars, before he were thirty years of age (although
there were otherwise in him, approved and tried manhood and valiaunce, and
that he were also even at those years ennobled or made famous for some martial
exploytes) This age did the Athenians think lawful and fitting for warlike
offices, although sometimes they derogate from this law, especially in
Alcibiades, who in his adolescencie, was so highly in the peoples favor, y^
wheresoever he walked abroad, all the Citizens cast their eyes only upon
him, and no man so well esteemed amongst them al, as he was. For before he was
of lawful age, he was made Lieutenaunt general of the wars against the
Syracusians, unto whom notwithstanding were adjoined two Colleges, far elder
then himself, that is to say Nicias and Lamachus, to the end they might more
safelye provide for the public weal. Also Octauius Caesar at the age of xviii
years was elected Emperor, Octauius Caesar.
Cicero persuading the same unto the people of Rome, but afterward when he
handled some matters against the mind and lykinge of Cicero, he was sorry for
that which before he had done, and repented his former counsel and advise
which he had given for his advancement and election, and thereupon wrate an
Epistle, wherein he exclaymeth against himself, that he had played no
wisemannes part, but confessed that the common wealth was by him and through
his means deceived.

Far more safer is an army or host committed unto Old beaten Soldiers are
to be preferred before youngmen.
old beaten Soldiers, then unto youngmen, whose first aduiseme^ts and
counsels, are more fearce and unstayed, and who do less forsee and consider
the incerteintye of chances, because Fortune never at any time deceived them:
but Old men with quiet minds do foresee many things, and prevent before hand
h^lve to encounter with Fortune: and where need is of stonte persons, they do
the same, not so willingly, as driven there unto by necessity, and will rather
choose to dyeun fight, then in flight.

Alexander King of Macedonie being twenty and one years of age lost his
father Philippe by Death, and because he would seem to be no less the
Heir and Successor of his kingdom, then of his worthynesse and glory, when
as he had taken on him the Gouernmente of the army left him by his father, he
did not choose unto him those compaignions, which he had been brought up, and
conversant wtal, neither youthful yonkers: but old tried and beaten soldiers:
many of the^ such as were already discharged and dispensed with al from following
the wars any ^^ger, who aforetime served his father, and had abide^ many a
sharp storm under him: in which doing, he seemed rather to have chosen
masters and capitaines of wars the^ soldiers: and he committed not the
orderinge and disposinge of his Battls, but unto the^ yt were Lx. years of age,
which sure lie was the cause, that he always vanquished the (...), and
obtained the victory, and with a very small hand of me^ overcame six hundred
thousand of the Persians: and if he had not been by death prevented, he
surely would have subdued the whole world.

The Tribune or Marshall of the field, ought to be a man most valiant and
courageous, in prowes and Martial Cheualrye exactlye trained: the rulers also
of every particular Crew and Band, which have so many men at their
commandment, ought in their office to be persens most grave, because that
in the absence of the General, they supplye his rowme. He also that has the
charge and office of pitching the Tents and encamping, ought Encamping.
of all others to be most skillful, and one by long experience and practice in
wars, thoroughly tried and experienced. For he ought diligently to view and
surueigh the nature and condition of the place, that he may chose the safest
and most convenient parts for the (...) to camp in that there (...) his
Soldiers might be easily by the enemy assaulted and displaced, neither by
means of a River surrounded and drowned* or else by the too much nearenesse
of wood growing the^rabout, to Choice of ground for pitching of tents and
encampinge
be consumed and fyred which thing happened unto Crassus in the civil
wars, who through such careless oversight, was with all his army almost
burned suddenly by the fire, that his enemies had secretly enkindled. So did
Camillus also destroy and spoil the camp and tents of the Volscia^s by
fiering the wood yt was near unto the^.

Moreover let a Generalle foresee that there be stoare enoughe of wood, of
forage and of water: let them also have an easy egresse abroad into the
fields round about the^, Surueighors of works.
and a safe return and egresse back again to the camp. Neither ought ye
Surueigher or chief ouerseer of workmen to lack long experience, upon whom
chiefly rests all the charge, to see yt nothing be wanting to ye host yt is
nedeful, either for assault and battry, or for repulsing or defense. This man
ought to have in a readiness Carpe^ters, Ioigners, Rafterers, and Maso^s, for
ye contriuing and maki^g of engines, and wodde^ towers, battring pieces,
crosbowes, Slinges, and other sorts of gunnes beside* and briefly to c^clude,
ye ancient persons must be appointed rulers over y^ army, and the younger sort
must be honored with other dignities, and specially such as have more glory and
praise when the case falls out well and with good success, the^ danger if
it should fall out otherwise, or that Fortune should deceive them. Reward and
punishment are to be demed and taken as two Gods in a common wealth, and in
Martial Reward for well doing and punishment for evil doing.
affairs especially accou^pted most necessary: for neither shall it be
sufficient for a Captain to keep his soldiers at co^mau^deme^nt, and in
obedience for fear of punishment: except also the hope of glory and reward do
quicken and prick forward ye courage and fortitude of ye soldier: and ye
desire of renoume does of it self particulerly prescribe such things as neither
the leaders nor captains themselves, ca^ by any possible means direct or
teach: For surely hope is a right great affect and mocion of the mind,
which oftentimes stirs up and moves men to do those things which seem to
excede the strength and ability of man, and which otherwise could not by any
reason or means be persuaded.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
Abstinence from civil bloodshed. Folio. 63. Adultry punished. 37. Age lavvful
for a general to be chosen at. 87 Age of Soldiers. 48. Alexanders friends
were his treasures. 28 Alexander his wise example in watching. 29 Annia a
widow, her answer as touching marriage the second time. 43 Appius Claudius
his violence. 62 Apt names for Citizens. 65 Aristotle's aduife touching silence
to Calisthenes. 52 Assured peace better then conquest hoped for. 75 Astronomy.
13 At what years an officer may be chosen. 65 Aucthors of war. 76
B.
Banqueting. 57 Bathes. 69 Better to be unborn then untaught. 47 Best
bodilye proportion and feature for a soldier. 85 Blushing in children a sign
of good nature. 45 Brick wales in Babylon. 10 Btibery a filthy thing. 26
Bishops named kings by Romulus. 24.
C
Careless princes. 1 Care for Scholemaisters. 11 Castles in cities. 72 Cato
his distinctio^s of ground. 67 Cato, one of fevv words. 52 Causes necessary
for marriage. 35 Certain ha^dicraftsme^ necessary. 9 Censor what it signisieth.
28 Ceremonial custo^es of Egypt. 68 Choice of a wife. 38 Chastity in a woman.
41 Chestnut tree. 67 Cherishing of children. 45 Children of dull vvytres. 46
Children how long they are so reputed. 55 Choice of ground for building. 66
Choice in buying land. eodem Choice of ground for pitchinge of Tents. 88
Ciuility what it is. 48 Cicero and Salust at dissentio^. 59 City Soldiers.
85 Clemency commendable. 83. Cloaked treasons. 82 Combatte. 74 Comfortable to
have children. 35 Communalty of Rome. 64 Commodities of learning. 46 Commodity
by concord. 49 Comelye building in a city. 72 Considerations for magistrates.
26 Considerations for children. 43 Concord in a Realm. 44 Concord in music.
50 Comparison of a common weal unto a Ship. 49. Complayntes of Suitors. 63
Countries famous through waters. 68 Continual toyling. 18 Country must be
respected vvher soldiers be borne. 85 Corporal exercise. 17 Corruption of
Judgment. 25 Covetous man good to none. 40 Covetous man, an ho^gry dog. 40
Couerous^es. 58 Costly funeralles. 58 Curiosity of a simpering prikmedainty 42
D
Daunsinge. 43 Dangerous to have many strangers in a city. 8^ Darius drank
muddy water. 56 Death esc^e^d by thraldom. 27 Death to the^ that leave
children behind them less grievous. 35 Death of them that want issue
brought into oblivion. ibide^ Demosthenes. 79 Difference of humane society. 3
Diet. 14 Dionisius. 53 Diogenes. 53 Disco^moditie of st^dig water. 66
Domestical. discord. 42 Duties of Justice. 21
E
Egiptian lore. 11 Eight kinds of punishments used by the Romans. 27
Eloquence. 15 Envy. 62 Epaminond^s. 18 Epaminondas never married any wife. 47
Epicutes. 57 Equality in a city causes concord. 5 Equality in choice of a
wife 38 Espialles very necessary. 81 Example of society in birds. 2^
Exercise of man's life. 8 Example of destenie. 13 Example of Milo. 18 Example
of Polidamus. ibidem Example of temperaunce. 21 Example of the husbands love.
36 Example of the vviues love. 46 Example of cockring children. 46
F.
Favor and mercy of conquerours 64 Fair and smoth words. 63 Fevv well
trained Soldiers, better then a great number unskillful. 84 Flattery must be
eschevved. 53 First reason of Societye instituted. 3 First duty of Justice. 6
First earthly treasures of men. 28 First love is most steadfast. 43 First onset
in battle dangerous. 75 Four special regardes in man's life. 20 Four
Cardinal virtues. 50 Four things belonginge to a Chief^ayne. 77 For women
to know the full time of going with child and when to be delivered. 45
Fortifications. 7^ Foreign soldiers untrusty. 8^ Fruit eaters. ^4 Fyrevvood.
68 Fishiug. 71 Fugitives and runnavvayes from the army. g^
G
Gaggling of a goose saved Rome from being taken by the enemies. 29 Gardens
and Orchardes. 6^ Gates. 81 God the principal aucthor of al good laws and
procedinges. 23 Good householders. ^ Good Arts and Sciences, to be cared for.
ibid. Good counselors. 23 Good examples by Romans. 26 Good order for corn.
30 Good order for the church. 31 Good order for high vvayes. ibid Good order
for Conduites. ibid Good parents bring up good children. 38 Good mother, good
nurse. 44 Good report for well doing. 50 Good citizen, good husband. ^1 Good
way to procure a stomach 56 Governors in vvarres. 77 Grammar. 12 Gratitude
52. Gourmaundise 55
H
Hard bringing up of youth. 17 Hard thing to chose a wife. 38 Hardness of
fare. 78 He that obayeth well rules well. 21 Honosalit arres. 3 How a
common weal prospers without magistrates. 19 Householders. 32 How the
master should entreat his servants. 33 How a healthful man disposes his
ryme. 45 How to deal with children. 45 How Bacchus was made a god. 51 How
Architas qualified his a^ger 54. Hot water, 69 How to overcome the enemy. 9
Humane care. 3 Hunting. 86 Hurt of flatterers. 53 Husbandry. 7 Husba^dry,
purueighour of many necessaries. 57 Husbandmen. 60
I
Juniper trees. 67 Imitation of Nature. 1 Invention of Music. 14 Infancy of
children. 45 Inconvenience of anger. 53 Indians manner in burialls. 58 Infamy of
Censors. 26 Innocence. 27 Isis a Goddess. 91 Italy. 66 Julius Caesar. 79 Iuba.
60 Ius^ice. 21
K
Kings of Egypt. 11 Kinds of waters. 70
L.
Lacedaemonians. 86 Laws made not observed 4 Law amongst Thegiptians. 8 Law
a silente magistrate. 21 Lawyers vnsaeiable. ibide^ Leuiyng Tributes. 28
Liberality in Captapnes. 74 Lybraries. 73 Lybrary of Ptolomeus. ibidem Lotos a
tree. 32
M.
Magistrates. 21 Manquelling. 23 Man's age. 54 Man's age divided by seven years.
ibidem Man's life compared to the 4. seasons of the year. 55 Man may not
vvish for long life. ibi. Manner of apparel. 57 Main timber trees 68
Merchauntes. 8 Memory in children the best token of vvitte. 45 Metellus his
oracion concerning marriage. 36 Moderate diet and measurable apparel. 41 Modest
aunsvvere of a chaste Lady 43 Moderation in Diet. 5^ Moneta a monendo. 28
Monumentes. 58
N
Nature in children ought to be careful for their Parents in old age, 35
Natural mothers are naturallnurses, 44 Naughty members in a commo^vveale. 64
Nearenesse of the Sea commodious to a Cittye, 70 Nobles. 5 No vvitty Citizen
without learning. 12 Not good to do any thing while anger lasts, 54 No
place for Loiterers in a common weal. 6 Nothing more rare then a perfect
General, 80 Nightvvatches in a city, 28 Nightvvatchers charged. 29
Nightvvatches prevent many dangers. 30
O
Obedience unto Justice. 4 Occasions of contention among Citizens to be
reformed. 25 Octauius Caesar. 87 Offenses in Soldiers, 78 Old men. 55 Old
beaten soldiers, 87 Oligarchia. 4 One politic Captain more worth then a
great sort of unskillful soldiers, 79 Orderly instruction of the man to his
wife 39 Ordering the members of children. 44 Order of buildinge houses. 72
Overseers of the laws. 24 Overseers of household affairs. 32
P
Pausanias of Macedonia. 62 Paynting. 10 Peace better then war 76 Pecunia, a
pecore. 28 Penury of corn and victualles. 71 People bred in cold countries. 67
People of the south part. ibidem Perjury. 52 Persians trusty in keeping
counsel. 22 Periander a buggerer. 62 Physic. 14 Philosophy. 16 Phocion. 31
Pinching poverty puts men to their shifts. 20 Piety of Alexander. 27
Poets necessary in a common weal. 16 Punishements for the vvatch. 80
Possession of Lands. 32 Poverty not relieved. 60 Praise of Titus Vespasianus
for his government. 1 Praise of his bounty. 51 Praise of some princes. 2
Praise of Julius Caesar's bounty toward learning. 17 Praise of Adrianus
Caesar. 31 Praise of Africanus for his bounty 51 Praise of vvarrefare. 76
Praetor what it signifies 25 Prodigality and riot of Albidius. 56 Prudence 21
R
Rash speech. 52 Rashness of anger. 53 Reasons of regard in a common weal.
9 Reason ought to rule our affections. 50 Repiners at other men's well doing.
62 Remorse of the Master toward his servants fidelity. 33 Reward for
well doing and punishment for evil doing. 86 Rich men unlearned 46 Riottous
persons reclaymed. 47 Riottous persons. 56 Riot and covetousness. 57 Rome and
Athens in old time the mothers of Arts and Sciences. 76 Romans esteemed
warfare and husbandrye both alike. 86
S.
Safe laid up soon found. 41 Sauegardes of a Cittye. 28 Secrets between
man and wife ought not to be revealed. 39 Scithia^s manner in burying their
kings. 58 Scoutes. 21 Scouts, vvatchers and vvarders. 28 Secret handling of
affairs. ibid. Semyramis. 58 Seigniorie of Venice. 22 Silence 52 Severity of
Justice. 64 Senate in doubt. 63 Senators discharged. 26 Shameless au^svvere of a
a shame less strompet. 37 Small stature of Alexanders soul diers, 85
Smellfeastes. 56 Society of citizens. 2 Societye humane profitable by
procreation. ibidem Society humane whereunto it te^deth. 49 Socrates. 36 Solons
law for the child that is not well provided for by the parents. 47 Solons
law for punishing adulterye. 37 Some women delyghting in filthy talk declare
the filthiness of their poluted mind. 37 Spiritualty ought to be maynreyned by
the lyuinges of the church. 60 Sundry good poinctes meet to be knovve^ of a
good captain. 80 Speed and expedition a notable furderau^ce unto war like
affairs. 83 Springes of vvonderfull quality in forreyn countries 69 Stature
most commendable for a Soldier. 85 Strangers. 61 Streite girding. 44 Studies
of virtues and disciplines. 3 Such men, such familye and servants. 32
Surueighours of works. 88
T
Thebes 10 To keep touch and perform promise, is commendable. 21 Two
precepts to be observed by the husband toward the wife. 39 Two kinds of
learning not prejudicial for the child to practice, at one instaunt. 46 Two
special precepts in directing warfare. 83 Trade of living. 34 Trayning of
Soldiers. 86 True ornaments of a vvoma^. 41 True citizens. 61 Triptolemus. 49
Tribes or wards in a city. 26 Times to be considered in peace and war. 24
Time does alter both the person and his properties. 24 Time or age for man and
vvoma^ to mary. 38
V
Vain traffiques. 8 Vain glory and ambition. 76 Venetians admitr no
strangers to bear rule among them. 22 Venetia^s alter nothing af^rtime
ordained by their predecessors and elders. ibidem Indecent gesture, in a
Senator put to repulse. 23 Virtues the guides of eiuile magistrates. 21
Virtuous children. 41 Unfitness of soldiers. 85 Unnecessary expenses must be
forborne in funeralles. 57
VV
Water. 68 VVaging battle. 57 Warring for enlarging empire. 76 Well using of
hired servants. 34 Widow marying again make men suspecte they do it for
lust. 42 What thing is most difficult in the life of man. 2 What a civil
man is. 44 What kinds of water is best. 70 Who be mere Persons to be made
magistrates in a common weal. 20 Who be metest for vvatchers. 29
VVorckmaisters and deuisers of vvorcks. 10 VVome^ stomach to have their
husbands keep an h^rlot. 37 Women with child. 43 VVome^ ought to be
restrained from gadding abroad. ibide^ Woman to save and keep that is brought
home. 35 Worthy acts of Hercules. 50 Wise vvome^ fear evil reports. 41
Wife, no stomacker nor resister. 42 Wise man will do no ill nor suffer any
to be done by his vvil. 51 Wicked demand of a woman. 43
Y
Youngme^ must be exercised. 48 Young men how long they are so reputed. 55
Youngme^ most aptest to be trained in warfare. 8^
Finis.

