THE Expedicion into Scotla^de of the most woorthely fortunate prince Edward,
Duke of Soomerset, uncle unto our most noble souereign lord ye kings Majesty
Edward the.VI. Goouernour of his hyghnes person, and Protector of his graces
Realms, dominions and and subjects: made in the first year of his Majesty's
most prosperous reign, and set out by way of diarie, by W. Patten Londoner.

VIVAT VICTOR.

Unto the right honorable Sir William Paget, knight of the most noble order of
the Garter, Comptroller of the kings Majesty's household, one of his hyghnes
privy counsel, Chauncellor of the duchy of Lancaster, and his most benign
Fautour and Patron, William Patten, most heartily wishes felicite.

Having in these last wars against Scotland (that never wear any with
better succes acheued) made notes of acts thear done, and disposed the same
since my cummynge home, into order of diarie as follows. As one that would
show sum argument of remembrance (right honorable Sir) of your most benign
favor, that as well while I was with ye right honorable my very good lord and
late master the earl of Arundell, as also since, ye have vouchsafed to bear me,
I have thought metest to dedicate my trauail unto your honor. How finally I
either am or have been by any means able to merit the same your ge^telnes, by
so much the less have I need here too show: as your humayne generosite, your
willing benignite, and promptnes to proffit all men is unto all me^ so commonly
known, for the which your name and honor is so familiar and well esteemed
with foreign princes abroad, and so woorthely well-beloved of al estates at home,
for who was he of any degree or cu^tree that had any just suit, or other a do
with our late souereign lord the kings Majesty deceased, when his highness, in
these his latter years for your approved wisdom, fidelite, trust, and
diligence had committed the special ministry and dispatch of his weyghtie
affairs unto your hands, that felt not as much then as I have found since?
or who finds not still a constant continuance thearof whear the equite of
his suit may bear it? Right many sure of the small knowledge I have, could I my
self reken both of than and since, which here all willyngly I leave
unattempted to do: both by cause my rehersall should be very unnecessary and
vain to you yt know them better then I, and also that I should tell the tale
to your self: Whoo^ for the respect of your honor as I have a reverence with
vanitees from your grave occupacions to deteyne, so have I for honesties sake a
shame to be suspect by any means to flatter. That same your syngler humanitee
wheare with ye are wont also so gently to accept all thing in so thankful a
part and whear with ye have bound me so straightly to you, did first (to say
the truth now) embolde^ me in this theme to set pe^ to the book, and now
after in this wise to present my work unto you. The which if it shall please
your honor too take well in woorthe and receive in to your tuicion, As the
thing shall more indede be dignified by having such a Patron, then your
dignytee gratifyed by receyuinge so unworthy a present, even so what fault
shall be found thearin I resume as clearly cummyng of my self. But if ought
shall be thought to be aptly said, pleasant, any thing sauering of wit or
learning, I woold all me^ should know it, as I acknowledge it my self, that ye
must holy be referred to you, then couraging of whose favor has ministered
such matter to my wit. That like as Ouyde said to Caesar of his, so may I say
to you of mine, Ingenium vultu statque caditque tuo. Faustor.i.
But now no further with my talk too troble you. Thus with increase of honor
unto your woorthines most heartily I wish the same continau^ce of health and
wealth.

Your most bounden client and puple. W. Patten.

A PREface, serving for much part, instead of argument, for the matter of
the story ensuing. (?)
ALthough it be not allways the truest means of meting to measure all men's
appetites, by one man's affeccion: yet hereof at this time dare I more then half
assure me, that (even as I would be in case like my self) so is every man
desirous too know of the manner and circu^staunces of this our most valiant
victory over our enemies, and prosperous success of the rest of our journey.
The bolder am I to make this general judgment, Arist. Metaph.i.
partly, for that I am sumwhat by learning, but more by nature instruct to
understand, ye thursty desyer, that all our kind has to know. And then for
that in every company, and at every table (whear it has been my hap to be
since my cummynge home) the hole communicacto^ was in a manner naught else, but
of this expedicion and wars in Scotland, whearof many to me then have
ministered so many interrogatories, as would have well cumbered a right
ripetunged deponent redyly to answer: and I indede thearto so hastily could
not: Yet nevertheless blame them no more for quiknes of question, then I would
my self for slownes of au^swer. For considering how much in every narracion,
the circu^stau^ces do serve for the perfect instruccio^ of them that do here. I
can easly think the same wear as much desired of them to be hard, as
necessary of me to be told. And specially of this (to say chefely of the
battle) being such a matter as neither the like has been seen with eyes, by
any of this age now, or red of istorie of any years past. So great a pour so
well picked and appointed, so restfull and fresh, so much encouraged by hope of
foreign aid, at their own doors, nay, in the mids of their house, and at
the worst so nie to their refuge: to be beaten vanquished, put to flight, and
slain: by so small a number, so greatly trauayled and weary, so far within their
enemies land, and out of their own, without hope, either of refuge or reskue
The circu^staunces hereof with the rest of our most triumpha^t journey, which
otherwise aptly for unaptness of time I could not utter by word of mouth, here
mind* I god willing no we too declare by letter of writi^g: Not as of
arroga^cie taking upon me the thing, which I my self must confess many ca^ do
better, but as of good will, doing mine endeavor (for that in me lies, to make
all me^ privy of that, whereof it wear mete no man wear ignorant. As Well
because they may the rather universally be moved to pray, praise, and glorify
ye most merciful Lord, whose cleme^cie has so continually of these late
years, vouchsafed to show his most benign favor toward us: As also to
worship honor and have in veneracion, the reverend worthiness of our most
honorable Cou^saill. By whose general sage consultacions and circumspect
wisdoms, as friendship with foreign princes and provision for thenemie, has
been continued and made abroad, we guarded from outward invasion or
disturbaunce at home, no prince with obedience and diligence more nobly served,
nor no co^minaltie with Justice and mercy, more sagely governed: Even so by
the special invincible virtue and valiant pollecie of my lord Protectours
grace, we have first and as it wear in the entry of this most honorable and
victorious viage, ouerturned many of our enemies rebellious holds, and the^
ouercu^men the dooble of our number and strength in open feld by plain dynt
of swoorde, slain so great a multitude of them, with so small a los of our
side, taken of their chefest prisoners, wun and keep a great sort of their
strongest fortes, bylded many nue, taken and destroyed their hole navy, and
brought the tounships in the hither parts of their bounds, above.xx. mile
cu^pas in an honest obedience, unto the kings Majesty. By the Martial courage
of his undaunted hardines was this expedicio^ so boldly taken in hand, by the
presence and adventure of his own person was the same so warely and wisely
conducted, by the virtuous policy of his circumspect prowes was this victory
or rather conquest so honorably acheued: unto whose valiaunce and wisdom I can
entierly attribute so much, as to the furtherau^ce of Fortune nothing at all,
De diuinac. ii.
which as Cicero proves, is either a vain name or not at al: or if thear be
is ever subject (as ye Platonikes affirm) to wisdom and industry. The which
indede did so manifestly appear in thaffaires of this viage, that like as in
account the several numbers of.x.xx.xxx.xl. being cast together, must needs
make up the just sum of an.C. Even so such his graces providence,
circumspection, courage and order (done fortune what she could) must needs
have atteind to such success of victory. That if the Romans wear content to
allow ye honor of triu^phe to Scipio Africane for ouercu^myng Anniball and
Syphax. Tit. Liui.
And to M. Attilius Regulus for vanquisshing the Sale^tynes. And thearto, to
set up images (the highest honor that they had) for a perpetual memory of M.
Claudius Marcellus, and Mutius Sceuola: the one but for killing Uiridomar the
French king in field at the River of Pade, Valeri. li.i. and.iii. Plini. de
vir. illust.
and for devising how Annibal might be vanquished, and ouercummynge but of
thonely city of Sarragoze: And the other but for his attempt to slay king
Porsenna that beseged Rome. What thanks then, what estimacio^, what honor and
reverence co^digne for these his notable demerites ought our Protector to
receive of us? nay, what can we woorthily give him? How be it, if we call to
mind, how first about Alhallowen tide was.v. year.M.D.XLij. his grace liyng as
Lord warde^ in our marches against Scotland, by the drift of his devise both
the great invasion of the late Scottishe king, James ye fifth, was stoutly then
withsto^d at Solom Moss, the king his deaths wound given him, and most part
of all his nobilitee taken. How the next year after, he being accompanied with
my lord the Earl of Warwycke, but with an handful to speak of, did burn
both Lies and Edinborow, and returned thence triumphantly home, but with an
easy march trauaili^g.xliiii long miles, through their mayn land. Whose
approved valiaunce, wisdom, and dexterite in the ha^delinge of our princes
affairs, how ca^ we be but sure that it did not smally aduau^ce or cause about
the conclusion of an honorable peace, between France and us? (although it did
not then strayghte ensue) when his grace in the same year, soon after his
return out of Scotland was deputed Ambassador to treat with the Bisshoppe of
Belay and oother the French kings commissioners at Hardilow castle. In the
year.M.D.xliiii. How his grace about August so invaded the Scottish borders,
wasted and burnt Tyupdale and their Marches, that even yet they forthinke that
inrode. In February then next, how, being appointed by our late suffrain Lord
to vieu the fortificacions in the Marches of Caleys, the which his grace
having soon done with diligence accordingly, he so devised with my Lord ye earl
of Warwyke, then Lieutenaunt of Bullein, and took such order with ye rest of
the garrisons thear, that with the hardy approach of but.vii. in. me^, he raised
an army of.xxi M. Frenchmen that had enca^ped them selves over the River by
Bulleyn, and thearwith then wan all their ordinance, carriage, treasure, and
tents in their ca^pe, hole as it stood with the los but of one man. And from
thence returnyng by land to Gynes, wan in his wey within the gu^shot and
reskue of Arde ye castle of Outinges, called otherwise the red pile. How hereto
by his force. M.D.xlv. was Pykardy invaded and spoiled, the fortes of Newhauen,
Blanknestes and Bullenberge begun bylded, and so well plied in work, that
in a few wekes ear his thence departinge they wear made and left defensyble.
Calling to mind I say (I speak not of his vnweryed diligence in the mean
time) these his valiant incursions, his often ouerthrowings, and notable
victories over our enemies And yet though this his last be far to be preferred
above the^ all, having been so great, and acheuing so much in so little time,
the like not hard nor red of and (but that thear be so many witnesses) half
incredible, yet is it none other sure, but such as makes his graces virtue
rather nue again then strange, and rather famous then woo^derful. We woo^der
not ye wot but at things strange and seldom seen or hard, but victory to
his grace semes no les commen and appropried then heat to the fire, or shadow
to the body. That, like as the well keeping of the Palladie in Troy was ever the
conseruacion and defense of the city, Palladium was an au^cie^t wodden image
in Troy, whearuppon Apollo by oracle did prophecy, that then shoold Troy be
destroyed* when yt wear had out of the City. This not vnknou e^ to the Greeks
Diomedes* and Ulisses, in the time of the sege thear, shaled the tower walls
whear ye image was kept, kyld the warders, and brought the image a wey with
them, whearuppon soon after the city was destroyed.
even so in warfare the presence of his parson is certain safeguard of the host,
and present victory over thenemie: for the which I have hard many of right
honest hauour to say, that for suerty of them selves they had rather in feld be
a mean soldier under his grace, then under any other a great Captain. And
sure, but that by my profession I am bound and do beleve all things to be
goouerned, not by fortune or hap, (although we must be content in commune
speech to use the terms of our formers devised) but by the mighty pour of
almighty God, Mat.x.
without whose regard a sparowe lights not upon the ground, I could count his
grace a Prince yt wey most fortunate of any living. But now remembering my
religion, and what fortunes force is, and hereto seeng his graces Godly
disposicion and behauour in fiercest time of war, seking nothing more then
peace, neither cruel upon victory nor insolent upon good success, but with
most moderate magnanimitee, upon the respect of occasion, using as the Poet
says: Vergil.
Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos. In peace again hoolly bent to
thaduauncement of Gods glory and truth, the kings honor, and the commons
quiet and wealth. And herewith conferring the benefits and blessings, that by
the prophet David the Lord assures too all them that so sto^de in love and
dread of him. Psalm. cxi. etc.xxvii.
I am compelled to think his grace, as lest happy by fortune, so most blessed
by God: and sent to us both king and commons as a minister, by whom the
merciful Majesty of the Lord, for our entier comfort of both soul and body,
will work his divine will. That if without offense I may openly utter, that I
have secretly thought: I have been often at a great muse with my self,
whither the kings Majesty of such an Uncle and Goouernour, we of such a
Mediator and Protector, or his grace again of such a Prince and Cosyn might
most worthily think them selfs happiest. But since I am so certain,
thexcellencie of his acts, and the baseness of my brain to be so far at odds,
as ought that I could utter in his praise, should rather obscure and darken
them, and as it wear wash iuery with ink, then give them their due light and
life: let no man look that I will here enterprise too deal with the woorthines
of his comme^dacions, who both have another matter in hand, and they again
being such as might by them selves be an ample theme for a right good wit:
whearin to say either little or insufficiently, wear better in my mind leaft
vnatte^pted and say nothing at al. Mary, an Epigram made upon ye Citezens
receiving of his grace, and for gratulacio^ of his great success and saufe
return: the which I had, or rather (to say truth and shame the deuel, for
out it wool) I stale: perchance more familiarly then friendly, from a friend of
mine: I thought it not much a mis for the neatnes of making and fynenes of
sense, and sumwhat also to serve (if reason woold bear it) in lieu of my
lack, here too place.

Aspice nobilium (Dux inclyte) turba virorum.
Vtque alacris latos plebs circu^fusa per agros.
Te patriae patrem communi voce salutent.
Scilicet et Romam victo sic host Camillus,
Sic redijt victor domito Pompeius Iarba.
Ergo tuus felix reditus, praesentia felix.
Vtque Angli, fusique tua gens effera Scotti
Dextra, (qua nu^quam visa est victoria mayor)
Det Deus imperium per te coeamus in vnum:
Simus and vnanimes per secula cu^cta Britanni.
Though I plainly told ye not that my fre^des name wear Armigil Wade, yet, ye
yt know the man, his good litterature, his wit and dexteritee in all his
doings, and mark the well couchynge of his clue, might have a great ges, of
whose spinnyng the threde wear.

But why these wars, by our late souereign Lord the kings Majesty
deceased, a Prince most worthy of eterne fame (whose soul God have) wear in
his days begun and yet to continued. Forasmuch as by sundry publicacion of
diverse wrytynges, as well then as since, the just title of our king unto
Scotland, the Scotts often deceites, untruths of promise, and perjury, has
been among other in the same writings so manifestly vttred: I entend not here
now to make it any part of my matter, which is but only a iournall or diarie
of this expedicio^ into Scotland, whearin I have digested our every days deeds
orderly as they wear doo^, with their circumstaunces (so nie as I could) from
the time of my lord Protectours grace, cummyng to Newcastell, until or
breakyng up of the camp from Rokesborow. And herein I dout not, but many
things both right necessary and worthy to be vttred I shall leave untold,
but sure rather of ignorance then of purpose. Although in deed I know it
wear metest for any writer in this kind to be ignorant of fewest and writing
of most, yet trust I again it will be considered that it is neither possible
for one man to know all, nor shame to be ignorant in that he cannot know. But
as touching deeds well done, being within the cumpas of my knowledge: as so
God help me, I mind to express no ma^s for flattery so will I suppress no
ma^s for malice. This battle and field now, which is the most principal part
of my matter, ye Scotts and we are not yet agreed how it shall be named: we call
it Muskelborough field, because that is the best town (and yet bad enough)
nigh the place of our meti^g: Sum of the^ call it Seton field (a town thear
nie too) by means of a blind prophecy of theirs, which is this or sum such
toy, Between Seto^ and the sey, many a man shall dye that day. Sum will have
it Fauxside, Bray feld, of the hill (for so they call a Bray) upon the side
whearof our foreward stood, ready to cum down and join. Sum oother will have
it Unreskfeld, in the fallowes whear of, they stood and we met. Sum will have
it Walliford feld, and sum no feld at all, for that they say thear wear so few
slain, and that we met not in a place by appointement certain, according to the
order and manner of battle, with such like fond arguments. Mary the
hinderars of this metynge I think for their meaning small sin to beshrew.
They of this haste hoped to have had the hole advantage, for what they did
appoynte upon, with out warnyng then so early to dislodge, and so hastily
tapproche, who cannot judge? And whither they me^t to make a feld of their
fight, or meant too fight at all or not, judge ye, by this that after ye here.
Certain it is that against their assemble and our encounter, (for they wear
not unware of our cummynge) in the former part of the year, they had sent
letters of warni^g to the states of their Realm, and then caused ye fire
cross in most places of their country to be carried: whearof the solempnitee
is never used, but in an urgent need, or for a great pour, either for defense
of them selves, or invasion of us. And this is a cross (as I have hard sum
say) of.ii. brandes ends, carried a cross upon a spears point, with
proclamacio^ of the time and place wha^ and whither they shall cu^, and with
how much provision of vitail: Sum other say it is a cross* painted al red, and
set for certain days in the feldes of that Baronrie, whearof they will have
the people too cum: whearby, all between sixty and sixten are peremtorily
summoned: that if they cum not with their vitayll according, at the time and
place then appointed all the land thear is forfaited straight to the kings
use, and the tariers taken for traitors and rebels. By reason of which letters
and fyercros, thear wear assembled in their camp (as I have hard su^ of the^
selves (not of the meanest sort) to confess above.xxvi.M. fighting footmen,
beside.ii.M horsemen prickers (as they call them) and hereto.iiii. thousand I
rishe Archers brought by therle of Arguile, all which (saving certai^ that we
had slain the day before) came out of their camp to encounter with us. Now,
whear they will have it no field, let the^ tell their cards, and count their
wynnyng, and they shall find it a field, howbeit, by mine assent, we shall not
herein much stick with the^, since both without them the truth shall have
place, and also by the courtesy of gaming we ought sumwhat to suffer, and let
ever the losers have their liberty of words. But whatsoever it wear, field
or no feld, I dare be bold to sai not one of us all, is any whit prouder of it,
then woold be the tooth that has byt the tung, ootherwise then in respect
that they wear our mortal enemies, and woold have done as much or more to us:
nor are nothing so fain to have beaten them as enemies, as we woold rejoice to
receive them as friends: nor are not so glad of the glory of this field, as we
woold be joyful of a steadfast atonement: whearby like cuntreymen and
cuntreymen, like friend and friend, nay like broother and broother we might in
one perpetual and brotherly life, ioyn, love* and live together, according as
thearunto, both by the appointement of God at the first, and by continuau^ce
of nature since we seem to have been made and ordained: separate by seas from
all oother nations, in customs and conditions littell differinge, in shape and
langage nothing at all. The which things oother nations viewing in chartes,
and redyng in books, and thear with hering this tumult, this rightyng these
incursions and intestine wars between us, do thearat no less marueyl and
bless the^, then they woold too here Gascoing fight with France, Aragone with
Spain, Flanders with Braba^t, or to speak more nere and naturally, friend
with friend, brother with brother, or rather hand with hand.

To the Scotts.
That no little both woo^der and woe it is to me my Cu^treemen (for I can
vouchsafe ye well the name) to consider, what thing might move ye, what tale
might incense ye, what drifte force ye, what charm enchau^t ye, or what fury
conjure ye, so fondly to fly from common sense, as ye should have need to be
exhorted to that, for the which it wear your parts most chefly to sue, so
untowardly to turn from human reason, as ye will be the hynderars of your
own weals, and so untruly to swerve from the bonds both of promise and
coouenau^t, as ye will needs provoke your friends to plain reue^gement of open
war. Your friends in deed (nay never wynke at the word) that have so long
before these wars forborne our quarrels so just, that wear so loath to begin,
and since that suffered so many injuries vnreue^ged: entreating your men taken,
not as captives of our mortal enemies, but as Ambassadors of our derest
friends.

Oh how may it be thought to be possible that ye should ever forget, or else
not ever remember the great munificence of our most magnificent prince our late
king? that when with most cruelty, by slaughter of subjects and burning of
tounes, At Allowentide. M.d.xlii
your last king Iamy with all your nobilitee had invaded his Realm, and soon
after ye invincible pollecie of my lord Protectours grace, then liyng at
Anwike, as lord wardeyn of our Marches, by the suffrau^ce of Gods favor
(which, thanks to his Majesty has not yet to left us) at Solom Moss made
them captyue and thrall to our princes oune will: with whom for their deeds, if
his hyghnes had dealt then as they had deserved, what should have blamed him? or
who could have controlled? since what he could do, they could not resist,
and what he should do, they had set him a sample. But his Majesty (among the
houge heap of oother his pryncely virtues) being ever of nature so inclined
too clemency, as never of will would use extremite, even straight forgettinge
who they wear, and soon forgyuynge what they had done, did not only then
receive them into his highness grace: place every of them with one of his
nobility or counsayll (not in prison like a captive) pardon them their
raundsommes: whearwith (if they be ought worth) sum Prince might have thought
hymn self rich, and hereto most frendely (for the time they wear here)
entertein them, but also of his Princely liberalitee impartinge treasure at
their departing to each of them all, did set them francke and free at their
own doors: Touching their sylkes, their cheynes, and their chere beside: I
mind not here among matters of weight to tarry on such trifles: Mary thear be
amoong us that saw their habit and port both at their cummynge and at their
departinge. Take it not that I hit you here in the teeths with our good turns
(yet know I no cause, more then for humanitees sake why ye should be
forborne) but as a man may sumtyme without bost of him self, say symply ye
thing that is true of him self: so may the subject without obbraid of
benefits, recount the bounty of his Princes larges. Although, perchance it
wear not much against manerflatly to break curtesy with the^ who either of
rechelesnes forget their friends benignity, or else of ingratitude will not
acknowledge it. To my matter now: What woold Cyrus, Darius, or Anniball in this
case have done? (noble co^querours and no tyrauntes) but why so far of? what
woold your own king Iamy have done? nay what king else woolde have done as
our king did? but su^what to say more. As our prince in cases of pitee was of
his own disposicio^ most merciful, so wanted thear not then of co^saillours
very nere about his highness, that showed them selves their friends, and
furthered his affectes in that behalf to the uttermost: being thus persuaded,
that as ye of the nobilitee appeared men, neither rude of behauour, nor base of
birth, so ye woold never show your selves inhumaine and ingrate toward him,
too whom ye should be so depely bound. And though since yt time, God have
wrought his will upon his Majesty (a loss to us sure worthy, never enough to
have be lamented, but that his mercy has again so bountifully recompensed us
with an image, so nie representyng his fathers Majesty and virtues, and of so
great hope and towardnes) yet be thear leaft us most of the cou^sailours we
had, who upon occasion will bend both pour and will to show you further
frendshippe. In part of proof thearof to speak now of later days, how many
means and weys has my lord Protectours grace, within his time of governance
under ye kings Majesty that now is, attempted and used to sho^ne these wars
and show him self your friend? what pollecie has he left unproven? what
shifte unsought? or what stone vnsturde? Touching your weals now, ye mind
not I am sure to live lawles and hedles without a Prince, but so to bestow
your Queen, as whoose make must be your king: And is it then possible ye can
so far be seduced, and brought too believe, that in all the world thear should
be any so worthy a Prince as our king? As Well for ye nobilitee of his birth,
for his rare cumlines of shape, his great exelle^cie of qualitees, his singular
towardnes to al godliness and virtues? Any likely to be so natural a Prince for
you, as his majesty borne, bred, and brought up under that, hemispherie and
cumpas of element, and upon that soil that both ye and we be all? Any so mete
for her as your princes own cuntreman, a right Brito^ both bred and borne: a
Prince also by birth, of so great a pour and of so mete an age? The ioynyng of
whom, both the kings their fathers did vow in their lives, and ye since
agreed upon in Parliament, and promised also after their deaths. Than which
thing (taking ones effect) what ca^ be more for your universal commoditees,
profits, and weals? whearby even at ones of foreign foes, ye shall accept as
familiar fre^des, of weak ye shall be made strong, of pour, rych, and of bo^d
free. And whither this now be rather too be offered of us, or sued for you I
make your selves judges. What we are able a lone to do both in peace and war,
as well without you as against you: I need not here to brag. Yet seek we not the
mastership of you, but the fellowship, for if we did we have ye wot a wey of
persuasion of the rigorus Rethorike so vengeable vehement (as I think ye have
felt by an oration or two) that if we woolde use the extremitee of argument, we
wear soo^ able so to beat reason in to your heddes or about your heddes, that I
doubt not ye woold quikly find what fo^denes it wear to stond in strife for the
mastrie with more then your match: We coueit not to keep you bond, that woold
so feign have you free, as well from the famed friendship of France (if I may
call it any friendship at al, that for a few crounes do but stay you still in
store for their own purpose) whearunto now both ye seem subject, and your
Queen ward, which friendship nevertheless (what soever it be) we desyer not, ye
should break with them for the love of us, but only in case whear ye should
be co^peld to lose either them or us: and in that case perchance we may be
content again too lose them for you.

As Well from the semblaunce or rather dissemblinge of this feigned frendeshippe
(I say) we^ cooueit to quite ye, as also from the most servile thraldom and
bondage under that hydeous monster, that venomous Aspis and very Antichriste
the Bishop of Rome, the which of so long time ye have and yet to do most
miserably abide: whose importable pride and execrable arrogancy, as well most
presumptuouslye against all sacred estates of Princes upon earth, as also
most contiumeliously against the high Majesty of God him self with
fastidious and utter contempt of both God and man, both the contexte and
tenor of his own Decrees, Decretals, Canons, and Extrauagantes made and
conspyred at the congregacions councels and synodes at sundry times for the
maintenau^ce and augmenting of his antichristiane authoritee, in his holiness
name assembled. And hereto his wicked blasphemy against God, his deuelish
dispensacio^s against his divine laws, his obstinate rebellion against all
powers, his outrageous usurpation in Princes lands, his cruel tyranny for
keeping of his kingdom, his coouert hypocrisy at home, his crafty co^spiracies
abroad, his insaciable avarice, his suttell supersticio^, his mischeuous
malice, his privy theft, his open rapine, his sacred simonie, his profane
hoordom, his ambition, sacrilege, extorcion, Idolatry and poysenynges, with
many other his carnal virtues beside. And also the undoubted witness of holy
writ, in both the testamentes does most certainly show and plainly make clear
to the eyes of ye all, if ye will not wilfully wink, at ye ye should willingly
see. Of him hardely spoke the prophet Daniel: Capi. xi.
He shall be lift up a hye, and magnified against all that is God, and shall
speak presumptuous words, and shall be set i a coorse, until wrath be
fulfilled against him. In the same Chap. He shall set at naught the God of their
fathers, and shall be in the dalyaunces and desyers of women, and shall pas naught
for God, but shall obstinatly be stubborn, and rise against all. And the holy
prophet Ezechiel. Cap. xxviii
Thy heart was lift up very hye, and saydest: I am God, and sit in Gods seat,
whear thou art but man and not God, and nevertheless have framed thy heart like
the heart of God. Thappostel saint Paul also, in whom the graces of God did
so plentyfully abou^d seemed not utterly to forget this prelate, when in his
epistle too the Thessaloniens he said: ii. Tessa. ii.
The lord Jesus shall not cum till first thear be a failing, and that wicked man
be discooueuered, the child of perdicion, who is adversary and exalted
against all that is called God, in such sort, as he stik not to sit in the
temple vau^ting him self yt he is God: And adds a little after, who^ the lord
Jesus shall quel with the spirit of his holy mouth. Of him and his abominable
behauour is thear much in both the holy testamentes, Hiere. xxiii eze. xxxiiii
Apo. xiiii.xvii.xix.
and a great deal more (I must confess) then I know my cumnyng can recite,
Al, so plai in sense, and easy to be understood, yt if ye confer ye words of
the same with ye acts of his life, ye shall have no more cause to doubt, whither
he be ye only a^tichrist, the^ ye may have, whither he wear only Christ of
whom saint Ihon ye Baptist said, Joan. i. Mat. xv.
behold the la^be of God: and the Centurion, This was sure ye very son of
God. I speak neither of spite nor of spetialtie of this precious prelate Paul
the.iii. yt now is alone, but of hi and his hole au^cetrie of these many years
paste: of whom sure, whoo list too say ought, wear mete they said truth:
and whoo list to say truth, ca^ say no more good: for their acts by their
office and lives by their profession, ar no les certainly known unto all the
woorld to be thus, then is the lion (as they say) by the pawe, or the day by ye
sunneshyne. The trees of that stock bear never oother fruit. And thearfore was
it that neither the Greeks, the Ruthens nor many nations in theast parts
besides (whom we cannot count but Christians) could never be brought ones so
much as to taste of it: and would never abide the presumptuous usurpation of his
insolent imperie, but utterly at the first did wisely refuse the unwieldy weight
of so heavy a burden, Contrary too Christ's, whose burden is light, and yoke
easly.
and the peynfull wringing of so uneasy a yok: The Bohems and Germai^s, of
later years have quite reject and cast him up. Mat. xi.
And we at last, not so much led by the^samples of others well doings as moved
by the mere mercy and grace of almighty God, Psalm. cxlv.
who (as by David he has promised) is ever at hand and nigh to all them, that
call upon him in truth, and always ready too do that he came for, Mat. xviii.
that is too save that was forlorn: through the aid and goodness of his mighty
pour and eterne wysedom strengthening his worthy champion, our late sovereign
lord, and custructinge his circu^spect counsel, have we most happily
exterminate and banished him our bounds. Whearby as we have now ye grace to
know and serve but one God, so are we subject but to one king, he naturally
knows his own people, and we obediently know him our only sovereign, his
highness estate brought and reduced from perticion, and in manner subieccio^ unto
the old princely entyer and absolute pour again, and ours redeemed from the
doubt, to whom we should obey. The great polling and intolerable taxes of
our moony, yearly both from his Majesty and us, now saved clear within his
Realm. Not feign now to fetch Justice so iniustly ministered, as he ye byds
most (like Caleys market) what soever be the cause, shall be sure of ye
sentence, and that so far from home and with so great cost of money and
danger of life. Our consciences now quite vnclogd from the fear of his vain
terriculame^ts and rattelbladders, and from ye fondnes of his trimtra^s and
gugaws his interdictions, his cursings his damynng to the devil, his pardons,
his soilyngs, his plucki^g out of purgatory, his supersticious sorts of sects
of religion, his canonisacion of saints, forbidding and lice^cing the eating
of meat, syngyng and saying, and wot not a word, rouynge a procession,
gadding a pilgrimage, worshipi^g of idols Oblacio^s and offerings, Saint
Uncu^ber. Saint Mudwyn. Saint Agnes Saint Sith.
of otes, images of wax, bound pe^s and pis for deliuerau^ce of bad husbands for
a sick kowe, to keep down ye belly, and when kyt had lost her key, setting
up candels too saints in every corner, and knak king of beadstones in every
pewe, tollyng of belles against tempests, Scala coeli Masses, Pardon Beads,
Tanthonie belles, Tauthrie laces, Rosaries, Collets, charms for every diseas,
and Suffrain suffrages for every sore, with a thousand tois else of his
deuelish devises, that lak of opportunity does let me here to tell.

We are now no more by the^ so wikkedly seduced to ye great offense of Gods
dignitee and utter parell of our souls. Now have we (by his divine pour)
wound our selves out of the danger of his just indignacio^ that we woorthely
wear in, for our former obstinacy, and turnyng from his truth, and have
received with most humble thanks gyuing his holly word, whearof we have the
free use in our own tung. These goodly benefits, or rather Gods blessings, if
ye will your selves, shall we with Gods assistence bring you to enioi as well as
our selfs. But if ye will not, but still be stubborn in your ungodliness
refuse his graces that he daily offers, wilfully wrye so far from his truth,
and be utterly obstinate in upholding ye Antichrist: Daniel. xi.
As first Daniel the prophet does declare what ye ar, and show you the state
ye stand in, by these words. They shall magnify hi^ as many as have drunk of
the wine of ye wrath of God, and whose names are not written in the book of
life. Even so think ye hardely that the just judgment, which ye head Priests
and seniours ye Iues, in au^swering Christ, unawares to them selves did give of
themselves, unto your confusion shall be verefied upon you: Mat. xxi.
which is, without mercy shall the Lord undo the evil, and set out his
vyneyard to oother good husbands that will yield him fruit in due times: And ye
soon after him self said to the^: thearfore ye kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, Eod. capit.
and be given to the nacio^ yt will do proffit: And hereto yt sharp sentence
of s. Poul too be pronounced, specially against you. i. Tes. ii*
The lord Jesus with Thau^gels of his blis shall cum from heaven in a flame of
fire, taking ve^geau^ce upon all the^, yt will not know God, and obey ye Gospel
of him our lord Jesus Christ, they shall be punished by death for ever from ye
glory of his virtue, when he shall cu^ to be glorified among his holy, and be
woonderful in ye eyes of all yt believe. As Well, nevertheless yt ye may be
delivered from the dreadful danger of this most terrible sentence, as also yt
the lord of his unmeasurable mercy, will ones vouchsafe to open your eyes, and
waken you out of this drousy Endimio^s drea^, Endymion* be looued of ye Moon
was laid by her in to a continual sleep, in a de^ne of mount Latmus in Caria,
whear she kyst him,
or rather this mortal A diseas cu^ming of burnt choler, cumpelling the pacie^t
to coueit naught, but drousie sleep, too forget all thing and to be as it wear
in a trance.
Lethargy, whearin by ye bytyng of this most venomous Bitte^ with this
serpent, as cast in a deadly slumber with a stifelinge, and benu^uminge of al
parts, and with a yore, do soon dye.
Aspis (ye Pope I say) ye do lame^tably lie a slu^ber, being benu^med of al ye
lims of your soul and lacking the use of all your spiritual sensis: Cic. i.
tue. quest.
how ever of grace ye shall be moved to do, we shall of charity most heartily
pray (for we do not so much remember our quarrel, and forget our profession, but
that we can wish rather your amendeme^t, then your destruction) And hereto that
ones also ye may see the miserable subieccio^, Cclius. lib. xiii.
whearunto ye are thral: and have the grace, to pray for grace to the lord
that ye may be quited of that captivity, and be made apt to receive the truth
and his holy word: and then to know whoo be your friends, and whyther we will
you well: With whoome by so many means since God of good will has so nie
joined you, seem not you of frowardnes to seauer a sunder against the thing
that should be a general wealth and common concord, the provision of nature,
and ordinance of God: and against his holy word, which not al unaptly,
perchance here may be cited. Mat. xix*
Quos Deus coniunxit, homo ne separet. The great mischeues, rising by this
disunion and seauering, and ye manifold commoditees cummyng by the contrary,
being shortly by you had in consideraunce, this marriage (I doubt not) between
our Prices shall be co^summate, al causes of quarrel ceast, atonement between us
made, and affirm aliaunce of frendshippe for ever concluded: The which thing
as most heartily, for my part I daily wysh for, so have I good hope shortly to
see, and herewith betake you to God.

But now, to return out of my disgressio^, for though I have been long a
talking to my cuntryme^ abroad in the North, yet wear I loath to seem to forget
my friends, at home in the South: And fare like the diligent servant, that
walks so earnestly on his masters erraund, that in the mids of his wey,
forgets whither he goes. Howebeit I might well perchance think it even here
hye time to leave, wear it not yt since I am in hand to utter in this case
what I know, and nooseld of my nurce, never too be spare of spech: though I be
but a bad evangelist, yet will I leave as few vnwritte^ verites as I ca^. As my
lords grace, my lord of Warwyke, the other estates of ye cou^sail thear, with the
rest of ye dignite of tharmie, did at our setti^g outward, tarry a few days at
Barwike: ye well appointing of ye noble me^ for their bo^des, and of the
knights and gentilme^ for the^ selves, and servants (I mean specially of ye
horsemen) which though but at moustres was never showed of purpose, yet coolde
it not at yt time be hyd, but be bright and apparent in every ma^s eye: and was
(if I can ought judge) I assure you, for the goodly number of ye likely men and
ready horses, for their perfect appointment of sure armor, weapon, and apparail
and their su^ptuous suits of liuerers beside: whereof I must of duty (if I
must of duty sai truth) most woorthely prefer, and give the chefest price
and prayle too my lord Protectours graces train, and to my lord of Warwykes)
was I say so generally such, and so well furnished, that both their duty
toward their prince, their love toward their country, and to the rulers wear
thear: and hereto thau^cie^t English courage and prowes might have easly in
this assemble been viewed. Men going out, never better at any time in all
points appointed, never better besene, with more courage and gladder will:
whearof with speed (for no doubt our enemies had factours at this mart among
us, though (as wisdom was) they did not openly occupye) the Scotts had soon
knowledge: And as they are merry men, and feat iesters hardely, they said (as
we hard) that we wear very gay, and came by like a wooing, the which though
they spoke drylie, more too tant the sumpte of our show, then to seem to know
the cause of our cummynge, yet said they thearin more truly, then they woolde
kyndely consider, for in deed, even as they wear acertayned by my lords graces
Proclamacion, as well at and before our entry into their country, that the
cause of our cummynge then was nothing else but touching the perfourmaunce of
coouenauntes on both sides about this marriage, that had been before time on
both sides agreed upon, which should be greatly for the wealths of us both,
and not to make war sure, nor ones to be enemy, but only to such as should
appear to be the hinderars of so Godly and honorable a purpose: even so
according too the promise of the Proclamacion, neither force nor fire was used
wyttyngly against any oother, during all our time of abode in the country,
howebeit the truth was so, that having doubt of the warste, it was wisely
consulted so to go to commune with them as friends, as nevertheless (if needs
they woolde) we might be able too mete them as foes, the which thing proved
after, not ye wurst point of pollecye. But what a maruaylous unkind people wear
they, that whear we came (as wooers cumme, not ootherwyse) but for good love
and quiet, they to rceyue us with hatred and war? It was too much ungentleness
and inhumanitee, sure in such a case too be showed: Yet since that we so quyt
them their kindness, and departed so little in their det, let us bear sumwhat
with them. Mary I wotte they wear not all so well content with the payment:
For the Earl Huntley (a gentleman of a great sobriety, and very good wit as by
his very presence is half vttred) being asked of a man of estate with us by
wey of communicacion (as I hard) how he bare his affeccion toward the ioyninge
of the two Princes. In good faith (quod he) I wade it sud gea forth, and hand
well with the marriage, but I like not this wooing. But now least I may
worthily be doubted by the plot of my Prologe, to have made the foorme of my
book, Thear is a tale indede (beside ye Bible) that saint Peter, having
gotten leave of our Lord too make a man, made one first with a very great head,
the^ with an exceeding little neck and so forth with such inequalitee of
proportion.
like the proportion of saint Peter's man, I will here leave of further process
of Preface, and fall to the matter.

FINIS.
Certain noble men, and other being special officers in this expedicion.
THe duke of Somerset, my lord Protectors grace general of the army, And
Capitayn of the battle, having in it iiii.M. fotemen. The earl of Warwyke,
lord Lieuetenau^t of ye army, and having the foreward of.iii.M footmen. The
lord Dacres the rerewarde of.iii.M. footmen. The lord Gray of Wylton, lord
lieuetenaunt of Bolleyn, high Marshall of the army, and Capitayn general of all the horsemen there. Sir Raufe Sadleyr knight, Treasaurer of the army. Sir
Fraunces Bryan knight, Capitayn of the light horsemen, being in number.ii.M.
Sir Raufe Uane knight, Lieuetenau^t of all the men of arms and dimilau^ces,
being in number.iiii.M. Sir Thomas Darcy knight, Capitayn of all the kings
Majesty pe^cioners, and me^ of arms. Sir Richard Lee knighte, deuisour of
the fortifications to be made. Sir Peter Mewtus knight, Captain of all the
hakbutters a foot, being in number.vi.C. Sir Peter Gamboa knight Spaniarde
Captain of.ii.C. hakebutters on horseback. Sir Fraunces Fle^mynge knight,
master of the ordinance. Sir James Wilforde knighte, Provost Marshall. Sir
George Blaag, and Sir Thomas Holcroft, Commissioners of the mousters. Edward
Shelley, my lord Grays Lieuetenannt of the men of arms of Bulleyn. Ihon Bren,
Captain of the Pioners, being.xiiii.C.
Officers upon the sea.
The lord Clynton, lord Admiral of the flete, which was of.lxv. vessels,
whereof the Galley and.xxxiiii. mo good ships, wear perfitly appointed for
war* and the residue for carriage of municion and vitaile. Sir William
Woodhouse knight, his Uiceadmirall. Thear were in the tharmie of great
ordinance drawn forth with us by horse.xv. pieces. And of Cariages.ix.C.
carts beside many waggens.
THE Story and process of the journey.
MY lord Protectours grace, Saturday the xxvii. of August.
whom neither ye length nor werines of ye way did any whit let, spedely to
further that he had deliberately taken in hand, riding all the way from London
his own person in post, accompanied with my lord Marshall, and sir Fraunces
Bryan, was met a.vi. mile on this side Newecastell, by my lord Lieuetenaunt
and Master Treasurer (who for ye more spedie dispatch of things were comen to
town there.iij. or.iiij days before) and all the nobles Knights and
Capitaynes of the army on horseback, attendi^g upon them. And coming thus to
town, my lords grace was honorably (for the dignity of the place) with
gonshot and presence of the Mayer, Aldermen, and commoners there, about iij.
of the clock in the afternone, received and welcomed, and lay at the house of
one Peeter Ryddell.

This day morning, in the feldes of the Northeast side of the town, Sundaye
the the.xxviii. of August.
mou^ster was made of such dimie lances and light horsemen as were comen,
where at my lords grace was himself, my lord Lieuetenau^t and other of the
cou^sail of the army.

In the after none came ye lord of Mangierto^ with a.xl. Scottish gentelmen of
the east borders, and presented them selfs to my lord at his lodging, whom
his grace did gentlye accept.

It would not be forgotten and it were but for ensamples sake, how a new pair
of gallows were set up in the market place and a souldior hanged for
quarellyng and fightyng.

All Capitaynes with their bands that had been mou^stred, Mondaye the xxix. of
August.
were commanded forward. My lords grace himself did early also the^ depart
the town, dyned at Morpeth.xij. mile on the way, and lay that night in Anwyke
Castle with sir Robert bows knight, lord Warden of the middle marches,
being.xii. mile further. Where there neither lact any store of geastes or of
good chere to welcumme them with, In the provision whereof a man might note
great cost and diligence, and in the spending a liberal heart.

Tuisdaye the xxx. of August
This day his grace having iourneyed in the morning, a.x. mile, dyned at
Bamborow Castle, whereof one sir Ihon horsley knighte is Captain. Bamborowe
Castle.
The plot of this Castle stands so naturally strong, that hardly can any
where (in my opinion) be found the like: inaccessible on all sides, as well for
ye great heighte of the crag, whereon it stands, as also for ye outward foorm
of the stone whereof the crag is, which (not much amiss perchance) I may lyken
to the shape of long bauens, sto^dynge an end with their sharper and smaller
ends upward. Thus is it fenced round about and has hereto on the eastsyde the
sea, at flud cummyng up to the hard walls. This Castle is very ancient, and
called in Artures days (as I have hard) Joyous guard: hither came my lord
Clynto^ from* shipboorde to my lord. In the afternone, his grace rode too
Berwycke xiiii. mile further, and thear received with the Captains, garrisons,
and with the officers of the town, lay in the Castle with sir Nicholas Strelley
knight, the Capitayn thear.

Much part of this day his grace occupied in co^sultacion, Wednisdaye the last
of August.
about ordres and matters, touching this voyage and army. This day, to
thentent we moughte save the stoore of the vitaile, we carried with us in the
army by carte, and to besure rather among us to have, somewhat to much then
any whit to little, as also that we should not need to trouble our ships for
vitaile, till we came to the place, by my lords grace appointed, every man of
the army upon general commandment made private provision for himself
for.iiii. days vitayle.

Thursday the first of September.
His grace, not with many mo then his awn band of horsemen, road too a town in
the Scottishe borders, standing upon the sea coaste, a.vi. mile from
Berwycke, and is called Aymouth, Aymouth.
whereat there runs a river into the sea, ye which he caused to be
sounded, and perceyuyng then the same well to be able to serve for a haven, has
caused since their buyldi^g to be made, whereof both Master and Capitayn is
Thomas Gower, Marshal of Berwyke.

Upon commandment generally given by sound of trumpet, Friday the.ii of
September.
all saving the counsayl departed the town, and enca^ped a.ii. flightshottes
of, upon the sea side, and toward Scotland.

This day my lord Clynton with his flete, took the seas from Berwyke toward
Scotland and herefore the rather, that though they might not have always
wind at will to keep their course still with us, yet and it wear but with the
driuynge of tides, they might upon any our need of municio^ or vitaile not long
be from us. My lord Lieuetenau^t and master Treasurer, who remained at
Newcastell after my lords grace for the full dispatch of the rest of the
army, came this day to Berwyke.

Saturday the iii. of September.
My lord Lieuetenaunt from out of the town did camp in field with the army.

To thente^t, the excuse of ignorance, either of the cause of my lords graces
cumming, or of his goodness, to such of the Scotts, as should show the^
selfs to favor the same cummynge, might quite be taken from them, his graces
Proclamacion (whereof they could not but here) was openly pronounced by
Heraulde, after sound of trumpet in.iii. several places of our Camp.

Beside ye mere matter of this journey I have here to touch a thing, which
seem it never so light to other, yet of more weight to me then to be let
pass unspoken of.

In the morning of this day my lords grace, walking upon the Rampere of the
tounewalles, on the side toward Scotland did tell I remember, My lords graces
dream.
that not many nights before, he dreamt he was comen back again to the
Court, whear the kings Majesty did heartily welcume him home, and every
estate else. But yet him thought he had done nothing at all in this voyage:
Which when he considered, with ye kings highness great costs, and the great
travail of the great men and soldiers, and al to have been done in vain, the
very care and shamefaste abashement of the thing did waken him out of his
dream. What opinion might we conceive of his thoughts wakyng, yt even dreaming
was moved with so pensyfe a regard of his charge toward his prince, and with
so humain a thought toward all men else? Howbeit, my mind is rather to note the
Pronosticacion and former aduertence of his future success in this his
enterprise, the which (I take it) was hereby then most certainly showed him,
although of right few (or rather of none) the same so taken. That if for
ensample like to this I should rehearse to you out of the old Testament, Gene.
xli
how the seven plentiful years, and the seven years of famyn in Egypt were
plainly signified before to Pharao by his dreams of seven fat oxen, and seven
full ears of corn, and by vii. lean Oxen that devoured the fat, and.vii.
withered ears consuming the full ears. Iustini li. i.
And hereto out of profane aucthors, how Astyages king of Medians was many a
day before admonished, yt he should be ouercommen by a His name was Cyrus.
nephew of his (as yet then vngotten and unborn) and lose his kingdom, and
this by a dream also, wherein he thought there spra^g out of the womb of his
daughter Ma^dane, a vine, by ye spreadinge of whose branches all Asie was
shadowed. Joseph. de antiquit. Li xvii. ca. vltimo.
And how Archelaus king of Cappadocia was warned before of his banishment out
of his country and kingdom by his dream of.x. wheat ears full type that
wear eaten of Oxen: and hereto the multitude of ensamples, beside touching this
case, in Tully, Valerius Maximus, De Divine, i Valor. li. i. ca. vii. Plin.
devir. illust. capi. xxvi. Cael. antiq. lect. li. xiiii capi. xlii. Sueton. in
Domitian. capi. xxiii.
Pliny the secunde, Celius Rediginus, Suetonius, and in infinity other
aucthors mo, they should be to cu^berous and irksum both for me to write and
you to read. The natural cause of which kind of propheciynge (as I may call
it) whyther it come as Astronomers hold opinion, by the influence of the air
or by constellacion, or else by sobriety of diet, and peculiar to the
Mela^cholycke, Socra. apud Plat. de. Rep. ix
both as Plato and also Phisicians affirm, or by gift of God as divines judge.
I trust I shall be borne with all though I do not here take upon me to discus,
but leave it for a doubt among them as I found it. Yet that thear is such
dignity and divinity in man's soul, as sometime in dreams we be warned of
things to come, both the learning of ancient Philosophers, Iambl. inde
Mister. Aegipt. Mercur. in Pymand.
Plotinus, Iamblicus, Mercurius, Trismegistus, with many other does auowe,
holy scripture and profane stories do prove, and daily exsperience to them
that do mark it, does also show.

But to this now, that my lords grace dreamt one thing, and the contrary came
to pass, writers upon exposicion of dreams, and specially Artemidorus, do
make.ii. special kind of dreams, Li. i. ca. ii.
the one Speculatiue, whereby we see things the next day after (for the
most part) much like as we saw them in dream: the other Allegoryke, which
warns us as it were by ridddell of things more then a day at the least,
after to come. And in these Allegoryke dreams he says, ye head betokens the
father, the foot the servant, the righthand signifies the mother, the left
the wife, Li. ii. cap i. lxv.
and so forth. And sometime one contrary is meant by an other, as to seem for
some cause to weep or be sorry, is a toke^ of gladness to come, and again to joy
much is a sign of care, Li. iii. cap. xxvii. Li. iiii. ca. iii.
to se foul water coming into the house, a sign to se the house burning,
Apollonides a surgion thought he went out and wounded many, and sone after he
healed many. Of which sort of dreams, this of my lords grace was, that showed
he had done nothing, and signified (as we may now be hold to conster) he
should do so much, as were skant possible to do more. Howbeit as I would have
no man so much to note and esteem dreams, as to thike there are none vayn, but
al significatiue, a thing in deed, both fo^dly superstitious and against ye
mind of God vttred in the old law, Deuteronomy. xviii
So would I have no man so much to co^te^ne the^, as to think we can at no
time be warned by the^, a thing also both of to much incredulite, and against
the promis of God, rehearsed in the new law by Peter out of ye prophet Iohel:
Act. ii. Iohel. ii.
But least with my dreams I bring you a stepe, I shall here leave them, and
begin to March with the army.

Sundaye the iiii. of September.
My lords grace came from out of the town, and the army reised from out of the
camp. And after disposicion of order yt sir Frau^ces Bryan, the Capitain of
lightt, orlinen with a.iiii. C. of his ba^de should tend to the skout a mile
or.ii. before. The cariages to keep a long by the sea coaste, And the me^ of
arms and dimilau^ces divided in to.iii. tropes, au^swering the.iii. wards, so
to ride in array directly against the cariages a.ii. flight shot a sunder from
the^. Our three battails kept order in pace between the^ both. The foreward
foremost, the battle in ye midst, and ye rerewarde hindermost each ward
his troop of horsemen and guard of ordinance, and each piece of ordinance, his
aid of Pioners for amendment of ways where need should be found. We marched
a.vi. mile, and camped by a village called Roston in the Baronrie of Bonke^dale.

We marched an.viii. mile til we came to a place called ye Peaths, Mundaye the
v. of September.
It is a valey, The Peaths.
running from a.vi. mile West, straight Eastwarde and toward the sea a.xx a.xx.
skore broad from bank to bank above, and a.v. skore in the bottom, wherein
runs a little river: So stepe be these ba^kes on either side and deep to the
bottom, that who goes straight down shall be in danger of tumbling, and the
commer up so sure of puffyng and pain, for remedy whereof the trauailers that
way have used to pas it, not by going directly, but by paths and footways
leading stopewise, of the number of which paths, they call it (somewhat nicely
in deed) ye Peaths. A Brute a day or.ii. before was spread among us that hereat
ye Scotts were very busy a working, and how here we should be stayde and met
withal by the^, whereunto I hard my lords grace vow, yt he would put it in
proof, for he would not step one foot out of his course appointed. At our
coming, we found all in good peace, howbeit the side ways on either side most
used for eas were crossed and cut of in many places with the castyng of trauers
trenches, not very deep in deed, and rather somewhat hinderyng then utterly
letting, for whither it were more by pollecie or diligence (as I am sure
neither of both did want) the ways by ye Pioners were sone so well plained,
that our army, caryage and ordenaunce were quite set over sone after sun set
and there as then we pight out camp. But while our army was thus in passing,
my lords grace willing to loose no time, and that the enemies as well by deed
as by brute should know he was come, sent an Heraulde to summon, a Castle of
George Douglash called Du^glas, Dunglas.
yt stood at the end of the same valey nerer the sea, and a mile from the
place of our passage. The Capitain thereof Matthew Hume, a brothers son of the
lord Humes upon this summons required to speak with my lords grace, it was
granted and he came. To whom quod his grace, Since it cannot be, but yt ye
must be witting both of our coming into these parts, and of our Proclamacion
sent hither before and proclaimed also since, and ye have not yet co^me^ to us
but keep this hold thus, we have cause to take you as our mere enemy. And
therefore be ye at this choice (for we will take none auau^tage of your being
here now) whither ye and your company will render your hold and stand body
and goods, at ye order of our will, or else to be set in it again as ye were,
and we will assay to win it as we can. The Captain being about this riddel
brought in great doubt what answer well to make, and whyther best to do, at
last stricken with the fear of cruelty yt by stubbernes he should well
deserve, and moved again with the hope of mercy, that by submission he might
hap to have, was content to render al at his graces pleasure, and thereupon
commanded to fetch his company, returned to the Castle. In the time of
tariyng for fetchyng his guard, we saw our ships with good gale and order
fair sailing into their Fryth, The Fryth.
which is a great arm of ye sea, and runs Westwarde into their country
above.iiii. mile. Upon this stands, Lies, Blak nest, Sterlinge and saint
Iho^s Rode, and all the best tounes else in the Southpart of Scotland. This
Capitayn came and brought with him his ba^de to my lords grace, which was of
xxi. sober soldiers, al so apparayled and appointed, that so God help me. (I
will say it for no praise) I never saw such a bunche of beggars come out of
one house together in my life. The Captain and.vi. of the worshipful of the
company were stayed and commanded to the keeping of ye Provost Marshal, more
(hardly) to take Mu^dais handsell, then for hope of advantage: the residue were
licenced to gea their gate* with this lesson, yt if they were ever known to
practyse or do ought against the army, while it was in the country and
thereupon taken, they should be sure to be hanged. After this surrender, my
lord Ihon Gray, being Capitayn of a number (as for his approved worthiness
right well he might) was appoi^ted to seize and take possession of the manner with
al and singular thappurtenau^ces in and to the same belonging, with whom (as it
hapt) it was my chance to go thither: the spoil was not rych sure, but of
white bread, oten cakes, and Scottishe ale, whereof was indifferent good store,
and sone bestowed among my lords soldiers accordingly, as for swords,
buklers, pykes pottes, panz, yarne, lynne^, he^pe and heaps of such baggage
beside were ska^t stopped for, and very liberally let alone, but yet sure it
would have rued any good huswiues heart, to have beholden ye great unmerciful
murder yt our men made of ye brood gees and good lai^g he^nes yt were slain
there yt dai, which ye wives of ye town had pe^d up in holes in ye stables and
sellers of ye castle ear we came. In this mean time my lords grace
appoi^ted, the house should be overthrown, whereupon ye Capitain of ye Pioners
with a.iii.C of his laborers were sent down to it, whom he straight set a
digging about ye fou^dacio^. In ye town of du^glas (the which we left unspoiled
and unburned) we understood of ye wives (for their husbands were not at home) yt
it was George Douglash devise and cost to cast these cross tre^ches at ye
peaths, and stood hi^ in.iiii. Scottish.l'. which is as much ster. as.iiii.
good english crounes of.v.s^. a piece, a mete reward for such a work.

Our Pioners were early at their work again about ye Castle, Tuisdaye the vi.
of September.
whose walls were so thick and fou^dacio^ so deep, and there to set upon so
craggy a plot, that it was not an easy matter sone to vnderdig them: Our army
dislodged and marched on. In ye wai we should go, a mile and a half from Du^glas
Northward, there were ii. pyles or holds, Thornton and Anderwike, set both on
craggy foundation and divided a stones cast a sunder, by a deep gut wherein ran
a little River. Thornton belo^ged to the lord Hume, Thornton.
and was kept then by one Tom Trotter, whereunto my lords grace over night
for summons sent Somerset his Heraulde, toward whom.iii. or.v. of this
Capitayns prikkers with their gaddes ready charged did right hastily direct
their course, but Trotter both honestly defended the Heraulde, and sharply
rebuked his men: and said for the summo^s he would come speak with my lords
grace himself, notwithstanding he came not, but straight lokt up a.xvi. poor
souls like the soldiers of Du^glas fast within ye house, took ye keys with
him, and commanding them they should defend ye house and tarry within (as
they could not get out) till his return, which should be on the morrow with
municio^ and relief, he with his prikkers prikt quite his ways. Anderwyke
perteined to the lord of Ha^bleton, Anderwyke.
and was kept by his son and heir (whom of custume they call the Master of
Ha^bleton) and an.viii. more with him, To be known that the Scotts call ye
son and heir of every lord the Master of ye house and surname, whereof his
father is called lord.
gentlemen for the most part as we hard say. My lords grace at his coming
nigh, sent unto both these piles, which upon summo^s refusing to render, were
straighte assailed, Thornton by batrie of.iiii. of our great pieces of
ordinance and certain of sir Peeter Mewtus hakbutters to watch ye loopholes
and wyndowes on all sides, and Anderwyke by a sort of the same hakbutters
alone, who so well besturd the^, yt whear these kepers had ra^med up their
outer doors, cloyd and stopped up their stayres within, and kept themselves a
loft for defense of their house about the battilme^tes, the hakbutters gat in
and fyered the^ underneath: whereby being greatly trobled with smoke and smoother,
and brought in desperacio^ of defense they called pitefully over their walls
to my lords grace for mercy, who, notwithstanding their great obstinaci and
the^sample other of ye enemies might have had by their punishment, of his
noble generosite and by these words making half excuse for the^. Men may some
time do yt hastily in a gere, whereof after they may soon repent the^, did take
the^ to grace, and thearfore sent one straight to the^. But ere the messe^ger
came, the hakbutters had gotten up to the^ and killed viii. of the^ aloft, one
lept over ye walls, and runninge more then a furlo^g after was stai^ without in
a water. All this while, at Thornton, our assault and their defense was stoutly
continued, but well perceiuinge how on ye tone side they were batred, mined on
ye other, kept in with hakbutters round about, and sum of our men wtin also
occupiyng al ye house under the^ (for there had likewise shopt up themselves in
ye highest of their house) and so to do nothing inward or outward, neither by
shoti^g of base (whereof they had but one or.ij.) nor tumbling of stones (ye
things of their chief anoyaunce) whereby they might be able any while to resist
our power, or save the^selfs, they pluct in a banner yt before they had set out
in defyau^ce, and put out over the walls* a white lynne^ clout tied on a
sticks end, criyng al with one tune for mercy, but having answer by the whole
voice of ye assaylers, they were traitors and it was to late, they plukt in
their stick, and sticked up ye ba^ner of defyaunce again, shot of hurled
stones, and did what else they could, with great courage of their side and
littel hurt of ours Yet then after, being assured by our ernesty, yt we had
vowed ye wynning of their hold before our departure, and then, yt there
obstinacy could deserve no less then death, pluct in their ba^ner once
again, and cried upon mercy, and being generally answered, nay nay look never
for it, for ye are errau^t traitors, then made they peticio^ yt if they should
needs die, yet that my lords grace would be so good to the^ as they might be
hanged, whearby they might sumwhat reconcile the^selfs to God ward, and not to
dye in malice with so great danger of their souls: A pollecy of war.
A pollecie sure in my mind, though but of gross heddes, yet of a fine devise.
Sir Miles Partrich being nie about this pile at ye time and spiyng one in a red
doblet, dydges, he should be an Englishma^ and therefore came and furthered this
peticio^ to my lords grace ye rather, which then took effect, they came and
humbled themselves to his grace, whearupo^ without more hurt they wear but
commanded to the Provost Marshal. My lords graces pitee.
It is su^what here to consider, I know not whither the destenie or hap of ma^s
life: The more worthy men, ye les offe^ders and more in ye judges grace wear
slain and the beggars, the obstinate rebels yt deserved naught but cruelty
wear saved. To say on now, ye house was soon after so blowe^ with powder, yt
more then ye one half fell straight down to rubrish and dust, the rest stood
al to be shaken with riftes and chynkes. Anderwyke was burned, and al ye houses
of office and stakkes of corn about them both. While this was thus in hand,
my lords grace in turning but about saw the fall of Du^glas, which likewise
was undermined and blown with powder.

This done, about noon we marched on passinge soon after wtin ye gu^shot of
Du^bar, a town sto^ding lo^gwise upon ye seasyde whearat is a castle (which
the Scotts count very strong) ye sent us diverse shottes as we passed but al in
veyn: their horsemen showed the^selfs in their feldes beside us, toward whom
Barteuile with his.viii* me^ all hakbutters on horsbak (whom he had right well
appoi^ted) and Iho^ de Rybaud, with diverse other did make, but no hurt on
neither side, saving yte a man of Barteuiles slew one of the^ with his piece, ye
skirmish was soon e^ded. We went a iiii. mile further, and having trauayled yt
day a.x. mile, we ca^ped nigh Ca^tallo^, and had at night a blind alarm.

Here had we first advertisement certain, that the Scotts wear assembled in
camp at the place whear we found them.

Wednesdaye the.vii. of September.
Marching this morni^g a.ij mile, we came to a fair River callen Lyn running
all straight eastwarde toward the sea, over this River is there a stone bridge
yt they name Lynto^ brig, of a town thereby on our rightha^d and eastward as we
went yt sto^ds upon the same River, Our horsemen and cariages past through ye
water, (for it was not very deep) our footme^ over the bridge. The passage was
very straight for an army, and therefore ye le^gar in setti^g over. Beyond this
bridge about a mile Westward (for some thought as then we turned) upon this
same River on the Southsyde stondes a proper house and of sum strength bylyke,
they call it hayles Castle, Hayles castle.
and perteyneth to the earl Bothwel, but kept as then by ye governors
appoyntme^t, who hylde the earl in prison. Above the Southsyde of this Castle
lies a long hill, Eeast and West, whearuppon did appear in diverse plumpes
about.iii.C. of their prickers, sum making toward the passage too lie in wayt
there to take up straglers and cut of ye tail of our host. My lords grace,
and my lord Lieutenaunt, against the Castle upon an hill over which we should
pass, did stay a while, as well for the army that was not all cum, as alsoo too
see a skyrmish that sum of these prickers by cu^ming over the River toward us
began to make, but did not maintain. Whearupo^ our foreward marching softly
before, his grace then took his way after, at whom, out of the Castle thear
wear rou^dly shot of (but without hurt) vi. or.vii. pieces, the which before
that, though sum of our men had been very nigh, yet kept they all coouert. In
this mean time did thear arise a very thick mist, My lord the earl of Warwyke
then lord Lieutenaunt (as I told you) of the army, did so nobly quite
himself upon an adventure that chanced then to fall, as that his accustumed
valiaunce might well be acknowledged, whearby first, and first of all men (a
little, but not without purpose now to digres) being lord Lieutenau^t of
Bulleyn next after it was wun, beaten on al sides, weak without, ill harbor
within, and (now to say troth, for the danger is past) skante tenable as it
was, did so valiauntly defend it against the Dolphyn then and all his power,
that as I remember was reconed a.lii.M. Of whom in a camisado then, as they
had slain many of our me^ and wun the base town, his lordeship killed above
viii.C counted of the best soldiers in all France, drove the rest away, and
recovered the town from them again. And the next year after, occupiyng his
office of lord Admiral upon the sea in person himself, what time the great
fleet of France with all their Galleys (which was no small pour) came to invade
our costs, he profrered battle unto the French Admiral and all his navy,
which fight (I will not say how cowardly) he utterly refused, his lordship
repeiled their force and made the^ fame to fly bak again home with all their
bragges and cost in vain. And the same year, but with a.vii.M. (whereof not v.M.
lo^ded) mawgre all France he burnt Treaport and diverse villages thear beside,
returned to ship again with ye los, but of one David Googan and no mo. And the
year than next. M, D.xlvi. after his diligence so well showed among the rest of
the commisioners, yt an honorable and fre^dly peace was concluded between
France and us, his lordship was sent over by our late souerain lord, to
receive ye oath of the late French king for co^firmacio^ of the same peace. In
which journey, how nobly he did aduau^ce his port for the kings Majesty's
honor and estimacio^ of the realm (and yet not above his degree) all me^ yt
saw it, will easly confess with me, that it was to much then, to be showed in
few words here. Uery few things else (to say truth) that have been any where
in these wars against the enemy either nobly attempted or valiauntly
acheued, whearin his lordship has not been, either the first there in office,
or one of the foremost in danger. That if it fell so fete for my purpose to
speak of his lordships honor at home, as it has done sumwhat to touch his
proowes abroad, I could sure for comme^dacion thearof move my self matter,
wherein I wear able to sai rather liberally much, then skarcely enough: but
omitti^g that thearfore, and to turn to my tale again, his lordship regarding
the danger our rerewarde was in by reason of disorder, caused at this passage
by the thicknes of this mist, and nienes of the enemies, himself skant with
a.xvi. horse (whereof Barteuile and Ihon de Ribaude wear.ii: vii. or.viii. light
horsemen mo, and the rest, of his own servants) returned toward the passage
to see to the arraye again. The Scotts perceyuyng our horsemen to have past
on before, and thinki^g (as ye truth was) that sum Capitain of honor did stay
for the lookynge to the order of this rerewarde: kepinge the Southsyde of the
River, did call over to sum of our me^ to know, whither there wear any noble
man nie thear: they wear asked why they asked, one of the^ answered yt he was
such a man (whose name our me^ knew to be honorable among the^) and woold cum
in to my lords grace, so that he might be sure to cum in safety: our yoo^g
soldiers nothing suspecting their ancient falshed, told him yt my lord
Lieutenau^t the earl of Warwyke was nie thear, by whose tuicio^ he should be
safely brought to my lords graces presence, they had cund their lesson, and
fell to their practice, which was this, having cu^me^ over ye water, in the way
as my lord should pass, they had couched behind a hillok about a.ii.C. of
their prickers, a.xl. had they sent beside, to search whear my lord was, whom
when they found part of them pricked very nie. and these again a.x. or.xii. of
my lords small company did boldly encounter and drove the^ wellnie home to
their ambush, fliynge perchance not so much for fear of their force as for
falshod to trap the^: But hereby informed yt my lord was so nie, they sent out
a bigger number, and kept the rest more secret, upon this purpose that they
might either by a plain onset have distressed him or else that not preuaylinge, by
feyning of flight to have trained him into their ambushe, and thus instruct
they came pricki^g toward his lordshippe a pace, why (quod he) and will not these
knaves be ruled? give my staff, the which then with so valiant a courage, he
charged at one (as it was thought) Da^dy Car a Capitayn among the^ yt he did
not only co^pel Car to turn, and him self chased him above.xii. skore
together, all ye way at the spear point, so yt if Carres horse had not ben
exceeding good and wight his lordship had surely ru^ him through in this race,
but also with his little band caused all ye rest to flee a main. After whom then
as Henry Uane, a gentleman of my lords and one of this company did fiersly
pursue, four or.v. scotts suddenly turned and set upon him, and though they
did not altogether skape his hands free, yet by hewyng and ma^gling his head,
body and many places else, they did so cruelly entreat him, as if reskue had not
cum ye sooner: they had slai^ him out right, but saved as he was, I dare be
bold to sai, many a.M. in war and else whear have dyed with les, then half ye les
hurt. Here was Barteuile run at sydeling and hurt in the buttok, and one of our
men slain. Of Scotts again, none slai^ but.iii. taken, whearof one was
Richard Maxwell and hurt in the thigh: who had been long in England not long
before and had received right many benefits, (as I hard himself confess)
both of ye late kings Majesty and of my lord Lieutenau^t, and of many other
nobles and ge^tlemen in ye court beside: and thearfore for his ingratitude and
traiterous untruth threatened too be hanged: But as otherwise he had a great deal to much more then he deserved, so had he here sumwhat to little, for how my
lords grace bestowed him I wot not, but hanged in deed he was not. To make my
tale per fit it is certainly thought, yt if my lord Lieutenaunt had not thus
valiau^tly encountered the^ ear they could have warned their ambushe, how
weakly he was warded, he had been beset round about by the^, ear ever he could
have been ware of the^ or reskued of us: where now hereby his Lordeship showed
his woo^ted woorthines, saved his cu^panie and disco^fited ye enemy. Soon
after he ouertooke my lord Protector, being as then set at dinner, to whom he
presented these prisoners and recounted his adue^tures, whose grace in the mean
tune had hapt upon a fellow like a man, but I wot not of what sort, small of
stature, red hedded, curld round about and shedded before, of a.xl. year old,
and calde himself Knockes. To say sumwhat of his hauour, his cote was of ye
coulor of a well burnt brik (I mea^ not blak) and well worth. xx. d.a broad
yard, it was pretely fresed, half with an ado and he^med round about very
sutably with pasmai^ lace of grene caddis, me thought he represented ye state
of a su^ner in sum city or of a peddler in sum boorowe, how far so ever he had
trauayled that day he had not a whit fyled his boots for he had none on,
harmles bilyke, for he ware no weapon, he rode on a trottynge tyt well worth a
coople of shillynges, the loss whereof at his taking he took very heuely, yet
did my lords grace cause him to be set on a better. I take his learning was but
small but his vttraunce was great sure, for he never lind babeling, very moist
mouthed and somewhat of nature disposed to slauer, and therefore fain (without a
napkin to wype his lyppes) to suppe at every word, sum said it was no faut in
the man, but the manner of the cuntree, in deed they have many moist mystes
thear, no lak of audacity nor store of wit, for being taken and brought in for
a spy and posed in that point whyther he went, neither by the honesty of his
erraunde, nor goodness of his wit, was he able to make any lykely excuse, the
tenoure of his talk so tempred thoorow out, and the most of his matter so
indifferently mingled, as (if they make him not both) it was hard for any
theare to judge, whether they might rather count him a folish knave or a
knauishe fool, at whom my lords grace and other had right good sport. As
Barteuile that day had right honestly served, so did ye lords right
honorably quite yt, for straight upon the ouertakynge of my lords grace, my
Lord Lieutenaunt did get him a surgion, and dressed he was, straight after laid
and conveyed in my lords graces own chariot, that was both right sumptuous for
cost and casy for caryage. The rest yt wear hurt, wear here all so dressed
Scotts and oother. ^^e had marched that day a ix. mile and camped at night by
a town standing upon the Fryth, and called Lang Nuddrey. Here ^^e found a
gentle wooma^ (some said a lady) the wife of one hugh Douglas, she was great
with child, and in a house others, thear abode her good time of deliverance,
and had with her an ancient gentle wooma^ her mother, a mid wife and a daughter:
whose estate ye counsel understanding, my lords grace and my lord Lieutenaunt
took order that al night without danger or damage she was well preserved, but
sone after our departure in the morenynge, I hard, that sum of our northern
prickers had visited her, not much for her profit* nor al for their honesties
yt had they then been caught with their kindness, they should have been sure of
thanks according* good people be they, but given much (as they say) to the
spoil.

Thursdaye ye viii. of september, being, our lady day.
This morning in ye time of our dislodgi^g, sign was made to sum of our ships
(whereof ye most part and chefest lay a.x. or xii. mile in the Fryth beyond
us over against Lies and Edinborowe) yt ye lord Admiral should cum a shore to
speak with my lords grace. In ye mean time sumwhat early, as our galley was
cu^ming toward us, about a mile and more beyond our ca^pe the Scots wear very
busy a waftynge her a shore toward them with a banner of Saint George that
they had: but my Lord Lieutenaunt soon disapointed ye policy, for making
toward that place wheare my Lord Admiral should land, our men on the water
by the sight of his presence did soon discern their friends from their foes.
By and by then my lord Clynton the Admiral came to land, Who with my Lord
Lieutenaunte rode back to my lords grace, among whom order was taken, that our
great ships should remove from before Lies, and lie before Muskelborowe and
their camp, and our smaller vessels that wear vitaillers to lie nerer us. This
thus appointed, my lord Admiral rode back to take the water again. And as our
army had marched onwarde a mile or.ii. thear appeared upon a hill that lay
longwise east and west, and on ye southsyde of us, upon a vi. hundred of their
horsemen prickers, whearof sum within a.ii. flightshot directly against us upon
the same hill, and most further of, toward these over a small bridge (for
thear ra^ne a little river also by us) very hardely did ride about a doosei^ of
our hakbutters on horsback, and held them at bay so me to their noses yt
whether it wear by the goodness of our me^ or badnes of the^, the Scotts did
not only not cum down to them, but also very curteisiy gave place and fled to
their fellows: and yet I know they lack no hearts, but they cannot so well
away with these crakkes. Our army went on, but so much the slowlyer, because our
way was sumwhat narowe, by means of the Fryth on the tonesyde and certain
marshes so nie on ye toother. The Scotts kept always pace with us upon their
hill, and showed themselfes upon sundry bruntes, very cranke and brag, at whom
as our captains did look to ye ordryng and arraiyng again of the battles, my
lord protectors grace appointed.ii. feld pieces to be turned, each piece shot of
twyse, whereof one Gold yt master gu^ner thear discharged the tone and did so
well direct it, yt at his former shot he struck of ye leg of a black horse,
right fair and as it was thought ye best in ye company, and at his next shot he
kyld a man: hereby, rather sumwhat calmed then fully content, they went their
ways and we saw no more of the^ til ye time of our ca^pyng, and then showed
they themselves very lordly aloft upon this hill again oueragainst us, as
though they stood there to take view of our campyng and mouster of our men. My
lord Marshall myndyng to know their co^missio^ did make toward the^ with a
band of horsemen, but they went wisely their way and would never abide ye
reasoning of the matter. In the way as we came not far from this place, George
Ferrers a gentleman of my lord Protectors and one of ye commisioners of ye
cariages in this army, happened upon a cave in the ground, ye mouth whereof was
so worn with ye fresh printe of steps, yt he seemed to be certain thear wear
sum folk within, and gone down to try, he was redily received with a hakebut
or.ii. He left them not yet, till he had known whyther they would be co^te^t
to yield and cum out, which they fondly refusyng, he went to my lords grace,
and upon vttraunce of the thing gat lisence to deal with them as he could,
and so returned to them with a skore or two of pioners. Three ventes had their
cave yt we wear wareof whereof he first stopped up on, anoother he filled full of
straw and set it a fire, whearat they within cast water a pace, but it was so
well maynteyned without that ye fire prevailed, and they fayn within, to get
them belyke into anoother parler. Then devised we (for I hapte to be with him)
to stop ye same up, whearby we should either smoother them or find out their
ventes if they had any mo: as this was doo^, at another issue about a.xii.
skore of, we moughte see the fume of our smoke to cum out, the which
continued with so great a force and so long a while that we could not but
think they must needs get them out or smoother within, and forasmuch as we
found not that they did the tone, we thought it for certain they wear sure or
the toother, we had doo^ that we came for, and so left them.

By this time our ships taking manerly their leave of Lies with a skore of
shot or more, and as they came by, salutyng ye Scotts in their ca^pe also with
as many, came and lay according to appoyntmente. We had gone this day about a
v. mile, and ca^ped toward night nigh a town they call salt, Preston by ye
Fryth. Here one Charleto^, a man before time banished out of England, and
continuyng all the while in Scotland, came in and submitted himself to my
lords grace, who took him to mercy.

Friday ye.ix. of september.
This dai is marked in ye kallender with the name of saint Gorgon, no famous
saint sure, but either so obscure that no man knows him, or else so aunciente
as every man forgettes him. Yet wear it both pitee and blame that he should
lose his estimacion among us. And methinkes out of that little that I have
red, I could somewhat say to bring him to light again, but then am in
doubt, what to make of him, a he saint a she saint or a neuter (for we have
all in our Kallendar.) Of the male and female saints, every leaf thear
showthe samples inowe. And as for the neuter, they or rather I wot unmarked
the^ unknown, as saint Christmas, s. Ca^delmas, saint Easter, Saint
Whitsontide and sweet saint Sunday yt cums ones a weke. Touching my doubt
now: If the day bear name in ye woorship and memory of him whom the
preacher Horace does mention in his first book of sermons by these words
Pastillos Rufillus olet, Satyr. ii. Phorcus king of ye Isles Corsica and
Sardinia had four daughters, Scylla, Medusa, Stenio and Euriale called
Gorgons, of whom as Neptune had ravished Medusa Gorgon in ye temple of Pallas:
This Gods for displeasure of the fact changed al ye hear of her head into
snakes and adders, and gave her a further gift yt who so ever saw her should
be turned straighte into stone, Perseus coueityng to kill this monster borrowed
of Mercury his wyngs and faulchion and struck of her head as she slepte and
brought it with him, which Pallas did after set in her shield and it had the same
pour still after as it had while she lived.
Gorgonius hircum. then may we be bold to believe it was a he sai^ct, but yet a
very sloouen saint and belyke a nesty. If this name were Kallendred of Medusa
Gorgon that had the hear of her head turned into adders, whom Perseus
overcame and kylde, as doctor Ouide declares in his.iiii. book of chaunges
Gorgonis anguicomae Perseus superator, then may we be sure it was a she
saint. But if it wear in ye honor of Pallas shield whearin this Medusa
Gorgo^s head was graue^, as Titus Stroz. pr^. Aeolo.iiii.
Stroza (a devout doctor to, but of later days) does say, Gorgonis anguicomae
caelatos aegide vultus, Pallas habet. Then was it neither a he nor a she but a
plain neuter saint. And thus with ye aunciente authority of mere poetical
scriptures, my conscience is so confounded, as I wot not in the world what
saint to make of him. Jacob de voragine
James of the synkhole (saving your reverence) a trier forsooth that wrote the
Legendaurie, tells me a very preposterous order in good cookerie, of one
Legend. autea cap. cxxviii.
Gorgo^ and his fellow Dorotheus, that wear first sauced with vinegar and salt,
and after ye then broiled on a girdyro^. But to be plain (as it is best for a
man to be with his fre^des) he has farced his book so full of lies, yt it is
quite out of credit in all honest company. And for my part, I am half a shamed
to say yt I saw it, but since it is said, and sumwhat to tell you what that I
saw, Thom. Ca^tuar. ca. xi. Lupus. ca. cxxiii.

Petr. exorcist. cap. lxxiiii.

Thaismere trix. cap. cxlvii.


he makes me Thomas the traitor, Lupus ye Lechour Peter the knave (if I may
call a co^iurer so) and Thais the hoor all to be hye and holy saints in
heaven, and yt with such prodigal impude^cie and so shameless liyng as I may
safely think he had either a Bull to make saints of devils, or else a placarde
to play the knave as he list. But as for Gorgon, be he as he be may, yt makes
no great matter, for he shall have my heart while he sto^des in ye kallender, he
has been ever so lucky. But what saint so ever he be, he is sure no Scotts
man's friend, but a very angry saint toward them, for upon his day.xxxiiii.
year paste, they had a great overthrow by us at Floddom feld, and their king
Iamy ye fourth slain, and thearfore is this day not smally marked among them. To
tell our adventures that befell now upon it, I think it very mete that first
I advertise, how here as we lay, our camp and theirs wear either within the
sight and view of oothers, and indistau^ce (as I gest) a.ii. mile and little
more a sunder, we had the Fryth on the north, and this hill last remembered as I
said on the south (the west end Whereof is called Fauxsyde Bray, Fauxsyde Bray.
whereupon stands a sorry castle and half a skore houses of like woorthines
by yt.) And had westward before us, the liyng in camp. A long this hill
(being about a mile from us) were they very bisy prankyng up and down all
the motenyng, and feign would have been a counsayll with the doings of our
camp. We again because their army seemed to sit to receive us, did
diligentely prepare that we might soon go to them, and therefore kept our camp
all that day, my lords grace and the counsel sittyng in co^sultacion, ye
captains and officers prouidyng their bands, store of vitaile, and furniture
of weapon, for furtheraunce whearof our vessels of municio^ and vitailes wear
here all ready come to the shore. The Scotts continued their bravery on the
hill, the which we not being so well able to bear, made out a band of light
horsemen and a troop of dimilaunces to back the^: our men gat up on the hill and
thereby of even ground with ye enemy, rode straight toward them with good speed
and order. Whom at ye first ye Scotts did boldly countenance and abide, but
after when their perceived yt our men would needs cum on, they began to prick
and would fayn have begone ear they had told their erraund: but our me^ hasted
so spedely after, that eue^ straight they wear at their elbowes, and did so
stoutly then bestur them, that what in ye onset at the first and after in ye
chase (which lasted a.iii. mile, wellny to as far as the furthest of their
camp on ye southsyde) they had kylde of the Scotts within a iii. hours,
abooue ye number of xiii.C. and taken ye master of Hume ye lord Humes sun and
heyr.ii. prestes and vi. gentlemen: whearof one (I remember) by sir Jacques
Granado, and all upon ye highest and well me niest of ye hill toward them, within
the full sight of their hole camp. Of our side again one spanish hakbutter
hurt, and taken Sir Rafe Bullmer knight, Thomas Gower Marshal of Berwyke, and
Robart Crouch: all Captains of several bands of our lighthorsmen, and men of
right good coorage and approved service, and at this time distressed by their
own forwardnes, and not by the enemies force.

After this skirmish it was marueiled on their side that we used so much
cruelty, and douted on ours that we had kylde so many. Their marueyle was
answered that they had pict ye quarrel first them selves, and showed us a
presidente at paniarhough, where of late years without any mercy, they slew the
lord Euers and a great cumpenie with him, and our dout was clered by the witness
of their oun selves, who confessed that thear wear ii. made out of their
ca^pe.xv.C horsemen for skirmish and.v.C. foot men to lie close in ambush and be
ready at need, and of all these for certain, not.vii. hundred to return home.

After this skirmish also hard we, The lord Hume hurt.
that the lord hume him self for have in this flight had a fall from his
horse, and burst so the canell bone of his neck, that he was fayn to be carried
straight to Edenborowe, and was not a little despayred of life.

Then also my lords grace, my lord Lieutenaunte and other of the counsel, but
with a small guard, upon this Fauxsyd Bray where the slaughter (as I said) was
made, about half a mile southeast from them, did take full view of their
camp, whereof the tents as I noted then, were divided in to.iiii. several
orders and rewes liynge east and west and a prikshot a sunder, and moustred not
unlike (as thought me) unto four great ridges of ripe barley. The Scotts camp.
The plot whear they lay so chosen for strength, as in all their country sum
thought not a better: safe on the south by a great marysh, and on the north by
the Fryth, which side also they fenced with.ii. field pieces and certain
hakbuts a crok liynge under a turf wall: Ede^borowe on ye west at their backs,
and eastward between us and them, strongly defended by the course of a River
called Eske runnyng north in to the Fryth: which as yt was not very deep of
water, so wear the banks of it so hie and stepe after ye manner of ye Peaths
mentioned before in our mundais journey, as a small sort of resistauntes might
have been able to keep down a great number of cummers up. About a xii. skore
of from ye Fryth, over the same River is thear a stone bridge which they did
keep also, well warded with ordinance. From this hill of Fauxsyde Bray descended
my lords grace my lord Lieutenaunt and thoother along before their ca^pe wtin
les then ii. flightshottes into a lane or street of a.xxx. foot broad, fenced
on either side with a wall of turf an elle of height: which wey did lead
straigth northwarde and nie to a church called saint Mighels of Undreske
stondynge upon a mean risyng hill sumwhat higher then the site of their camp.
Thus this viewed, they took their return directly homewarde to our te^tes, at
whom in ye way ye Scotts did often shoot, but with all their shot and of all
our cumpenie they kylde but one horse in ye midst of.iii. without any hurt of
the rider.

(...)
And as my lords grace was passed well nie half ye way homeward, a Scottish
herald with a cote of his princes arms upon him (as the manner is) and with
him a trumpetour did overtake his grace, we thought upon sum message and
thearfore every man gave them place to cum and say their erraundes, which as I
might ges (partly by the aunswers as follow) wear these, The herauldes
message.
or to this effect. The heraulde first, my lord the Governor has sent me to
your grace to enquere of prisoners taken, and thear with to say, that for ye
pitee he has of effusio^ of Christen blood, which by battle must needs be
shed, and because your grace has not done much hurt in the cuntree, he is
content ye shall return as ye came, and will proffer your grace honest
conditions of peace. And then the trumpetour: The trumpetours errau^d.
My lord my Master the earl of Huntley, has willed me to show your grace, yt
because this matter may be ye sooner ended and with les hurt, he will fight with
your grace for the hole quarrel.xx. to xx.x. to.x. or else himself alone with
your grace man to man. My lords grace having kept with him my lord Lieutenaunt
had hard them both thrughly, and then in aunsweryng spoke sumwhat with louder
voice, the^ they had done their messages. whear upon we that wear the ryders
by, thynkyng his grace would have it no secret, wear sumwhat the bolder to cum
the nigher. The words whearof (as seemed me) wear vttred so expeditely with
honor and so honorable with expedicion, as I was for my part much moved then
to dout, whyther I might rather note in them, ye pro^ptnes of a singular
prudence or ye animositee of a noble coorage. And they wear thus, your
goouernour may know, My lords graces aunswers.

To ye herald


that ye special cause of our cummyng hither was not to fight, but for the
thing that should be the weal of both us and you, for God we take to
record, we mind no more hurt to ye Ream of Scotland then we do too the Ream
of England, and thearfore our quarrel being so good, we trust God will prosper
us the better. But as for peace, he has refused such conditions at our hands
as we will never proffer again, and thearfore let him look for none, til this
wey we make it.

And thou Trumpet, To the trumpetour.
say to thy Master, he seems to lak wit to make this challenge to me, being
of such estate by the sufferaunce of GOD as have so weighty a charge of so
precious a jewel, the goouernaunce of a kings parson, and then ye protection of
all his reames, whearby in this case I have no power of my self, which if I had,
as I am true gentleman it should be the first Bargain I would make, but thear
be a great sort here among us his equals, to whom he might have made this
challenge with out refusal, quod my lord Lieutenaunt to them both, he shows
his small wit to make challe^ge to my lords grace and he so mean, but if his
grace will give me leave I shall receive it, and trumpet bring me word thy
master will so do, and thou shall have of me a.C. crowns. Nay quod my lords
grace, the earl huntley is not mete in estate with you my lord. But heraulde,
say to the governor and him also that we have been a good season in this
cu^trey, Sober, is the proper term whearby the Scotts do signify small,
little, easy, or slender.
and ar here now but with a sobre cumpenie and they a great number, and if they
will mete us in field they shall be satisfied with fighting enough. And
heraulde, bring me word they will so do and by my honor I will give ye a
thousand crounes. Ye have a proud sort among you, but I trust to see their
pride abated shortly and of ye earl huntleys too, iwys his courage is known well
enough but he is a glorious young gentleman. This said, my lord Lieutenaunt
continued his requests yt he might receive this challenge, but my lords grace
would in no wise grant too it, these messagers had their aunswers, and thear
with leave to depart.

It is an ancient order in w^t, inuiolably observed, that ye herauldes and
trumpetours at any time upon necessary messages may freely pas too and fro
between the enemies, without hurt or stay of any, as priuileged with a certain
immunitee and freedo^ of passage: Likewise as during ye time of any such
message, hostilitee on both sides should utterly ceas. The Scotts
notwithsto^ding, what moved them I know not, but sumwhat bisyde the rules of
Stans puer ad mensam, shot, iii. or.iiii. shot at us in the midst of this
message dooi^g but as hap was wide enough. On ye morrow after they had their
gunnes taken from them every chone, and put into the hands of them yt could
use them more with good manner.

It becummeth not me I wot, apertly to tax their goouernour with ye note of
dissimulacio^: for how ever he be our enemy, yet a man of honorable esiat and
worthy (for ought I know) of the office he bears. Howbeit touching this
message sent by the heraulde, to say as I think I am fully persuaded he never
sent it either bicaus he thought it would be received by my lords grace, whoos
coorage of custume he knue to be such that would never brook so much dishonor
as to travail so far to return in vain: or else yt he me^t any sparing or
pitee of us who^ i^ his heart he had al ready devoured. But only to show a
color of kindness, by ye refusal whearof he might first in his sight the more
justly (as he should list) use extremitee against us, and then upon victory
triumph with more glory. For asfor of victory, he thought himself no les
sure, then he was sure he was willing to fight. That makes me in this case
now to be so quite out of doubt, wear the causes whearof I was after so
certainly informed. And they were, first his respect of our only strength
(as he thought) our horsemen, the which not so much upon pollecie to make his
men hardy against us, as for that he plainly so took it, he caused to be
published in his host, that it was holy but of very young men unskillful of
the wars and easy to be dealt with all. And the^ his regard to ye number and
place of our power and his, ye which indede wear far unequal. And hereto his
assured hope of.xii. galleys and.l. ships that alweys he looked for to be sent
out of France to cum in at our backs. He with his host made themselves
hereby so sure of the matter, that in the night of this day, they fell
aforehande to plaiynge at dyce for certain of our noble men and Captains of
fame. For asfor all the rest they thought quite to dispatch, and wear of
nothing so mooch afeard, as least we would have made awey out of the country
ear they and we had met, brutyng among them, that our ships the day before
removed from before Lies, but only to take in our footmen and caryage, to
the intent our horsemen then, with more have and its cumber might thence be able
to hie them homeward: for the fear hearof also, appointed they this night to
have given us a camisado in our ca^pe as we lay, whearof even then we hapt to
have an inkelyng, and thearfore late in ye night entrenched our cariages and
wagge^boorowe had good skout without and sure watch within, so that if they had
kept pointment (as what let them I could not learn) they should neither
have been vnwelcummed nor unlooked for. Ye, the great fear they had of our
hasty departure made them so hasty as ye next morrow (being ye day of the
battle) so early to cum toward us out of their camp, against whoom then
though they saw our horsemen redily to make, yet woold they not think, but
that it was for a pollecie to stay them while our footme^ and carriage might
fully be stowed a shipboorde. Meruailousmen, they woold not believe thear wear
any bees in ye hyue, til they came out and stang them by the noses. They fared
herein (if I may compare great things to small and earnestie to game) like as I
have wist a good fellow ear this, that has cum to a dycyng board very hastily
thrustyng, for fear least all shoold be done ear he could begin, and has soon
been shred of all that ever he brought: but after, when he has cu^ tro ye board
with his hands in his boosom and remembered thear was never a penny in his
purse, he could quikly find, yt ye fondnes was not in tariynge to long but in
cummyng to soon. We are warned if we wear wise of these wit les bru^tes by ye
commune proverb that says: It is better sit still, then rise up and fall. But
bylyke they know it not. In ye night of this dai, my lords grace appoi^ted yt
early in ye next morning part of our ordinance should be planted in the lane I
spoke of, under ye turf wall next to their camp: and sum also to be set upon
the hill nie to Undreske church before remembered: and these to thentent we should
with our shot cause them either hoolly to remove their ca^pe, or else much to
anoy the^ as they lay. It was not ye least part of our meaning also, hereby to win from them certain of their ordinance that lay nerest this church.

No great breach of order I trust, though here I rehearse ye thing, yt not til
after I hard touching the tru^petours message from the earl Huntley. Which
was (as I hard ye earl him self say) that he never sent ye same to my lords
grace, but George Douglas in his name: and this by him devised, not so
specially for any challe^ge sake, as for that the messager should mayntein by
mouth his talk to my lords grace, while his eye wear rolling to toote and
pry upon the state of our camp, and whyther we wear pakkynge or no (as indede
the fellow had a very good cou^tenau^ce to make a spy.) But my lords grace
of custume not vsyng so redyly to admit any kind of enemy to cum so nie, had
dispatched the^ both with their aunswers (as I said) ear ever they came within a
mile of our camp. As I hapt soon after to rehearse the excuse of the Earl and
this drift of Douglas, a gentleman Skot that was prisoner and present, swear by
the mis it was like enough for he kend George full well, and said he was a mete
man to pike whatels for oother men to fight for. To thentent I woolde show my
good will to make all thing as easy to the sense of the reder as my knowledge
coolde enstruct, and forasmuch as the assaylee spetially of our horsemen at the
first, their retire again, and our last onset, pursuit, and slaughter of the
enemies, can not all be showed well in one plot: I have devised and drawn,
according to my cunnyng, three several viewes of them, placed in their order
as follow in the battle. Whearin ar also oother tounes and places remembered,
such as that time I thought mete to mark, and as my memory could since call
to mind. No fine portrayture indede, nor yet any exquisite obseruau^ce of
geometrical dime^sio^, but yet neither so gross nor far from the truth I
trust, but that they may sarue for sumeas of understanding. But since the
skantnes of room will not suffer me plainly and at length to write thear every
places name, but thearfore am fayin instead of a name to set up a letter. The
Reder must be co^te^t to learn his A.B.C. again, such as I have thear devised
for the expoundyng of ye same viewes. They that list to learn, I trust in this
point will not much stik with me, considering also that Ignoratis Terminis,
Aristot.
ignoratur and ars. If they know not my A.B. C. they cannot well know my
matter: like as he that knows not Raymu^des Alphabete shall never cum to the
composicion of his quintesse^ce: In practica testi sui. ca. ii.
what he shall do though, sum practicioners do dout. And mi^ding to interrupt
ye process of the battle ye follows with as few mean matters as I may, I
have thought good, this hereto have before written.

This day morenyng sumwhat before.viii. of the clok, Saturday ye x. of
september being ye day of ye battle.
our camp dislodged, and our host marched straight toward the church of
Undreske, as well for intent to have camped nie ye same, as for placyng our
ordenaunce and oother consideracio^s before remembered. The Scotts, I know not
whither more for fear of our departing or hope of our spoylynge, wear out of
their camp cummyng toward us, passed the River, gathered in array, and wellny
at this church ear we wear half wey to it. They had quite disapointed our
purpose, and this at the first was so strange in our eyes, that we coold not
deuyse what to make of their meaning. And so much the stranger, as it was
quite bysyde our expectacion or dout, that they woold ever forsake their
strength to mete us in field. But we after understood, that they did not only
thus purpose to do, but also to have assailed us in our camp as we lay, if we
had not been sturryng the tymelyer. And to thentent at this time, that as well
none of their soldiers shoolde lurk behind them in their camps, as also
that none of their Captayns shoold be able to flee from their enterprise, they
had first caused all their tents to be let flat dou^ to the ground ear they
came out, and then all that had horses as well nobles as oother (few except) that
were not horsemen appointed, to leave their horses behind them, and march on
with their soldiers afoot. We came on spedily a both sides, neither as thento
any whit ware of others intent: but ye Scots indede with a rounder pace: Betwent
the ii. Hillockes betwixt us and the church, they moustred sumwhat brim in our
eyes, at whoom, as they stayed thear a while, our galley shot of and slew the
Master of Greym with a five and twenty nere by him, and thearwith so skarred
the.iiii. thousand Irish archers brought by the earl of Arguile, that whear (as
it was said) they should have been a wyng to the forewarde, they coold never
after be made to cum forward. Hereupon did their army hastily remove and
from thence declyning southwarde, took their direct wey toward Fauxsyde Bray:
Of this, sir Rafe Uane Lieutenaunt of all our horsemen (as I think of al me^ he
first did note it) quickly advertised my lord: whoos grace thearby did redily
conceive much of their meaning: which was to win of us ye hill, and thearby the
wind and ye sun if it had shyned, as it did not (for the weather was cloudy
and lowri^g) The gain of which iii. things whyther party, in fight of battle
can hap to obtein, has his force doubled against his enemy. In all this
enterprise, they used for hafte so little the help of horse, that they pluct
forth their ordinance by draught of men, which at this time began freely to
shoot of toward us: whearby we wear further warned they me^t more the^ a
skirmish. Here with began every man to be smitte^ with ye care of his office and
chardge, and thearupo^ accordyngly to apply him about it: Hearwith began still
ridyng too and fro, herewith a general rumor and buzzing amoo^g ye soldiers,
not unlike ye nois of ye sea being hard a far of: and herewith my lords grace
and the counsel on horsbak as they wear, fell straight in consultacion. The
sharpnes of whoos circu^spect wysedomes, as it quyckly spyed out the enemies
entntes, so did it amoong other things pro^ptly provide thearin to prevent
them, (as needful it was, for the time asked no leisure.) Their devise was
this, that my lord Gray with his band of Bulleners and with my lord
Protectours ba^de and my Lord Lieutenauntes, al to ye number of an xviii.C.
horsemen on ye east half: and sir Ra^e Uane with sir Thomas Darey captain of ye
pencioners and men of arms and my lord Fitzwaters with his ba^de of dimilau^ces,
all to ye number also of a.xvi.C. to be ready and eue^ with my lord Marshal on ye
west half, and thus all these toogether before to encounter ye enemies a fru^t,
whearby either to break their array, and yt wey weake^ their power by disorder,
or at ye lest to stop them of their gate, and force them to stay while our
forewarde might hoolly have ye hills side, and our battle and Rerewarde be
placed in grounds next that in order and best for advantage. And after this
then; that ye same our horsemen shoolde retire up the hills side to cum down in
order a fresh and infest them on both their sides, whiles our battayles should
occupy them in fight a frunt. The pollecie of this devise for the state of ye
case, as it was to al yt knue of it generally allowed to be ye best ye coold
be, even so also taken to be of no small danger for my lord Marshall, sir Rafe
Uane and oother ye assaylers, the which nevertheless I know not whither more
nobly and wisely devised of ye counsel, or more valiau^tly and willingly
executed of them for even thear with good coorage taking their leaves of ye
counsel, my lord Marshal requyri^g only, that if it went not well with him, my
lords grace would be good to his wife and children, he said he would mete
these Scotts: and so with their bands these Captayns took their wey toward
the enemy. By this, wear our forewarde and theyrs within a.ii. flightshot a
sunder: The Scotts hasted with so fast a pace, that it was thought of the most
part of us, they wear rather horsemen then footmen. Our men again wear led ye
more with speed. The Master of the ordinance to our great aduau^tage pluct up
the hill then certain pieces, and soon after planted.ii. or.iii canons of them,
well nie upon the top thear, whearby having so much the help of the hill, he
might over our men's heddes shoot nyest at the enemy. As my lords grace had
so circu^spectly taken order for the array and station of the army, and for
thexecucio^ of every ma^s office beside: Eue^ as it is metest that head to be
highest, that shoolde well look about for ye safegarde of all the other members
and parts of the body, so did his grace (first perfitly appointed in fair
harneys) accompanied with no mo (as I noted) then with Sir Thomas Chaloner
knight, one of the Clerks of the kings Majesty's privy cou^saill) take his
way toward the heyth of the hill to tarry by the ordinance, whearas he might
both best survey us al and succor with aid whear most he saw need, and also
by his presence be a defense to the thing yt stood weakest in place and most in
danger, the which thearby how much it did stead, anon shall I show. As his
grace was halt up the hill (my lord Leiutenau^t as it chanced by him) he was
ware the enemies were all at a sodeyn stay and stood still a good while. The
sight and cause hereof was marueyllous too us all, but understa^dable of none,
my Lords grace thought (as in deed the most lykely was) that the men had much
over shot themselves and woolde feign have been home again, and herewith said
to this effect: These men surely will cum no further, it wear mete to cast whear
we shoolde camp, for peyn of my life they will never fight. It had been
hardely, I wot not how bad, but I am sure no good devise for our pour to have
forsaken their ground to assail them whearthey stood, so far from the hill,
that we had wellnie wunne so hardly, and shoold keep to so much aduau^tage. And
in warfare allways, tymely provision is counted great pollecie. Hereto his
grace was sure that we wear able, better and longer to keep our hill, then
they their plain. Asfor fighting now, it might be more then likely to who
that considered it, their courage was quite quayled, and thearfore had no will
to cum any further, but woold have been glad to have been whence they came.
First, because at that time, beside the full mouster of our foot men, of whoome
they thought we had had none thear, but all to have been either shipped or a
shipping: then they saw plain that we wear sure to have the gain of ye hill,
and they the ground of disaduauntage, out of their hold and put fro their
hope. And hereto, for that their Herald gave my lords grace no warning ye
which by him (if they had me^t to fight it out) whoo woold not have presumed,
that for the estimacion of their honor, they woold little stuck to have sent,
and he again and it had been but for his thousand Crounes woold have been
right glad to have brought? These be the co^sideracions that both then and
since did persuade me, my lords grace had good cause too say they woold not
fight. Howbeit, hereunto if I wist and disclosed but half as much now, as (I
am sure) of circumspeccion his grace knue then, I do not dout, but I were able
sufficiently to prove, he might well be no les certain of yt he had said, then
any man might be of an undone deed: the which nevertheless how true it was, ye
proof of the matter soon after did declare, which was, that ye Scotts ran
quite their way, and would never tarry stroke with our footmen, whear the fight on
both sides should have been showed. Notwithstondyng by this time consyderyng
bylyke ye state they stood in, that as they had left their strength to soon,
so now to be to late to repent, upon a change of countenance they made
hastily toward us again, I know not (to sai truth) whither more stoutly of
courage or more strongely of order, me thought then I might noote both in
their march. But what after I learned, The manner of the Scottish order in
Battle.
specially touching their order, their armor and their manner of fight as well
in going to offend as in standing to defend, I have thought necessary here
to utter. Hakbutters have they few or none, and appoint their fight most
commonly alwais a foot. They cum to the field well furnished all with Iak and
skull, dagger, buckler, and swoordes all notably broad and thin, of exceeding
good temper and universally so made to slyce, that as I never saw none so
good, so think I it hard to deuyse ye better: hereto every man his pyke, and a
great kercher wrapped twyse or thrice about his neck, not for cold but for
cutti^g. In their array toward ye ioining with ye enemy, they cling and thrust so
nere in ye foreranke shoulder to shoulder together, with their pykes in both
hands straight before them and their followers in that order so hard at their
backs, laiynge their pykes over their fooregoers shoulders, that if they do
assail vndisseuered, no force can well withstond the^. Standing at defense,
they thrust shoulders likewise so nie together ye forera^kes well nie to kneling
stoop low before for their fellows behind, holding their pykes in both
hands, and thearwith in their left their bucklers, the one end of the pyke
against their right foot* the other against the enemy breast hye, their
followers crossing their pyke points with them forewarde, and thus each with
other so nigh as place and space will suffer, through the hole ward so thick,
that as easly shall a bare finger perce through the skyn of an angry hedgehog,
as any encounter the frunt of their pykes. My lord Marshall, notwithstondynge,
whoom no danger detracted from doing his enterprise, with the cumpanie and
order before appointed, came full in their faces from ye hills side toward
them. Herewith waxt it very hot on both sides, The countenance of war.
with piteful cries, horrible rore and terrible thunderinge of gunnes beside,
the day darkened abooue head with smoke of shot, ye sight and apparaunce of the
enemy even at hand before, the danger of death on every side else, the
bullettes, pellettes and arrows fliyng each whear so thik, and so vncerteinly
lightynge, that no whear was thear any suerty of safety, every man strooken
with a dreadful fear, not so much perchance of death as of hurt, which
things, though they wear but certain to sum, yet douted of all, assured
cruelty at the enemies hands without hope of mercy, death to fly and danger
to fight. The hole face of the field on both sides upon this point of ioining
both to the eye and to the ear, so heavy, so deadly, lamentable, furious,
outrageous, terribly confuse, and so quite against ye quiet nature of man: as
if to our nobilite the regard of their honor and fame, to the knights and
Capitaines, the estimacio^ of their wurship and honesty: and generally to us
all, the natural motion of bounden duty, our oun safety, hope of victory,
and the favor of God that we trusted we had for ye equite of our quarrel, had
not been a more ve^heme^t cause of courage, then ye danger of death was cause
of fear, ye very horror of ye thing had been able to make any man to forget
both prowes and pollecie. But my lord Marshal and the other, with present mind
and courage waerely and quikly continued their coorse toward the^. And my
lords grace then at his place by thordinau^ce aloft. The enemies were in a
fallowe field, whereof the furrows lay sydelyng toward our men, by the side of
the same furrows, next us and a stones cast from them, was thear a crosdich or
slough, which our me^ must needs pas to cum to the^, whearin many that could
not leap over stack fast, to no small danger of them selves and sum disorder
of their fellows. The enemies perceiving our men fast approach, disposed
themselves to abide the brunt, and in this order stood still to receive the^.
The earl of Anguish next us in their forewarde, as Capitayn of the same with
an.viii.M. and iiii. or.v. pieces of ordinance on his right side, and a.iiii.C
horsemen on his left: Behind him sumwhat Westwarde, the governor with a.x.M.
inlo^d men (as they call them) ye choysest men counted of their co^tre. And the
earl Huntley in the rerewarde, wellnie even with the battle on the left side,
with.viii M. also. The.iiii.m. Irish Archers as a wyng to them both, last indede
in order, and first (as they said) that ra^ a way. These battle and rereward
wear warded also with their ordinance according. Edward Shelley Lieutenaunt
under my lord Gray of his band of Bulleners, was the first on our side that
was over this slough, my lord Gray next, and so then after two or three ra^kes
of the former bands. But badly yet, coolde they make their race, by reason the
furrows lay trauers to their course. That, notwithstondynge, and though also
they wear nothing likely well to be able thus a frunt to cum within them to
hurt them, as well, because the Scottishmens pykes wear as long or le^ger then
their staves, as also for that their horses wear all naked without barbes,
whereof

The exposicio^ of ye letters of this table.
A. Signifies the place we camped in before the battle. B. Our rerewarde. C.
Our battle. D. Our forewarde. E. The square close. F. The foot of the hills
side. G. My lord Protectours grace. H. The master of the ordinance. I. Our
horsemen. K. The slough. L. The lane and the.ii. turf walls. M. Their forewarde
and horsemen by ye same. N. Their battle. O. Their rerewarde. PP. The.ii.
hillockes before the church. Q. Saint Mighels of vndreske. R. Muskelborowe. S.
Their horsemen at the end of fauxside Bray. TTTT. Their rewes of tents. V. The
turf wall toward the frith. VV. Our cariages. X. the marish. Y. Our galley. Z.
Edinborow castle.
The significacio^ of certain other notes.
^ Signifies a footman. ^ A horsman. ^ A hakbutter a foot. ^ A hakbutter on
horsback. ^ An archer. ^ A footman slain. ^ A horsman slain. ^ The fallowe
field, whearon their army stood.




though thear wear right many among us, yet not one put on, forasmuch as at our
cumming forth in the morni^g, we looked for nothing les then for battle that
day, yet did my lord and Shelley with ye residue, so valiauntly and strongly
give the charge upon them, that whither it wear by their prowes or power, the
left side of the enemies that his lordship did set upon (though their order
remained unbroken) was yet compelled to swey a good wey bak and give ground
largely, and all the residue of them beside, to stand much amassed. Before
this, as our men wear well nie at them, they stood very brave and bragging
shaking their pyke points, criyng, cum here loundes, cum here tykes, cum here
heretykes, and such like (as hardely they are fair mouthed men) Though they
meant but small humanite* yet showed they hereby much ciuilite, both of fair
play to warn ear they struck, and of formal order to chyde ear they fought.

Our Captains that wear behind, perceyuinge at eye that both by the vnevinnes
of the ground, by the sturdy order of the enemy, and for that their fellows
wear so nie and straight before them, they were not able to any aduau^tage to
maintain this onset, did thearfore, according to the devise in yt point
appointed, turn themselves and made a soft retire up toward the hill again.
Howbeit, too

This secunde Table shows the placinge of our footmen, the slaughter of
Edward Shelley and the oother. the Retire of our band of horsemen up to the
hill, and the breach of array of the straglers from the^. But touching the
exposicion of the notes and letters, I refer the reder to the Table before.





confess the truth, sum of the number that knue not the prepe^sed pollecie of
the counsel in this case: made of a sober advised retire, an hasty
temerarious flight. Sound to any man's ear as it may, I shall never admit for any
affection toward country or kyn, to be so partial, as will wittingly, either
bolster the falshod or bery the truth, for honor in mine opinion ye way gotten
wear unworthily wun and a very vile gain: howbeit hereby I cannot count any
lost, whear but a few leude soldiers ran rashely out of array without
standard or Captayn upon no cause of need, but of a mere vndiscretion and
madness: A madness in deed, for first the scotts were not able to pursue
because they wear footmen, and the^ if they coold, what hope by flight, so far
from home in their enemies land, whear no place of refuge?

My lord Marshal, Edward Shelley, little Presto^, Brampton and Gerningham,
Bulleners, Ratclyf, the lord Fitzwaters brother, Sir Ihon Cleres son and heyr,
Digges of ke^t, Ellerker a pe^cioner Segraue. Of my lord Protectours ba^d my
lord Edward, his graces son, Captain of ye same ba^de, Sta^ley, Woodhous,
Coonisby, Horgill, Morris Dennys, Arthur and Atkinson, with other in the
forera^ke, not being able in this earnst assault, both to tend to their fight
before, and to ye retire behind: ye Scotts again, well considering hereby how
weak they remained, caught courage a fresh, ra^ sharply forward upon them, and
without any mercy slew every man of our men that abode furthest in prece:
a.vi. mo (of Bulleners and other) then I have here named, in all to the number
of a xxvi. and most part gentlemen. My lord Gray, yet and my lord Edward (as
sum grace was) returned again, but neither all in safety nor without evident
marks they had been thear: for the one with a pyke through the mouth was raced
a long from the tip of the tunge, and thrust that way very daungerously more
then two inches within the neck, and my lord Edward had his horse under him
with swoordes wounded sore, and I think to death. Like as also a little before
this onset, Sir Thomas Darcy upon his approach to the enemies, was strooken
glauncing wise on the right side, with a bullet of one of their field pieces,
and thearby his body broosed with the boowynge in of his harneys, his sword
hiltes broken, and the forefynger of his right hand beaten flat. Even so upon
the partynge of this fray, was Sir Arthur Darcy slasht at with swoordes, and so
hurt upon the weddyng finger of his right hand also, as it was counted for
the first part of medecin, too have it quite cut away.

About the same time, certain of the Scotts ran out hastily to ye kings
Majesty's standerde of the horsemen, (the which sir Androwe Flammak bare) and
laiyng fast hold upon the staf thearof, cried a king a king. That if both his
strength, his heart and his horse had not ben good, and hereto, sumwhat aided at
this pinch by sir Raulph Coppinger a pencioner: both he had been slain, and
the standerd lost, which the Scotts nevertheless hilde so fast, yt they brake
and bare away ye nether end of the staff to the burrel, and intended so much
to the gain of the sta^derd, that sir Androw (as hap was) skaped home all
safe, and else without hurt. At this bysines also, was my lord Fitzwaters
Captain of a number of dimilaunces, vnhorste, but soon mounted again, skaped
yet in great danger, and his horse al he we^: Hereat further wear Cauarley the
standard bearer of the men of arms, and Clement Paston a pe^cioner, thrust
each of them into the leg with pykes: and Don Philip a Spaniard, in ye knee:
diverse other mayned and hurt and many horses sore wounded beside.

By this time had our forewarde, accordingly gotten the full vau^tage of the
hills side, and in respect of their march, stood sydeling toward the enemy:
Who nevertheless wear not able in all parts to stand full square in array, by
reason that at the West end of them upon their right hand, and toward the
enemy, thear was a square plot enclosed with turfe (as their manner of fencynge
in thoose parts is) one corner whearof, did let the square of the same arraye.
Our battle in good order next them, but so as in continaunce of array, the
former part thearof stood upon the hills side, the tail upon the plain. And
the rerewarde hoolly upon the plain. So that by the placing and countenance
of our army in this wise, we showed ourselves in a manner to cumpas them in,
that they shoolde no way skape us: the which, by our pour and number we wear
as well able to do, as a spynners web to catch a swarm of bees. Howebeit
for heart and courage we meant too mete with them, had they been as many mo.
These indiscreet gadlinges, that so fondly brake array from the horsemen in the
retire (as I said) ran so hastily thrughe the orders and ranks of our
forewarde as it stood, that it did both there disorder many, feared many, and
was great encouraging to the enemy. My lord Lieutenau^t, who had the gyding
of our forewarde right valiauntly had conducted the same to their sto^dynge,
and thear did very nobly encourage and comfort the^. Bidding them pluck up
their hearts, and show themselves me^, for thear was no cause of fear: asfor
victory, it was in their oun hands if they did abide by it, and he himself
even thear woold live and dye among them. And surely, as his wurthines always
right well deserves, so was his honor at that time, accordingly furnished with
wurthy Captains. First sir Ihon Lutterel, who had the leading of a.iii.C. of
his lordships me^ that wear the foremost of this forewarde, all with harneys and
weapon, and in all points else so well trimmed for war, that like as at that
time I could well note my lords great cost and honor, for that their choice
and perfect appointment and furniture: so did I then also consider sir Ihon
Luttrels proowes and wisdom for their valiant conductio^ and exact
obseruaunce of order, whom (knowing as I know) for his witmanhod, good
qualitees and aptnes to all gentle feats beside, I have good cause to count
both a good Captai^ a warfare in feld, and a wurthy courtyar in peace at home.
I mean such a one as Co^te Balthazar the Italian in his book of Courtyar does
frame.
Then, in the same forward, Sir Morris De^nis, another Captain, who wisely
first exhortyng his men to play the me^, showing thearby the assurance of
victory: and then to the intent they shoolde be sure, he woold never shri^ke
from them, he did with no les wurship then valiaunce, in the hottest of this
bysines alight among them, and put his horse from him. But if I shoold (as
cause I confess thear wear enough) make here any stay in his commendacion
thearfore, or of the forward courage of Sir George Hawarde, whoo bear the
Kings Majesty's standarde in the battle: or of the circumspect diligence of
sir William Pykering, and Sir Rychard Wingfeld, Sargeau^tes of the band to the
foreward or of the pro^pt forwardnes of Sir Charles Bra^do^, another Captain
there, or of ye peinful industry of sir James Wilford, Provost Marshal, who
placed himself with the foremost of this forewarde, or of the good order in march
of sir Hugh Willoughby, and William De^nis esquyer captai^s both, or of ye
present heart of Ihon Chaloner a Captain also in ye battle, or of honest
respect of Edward Cha^berlayn, ge^tlema^ harbynger of ye army, who willingly
as then came in order with the same foreward. Or of right many other in both
these battles (for I was not nie ye rereward) whose behauours and wurthynes
wear at ye time notable in mine eye, (although I neither knue then al of the^ I
saw, nor coold not since remember of the^ I knue) I might well be in dout, it
should be to much an intricacio^ to the matter to great a tediousnes to ye
reder. And therefore to say on: The Scotts wear su^what disordred with their
cu^minge out about ye slaughter of our men: ye which they did so earnestly then
ente^d, they took not one to mercy: but more they wear amassed at this
adue^torous and hardy onset. My lords grace, having before this for the causes
aforesaid, placed himself on this Fauxsyde Bray: and thearby quikly,
perceiving the great disorder of these straggling horsemen: hemd them in from
further straiyng, whom sir Rafe Uane soon after with great dexterite brought in
good order and array again. And thearwith the rest of our strengths by ye
pollecie of my lords grace, and diligence of every Captain and officer bysyde,
wear so oportunely and aptly applied in their feat, that whear this repulse of
the enemy, and retire of us was douted of many to turn to the danger of our
los: ye same was wrought and advanced (according as it was devised) to our
certeinte of gayn and victory. For first at this sloughe whear most of our
horsemen had stond, sir Peter Mewtus Captain of all ye hakbutters a foot, did
very valiauntly conduct and place a good number of his men, in a manner hard at
the faces of the enemies. Whereunto Sir Peter Gamboa a Spanyard, Captain of
a.ii.C. hakbutters on horsback did redily bring his me^ also, whoo with ye hot
co^tinuau^ce of their shot on both parts did so stoutly stay the enemies, that
they could not well cum forther forward: then our archers that marched in array
on the right hand of our footmen, and next to the ennemie prict them sharply
with arrows as they stood. Thearwith the

This third Table shows the cummyng into array of our horsemen upon the hill
again, the placinge of the Hakbutters against the enemy, the shotyng of our
archers, and then the cummyng down of our horsemen after about the chase and
slaughter of the enemy.

M. Signify the pykes and weepons let N. fall by the Scotts in the place they
O. stood in. As for the oother characters and notes, I referr the reder again
to the first Table.





Master of the ordinance to their great anoyaunce did gall them with hailshot
and other out of the great ordinance directly from the hill top, and certain
other gunners with their pieces, a flank from our Rerewarde, most of our
artillery and missiue engines, then holy thus at ones with great puissance and
veheme^cie occupied about the^: Herewith, the full sight of our footmen all
shadowed from them before by our horsemen and dust raised, whoom then they
wear ware in such order to be so nere upon them. And to this the perfet array
of our horsemen again cummi^g cooragiously to set on them afresh. Miserable me^,
perceyuyng themselves then al to late, how much to much, they wear
misenformed, began sodeinly to shrink. Their governor that brought the^
first to ye bargain, like a doughty Capitain, took hastily his horse, that he
might run foremost away. Indede it stood sumwhat with reason that he should
make first homewarde that first made outward, but (as sum of them said)
skant with honor and with shame enough. The earl of Anguish, and other chief
Capitains, did quickly follow as their governor led: And with the formoste
their Irishmen. Thearwith then turned all the hole rout, kest down their
weapons, ran out of their wards, of with their iackes, and with all that ever
they might, betook them to the race yt their governor began. Our men had
found them at the first (as what could escape so many thousand eyes?) and
sharply and quikly with an universal outcrie, they fly they fly, pursued
after in chase amam: and thearto so eagerly, and with such fiersnes, that they
ouertooke many, and spared indede but few, (as it might then hardly have been
both folly and parell to have showed any pitee) But when they wear ones turned,
it was a wonder to see how soo^ and in how sundry sorts they wear skattered:
The place they stood on, like a wood of staves strewed on the ground as rushes
in a chamber, impassable (they lay so thik) for either horse or man: Here at
the first had they let fall al their pykes. After that every whear skatred
swords, buklers, daggers, iackes, and all thing else that either was of any
weight or might be any let too their course, which course among the^, three
weys specially they made, sum along the sands by the Fryth toward Lies, su^
straight toward Edinborow, whearof part through the park thear (in the
walls whearof, though they be round about of flynte stone, yet wear thear
many holes al ready made) and part of them by the hye way that leads alonge
by holly rood Abbey. And the residue, and (as we noted then) the most of them
toward Dakyth, which wey by means of the marish, our horsemen wear woorst able
to follow. Sundry shyftes sum shrewd su^, sorry, made they in their running,
diverse of the^ in their courses, as they wear ware they wear pursued but of
one, would suddenly start back and lashe at ye legs of the horse or foyne him
in ye belly, and sumtyme did they reach at the rider also: whereby Clement
Pasto^ in the arm and diverse other otherwise in this chase wear hurt. Sum
other lay flat in a furrowe as though they wear dead, thereby past by of our me^
untouched, as I hard say the Earl of Anguishe confessed he couched till his
horse hapt to be brought him. Oother sum, to stay in the River cowringe down his
body, his head under the rote of a Willowe tree with skant his nose abooue water
for breath: A shift, but no succor it was too many that had their skulles on,
at the stroke of the follower too shrink with their heddes into their shulders
like a tortuis into his shell: Oothers again for their more lightness, cast away
shoos and doblettes and ran in their shirtes: And sum also seen in in this race
all breathles to fall flat down, and have run themselves to death.

Before this, at the time of our onset came thear Eastward a.v.C. of their
horsemen up a long this Fauxsyde Bray straight upon our ordinance and carriage.
My lords grace (as I said) most specially for the dout of the same placynge
himself thearby, caused a piece or two to be turned toward them with a few
shottes whearof, they wear soon turned also and fled to Dakyth. But had they
kept on, they wear provided for accordingly, for one parson Keble, a chaplain
of his graces, and two or three oother, by and by discharged four or five of
the carts of municion, and thearwith bestowed pykes, bills, bows, and
arrows, to as many as came, so that of carters and other thear wear soon
weaponed thear about a thousand, whoom parson Keble and the oother did very
handsomely dispose in array, and made a pretty mouster. To return now, Soon
after this notable strewyng of their footmens weapons, began a pitefull sight
of the dead corpses, liyng disparsed abroad, sum their legs of, sum but
hought, and left liynge half dead, sum thrust quite thrughe ye body, oothers
the arms cut of, diverse their necks half a sunder, many their heddes cloven,
of sundry the brains pasht out, sum others again their heddes quite of, with
other.M. kinds of kylli^g. After yt and further in chase, al for ye most part
killed either in the head or in ye nek for our horsemen coolde not well reach
the^ lower with their swoordes. And thus with blod and slaughter of ye enemy, this
chase was continued.v. miles in length westward, from the place of their
standing, which was in the fallow feldes of Undreske, until Edinborowe
park, and well nigh to the gates of the town it self, and unto Lies. And in
breadth nie.iiii. mile, from the Fryth sands up toward Daketh Southwarde. In
all, which space the dead bodies lay as thik as a man may note cattle grasing
in a full replenished pasture. The River ran al red with blood, so that in the
same chase wear counted as well by sum of our men, that sumwhat diligently did
mark it, as by sum of them taken prisoners that very much did lament it, to
have been slain abooue.xiiii. thousand. In all this cumpas of ground, what
with weapons, arms, hands, legs, heddes, blood, and dead bodies, their
flight might have easly been tracted to every of their.iii. refuges. And for
the smallnes of our number, and shortness of the time (which was skant.v.
hours, from one till wellnie vi.) the mortalite was so great, as it was
thought, the like before time not to have been seen. Indede it was the better
maynteyned with their oun swoordes that lay each whear skattred by the way,
whearof our men as they had broke one, still took up another, thear was store
enough, and they laid it on freely, that right many among them, at this
bysynes brake three or four ear they returned homeward to ye army. I may well
perchance confess that herein we used sum sharpnes (although not as much as we
might) and little courtesy, and yet I can safely avowe, all done by us, as
rather by sundry respects driven and compeld, then either of cruelty or of
delight in slaughter. And like (sumwaye) to the diligent Master that sharply
sumtime (when warning will not serve) does beat his scholar, not hardely for
hate of the child, or his oune delyghte in beatynge, but for love he woolde
have him amend his fautes or negligence, and beats him ones surely, because
he woolde need to beat him no more. One cause of the correction we used, I may
well count to be their tyrannous vow they made (which we certainly hard or)
that whenever they fought and ouercam, they woolde liea so many, and spare so
few: a sure proof whereof they plainly had showed at our onset before, whear
they kylde all and saved not a man.

Another respect was, to revenge their great and cruel tyranny showed at
Panyar hough (as I have before said) whear they slew the Lord Euers (whom
otherwise they might have taken prisoner and saved) and cruelly kylde as many
else of our men as came into their hands. We wear forced yet hereto by a
further and very earnest regard, which was the dout of assemble of their
army again, whearof a cantell (for the number) had been able to compare with
our hole host, when it was at the greatest: and so perchance we should have
been driven with dooble labor to beat the^ again, and make two works of one:
whearas we well remembered, that a thing ones well done is twyse done. To
these, anoother and not the meanest matter was, The name of lord* ye Scotts
take in like signification of speech as we do. But a larde with them (I take
it) is as a squire with us, A lound is a name of reproach as a villain or such
like.
their armor among them so little differing, and their apparail so base and
beggarly, whearin the Lurdein was in a manner all one with the Lord, and the
Lounde with the Larde: all clad a like in iackes coouerd with white with white
leather, dooblettes of ye same or of fustian, and most commonly al white hosen.
Not one with either cheine, broochryng, or garment of silk that I coold see,
onles cheynes of latten drawn four or five times along ye thighs of their
hosen and dooblet sleues for cuttyng: and of ye sort I saw many. This vileness
of port, was the cause that so many of their great men and gentlemen wear kyld
and so few saved. The outward sheaw, the semblaunce and sign, whearby a
staru^ger might discern a villain from a gentleman was not amoong them to be
seen: As for words and goodly proffer of great raundsums, wear as common and
ryfe in the mouths of the tone as in the toother. And thearfore hereby it came
to pas that after, at the examinacion and countyng of the prisoners, we sound
taken above twenty of their villayns to one of their gentlemen: whoo^ no man
need to dout, we had rather have spared then the villayns, if we coold have
known any difference between the^ in taking: And yet notwithstonding all these
our just causes and quarrels to kill them, we showed more grace and took mo to
mercy, then the case on our side for the causes aforesaid did well deserve or
require: for bysyde the Earl Huntley, who in good harneys appointed lykest a
gentleman of any of them that I coold hereof or see, (but coold not then eskape
bicaus he lact his horse and thearfore hapt to be taken by Sir Rafe Uane) and
bysyde the Lord of Yester, Hobby Hambleton Captayn of Dunbar. The Master of
Sa^poole. The Larde of Wimmes taken by John Bren. A broother of ye earl of
Cassils. And bysyde one Moutrell taken by Cornelius Co^troller of the
ordinance in this army. And bisyde one of ye Camals an Irish gentleman taken
by Edward Chamberlain, and bysyde many oother Skottish ge^tleme^ mo, A kynsma^
bylyke of ye earl or Arguiles whoos proper sur name is Lamall, like as the earl
of Anguishes is Douglas, and ye earl Huntleys Gordon. A Scottish heraulde was
also taken, but here not placed, bicaus my lords grace caused hi^ forth with
free y to be releaced home without rau^dso^ or los
whoos names and takers I well remember not. The prisoners acco^ted by ye
Marshals book wear numbered to abooue xv. Touching ye slaughter, sure we kyld
nothing so many, as (if we had minded cruelty so much) for the time and
oportunitee right well we might: for my lords grace of his woonted mercy mooch
moved with ye pitee of this sight: and rather glad of victory then desirous of
cruelty, soon after (by ges) v. of the clok, stayed his standerd of his
horsemen at the furthest part of their camp westward, and caused the trumpettes
to blow a retreat. Whearat also sir Rafe sadleyr treasurer (whoos great
diligence at yt time, and ready forwardenes in ye chefest of ye fray before, did
woorthely merit no small commendacion) caused all the footmen to stay, and then
with much travail and great peyn made them to be brought in su^ order again: It
was a thing yet not easly to be done, by reason they all as then sumwhat bisyly
applied their market, the spoil of this Scottish camp. Whearin wear found
good provision of white bread, ale, otencakes, otemeal, mutton, butter in
pottes, chese, and in diverse tents good wine also: good store to say truth of
good vitaile for the manner of their cuntree. And in sum tents amoong them, as
I hard say wear also found of silver plate a dish or ii: ii. or.iii.
goblettes, and.iii. or.iiii. chalices, the which the fynders, (I know not with
what reverence, but with sum devotion hardely) pluct out of the cold clouts and
thrust into their warm booso^s. Here now to say sumwhat of the manner of their
camp: As they had no pauilions or round houses of any commendable cumpas, so
wear thear few oother tents with posts as ye used manner of making is: And of
these few also, none of abooue.xx. foot length, but most, far under: for ye
most part all very sumptuously beset (after their facio^) for the love of
France with fleur de lices, sum of blue buckeram sum of black and sum of sum
oother colors. These white ridges (as I called them) that as we stood on
Fauxsyde Bray did make so great mouster toward us, which I did take then to be
a number of tents: when we came, we found it a lynnen draperie, of the coorser
cameryk in deed, for it was all of canuas sheets: and wear the tenticles or
rather cabayns and couches of their soldiers, the which (much after the
common byldyng of their cuntree beside) had they framed of iiii. sticks, about
an elle long a piece, whearof.ii. fastened toogyther at one end a loft, and
ye.ii. ends beneath stict in ye ground an elle a sunder, standing in facion
like the bow of a soowes yoke: Over.ii. such bows (one as it wear at their
head, thoother at their feet) they stretched a shete down on both sides, whearby
their cabain becam roofed like a ridge: But skant shit at both ends and not
very close beneath on the sides, onles their stiks wear the shorter, or their
wives ye more liberal to lend them larger naperie. Howbeit wtin they had lyned
them and stuffed them so thick with straw, yt the weather as it was not very
cold, when they wear ones couched, they wear as warm as they had been wrapped in
horsdung.

This the plot of their camp was called Edminsto^ edge, nie Gilberton a place
of the Lord of Brimstons, half a mile beyond Muskelboorowe and a iiii. mile
on this side Edenborowe, and occupied in largenes with diverse tents and
tenticles, that stood in sundry parts out of square about a miles cumpas:
whearin as our me^ upon ye sound of retreat at their retire wear sumwhat
assembled we all with a loud and entyer outcrie and hallowyng, in sign of
gladness and victory, made an universal noys and shout: whearof the shrilnes
(as after we hard) was hard until Edinboorowe.

It was a wonder to see, but that (as they say) many hands make light woork,
how soon the dead bodies wear stryped out of their garments stark naked, even
from as far as the chase went, until the place of our onset: whearby the
parsonages of the enemies, might by ye wey easly be viewed and considered: yt
which for their tallnes of stature, cleanes of skyn, bigness of bone, with due
proportion in all parts, I for my part advisedly noted to be such, as but that
I well saw that it was so, I woolde not have believed sure so many of that sort
to have been in all their cu^tree: Amoong them lay thear many prestes and
kirkmen as they call them: of whoom it was bruted amoong us that thear was a
hole band of a.iii. or.iiii. M. but we wear after enfourmed, it was not
altogyther so. At the place of the chardge at the first by us given, thear
found we our horses slain, all gored and heawe^, and our men so rufully gasht
and mangled in the head spetially as not one by the face coold be known who he
was. Little Preston was found thear with both his hands cut of by the wreasts,
and known to be he, for that it was known he had of each arm a bracelet of
gold, for ye which they so chopped him. Edward Shelley alas that worthy
gentleman and valiant Captain all piteefully disfigured and mangled amoong
them lay: and but by his bearde nothing discernable Of whoom (bysyde the
propernes of parson) for his wit, his good qualitees, his actiuitee in feats
of war, and his perfet honesty (for the which with all men of all estates he
was alwey so much esteemed and so welbelooued) and hereto for that he was so
nere my friend: I had cause enough here without parsimonie to prays his life,
and lament his death, wear it not that the same shoolde be to great a digression
and to much interrupcion of the matter: As their fell sodeinly in Roo^ a great
dungeo^ and swallowig of ground Curtius a Roman gentleman, for yt pleasyng of
ye gods and yt ye same might ceas, mounted on his horse and lept down into
the same, which straight then after closed by again. Vale. Max. li. vi. ca.
vi. Decius Mus and Publius Decius his sun, Consule of Room, as they shoold
fight, the Father against ye I atines, and the sun after yt against the
Sa^nites, and wear warned by dream that those armies shoolde have the victory,
whoos Captains wear first slain in field, they both ran willingly in to ye
hosts of their enemies, they wear slain, and their armies wan the field
Plutarch. de Decio pr^e. paral. xxxvii. Et Liui. de. P. Decio li.x. dec. i.
But touching the manner of his death, I think his merit to mooch to be let pas
in silence: who not inferior in fortitude of mind either unto the Roman
Curtius or the.ii. Decii, he being in this business foremost of all our men
against the enemies: Consyderyng with himself, that as his hardy charge upon
them, was sure to be their terror, and very lykely to turn to the breach of
their order: and herewith also yt the same should be great coorage to his
followers that came to give the charge with him: And ponderynge again that his
turnynge bak at this point, should cause the contrary and be great danger of
our confusion: was content in his kings and contrees quarrel, in hope the
rather to leave victory unto his cuntremen, thus honorably to take death to
him self. Whoom, let no man think, no foolysh hardines or werynes of life
drove unto so hard an enterprise: whoos sober valiaunce of coorage had often
ootherwyse in the late wars with France been sufficiently before approved,
and whoos state of living my self I knue to be such, as lact nothing ye might
pertein to perfect worldly wealth. I trust it shall not be taken that I mean
hearby to derogate fame from any of the rest that dyed thear (GOD have their
solles) who I wot bought the bargain as dear as he, but only to do that in me
may lie to make his name famous, Whoo amoong these (in my opinion) toward his
prince and cuntree did best deserve.

Nigh this place of onset, whear the Scotts at their ru^nynge awey had let fall
their weapons (as I said) Thear found we, bysyde their common manner of armor,
certain nice instruments for war (as we thought.) And they wear, nue boordes
ends cut of, being about a foot in breadth and half a yard in leangth: having
on the insyde, handels made very cunnyngly of.ii. cords ends: These a Gods
name wear their targettes again the shot of our small artillery, for they wear
not able to hold out a canon. And with these, found we great rattels swellyng
bygger then the belly of a pottell pot, coouered with old parchement or dooble
papers, small stones put in them to make noys, and set upon the end of a staff
of more then two else long: and this was their fine deuyse to fray our horses
when our horsemen should cum at them: Howbeeit bycaus the ryders wear no
babyes, nor their horses no colts: they coold, neither duddle the tone nor fray
the toother, so that this pollecye was as witles as their power forceles.

Amoong these weapons, and bysyde diverse oother banners standerds and penons, a
banner of white sarcenet was found under which it was said these kirkmen came,
whearupon was painted a wooman with her hear about her shoulders, knelynge
before a crucifix, and on her right hand a church, after that written a long
upon the banner in great Roman letters, Afflictae sponsae ne obliuiscaris,
which words declared that they woold have this wooman to signify, the
church Christ's spouse, and thus in humble wise making her peticion unto
Christ her husbond that he woold not now forget her, his spouse being skourged
and persecuted, meaning at this time by us. It was said it was the Abbot of
Donforlings Banner, but whyther yt wear his or the Bishop of Dunkels ye
goouernours broothers (who I understood wear both in the field.) And what the
number of these kirkmen was, I coold not certainly learn: but sure it was sum
devout papists devise, that not only bylyke woold not endeavor to do ought
for atonement and peacemakyng between us, but al contrariwise brought forth
his standard stoutly to fight in feld himself against us: pretexyng this his
great ungodliness thus bent toward ye maintnaunce of a noughtie quarrel, with
coolour of religion to cum in aid of Christ's church. Which church to say
truth cu^myng thus to battle full appointed with weapon and guarded with such
a sort of deaco^s to fight: how ever in payntyng he had set her out, a man
might well think that in condition he had rather framed her after a cursed
queen that woolde piuk her husband by the pate except she had her will, then
like a meke spouse that went about humbly by submission and prayer to desire
her husbands help for redres of things amiss. Howbeit for saving upright the
suftiltie of this godly ma^s devise, it is best we take him he meant the most
lykely: that is, the church malignaunt and congregation of the wicked, whear
unto that Antichrist the Bishop of Room is husbond whom Christ said, as a
thief cums never but to steal slay and destroy. Io. ca. ^.
And whoos good sun this holly Prelate in his thus cummyng to the field with
his Afflictae now showed him self to be.

Thear was upon this Fauxsyde Bray (as I have before said) a little Castle or
pile which was very bysy all the time of the battle, as any of our men came
nigh it, to shoot at them with such artillery as they had (which, was none
oother then of handgunnes and hakbutes, and of them not a doosein neither)
little hurt did they, but as they saw their fellows in the feld thus driven
and beaten awey before their faces, they pluct in their pieces, like a dog his
tail: and couched them selfs within all muet: but by and by ye house was set
on fire, and they for their good will brent and smoothered within.

Thus through the favor of gods bounty, by the valiaunce and pollecie of my
lords Protectours grace by the foreward endeavor of all the nobles and
counsel thear beside, and by ye willing diligence of every captain, officer,
and true subject else, we most valiauntly and honorably wan the victory over
our enemies. Of whoo^.xiiii.M wear slai^ thus in field, of which number (as we
wear certainly enfourmed by sundry and the best of the prisoners then taken)
bysyde the earl of Loghen war, ye lord Flemmyng, the master of Greym, the
master of Arskyn ye master of Ogleby, the master of Auendale, the master of
Rouen and many oother of noble birth among them: thear wear of Lardes, Lardes
su^nes and oother gentlemen slain abooue.xxvi.C. and v.C. wear taken prisoners
whearof many gentlemen also, among whom wear thear of name (as I have before
named) ye earl Huntley lord Chauncelour of the Ream thear. The lord of pester,
Hobby Hambleton captayn of Dunbar. The Master of Sampoole. The Larde of Wymmes,
and a broother of ye earl of Cassyls. Too thousand by luckyng and liyng as
though they wear dead skaped awey in ye night all maimed and hurt. Herewith wan
we of their weapons and armor more then we woolde vouchesafe to give carriage
for, and yet wear thear conveyed thence by ship into these parties of iakkes
spetially and swords abooue.xxx.M. This night with great gladness and thanks
gyuyng to God (as good cause we had) about.vii. of the clok we pitched our camp
at Edgebuklyng Bray bysyde Pynkersclough, and a mile beyond the place we camped
at before.

About an hour after that, in sum toke^ (as I took it) of gods assent and
applause showed to us touching this victory, the heavens relented and poured
down a great shour of rain that lasted well nie an hour, not unlike and
according as after our late sovereign lords conquest of Bullein ple^tifull
shoures did also then ensue.

And as we wear then a setli^g and ye tents a setting up, amoo^g all things
else commendable in our hole journey, one thing seemed to me an intolerable
disorder and abuse, that whear as all weys both in all tounes of war and in all
ca^pes of armies, quietness and stilnes without nois is principally in the night
after the watch set, observed. (I need not reason why) our Northern prikkers ye
borderers, notwithstanding with great enormite (as thought me) and not unlike (to
be plain) unto a masterles hound howlyng in a hie wey when he has lost him he
waited on: sum hoopynge, sum whistelyng and most with crying, a Berwyke a
Berwyke a Fenwyke a Fenwyke, a Bulmer a Bulmer or so ootherwise as their
capteins names wear, never linde these troublous and dangerous noyses all ye
night long. They said they did it to find out their captain and fellows, but
if the soldiers of our oother countries and sheres had used ye same manner in
that case, we shoold have often times had the state of our camp more like the
outrage of a dissolute huntyng then ye quiet of a well ordered army. If is a
feat of war in mine opinion that might right well be left: I could rehearse
causes (but yt I take it, they are better unspoken then vttred, onles the faut
wear sure to be amended) that might show, they move alweis more perel to our
army but in their one nights so doing, then they show good service (as sum
sey) in a hoole vyage. And since it is my part to be plain in my process I will
be ye bolder to show what further I noted and hard. Anoother manner have they
amoong them of wearyng handkerchers rolled about their arms and letters
broudred apo^ their cappes, they said themselves the use thearof was yt each of
them might know his fellow and thearby ye sooner assemble, or in need to aid
one another and such like respects: Howbeit thear wear of tharmy amoo^g us
(sum suspicious me^ perchance) ye thought they used them for collusion, and
rather bycaus they might be known to thenemie, as ye enemies ar known to them
(for they have their marks too) and so in conflict either each to spare oother,
or ge^tly each to take oother. In deed me^ have been moved yt rather to think
so, bycaus sum of their crosses wear so narrow and so singly set on that a
puff of wind might have blowe^ the^ from their breasts and yt they wear found
right often talki^g with ye Skottish prikkers wtin les then their gads length a
sunder, and when they perceived they had been spied, they have begun one to run
at another, but so apparauntly perlassent, as ye lookers on resembled, their
chasyng like ye running at base, in an vplondish town, whear the match is made
for a quart of good ale: or like ye play in Robin Cooks skole, whear bicaus the
punics may learn they strike few strokes but by assent and appointeme^t. I
hard sum men say it did mooch augment their suspicio^ yt wey, bicaus at ye
battle they saw these prikkers so badly demean them, more inte^ding ye taki^g
of prisoners then ye suerty of victory, for while oother men fought, they fell
to their prey, that as thear wear but few of them but brought home his
prisoner, so wear thear many yt had.vi. or.vii. Many men yet, I must co^fes are not disposed all weys, to say all of the best, but more ready happily to find
oothers men's fautes then to amend their oun. Howbeit I think sure as for our
prikkers, if their fautes had been fewer their infamye had been les. yet say I
not this so much to disprais them, as for mean of ame^dement. Their Captains
and gentlemen again, ar men for ye most part al of right honest service and
approved prowes, and such sure as for their well doing, woold soon becum
famous if their soldiers wear as toward as themselves be forward.

As things fell after in communicacion, one question among oother arose, who
kyld the first man this day in field, the glory whearof one Ieronimo an
Italian woold fayn have had, howbeit it was after well tried, yt it was one
Cuthbert Musgraue a gentleman of my lord of War wykes, who right hardely kyld a
Gu^ner at his piece in ye Scotts foreward, ear ever they begone any whit to
turn: the fact for the forwardnes well deseruyng remembrance I thought it not
mete to be let slip in silence.

This night the Skottish goouernor when he thought ones him self in sum
safety, with all speed caused the earl Bothwel to be let out of prison: which
whither he did for the doubt he had that we woold have releaced him wild he
nild he, or whither he woold show himself fayn to do sumwhat before ye people
to make sum amends of his former faut I do not know, but this sure, rather
for su^ cause of fear, then for any good will: which was well apparaunt to all
men, in that he had kept the earl so long before in hold, with out any just
cause.

Sunday the xi. of september.
In the morenyng a great sort of us rode to the place of onset whear our me^ lay
slain, and what by gentlemen for their fre^des, and servants for their
Masters, al of the^ yt wear known to be ours wear buried. In ye mean time, ye
Master and officers of ye ordinance, did very diligently get to gyther all ye
Skottish ordinance, which bycaus it lay in sundry places they could not inn
all over night. And these wear in number a xxx. pieces, whearof one
culuerine.iii. sacres ix. smaller pieces of bras and of iron 17. pieces mo
mounted on carriage.

These things thus done, su^what a fore none our ca^pe raised, we marched
alo^g the Fryth side straight toward Lies: and approchi^g me ye same about
iii. of the clok in thafter none, we pyght our fyeld a prikshot on thissyde the
town: being on the southest half sumwhat shadowed from Edinborowe by a hill,
but ye most of it liyng wtin ye full sight and shot of the castle thear, and in
distaunce sumwhat abooue a quarter of a mile. My lords grace, guarded but with
a small cu^peny was cu^me^ to Lies well nie half an hour before the army, the
which he found all desolate of resistau^ce or any body else. Thear wear in ye
haven that runs into the mids of the roun, vessels of diverse sorts a xiii.
Sumwhat of ode, wynes, wainskot and salt wear found in the town, but as but
little of yt, so nothing else of value: for how much of oother things as could
well be carried, ye inhabitauntes ouernight had pact awei with them. My lord
Marshall and most of our horsemen wear bestowed and lodged in the town, my
lords grace, my lord Lietenaunt and the rest of tharmie in the camp.

Monday the xii. of september.
This day my lords grace with the counsel and sir Rychard Lee, rode about yt
town, and to the plottes and hilloks on either side nie to it, to view and
consider whither the same by byldyng, might be made tenable and defensible.

Certain of our smaller vessels burnt Kynkorne and a town or two mo stondyng
on the north shore of the Frith against Lies. Tuysday the xiii. of september.


In the after noon, my lords grace rowed up the Fryth a.vi. or.vii. miles
westward as it runs into the land, and took in his way an Island thear called
saint Coomes Ins, which sto^deth a.iiii. mile beyond Lies and a good wey
nerar the north shore then the south, yet not wtin a mile of the nerest. It is
but half a mile about, and has in it a pretty Abbey (but ye moo^ks wear gone)
fresh water enough, and also coonyes, and is so naturally strong as but by one
way it can be entered. The plot whear of, my lords grace considering, did
quikly cast to have it kept, whearby al traffik of marchau^dise, all
commodities else coming by the Fryth into their land, and utterly ye hole use
of the Fryth it self with all the havens upon it shoold quyte be taken from
them.

Wednesday ye.xiiii. of september.
This day my lords grace tidyng bak again Estward to vyew diverse things and
places, took Dakyth in his way, whear a house of George Douglasses does
stand: and coming sumwhat nere it, he sent Soomerset his herald with a
trompet before to know, whoo kept it, and whether the kepers hold it or yield
it to his grace, Answer was made that thear was a.lx. parsons within, whoom
their master liyng thear the saturday at night after the batell, did will that
they, the house, and all that was in yt shoolde be at my lords graces
commandment and pleasure. Whear upon the chefest came out, and in the name
of all the rest humbled himself unto my Lords will, proferynge his grace in his
Masters name, diverse fair goshaukes, the which my Lords grace how nobly soever
he listed to show mercy upon submissio^, yet uttering a more majesty of honor,
then to base his generositie to the reward of his enemy, did (but not
co^temptuosly) refuse, and so without cu^myng in past by, and rode to the place
whear the battle was begun to be strooken: the which having a pretty while
ouerseen, he returned by Muskelborowe and so along by the Frythe, diligently
markyng and notyng things by ye way. And as well in his return, as in his out
going, many wear the houses, gentlemen, and oother, that upon submission his
grace received in to his protection.

This dai my lords grace as well for countenance of buyldyng, as though he
woold tarry long, as also to keep our Pioners sumwhat in exercise (whoo^ a little
rest woolde soon make naught) caused along the east side of Lies a great
dich and trench to be cast toward the Frith, the work whearof continued till
the morning of our departing.

My Lord Clynton, Thursday the xv. of september
hye Admiral (as I said) of this flete taking with him the galley (whearof one
Broke is Captain) and.iiii. or.v. of our smaller vessels besides, all well
appointed with municion and men, rowed up the Frith a ten mile westward to an
haven town stondyng on the south shore called Blaknestes, whearat toward the
water side is a castle of a pretty strength. As nie whearvnto as the depth of
the water thear woold suffer: the Skots for sauegard, had laid ye Mary
willough by and the Antony of Newcastel.ii. tall ships, which with extreme
injury they had stolle^ from us before time, when no war between us: with
these ley thear also an oother large vessel called (by them) the Bosse and
a.vii. mo, whearof part laden with marchau^dize: my lord Clynton, and his
co^penie with right hardy approach, after a great conflict betwixt the castle and
our vessels, by fine force, wan from them those.iii. ships of name, and burnt
all ye residew before their faces as they ley.

Friday ye.xvi. of september.
The lard of Brimston, a Skottish gentleman who came to my lords grace from
their counsel for cause of communicacion bilyke, returned again to them having
with him Norrey an herald and king of arms of ours: whoo found them with ye old
queen at Sterlyng, a town stondyng westward upon ye Frith a.xx. mile beyond
Edinborowe.

Thear was a fellow taken in our ca^pe, Saturday the xvii. of september.
whoo^ ye Scotts called English William, an English man indede, yt before time
having done a robery in Lincolnshier, did after ru^ away into Scotland, and at
this time cu^me^ out of Ede^borowe castle as a spy for y^e Scotts was spied
himself with the manner, and hanged for his mede in ye best wise (bicaus he well
deserved) upon a nue giebet somewhat biside our camp, in ye sight both of ye
town and castle. God have mercy on his soul. Thear is no good logicioner, but
woold think, I think, yt a Syllogisim thus formed of such a theuing mayor, a
ru^away minor, and a traiterous consequent, must needs prove (at ye weakest)
to such a hanging argument.

Sir Ihon Luttrell knight having been by my lords grace, and the counsel elect
Abbot by gods suffraunce of the monastery of saint Coomes Ins before remembered,
in the after noon of this day departed toward the Island to be stalled in his
see thear accordyngly: and had with him a coouent of a C. hakbutters and.l.
pioners to keep his house and land thear, and.ii. row barks well furnished
with municion and.lxx. mariners for them to keep his waters. Whearby it is
thought he shall soo^ becu^ a prelate of great power. The perfytnes of his
religion, is not always to tarry at home, but sumtime to row out abroad a
visitacion, and when he goithe, I have hard say he takes alweyes his sumners
in bark with him, which are very open mouthed and never talk, but they are hard
a mile of, so that either for love of his blessings, or fear of his
cursinges he is like to be sooueraigne over most of his neighbors.

My lords grace as this day geuyng warnyng that our departure shoold be on ye
morrow and minding before with recompense sumwhat according, to reward one
Barto^ that had played an untrue part: commanded that over night his house in
Lies shoolde be set afyer. And as the same the same night about.v. of the clok
was done, many of our soldiers that wear very forward in fyering, fyered with all have all the town beside. But so farfoorth (as I may think) without
commission or knowledge of my lords grace, as right many horses both of his
graces and of diverse others wear in great danger ear they coold be quited then
from out of the town.vi. great ships liyng in the haven thear, that for age
and decay wear not so apt for use, wear then also set, a fire which all the
night with great flame did burn very solemnly.

In the time of our here campynge many lardes and gentlemen of the cuntry nie
thear, came in to my lord to require his protection, the which his grace to
whoom he thought good, did grant.

This day also, came the earl Bothwell to my lords grace, a gentleman of a
right cumly port and stature, and hereto of right honorable and just meaning
and dealyng toward the kings majesty, whoom my lords grace did thearfore
according unto his degree and demerites, very friendly welcum and entertein, and
having supped this night with his grace, he then after departed.

Thear stood southwestward about a quarter of a mile from our ca^pe, a
monastery, they call it holly roode abbey, sir Water Bonha^ and Edward
Cha^berlayne gat license to suppress it whearupo^ these commissioners making
first their visitacion thear, they found the moo^ks all gone: but the church
and mooch part of ye house well coouered with lead, soon after they pluct of
the lead and had down ye bells (which wear but.ii.) and according to ye statute
did sumwhat hearby disgrace ye house. As touching the moo^kes, bicaus they wear
gone, they put them to their pencions at large.

Sunday the xviii. of september.
My lords grace for consideracions moouyng him to pitee, having all this while
spared Edinborowe from hurt, did so leave it, but Lies and the ships still
burning, soon after vii. of ye clock in this morenyng caused ye ca^pe to
dislodge. And as we wear parted from whear we lay, the castle shot of a peal
(with chambers hardely and all) of a.xxiiii. pieces, we marched sowtheast from
the Frith, into ye landward. But part of us kept the wey yt the chief of the
chase was continued in, whearby we found most part of the dead corpses liyng
very rufully with ye color of their skynnes changed grenish about ye place
they had be smitten in, and as thento abooue ground vnberied, many also we
perceived to have been beried in Undreske church yard, the graves of whoom, ye
Scots had very slyly for sight coouered again with grene turfe. By diverse of
these dead bodies wear thear set up a stik with a clowte, with a rag, with an
old shoe or su^ oother mark for knowledge, the which we understood to be
marks made by ye friends of ye party dead when they had found him, whoo^ then
since they durst not for fear or lack of leisure convey awey to bery while we
wear in those parts, they had stict up a mark to find him the sooner when we
wear goon. And passing that day all quietly a.vii. mile, we camped early for
that night at Crainston, by a place of the Lord of Ormstons. This morenynge
his grace making Master Andrew Dudley knight, broother unto the earl of Warwyk
(as his valiaunce sundry whear tried, had well before deserved it) dispatched
my Lord Admiral and him by ships full fraught with men and municion toward
the wynnyng of an hold in the east side of Skotland called Broughty Crak,
which stondest in such sort at the mouth of the tyuer of Tey, as that being
gotten, both Dundy, saint John's town, and many towns else (the best of the
country in those parts, set upon the Tey) shall either be cum subject unto
this hold, or else be compelled to for goo their hole use of the river, for
having any thing thearby cummynge inward or outward.

We went a ten mile, Mu^day ye.xix. of september.
and camped toward night a littell a thissyde a market town called Lawder: at
the which as we had indede no frendely enterteynment, so had we no envious
resistaunce, for thear was no body at home. Here, as our tents wear a
pytchyng, a doosein or.xx. of their hedge crepers horsemen, that lay lurking
thearby, like sheep byter curres to snach up and it wear but a sorry lamb for
their prey, upon a hill about half a mile sowtheast from us, ran at and hurt
one of our me^. For acquitaile whearof, my lords grace commanded that.iii.
or.iiii. houses (such as they wear) stondyng also upon a hill.ii. flight shot
southward from our ca^pe, shoolde be burnt. Thomas fissher his graces
secretary rode straight thither with a burning brand in his tone hand, and his
gun in the toother, accompanied with no mo but one of his own men and fyred
them all by and by. I noted it for my part an enterprise of a right good heart
and courage, peradventure so mooch the rather, bicaus I woold not gladly have
taken in hand to have done it so my self, spetially since part of these
prikkers stood then within a slight shot of hi^. Howbeit as in all this journey
upon any likelihode of bysines I ever saw him right well appointed and as
forward as the best, so at the skirmish which the Scotts proffered at Hailes
castle on wedensday before written the.vii. of this month, I saw none so nere
them as he: Whearby I may have good cause to be ye les in doubt of his
hardines. Here also as we wear setteled, our herald Norrey returned from the
Skottes counsel, with the Larde of Brimston and Rose their heraulde: who upon
their suit to my Lords grace obtained, that.v. of their counsel shoolde have
his graces safecundet that at any time and place within fiften days during
our abode in their country or at Berwyke, the same.v. might cum and commen
with.v. of our counsel touching the matters bitwene us.

Tuysday the xx. of september.
Rose the heraulde departed erely with this saufecundet, our camp raised and we
went that day an.vii. mile till as far as Hume castle: whear we camped on the
westsyde of a rocky hill that they call harecrag which stondeth about a mile
westwarde from the Castle. The Lord of Hume (as I said) lay diseased at
Edenborowe of his hurt in his flight at the Frydays skyrmysh before the
battle. the Lady his wife came straight to my Lords grace, making her humble
suit that like as his goodness had graciously been showed to right many oother
in receyuynge them and their howses into his graces protection and assurance,
even so, that it woold pleas him to receive and assure her and her house the
Castle: My Lords grace minding never oother but to assure her she shoolde be
sure soon to forgo it, turned straight her suit of assurance into communicacion
of tendering, for my part I doubt not but the terror of extremity by their
obstinacy, and proffit of friendship by their submission, was sufficiently
showed her: the which having well (by like) considered, she left of her suit
and desired respite for consultacion till the next day at noon, which having
granted her, shere turned to the castle. They say a match well made is half
wun: we wear half put in assurance of a toward answer by the promise of a
prophecy amoong the Frenchmen, which says. Chasteau que parloit and femme que
escote: lu^g voet render, and lautre: and so forth. Thear wear certei^
hakbutters that upon appointment before, had beset the castle: whoo then had
further commandment given them, that taking diligent head none should pas in
or out without my lords graces license, they should also not occupy any shot
or annoyaunce till upon further warnyng.

This Lady in this mean time consulted with her sun and heir prisoner with us,
Wednesday the.xxi. of september.
and with oother her friends the kepers of the castle, at the time appointed,
returned this day to my lords grace: requirynge first a longer respit
till.viii. a clock at night, and thearwith saufcundet for Andrew Hume her
secund sun and John Hume lord of Coldamknowes a kinsman of her husbands,
Captains of this castle, to cum and speak with his grace in the mean while:
It was granted her, whearupon these Captains about.iii. of the clock came to
his Lordship and after oother coouenau^tes with long debatyng on both parts
agreed upon, she and these Captains concluded to give their assent to render ye
Castle, so far forth as the rest of the kepers woold thearwith be content.
For.ii. or.iii. within (said they) wear also in charge with keeping it, as well as
they: for knowledge of whose mi^des, my lords grace then sent Soomerset his
herald with this lady to ye castle to them: who, as the herald had made them
privy of the articles, woolde feign have had leisure for.xxiiii. hours longer
to send to their Lord to Edi^borowe to kno his will, but being wisely and
sharply cauld upon by the herald, they agreed to the coouenauntes, before by
their Lady and capteyns concluded on. Whearof part wear (as I saw by ye
sequel) that they shoolde depart thence the next day morning by.x. of the
clok with bag and baggage as mooch as they coold carry, saving all municion
and vytayle to be left be hynde them in the Castle: Howbeeit for as mooche as
before time their nation had not been all together so just of coouenaunt,
whearby as then we might have cause fyrmly to credyt their promys, my Lords
grace prouidyng, each wey to be ready for them, caused this night viii. pieces of
our ordinance fenced with baskets of earth to be planted on the southsyde
toward the Castle within pour of batrie, and the hakbuttes to continue their
watch and ward.

Thursday ye xxii. of september.
This morning my lords grace having deputed my lord Gray to receive the rendryng
of the castle, and Sir Edward Dudley after to be captayn of the same. They
both departed to yt: and at the time set, Androwe Hume and.iiii. oother of ye
chefest thear with him came out, and yeldyng ye castle delivered my lord the
keis. His lordship causyng the residue also to cumme out then, saving.vi.
or.vii. to keep their baggage wtin (who all wear in number.lxxviii) entered ye
same with master Dudley and diverse oother gentlemen with him. He found thear
indifferent good store, of vytayle and wine: and of ordinance, two basterd
culuerins, one sacre.iii. fawconets of bras, and of iren viii. pieces beside.
The castle stondeth upon a rocky crag, with a proud heith over all the
contrie about it, on every side well me fenced by marrysh, almost round in
foorme, with thik walls* and (which is a rare thing upon so hie and stony a
ground) A fair well within yt. The keeping of this castle my lord betakyng
unto master Dudley accordyngly, returned to my lords grace at the camp.

We reised, Friday ye xxiii. of september.
and came that morning to Rokesborow, and iii. mile from Hume: our camp occupied
a great fallowe field between Rokesborowe and Kelseye stondyng eastward a
quarter of a mile of: a pretty market town to, but they wear all goon forth
thear. My Lords grace with diverse of the Counsel and Sir Richard lee knight
(whose chardge in this expedycyon spetially was to appoint the pioners each
whear in woork as he shoolde think meet, and then (whear my lords grace
assigned) to deuyse the form of byldyng for fortificacion: whoom suerly the
goodness of his wytt and his great experience has made in that science right
excellent) went straight to Rokesborowe to cast what thear for strengthnyng
might be done. The plot and syte whearof has been in time paste a Castle,
Rokesborow.
and stands naturally very strong, upon a hill east and west of an eight
skore in length and.iii. skore in breadth, drawing to narownes at the east
end: the hole ground whearof, the old walls do yet enuyron. Beside the
heyth and hardines to cum to, it is strongly fenced on eythter side with the
course of ii. great rivers, Tiuet on the north and Twede on the sowth: both
which joining sum what nie to gyther at the west end of it, Tyuet by a large
cumpas a bowte the feldes we lay in, at Kelsey does fall into this Twede
which with great deapth and swiftnes runs from thence eastward into the sea
at Berwyk, and is notable and famous for.ii. commodities specially, Salmons:
and whetstones. Over this, betwyxte kelsey and Rokesborowe has thear been a
great stone bridge with arches, the which ye Skottes in time paste have all to
broken bycaus we shoold not that wei cum to them. Soo^ after my Lords graces
survey of the plot and determinacion, to do as much indeed for making it
defensyble, as shortness of the time and season of ye year could suffer: (which
was, yt one great trench of twenty foot broad with deapth according, and a wall
of like breadth, and heyth, shoold be made a cross with in the castle from the
tone sidewall to thoother and a.xl. foot from the west end: and that a like
tre^ch and wall shoold likewise be cast a trauers within about a quoyts cast
from theast end, and hereto that the castle walls on either side, whear
need was shoolde be mended with turfe and made with loopholes as well for
shooting directly foorthward as for flankyng at hand: the woork of which devise
did make, that bisyde the sauegard of these trenches and walls, ye kepers
shoold also be much fenced by both the end walls of the castle) ye pioners
wear set a woork and diligently applied in the same.

This day the Lard of Cesfoorth, and many oother lards and gentlemen of
Tyuetdale and their marches thear having cum and communed with my Lords grace,
made us an assurance (which was a friendship and as it wear a truis) for that
day till the next day at night.

This day in the mean while their assurance lasted, these Lardes and
gentlemen aforesaid, being the Chefeste in the hole marches and Tyuetdale, came
in again, whoom my Lords grace with wysdom and pollecie without any fighting
or bloodshed, did wyn then unto the obedience of the kings majesty: for the
which they did wyllyngly then also receive an oath, whose names ensue.

Lards.
The lard of Ceffoorth. The lard of Fernyherst. The lard of Grenehed. The lard
of Hunthill. The lard of Hundley. The lard of Markestone by mersyde. The lard
of Bouniedworth. The lard of Ormeston. The lard of Mallestaynes. The lard of
Warmesey. The lard of Lynton. The lard of Egerston. The lard of Marton. The
lard of Mow. The lard of Ryddell. The lard of Reamersyde.
Gentlemen.
George Trombull. John Hollyburton. Robert Car. Robert Car of Greyden. Adam
Kyrton. Andrew Meyther. Saunder Spuruose of Erleston. Mark Car of Litleden.
George Car of Faldenside. Alexander Makdowell. Charles Rotherford. Thomas Car
of the year. Ihon Car of Meynthorn. Walter Holy burton. Richard Hanganfyde.
Andrew Car. James Douglas of Eauers. James Car of Mersyngto^. George
Hoppringl^^ William Ormeston of Endmerden. Ihon Grymslowe.
Many wear thear mo beside, whose names also for that they remain in regester
with these, I have thought the less mister here to wryt.

My lords grace did tender so mooch ye furtherau^ce of ye work in ye castle,
yt this day (as every day else during our campynge thear) his grace did not
styk to dig with a spade abooue.ii. hours him self: Curti. lib. viii.
whearby as his estate sure was no more embased then ye majesty of great
Alexander what time with his oun hands he set the poor cold soldiour in his oun
chair of estate* to relieve him by his tier. So by ye example hereof was every
man so moved, as thear wear but few of Lords knights and gentlemen in the
feld, but with spade shoouell or mattook did thearin, right willyngly and
vncompeld their parts.

Sunday the xxv. of september.
This day began the Skottes to bring vitayll to our camp, for the which
they wear so well entreated and paid, that during the time we lay thear, we
wanted none of the commodities their co^try coold minister.

Monday the xxvi of september.
No notable thing but the continuance of our woork at the Castle: for
furtheraunce whearof, order was taken that the Captayns of footmen each after
oother shoolde send up his C. of soldiers thither to work an hours space.

The larde of Coldehamknowes not having so fully kept his appointment made at
Hume Castle touching his cummynge again to my Lords grace, Tuisday the xxvii.
of september
at Rokesborowe: Sir Raufe Uane with a two or.iii.C. horses, about.iii. of the
clock in this morning was sent for him to his house, which was a.vii. myte
from us: the which chardge Master Uane did so earnestly apply, as he was
thear with his number before.vi: but the Larde whither he was warned thearof by
privy skout or spy, he was passed by, an oother way, and was soon after.vii.
with my Lords grace in the ca^pe, master Uane was welcu^med and having no
resistaunce made, but al submitted, and proffer of chere (for so had the lord
charged his wife to do) soon after he returned to ye camp.

This day my lords grace was certefied by letter from my lord Clynton and sir
Andrew Dudley that on the wednesday last being ye.xxi. of this moo^th, after
certain of their shot discharged against the castle of Browghty Crak, the same
was yeldyn unto them, the which sir Andrew did then enter, and after keep as
captain.

Wedynsday the.xxviiii. of september.
A Skottysh heraulde accumpanied with certain Frenchmen yt wear perchance more
desierous to mark our army then to wit of our welfare, came and declared from
their counsel ye within a seuenight after, their commissioners to whoom my
lords grace had before granted his safecundet, shoold cum and commune with our
counsel at Berwyk: whose cu^ming my lord Lieutenau^t and master Treasurer and
thoother of our commissioners did so long while there abide. But these Skottes
(as men that are never so just, and in nothing so true as in breach of promys
and vsyng untruth) neither came, nor by like meant to cu^: And yet sure take I
this no fetch of no fine devise, o^les they mean hereby to win, yt they shall
need never after to promys; vsyng the feate of Arnus, In Epigra^. More.
who with his all weys swearyng and his ever liyng, at last obtained that his
bare word was as much in credyt as his solemn oath, but his solemn oath indeed
no more then an impudent lie: Howbeit since I am certain that sundry of them,
have showed themselves right honest, I woold be loath here to be counted so
unadvised, as to arret ye fautes of many to ye infamy of al.

It was said amoong us they had in the mean time received letters of
consolacion and of many gay offers from the French king: yet had that been no
cause to have broken promys with ye counsel of a Ream: Howbeit, as these letters
wear to the^ but an unprofitable plaster to heal their hurt then, so ar they
full likly (if they trust much therein) to find the^ a corzey that will freate
them a nue sore.

My lords grace considering that of virtue and welldooyng the proper mede is
honor. As Well thearfore for reward to them that had before done well, as for
cause of encoorage to oother then after to do the like, did this day after
noon adourne many Lords knights and gentlemen with dignitees as follow. The
names and promotio^s of whoo^ I have here set in order, as they wear placed in
the herauldes book.

Sir Rafe Sadlier, Banereis.
Treasurer. Sir Fraunces Bryan, Capteyn of the light horsemen. Sir Rafe Uane,
Lieutenau^t of all the horsemen.
These knights wear made Banerettes a dignity abooue a knight, and next to a
Baron, whose acts I have partly touched in the story before.

Knights*
The lord Grace of Wylton high Marshall. The lord Edward Seimor my lords graces
sun.
Of these, the reder shall also find before.

The lord Thomas Haward The lord Walldyke. Sir Thomas Dacres. Sir Edward
Hastyng. Sir Edmund Brydges. Sir Iho^ Thin, my lords graces Stuard of
howshold. Sir Miles Partrich. Sir Ihon Conwey. Sir Giles Poole. Sir Rafe
Bagnolle. Sir Oliver Laurence. Sir Henry Gates. Sir Thomas Chaloner, one of the
Clerks of the kings majesty's privy counsel, and in this army, (as I might
call him) chief secretary, who with his great peyns and expedite diligence in
dispatch of things passing from my lords grace and the counsel thear, did make
yt his merit was not with ye meanest. Sir Fraunces Flemmynge master of
thordinaunce thear, a gentleman whoom long exercise and good obseruaunce has
made in that feate right perfect, whear unto in this viage he joined so mooch
head and diligence, as it was well found how much his service did stead. Sir
Ihon Gresham. Sir William Skipwyth. Sir Ihon Buttes. Sir George Blaag. Sir
William Frauncis. Sir Fraunces Knolles. Sir William Thorborow. Sir George
Haward. Sir James Wylforde. Sir Rauf Coppinger.
But yt I have written in ye story before with what forward hardines Sir George
haward did bear ye kings majesty sta^derd in ye battle, and thear also of ye
industrious peyn of sir James Wilford, and how sir Rauf Coppi^ger did aied not
smally in saufgard of the standard of our horsemen, I woolde have been more
diligent to have rehearsed it here.

Sir Thomas We^twoorth. Sir Ihon Maruen. Sir Nycha^s Strange. Yet knights
Sir Charles Sturton. Sir Hugh Askue. Sir Frauncis Salmyn. Sir Richard Tounley.
Sir Marmaduke Cu^stable Sir George Awdeley. Sir Ihon Holcroft. Sir Ihon
Soutwoorth. Sir Thomas Danby. Sir Ihon Talbott. Sir Rowland Clerk. Sir Ihon
Horsely. Sir John Forster. Sir Christofer Dies. iii. spaniards.
Sir Peter Negroo. Sir Alonzo de vile. Sir Henry Hussy. Sir James Granado. Sir
Water Bonham. Sir Robert Bra^dling mayr of new castle and made knight thear at
my lords graces return.
As it is not to be douted but right many mo in the army beside these, did
also well and valiauntly quite them. Although their prefermente was rather then
differred, then their deserts yet to forgotten: even so among these wear thear
right many, the knowledge of whose acts and demerytes, I coold not cu^ by: And
yet woold have no man no more to doubt of the worthiness of their aduaunceme^t
then they are certain of his circu^spectio^ and wisdom, who preferred them to
it. Whearupon all me^ may safely thus far forth without offense presume, yt
his grace unworthily bestowed this honor on no man.

By this day, as Rokesborowe was sufficiently made tenable and defensible, (yt
which to see, my lords grace seemed half to have vowed before he woold thence
depart) his grace and the counsel did first determine, that my lord Gray
shoold remain upon the borders thear as the kings majesty's Lieutenaunt. And
then took order for the forts, that sir Andrew Dudley Captein of Broughty Crak
had leaft with him.CC. soldiers of hakbutters and oother, and a sufficient
number of pyoners for his works. Sir Edward Dudley Captain of Hume castle lx.
hakbutters.xl. horsemen and a.C. pioners. Sir Rafe Bulmer captain of
Rokesborowe.CCC. souldyours of hakbutters and oother, and.CC. pioners.

Thursday the xxix. of september being Mighelmas day.
As things wear thus concluded, and warnyng given over night that our ca^pe
shoold this day dissolve, every man fell to pakkyng a pace: my Lords grace
this morening soon after vii. of the clok was passed over the Twede here. The
best place whearof for getti^g over (which was over against the west end of
our ca^p, and not far from ye broken atches of ye broken bridge) was yet with
great stones in ye bottom so uneven of ground: And by reason of rain that
lately tell before, the water so deep and the stream so swyft that right many
of our horsemen and footmen wear greatly at their passage in perell, and one
or two drowned: and many cariages overthrown and in great danger also of
losyng.

My lords grace took his wey straight toward Nuecastell, and thence homeward:
And my lordtherle of Warwik, my lord Gray, and sir Rafe, Sadleyr with diverse
oother rode toward Barwyke, to abide the cu^myng of the Scottish
commissioners. In ye mea^ time of tariyng thear my lord of Warwyk did make v.
knights.

Sir Thomas Neuell, the lord Neuels broother. Sir Anthony Strelley. Sir Uerney.
Sir Ihon Barteuile, French man. and anoother.
But the Skottes like men, though supper in covenant yet constant in usage:
and thearfore les blusshing to break promise, then custom, came not at all:
whearupo^ my lord and oother of our commissioners, having tarried for them, the
full time of appointment which was until the iiii. of october, ye next day
after departed thence homeward. In part of ye mean time, while my lords grace
was thus doing thexploits in Skotla^d as I have before written, the earl of
Linnos, with my lord Wharto^ lord Warden of our westmarches against Skotland
(according as his grace had before taken order) with a number of v.M. entered
Skotla^d on the west marches. And first passing a ii. mile (after a days and a
nights defense) they wan the church of Annan, a strong place and very noysum
alwey unto our men as they passed that wey. Thear they took.lxii. prisoners
the kepers of the same, burnt ye spoil for cumber of caryage, and caused the
church to be blown with powder: passinge thence, a.xvi. mile within the lo^d,
soon after they wan a hold, called ye castle of milk, ye which they left well
furnyshed with municion and me^ and so returned. Diverse other acts notable
they did, here left vnwritte^ of me, because unknown too me, but as much as I
certainly hard of, I have thought mete hereunto to add: because I may well
count them as part of this expedicio^ and viage.

A PERoracion unto the gentle reder, with a short rehersall of the Acts done.
I Have thus absolved my book, but neither with such speed, as perchance it had
been the office of him, that woold take upon him to write of this matter, nor
as the dignity of ye Argument required publicacion. For well it may be
thought, a man with mean diligence, that had been forth in no part of the
viage might in this space have learned and written, as much by inquiry at
home. And since ye pour of time is in each case so great, as things
indifferently good, by choice of opportunity are made much comendable, and
again by cumming out of season, may much be disgraced: Right small then may
I take my meryt to be, that cum now so intempestiuely to tell ye tale, whearof
al men's ears are full of a four mooneths before. Yet for excuse of my slacknes
(as who woolde not be blameles?) trusting that my plain confession may the
rather move you too take things too the better: I have thought it best, to
render you the very cause thearof: which is, that after I had sum what
entered intoo this busynes. And thearby compeld to consider ye precise
obseruaunce of deeds, words, and in a manner of gestures: and ye dilligent
markinge of ye situacio^ of tounes, castles and churches, of ye lieng of hills
playns and feldes, of ye course of ryuers, of respect of wyndes and of infinite
such other things that ought first too have been made thear, while they wear
a doing, and while a man had been at them (the which in deed I had not so
perfitly written in my notes, and thearfore driven to stresse my memory ye
more for calling the same too mind again) And here with regardyng ye great head
that ought to be had in rehersall of circu^staunces, and placinge of things,
accordingly in writing as they wear done, seen or hard: I found the enterprise
a great deal more weyghtie, then the sle^dernes of my wit was able quikly to
pas with. Howbeit, when upon deper considerau^ce I pondered with my self, what
a thing it was to make any monument in this so prosperous a comminaltie, whereof
the Governors are so absolutely wise, and whear in an infinity number of men
so fynely wytted and so profoundly learned are beside: I rather regarded the
counsel of the wise poet Horace, Inde Art. Poet.
whoo wills a man to keep his writings in his hands nine year, (meaning a good
while for correccion) then had any have of publicatio^, whearby at ones I
should lose my liberty of ame^dment. Which liberty though after, I might have
never so well, yet because it is nothing so comme^dable to mend a faut as to
make no faut, I woolde gladly before have had the leisure to look, yt the thing
might have past as faults from me, as my diligence could have made it. And
surely had it not ben more for au^swering the expectacion of sum men of honor,
whoo knew I was in hand with the matter, and who else peradventure might have
douted my diligence, then it was for mine own desire, to have my doings soon to
cu^me abroad, I woold have taken a better breath ear they had cum out yet. But
sins the chance is cast, and the word thus vttred cannot be called again,
whearby I have ieoperded with your.iii. hours reding to make you ce^sour of my
three months writing: Judge ye I pray you (as ye may) with favor, and
conster my meaning to the best. My need, I know is much to pray, for I am not
so foolysh too think my self so wise, that with a text al fautles I can drive
forth so long a process. But as I, for the time have endeavored to say,
rather as well as I can, then as well as can be, so shall thear be for me
liberty too all men too write, what else they can utter, either foorther or
better: which if they do, I shall with all my heart becum then as benign a reder
to the^, as I woold wish you now to be here to me.

To the intent now, I woold quite from cumber of inquiry or question, such as
happily woold wit, what a do I had in the army, or how I had any knowledge of
that I have written: I have thought it courtesy not to be dangerous to show,
that it pleased my very good lord, ye earl of Warwyke, Lieutenau^t of the host
(who thearby had pour to make officers) too make me one of the Judges of the
Marshalsey: as Master William Cycyl, now master of the Requests, with my lord
Protectours grace was the other: whearby we both, not being bound so
straightly in days of travel to order of march: nor oother while, but when we
sat in Court, too any great affairs, had liberty to ride, to see things that
wear done, and leisure too note occurrences yt came: The which thing (as it
chanced) we booth did, but so far from appoyntme^t between us. As neither was
wyting of others doing, till sumwhat before our departure homeward. Mary, since
my cu^ming home indede, his ge^tilnes being such as too communicate his notes
with me (I have I co^fes) been thearby, both much a certeyned in many things
I douted. And sumwhat remembered of yt, which else I might hap to have forgotten

But now, forasmuch as it has pleased the most benign goodness of God, so
favorably to aid us in these our affairs, and so much to tender the equity of
our cause, as by his mynister, and our head in this journey my lord Protectours
grace, we have turned our enemies entents for destruction of us, unto their
own confusion: And first ouerturned of thear holds, Dunglas, Thornton,
Anderwyke, and Anna^ church, ouercumme^ then with the half of their
number.xxxii.M: slain xv.M.iii.C: maimed.ii.M: taken.xv.C: burned, lies and
kynkorne (as more of their tounes else we might, if our Chieftai^ had been as
willing, as our capitayns wear ready) wun ye best of their navy, and burnt the
residue: wun from the^, and keep in the mids of their land saint Coomes Ins,
and Broughty crak, and thearby (but by our leave) keep the^ from their hole
entercours of merchau^tes: wu^ also and keep the Castle of Mylk and Hume
castle: wun of ordinance in their fortes, and at the feld above.lxxx. pieces:
Bylded Rokesborow castle, and Aymouth and gained unto the kings Majesty's
obedience, al Tyuedale and their Marches: All this in so short a time, as
within.xxv. days: with so small a loss of our side in all the hole viage,
as under the number of lx. persons: and that in this the first year of our
kings Majesty's dominion and rule: whearby, according unto his singular
towardenes, else evident, we may well conceive an assured hope, his hyghnes too
shall have a most happy reygn, and with a (Gods grace) a long: I woold wyshe
and exhort, that ye, which wear not theare (for though ye wear far from any
danger of the los, yet can ye not be but full parteners of the winnynge)
shoolde effectually with us (according as we all have cause) give and wish,
first glory and prays unto God, obedience and victory to our soueraygn,
honor and thanks unto our Protector and cou^sellours, woorship to our
chyualrie, commendacio^ unto the rest that wear out, and a better mind unto our
enemies. And I, trustyng unto the benignity of your gentle acceptaunce, whoo
of this work shall hap to be Reder, with such indifferency of request
touching the same as Horace made to his well-beloved fre^d Numicius, Epist. i.
shall thus take my leave of you.

Viue Vale: si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non his vtete mecum.
Out of the Parsonage of s. Mary hill in London, this xxviii. of January. 1548.

Fautes escaped in the printynge, and to be correct as follows.
a. the first leaf, on the first side, the.xviii. line, or, read: our, a.
the.ii. first side, the.xvii. line, Blank nests, read: Blaknests. a. vi. first
side.ii. line, his, read: this. a. vi. second side.ix. line, or, read our. ^.
v. first side.x. line, as well, add: as. ^. ii. first side, vi. line, put out: a
marvelous. A. v, first side.vi. line, their, read: thear. B. iii. first side,
viii. line, put out: these. B. iii, ii. side, v. line, Douglash, read:
Douglasses. B iiii.ii. side, vii. line.iiii. mile, read: iiii. sko re mile. B.
v.ii, side, viii. line, stopped, read: stoopt. B. vi, first side, vii. line,
Douglash, read: Douglasses. L. vii, first side, ix. line. for, give my: read
give me my. E. ii, ii. side, xxi. line.ii. read: ii. M E iiii, ii. side, viii.
line, iii. read: iii. L E v, ii. side, xiii. line, honorable, read: honorably E
viii.ii. side, first line, sight, read: fight F ii, ii. side, iii. line,
hands, read: hand F iii, ii. side, xvii. line, enough, read: enugh F vi, i.
side, x. line, any whit, add: (I dare say) G ii, ii. side, ix, line, of our,
add: horsemen before them, they had sum sight of our. G vii, first side, ii
line, men, read: men's H iii, i. side, xvii. line, Morris, read: Norris thear,
xx. line, earnst, read: earnest H v, ii. side, x. line, continaunce, read:
continuance H vii.ii. side, v. line, bear* read: bare H viii, first side.xiiii.
line, matter, add: and thear, xi. line, remember, add: all thear, xx. line,
entend, add: as K ii, ii. side, first line, xv, read: xv. L K vi, ii. side,
ii. line, his, read: the L iii, ii. side, vii. line, luckyng, read: lurkyng
FINIS.
Imprinted in London, the last day of June in the second year of the reign of
our sovereign lord king Eduuard the VI: by Richard Grafton, printer to his
most royal Majesty, in the year of our lord.

M. D. XL VIII.

Cum preuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


