The Piththy and most notable sayings of al Scripture, gathered by Thomas
Paynell: after the manner of common places, very necessary for all those that
delight in the consolations of the Scriptures. 1550.

To the right excellent and most gracious Lady, my Lady Maryes good grace.
Thomas Paynell sends gretynge.
Notwithstanding that this my collection of Scripture most excellent and
virtuous Lady, has no need of any man's tuition or defense, forasmuch as it
contains only the simple and very true word and sayings of god: yet after
I had finished and ended the thing, and purposed by the counsel of a learned
man to publyshe it, for man's consolacio^ and learning: your graces fyery and
^e^ue^t mind to virtuous and godly living, your true intent and natural
inclinacion to the same: your liberal hand and favor to those, which
diligently do exercise themselves in the spiritual and moral study of the
sincere word of god, and again your Graces benignity and gentilnes of long
time bounte fully to me declared: enforced me to publishe it in your graces
name. Accept therefore this my labor most excellant Lady, as sent of your
daily Orator and most humble servant to your grace. Read the fruiteful
lessons thereof and digest them thoroughly, practyse and prove in very deed, how
sweet the Lords words be, use the profitable doctrines of this little book:
for so doing, your grace shall learn daily more and more, truly to know the
Lord, to taste, releafe and to ensewe his holy and sweet word, to love and
fear him, to be his faithful and obsequines handmayde^* and a diligent ensuer
of his will and s^eppes most pleasant and voluntariously to bear the yoke of
his most comfortable and sweet commandments.

Think nor esteem not, I most humblye beseech your grace, this my gift to
be sle^der in valor, although of it self it be but little: for precious stones
are of themselves in quantity but little and yet for their natural operacions
and proprieties, of great estates most hyely esteemed. Esteem the content of
my book and gift, that is the word of God, and not the slenderness thereof:
esteem my faithful and true heart unto your grace, and not my simple and
slender gift. And yet if this my poor and slender gift, may be well and
exactly wayd and pendred, what thing (although it comprehend not all the
fruiteful lessons of Scripture) may be compared unto it? For what is more
excele^t, or more precious then the word of god? what thing may be esteemed
equal unto it? what ought to be more embraced of a christian the^ Christ's
wo^de: then a pure and a christian life? then chastity, then hum^^e, then
godly wisdom and pure doctrine? the which with other virtuous and heavenly
lessons, are in this my brief collection, compendiously and fruitfully
comprised. Wherefore I even humbly desire your noble grace to accept this my
labor and small gift in good part. Accept, I say, and embrace the word of
God, for that truly understood, and seriously ensued and followed, shall be to
your graces spiritual increase most comfortable comfort.

The first Chapter of Genesis.
IN the beginning, God created heaven and earth. The earth was void and empty,
and darckenes was upon the face of the deep, and the spirit of god moved upon
the face of the waters.

God called the dry land, earth, and the gatheringe together of waters, called
he the sees.

God made two great lights, a greater light to rule the day, and a less
light to rule the night.

God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, male
and female created he them. And god blessed them, and said unto them: Grow and
increase, and replenishe the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion of the
fyshe of the sea, and foul of the air, and of every lyuinge thing that
moves upon the earth.

The second Chapter.
AND in the seventh day, God endued his work which he had made. In the.vii.
day also, he rested from all his works which he had made, and God blessed
the.vij. day, and sanctified it, because that in it, he had rested from all
his work which God ordained to make.

The Lord god also shope man, even dust from the ground, and breathed in to
his nostrelles, the breath of life, and Adam was made a living soul. And the
Lord God planted a garden cast ward from eden, and there he put man whom he
had made.

The tree of life and the tree of knowledge of good and evil was in the widdes
of the garden.

The Lord god also took Adam, and put him into the garden of eden, that he
might dress and keep it. And the Lord God commanded Adam saying: eatinge
thou shall eat of every tree of the garden. But as touching the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it. Ele, in what day
soever thou eatest there of thou shall dye the death.

It is not good that Adam should be alone I will make him an help, which may
be present with him. And so out of the ground shope the Lord god every best
of the field, and every foul of the air, and brought it unto man, that he
might se how he would call it. For like wise as man him self named every
living thing, even so was the name thereof.

Man himself therefore named the names unto all catel, and foul of the air,
and to every beast of the field. And for man found he not an help that might
be present with him.

The Lord god also caused a slombre to fall upon Ada^, and he stepte. And he
took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in stead thereof.

And the ribbe which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and
brought her unto man. And man said: This is now bone of my bones, and flesh
of my flesh, she shall be called woman, by cause she was taken out of man. For
this cause shall man leave his father and his mother, and shall be joined with his
wife, and they shall become one flesh, and they were both naked, the man and
his wife, and were not ashamed.

The.iij. Chapter.
THe serpent was subtiller then every beast of the field, which the lord god
made.

The serpent said unto the woman: ye shall not dye the death, but god does
know that the same day that ye eat there of, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be even as gods, knowing good and evil.

And the Lord god called Adam, and said unto him: where art thou? which
said: I herd thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid because I was naked,
and hyd my self.

Adam said, The woman whom thou gave to be with me gave me of the tree, and
I did eat. And the woman said: yonder serpent begylyd me, and I did eat.

The Lord said unto the serpent, because thou have done this thou art cursed
above all cattle, and above every beast of the field. Upon thy bellye shall
thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. I will also put
enimitie between the and the woman, between thy seed and her seed, the same
shall tread down thy head, and thou shall tread upon his heel.

Unto the woman he said: In multiplyinge will I multiply thy sorrow, and thy
conceyuing: In sorrow shall thou bring forth the children, and thy lust shall
pertayne to thy husband, and he shall have the rule of the.

To Adam he said, cursed be the ground for thy sake. In sorrow shall thou
eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorn also and thystie shall it cause to
grow unto the, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou be turned again
in to the ground, for out of it was thou taken: in as much as thou art dust,
and in to dust shall thou be turned again.

The fourth Chapter.
ANd in process of days it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of
the ground an oblation unto the Lord. Habell also brought of the firstlinges
of his sheep, and of the fat thereof.

And the Lord had respect unto Habel, and to his oblation: But unto Cain and
to his offering he had no respect, for the which cause Cain was exceeding
wrath, and his countenance abated. And the Lord said unto Cain: Why art thou
wroth, and why is thy countenance abated? if thou do well, shall there not be
a promotion? And if thou do not well, lies not thy sins in the doors? Unto
the also pertayneth the lust thereof, and thou shall thaue dominion ever it,

AND it fortuned when they were in the field, Cain tose up against Habell his
brother, and slew him. And the Lord said unto Cain, where is Habell thy
brother? Which said: I wot not, am I my brothers keeper? And he said, what
have thou done? The voice of thy brothers blood tries unto me out of the
ground: and now art thou cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth,
to receive thy brothers blood from thy hand. If thou till the ground, she
shall not proceed to yield unto the her strength. Fugitive and avagabende shall
thou be in the earth. And Cain said unto the Lord: My iniquite is more, then
that it may be forgeuen.

Lameth took unto him two wives, the name of the one was Ada, and the name of
the other was Zylla.

Iabell was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have
cattle.

Thuball was the father of such as handle harp or organe.

Thubalchain wrought cunningly every craft of brass and of iron.

The fyft Chapter.
ALl the days that Adam lived were nine hundredth and thyrthye years.

Henoche walked with God, and he was no more seen, for God took him away.

The syxt Chapter.
THE sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took
them wives from among all that they had chosen.

The Lord said: my spryte shall not always strive in man, because he is
flesh, and his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.

But God saw that the malice of man was great in the earth, and all the
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil every day. And it
repented the Lord that he had made man in the earth, and he was touched with
sorrow in his heart, and the Lord said: I will from the upper part of the
earth destroy man, whom I have created, both man, catel, worm, and foul of
the air, for it repents me that I have made them.

Noah was just and perfect in his generations, and walked with god, and
begat.iii. sons, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth.

The earth was corrupt before God, and the same earth was filled with crueltye,
and God looked Upon the earth, behold it was corrupt, for all flesh had
corrupt his way upon earth.

The length of the arc shall be three hundredth cubits: the breadth of it.l.
cubytes, and the height of it thyrty cubytes.

The.vij. Chapter.
THe rain was upon the earth fortye days and fortye nyghtes.

And the waters prevailed exceadingly upon the earth, and all the hye hills
that are under whole heaven, were covered. Fyftene cubits upward did the
waters prevail, so that the mountains were covered.

The waters prevailed upon the earth an hundredth and fyftie days.

The.viij. Chapter.
AND he sent forth a raven, which went out goinge forth and returninge again,
until the waters were dried up upon the earth.

He sent forth the dove out of the arc, and the dove came to him in the even
tide, and Loin her mouth was an olive leaf, that she had plucte: whereby Noah
did know yt the waters were abated upon the earth.

And yt Lord said in his heart: I will not proceade to curse the ground any
more for man's sake, for the ymagination of man's heart is evil even from his
youth. Neither will I add to smite any more every thing living, as I have done.

The.ix. Chapter.
Every thing that moves it self, and that lives shall be meat for you:
even as the grene heat be have I given you all things.

But flesh in the life thereof, and in the blood thereof shall ye not eat.
Else your blood of your lives will I require, from the hand of every beast
will I require it, and from the hand of man, from the hand of man's brother
will I require the life of man. who so shedeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, for in the image of God, did god make man.

My couenaunte will I make with you, that from henseforth every flesh he not
rooted out with the waters of a floude, neither shall there be a floude to
destroy the earth any more.

Noah also began to be an husband man, and planted a vyneyarde* and he
drincking of the wine was dronken, and uncovered within his cente. And Ham the
father of Canaan saying the nakedness of his father told his two brethren
without. And Sem and Iaphet, they two, taking a garment, laid it upon there
shulders, and coming backwarde, covered the naked priuities of the^re father,
namely their faces being turned away, leyst they should se their fathers
priuities.

The.x. Chapter.
NImrod began to be mighty in the earth for he was a mighty hunter before the
Lord.

A slut builded Niniue, and the streets of ye city.

The.xi. Chapter.
ALl the whole earth was of one language and like speech.

And they said: Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower, whose top may
reach unto hear; and let us make us a name.

And therefore is the name of it called Babel, because the Lord did there
confound the language of all the earth.

The.xii. Chapter.
THE Lord said unto Abram: Get the out of thy country, and out of thy
nation, and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I will show the, and I
will make of the a great people, and will bless the, and make thy name
great, that thou may be even a blessing, I will also bless them that bless
the, and curse the^ that cursethe, and in the shall al kinredes of the earth be
blessed.

AND it happened when he was come nite to enter into Egipte, he said unto Sara
his wife: Behold, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon. Therefore
shall it come to pass, that when the Egyptians se the, they shall say: She is
his wife. And they shall kill me, but they shall save the alive. Say (I pray
the) that thou art my sister, that I may fare well for thy sake, and that my
soul may lyuethorowe thy occasion.

AND the Lord smote Pharao this house with great plages, because of Sara
Abrams wife.

The.xiii. Chapter.
THen said Abram unto Lot: Let there be no strife (I pray the) between the and
me, and between my herdme^ and thine, for we be brethren.

And I will make thy sede, as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can
number the duste of the earth, then shall thy sede also be numbered.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHen Abram heard that his brother was taken, he harnessed his fresh young
men, borne in his own house, three hundred and eightene, and followed on them
unto Dan. And he was set in array upon them by night, he and his servants,
and smote them, and pursued them unto Hoba: which lies of the left hand of
Damascos, and recovered all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot,
and his goods, the women also, and the people.

And Melchisedech, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, for he was ye
preaste of the most highest god, and blessed him, saying: Blessed be Abram
unto the high God, possessor of heaven and earth, and blessed be the hye GOD
which has delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And Abram gave him tithes
of all.

And Abram answered the king of Sodom: I have lift up my hand unto the Lord
the hye God, possessor of heaven and earth, that I will not take of all that is
thine somuche as a threde or shoulachet, least you should say, I have made
Abram rich.

The xv. Chapter.
ADN Abram said: See to me thou haste given no seed: Lo, a lad borne in my
house is mine heir.

AND behold, the word of the Lord came unto him saying. He shall not be
thine heir: but one that shall come out of thine own body shall be thine
heir. And he brought him out and said, look up unto heaven, and tell the
^^attes, if thou be able to number them. And be said unto him: even so shall
thy sede be. Abram believed the Lord, and that counted he to him for
ryghtwysnes.

The.xvi. Chapter.
SAra said unto Abram, behold, the Lord has restrained me, that I can not
bear, I pray the go in unto my maid, perauenture I may be edyfyed by her.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham
for a father of many nacyone have I made the.

Every man's child among you shall be cyrcumcised, ye shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskyn, and it shall be a token of the bond betwyxte me and
you. And every man child of eyghte days old, shall be circumcised among
you, and such as be in your generacions, and borne at home. And the
uncircumcised man child, in whose flesh the foreskynne is not circumcised,
that soul shall peryshe from his people, because he has broken my testamente.
Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed and said in his heart, shall a child
be borne unto him that is an hundredth year old? and shall Sara that is nyntie
year old bear. Abraham also him self was nyntye year old and nine, when the
flesh of his foreskynne was cyrcumcised

The.xviii. Chaptre
ANd the Lord appeared unto Abraham in the plain of Mamre, as he satte in his
tent door in the heat of the day. And he lift up his eyes and looked, and lo,
three men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meat them from the
tente door, and fell to the ground and said: Lord I beseech the if I have
found favor in thy sight: go not I pray the from thy servant. Let a
little water be fet and wash your feet, and refreshe your selves under the
tree. And I will feate a morsel of bread to comfort your hearts with all,
and then shall ye go your ways, for even therefore are ye come to your
servant.

Sara laughed within her self saying: Now am I waxed old, shall I give my
self to just, and my lord old also. And the Lord said: The cry of Sodom
and Gomore is great, and their sin is exceeding grievous. I will go down now
and see whether they have down altogether according to that cry which is
come unto me or not, that I may know. I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, which art but dust and ashes.

The.xix. Chapter.
ANd there came two Angels to Sodom at even, and Lot sat at the gate of
Sodom. And Lote seeing them rose up to mete the^ and be bowed him self to the
gronde with his face. And be said: My Lords, turn in I pray you into your
serusuntes house, and rary all night and wash your feet, and ye shall rise
up early to go on your way.

Nay good brethren do not so wyckedly, behold I have two daughters which have
known no man, them will I bring out now unto you, and do with them as it
seems good in your eyes. Only unto these men do nothing, for therefore came
they in under the shadow of my rofe.

Se I have received thy request, as concerning this thing, that I will not
overthrow this City, for the which thou have spoken. Lotes wife looked behind
her, and was turned into a pillar of salt.

The.xx. Chapter.
SE thou shalt dye for the woman's sake which thou have taken away, for she
is a man's wife. Now therefore belyuer the man his wife again, for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for the that thou may live. But if thou deliver
her not again be sure that thou shalt dye the death, both thou and all that
thou haste.

In very deed she is my sister, for she is ye daughter of my father, though she
be not the daughter of my mother.

The.xxi. Chapter.
SAra saw also the son of Hagar the Egiptian (which she had borne unto
Abraham) to be a mocker, wherefore she said unto Abraham put away this bond
maid and her son: for the son of this bon^e woman shall not be heyr^ with
my son Isahac.

The.xxii. Chapter.
AND the Angel of the Lord called unto him from heaven. Abraham, Abraham,
And he said: here am I. And he said: say not thy hand upon the child,
nether do any thing at all unto him, for now I know that thou fear God,
and haste for my sake not spared thine only son.

By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou haste done this
thing, and haste not spared thy only son: that in blessinge, I will bless
the, and in multypliyng, I will multyplye thy seed, as the stars of heaven,
and as the sand which is upon the sea side. And thy seed shall possess the
gate of his enemies. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed, because thou haste heard my voice.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Abraham came to mourn Sara, and to weep for her.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
THey said: we will call the damesell, and inquyre at her mouth: And they
called for the Rebecca, and said unto her: wylt thou go with this man? and she
answered: I will go.

The.xxv. Chapter.
THese are the days of the years of Abraha^s life, which he lived an.C. lxxv
years.

Rebecca conceived, and the children strove together within her, and the Lord
said unto her, there are two manner of people in thy womb, and two nations
shall be divided out of thy bowele, and the one nation shall be myghtyer then the
other, and the elder shall be servant unto the younger.

Therefore when her time was come to be delivered, behold, there were two twynes
in her womb. And he that came out first was read, and he was all over as it
were a rough garmente, and they called his name Esau. And after him came his
brother out, and his hand holdyng Esau by the hele, and his name was called
Jacob.

Jacob said: sell me this day thy byrthrygth, Esau said: Lo, I am at a
point to dye, and what profit ^hal this byrthryght do me? Jacob answered:
swear to me then this day: and he swear to him, and sold his byrthryght unto
Jacob. Then Jacob gave Esau bread and potage of rise. And he did eat and
drink and rose up and went his way, and Esau regarded not his byrthryghte.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
AND in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because that
Abraham harkened unto my voice, and kept mine ordinances, my commandments,
my statutes, and my laws.

The xxvij. Chapter.
Jacob went to Isahat his father, and he felt and said, the voice is Jacobs
voice: but the hands are the hands of Esau.

He may well be called Jacob, for he has undermined me two times, first he
took away my byrthryght, and se now has he taken away my blessinge also.

The.xxviij. Chapter.
Jacob Dreamed, and behold there stood a Ladder upon the earth, and the top
of it reached unto Heaven. And se, the Aungelles of God went up and down upon
it: yea, and God stood upon it.

When Jacob was awaked out of his sleep, he said: Surely the Lord is in this
place, and I was not aware. And he was afraid and said how fearful is this
place? it is none other but even the house of God, and the gate of Heaven.

And Jacob vowed a vow saying: If God will be with me, and will keep me in
this journey which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put
on, so that I come again unto my fathers house in sauetie, then shall the Lord
be my God, and that stone which I have set up an end, shall be gods house: and
of all that thou shalt give me will I give the tenth unto the.

The.xxix. Chapter.
LAban had two daughters the eldest called Lea, and the youngest Rahell. Lea
was tender eyed, but Rahell was bewtyfull, and well favored. Jacob served.vii.
year for Rahell, and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had
to her.

It is not the manner of this place, to mary the youngest before the eldest.

The.xxx. Chapter.
THen said Rahell to Lea, give me of thy sons ma^dragoras. Laban took out al
yt he goats that were party and of diverse colors, and all the she goats
that were spotted and party^ colored, and all that had white in them, and all
the black among the sheep, and put them in the keeping of his sons, and set
three days journey betwyxte him self and Jacob. And so Jacob kept the rest of
Labans sheep Jacob took rods of grene popular hasell, and the chestnute
trees, and pylled white strakes in them, and made the white appear in the
rods, (but they that were whole remained grene, and thus was it made a
variable color) and put the rods which he had pylled, even before the
sheep in the gutters and waterynge troghes when the sheep came to drink, that
they should conceive when they came to drink, and the sheep conceived before
the rods, and brought forth Lambs, straked, spoted, and party* etc.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
I Am not worthy of thy least of all the mercyes and truth which thou have
showed unto thy servant.

And there wrasteled a man with Jacob unto the breaking of the day, and when
he saw that he could not prevail against him, he smote him under the thie,
the s^nowe of Jacob thie shranke as he wrasteled with him, and he said, let me go
for ye day breketh, which answered I will not let yt go except you bless me.
And he said unto him, what is thy name? He answered Jacob: he said, you shall
be called Jacob no more, but Israel, for as a prince have thou wrasteled with
God, and with man, and haste prevailed.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
DIna daughter of Lea, which she Bare unto Jacob, went out to se the daughters
of the land, whom when Sichem the son of Hemor the henite, Lord of that
country saw, he took her, and forced her, and his heart lay unto Dina the
daughter of Jacob.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
RAhell was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem.

The.xxxvij. Chapter.
I Staelloued Joseph more then al his children, because he begat him in his
old age. Behold this dreamer comes, come now therefore, and let us slaye
him, and cast him into some pyt, and we will say a wicked beast has
devoured him, and we shall se what will come of his dreams.

I will go down in to the grave unto my son mourninge, and thus his father
wept for him.

The.xxxviij. Chapter.
AND Judas said unto Ouan, go into thy brothers wife, and mary her, that thou
may stir up sede unto thy brother. And when Ouan perceived that the sede
should not be his, there fore when he went in to his brothers wife, he spylled
it on the ground, and gave not seed unto his brother. And the thing which he
did, displeased the Lord, wherefore he slew him.

It fortuned when Chamats time was come that she should be delivered, behold,
there was two twynnes in her womb. And it fortuned when she traueled the one
put out his hand, and the mydwyfe took and bound a read threde about it,
saying this is come out first. And it chanced that he plucked his hand back
again, and behold his brother came out. And she said: wherefore haste thou
rent a tent upon the? And called his name Phares. Afterward came out his
brother that had the red threde about his hand, and his name was called
Zarah.

The.xxxix. Chapter.
Joseph was a goodly person, and a well favored. And it fortuned after this,
that his masters wife cast her eyes upon Joseph and sayde^ come lie with me.
But he refused, and said to his masters wife: Behold, my master woteth not
what he has in the house with me, and has committed all that he has to my
hand. There is no man greater in the house then I. Neither has he kept any
thing from me, but only the, because thou art his wife. How then can I do
this great wyckednes and sin against God?

The.xlii. Chapter.
ANd they said one to another: we have verily sinned against out brother, in
that we saw the anguishe of his soul when he besought us, and we woldde not
hear him, and therefore is this trouble come upon us.

The.xliii. Chapter.
THe Egyptians may not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is abomination
to the Eyptians.

The.xlvi. Chapter.
THe souls that came with Jacob into Egypt which came out of his loyues
(beside Jacobs soimes wives) were altogether.xlvi souls, and the sons of
Joseph, which were borne him in Egypt, were two souls: so that all the souls
of the house of Jacob which came into Egypteare.lxx.

Every sheep keeper is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

The.xlvii. Chapter.
HE appointed the people unto the cities from one side of Egypt unto the
other, only the land of the prestes bought he not, for the priests had an
ordinance of Pharao that they should eat that which was appointed unto
them, which Pharao had given them.

And Joseph made a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharao
should have the fyfte part, except the land of the priests only, which was
not Pharaoe.

Thou shall not burye me in Egypt, but I will lie with my fathers, and thou
shall caty me out of Egypt, and burye me in their burial.

The.xlviii. Chapter.
GOd which has fed me all my life long, and the angel which has
deuuered me from all evil, bless the laddee, and let my name be named in
them, and the name of my fathers. Ibraham and Isabac, and that they may grow
into a multitude in the mids of the earth.

The.xlix. Chapter.
RVBen mine eldest son, thou art my might and the beginning of my strenght
the nobleness of dignite, and the nobleness of power.

Jacob dyed, and was put unto his people. And Joseph fell upon his fathers
face, and wept upon him, and kyssed him.

The.l. Chapter.
Joseph commanded his servants the Physicians to enbawme his father, and the
Phisytions enbawmed Israel foriye days long, for so long does the enbawminge
last, and the Egyptians bewailed him.lxx. days.

Joseph mourned his father seven days.

God will not fail but visyt you, and ye shall carry my bones hence, and so
Joseph dyed and they embawmed him with spices putting him in a chest in Egypt.

The first Chapter of Exodus.
THE Egiptians held the children of Israel in bondage without mercy.

Therefore was there life bitter unto them in that cruel bondage, in claye and
bryck, and all manner of work in the feldes. For all their bondage which
they served them, was full of tyranny.

The.ij. Chapter.
THE child grew, and she brought it unto Pharaos daughter, and it was made
her son. And she called the name of it Moses, because (said she) I took him
out of the water.

The.iij. Chapter.
HAD he soked, and behold, the bushe burned with fire, and the bushe was not
consumed.

And the Lord said: come not hither, put thy shoes of thy feet, for the
place where on thou stand, is holy ground.

I am that I am, I am has sent me unto you. And I will get this people favor
in the sight of the Egiptions, so that when ye go, ye shall not go empty, but a
wife shall borowe of neighbor, and of her that segeorneth in her house,
iewelles of silver and gold and raiment. And ye shall put them on your sons
and daughters, and shall rob the Egyptians. Cap. xj. xij.

The.iiij. Chapter.
I Will be with thy mouth and teach the what thou shall say.

I will hold Pharaos heart, and he shall not let the people go.

The.vij. Chapter.
THe encha^ters cast down their rods and they turned to serpents, but
Aaro^s rod did eat up their Rods.

The.viij. Chapter.
VThen said the enchau^ters, it is the finger of god.

The.ix. Chapter.
HAd the children of Israel took their journey from Ramases to Sucoth, six
hundred thousand men of foot, beside children.

The dwelling of the children of Israel, which they dwelled in Egipte was
foute hundred and thyrty years and when the four hundred and thyrty years were
expired, even the self same day departed all the hosts of the Lord out of
Egypt.

The.xiij. Chapter.
HAd the Lord spoke to Moses saying sanctify unto me all the first borne, that
open al manner matrices among the children of Israel as well of man, as of
beast, for it is mine.

All the first borne among thy children, shall thou bye out.

And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them
the way: and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they might
go both by day and by night. The pillar of the cloud departed not by day,
nor the pillar of fire by night out of the sight of ye people.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
THe children of Israel walked upon dry land through the mydst of the sea,
and the waters were a well unto them on the right hand, of them, and on the
left.

The.xv. Chapter.
HAD when they came to Mars, they could not drink of the waters of Mara: for
they were bitter, therefore the name of the place was called Mara. And the
people murmured against Moses, saying: what shall we drink? and he gryed
unto the Lord, and the lord showed him a tree, which when he had cast into
the water, the waters were made sweet.

The.xvi. Chapter.
THen said the Lord unto Moses: Behold I will rain bread from heaven to
you, and the people shall go out, and gather day by dare, that I may prove
them, wether they will walk in my law or no. The syxte day they shall prepare
for them selves that which they will bring in, and let it be twyse asmoche as
they gathered in daily.

And at even the quayles came and covered the ground where they lay. And in
the morning the dew lay tomide about the host. And when the dew was
fallen: behold, it lay upon the ground in the wilderness, small and round,
and thynne, as the hoar frost on the ground. And when the children of Israel
saw it, they said every one to his neygh boure: it is Manne for they wist not
what it was.

Six days ye shall gather it and in the seventh day which is the Sabbath
there shall be none.

The house of Israel called it Manna, and it was like unto Coriandre sede,
white, and the taste of it was like unto wafets made with honey.

And the the children of Israel, did eat Manna fortye year, until they came
unto a land inhabited.

The.xvij. Chapter.
Joshua did as Moses bad kym, and fought with Amalech And Moses and Aaron, and
Hut went up to the top of the hill.

And it happened that when Moses held up his hand, Israel had the better. And
when he let his hand down, Amalech had the better.

The.xviii. Chapter.
THou shall seek out among all the people men of actiuite, and such as fear
God, true men, harynge couerouskes, and make them hedes over the people, ever
hit bredes over fyfty, and over ten. And set them judge the people at al
seasons.

The.xix. Chapter.
NOw therefore if ye will here my voice inded, and keep mine appoynteme^t, ye
shall be my own, above al nations, for all ye earth to mine, ye shall be unto me
also a kyngedome of Preastes and an holy people.

And he said unto the people: Be ready against the third day, and come not
at your wives. Let the Preastes also which come to the Lord s^nctifye them
selves, lest the Lord destroy them.

The.xx. Chapter.
THou shall have non other gods I my sight. Thou shalt make the no graven
image, neither any similitude yt is in heaven above, either in ye earth beneth,
or in the water under the earth Thou shall not worship them, neither serve
them, for I the Lord thy GOD, am a gelouse god: And visit the sin of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Thou shall not take the name of ye lord god in vain^: For ye lord will not
hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain.

The.xx. Chapter.
REmember the Sabbath day, that thou sanctify it. Six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou haste to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy
son, and thy daughter, thy men servant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle,
and the stranger that is within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made
heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh
day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. Honor thy
father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land, which the
Lord thy god gives the.

Thou shall not kill.

Thou shall not break wedlock.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall you covet thy
neighbors wife, or his man servant, or his maid, or his ox or his ass, or
whatsoever thy neighbor has.

The.xxi. Chapter.
HE that smyteth a man that he dye, shall be slain for it.

He that smites his father or his mother, let him be slain for it.

He that curses his father or his mother shall be put to death for it.

If men strive together, and one smite another with a stone or with his first,
and he dye not, but lies in bed, if he rise again and walk without upon his
staff, then shall he that smote him go quyte: save only he shall bear his
charges for lesing his time, and shall pay for his healing.

If an ox gore a man or a woman that they dye, then the ox shall be stoned,
and his flesh shall not be caten, but the owner of the ox shall go quite. If
the ox were wont to pushe in time past, and it has been told his master,
and he has not kept him, but that he has hylled a man or a woman, then the
ox shall be stoned, and his owner shall dye also. If there be set to him asumme
of money, then he shall give for the deliverance of his life, whatsoever is
put to him.

If a man open a well, or dig a pit, and cover it not, and an ox or an ass
fall therein, the owner of the pytt shall make it good, and give money unto
there master, and the deed best shall be his.

The.xxij. Chapter.
IF a these be found breakinge up, and be smitten that he dye, there shall no
blood be shed for him: but if the sun be up* when he is found, then there
shall be blood shed for him.

If a man entise a maid that is not be trouthed, and lie with her, he shall
endowe her, and take her to his wife.

Whosoever lies with a beast shall be slain for it.

He that offers unto any gods save unto the lord only, let him be utterly
rooted out.

Vex not a stranger, neither oppress kym, for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt.

If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by the, thou shall not
be as a tyrau^t unto him, nether shall thou oppress him with usury. If thou
take thy neighbors raiment to pledge thou shall deliver it unto him again by
that the sun go down, for that is his covering only, eue^ the rayme^t for
his skin, where in he slepeth. And when he cries unto me, I will hear him,
for I am merciful.

Thou shalt not rail upon the gods, neither blaspheme the ruler of the
people.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
IF thou mete thine enemies ox or his ass going astraye, thou shalt bring
them to him again. If thou se thy enemies ass to synke under his b^^then,
thou shall not pass by and let him alone, but shalt help him to lift him up
again. Thou shalt take no gifts, for gifts blyndeth the seeing, and pervert
the words of the ryghteous. Se that no man appear before me emptye.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
MOses was in the mount fortye days and fortye nyghtes.

The.xxv. Chapter.
THey shall make an Arc of set him wood two cubytes and a half long, a cubyte
and an half broad, and an cubyte and a half hye. And thou shalt ouerlaye it
with pure gold, within and without shalt than ouerlaye it, and shall make hye
upon it a crown of gold round about. And thou shalt make two cherubins of
gold.

The xxvi. Chapter.
HAd thou shall make a veil of yelowe silk of purple scarlet, and with twyned
sylke. Of broeder work with pictures shalt thou make it.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
HAd beneth upon the hem, thou shalt make pomgranates of yelowe sylke, and
purple and scarlate, round about him, and belles of gold between the^ round
about, and let there be ever a golden bell, and a pomgarnat, a golding bell
and a pomgarnate round about the hem of the tunycle.

The.xxix. Chapter.
Bring Aaron and his sons unto ye door, of the tabernacle of wytnes, and
wash the^ with water and take the garments and put upon Aaron the strayte
cote the tunicle of the Ephod and the Ephod, and the brastlap: and gyrd them to
him with the broad red gyrdell which is in ye Ephod. And but the mytre upon
his head, and put the holy crown upon the mytre. Then shall thou take the
anoyntinge oil, and your it upon his head, and anointe him. And bring his
sonne^, and put albes upon them, and gyrde them with gyrdles as well Aaron as
his sons. And put the myters on them, and the prestes office shall be theyrs
for a perpetual law.

Every one that touches the altar, let him be holy.

The xxx. Chapter,
HAron and his sons shall wash their hands, their feet, even when they go
into the tabernacle of wytnes, or when they go unto the altar to minister and
to burn the Lords offering, they shall wash them selves with water, less
they dye.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
HAd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: be hold I have called by name Bezaleel
the son of vry, the son of Hur of the trybe of Iuds. And I have filled him
with the sprete of God, in wyldome, and understanding, in knowledge and in all
manner of work, to find out such feattes, and to work gold silver and
brass, and in the craft to set stones and to carue in tymbre, and to work
in all manner of worckeman ship. And when the Lord had made an end of
comenynge with Moses upon the monte Sinay, he gave him two tables of witness,
even tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
THE people sat them down to eat and drink and rose up again to play. And
ye Lord said unto Moses: I have seen this people, and behold it is a
slyfnecked people, and now suffer me, that my wrath may ware hot against
them, and consume them. And Moses turned his back and went down from the
hill, and the two tables of wytnes were in his hand: and the same tables were
written on both leaves, and were the work of God, and the wryttinge was the
writing of God, graven in tables. Moses wrath waxed hot, and he cast the
tables out of his hands, and brake them beneth the hill. Moses said: Oh this
people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. And now
I pray the, either forgive them their sins, or (if thou wylt not) wype me
out of the book, which thou have written.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
THE Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend. I
will be called in this name of the Lord before the, and will show mercy to
whom I will show mercy, and will have compassion, on whom I will have
compassion. Thou may not se my face, for there shall no man se me and live.
And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt se my back parts: but my
face shall not be seen.

The.xxxiiii Chapter.
HAD Moses was there with the Lord tortye days and fortye nyghtes, and did
neither eat nor drink water. Moses wyste not that the skin of his face
shone in manner of an horn while he talked with him.

The.xxxviij. Chapter.
ALl ye gold ye was ocupied for all the work of ye holy place, was the gold
of ye wave offering, eue^.xxix. hu^drech weight, and seven hundred and.xxx.
sykeles according to ye sycle of ye sactuarye. And the seem of silver that came
of ye multitude was five score hundred weight, and a thousand seven hundred
and.lxxv. sicles, after the sicles of the sanctuarye.

The first Chapter of Leuiticus.
IF any man of you bring a sacrifice unto the Lord, ye shall bring your
sacrifyce from among these cattle even from the oxen and from the sheep. If
his sacryfyce be a burnte offering, let him offer a male of the ox without
blemyshe, and bring him (of his own voluntary will) unto the door of the
tabernacle of witness before ye lord And if his sacrifyce be of ye clockes
(namely of the sheep, or goats) let him bring a male without blemysh for
avurnte sacryfice. If the burnte offering for the facrifyce of the Lord be of
the fowls, he shall bring his sacrifyce of the turtyll doves, or of the young
pygeons.

The.ii. Chapter.
THe soul that will offer a meat offeringe, unto the Lord, the same offering
shall be of fine flower, and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankencens
thereon, and shall bring it unto Aacons sons the Preastes. All the meat
offeringes which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made without leven,
for ye shall nether burn leven nor honey in any offeringe of ye lord. All the
meat offeringes also that thou seasonest with salt, neither shalt thou
suffer the salt of the couenaunte of God to be lackinge from thy meat
offering, but upon all thine offeringes thou shall bring salt.

The.iii. Chapter.
ANd if it be a sacrifice of peace offeringes, and he take it from among ye
droues (whether it be male or female) he shall bring such as is with out
blemishe before the Lord.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IF a soul sin through ignorance, and has done any of those things
which ye Lord has forbidden in his commandments to be done, as if the
preast that is anointed do sin, according to the sin of the people, let him
bring for his sin which he has sinned a young ox with out blemyshe unto the
Lord for a syn offering: And if he bring a sheep for a sin offeringe he
shall bring a female with out blemyshe.

The.v. chapter.
IF a soul touch any unclean thing: whether it be a cario^ of an unclean
beast, or of unclean cattle. or unclean worm, or if he touch any uncleanness
of man, whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man is wont to be defiled withal,
and is not ware of it, and comes to the knowledge of it, he has trespassed,
and shall confess that he has sinned in one of these things. Therefore shall
he bring his trespace offeeinge unto the Lord for his sin which he has
sinned, a female from the flock, and lamb or a she goat, for a sin
offering.

The.vi. Chapter.
IF a soul sin and trespace against the lord and deny unto his neighbor
that which was taken him to keep, or that was put into his hands, or does
violent robbery, or wrong unto his neighbor, or if he have found that which
was lost and denies it, and swears falsely upon whatsoever thing it be
that a man does and sins therein. If he have so sinned or trespaced, he
shall restore again that he took violently away, or the wrong which he did
or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he fonnde,
and all that about which he has sworn falsely, he shall restore it again
in the whole sum, and shall add ye fyfte part more thereto, and give it unto
him to who^ it perteyneth the same day that he offers for his trespace. And
let him bring for his trespace unto the Lord a Ram without blemyshe, that is
estymed worth a trespace offeringe unto the preaste. The fire upon the altar
shall burn still and never be put out.

The.vii. Chapter.
ANd the Preaste ye offers any man's burnt offering, shall have the shynne of
the burnt offeringe which he has offered.

If any soul eat of the flesh of the peace offering that pertayneth unto
the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him or that does touch any unclean
thing, that is of the uncleanness of man, or of any unclean beast, or any
abhominacion that is unclean, and then eat of the flesh of the peace
offeringe, which pertayneth unto ye Lord, that soul shall peryshe from his
people.

Ye shall not eat no manner of blood whether it be, of foul or of beast
whatsoever soul it be, that eats any manner of blood, the same soul shall
perish from his people.

The.ix. Chapter.
MOses said unto Aaron: go unto the anltar and offer thy secrifice for sin,
and make an atonement for the and the people and thou shall offer the
offeringe of the people to reconcile them, as the Lord commanded.

The.x. Chapter.
NAdab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censor, and put
fire therein, and put cens thereupon, and offered strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not, and there went a fire out from the lord,
and consumed them, and they dyed before the lord.

And the lord spoke unto Aaron, saying: Thou shall not drink wine and
strong drink, thou and thy sons that are with the, when ye go into the
tabernacle of witness, lest ye dye, Let it be a law for ever thorowout your
generatio^s, and that ye may have knowledge to put difference between holy and
unholy, between clean and unclean, and that ye may teach the children of
Israel all the statutes which the Lord has spoken unto them, by the hand
of Moses.

The.xi. Chapter.
WHese are the beasts which ye shall eat: Among all the catell that are on
the earth, whatsoever parts the hose, and deuideth it into two claws, and
chaweth cud, among the beasts that shall ye eat.

These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters, whatsoever has sins and
skales in ye waters, sees and ryuers that shall ye eat, let all other be
abomination unto you.

Let every crepinge thing that crepeth upon the earth be an abomination unto
you.

The.xij. Chapter.
IF a woman has conceived and borne a man child, she shall be unclean.vij.
days, even in like manner as when she his put a part in time of her natural
disease. And in the.viij. day, the flesh of the childs foreskynne shall be
cut away: and she shall then continue in the blood of her purifyinge.xxxiij.
days. She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until
the time of her purifyinge be out. If she bear a maid, child, she shall be
unclean two weakes as when she has her natural disease: and she shall
continue in the blood, of her purifyinge lxvj. days.

The.xiij. Chapter.
WHen there appears a rising in any man's flesh, either a scabbe or a
glistering white, and the plage of leprosye be in the skin of his flesh, he
shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests,
and the priest shall look on the sore in the skin of his flesh.

And as long as the disease lasts upon him, he shall be defiled and unclean,
he shall dwell alone, even without the host shall his habitation be.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
ANd if I put ye plage of ye leprosy in a house, of the land of your
possession, he yt owes the house shall come, and tell the preast, saying: my
think that there is as it were* a leprosye in the house. And the preast shall
command them to empty the house before the preast go into it to se the
plage: that all that is in the house be not made unclean, and then must the
priest go in to se the house. If the preast also se that the plage is in the
walls of the house, and that their be holowe strakes pale or red which seem
to be lower then the wall it self, the preast shall go out at the house
doors, and shut up the house seven days. And the preast shall come again the
seventh day, and if he se that the plage be increased in the walls of the
house, the priest shall command them to take away the stones in which the
plage is, and let them cast them into a foul place without the city, and he
shall command the house to be scraped within round about, and power out the
duste (that they scrape of) without the city into a soul place. And they
shall take other stones, and put they in the places of those stones, and other
mortar, to plaster the house withal.

The.xv. Chapter.
IF any man's sede depart from him in his sleep he shall wash his flesh in
water, and be unclean until even. And all the clothes and all the furs
wherein is such sede of sleep, shall be washed with water, and be unclean unto
the even. And if he that has such an issue of sede, do lie with a woman, they
shall both wash them selves with water, and be unclean until even.

The.xvj. Chapter.
WHen Aaron has made an end of reconcilynge the holy pace, and the tabernacle
of wytnes, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat, and Aaron shall put
both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the
misdedes of the children of Israel, and all there trespaces, in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and send him away by the
hand of a couenient man, into the wyldernes. And the goat shall bear upon
him all their misdedes unto the wilderness, and he shall let the goat go free
into the wyldernes.

The xvij. Chapter.
AND whatsoever man it be of the house of Israel or of the strangers that
soiourne among you, that eats any manner of blood, I will set my face
against that soul that eats blood, and will destroy him from among his
people for the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it unto
you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls, for blood shall
make an atonement for the soul. And therefore I said unto the children of
Israel, let no soul of you eat blood.

The.xviij. Chapteer.
HE shall keep mine ordinances and my judgments, which if a man do, he
shall live in them. I am the Lord.

Thou, shall not vnheale the secrettes of thy brothers wife, for that is thy
brothers priuite.

Thou, shall not lie with mankind as with woman kind, for it is abomination.

Thou shall lie with nomaner of beast to defylethy self therewith, neither
shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down thereto, for it is
abomination.

The.xix. Chapter.
WHen ye reap down the ripe corn of your land, ye shall not reap down the
utmost border of your fylde, neither shall thou gather that which is left
behind in thy harvest

Thou shall not pluck in all thy vyneyarde clean, neither gather in the
grapes which are ouerscaped: But thou shall leave them for the pour and
stranger.

Neither shall the workmans labor abide with the, until the morninge.

Thou shall not curse the deaffe, neither put a stombling block before the
blind.

Thou shall not favor the poor, nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness
shall thou judge thy neighbor.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart but shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, that thou bear not sin for his sake.

Thou shall not let cattelge^dre with a contrary kind, neither sow thy
selde with mingled sede, neither shall thou put on any garment of linen and
woollen.

Ye shall not round the locks of your heads, neither shall thou mar the
tuftes of thy bearde.

Ye shall not regard them that work with sprites, neither seek after
sothsayeres to be desyled with them.

Thou shall rise up before the horehed, and reverent the face of the old man.

If a stranger soiourne with you in your land, ye shall not vex him. But the
stranger that dwells with you, shall be as one of your selves, and thou shall
love him as thy self. For ye were strangers in the land of Egipte.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment in meteyerde, in weyghte or in
measure, true balaunces, true weyghtes, a true Epha, and a true hyn shall ye
have.

The.xx. Chapter.
HAD the man that breketh wedlock with another ma^s wife, even he that
breaks wedlock with his neighbors wise, let him be slain both the
aduouterer and the aduouteresse.

If a man lie with a beast, let him dye, and ye shall slay the beast also.

If a man take his brothers wife, it is an unclean thing, he has uncovered
his brothers secrets, they shall be childlesse.

If there be a man or woman that worcketh with a sprite, or that is a soth
sayer, let them dye, men shall stone them with stones, their blood be upon
them.

The.xxj. Chapter.
LEt not the preast take a wife that is an aduoutresse, or polluted, nor put
from her husband, for such a one is holy unto his God.

If apreastes daughter fall to play the whore she polluteth her father,
therefore must she be burnt with fire.

The hye preast shall take a maid unto his wife, but a wydowe, a deuorsed
woman, or an harlot, shall he not marye, but shall take a maid of his own
people to wife, neither shall he defyle his sede among his people: for I am the
Lord which sanctify him.

Whosoever of thy sede in their generations has any deformite, let him not
preace for to offer bread unto his God: for whosoever has any blemishe, shall
not come nere, as if he be blind or lame, or that has a bruised nose, or yt
has any mys shapen membre, or is broken foted, or broken handed, or have no
hear on his eye brows, or have a web or other bleamishe in his eyes, or be
maunge, or, shauld, or has his stones broken. No man that has a blemysh, and
is of the sede of Aaron the preaste, shall come nigh to offer the sacrifices of
the Lord. When he has a deformity, let him not preace to offer the bread of
his God, let him eat the bread of his GOD, even of the most holy and of the
holy. Only let him not go in unto the veil, nor come nigh the altar, when
he is deformed that he polute not my sanctuary, for I am the Lord that
sanctifye him.

The.xxij. Chapte
WHat man soever of the sede of Aaron is a leaper, or has a running issue, he
shall not eat of the holy things until he be clean.

Whatsoever has a blemishe, that shall ye not offer, for ye shall get no
favor therewith.

The.xxiij. Chapter.
HAd when ye reap down your harvest, ye shall not make clean tyddau^ce of
the field neither shall thou make any after gatheringe of thy harvest: but
shall leave it unto the poor, and the stranger.

The.xxiiij Chapter.
HH that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, let him be stayne, and all the
multitude shall stone him to death.

If a man may me his neighbor, as he has done, so shall it be done to him,
broke for broke, eye for eye, and toth for toth, even as he has may med a man,
so shall he be maimed again.

The.xxv. Chapter.
Six years thou shall sow thy field, and six years thou shall cut thy
vyneyard, and gather in the fruit thereof: but the seventh year shall be a Sabbath
of rest unto the land.

And thou shall halowe that year, even the fyftyeth year, and proclaim liberty
through out the land unto all the inhabiters thereof, for it shall be a year of
iubelye unto you, and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and
every man unto his kynred again.

If thy brother be wared poor, and fallen in decay with the, thou shall
releue him, both the stranger and soiourner, that he may live with the, and
thou shall not take usury of them, or vauntage, but thou shall fear thy God,
that thy brother may live with the. Thou shall not give him thy money upon
usury, nor lend him thy corn for increase.

The.xxvij. Chapter.
ONe sycle conteyneth twenty halfepens. Every tyth of the land which is of the
sede of the land, or of the fruit of the trees, is the lords, and is
sanctified unto the lord. And if a man will redeem ought of his tithes, let
him ad the fyfte part thereto. And every tyth of ox and of sheep and of every
beast that goes under the Red, even every tenth shall be holy unto the Lord. He
shall not look if it be good or bad, nor change it. Else if he change it, both
it, and that it was chaungyd with all, shall be hallowed unto the Lord, and may
not be redeemed.

The first Chapter of Numeri.
ALl the nombres of the children of Israel, through out the houses of their
fathers, from twenty year and above, all that went forth to the war in
Israel, drew all to the sum of six hn^ored and three thousand, five hundred
and fyftye. But the Levites after the tribes of their faihers, were not
nombred among them.

The.iij. Chapter.
AND the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: behold I have taken the Levites from
among the children of Israel, for all the first borne that opens the matrice
among the children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine, because all ye first
borne are mine: for ye same day that I smote all the first borne in the land
of Egypt, I hallowed unto me all the first borne in Israel, both man and
beast, and mine they shall be. I am the Lord.

The whole sum of ye Levites which Moses and Aaron nombred, at the
commandment of the Lord thorowout their kynredes (even all the males from a
month old and above) was.xxij. thousands.

The.v. Chapter.
AND the Lord said unto Moses: speak unto the children of Israel, wether it
be man or woman, if they have committed any sin that man does, and have
trespaced against the Lord, that soul has done amysse. Therefore they shall
knowledge their sin which they have done, and let him restore again the
hurt that he has done in the hole, and put the fyfte part of it more thereto,
and give it unto him whom he has treaspaced against. But and if there be not
a man to restore the hurt unto, nor a kynsman of his, let the trespace be
made good unto the Lord, and it shall be the priests, beside the ram of the
atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.

The.vi. Chapter.
WHen either man or woman does separate the^ selves to vow a vow of an
absteiner, and appointe them selves unto the Lord, he shall separate him self
from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vyneagre of wine, or of
strong drink, nor shall drink whatsoever is pressed out of grapes: and
shall eat no fresh grapes neither yet dried. As long as his abstinence
endures shall he eat nothing that is made of the vynetre, or of the carnels
or of the husk of the graye.

The Lord bless the, and keep the. The Lord make his face shine upon the, and
be merciful unto the. The Lord lift up his countenance upon the and give
the peace. And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel, and I will
bless them.

The.viii. Chapter.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: this is it that belongs unto the
Levites from.xxv. year upward, they shall go in, to wait upon the service of
the tabernacle of witness, and from the age of fyftye year, they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more, but shall minister
unto their brethren, in the tabernacle of wytnes, to wait, but shall do no more
service.

The.ix. Chapter.
ANd the same day that the tabernacle was reared up, a cloud covered the
habitacion which was a tabernacle of the witness: and at even there was upon
the habitacion, as it were ye symilytude of fire until the morninge. So it was
always the cloud covered it by day, and ye symilytude by night, and when the
cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then the children of Israel iourneyed,
and where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pytched their tents,
At the mouth of the Lord the children of Israel iourneyed, and at the mouth of
the Lord they pytched. And as long as the cloud abode upon the habitacion,
they lay slyll, and when ye cloud taiyed still upon the habitacion long
time, the children of Israel kept the watch of ye Lord, and iourneyed not.
And it chanced that when the cloud abode afewe days upon the habitacyon,
they abode in their tents, according to the commandment of the Lord, and
they iourneyed also at the commandment of the Lord.

The.xi. Chapter.
THe rascal people that was among them fell a lustynge, and turned them selves
and wept even as Did also the children of Israel, and said: who shall give us
flesh to eat, we remember the flesh which we did eat in Egypt for naught:
And ye cucumbers, and Melones Lekes, onions and garleke. But now our souls is
dried away for we can se nothing, save Manna. Manna was as coriander sede, and
(to se to) like Bedellyon. And there went forth a wind from the Lord and
brought quayles from the sea, and let them fall about the host, even a days
journey round about on every side of the host, and they did flee in the
air. as it were two cubytes hye, over the earth And the people stood up, and
all that day and all ye night, and on the morrow they gathered quayles.

The.xii. Chapter.
MOses was a very meke man, aboge all the men of the earth.

The.xiii. Chapter.
ANd they came unto the River of Escolle, and cut down there a branche with a
clouster of grapes, and twain bare it upon a staff.

The xiiii. Chapter.
THe Lord is long yet he be angry, and full of mercy, and suffers iniquytie,
and sin and leaves no man innocent, and visits the unrighteous of the
fathers upon the children, in the third and fourth generacyon.

The.xv. Chapter.
ANd while the children of Israel were in the wyldernes, they found a man ye
gathered styckes upon the Sabbath day. And they that found him gatheringe
sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaran, and unto all the congregation, and
they put him in ward, saying it was not declared what should be done unto him.
And the Lord said unto Moses: Let the man dye^, and let all the multitude
stone him with stones with out the host. And all the multitude brought him
without the host, and stoned him with stoues, and he dyed as the Lord
commanded Moses.

The.xvi. Chapter.
ANd Eleazar commanded that no stranger which is not of the sede of Aaron,
come nere to offer cens before the Lord, that it happen not unto him: like as
unto Corab and his company.

The.xvij. Chapter.
ANd Moses put the.xij. Rods before the Lord, in the Tabernacle of witness.
And on the morrow. Moses went into the Tabernacle of witness: and behold, the
rod of Aaron for the house of Leut was budded, and bare blossoms and almondes.

The.xviii. Chapter.
ALl yt break the matrice in all flesh that men bring unto the Lord, whether
it be of men or of beasts, shall be thine. Never the later the first borne of
unclean beasts shall you redeem likewise

And the Lord spoke unto Aaron: thou shall have none inheritance in their
land, neither shall thou have any part among them. I am thy part and thy
inheritance, among the children of Israel. Behold I have given the children
of Leui all the tenthe in Israel to inherit, for the service which they serve
in the tabernacle of witness.

The.xx. Chapter.
MOses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and Moses
said unto the^: hear ye rebellio^s, must we fet you water out of this rock?
And Moses lift up his hand, and with his rod he smote ye rock two times, and
the water came out abounda^tly, and the multitude drank, and their beasts
allo. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me not to
sanctyfye the in ye eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not
bring this congtegacion into the land which I have given them. This is the
water of strife, because the children of Israel strove with the lord, and he was
sanctified in the.

When all the multitude saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron
thyrtye days and thorowout all the housholdes of Israel.

The.xxi. Chapter.
Our soul lotheth this light bread. The Lord sent fyerye serpents among
the people which stonge them, and much people of Israel dyed

And the Lord said unto Moses: make the a fycrye serpente, and set yt up for a
sign, that as many as are bytten, may lohe upon it and live, And Moses made
a serpente of brass, and set it up for a sign, and when the serpents had
bytte any man, he behold the serpente of brass, and was healed.

The.xxii. Chapter.
ANd when the ass saw the Angel of the Lord, she fell down under Balaam:
and Balaam was wroth, and smote the Ass with a staff. And the Lord opened
the mouth of the Ass, and she said unto Balaam: what have I done unto the,
that thou haste smytten me now three times? And Balaam said unto the Ass:
because thou have moched me, I would also there were a sword in mine hand,
for even now would I hill the. And the Ass said unto Balaam: am not I thine
Ass which thou haste rydden upon, sense thou was borne unto this day? was I
ever wont to do so unto the, he said nay.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
GOd is not aman that he should lie neither the son or a man that he should
repent: should he say and not do? or should he speak and not make it good?

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
THere shall come a star of Jacob, and rise a scepter of Israel, and shall
smite the costs of Moab, and undermine all the children of Neth, and Edom
shall be possessed, and ^ey; shall fall to the possession of they enemies, and
Israel shall do manfully. Out of Jacob shall come he yt shall have domynyon,
and shall destroy the remnaunt of the city,

The.xxv. Chapter.
ANd behold one of the children of Israel came and brought unto the brethren
a Madianity she wife in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the
multitude of yt children of Israel that wept before the door of the tabernacle
of witness. And when Phynehes the soune of Eleater the son of Aaron the
preast saw yt, he tose up out of the mids of the company, and took a weapon
in his hand, and went after the man of Israel into the tente, and thrust
them through both the man of Israel and also the woman eve through the belly
of her, and the plage ceased from the children of Israel.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
IF a man dye and have noso^ne, ye shall turn his inheritance unto his
brother, if he have no daughter, ye shall give his inherytaunce unto his
brethren, if he also have no brethren ye shall give his inherytaunce unto his
fathers brethren, and if his father have no brethren, ye shall give his
inheritance unto him that is next to him of his hindered, and he shall
possess it.

The.xxx. Chapter.
IF a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an a the to hynde his soul: he
shall not go bathe with his word, but shall fulfill all that is proceeded out of
his mouth.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
AAron was a hundred and.xxiii. years old when he dyed in Mount Nor.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
ANd from among the Cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there
shalbesyre cities for refuge, which ye shall appointe to that entente, that he
which hylleth may fle the there And to them ye shall add.xlii. Lities so that
all the Cities whicheye shall give the Levites may be xlviii, with theye
subuthes. And the Lyties, which ye shall give, shall be out of the possession of
the children of Israel.

If the sleyer come without the borders of his priuileged cytyes whether he was
fled, if the auenger of vloud find him without the borders of his fre town,
and sleye ye Murderer, he shall be gyltelesse, because he shulbe have bydden in
his free town, until the death of the hye priest, and after the death of the
hyepriest to return again unto the land of his possession.

Neither shallone witness answer to puts man to death.

Ye shall take none amends for the life of the murderer, which is worthy to
dye.

The first Chapter of Deuteronomium.
Hear the cause of your brethren, and Judge ryghteouslye between every man and
his brother, and the stranger yt is with him. Se yt ye know no faces in
judgment, but hear the small as well as the great, and be a frayde of no man,
for the judgments is gods.

The.ii. Chapter.
But Sehon the king of Hosbon would not let us pass by him, for the Lord thy
God hardened his sprete, and made his heart tough, because he would deliver him
into thy hands, as it is come to pass this day.

The.iii. Chapter.
ONly Or king of Basan remained of ye remnaunt of the gyau^tes, whose bed was a
bed of Iron. And is it not yet at Rabah, among the children of Ammon? ix.
cubytes does the length thereof conteins, and.iiii. cubytes the breadth of it
after ye cubyte of a man.

The.iiii. Chapter.
WHat nation is so great that gods come so nigh unto, as the Lord out god is
nigh unto us in all things, as often as we call unto him? Take head, and make you
no graven Image and picture of any manner of figure, the lykenes of man or
woman, the likeness of any manner of beast that is on the earth, or the
lykenes of any manner fethered foul, that flies in the air, or the likeness
of any manner of worm that creppeth on the earth, or the likeness of any manner
fyshe yt is in the waters beneth the earth. Ye and lest you lift up thine eyes
unto heaven, and when ye see ye son the moon and stars with all the host of
heaven should be deceived, and should worship and serve the things
which the Lord thy God has made to serve all nations under the whole heaven.

The.vi. Chapter,
Hear O Israel, the Lord our god, is Lord only, and thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
might. And these words which I command yt this day, shall be in thy heart,
and thou shall show them unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
art at home in thy house and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou rysest up, and thou shalt bind them for a sign upon
thine hand. And they shall be warninges between thine eyes, and thou shall write
them upon the posts of thy house, and upon the gates.

The.vii. Chapter
The Lord thy God he is God, and that a true god, which keeps appointement
and mercy unto them that love him, and keep his commandments, even through
out a thousand generacions, and rewards them that hate him before his face,
so that he brings them to naught, and does not defarre the time, but
rewards him that hates him before his face.

If ye harken unto these laws, God will love the, and bless the, and
multiply the, he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of ye
land, thy corn, thy wine, and thy oil, and the increase of thy oxen, and the
flocks of thy sheep in the land which he swear unto thy fathers, to give
the. Thou shalt be blessed unto all nations, there shall be nether man nor woman
vnfrutful among you, nor any thing unfruitful among your cattle Moreover
the Lord will take away from the al manner of infirmities, and will put none
of the evil diseases of Egipte (which thou know, upon the, but will send
them upon all them that hate the.

The.viii. Chapter.
A Man does not live by bread only: but by every (word) that proceeds out
of the mouth of the lord, does a man live.

Thy raiment waxed not old upon the, neither thy foot did swell those forty
years.

The.ix. Chapter.
Speak not thou in thy heart (after that the lord thy god has cast them
out before thee) saying: for my righteousne^ the lord has brought me in, to
possess this land. Nay, but for the wickedness of these nations, the lord
has cast them out before thee. It is not for thy righteousness sake, or for
thy right heart, that thou go to possess their land, but for the
wickedness of these nations, the lord thy god does cast them out before thee,
even to perform the word which the lord thy god swear unto thy fathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Fortye days and forty nights I did neither eat bread nor drink water,
because of all your sins which ye sinned in doing wickedly in the sight of
the lord in that ye provoked him unto wrath.

The.x. Chapter.
ANd now O Israel what does the lord thy god require of thee, but to fear the
lord thy god, and to walk in all his ways, to love him and to serve ye lord
thy god with all thine heart, and withal thy soul, namely that thou keep the
commandments of the lord, and his ordinances which I commanded this day
to observe.

The xiij. Chapter.
IF thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thine own son, or thy daughter,
or thy wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul
unto the, entyce the secretly, saying, let us go and serve strange gods
which thou haste not known, nor yet thy fathers. And they be of the gods of
the people which are round about you, whether they benye unto the, or far of
from the, from the one end of the earth unto the other. Chou shall not consent
unto him, nor harken unto him: thine eye shall not pytye him, neither shall thou
have compassion on him, nor keep him secret, but cause him to be slain. Thine
hand shall be first upon him to kill him and then the hands of all the
people.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
THou shalt tithe all the increase of thy sede that the field brings forth,
year be year.

The.xv. Chapter.
There shall be no beggars among you.

If one of thy brethren among^ you be poor within any of thy gates in thy
land, which the lord thy god gives the, thou shall. ^ot harden thy heart,
nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother, but open thine hand unto him, and
lend him sufficient for his need which he has.

The.xvj. Chapter.
WRest not thou the law, nor know any person, neither take any reward, for
gifts blind the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. That which is
just and right shalt thou follow, that thou may live, and enjoy the lands
which the lord thy God gives the.

The.xvij. Chapter.
AT the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of death dy^,
and at the mouth of one wytnes, let no man dye.

That man that will do presumptuously, and will not harken unto the priest, that
stands before the lord thy god to minister, or unto the judge, that man shall
dye, and thou shalt put away evil from Israel.

The.xviij. Chapter.
THis is the priests duty of the people, and the^ that offer sacrifice,
whether it be ox or sheep. They must give unto the priest, the shulder, and
the two chekes, and the mawe, the first fruits also of thy corn, wine, and
oil, and the first of the well of thy sheep shalt thou give him. For the
Lord thy GOD has chosen him out of all thy trybes, to stand and to minister
in the name of the Lord, he and his sons for ever.

Let there not be found among you any one that makes his son or his
daughter to go through the fire, or that uses wytchecraft, or a choser out of
days, or that regards the flyinge of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmar. or
that counceleth with spretes, or a sothsayer, or that asks the truth at them
that be dead.

The Lord GOD will stere up unto the a Prophet among you, even of thy
brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall harken, according to all that thou
desyredst of the Lord thy God in Hor^b.

The.xix. Chapter.
IF an unrighteous wylnesse rise up against a man to accuse him of trespace,
then both the men which strive together shall stand before the Lord, before
the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days, and the judges shall
make diligent inquisition. And if the witness be found false, and that he has
given false witness against his brother, then shall ye do unto him, as he had
thought to do unto his brother, and thou shalt put evil away from the.

The.xx. Chapter.
IF any man be betrouthed unto a wife, I have not taken her, let him go and
return again unto his house, lest he dye in the battalle, and an other man
take her.

If any man fear and be fainte herted, let him go and return home to his
house, lest he make his brothers heart fainte as well as his.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THou shall give to the first borne double portion of all that thou have, for
he is the first of thy strength, and to him belongs the right of the first
borne.

If any man beue a son that is stubborn and disobedient, that he will not
hearken unto the voice of his father, and voice of his mother, and they have
chastened him, and he would not harken unto them: Then shall his father and his
mother take him, and bring him out unto the elders of that city, and unto the
gate of that same place, and say unto the elders of the city: This our son
is stubburne and disobediente, and will not harken unto our voice he is a
ryotour, and a drunckarde. And all the men of that city shall stone him with
stones unto death. And thou shall put evil away from the, and all Israel
shall hear and fear.

If a man have committed a trespass worthy of death, and is put to death for
it, and thou hangest him on tree, his body shall not remain all night upon the
tree, but thou shall burye him the same day: for the curse of God is on him
that is hanged.

The.xxij. Chapter.
THou shalt norse thy brothers ox or sheep go astray, and withdraw thy self
from the^: But shall bring them again unto thy brother. And if thy brother be
not nigh unto the, or if thou know him not, then bring it unto thine own
house, and it shall remain with the, until thy brother ask after them, and
then deliver them him again. In like manner shall thou do with his ass, and so
shalt thou do with his raiment, and with all lost things of thy brother
which he has lost and thou have found, shalt thou do like myse, for thou
may not hyde it. Thou shall not se thy brothers ass, or ox fall down by
the way, and withdraw thy self from them, but shalre helye him to heue him up
again.

The woman shall not wear that which perieyneth to the man, nether shall a man
put on woman's raiment. For all that do so, are abomination unto the Lord thy
God.

If a man be found lyinge with a woman that has a wedded husband, they shall
dye either other of them, both the man that lay with the wife, and also the
wife, and so thou shalt put away evil from Israel.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
THere shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor whore keeper of ye sons
of Israel. Thou shalt nether bring the hyre of an whore, nor the price of a
dog, into the house of the Lord thy god in any manner of vow: for even both
of them ar abomination unto the lord thy god.

Thou shalt not hurt thy brother by usury of money, nor by usury of corn, nor
by usury of any thing that he may be hurt withal unto a stra^ge^, thou may
lend upon usury but not unto thy brother, that the Lord thy God may bless
the in all that thou set thine hand to in the land whyther thou go to
conquer it.

When thou haste vowed a vow unto the Lord thy god, thou shalt not slack to
pay it: for the lord thy God will surely require it of the, and it shall be
sin in the. If thou shall leave vowing, it shall be no sin in the but that
which is once gone out of thy lyppes, thou must keep and do, according as
thou have vowed unto the Lord thy god of a fre will, and as thou have spoken
with thy mouth.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
WHen a man has taken a wife and married her, if she find no favor in his
eyes because he has espied some uncleanness in her, then let him write her a
byll of deuorcement and put it in her hand, and send her out of his house and
let her go, and be another man's wife.

When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go a warfare, neither shall be
charged with any ^usynes, but shall be free at home one year, and rejoice with
his wise which he has taken.

The.xxv. Chapter.
IF brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and have no child, the wife of
the dead shall not mary without unto a stranger, but his brother shall go in
unto her, and take her to wife, and occupy the rowme of his kynsman. And the
eldest son which she deareth, shall succeed in the name of his brother
which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.

Thou shalt not have in thy bag two manner of weyghtes a great and a small
neither shalt thou have in thy house diverse measures a great and a small: but
thou shalt have a right and just weight, and a perfect measure shalt thou
have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land, which the lord thy god
gives the, for all that do such things, and all that do vnrighte are
abomination unto the Lord thy God.

The.xxvij. Chapter.
CUrsed be the man that makes any carved or nolten Idol, an abheminatio^ unto
the lord, the work of the hands of the craftesman, and puts it in a secret
place.

The.xxix. Chapter.
I Have led you forty year in the wyldernes, and your clothes are not wared
old upon you and thy shoe is not waxed old upon thy foot.

The.xxxij. Chapter.
Perfect is the work of the most mighty god, for all his ways are judgment,
he is a god of truth, without wickedness righteouse and just is he.

The lords part is his folk, and Jacob is the portion of his enheritaunce.

He that should have been upright, when he wared fat, spurned with his hele:
Thou art well fed, thou art grown thycke, thou art laden with fatness. And he
forsook God his maker, and regarded not the god of his salvation.

I alone am god, and there is none but I: I kyl and will make a live, I wound
and I will heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter.
MOses was an hundred and twentye year old when he dyed, his eye was not
dim, nor his natural color abated.

The book of Joshua the.iii. Chapter.
AS soon as they that bare the arc came unto Jordan, and the fete of the
priests that bare the arc were dypped in the brym of the water (for Jordan
uses to fill all his banckes all the time of harueste) the waters also that
came down from about, did cyse up upon an heap, (and appeated as great as a
mountain,) and departed farte from the city of Adam, that was be side Zarthan.

And the waters that were beneth toward the sea of the wyldernes, fell away
and departed into the salt see and the people went right over against
Jericho. And the priests that bare the Arc of the appointemente of the Lord,
stood dry within Jorden ready prepared, and all the Israelites went over
through the dree, until all the people were gone clean over through Iordane.

The.iiii. Chapter.
ANd as soon as ye sooles of the priests fete were set on the dry land,
the waters of Jordan returned again unto their place, and went over all their
banckes as they did before.

The.v. Chapter.
THe Manna ceased on the morrow afer they had begone, to eat of the corn of
the land neither had the children of Israel Manna any more, but did eat of
the corn of the land of Lauaan that year.

The.vi. Chapter.
ANd Joshua saned Rahab the harleit, and her fathers bou should, and all that
she bad, and ^he dwelt in Israel even unto this day, because she hyd the
messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Ieticho.

The.i. Chapter.
SVnne stende thou still upon Gybeon, and thou Moon in Aialo^. And the sun
abode, and the moon stood still, until the people aue^ged themselves upon their
enemies, is not this written in the book of the ryghteous: The sun I say
abode in the myddest of heaven, and hasted not to go down by the space of an
hole day. And there was no day like that, beforeit, or after it, that the
lord heat de the voice of a man: for the lord fought for Israel.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
Joshua the sun of Nun, the servant of the Lord dyed, being an hundredth and
ten years old.

The book of Judges. The first Chapter.
ADombezek fled, and they followed after him and caught him, and cut of his
tho^bes, and his great toes. And Adonibezek said: threscore and ten kings
having their thombes and great toes cut of, gathered their meat under my
table. As I have done, so god has done to me again.

The.iij. Chapter.
ANd Ahud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thyghe,
and thrust it in king Eglons bellye, and the hafte went in after the blade.
And the fat closed the hafte so, that he might not draw the dagger out of
his belly, but the dynte came out.

Sangat the son of Anath slew of the Philistines.vi. hundred men with an Ore
goade, and delivered Israel.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IAhel Habets wife took a nail of the tente, and an hammer in her hand, and
went softly unto him, and smote the nail into yt temples of Sisaras head, and
fastened it into the ground for he slombered sore, and was weary.

The.viii. Chapter.
IEdeon had.lxx. sons, of his body begotten for he had many wives.

The.ix. Chapt.
ANd when Abunelech had fought against the Litte of Sichem all that day, he
took it and slew the people that was therein, and destroyed the city, and
sowed salt through it.

The xiiii. Chapter.
ANd behold, a young lion roared upon Sa^son and he tare him, as he would have
rent a kydde, and yet had nothing in his hand.

The.xv. Chapter.
ANd Samson found a rotten iawe bone of an Ass, and put forth his hand, and
caught it, and flewe a thousand men therewith.

The.xvi. Chapter.
ANd Samson took his rest till mydnyghte, and arose at mydnight, and took the
doors of the gate of the city, and the two side posts, and rent them of with
the bar and all, and put them upon his sholdets, and carried them up to the
top of an hill that is before Hebron.

The.xx. Chap.
ANd among al these folk of Gibea, were seven L. left banded me^, which every
one could flyng stones at an hear bread the, and not mysse.

Finis.
The book of Ruth the fourth Chapter.
THis was the manner of old time in Israel concerning pourches and chaungyng
for to stablishe althynge, that a man must pluck of his shoe and give it his
neighbor, and this was a sure witness in Israel.

The.i. book of the Kings the.i. Chapter.
AH my lord, as truly as thy soul lives my lord I am the woman that stood
before thee here praying unto the lord: for this ladde I prayde and the lord
has given me my desire which I asked of him, and therefore I have given him
unto the lord, as long as he is mete for the lord.

The.ii. Chapter.
THereis none so holy as the Lord, for without the is nothing. Nether is there
any of strengh as is our Lord.

The Lord is a god of knowledge and his purposes come to pass.

The lord kylleth, and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and fetches
up again.

The lord makes poor. and makes ritche, brings law, and gives up on
hye. He reyseth up the pore out of the dust, and lyfteth up the beggar from the
donghyll, to set him among princes, and to enheret them with the seat of
glory.

If one man sin against an other, dayesmen may be judges: but if a man sin
against God, who wylbe his daysman?

They that worship me, I will worship, and they that despise me shall come to
shame.

The.iii. Chapter.
I Have told Ely, that I will judge his house for ever, for the wickedness
which he knows. For when the people cursed his sons, for the same
wickedness, he has not corrected them, and therefore I have sworn unto the
house of Ely, that the wickedness of Elyes house, shall not be purged with
sacrifice nor offering for ever.

The.iiii. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned that when he made mencio^ of the at he of god, Ely fell from
his stole backewarde upon the tresholde of the gate, and his neckebrake, and he
dyed.

The.viii. Chapter.
SAmuels sons Joel and Abis walked not in hie ways, but turned aside after
lucre and took reward, and perverted the right.

The.ix. Chapter.
Saul was a goodly young man and a fair. so that among the children of Israel
there was none goodlyet then he. For from the shoulders upward he was hyer
then all the other people.

He that is now called a prophet was in the old time called a sear.

The.xi. Chapter.
ALL the men of Iabes says unto Nahas: make a covenant with us, and we will
be thy servants. And Nahas the Ammonite answered them: In this will I make a
couenaunte with you, if I may thruste out all your right eyes, and bring the
shame upon all Israel.

The.xii. Chapter.
Saul said unto the people: I am old and graye headed, and behold my sons
are with you and I have walked before you from my chyldehode unto this day,
behold, here I am, bear record of me before the lord and his anointed.
whose ore have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? whom have I done wrong
to? whom have I hutte? or of whose hand have I received any brybe, to blind
my eyes there with and I will restore it you again. They said: thou haste
done us no wrong, nor hu^to us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's
hand.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
IT is no hardness with the lord, to save either in many or in few.

The.xv. Chapter.
Has the lord as great pleasure in burnt sacrifices and offeringes, as when
the voice of the lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey, is better, than sacrifice,
and to harken is better then the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin
of wytchecrafte, and stubbernesse is as the wickedness of ydolatry.

The.xvi. Chapter.
GOd sees not as man sees, for man lokethe on the outward apperance, but god
beholds the heart.

And so it fortuneth that when the evil spirit sent of god came upon Saul,
David took an harp and playde with his hand, and so Saul was refreshed and
did amend, and the evil spirit departed from him.

The.xvii. Chapter.
THen said David to the philistine Goliath: thou come to me with a sword, a
spear, and a shylde, but I come to the in the name of the lord of hoostes, the
God of the host of Israel whom thou haste railed upon.

The.xxj. Chapter.
ANd the priest answered David, and said: there is no commen bread under my
hand, but here is hallowed bread, if the young men have kept the^ selves from
unclean things especially women.

The.xxij. Chapter.
THe servants of king Saul would not move their hands to fall upon the
priests of the Lord. Doeg the edomite turned and ran upon the priests, and
slew that same day, four score and five persons that did were a fynned Ephod.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
ANd David said unto his men, the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto
my master the lords anointed, to lay my hand upon him, saying he is the
anointed of the Lord.

The.xxvj. Chapter.
WHo can lay his hand on the lords anointed and by gyltlesse?

The.xxx. Chapter.
AS his part is that goes down and syghteth, so shall his part be that
taryeth by the stuff, that it may be parteda like.

The.ii. book of the kings The first Chapter.
THE bow of Ionathas, and the swerd of Saul turned never back again emptye
f^o^ the blood of the slain and from the fart of the mighty warriors.

The.v. Chapter.
David was thyrty year old when he began to raygne, and he raygned forty year:
In Hebron he rayngned over Judah seven year and six months. And in Jerusalem
he raygned thyrtye and three years over all Israel and Judah.

The.vj. Chapter.
TZa put his hand to the ark of God, and held it, for the oxen stombled, and
the lord was wroth with Vza, and god smote him in the same place for his
fault, and there, he dyed before the ark of God.

And David said unto Michol, I thought to dance before the Lord, which
chose me rather then thy father, and all his kyn, and commanded me to be ruler
over all the people of the Lord, even over Israel: And theefore will I play
before the Lord: And will yet be more vile then so, and wylbe meke in mine
own sight.

The.x. Chapter.
HAnon took David's servants, and shaued of the half of every man's Beerde,
and cut of their garments in the myddle, even hard to the buttockes of them,
and sent them away.

The.xj. Chapter.
TRias answered David. The arc of Israel and Judah, dwell in pauilio^s, and my
Lord Ioab and the servants of my Lord lie upon the flat earth, and shall I
then go into mine house, to cate and drink, and lie with my wife? By thy life,
and by the life of my soul, I will not do this thing.

The.xij. Chapter.
ANd David said unto Nathan: I have sinned against the lord. And Nathan said
unto David: the Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. How
beyt, because in doing this deed, thou have given the enemies of the Lords
cause to rail, the child that is borne unto the shall surely dye.

Then said his servants unto him: what thing is this, that thou have done?
Thou did fall and weep for the child, while it was a live, and as soon as
it was deed, thou dyddest rise up, and eat meat, he said: while the child
was yet alive, I fasted and wept, for this I thought, who can tell whether god
will have mercy on me, that the child may iyue. But now saying he is deed,
whet fore should I fast? can I bring him again any more. I shall go to him,
rather then he shall come again to me.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
IN all Israel there was not so goodly a man as Absalom, for he was very
beautiful, in somuche that from the sole of his foot to the top of his head,
there was no blemishe in him. And when he shaued his heed (for at every years
end he shaued it, because the here was heavy on him, and must neades shave it)
the here of his heed weyed two hundred sycles, after the kings weight.

The.xvj. Chapter.
THe counsel of Thithophel which he con^sayled in those days, was as a man
had asked counsel of god, both with David and with Absalom.

The.xxij. Chapter.
With the godly thou shalt be godly, and with the man that is incorrupt, thou
shalt be vncorrupt, with the pure thou shalt be pure, and with the froward
thou shalt be froward.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
HE that bears rule over me^, ought to rule justly in the fear of god.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
ANd David said unto Gad: I am in extreme trouble, me will fall now into the
hand of the lord, for much is his mercy, and let me not fall into the hand
of man.

The.iii. book of the Kings the.iii. Chapter.
Give unto thy servant an understanding heart, to judge the people, that I
may decerne between good and bad. Behold I have done according to thy
peticion, for I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that
there was none like the before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like
unto thee.

The.iiii. Chapter.
UNder Iair the son of Manasse was the region of Argob, which is in Basan,
three score great Cities with walls and bars of brass.

And Salomons bread for one day was thirtye quarters of manchet stout, and
threscore quarters of meal, ten sialled Oxen, and.xx. out of the pastoures,
and an hundred sheep, besides hertes buckes, and wild goats and capons.

And Salamon had.xl. M. stalles of horses for chareties, and.xii. M. horsemen.

The.viii. Chapter.
WHere as it was in thine earte to build an house unto my name, thou byddest
well, that thou wast so minded.

Solomon offered unto the Lord.xxii. M. oxen and an hundred and twenty
thousand sheep.

The.x. Chapter.
Silver was nothing worth in the days of Solomon. And he made silver in
Jerusalem as plenteous as ^iones.

The.xi. Chapter.
Solomon had seven.C. Queen's, and three hundred Concubines.

The.xii. Chapter.
MY father made your yoke greuouse, and I will make it greuouser: My father
also chastised you with whippes, but I will chastise you with Scorpions.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Jeroboam stretched out his hand from the auitare, saying: hold the man of
god: And his hand which he put forth against him, dried up, and he could
not pulle it in again.

The.xvii. Chapter.
THe Ravens brought Elias bread and flesh in the morning, and likewise bread
and flesh in the euenyng, and he drank of the brook Cherith.

The.xix. Chapter.
ELia arose and did care and drink and walked in the strength of that meat
fourtye days and forty nights, even unto Horeb the mount of God.

I have left me.vii. M. in Israel, of which never man bowed his knees unto
Baal, nor kyssed him with his mouth.

The.xxi. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned that when Ahab heard those words, he rent his clothes, and
put sackcloth about his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went
bare foot. And the word of the lord came to Elia the Thesbyte, saying:
seeste thou how Ahab. humbles hymselte before me because he submits
himself before me. I will not bring that evil in his days but in his sons
days, will I bring in evil upon his house.

The.xxii. Chapter.
ANd there came forth a certain spirit, and stood before the Lord, and
said: I will persuade him, and the Lord said unto him wherewith? And he
said, I will go out and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his
prophets. He said: thou shalt persuade him, and prevail, go forth then, and
do even so. Now therefore hold, the Lord has put a lyinge spirit in the
mouth of all these thy prophets.

The.iii. book of the kings the first Chapter.
ELias was an heaty man, and gyrde with a gyrdle of lether about his loins.

The.ii. Chapter.
ELias took his mantel, and wrapte it together and smote the waters, and they
were divided, part the one way and part the other.

The.iii. Chapter.
BUt row bring me a mynstrell, and when the mynstrell playde, the hand of the
lord came upon Eliseus.

The.iiii. Chapter.
O Thou man of god, there is death in the pot and they could not eat thereof,
but he said bring meal, and he cast it into the po^, and said: Fyl for the
people, that they may eat, and there was no more harm in the pot.

The.vi. Chapter.
ANd behold there was a great dearthe in Samaria, and Benhadad king of Siria
besieged it until an Asses head (was sold) for four score silver pence, and
the fourth part of a cab of doves dunge for.v. sicles.

The.xiii. Chapter.
THe soldiers of the Moabites came into ye land the same year, and it
chanced as some of them were buryeng a man, and spyed the soldiers, they cast
the man into the sepulcher of Eliseus, and when the man was rolled down, and
touched the body of Eliseus, he revived and stood upon his feet,

The.xviii. Chapter.
HEzekia put away the hyl aulters, and brake the Idolles, and cut down the
groves, and all to brake the brazen serpent that Moses had made, for unto
those days the children of Israel did burn sacrifice to it, and he called it
Nehusta^.

The.xix. Chapter.
ANd so it came to pass: that the self same tyghte the angel of the lord
went out and smote in the host of the Assirians an hundred four score and
five thousand.

The.xx. Chapter.
HAd Hesekia turned his face to the waland prayed to the lord, saying: I
beseech thee now O Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight: and
Hesekia wept sore. Esaye said to Hesekia: Thus says ye lord god of David thy
father: I have herd thy prayer, and seen thy tears. And behold, I will heal
thee, so that on the third day, thou shalt go up into the house of the
Lord. And I will add unto thy days yet fiftene year.

Shall the shado we go forward ten degrees or go back again ten degrees,
Hesekia answered: it is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten degrees,
(nether is that my desire,) but if the shadow go backewarde ten degrees it is
no light thing. And Esaye the prophet called unto the lord, and he brought
the shadow ten degrees backewardes, by which it had goen down in the dyall
of Ahas.

Th.xxii. Chapter.
THe King Iosus sent Saphan, saying: go up to Nelkia the hye priest, that he
may sum the silver which is brought into the house of the lord, which the
kepers of the porche have gathered of the people. etc. How be it let no
te^^nyng be made with them, of the money that is delivered into their hands
for their use is to deal* faithfully.

The first book of Chronicles the tenthe Chapter.
SAVL dyed for his trespass that he trespassed against the Lord, in that he
kept not the word of the lord, and in that he sought, and asked counsel
of a womanne that wrought with a spirit, and asked not of the Lord. And
therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Esaias.

The.xv. Chapter.
ANd Chenanishu the chief of the Levites, was wayster of the song, for he
taught other to sing because he was a man of understanding.

The.xvi. Chapter.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make his acts known
among the people, Sing unto him, and play unto him, talk of all his
wondrefull deeds. Rejoice in his holy name: let the hearts of them that seek
the Lord be glad: Seek the lord, and his strength, seek his presence
always.

Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

The.xx. Chapter.
And there chanced yet again war at Geth* where as was a man of a great
stature, with.xx^^ fyngers and toes.vi. on every hand and.vi. on every foot,
and was the son of Raphath.

The.xxi. Chapter.
HAd David said unto God: I am in an excedyng strayte. Let me fall now into
the hand of the lord, for passing great are his mercyes, but let me not fall
into the hand of men.

The.xxii. Chapter.
HAd David said unto Solomon: my son, I thought (as it was in my heart) to
buyld an house unto the name of the Lord my God: but the word of the lord
came to me, saying: thou haste shed much blood, and haste made great
battayles, thou shalt therefore not build an house unto my name for thou
haste shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.

The.xxiij. Chapter.
HAD the Levites were noumbred from the age of.xxx. year and above, and the
number and sum of them was.xxxvii. thousand men. Of which.xxxiiii. M. were
set to fourther the work of the house of the Lord: and.vi. M. were officers
and judges iiii. M. were porters, and.iiii. M praised the lord with such
instruments as was made to praise withal.

The.xxv. Chapter.
IEduthun and Heman execated the service in the house of god, at the kings
hand. And the multitude of them with their brethren that were instruct in the
songs of the lord even all that were coming were two hundred four froze and
eight.

The.xxviij. Chapter
THe Lord searchech all hearts, and understands all the ymaginacion of
thoughts.

The.xxix. Chapter.
Our days on the earth are but as a shadow and there is none abiding.

The.ii. book of the Chronicles the.vi. Chapter.
AND will GOD in very deed dwell with me^ on earth? behold heaven, and heaven
above al heavens do not contain thee: how much less the house which I have
builded?

The.vii. Chapter.
This house which I have sanctified for my name will I cast out of my sight,
and will make it to be a proverb and a ieste among all nations. And every one
that passes by shall be astoned at this house which belonged to the most hye
GOD and shall say: why has the lord delte on this fashion with this land, and
with this house? And they shall answer, because they forsook the lord god of
their father, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and caught
hold on other gods, and worshypped them, and served them, even therefore
has he brought all this evil upon them.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
HAd Asa eryed unto the lord his god, and said: lord it is no hard thing
with the to help either many, or them that have no power. Help us therefore O
lord our god, for we trust to the, and in thy name we go against this
multitude.

The.xvi. Chapter.
THe eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to strength them that are of
perfect heart toward him.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
HAd the sprite of God came upon Zacharye the son Iehoiada the priest, which
stood by the people, and said unto them. Thus says god: why transgress ye
the commandments of the lord, that ye cannot prospere? for because ye have
forsaken the lord, he also has forsaken you. And they conspired against him,
and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king, even in the
court of the house of the lord.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
TZia transgressed against the lord his god, and went into the temple of the
Lord, to burn cense upon the altar of incense. And Azariahu the priest went
in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the lord, that were valiau^t
men. And they stood by Vzia the king and said unto him: It pertains not to
the Vziato burn incense unto the lord, but to the priests the children of
Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense. Come therefore out of the
Sanctuarye for you have trespaced, and it is no worship to the before the lord
god. And Vzia was wroth, and had incense in his hand to burn it, and so
while he had indignacio^ against the priests, the leprosy sprang in his
foreheade before the priests in the house of the lord even beside the incense
altar.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
Pluck up your hertes and be strong, be not afraid nor discoraged, for the
king of Assure, and for all the multitude that he has with him, for there be mo
with us, then with him. With him is an arm of flesh but with us is the lord
our god for to help us and to fight our battayles.

The.xxxiii. Chapter
And when Manasses was in tribulation, he besought the lord his god, and
humbled him self excedingly before the god of his fathere, and made
intercessyon to him, and god was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom, and then Manasse knew that
the lord was god.

The first book of Esdras. The.vii. Chapter.
AND we certify you that ye have no auctorite to require taxynge and custom
and yearly rentes upon any of the prestes levites, singers, porters, Nethinuns,
and ministers, in the house of his god.

The.viii. Chapter.
The hand of our god is upon all them that seek him in goodness, and his
violence and wrath is against all them that forsake him.

The.ii. book of Esdras. The.v. Chapter.
I And my brethren, and my servants do lend them money and corn, but as for
usury let us leave it.

The.xii. Chapter.
In the time of Zorobabell and Nehemiah did al they of Israel give portions
unto the syngers and porters every day his portion, and they gave tithes unto
the Levites, and the Levites gave tithes again unto the children of Aaron.

The.iii. book of Esdras. The.iii. Chapter.
Wine is a strong thing. The king is stronger. Women have yet more strenghte,
but above all things the truth bears away the victory.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Truth endures, and is always strong, it lives and conquereth for evermore
world without end.

The.viii. Chapter.
I Command you also that ye require no tax nor tribute of the preastes,
Levites, syngers, and ministers of the temple, nor of the writers, and that no
man have auctorite to meddle any thing against them.

The.iiii. book of Esdras the.i. Chap.
WHat shall I do unto the O Jacob? Thou Judah would not obey me, I will turn
me to another people, and unto those will I give my name, that they may keep my
statutes seeing ye have forsaken me, I will forsake you. When ye desire me to
be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy upon you. When ye call upon me, I
will not hear you, for ye have defiled your hands with blood, and your fete
are swyfte to commit manslaughter. Ye have not forsaken me (in a manner) but
your own selves, says the lord.

The.ii. Chapter.
EXecute justice for the wyddowe, be judge for the fatherles, give to the
peore, defend the confortlesse, clothe the naked, heal the wounded and sick,
laugh not a lame man so scorn, defend the crepell, and let the blind come
into the light of my clearenes, whersoeuer you fyndest the dead take them and
bury them, and I shall give the, the first place in my resurrection.

The.iiii. Chapter.
GO thy way, way me the weight of ye fire or measure me the blaste of the
wind, or call me again the day that is paste.

They that dowell upon earth may understand nothing, but that, which is upon
earth, and he that dwells above the heavens, may only understand the
things that are above the heuens.

The world hastes fast to pass away, and can not comprehend the things
that are promised for the righteous in time to come, for this world is full of
unrighteous and weakness.

The corn of euel sede has been sown in the heart of man, from the
beginning.

The.v. Chapter.
Behold, the days shall come, yt they which dwell upon the earth, shall be
taken in a great nombre, and the way of the truth shall be hid, and the land
shall be barren from faith, but iniquity shall have the upper hand, like as
thou have seen now, and as thou haste heard long ago.

And he said unto me: Nombre the things that are yet not come, gather me
together the drops that are scattered abroad, make me the flowers greane
again, that are wythered, open me the thing that is closed, and bring me
forth the wyndes that are shut up, show me the Image of a voice, and then
shall I declare the thing that thou labourest to know.

The.vi. Chapter.
FRom Abraham unto Isahar, when Jacob and Esau, were borne of him, Jacobs hand
held first the heir of Esau, for Esau is the end of this world, and Jacob
is the beginning of it that follows. The hand of man betwyxt the hele and
the hand

The earth shall restore those that have slepte in her, and so shall the dust
those that dwell in silence, and the secret places shall deliver those that be
committed unto them.

The.vii. Chapter
HAnd the most highest shall be openly declared upon the seat of judgment, and
all miserye shall vanyshe away, and long sufferynge shall be gathered together,
but the judgment shall continue, the truth shall remain, and faith shall wax
strong, the work shall follow, and the reward shall be showed, ye righteousness
shall watch, and the unrighteousness shall bear no rule.

The day of dome shall be the end of this time, and the beginning of the
immortality for to come, where in all corruption is vanyshed, all
voluptuousnes is lowsed, all mysbeleue taken away, righteousness growed, and
the verite spronge up. Then shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed,
nor oppress him, that has given the victory.

I know lord, that the highest is merciful, in that he has mercy upon
them, which are not yet in the world, and upon those also that walk in his
law, and that he is pacient and long sufferynge toward those that have sinned
in their worckes, and that he is liberal to give where as it requires, and
that he is of great mercy, for he multiplied his loving kyndnesse toward
those that are present, and that are paste, and to them which are for to
come, for if he multiplye not his mercyes, the world shall not be made living,
with those that dwell therein. He gives also, for if he gave not of his goodness
that they which have done evil, might be eased from their wyckednes, the ten
thousand part of men should not be made living. And if the judge forgave not
those which he healed with his word, and if he would destroy the multitude yt
strives, there should be very few left in an innumerable multitude.

The.viii. Chapter.
THe most highest made this world for many but ye world to come for few. I
will tell the a symilitude Esoras: As when thou askeste the earth, it shall
say unto the, that it gives much moulde whereof earthen vessels are made, but
little of it that gold comes of, even so is it with the work of this
world, There be many created, but few shall be preserved.

If thou have mercy upon us, thou shall be called merciful, where as we have no
worckes of righteousness, for the righteous which have laid up many good
worckes together, shall out of their deeds receive reward.

The.ix. Chapter.
Like as the field is, so is also the seed, as the flowers be, so are the
colors also, such as the worckeman is, such is the work, and as the
husband man is him self, so is his husbandry also.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
THe weaker that the world and the time is, the more shall sin and
wickedness increase in them that dwell upon earth, for the truth is fled
far away, and lesynge is hard at hand.

If so be that ye will subdue your own understanding, and reform your heart,
ye shall be kept alive, and after death shall ye optaine mercy, for after
death shall the judgment come, when we shall live again, and then shall the
names of the righteous be manifest, and the works of the ungodly shall be
declared.

The.xv. Chapter.
THus says the lord god, my right hand shall not spare the sinners, and my
sweard shall not cease over the^ yt shed innocent blood upon earth.

The.xvi. Chapter.
ANd when your sins are brought forth ye shall be ashamed before men, and
your own sins shall be your accusers in that day.

Woe be unto them that are subdued unto their sins, and tangled in their
wickedness, like as a field is hedged in with bushes, and the pathe thereof
covered with thorns, and that no man may travail through, and so is he
taken, and cast in the fire, and burnt.

The book of Tobias The first Chapter.
TObias gat him to Jerusalem unto the temple of the lord, and there worshipped
ye lord god of Israel, faithfully offering of al his first fruits and tithes,
so that in the third year he ministered all the tithes unto the strangers and
conuertes.

Tobias taught his son from his youth up to fear god, and to refrain from
all sin.

Tobias fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and buried the dead and slain,
diligently.

The.ii. Chapter.
THis temptation (of blindness) did god suffer to happen unto him, yt they
which came after might have an example of his patience, like as of holy Job,
for in so much as he ever feared god from his youth up, and kept his
commandments, he grudged not against god, yt the plage of blindness chau^sed
unto him, but remained sted fast in ye fear of god, and thanked god all the
days of his life.

The.iii. Chapter.
BLessed be thy name (o god) of our fathers, which when thou art wroth,
show mercy, and in time of trouble, thou forgeuest the sins of them that
call upon the.

Whosoever loves the, and serves the a right, is sure of this, that if his
life be tempted and proved, it stands in the trying, and if he endure in
patience, he shall have a reward and be hyghlye crowned, and if he be in
troble, that god (no doubt) shall deliver him, and if his life be in
chastening, that he shall have leave to come unto thy mercy. For thou have no
pleasure in our damnation, and why? after a storm thou make the wether fair
and still, after wepinge and heaviness thou geuest great joy.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Hold thy mother in honor all the days of her life: for thou oughteste to
remember what and how great parels she suffered for the in her womb.

Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from the pore, and so shall
it come to pass, that the face of the lord, shall not be turned away from the.

Mercy delyuereth from all sin and from death, and suffers not the soul to
come in darcknes. A great conforte is mercy before the high god, unto all
them that show it.

Whosoever worcketh any thing for the, immediately give him his hyre, and look
that thy hired servants wages remain not by the over night.

Look that thou never do unto another man, the thing that thou would not
another manne should do unto the.

The.vi. Chapter.
If thou layest a piece of the heart upon the coals, the smoke thereof drives
away all manner of evil spretes wether it be from man, or woman, so that from
thenceforthe the same shall come no more unto them.

Hear me, and I will tell the, what they be of whom the devil has power.
Namelye they that receive marriage of such a fashion, that they shute god out
from them, and from their heart, and give them selves to their own lust,
even as it were an horse and mule, which have no understanding, upon such
has the devil power. But when thou take Sara, and art come in to her
chaumbre, wytholde thy self from her three days, and give thy diligence unto
nothing, but unto prayer with her.

The.x. Chapter.
SO the elders embraced their daughter, ^yssed her, and let her goo, exortyng
her to honor her father and mother in law, to love her husband, to rule
well her household, to keep her house in good order, and to show her selte
fawtlesse.

The.xii. Chapter.
IT is good to hyde the kings secret, but to show the worckes of god, and to
praise them is an honorable thing.

Prayer is good with fasting, and mercy is better then to horde up treasures
of gold.

For mercy delyuereth from death, cleanses sin, and causes to find
everlasting life. But they that do sin and unrighteousness, are the enemies of
their own soul.

When thou prayedest with tears, and buriedest the dead, and leftest thy
dinner, and hyddest the dead in thy house upon the day time, that thou myghtest
burye them in the night, I offered thy prayer before the lord.

You thougt that I did eat and drink with you, but I use meat that is
muscible, and drinck that can not be seen of men.

The book of Judith. The fourth Chapter.
BE ye sure that the lord will here your petitions if ye continue steadfast in
fastinges and prayers in the syghte of the lord.

The.viii. Chapter.
Iudyth ware a smock of hear, and fasted all the days of her life, except
the sabothes, and new mones, and the solemn days that the people of Israel
kept.

The.ix. Chapter.
THy power (o lord) standethe not in ye power of men, neither have thou any
plesur in the strenghte of horses. There was never proud parsone that plaised
the, but in the prayer of the humble and meke has thy pleasure been evermore.

The book of Ester The first Chapter.
ANd the drynck was so appointed, that none should compel any man, for so the
king had commanded by the officers of his house, that every one should do, as
it lyked him.

He sent letters forth in to all the kings lands, in to eueri land
according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language,
that every manne should be lord in his own house,

The.ii. Chapter.
HAd when the appointed time of every damsel came, that she should go in to the
king, Ahasuerus, after that she had been twelve months in the deckynge of the
women (for their deckynge must have so much time, namely, six months with
bauline and myrre, and sire months with good spyces, so were the women
beautyfyed) yet went their one damesell unto the king. etc.

The.xvi. Chapter.
IT happens often also, that they which be set in office by the hyer power,
and unto whom the business and causes of the subjects are commutted to be
handled, wax proud, and defile them selfs with shedyng of innocent blood,
which brings the^ to intolerable hurt, which also with false and
deceytefull words, and with liyng tales, disceaue and berray the innocent
goodness of princes.

The book of Job. The first Chapter.
NAked came I out of my mothers womb and naked shall I turn thither again. The
lord gave, and the lord has taken away, blessed. be the name of the lord.

The.ii. Chapter.
SHall we receive prosperity at the hand of god, and not receive adversity.

The.iiii. Chapter.
COnsider (I pray the) who ever perysshed being an innocent? Or when were the
godlyr destroyed? For (as I have proved by experience) they that plowe
iniquity, and sow wretchedness, reap the same.

The.v. Chapter.
AMa^ is borne to labor, like as the sparches fly up out of the hot coals.

Behold, happy is the man whom god punissheth, therefore refuse not thou the
chastenynge of the almighty: for though he made a wound, he gives aplaster,
though he sutyte, his hand makes whole again.

The.vi. Chapter.
HE that is in tribulation, ought to be comfort of his neighbor.

The.vij. Chapter.
MY flesh is clothed with worms and duste of the earth. My skin is
wythered and become horrible, my days pass over more spedly then a weuer can
weue out his web, and are gone or I am aware. Remember that my life is but a
wind.

The.viii. Chapter.
Our days upon earth are but a very shadow

The.ix. Chapter.
HE is good, whose wrath no man may withstand, but the proudest of all must
stoape under him.

If men will speak of ryghteousnes, who date be my record? If I will justify
my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, if I will put forth my self for
a perfect man, he shall reprove me a wicked doet.

The.x. Chapter.
O Remember (I besecbe the) how that thou made me of the earth, and shalt
bring me in to dust again.

The.xii. Chapter.
Among old persons there is wisdom, and in age is understanding.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
MAn that is borne of woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
miserye. He comes up, and is cut down like a flower. He flies as it were a
shadow, and never continues in one state.

The days of man surely are determined, the nombre of his months are
known only unto the Thou have appointed him his bounds, which he cannot go
beyond.

while man lives: his flesh must have travail: and while the soul is in
him: he must be in sorrow.

The.xv. Chapter.
WHat is man, that he should be clean? What has he (which is borne of a
woman) whereby he might be righteous? Behold he does not trust his saints:
yea, the very heavens are not clean in her sight, how much more then an
abbominable and vile man, which drincketh wycnes like water?

The.xix. Chapter.
I Am sure that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in
the latter day: that I shall be clothed again with this sainne, and se god in
my flesh, ye, I my self shall behold him, not with other, but with the same
eyes.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THe wicked spend their days in welthnes^ but suddenly they go down to hell.
They say also unto god, go from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Who is the almyghtye that we should serve him? and what profit should have to
submyt our selves unto him.

The.xxii. Chapter.
WHo so humbles him self, him shall he set up, and who so looks mekely
shall be healed.

The.xxv. Chapter.
How may a man compared unto god be iustyfyed? or how can he be clean that is
borne of a woman? Behold the moon shines nothing in comparison to him, and
the stars are vnciene in his syghte. How much more then man, that is but
corruption, and the son of man, which is but a worm?

The.xxvii. Chapter.
WHen the rich man dies, he carried nothing with him, he is gone in the
twynckelynge of an eye, and has nothing.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
Behold, to fear the lord is wisdom, and to forsake euellis understanding.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
WHen god does once command a thing, there should no man be curious to
search whether it be right.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
FOr the ungodliness of the people, does god make an ypocrit (...) reign
over them.

The.xlii. Chapter.
MY servant Job shall pray for you. The Lord gave Job twyse as much as he
had before.

The Psalms of David. The.i. Chapter.
BLessed is that man that has not walked in the council of the ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the scorneful.
But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law will he exercise
him self day and night.

The.ii. Chapter.
BE wise now therefore O ye kings, be learned ye that are judges of the earth.

The.v. Chapter.
THou shalt destroy them that speak leasyng, the lord will abhor both the
bloud-thyrsty, and disceatfull man.

The.vi. Chapter.
I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed, and water my couche with
my tears.

The.vii. Chapter.
God is provoked every day, if a man will not turn, he will whette his
swearde, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has prepared him the
instruments of death, he ordeyneth his arowes against the persecutoures.

The.viii. Chapter.
WHat is man that thou art myndefull of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him? Thou made him lower then the aungelles, to crown him with
glory and worship. Thou make him to have dominion of the worckes of thy
hands, and thou have put all things in subjection under his feet.

The.xi. Chapter.
THe Lord is in his holy temple, the lords seat is in heaven, his eyes
consider the poor, and his eye lyddes tries the children of men. The Lord
aloweth the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delyted in wychednes
does his soul abhor, upon the ungodly he shall raygne snares, fire and
brymstone, storm and tempeste, this shall be their portion to drink.

The.xii. Chapter.
THe Lord shel rote out all disceatful lips, and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

The.xiii. Chapter.
How long shall mine enemy triumph over me? Consider and hear me O lord my
god, lyghten mine eyes, that I stepe not in death, lest mine enemy say, I
have prevailed against him. For if I be cast down, they that trouble me will
rejoice at it. But my trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy
salvation.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
THe Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to se if there
were any that would understand, and seek after god. But they are all gone out
of the way, they are altogether become abominable, there is none that does
good, no not one.

The.xv. Chapter.
Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? he that has not given his money to
vsurye, nor taken reward against the innocent.

The.xvi. Chapter.
THe Lord him self is the portion of mine enheritaunce.

Thou shalt not leave my soul in hell, neither shalt thou suffer thy holy one
to se corruption.

The.xviii. Chapter.
The lord shall reward me after my righteous dealyng, according to the
clennes of my hands shall he recompense me.

With the holy thou shalt be holy, and with a perfect man thou shall be
perfect. With the clean thou shalt be clean: and with the froward thou
shalt learn frowardnes.

The.xix. Chapter.
The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous all together. More to be
desired are they than gold, yea then much fine gold: sweter then honey comb
of the honey. Moreover by them is thy servant taught, and in keeping of them,
there is great reward.

Who can tell how often he offends? Oh cleanse thou me fro my secret fautes.
Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me, so shall I be undefiled, and innocent from the great offense.

The.xx. Chapter.
SOme put their trust in charrettes, and some in horses, but we will remember
the name of the lord our god. They are brought down and fallen, but we are
risen, and stand upright.

The.xxii. Chapter.
I Am a worm and no man: a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people.

They pearsed my hands and my fete, I may tell all my bones, they stand
staring and lokynge upon me. They part my garments among them and cast
lottes upon my vesture.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
Who shall rise up into the hill of the lord? even he that has clean hands,
and a pure heart, and that has not lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn
to deceive his neighbor. The. 25. Cha. What man is he that fears the lord?
him shall he teach in the way that he shall chose. His soul shall dowell at
ease, and his seed shall inherit the land. The secret of the lord is among
them that fear him, and he will show the^ his conuenaunt.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
ONe thing have I desired of the lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the lord all the days of my life to behold the fair
beauty of the lord and to viset his temple.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
O Pluck me not away with the ungodly and wicked doers, which speak fre^dly
to their neighbors, but ymagine myschefe in their hertes. Reward them
according to the wickedness of their own inventions. Recompense them after
the work of their hands, pay them that they have deserved. For they
regard not in their mind the worckes of the lord, nor the operations of his
hands, therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
BLessed is he whose unrighteous is forgeuen, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed is that man, unto whom the lord imputes no sin, and in whose
sprete there is no gyle.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
THe lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the
devises of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the counseyles of
princes.

There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an hooste, neither is
any mighty man delivered by much strenght. A horse is counted but a vain
thing to save a man, neither shall he deliver any man by his great strength.
Behold the eye of the lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy. To deliver their souls from death, and to feed
them in time of dearth.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter
I will always give thanks unto the lord, his praise shall ever be in my
mouth.

The aungel of the lord tarieth round about them that fear him, and
delyuereth them. O taste and se, how gracious the lord is, blessed is the
manne that trusts in him. O fear the lord, ye that be his saints for they
that fear him, lack nothing.

What man is he that lusts to live, and would feign se good days? Keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lyppes, that they speak nogyle. Eschew evil and do
good, se he peace and ensue it.

The eyes of the lord are over the ryghteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers. The countinaunce of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
rote out the remembrance of them from the earth, The righteous cry, and the
lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their troubles. The lord is
nigh unto them, that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be of an
humble sprete. Great are the troubles of the ryghteous, but the lord
delivers him out of all. He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them is
broken.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
I put on sack clothe, and humbled my soul with fasting: and my prayer
shall return in to my own bosom.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
Wicked doers shall be roted out, and they that patiently abide the lord, these
shall inherit the land. Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean
gone, thou shalt look after his place: and he shall be away. But the meke
spirited shall possess the earth, and shall be refreshed in the multitude of
peace.

A small thing that the righteous has, is better then great richesse of the
ungodly.

I have been young, and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed beggyng their bread.

The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue wylbe
talking of judgment.

I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and florishyng like a grene
bay tree: I went by, and lo, he was gone, I sought him, but his place could
no where be found.

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
There is no health in my flesh. And there is no whole part in my body.

The.xxxix. Chapter.
Verily every man living is altogether ^^nitie, for man walks in a vain
shadow, and disquieteth him self in vain, he heapeth up richessr, and cannot
tell who shall gather them.

The.xli. Chapter.
BLessed is he that considers the poor, and neady, the lord shall deliver
him in the time of trouble.

The.xliiii. Chapter.
I will not trust in my bow it is not my swearde that shall help me, but it is
thou that sauest us from our enemies, and put them to confusion that hate
us.

For thy sake also are we killed all the day long, and are contented as sheep
appointed to be claine.

The.xlv. Chapter.
Thou haste loved ryghteousnes, and hated iniquity, wherefore god, even thy
god, has anointed the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

The.xlix. Chapter.
The wise men dye and her. she together as well as the ignorant and foolyshe,
and leave their riches for other.

Be not thou affrayed though one be made rich or if the glory of his house be
increased, for he shall carpe nothing away with him, when he dies, neither
shall his pomp follow him.

The.l. Chapter.
Our god shall come, and shall not hepe silence, there shall go before him a
consumyng fire, and a mighty tempeste shall be stered up round about him, he
shall call the heaven from above, and the earth that he may judge his people.

Offer unto god thankesgeuyng, and pay thy dowes unto the most highest.

But unto the ungodly said god, why do thou preach my laws, and take
my co^uenaunt in thy mouth?

The.li. Chapter
The sacrifice of god, is a troubled sprete, a broken and a contrite heart, o
god, shall thou not despise.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

The.lii. Chapter.
THe righteous also shall se this, and fear, and shall laugh him to scorn.
Lo, this is the man that took not god for his strenghte, but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthed him self in his wyckednes.

The.lv. Chapter.
HE laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him, and he brake his
covenant. The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having war in his
heart, his words were smother then oil, and yet be they very sweardes.

The.lviii. Chapter.
THe righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he shall wash his
footesteppis in the blood of the ungodly.

The.lxii. Chapter.
IF riches increase, set not your heart upon the^. Thou rewardell every man
according to his work.

The.lxvi. Chapter.
I Will gointo thy house with brent offeringes and will pay thee my vows
which I promis^d with my lips and speak with my mouth when I was in
trouble.

The.lxix. Chapter.
I wept and chastened my self with fasting and that was turned to my
reproach, I put on a sackcloth also, and they iested upon me. They that sytte
in the gate, speak against me, and the dronkardes make songs upon me.

The.lxxi. Chapter.
O What great troubles and adversities haste thou showed me? and yet did
thou turn and refreshe me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again. Thou haste brought me to great honor, and comforted me on every side.

The.lxxvi. Chapter.
Promise unto the lord your god, and keep it.

The.lxxix. Chapter.
O Remember not our old sins, but have merry upon us, and that soon, for
we are come to great misery.

The.lxxx. Chapter.
THou fedest them with the bread of tearee, and geuest them plenteousnesse of
tears to drink.

The.lxxxi. Chapter.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would not obey me. So I gave
them up unto their own hearts lust, and let them follow their own
ymaginacions.

The.lxxxiiii. Chapter.
I Had rather be a door keeper in the house of my god, then to dwelin the
rentes of ungodliness.

The.lxxxix. Chapter.
But if his children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments, if they
break my statutes, and keep not my commandments I will viset their offenses
with the rod, and their sins with scourges.

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death?

The.xc. Chapter.
A Thousand years in thy syghte, are but as yesterdaye.

The days of our age are three score years, and ten and though men be so
strong that they come to four scour years, yet is their strength then but
labor and sorrow, so soon passes it away, and we are goen.

The.xci. Chapter.
HE shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep the in all thy ways. They
shall bear the in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against astone.

The.xcii. Chapter.
WHen the ungodly are grene as the grass, and when all the worckes of
wickedness do florishe, then shall they be destroyedde for ever.

The.xcuii. Chapter.
BLessed is the man whom thou chasteneste O lord.

The.xcvii. Chapter.
THere shall go a fire before him, and burn his enemies on every side.

O ye that love the lord, se that ye hate the thing which is euyli. The
lord preserves the souls of his saints, he shall deliver them, from the
hand of the ungodly.

The.Ci. Chapter.
WHo so priuelye slaundereth his neighbor him will I destroy.

There shall no disceatefull person dwell in my house, he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight.

The.Cii. Chapter.
I Have eaten ashes as it were bread, and myngeled my drink with weeping.

My days are gone like a shadow, and I am wythered like grass.

Thou lord, in the beginning haste laid the fundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou shal^e
endure: they all shall wax old, as does a garment, and as a vesture shalt
thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail.

The.C.iii. Chapter.
THe merciful goodness of the Lord, endures for ever and ever, upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness upon chylders children.

The.C.iiii. Chapter.
HE brings forth grass for the cattle, and grene herb for the service of
men, that he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad
the heart of man, and oil to make him a chereful countenance, and bread to
strength man's heart.

Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the euenyng.

The.cv. Chapter.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

The.cvi. Chapter.
BLessed are they that always keep judgment and do righteousness.

The.cix. Chapter.
His delight was in cursyng, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not
blessing, therefore shall it be far from him.

My knees are weak through fasting, my flesh is dried up for want of fatness.

The.cxi. Chapter.
THe works of his hands are verity and judgment, all his commandments
are true.

The fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have
all they, that do thereafter.

The.cxii. Chapter.
A Good manne is merciful and lends, and will guide his words with
discrecion.

He has sparsed abroad, and given to the poor and his righteousness
remains for ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor.

The.cxiii. Chapter.
HE takes up the simple out of the duste, and lyfteth the poor out of the
mire. That he may set him with the princes, even with the princes of his people.

The.cxviii. Chapter.
IT is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in man. It is
better to trust in the lord, then to put any confidence in princes.

The.cxix. Chapter.
BLessed are those that be undefiled in the way: and walk in the way of the
lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with there hole
heart. For they which do no wickedness, walk in his ways.

It is good for me, that I have been in trouble that I may learn thy
statutes. The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me, then thousands of gold
and silver.

O how sweet are thy words unto my throat? yea, swetter then honey unto my
mouth.

Thy word is a lantern unto my fete, and a light unto my paths.

My soul is always in my hand.

When thy word goes forth, it gives light and understanding even to the
simple.

The.cxx. Chapter.
What reward shall be given unto the thou false tongue? even mighty and sharp
arowes with hoote burning coals.

They that sow in tears, shall repe in joy, he that now goes in his way
weeping and bears forth good seed, shall doutles come again with joy, and
bring his sheaues with him.

The.cxxvii. Chapter.
Except the lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it.
Except the lord keeps the city, the watch manne waketh but in vain.

The.cxxxviii. Chapter.
Though the lord be hye, yet has he respect unto the lowlye: as for the
proud he beholds him a far of.

The.cxxxix. Chapter.
WHether shall I go then from the sprete, or whether shall I go then from thy
presence, if I clyme up into heaven thou art there, if I go down into hell,
thou art there also, if I take the wings of the morenynge and remain in the
vttermoste parts of the sea, even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me.

The.cxl. Chapter.
A Man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth.

The.cxli. Chapter
SEt a watch O lord, before my mouth and keep the door of my lyppes.

The.cxlii. Chapter.
I Cried unto the O lord, and said: thou art my hope, and my portion in the
land of living.

The.cxliii. Chapter.
INter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy syghte shall no man
living be justified.

The.cxlv. Chapter.
THe lord is louinge unto every man, and his mercy is over all his worckes.

The lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, yea all such as call upon
him faithfully.

The.cxlvi. Chapter.
O Put not your trust in princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no
help in them.

The.clxvii. Chapter.
HE has no pleasure in the strength of an horse, neither deliteth he in any
man's legs, but the lords delight is in them that fear him, and put their
trust in his mercy.

The Proverbs the first Chapter.
THe fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, but foles despise wisdom and
instruccion.

My son, consent not unto sinners if they entice thee, and say come with us.

In vain is the net laid forth before the birds eyes.

I have called, and ye refused it, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded it, but all my counsele have ye despised, and set my corrections at
naught.

The.ii. Chapter.
Walk thou in the way of such as be virtuous, and keep the paths of the
righteous.

The.iii. Chapter.
LEt mercy and faythfulnes never go from thee, bind them about thy neck and
write them in the tables of thy heart: so shalt thou find favor and good
understanding in the sight of god and men.

Be not wise in thine own conceyte.

Whom the lord loves, him he chasteneth, and yet delyteth in him, even as a
father in his own son.

All the things that thou can desire are not to be compared unto wisdom.

Wythdrawe no good thing from them that have need, so long as thine hand is
able to do it. Say not unto thy neighbor, go thy way, and come again, to
morrow will I give thee, where as thou hall now to give him.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe chief point of wisdom is, that thou be wyllyng to obtain wisdom, and
before all thy goods to get the understanding.

Take fast hold of doctrine, and let her not go, keep her, for she is thy
life.

But away from thee a froward mouth, and let the lips of slander be far
from the.

The.v. Chapter.
THe lyppes of an harlot are a droppyng honey comb, and her throat is more
glystering then Oil. But at the last she is as bitter as wormwood, her tongue
as sharp as a two edged swearde.

The.vi. Chapter.
Go to the Emmet thou sluggarde, consider her ways, and learn to be wise. She
has no guide nor ouersear, nor ruler, yet in the summer she provides her
meat, and gathers her food together in the harvest.

These sire things does the lord hate, and the seventh he utterly abhors.
Aproude look, A lying tongue, hands that shed innocente blood, an heart
that goes about with wicked ymaginacion, feet that be swift in running to do
mischief. A false witness that brings up lies. And such one as sows
discord among brethren.

An harlot will make a man to beg his bread.

May a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Or can one
go upon hoote coals, and his feet not be hurt? Even so, who so ever goes
into his neighbors wife, and touches her, cannot be vngyltye.

The.viii. Chapter.
They that seek me early, shall find me.

The.ix. Chapter.
Reprove not a scorner, lest he owe the evil will, but rebuke a wise manne,
and he will love the.

Stolen waters are swets, and the bread that is privily eaten, has a good
taste.

The.x. Chapter.
A Wise son makes a glad father, but an indiscreet son is an heuinesse unto
his mother.

Treasures that are wyckedly gotten, profit nothing, but righteousness
delivers from death,

A wise man will receive warning.

Love covers the multitude of sins.

He that refuses to be reformed desceyueth him self.

Where much babbling is, there must needs be offense, and he that refraineth
his lyppes is wise. An innocent tongue is a noble treasure.

As vinegar is to the tethe, and as smoke is unto the eyes, even so is a
slouggyshe person to them that sends him forth.

The.xi. Chapter.
WHereno good counsel is, there the people decay, but where as many are that
can give counsel, there is wealth.

He that is suretye for a stranger hurts him self, and he that medieth not
with suretyshyppe is sure.

A fair woman without discrete manners, is like a ring of gold in a swynnes
snoute.

Some man gives out his goods, and is the rycher, but the nygarde having
enough will depart from nothing, and yet is ever in poverty. He that is
lyberall in geuynge shall have plentye.

Whose hoordeth up his corn, shall be cursed among the people, but blessing
shall light upon his head that gives food.

The.xii. Chapter.
Whosoever loves wisdom wylbe content to be reformed: but he that hates to be
reproved is a fool.

Every man shall enjoy good, according to the fruit of his mouth, and after
the worckes of his hands shall he be rewarded.

The.xiii. Chapter.
He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but whosoever opens his lips to
evil, destroys, him self.

Some men are rich, though they have nothing, again, some men are poor
having great riches.

Vaynelye gotten goods are sone spente, but they that be gathered together
with the hand shall increase.

He that thinks scorn to be reformed commethe to poverty, and shame: but
who so regards correction, shall come to honor.

He that spares the rod, hates his son, but whosoever loves him, chasteneth
him by times.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
Se that thou meddle not with a fool, in whom thou percepuest to be no
knowledge.

There is away which some men think to be right, but the end thereof
leads unto death.

The poor is hated even of his own neighbors, but the rich has many
friends.

The increase and prosperity of the commens is the kings honors, but the
decay of the people, is the confusion of the prince.

A merye heart is the life of the body, but rancoure consumes away the bones.

He that does a poor man wrong blasphemeth his maker, but whosoever that has
pity of the poor both honor unto God.

The.xv. Chapter.
A Soft answer puts down displeasure, but froward words provoke unto
anger.

A merye heart makes a cherefull countenance, but an heavy heart compels
a man to syghe.

Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure with sorrow.

Better is a moss of potage with love, then a fat Ore with evil will.

Who so hates rewards shall live.

The.xvi. Chapter.
BEtter it is to have a little thing with righteousness, then great rentes
wrongfullye gotten.

It is a great abhominacion when kings are wicked, for a kings seat should
be holden up with righteousenes.

The kings displeasure is a messenger of death, but the cherefull countenance
of a king is life, and his loving favor is as the evening dew.

He that is a blable of his tongue, makes division among princes.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Whosoever laugheth the poor to scorn, blasphemeth his maker, and he that is glad
of a another man's hurt, shall not be unpunished.

One reprofe only does more good to him that has understanding, then a.C.
strypes to a fool.

Whosoever rewards euel for good, the plage shall not depart from his house.

He is a friend that always loves, and in adversity a man shall know who is
his brother.

Who so promises by the hand, and is suerty for his neighbor, he is a fool.

The.xviii. Chapter.
THe words of a staunders are very wounds, and go through unto the innermoste
parts of the body.

The name of the lord is a strong castle, the righteous flies unto it, and
is in sauegarde.

He that gives sentence in a matter before he hear it, is a soole, and worthy
to be consounded.

Liberality brings a man to honor, and worship, and sets him among
great men.

Death and life are in the instrumente of the tongue, and they that love it,
shall enjoy the fruit thereof.

Whosoever fyndeth a good wife, fyndeth a good thing, and receives a wholesome
benefit of the Lord.

The.xix. Chapter.
Riches makes many fre^des, but the poor is forsaken of his neighbor.

A wise man can put of displeasure, and it is his honor to let some tauntes
pass.

A bra^lyng wife is like the top of an house, where through it is ever droppyng.

A discrete woman is the gift of god.

The.xx. Chapter.
Wine makes a man to be scornful, and strong drink causes a man to be
unquiet: whosoever delyteth therein shall never be wise.

The king ought to be feared as the roaryng, of a lion, whosoever provoke him
unto anger, offends against his own soul.

A flouthful body will not go toplowe for cold of the winter, therefore shall he
go a beggyng in summer, and have nothing.

Many there be that would be called good doers, but where shall one find a
true faithful manne?

Who can say, my heart is clean, I am innocent from sin?

Delight not in sleep, least thou come to poverty.

Take his garmente that is suerty for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for
the unknown man's sake.

To him that custometh flatering lyppes, join not thy self.

Whosoever curses his father and mother, his light shall be put out in the myddest
of darkness.

The heritage that comes to hastelye at the first, shall not be praised at
the end.

It is a snare for a man to devour that whicht is holy, and after the vow to
turn to thine own use the thing thou have vowed.

Mercy and faythfulnes preserve the king, and with loving kyndnes his seat
is holden.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THe Kings heart is in the hand of the lord, like as are the ryuers of water:
He may turn it whithersoeuer he will.

To do righteousness and judgment is more acceptable to the lord, then
sacrifice.

Whosoever stops his cares at the crying of the poor, he shall cry himself
and not be heard.

He that has pleasure in banchettes, shall be a poor man.

Whosoever deliteth in wine and delicates, shall not be rich.

It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a chiding and angry woman.

Whosoever kepethe his mouth and his tongue, the same keeps his soul from
troubles.

The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but the lord gives
victory.

The.xxii. Chapter.
THe end of lowliness and the fear of god, is riches, honor, prosperity
and health.

Teach ackylde in his youth what way he should go, for he shall not leave
it when he is old.

Whosoever does a poor man wrong to increase his own riches, and geuethe unto
the rich to please him, at the last commethe to poverty himself.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
TAke not over great travail and labor to be rich, beware of such a
purpose:

Why will thou set thyns eye upon the thing, which sodeynelye vanishethe
away: for riches make themselves wings, and take their flight like an Egle
into the air.

Keep no company with wine bybbers and ryotous eaters of flesh, for such as
be drounkardes and ryotous shall come to poverty, and he that is given to
much sleep, shall go with a ragged coat.

Who has woo? who has sorrow, who has strife? who has braulynge? and who
has wounds without a cause? or who has red eyes? even they that be ever at
the wine, and seek excess. Look not thou upon the wine, how read it is, and
what a color it gives in the glass, it goes down softlye, but at the
last it byteth like a serpent, and stingeth as an adder.

My son thou eatest honey and the sweet honye comb, because it is good and
sweet in thy mouth: even so shall knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul,
as soon as thou have gotten it.

A just man falls seven times, and ryseth up again: but the ungodly fall
into wickedness.

Rejoice not thou at the fall of thine enemy, and let not thine heart be
glad when he stombleth, lest the Lord (when he sees it) be angrye and
turn his wrath from him unto the.

The.xxv. Chapter.
PUt not forth thy self in the presence of the king, and prese not into the
places of great men: Better it is that it be said unto the, come up hither,
then thou to be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thou see with
thine eyes.

Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of the, and so
abhor thee.

If thine enemy honger, feed him, if he thyrst give him drink, for so shall
thou heap coals of first upon his head, and the lord shall reward the.

Like as it is not good to eat to much honey, even so he that will search out
hye things, it shall be to heavy for him.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
Give not the fool an answer after his foolishnes, least thou become like
unto him, but make the fool an answer to his foolishnes, less he be wise in
his own conceyte.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
LEt a another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, yes, other men's
lips, and not thine.

An open rebuke is better then a secret love.

Better is a friend at hand, then a brother far of.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
HE that by usury and unjust gaynes gathers riches, he shall lay them in
store for a man that will pity the poor.

He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abominable.

He that hydeth his sins, shall not prosper but whosoever knowlegeth them, and
forsakes them shall have mercy.

Like as a roarynge Lion, and an hungrye bear, even so is an ungodly prince
over the poor people.

Where the prince is without understanding, there is great oppression and
wrong, but if he be such a one as hates covetousness, he shall long raygne.

He that makes to much haste to be rich, shall not be unguilty.

He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack, but he that turns away his
eyes from such as be in necessity, shall suffer great poverty himself.

The.xxix. Chapter.
With true judgment the king sets up the land, but if he be a man that
oppresses the people with gatheringes, he turueth it vpside down.

When the ungodly come up, wickedness increases, but the righteous shall se
their fall.

When the word of god is not preached, the people perish.

He that delicately brings up his servant from a child, shall make him his
master at length.

The.xxx. Chapter.
ALL the words of god be pure and clean.

Put thou nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar.

Remove fro me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty, nor riches, only
grant me a necessary living, least if I be full, I deny the, and say, who
is the Lord. And least I being constrained through poverty fall unto
stelynge, and take the name of my Lord god in vain.

There be three things that are never satisfied, yea four things says
never whoo. The grave, a woman's womb closed, and the earth that has never
water enough. As for fire it says never whoo.

There be three things to hye for me, and as for the fourth that passes my
knowledge.

The way of an Egle in the air, the way of a serpent over a stone, the way
of a ship in the sea, and the way of a man with a young woman.

Through three things the earth is disquieeted, and the fourth may it not
bear. Through a servant that bears rule. Through a fool that has to much
bread. Through a wife worthy hatred when she is married. And through an
handemayden, that is heir to her maystres.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
O My beloved son, give not over thy strength and ways unto women: which
are the desiruction even of kings.

O ^amuel, it is not for kings, it is not (I say) for kings to drink wine,
nor princes strong drink (for there is no secret where dronkennes raygneth,)
lest they being dronken forgette the law, and peruerte the judgment of all
poor men's children. Give strong drink unto such as are condemned to
death, and wine unto those that mourn, that they may drink it, and forget
their miserye and adversity as for favor, it is discretefull, and beauty is
a vain thing.

The book of the preacher the first Chapter.
AL floudes run into the sea, and yet is the sea it self not filled: for
look unto what place the waters run, thence then come the flow again. All
things are so hard to be known, that no man can express them.

There is no new thing under the sun.

Where much wisdom is, there is also great travail and disquietnes, and
the more knowledge a man has, the more is his care.

The.ii. Chapter.
The wise manne dies as well as the fool.

What gathers a man of all the labor and travail of his mind that he
takes under the sun, but heuinesse and sorrow, and disquietnesse all the
days of his life?

The.iii. Chapter.
SO I yet ceyued that there is nothing better for a man, then to be merye, and
to do well as long as he lives.

The.iiii. Chapter.
I Judged those that are dead more happy then those that be a live, yea him
that is yet unborn to be better at ease then they both, because he sees not
the miserable works that are done under the sun.

Woo is him that is a lone, for if he fall he has not another to help him up.

The.v. Chapter.
IF you make a vow unto god, be not slack to perform it. Is for folyshe vows
he has no pleasure in them. If thou promise any thing pay it, for better it
is that thou make no vow, then that thou should promise and (...).

He that loves money will never be satisfied with mo^^: And who so delyteth in
riches, shall have no profit thereof.

Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb so go the he thither again,
and carries nothing away with him of all his labor.

The.vii. Chapter.
A Good name is more worth, then precious oyntement.

It is better to go into an house of mourning, then into an banckettyng house.

Better it is to consydre the end of a thing, then the beginning.

Use well the time of prosperity, and remember the time of mysfortune.

Be thou neither to righteous, nor over wise that thou perish not, be neither
to unrighteous also nor to foolish least thou dye before thy time.

There is not one just upon earth that does good and synneth not.

The.viii. Chapter.
BEcause that evil worckes are not hastelye punished, the heart of man
gives him self to wickedness.

The.ix. Chapter.
THey that belyuing, know that they shall dye, but they that or dead, know
nothing: neither deserve they any more. For their memorial is forgotten, so
that they be neither loved, hated, nor enuyed: neither have they any more part
in the world in all that is done under the sun.

Whatsoever thou take in hand to do, that do with all thy power. For in the
grave yt thou go unto, there is neither work, counsel, knowledge, nor
wisdom.

For a man knows not his time, but like as the fyshe are taken with the
angle, and as the birds are caught with the snare, even so are men taken in
the perilous time, when it comes suddenly upon them.

The.x. Chapter.
A Bablet of his tongue is no better the^ a serpent that stingeth without
hysiyng.

Woo be unto thee, o thou land, whose king is but a child, and whose princes
are early at their bankettes. But well is thee o thou land, whose king is
come of nobles, and whose princes eat in due season, For necessity, and not
for lust.

Wish the king no evil in thy thought^, and speak no hurt of the rich in
thy preuye chamber, for a bird of the air shall betraye thy voice, and with
her feathers shall she bewrayethy words.

The.xi. Chapter.
WHen the tree falls, whether it be toward the South or North in what place
so ever it fall there it lies.

The book of wisdom the first Chapter.
Wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul, nor dwell in the body that is
subdued unto sin.

The mouth that speaks lies, stays the soul.

The.ii. Chapter.
Through envy of the deuel came death into the world.

The.iii. Chapter.
GLorious is the fruit of good labor, and yt root of wisdom shall never
fade away.

The.iiii. Chapter.
ASe is an honorable thing, nevertheless it stands not only in the length
of time, nor in the multitude of years, but a man's wisdom is the graye hear,
and an undefiled life is the old age.

The.v. Chapter.
THe righteous shall live for evermore, their reward also is with the lord,
and their remembrance with the hygheste.

The.vi. Chapter.
MErry is granted unto the simple, but they that be in auctorite shall be
soreptin^ shed.

The keeping of the law is perfection, and an vncorrupt life, makes a man
familier with god.

The multitude of the wise, is the welfare of the world, and a wise king is
the vyholdyng of the people.

The.vii. Chapter.
Wisdom is the breath of the power of god, and a pure clean expressing of
the clearenesse of almighty god.

God loves no man, but him, in whom wisdom dwells.

The.ix. Chapter.
A Mortal and corruptible body is heavy to the soul, and the catthlye
mansion kepest down that understanding that museth upon many things.

The.xi. Chapter.
LObe wherewithal a man synneth; by the same also shall he he punyshed.

Thou have ordered all things in measure number and weighte.

The.xii. Chapter.
WHere as thou do but chasten us, thou p^nyshest our enemies diverse ways,
to the intent that when we punyshe we should remember thy goodness, and when we
out selves are punyshed to put our trust in thy mercy.

The.xiii. Chapter.
BY the greatness and bewte of the creature, the maket thereof may plainly be
known.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
CUrsed is the ydoll that is made with hands yea both it, and he that made it.

The.xvi. Chapter.
It was nether herb nor piaster that restored them to health, but thy word o
Lord, which healest all things. It is thou o Lord, that haste power of life
and death, thou leadest unto dethes door, and bring up again.

The.xvii. Chapter.
IT is an heavy thing, when a man's own conscience bears record of his
wickedness, and condemns him. And why? a vexed and a wounded conscience,
takes ever truell things in hand.

The book of Jesus the son of Sirach the first Chapt.
THe fear of the Lord is the rote of wisdom, and her branches are long
life.

The.ii. Chapter.
LIke as gold and silver are tried in the sire, eue^ ^o are acceptable men in
the furnace of adversity.

Better it is for us to fall into the hands of the lord, them into the hands
of men: for his merceye is it great as himself.

The.iii. Chapter.
HOuoure thy father in deed, in word, and in all patience, that thou may
have god^ biessyng and his blessyng shall abide with thece^ the last.

The greater thou art, the more humble thy self in all thyngee: and thou shall
find favor in the sight of god.

Seek not out the things that are about thy capacity, and search not the
ground of such things as are to mighty for thee, but look what god has
commanded thee, think upon that al way, and be not curious in many of his
works For it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that
are secret. Make not thou to much search in superfluous thyngee, and be not
curious in many of his works, for many things are showed unto thee
already, which be above the capacity of men. The medlyng with such has
begyled many a man, and ta^gled their wits in vanity. Now, he that loves
petell shall perish therein.

God has respect unto him that is thankful, he thinks upon him, against the
time to come so that when he falls, he shall find a strong hold.

The.iiii. Chapter.
CAst not thine eyes aside from the poor for any evil will, that thou give
him none occasion to speape euel by thee. For if he complaint of thee, in the
bytternesse of his soul, his prayer shall be heard, even he that made him shall
heart him.

My son, make much of time, eschew the thing that is evil, and for thy
life shame not to dye the truth. For there is a shame that brings sin, and
there is a shame that bryngethe worship and favor.

Be not hastye in thy tongue, neither slack and negligent in thy works.

Let not thine hand be stretched out to recepue, and shut when thou shuldeit
give.

The.v. Chapter.
BEcause thy son is given the, be not therefore without fear neither heap
one sin upon another: And say not: tushe, the mercy of the lord is great,
he shall forgive me my sins, be they never so many For like as he is
mercyful, so goes wrath from him also, and his indignacio^ comes down upon
sinners.

Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to day, for
sodenty shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he shall destroy
thee.

Be swyfte to hear, but slow and paciente in geuyng answer.

The.vi. Chapter.
Hold friend ship with many, nevertheless have but one counceller of a
thousand.

If thou gettest a friend prove him first, and be not hasty to give him
credence. For some man is a friend but for a time, and will not abide in the
day of trouble. And there is some friend that turns to enemitte, and takes
part against the, and if he know any hurt by thee, he tellethe it out. Again
some friend is but a companyon at the table, and in the day of need he
continues not. But a sure friend will be unto thee, even as thy dooneselte,
and deal faythfullye with thy householde folk. If thou suffer trouble and
adversity he is with the, and hydeth not himself from the. A faithful friend
is a strong defense who so finds such a one, finds a treasure. A faieth
full friend has no pear, the weyghte of gold and seiuer is not to be
compared to the goodness of his faieth. A faieth full friend is a medicine of
life, and they that fear the Lord shall synde him.

The.vii. Chapter.
BInd not.ii. sins together, for in one sin shall thou not be unpunished.

Use not to make any manner of lie, for the customs thereof are not good.

Give not over thy friend for any good, nor thy faithful brother for the best
gold.

Love a discrete servant as thine old soul, defraude him not of his
liberty, nether leave him a poor man.

If thou have daughters, keep their bodies, and show not thy face cherfull
toward them. Mary thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty matter,
but give her to a man of understanding.

Fear the Lord with all thy Soul, and honor his priests, give them their
portion of the first fruits, and increase of the earth, like as it is
commanded the. etc

Be liberal unto al men living, yet let not, but do good, even unto them that
are dead.

The.viii. Chapter.
Gold and silver has undone many a man, eue^ the hertes of kings has it
made to fall.

Lend not unto him that is mightier then thy self, if thou lendest him, count
it but lost.

Be not surety above thy power, if thou be, then think surely to pay it.

The.ix. Chapter.
Turn away thy face from a beutiful woman, and look not upon the fatrenes of
her. Maope a man has perished through the beautre of women. For through it
the desire is kindeled as it were a fire.

For sake not an old friend, for the new shall not be like him. A new friend
is new wine, let him be old, and thou shalt drink him with pleasure.

Let all thy talkinge be in the commandments of the hiest.

The.x. Chapter.
AS the judge of the people is him self, even so are his officers: and look
what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are they that dwell within
also.

Remember no wrong of thy neighhoure?

Why art thou proud, o thou earth and ashes?

There is nothing worsse then a covetous man there is not a more wicked thing
the^ to love money, and why? such one has his soul to sell, yet is he but
filthy dounge while he lives.

The beginning of man's pride, is to fall away from God: and why? his heart is
gone from his maket: for pride is the originail of al sin.

The.xi. Chapter.
Give no sentence, before thou have heard the cause, but fieste let men tell
out their tales.

When thou art in welfare, forget not adversity, and when it goes not well
with the, have a good hope that it shall be better.

The.xii. Chapter.
IN prosperity a friend shall not be known, and in aduer sitie an enemy
shall not be hid, for when a man is in wealth, it greueth his enemy, but in
heuines and trouble, a man shall know his friend.

The.xiii. Chapter.
He takes a burden upon him, that acco^panieth a more honorable man than him
self, therefore keep no familiarite with one that as richer then thy self.

If thou be called of a mighty man, absent thy self, so shall he call the to him
the more often. Please not thou unto him, that thou be not shut outs, but go
not thou to far of, least he forgette the: withdraw not thy self from his
speech, but believe not his many words, for with much communication shall he
tempte the, and with apriuy mock shall he question with the of thy secrets.

If a rich man fall, his friends set him up agains: but when the pore
falls, his acquaintan^ce forsake him. If a rich man fall into an error, he
has many helpers, he speaks proud words, and yet men justify him. But if
a posre man go wrong: he is punished ryea, though he speak wisely, yet can
it have no place, when the rich man speaks, every man holds their tongues,
and look what he says, they praise it unto the clouds, but if the poor man
speak: they say, what fellow is this? and if he do amiss, they shall destroy
him.

The.xiiii. Chapterr.
ALl flesh shall fade away like grass, and like a flourishing leaf in a
grene tree, some grow, some are cast down, even so is the generation of al
flesh and blood, one comes to an end, another is borne.

The xv. Chapter.
GOd made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel.

God has set water and fire before the, teach out thine hand unto which
thou will. Before man is life and death, good and evil, look what him
likes, shall be given him.

The.xvi. Chapter.
BEtter it is for a man to dye without children, then to leave behind him
such children as are vngodrye.

God judges a man according to his werches.

The.xviii. Chapter.
Learn before thou speak, and go to phisike or ever thou belicke, examine and
judge thy self before the judgment come, and so shalt thou find grace in
the sight of god.

Before thou prayest, prepare thy soul, and be not as one that tempts god.

Follow not thy lusts, but turn the from thine own will: for if thou ge^est thy
soul her desires, it shall make thine enemies to laughe ye to scorn.

The.xix. Chapter.
HE that makes not mucke of small things, shall fall by little and little.

Wine and women make wise men rennagates, and put men of vnderslandyng to
reprofe.

He that is hastye to give credence, is light emynded and does against him
self.

A man may be known by his face, and one that has understanding, may be
perceived by the look of his countenance.

A man's garment, laughter, and going declateth what he is.

The.xx. Chapter.
AWyse man will hold his tongue, till he se opportunity, but a wanton and
indiscreet body shall regard no time.

I these is better, then a man that is accustomed to lie.

He that pleases great men, shall escape much tryll.

Rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and make him dumme, that he
cannot tell men their fautes.

Wisdom that is hide, and treasure that is hoorded up, what profit is in
them both?

The.xxi. Chapter.
The talkyng of a fool is like an heavy burden by the way, but to hear a
wise man speak, it is a pleasure.

I fool lyfteth up his voice with laughter, but a wise man shall scarce
laughte secretly.

The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in
their heart.

The.xxii. Chapter.
MAke but a little weeping because of the brad, for he is come to rest.

Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a suit seal upon my lyppes, that
I fall not with them, and that my tongue destroy me not.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
LEt not thy mouth be accustomed with foo^tyng, for in it there are many fallen.

I man that uses much sweatyng, shall be filled with wickedness, and the plage
shall never go from his house.

The.xxv. Chapter.
There things there are, that my sprete favors, which be also allowed before
god and men. The unity of brethren, the love of neygheboures, a man and wise
that agree well together.

Three things there be which my soul hatethe, and I utterly abhorte the life
of them. A poor man that is proud. A rich man that is a liar, and an old
body that doteth, and is unchaste.

All wichednesse is nothing to the wickedness of a womanne.

There is no wrath above the wrath of a woman.

Of the woman came the beggynning of sin, and through her we all are dead.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
THere be three things that my heart fears, and my face is a frayde of the
fourth: treason in a city, a sedicious people, and noisome tongues, all these
are heuyer then death. But when one is gelous over his wife, it brings pain
and sorrow unto the heart.

The whoredom of a woman may be known the pride of her eyes, and eyeliddes.

There be two things that grave my heart, and the third is a displeasure come
upon me. When an expert man of war suffers scarceness and pouertye. When
men of understanding and wisdom are not set by and when one departs
from righteousness unto sin.

There be two manner of things, which me think to be hard and parlous. A
marchau^te cannot lightly keep bym from wrong, neither a tauerner himself
from sin.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
Like as a nail in the wall stieketh fast betwyxte two stones, even so does
sin stick betwixt the byer and the seller.

The tree of the field is known by his fruit, so is the thought of man's heart
known by his words.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
THe more wood there is, the more veheme^te is this fire, and the mightier that
men be, the greater is the wrath, and the longer that the stryle endures, the
more it burns.

Thou hedgest thy goods with thorns, why do thou not rather make doors
and bars for thy mouth? Thou weyest thy gold and silver why do thou not
weye thy words upon the balaunce?

The.xxix. Chapter.
Help the poor for the commandments sake, and let him not go emptye from
thee, because of his necessity.

Lay up thy alms in the hand of the poor and it shall keep the from all
evil.

Surety ship has destroyed many a rich man.

Better it is to have a poor living in a man's own house, the^ delicate fare
among the strange.

The.xxx. Chapter.
THere is no richesse above a sound body, and no joy above the joy of the
heart. Heaviness has slain many a man, and bring the no profit, zele,
and anger shorten the days of the life, carfulness and sorrow, bring age
before the time. Unto a merry heart every thing has a good taste that he eats.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
Travail and carefulnes for richesse takes away the sleep, and makes the
flesh to consume.

He that loves richesse, shall not be iustityed.

If thou sit at a great man's table, open not thy mouth wide upon it, and make
not many words.

If thou fealest that thou have eaten to much arise, go thy way, cast it out
of thy stomach and take thy rest, and it shall ease thee, so that thou shalt
bring no sickness unto thy body.

Wine soberly dronken quickens the life of man. If thou drynkest it
measurably, thou shalt be temperate. What life is it, that may continue
without wine? Wine was made from the beginning to make men glad, and not for
dronkennes. wy^e measurably dronken is a reioy sing of the so^le and body. I
measurable drynkyng is health to sou^e and body. But if it be dronken with
excess it makes bytternesse and sorrow unto the mind. Dronkennes fylseth the
mind of the folyshe with shame and ruin, minisheth the strength and makes
wounds.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
IF thou be made a ruler, pride not thy self therein, but be thou as one of the
people.

Like as the Carbuncle stone shyneth that is set in gold, so does a song
garnishe the wine feast: and as the smaragde that is set in gold, so is the
sweetness of musyke by the mirth of wine.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
BE sure of the matter, then talk thereof. Be fyrse well instruct, then may
thou give answer.

Why does one day excel another seeing all the days of the year come of the
sun? the wisdom of God has so parted them a sondre, and so has he
ordained the times and solemn feasts. Some of them has he chosen and
hallowed before other days. And al me^ are made of the ground, and out of the
earth of Adam. In the multitude of science has the lord sondred them, and
made their ways of diverse fashione: Some of them has he blessed, made much
of them, hallowed them, and claymed them to himself. But some of them has he
cursed, brought them low and put them out of their estate.

Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over the while thou
lyuesle and give not away thy substance and good to another, lest it repent
the, and thou be feign to beg therefore thy self. As long as thou lyuest, and
have brethe, let no man change thee. For better it is that thy children do
pray the, then that thou should be feign to look in their hands.

The fodder, the whyppe, and the burden belongs unto the Ass: Meat,
correction and work unto thy servant.

If thou have a faithful servant, let him be unto the, as thine own soul,
entreat him as a brother, for in blood haste thou gotten him. Yt thou have a
servant, hold him as thy self, for thou have need of him as of thy life.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
Whosoever regards dreams, is like him that will take hold of a shadow, and
follow after the wind.

Southsaying, witchecrafte, sorcery, and dreamyng is but vanity. For dreams
have disceyued many a man and failed them that put their trust in them.

Whosoever brings an offering out of the goods of the poor, does even as one
that kylleth the son, before the fathers eyes.

The bread of the nedeful is the life of the poor, he that defraudeth him
thereof, is a man of blood.

Whosoever robs his neighbor of his living does as great sin, as though he
slew him to death.

He that defraudeth the labourer of his heir is a blood shedder.

He that washes him self because of a dead body, and touches the dead
again, what does his washing? So it is with with a man that fasteth for his
sins, and does them again: who will hear his prayer? or what does his
fasting help him.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
THe offeringe of the righteous makes the altar fat and a sweet smell is it
before the highest.

Halowe thy tithes unto god with gladness.

Give unto god according as he has enriched and prospered the, and look what
thy hand is able, give with a cheerful eye: for the Lord reco^penseth, and
gives thee seven times as much again.

The.xxxvi. Chapter.
AFeyre wife reioyseth her husband, and a man loves nothing better. If she be
loving and virtuous withal, then is not her husband like other men. He that
has gotten a virtuous woman, has a goodlye possession, she is unto him a
help, and pyller where upon he rests.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
HOld thy rounsayle fast in thy heart, for there is no man more faithful to
keep it, then thou thy self.

Before al thy works ask counsel first, and or ever thou do any thing,
be well aduysed.

Be not gredy in every eating, and be not to hasty upon all meats: for excess
of meats brings syckenes, and glotony comes at the last to an
unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many one perished, but he that dyeteth
himself temperately, prolongeth his life.

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
Honor the Physician, honor him because of necessity. God has created him,
for of the highest comes medicine, and he shall receive gifts of the king.

The wisdom of the physician brings him to great worship, and in the sight
of the great me^ of this world, he shall be honorably taken.

My son, bring fourth thy tears over the dead, and begin to mourn, as if
thou had suffered great harm thy self: and then cover his body after a
convenient manner, and despise not his burial. Enforce thy self to weep, and
provoke thy self to mourn, and make lamentacion expediently, and that a day
or two, least thou be evil spoken of, and then comfort thy self because of
thy heaviness. For of heuines comes death.

The.xl. Chapter.
TO labor and to be content with that a man has is a sweet pleasant life, and
that is to find a treasure above all treasures.

The.xli. Chapter.
O Death how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that seeks rest and
comfort in his substance and riches, unto the man that has nothing to vex
him, and that has prosperity in all things, yea unto him yt yet is able to
receive meat.

O Death how acceptable and good is thy judgment unto the nedeful, and unto
him whose strength fails, and that is now in the last age, and that all
things is full of care and fearfulness, unto him also that is in despair,
and has no hope, nor patience?

Labor to get the a good name; for that shall continue surer by thee, then a
thousand great treasures of gold.

Be ashamed to look upon another man's wife, and to make any tryflyng words
with her maiden, or to stand by her bedsyde.

The.xlii. Chapter.
Like as ye worm and mothe, comes out of the clothyng, so does wickedness
come of women.

The.xlvii. Chapter.
Like as the fat is taken away from the offering, so was David chosen out of
the children of Israel.

The xlix. Chapter.
ALl Kings, except David, Hezechias, and Josiah, committed wickedness.

But upon the earth is there noman created like Enoch, for he was taken up
from the earth.

The.li. Chapter.
Work the Lords work by times, and he shall give you your reward in due
season.

The Prophecy of Esaye the first Chapter.
THe Ox has known his owner, and the Ass his masters cryb, but Israel
has received no knowledge, my people has no understanding.

Offer me no mo oblacio^s, for it is but lost labor.

Incesse is an abominable thing unto me, your fastings are also in vain. I
may not away with your new holy days and fastyngs, I hate them even from
my very heart, they make me weary, I cannot abide the^, when ye hold out your
hands, I will turn mine eyes from you. And though ye make many prayers, yet
will I hear nothing at all, seeing your hands are full of blood.

Wash you, make you clean, put away your evil thoughts out my sight, cease
from doing of evil, learn to do right, apply your selves to equity
deliver the oppressed, help the fatherles to his right, let the wydowes
complainte come before you. etc.

If ye be loving and obedient, ye shall enjoy the best thing that grows in
the land. But if ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the
swearde, for the Lord has promised with his own mouth.

The.ii. Chapter.
THe glory of the lords majesty, casts down the high lokes of the
presumptious persons, and brings low the pride of man.

The.iii. Chapter.
Bid the righteous do well, for they shall enjoy the fruits of their studies.
But woo be to the ungodly, and unrighteous, for they shall be rewarded after
their works.

Seeing the daughters of Sion are become so proud, and come in with stretched
out necks, and with vain wantonne eyes, seeing they come in trippynge so
nicelye with their feet. Therefore shall the Lord shave their heads, and
shall discover their shame, in that day shall the LORD take away the
gorgiousenesse of their apparel and spanges cheynes, Partelets, and colers,
bracelettes, and hoones, the goodlye floured, wide and broydered rayemente,
brooches and handebandes, rings and garlandes, holy day clothes and vales,
kerchefes and pinnes, glasses and cypresses, bonets and taches. And instead of
good smell, there shall be stink among them, and for their gyrdels, there shall be
lose bands, and for well set hear, there shall be baldenes, in stead of a
stomacher, a sack clothe, and for their bewetye, wytherdenesse, and Sun
burning. Your husbands and mighty men, shall perish with the swearde in
battle.

The.v. Chapter.
IVdge I pray you betwixt me and my vine yard. what more could have been done
for it, that I have not done? wherefore then has it given thorns, where I
looked to have had grapes of it?

Woe unto them that join one house to another, and bring one land so nyghe
unto another, that ye poor can get no more ground, and that ye may dwell
upon the earth alone.

Woe be unto them that rise up earlye to follow dronkennes, and to them that
continue so until night, and till they be set on fire with wine.

Woe be unto them, that draw wickedness unto them with cords of vanity, and
sin, as it were with a carte rope.

Woo be unto them that call evil good, and good evil, which made datkenesse
light, and light darkness, that make sour sweet, and sweet sour.

Woo be unto them that are wise in their own sight, and think themselves to
have understanding.

Woe be unto them that are strong to suppe^ out wine, and expert men to set
up dronckenesse.

The.vi. Chapter.
GO and tell this people, ye shall hear in deed, but ye shall not understand,
ye shall playnelye se, and not perceive. Harden the hearts of this people,
stop their ears and shut their eyes, that they se not with their eyes,
hear not with their ears, and understand not with their hearts, and
convert, and be healed.

The.vii. Chapter.
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and (thou his mother)
shalt cell his name Emanuel: butter and honye shall he ear, that he may
know to refuse the evil, and chose the good.

The.viii. Chapter.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts, let him be your fear and dread. For he
shall be the holy place to fly to, and stone to stomble at, ye rock to fall
upon, a snare and net to both the houses of Israel, and the inhabitours of
Jerusalem.

And many shall stomble, fall, and be broken upon him, yea, they shall be snared
and taken.

The.ix. Chapter.
THe people that walk in darkness have sent a great light. As for them that
dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shyned.

Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, upon his shoulder
does the kingdom ly^, and he is called with his own name wonderful, the
geuer of counsel, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of
peace, he shall make no end to increase the kingdom and peace, and shall sit
upon the seat of David and in his kingdom, to set up the same, and to
stablishe it with equity and righteousenesse from hence for the for evermore.

The.x. Chapter.
Woe be unto them that make unrighteous laws, and devise things which be to
hard for to keep: where through the poor are oppressed on every side, and the
innocents of my people robbed of judgment: that wyddowes may be their
pray, and that they may rob the fatherless. What will ye do in time of
the vysytation. etc.

Shall the are boaste it self against him that heweth there with? or does
the saw make any braggyng against him that rules it, that were even like,
as if the rod did exalte it self against him that bears it, or as though
the staff should magnify it self, as woe say it were no wood.

The.xi. Chapter.
ANd there shall come a rod forth of the kynred of Isay, and a blossom
shall florishe out of his root. The spirit of the LORD shall light upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
streng the, the spirit of knowledge, and of fear of the LORD, and shall make
him feruente in the fear of GOD. For he shall not give sentence after the
thing that shall be brought before his eyes, neither reprove a matter at the
first hearing but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and with
holiness shall he reform the simple of the world. He shall smite the world
with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his mouth he shall slaye
the ungodly. Righteousenesse shall be the gyrdle of his loins, truth and
faythfulnesse the gyrdyng of his reins.

The.xiii. Chapter.
BE hold the day of the lord shall come terryblye, and full of indignacion,
furoure, and wrath to make the land waste, and to root out the sinners
thereof. For the stars and Planettes of heaven shall not give their light,
the Sun shall be darkened in the rysynge, and the Moon shall not shine with
his light. And I will punish the wickedness of the world, and the sins of
the ungodly says the lord.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
How art thou fallen from heaven (O Lucifer) thou fair mournyng child? how
Less thou gotten a fall even to the ground, and art become weaker then the
people? for thou saydesse in thy heart, I wylelymme up into heaven, and exalte
my throne above, beside the stars of god. I will sit also upon the holy
Mount toward the North, I willelyme up above the clouds, and will be like
the highest of all, yet thou shall be brought down to the dept of hell.

The.xxii. Chapter.
LEt us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

And the keye of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so that he
shall open and no man shall shut, he shall shut, and no man shall open.

The.xxv. Chapter.
Do, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he shall save us.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
THy deate men shall live, even with my body shall they rise again.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
IT is a people of no understanding, and therefore he that made them shall not
favor them, and he that created them shall give them no grace.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
Therefore says the Lord God, behold, I lay in Spon for a foundation a
stone, euin a tried stone a precious corner stone, a suit foundation.

The.xxix. Chapter.
FOr so much as this people when they be in trouble, do honor me with their
mouth and with their lyppes, but their heart is far from, and the scare
which they have unto me proceadeth of a commandment which is taught of men,
therefore etc.

Woe unto them, that keeps secret their thoughts, to hyde their counsel from
the LORD, and do their works in darkness saying, who sees us? and who
knows us?

The.xxx. Chapter.
THis is an obstinate people, and dissemblinge children, children that refuse
to hear the law of the Lord. For they say unto the seers, se not, and to
them that be clear of judgment, look not out right things for us, but
speak fair words unto us, look out erroures, get you out of this way,
depart out of this pathe, and turn the holy one of Israel from us.

The fire of pain is ordained from the beginning, yea, even for Kings it is
prepared. This has the Lord set in the deep, and made it wide, the burning
where of is fire and much wood, the breathe of the LORD, which is a tyuer
of brymstone does kyndle it.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
A King shall govern after the rule of righteousence, and the princes shall
rule according to the balaunce of equity.

The reward of righteousness shall be peace, and her fruit rest and quietness
for ever.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
HE that leads a godly life say I, and speaks the truth: he that abhors
gaynes won by violence and disceyte, he that keeps his hand that it touch
no reward, which stoppethe his ears that he hear no counsel against the
innocente blood, which holdethe down his eyes that he se none evil, he it
is that shall dwell on hye, whose sauegarde shall be in (...) bulwark of
rocks, to him shall be given meat, and his waters shall not fail.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
GOd comes his own self, and will deliver you, then shall the eyes of the
blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaffe opened, the^ shall the lame
manne leaye as an heart, and the dume man's tongue shall give thanks.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
THeangell of the Lord went forth, and slew of the Assirians host, an.C.
lxxx. and.v. M.

The, xxxviii. Chapter.
HEzechtas turned his face toward the wall, prayed unto the Lord, and said.
Remember O Lord, that I have walked before the in truth, and a steadfast heart,
and have done the thing that is pleasant to the.

The.xl. Chapter.
I Voice cried in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, in the
wilderness, make liraight the pathe for our God in the deserte. Let all valleis
be exalted, and every mountain and hill be laid low. What so is crooked,
let it be made straight, and let the roughe be made plainfeldes, for the
glory of the Lord shall appear, and all flesh shall at once se it, for why?
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Now cry, and the Prophet answered, what shall Ierye? that al flesh is
grass, and that all the goodlines thereof is as the frower of the feilde, the
grass is withered, the flower falls away, even so is the people as grass,
when the breath of the Lord blows upon the im. Nevertheless whether the
grass wither, or that the flower fade away, yet the word of god endures for
ever.

Who has reformed the mind of the Lord? or to whom has he showed his
counsel? or who is of his counsel to teach him? or who has given him
understanding, and has taught him the path of judgment? who taught him
cunninge, and opened unto him the way of understanding.

The.xlii. Chapter.
WHo suffered Jacob to be trode^ under foot, and Israel to be spoiled? did not
the Lord? because we have sinned against him, and have had no delight to walk
in his wates, neither been obediente unto his law.

The.xlv. Chapter.
TVrne you to me, al ye ends of ye earth, that ye may be saved: for I am God,
and there is else none. I swear by my felfe, out of my mouth comes the word
of righteousness, and that no man may turn: but all knees shall bow unto me
and all tongues shall swear by my name, saying: verily in the Lord is my
rightuousenes and strength. To him shall men come, but all they that thyncke
scorn of him, shall be confounded. And the whole sede of Israel shall be
justified, and make their bost in the Lord,

The.xlix. Chapter.
HAd thus says the Lord. In the time accepted have I heard the, and in the
day of salvation have I helped the.

God has conforted his people, and will have mercy upon his that be in
trouble. But Sion said God has forsaken, and my Lord has forgotten me. Will
a wife forget the child of her womb, and not pitye the son whom she has
borne. And though she do forget, yet will I not forget the.

Who so puts his trust in me, shall not be confounded.

The.l. Chapter.
The lord god haths opened mine ear therefore can I not say nay, nor
withdraw my self, but I offer my back unto the smiters, and my chekes to the
nippers. I turn not my face from shame and spitting, and the lord god shall
help me, therefore shall I not be confounded, I have herdened my face like a
flynt stoone. For I am sure that I shall not come to confusion.

The.lii. Chapter.
O How bewtifull are the feet of the ambassa doure that bryngethe the message
from the mountain, and proclaims peace, that brings good tidings, and
preaches health, and says unto Syon: thy god is the king.

The.liii. Chapter.
HE only has taken on him our infirmities, and borne our pains. He was
wounded for our offenses, and smytten for our wyckednes. The chastement of
our peace was laid upon him and with his stripes we are healed. The lord has
heaped together upon him the iniquite of us all. He suffered violence and was
evil entreated, and did not yet open his mouth. He shall be led as a sheep to
be slain, yet shall he be as slyll as a lamb before the shearer and not open
his mouth He did never violence nor unright, neither has there been any
disceatfulnes in his mouth. And he is ^ekened among the trangressons, which
nevertheless has taken away the sins of the multitude, and made
intercession for the mysdoers.

The.iv. Chapter.
SEkethe Lord while he may he found, and call upon him while he is nie.

Let the ungodly man forsake his own way and the vnrightnouse his own
Imaginations, and turn again unto the Lord, so shall he be merciful unto
him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive.

The word that comes out of my mouth. shall not turn again void unto me,
but shall accomplish my will and prospere in the thing whereto I send it.

The.lvi. Chapter.
BLessed is he that takes head, that he vnhallowe not the Saboth, that is, he
that keeps him self, that he do none evil.

My house shall be called an house for all people.

The.lvii. Chapter.
THe wicked have no peace, says God.

The.lviii. Chapter.
Cry now as loud as thou canste, leave not of, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and show my people their affences, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Wherefore fast we, say they, and thou see it not? we put our lives to
straitenes, and thou regardeste it not. Behold, when ye fast, your just
remains still, for ye do no less violence to your detters: lo, ye fast to
strife and debate, and to smite with the fiste of wickedness. Now ye shall not
fast thus, that you may make your voice be heard above. Think you this fast
pleases me, that a man should chasten him self for a day, and to wreth his
hand about like ahoke, and to lie upon the earth in an heary cloth?

Should that be called faslinge, or a day that pleases the Lord? Does not
this fasling rather please me, that thou lose him out of bondage, that is in
thy danger? that thou break the oath of wicked bargains? that you let the
oppressed go free, and take from them all manner of burthene? to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and bring the poor wandryng, home into thine house, when
thou feast the naked that thou cover him, and not thy face from thy neighbor?

The.lix. Chapter.
BEhold, the Lords hand is not so shortened that it cannot help, neither is
his ear so stopped that it may not hear: But your misdedes have separated you
from your god, and your sins hyde his face from you, that he hearethe you
not.

The.lxiiii. Chapter.
WE are all as an unclean thing, and all our right cousnesse are as the
clothes stained with flowers of a woman, we fall every cheone, as the leaf, for
our sins carye us away like the wind.

The.lxv. Chapter.
THus says the Lord God. Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall have
hunger. Behold my seruauauntes shall drink, but ye shall suffer thyrste.
Behold, my servants shall be merry, but ye shall be confounded. Behold my
servants shall rejoice for a very quietness of heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of heart, and compain for vexacion of mind.

The.ixvi. Chapter.
THus shall the hand of the Lord be known among his servants, and his
indignac^on among his enemies. For behold the lord shall come with fyr^, and
his charet shall be sykes whyrlewynde, that he may recompense his vengeance in
his wrath, and his indinguacio^ with the flame of fire for the lord shall
judge all flesh with the fire, and with his swearde, and there shall be agreate
nombre slain of the lord.

They shall go forth, and look upon the catyons of them that have
transgressed against me. For their worms shall not dye, neither shall their
fire be quenched, and all flesh shall abhor them.

The book of the Prophet Jeremy the.i. Chapter.
BEfore I fashioned thee in thy mothers womb I did know the: And or ever thou
waste borne, I sanctified the, and ordained the to be a prophet unto the
people.

The.iii. Chapter.
COmmonly, when a man puts away his wife and she goes from him, and maryeth
with another, then the question is, should he resort unto her any more after
that? is not his wife then defiled and unclean? But as for the, thou haste
playde the harlot with many louerrs, yet turn again to me, says the lord.

Judah has committed fornicacion with stones and stocks.

The health of Israel stands only upon god our lord.

The.iiii. Chapter.
BE circumcised in the Lord, and cut away the forestynne of your hearts, all
ye of Judah, and all the indwellers of Jerusalem, that my indignacion break not
our like sire and kyndle, so that noman may quench it, because of the
wickedness of your ymaginacions.

The.v. Chapter.
Among my people are found wicked persons, that privily lay snares and
wait for men to take them and destroy them. And like as a net is full of
birds, so are their houses full of that which they have gotten with falsheade
and disceite. Hereof comes their great substance and tyches, hereof are
they fat and wealthy, and are more mischeuouse then any other.

The.vi. Chapter,
ERom the least unto the most, they hang all upon couetuousenes, and from the
Prophet unto the priest, they go al about we falshead and lies. And beside
that, they heal the hurt of mi people with sweet words, saying: peace,
peace, when there is no peace at all.

Thus says the lord, go into the streets, consider and make inquisition for
the old way, and if it be the good and right way, then go there in that ye
may find rest for your souls, but they say we will not walk therein.

The.vii. Chapter.
TRust not in false lyinge words, saying: here is the temple of the lord, here
is the temple of the lord, here is the temple of the lord. But rather in deed
amend your ways and councils, and judge right betwyxte a man and his neigh^
boure, oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the wyddowe, shed not
innocent blood in this place, cleave not to strange gods to your own
destruction, then will I let you dwell in this place, ye in the land that I gave
before time unto your fathers for ever.

The.viii. Chapter.
OD men fall so that they arise not up again? or if Israel repent, will not god
turn again to them? Wherefore then is the people, and Jerusalem gone so far
back, yt they turn not again? they are ever the longer the more obstinate,
and will not be converted.

The.ix. Chapter.
THus says the lord, let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor the
strong man in his strength, neither the rich man in his riches. But whosoever will
rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he understands, and knows me, for I
am the lord which do mercy, equity, and righteousness upon the earth.

The.x. Chapter.
Now I know (O Lord) that it is not in man's power to order his own ways,
or to rule his own steps and goynges: Therefore chasten thou us, O Lord, but
with favor, not in thy wrath, bring us not utterly to naught. Power out
thine indignacion rather upon the gentyles, that know the not, and upon the
people that call not on thy name.

The.xiii. Chapter.
May a man of Jude change his skyn, and the cat of the mountain her spots?
no more may ye that be exercysed in evil, do good.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
ANd the lord said unto me. The Prophets preach lies in my name, where as I
have not sent the^, neither gave I them any charge, nether did speak unto
them, yet they preach unto you false visions, charmying, vanity, and
disceytfulnes of their own heart.

The.xvii. Chapter.
CVrsed be the man that puts his trustein man, and takes flesh for his
arm, and he, whole heart departs from the lord.

O blessed is the manne, that put his trust in the Lord, and whose hope is
the LORD himself.

Among all things, man has the must disceytefull and stubberne heart.

The.xviii. Chapter.
WHen I take in hand to rote out, to destroy or to waste away any people or
kyngedomes, if the people against whom I have thus devised, convert from their
wickedness, I repent of the plage that I devised to bring upon them. Again,
when I take in hand to build or to plant a people or a kingedome, if the same
people doyll before me, and hear not my voice, I repent of the good that I
devised to do for them.

The.xxii. Chapter.
ANd all the people that go by this city shall speak one to an other,
wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this noble city? Then shall it be
answered, because they have broken the commandment of the Lord their God,
and worshipped and served strange Gods.

Woe worth him that builds this house with unrighteous, and his parlours
with the good that he has gotten by violence, whicheneuer recompenseth his
neighbors labor, nor pays him his hire.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Do not I fulfill heaven and earth, faieth the Lord

Is not my word like a fire says the Lord? and like a hammer that breaks
the hard stone?

The xxxi. Chapter.
THus lays the Lord, the voice of heuines wepinge, and lamentation, was
heard on hye, even of Rachell mourninge for her children, and would not be
conforted because they were away.

I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and write it in their
hertes, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And from thence for
the shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother, and say: know the
lord: but they shall all know me from the lowest unto the highest, says the
lord. For I will forgive their mildedes, and will never remember their sins
any more.

The.xxxii. Chapter.
Thine eyes look upon all the ways of men's children, to reward every one
after his way, and according to the fruits of his inuencions.

The.xxxix. Chapter.
THe King of Babylon caused the children of Zedechis, and all the nobles of
Judah to be stayne before his face at Reblath: and made Zedechias eyes to be put
our, and bound him with two chains, and sent him to Babylon.

The.xlviii. Chapter.
OUrsed be he, that does ye work of the Lord negligently.

The.xlix. Chapter.
THough thy nest were as hye as the Egles, yet will I cast the down sayethe
the lord.

The.li. Chapter.
COnfounded be all casters of Idols for the thing that they make is but
disceyte, and has no breathe, vain it is, and an erroniouse work: and in the
time of visitacion it shall perish.

The lamentacion of Ieremye the first Chapter.
Jerusalem has sinned cure more and more: therefore is she come in decay. All
they yt had her in honor despise her, for they have seen her fylthynes Yea she
sigheth, and is a shamed of her self.

O all ye that go fathy, behold and se, if there be any sorrow, like unto
mine, wherewith the LORD has troubled me, in the day of his fearful wrath.

The.iii. Chapter.
IT is of the lords mercyes, that we are not utterly consumed.

The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. O how
good is the lord unto them, that put their trust in him, and to the soul that
seeks after him.

O how good is it for a man to take thy yoke upon him from his youth up?

The Lord will not forsake for ever, but though he punish, yet according to
the multitude of his mercyes, he receaueth to grace again for he does not
plage, and cast out the children of men from his heart.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe women, which of nature are petyfull, have sodden their own children with
their hands, that they might be their meat in the miserable destruction of
the daughter of my people.

The book of the Prophet Ezechiel the.iii. Chapter.
THe house of Israel will not follow the, for they will not follow me, yea all
the house of Israel have styffe foreheades, and hard hearts.

Y^ I say unto the concerning the ungodly man, that without doubt, he must
dye, and thou geuest not him warning, nor speak unto him that he may turn
from his evil way, and so to live: than shall the same ungodly manne dye in
his own vnrighteousenesse: but his blood will I require of thine hand.
Nevertheless if thou give warn^nge unto the wicked, and yet he forsake not his
ungodliness, then shall he dye in his own wickedness, but thou haste
discharged thy soul.

Now if a righteous manne go from his righteousenesse, and do the thing that
is evil: I will lay a stumblynge block before him, and he shall dye, because
thou haste given him warning, yea dye shall he in his own sin, so that the
virtue that he did before, shall not be thought upon, but his blood will I
require of thine hand. Nevertheless if thou exhortest the righteous that he
sin not, and so the righteous do no sin, then shall he live, because he
has retryued thy warning, and thou have discharged thy soul.xxxiii. Ca.

The.v. Chapter.
IN the Jerusalem, the fathers shall be feign to eat they: own sons, and the
sons their own father^.

The.xi. Chapter.
THat stonye heart will I take out of your^ body and give you a fleshly heart,
that ye may walk in my commandments, and keep my ordinances, and do them,
that ye maych^ my people, and I your god.

The.xiii. Chapter.
WOE be unto you, that sow pyllours under all arm holes, and bolsters under
the heads both of young and old to catch souls withal. For when ye have
gotten the souls of my people in your captivity, ye promise them ly^e, and
dishonor me to my people for an handefull of barlye and for a piece of
bread, when ye kill the souls of them that dye not, and promise life to them
that live not. Thus ye dissemble with my people, that believes your lies.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Behold, the sins of Sodoma were these, pride, fullness of meat,
abundance of idleness, these things had she, and her daughters: besides
that, they reached not their hand to the poor and nedye, but were proud, and
did abominable things before me, and therefore I took them away, as pleased
me.

The.xviii. Chapter.
THe fatherles have eaten sour grapes, and the chyldrens tethe are set on edge.

The soul that synneth, shall dye. If a man be godly, and do the thing that
is equal and right and lends nothing upon vsurye, he takes nothing over,
this is a righteous man, he shall surely live says the lord God. If he now
get a son that is a murderer, or that lends upon vsurye, and takes
moreover, shall this man lyue^ he shall not live.

The son shall not bear the fathers offense neither shall the father bear
the sons offense, the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself also.

If the ungodly will turn away from all his sins that he has done, and
keep all my commandments, and do the thing that is equal and right:
doubtless he shall live, and not dye. As for all his sins that he did before,
they shall not be thought upon, but in his righteousenesse that he has done,
he shall live, for have I any pleasure in the death of a sinner, says the
lord god, but rather that he convert and live? Again if the righteous turn
away from his righteousness, and do iniquity, according to all the
abhominacions that the wicked manne does, shall he live? All the righteousness
that he has done shall not be thought upon: but in the fault that he has
offended withal, and in the sin that he has done, he shall dye.

The.xxxiii. Chapter.
COme let us hear what word is gone forth from the lord. These come unto
the, after the manner of a great people: yea, as who says they were my people,
they sit down before the, and hear thy words but they do not there after.

For in their mouths they make a test of them, and their heart goes after
their own covetous lucre, and as a bailet that has a sweet tune, and is
pleasant to sing so shalt thou be unto them: thy words shall they hear,
but they will not do there after.

The.xxxiiii. Chapter.
WOE be unto the shepeheardes of Israel, that feed themselves. Should not the
shepeheardes feed the flocks? ye have eaten up the fat ye have clothed you
with the woll, the best fed have ye slain, but the flock have ye not
nourished. The weak have ye not holden up, the sirk^ have ye not healed, the
broken have ye not bound together, the outcastes have ye not brought again,
the ioste have ye not sought, but churlyshelye and cruellye have ye ruled them.
Thus are they scatered here and there without a shepehearde. Yea all the
beasts of the field devour them, and they go astraye. etc.

The.xxxvi. Chapter.
I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you together out of al
countries, and bring you again into your own land. Then will I pour clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean, yea, from all your uncleanness and from
all your ydols shall I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put into you. As for that stonye heart, I will take it out
of your body, and give you a fleshly heart. I will give my sprite among you, and
cause you to walk in my commandments to keep my laws and to fulfill them.

The.xxxvii. Chapter.
Behold I will open your graves, (O my people) and take you out of your
sepulchers and bring you into the land of Israel again. So shall ye know
that I am the lord, when I open your graves, and bring you out of them. My
spirit also will I put in you, and ye shall live. I will se^te you again in
your own land, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, which have said it,
and fulfilled it in deed.

The.xliii. Chapter.
O Thou son of man, this tome is my feate, and the place of my foot steps,
where as I will dwell among the children of Israel for evermore.

The.xliiii. Chapter.
THey shall not shave their heads, nor nourishe the bushe of their hear, but
round their heads only. All the priests that go into the inmoste court,
shall drink no wine. They shall mary no wydowe, neither one that is put from
her husband, but a maid of the scede of the house of Israel, or a wydow that
has had a priest before.

The.xlv. Chapter.
Upon the.xiiii. day of the first month, ye shall keep Easter, seven days
shall the feast continue, wherein there shall no sour nor leuended bread be
eaten.

One sycle makes twenty garres. So.xx. sicles, and.xxv. and.xv. sicles make a
pound.

The.xlvi. Chapter.
If the Prince give a gift unto any of his sons, then shall it be his
sons heritage perpetual, that he may possess it. But if he will give one
of his servants, some of his heritage, it shall be his unto the fre year, and
then to return again unto the Prince: for his heritage shall be his sons
only.

The book of the Prophet Daniel the.ii. Chapter.
ANd Daniel praised the God of heaven. Daniel also cried loud, and said: O
that the name of GOD might he praised for ever and ever, for wisdom and
strength are his own, he changes the times and ages, he puts down
kings, he sets up kings, he gives wisdom unto the wise, and
understanding to those that understand, he opens the deep secrets he
knows the thing that lies in darkness, for the light dwells with him.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Wherefore O king be content with my counsel, that thou may redeem thy
sins with alinesse, and thine* offenses with mercy to poor people, for this
shall be an healyng of thine error.

O king Nabuchodonozor, to the it is spoken. Thy kingdom shall depart from
thee, thou shalt be cast out of men's company, thy dwelling shall be with
the beasts of the field, so that thou shalt eat grass as an Ox, till
seven years be come and goen over thee, even until thou know that the
kygheste has power upon the kingdoms of men, and that he may give them unto
whom it pleases him.

The.v. Chapter.
MAne, Thetell, Phares. Now the interpretacion of the thing is this. Mane God
has noumbred the kingdom, and brought it to an end. Thetel, thou art wayed
in the balaunce, and art found to light. Phares, thy kingdom is delie in
parts, and given to the Medes and Parses.

The.vii. Chapter.
HE shall suddue three kings, and shall speak words against the highest of
all, he shall destroy the saints of the most highest and think that he
may change times and laws.

They shall be given under his power, until a time, two times and half a
time. But the judgment shall be kept, so that his power shall be taken from
him, for he shall be destroyed, and peryshe at the last.

The.ix. Chapter.
I Turned me unto my God the Lord for to pray and make mine intercercession
with fasting sackecloth and ashes.

We do not cast our prayers before thee in our own righteousenesse, no, but
only in thy great mercies.

The.xii. Chapter.
THere shall come a time of trouble, such as never was, sense there began to
be any people, unto the same time. Then shall thy people de delivered, yea, al
those that be found written in the book.

Many of them that sleep in the duste of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting lyte, some to perpertuall shame and reprofe, the wise, such as
have taught other, shall glyster as the shynyng of heaven, and those that have
instruct the multitude unto godliness, shall be as the sterres, world without
end.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Well, it is better for me, to fall into your bands with out the bid doyns,
then to sin in the syghte of the lord.

The book of the Prophet Oseas The first Chapter.
GO thy way, take an harlotiets thy wyfs, and get children by her.

The.ii. Chapter.
I Will have mercy upon her. that was without mercy.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe lord must punyshe the^ that dwell in the land. And why? there is no
truth, there is no mercy, there is no knowledge of god in the land: but see
eating liynge, manslaughter, theft and aduoutrye have gotten the upper hand,
and one gyltynesse follows another. Therefore shall the land be in a miserable
case, and all they that dwell therein shall be rooted out. The beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fyshes of the sea shall dye.

My people peryshe, because they have no know ledge.

Whoredom, wine, and dronckennesse takes the heart away.

The.vi. Chapter.
I Have pleasure in loving kyndnes, and not in offering: yea in the knowledge
of god more then in burnt sacrifice.

As the thieves armed, wait for him that passes by the way: such is the
counsel of the presses, which with one agterd counsel murder cruelly
such as keye the way: yea, they dare do all unspeakable myschefe.

The.x. Chapter.
Sow unto righteousness, and reap the fruits of weldoynge, plowe up your
fresh land, for it is time to seek the lord, till he come and rain
righteousness, upon you, but you have plowed ungodliness, ye have reaped
iniquity, you have eaten the fruit of lies.

The.xii. Chapter.
Jacob took his brother by the hele, when he was yet in his mothers womb, and
in his strength he wrestled with god, he strove with the angel, and gat the
victory: so that he prayde and desired him

The.xiii. Chapter.
O Israel, thine iniquity has destroyed the. but in me only is thy help.

O death, I will be thy death, O hell, I will be thy slinge.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
THe ways of the lord are righteous, such as be godly will walk in them.
As for the wicked, they will stomble therein.

The book of the Prophet Joel The first Chapter.
WAke up ye dronkardes, and weep, mourn all ye wine suppere, because of your
swet wine: for it shall be taken away from your mouth.

Gyrde you, and mourn.

O ye prestes, mourn ye ministers of the altar go your way in, and sleep in
sackeclothe proclayme a faslyng, call the congregacyon, gather the elders, and
all the inhabytoure of the land together in to the house of the lord your
god, and cry unto the lord, alas, alas for this day. And why? the day of the
lord is at hand, and comes as a destroyer from the almyghtye.

The.ii. Chapter.
The day of the lord comes, and is hard at hand, a dark day, a glomyng
day, a cloudy day yea and a stormy day. Before him shall be a consumyng fire,
and behind him a durnynge flame. The earth shall quake before him, yea the
heavens shall be moved. The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the
stars shall withdraw their shine. This is that great and merueylous
fearful day of the lord, and who is hable to abydeit? I will show wonders
in heaven above, and tokens in the earth beneth, blood and fire, and the
vapors of smock, the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood before the great and notable day come of the lord.

The.ii Chapter.
The time shall come, that whosoever calls on the name of the lord, shall be
saved.

The.iii. Chapter.
I shall gether all people together, and bring them in the valley of Iosaphat,
and there will I reason with them.

Let the people arise, and get them to the valley of Iosaphat, for there will
I sit, and judge all heathen round about.

The book of the Prophet Amos The fyft Chapter.
THey owe him euel will, that reproves them openly, and who so tells the^
the plain truth, they abhor him.

Seek after the thing that is good, and not evil, so shall ye live. Yea the
Lord God of hosts shall be with you according to your own desire.

Shall not the day of the Lord be dark and not clear? shall it not be
cloudy and no shime in it?

The.viii. Chapter.
Behold, the time comes, says the lord god, that I shall send an hunger
into the earth, not the hunger of bread, nor the thyrste of water, but an
hunger to hear the word of God, so that they shall go from the one sea to the
other, yea from the North unto the East, running about to seek the word of
the Lord, and shall not find it.

The.ix. Chapter.
Their covetousness shall fall upon all their heads, and their posterity
shall be slain with the swearde. They shall not fle away, there shall not one
of them escape, nor be delivered. Though they were buried in the hell, my hand
shall fetch them from thence, though they clime up to heaven, yet shall I
cast them down, though they hyde themselves upon the top of Larmel, yet shall
I seek them out, and bring them from thence: though they crepe down fro my
sight in to the deep of the sea, I shall command the serpent, even there to
byte them, if they go away before their enemies into captivity, then shall I
command the swearde there to slaye them. Thus will I set mine eyes upon them,
for their harm and not for their welthe.

The book of the Prophet Abdy the first Chapter.
THou say in thine heart, who shall cast me down to the ground? But though
thou wentest up as ^ye as the Aegle, and made thy nest above among the
slarres, yet would I pluck the down from thence says the lord.

Like as thou haste done, so shalt thou be delte withal.

Upon the mount Sion shall the salvation be.

The book of the Prophet Jonas the first Chapter.
THey took Jonas and cast him into the sea, and the sea left raging. And the
men feared the LORD excedingly, doing sacrifices and making vows unto the
Lord.

The.ii. Chapter.
The Lord prepared a great fyshe, to swalowe up Jonas. So was Jonas in the
belly of the fish three days and three nights.

The.iii. Chapter.
Jonas cried saying: There are yet fortye days, and then shall Niniue be over
throwe^. And the people of Niniue believed god, and proclaimed fasting, and
arrayed themselves in sackeclothe, as well the great as the small of them. And
the tidings came unto the King of Niniue, which rose out of his seat, and
did his apparel of, and put on sack clothe, and satte him down in ashes.
And it was cried and commanded in Niniue, by the authority of the king and
his Lords, saying: Se that neither manne, nor beast, Ox or sheep taste ought
at all, and that they neither feed nor drink water: but put on sackeclothe
both man and beast, and cry might lie unto god: yea, so that every manne
turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that he has in hand. Who
can tell? god may turn and repent, and cease from his featte wrath, that we
perish not. And when god saw their worckes how they turned from their wicked
ways: he repented on the evil, which he said he would do unto them, and did
it not.

The.iiii. Chapter.
I know well enough that thou art a merrifull god, full of compassion, long
sufferinge, and of great kyndenes, and repentest when thou should take
punishemente.

The book of the Prophet Micheas the.i. chapter.
Owo unto them, that ymagie^ to do harm, and deuyse ungraciousness upon their
beds to perform it in the cleate day, for their power is against god, when
they count to have land, they take it be vyoience, they rob men of their
house^. Thus they oppress a man for his house, and every man for his heritage.

Truth it is, my words are frendelye unto them that live right: but my people
does the contrary, therefore must I take part against them, for they take
away both coat and cloak from the simple.

If I were a fleshly fellow, and a preacher of lies, and told them that they
might sit bybbinge and bollyng, and be dronken. O that were a prophet for this
people.

The.iii. Chapter.
OHeare this ye rulers of the house of Jacob, and ye judges of the house of
Israel, ye that abhorte the thing that is lawful, and wrest aside the thing
that is straight. Ye that build up Syon with blood, and Jerusalem with doying
wrong. O ye judges ye give sentence for gifts. O ye priests, ye teach for
lucre. O ye prophets ye prophecye for money, yet will they be taken as those
that hold upon god, and say: Is not the lord among us? Tushe, there can no
mysfortune happen us. Therefore shall Syon for your sake, he plowed like a
field, Jerusalem shall become an heap of stones, and the hill of the temple
shall be turned to an hye wood.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe law shall come out of Syon, and the word of god from Ierusaiem.

The.v. Chapter.
ANd thou Bethleem Ephrata art little among the thousands of Judah, out of thee
shall come unto me which shall be the governor in Israel, whose outgoynge has
been from the beginning and from everlasting.

The vi. Chapter.
I will show the, O man, what is good, and what the lord requires of the,
namelye to do righ^, to have pleasure in loving kyndenes, to be lowly, and to
walk with thy god.

Shu^de I not be displeased for the unrighteous good in the houses of the
wicked, and because the measure is min^shed? Or should I justify the false
balaunces, and the bag of disceptefull weyghtes, among those that be full of
riches unrighteously gotten: where the citesins deal with falschede, speak
lies, and have disceytfull ro^gues in their mouths?

The.vii. Chapter.
THere is not a godly upon earth, there is not one righteous among men. They
labor all to shed blood, and every man hurts his brother to death, yet
they say they do well, when they do evil. As the prince wills, so says the
judge, that he may do him apleasure again. The great man speaks what his
heart desires and the hearers allow him. The best of them is but a thystle, and
the most righteous of them is but a breer in the hedge.

Let no man believe his friend, nor put his confidence in a brother.

The Prophecy
Keep the port of thy mouth from her that lyech in thy bosom.

A man's foes shall be even they of his own household.

Where is there such a god as thou? That pardonest wickedness, and forgeuest
the offenses of the remnaunt of thine heritage? He keeps not his wrath for
ever and why? his delight is to have compassion, he shall turn again, and be
merciful to us: He shall put down our wickednesses, and cast all our sins
into the botome of the sea. Thou shall keep thy truth with Jacob, and thy
mercy for Abraham, like as thou have sworn unto our fathers long ago.

The book of the Prophet Nahum the.i. Chapter.
THe Lore is a gelouse Lord, and a taker of vengeance is the Lord and
wrothfull.

The lord takes vengeance of his enemies, and reserueth displesure for his
adversaries The lord suffers long, he is of great power, and so innocent,
that he leueth no man fautlesse before him.

Full gracious is the Lord, and a strong hold in the time of trouble, he
knows them that put their trust in him.

Like as the thorns that stycke together, and as the dry straw, so shall the
dronkardes be consumed together, even when they be full.

The book of the Prophet Abacuc the first Chapter.
Tyranny and violence are before me. Power over goes right: for the law is
torn in pieces, and thee can no right judgment go forth. And why? the
ungodly is more set ^y then the righteous, this is the cause that wrong
judgment proceeds.

The.ii. Chapter.
THe unrighteous thinks himself in sauegarde, as a strong hold: but the
just shall live by his faith.

Woe be to him that heayeth up other men's goods.

Woe unto him, that couetously gathers evil gotten goods into his house, that
he may set his nest on hye, to escape from the power of misfortune.

Woe unto him that buyldeth the town with blood, and mayntayneth the city
with unrighteousness.

Woe be unto him that gives his neighbor drink, puttyng in gall, and making
him dronken that he may se his priuities.

Woe be unto him, that says to a piece of wood arise, and to a dumme stone,
stand up: for what instruccion may such one give? Behold it is laid with
gold and silver, and there is no breths in it. But the lord in his holy
temple is he whom all the world should fear.

The book of the Prophet Sophony the.i. chapter.
I Will visit the Princes, the kings children and al such as wear strange
clothyng.

The great day of the Lord is at hand, it is hard by, and comes a pace.
Horrible is the tydinges of the Lords day, then shall the Gyaunte cry out,
for that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and heaviness: a day of
utter destruction and misery a dark glomyng day, a cloudye and stormy day, a
day of the noise of trompettes and shawmes, against the strong cities and
towers. Their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in that
wrothfull day of the lord, but the whole land shall be consumed through the
fire of his gelousye: for he shall soon make clean ryddau^ce of all them that
dwell in the land.

The.ii. Chapter.
Seek the Lord al ye meke herted upon earth. ye that work after his indgement
seek righteousness, seek lowlynesse, that ye may be defended in the wrothfull
day of the Lord.

The book of the Prophet zachary the first Chapter.
TVene you unto me says the Lord of hoostes, and I will turn to you says
the lord of hoostes.

The.v. Chapter.
I Se a flying book of.xx. cubytes long, and ten cubits broad. Then said
he unto me. This is the curse that goes furthe over the whole earth, for all
thieves shelbe judged after this book, and all swearers is shall be judged
according to the same, and I will bring it forth, says the lord of hoostes,
so that it shall come to the house of the thief, and to the house of him that
falsely swears by my name, and shall remain in his house and consume it,
with the tymbre and stones thereof.

The.vii. Chapter.
THus says the Lord of hoostes, execute true judgment, show mercy and
louyngs kyndenesse, every man to his brother. Do the widdowe, the fatherless,
the stranger and poor no wrong, and let no man ymagine evil against his
brother in his heart.

Like as he spoke, and they would not hear even so they cried, and I would
not hear, says the Lord of hoostes.

The.viii. Chapter.
Speak every man the truth unto his neighbor, execute judgment truly and
peace ablye within your ports, none of you imagine evil in his heart against
his neighbor, and love no false oaths. For all these are the thing that I
hate, says the lord.

The.viii. Chapter.
THus seyeth the Lord of hoostes. The fast of the fourth month, the fast of
the fifthe, the fast of the seuenthe, and the fast of the tenthe, shall be joy
and gladness, and prosperous hye feasts unto the house of Judah, only love
the truth and peace.

The.ix. Chapter.
BEioyse thou greatly, O daughter Syon, be glad, o daughter Jerusalem, for
lo, the king comes unto thee, even the righteous and Savior, lowly and
simple is he, he rydeth upon an ass, and upon the fool of an ass.

The.xi. Chapter.
ANd I said unto them, if yet think it good bring hither my price, if not
then leave. So then they weyed down thirty silver pence, the value that I was
praised at. And the Lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter (a goodlye
price for me to be valued at of them) and I took the.xxx. silver pence, and
cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord.

The.xii. Chapter.
Moreover, upon the house of David, and upon the cytezins of Jerusalem will I
pour out the spirit of grace and compassion: so that they shall look upon me,
whom they have pearsed, and they shall bewepe him as men mourn for their
only begotten son: yea, and be sorye for him as men are sorye for their
first child.

The.xiii. Chapter.
ANd if it be said unto him, how came these wounds then in thy hands? he
shall answer. Thus am I wounded in the house of mine own friends.

Smite the shepcheard, and the sheep shall be sent tied abroad: and so will I
turn mine hand to the little ones.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
ANd the lord my god shall come, and al saints with him. In that day shall
it not be light, other clear or dymme. This shall be that special day which
is known unto the Lord, neither day nor night, but about euenyng time it
shall be light.

The book of the Prophet Malachy the.i. Chapter.
WAs not Esau Jacobs brother, says ye lord yet have I loved Jacob, and hated
Esau. Yea, I have made his hills waste, and his heritage in a wilderness for
dragons.

If ye offer the blind, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick,
is not that evil? yea, offer it unto the prince, shall he be content with
the, or accept thy person, says the LORD of hosts?

What is he among you, that will do so much as to shut the doors, or to
hyndle the fire upon my altar for might: I have no pleasure in you, says
the lord of hoostes.

From the rising up of the sun, unto the going down of the same my name is
great among the gentiles: Yea in every place shall there sacrifice be done,
and a clean offering offered up unto my name: for my name is great among ye
heathen says the Lord of hoostes.

Cursed be the dissembler, which has in his flock one that is a male, and
when he make the a vow, offers a spotted one unto the Lord.

The.ii. Chapter.
IN the Priests lyppes should be sure knowledge, that men may seek the law
at his mouth for he is a messenger of the LORD of hoostes.

The.iii. Chapter.
I will send my messenger, which shall prepare the way before me.

Behold, he comes says the Lord of hoostes. But who may abide the day of
his coming? who shall be able to endure, when he appears? for he is like a
gold smythes fire, and like washers soap. He shall set him down to try and
to cleanse the silver, he shall pourge the children of Leuy, and purifye them
like as Gold and silver.

I will come and punish you, and I myself will be a swifte witness against
the witches, against the aduouterers, against false swearers, yea and
against those that wrong fullye keep back the hyrelynges dewlye: which vex
the widows and the fatherles, and oppress the stranger, and fear not me
says the Lord of hoostes.

Turn ye new unto me, and I will turn me unto you say the the lord of
hoostes. Ye say, wherein shall we turn? Should a man use false head and
disceyte with god as ye use false head and disceyte with me? yet ye say,
wherein use we disceyte with the? In tithes. Therefore are ye cursed with
penury, because ye dissemble with me, all the sort of you. Bring every tithe
into my barn that there may be meat in my house, and prove me withal says
the Lord of hoostes, if I will not open the wyndose of heaven unto you, and
power you out a blessyng with plenteousenesse, yea I shall reprove the
consumer for your sakes, so yt he shall not eat up the fruit of your ground,
neither shall the vineyard be bacon in the field says the Lord of hoostes.
Insomuche that all people shall say that ye be blessed. For ye shall be a
pleasant land says the Lord of hoostes.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe day comes that shall burn as an over, and all the proud, yea, and all
such as do wickedness, shall be straw, and the day that is to come, shall
burn them up, says the Lord of hoostes, so that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall that sun of
righteousness arise, and health shall be under his wings: ye shall go forth and
multiplye as the fat calves, ye shall tread down the ungodly, for they shall be
like the ashes under the souls of your feet in the day that I shall make,
says the lord of hoostes.

Behold, I will send you Elias yt Prophet before the coming of the day of
the great and fearful Lord

The book of the Prophet Batucke the.i. Chapter.
THe dead that be gone down to their graves, and whose souls are out of
their bodies, ascribe unto the Lord, neither praise nor righteous making: but
the soul that is vexed for the multitude of her sins, which goes on
beauelye and weakelye, whose eyes begin to fail, yea, such a soul
ascribes praise and righteousness unto the Lord.

The.iii. Chapter.
O Learn then where discretion is, where virtue is, where understanding is,
that thou maiste know also from whence comes long life a necessary living,
the light of the eyes, and quietness, who ever found out her place: who ever
came into her treasures.

Afterward did he show him self upon earth and dwelte among them.

The.vi. Chapter.
Blessed is the godly man, that has no ydolles, and worshippeth none, for he
shall be far from reproufe.

The first book of the Machabees The.ii. Chapter.
THus ye mare consider through out allages since the word began, that who so
ever put their trust in God, were not overcome, fear not ye then the words
of an ungodly manne, for his glory is but donge and worms, to day is he set
up, and to morrow is he gone, for he is turned into earth, and his memorial is
come to naught.

The.iii. Chapter.
But Judas said, it is a small matter for many to be overcome with few, yea,
there is no difference to the God of heaven, to deliver by a great multitude,
or by a small company, for the victory of the battle stands not in the
multitude of the host, but the strength comes from heaven.

Judas ordained captains over the people, over thousands, over hundredes,
over fiftye, and over ten. But as for such as builded them bouses, mar^ed
wives, planted them vineyardes, and those that were fearful, he commanded
the^ every manne to go home again, according to the law.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IVdas and his brethren with the whole congregation of Israel, ordained that
the time of dedication of the altar should be kept in his season from year
to year, by the space of eyghte days from the.xxv. day of the month Caslue
with mirth and gladness.

The.vi. Chapter.
HAd to provoke the Elephantes for to fight they showed them the say of red
grapes and molberyes.

The second book of the Machabees the.iii. Chapter.
THancke Inias the hye preast, for his sake has the lord granted the thy
life.

The.iiii. Chapter.
TO do wyckedly against the law of god, shall not escape unpunished.

The.v. Chapter.
Yet was Antiochus not content with this, but durst go into the most holy
temple, (Menelaus yt traitor to the laws, and to his own natural country,
being his guide) and with his wicked hands took the holy vessel, which
other kings and cities had given thither for the garnyshinge and honor of
the place, them took he in his hands unworthily, and detiled them.

God has not chosen the people for yt places sake, but the placee for the
peoples sake: and therefore is the place become partaker of the peoples trouble,
but afterward shall it enjoy the welthe of them. And like as it is now
forsaken in the wrath of almighty god, so when the great god is reconciled,
it shall be set up in hye worship again.

The.vi. Chapter.
WHen god suffers not sinners long to follow their own mind, but shortelye
punish them, it is a token of his great loving kindness. For this grace have
we of god more then other people, that he suffers not us long to sin
unpunished like as other nations, that when the day of judgment comes, he
may punish them in the fulness of their sins. If we sin, he corrects us,
but he never withdraws his mercy from us, and thought he punish with
adversity, yet dueth he never forsake his people.

The.viii. Chapter.
FOr they, said Judas Machabeus, trust in their weapons and boldness, but ours
confidence is in the almighty lord, which in the twincling of an eye, may
both destroy them that come against us and all the world.

The.xii. Chapter.
Judas gathered of every one a certain in so much that he brought together
two. M. dragmars of silver, which he sent unto Jerusalem yt there might a
sacrifice be offered for the misdede In the place which he did well and right:
for he had some consideration and pondring of the life that is after this time.
For if he had not thought that they which were flayne, did not live, it had
been superfluous and vain, to make any vow or sacrifice for them that were
dead. But forasmuch as he saw that they which dye in the favor and belefe
of god, are in good rest and joy, he thought it to be good and honorable for a
reconcilinge, to do the same for those which were slain, that the offense
might be forgeuen.

The.xv. Chapter.
THis is he that prays much for the people and for all the holy city,
Jeremy the Prophet of God.

And Machabeus held up his hands toward heaven, calling upon the Lord, that
does wonders: which gives not the victory after the multitude of the weapons
and power of the host but to them that please him, according to his own will.

The Nycanor and they that were with him, drew nigh with shaumes, and so^ges:
But Judas and his company with prayer and calling upon god with their hands
they smote, but with their hearts they prayed unto the Lord, and slew no
less then.xxxv. M. men.

Finis. Here ends the old Testamente.
The Table of the old Testament.
A
ABram is commanded to depart his country. Genesisxii. Abram is blessed.
genesisxiiii. Abram does rescue Lot. gene.xiiii. Abra^ pays tithes. ge.xiiij.
Abram will be only enryched of god. genesisxiiii Abrams sede is likened un o the
stars. genesisxv. xxii. Abrams faith does iustifye him. gene.xv. Abrams name is
changed. gene.xvii The significacion of Abraham. gene.xvii. Abraham did laugh.
gene.xxii. Abraham saw three, and worshipped one. ge. 18. Abraham lay not thy
hand upon the child. Gene.xxii. In Abraham's sede shall the nations of the
world be blessed. gene.xxii. xxvi. Abraham wept for Sara. gene.xxiii. Abraham's
years. gene.xxv. Abhominacions, that man should were woman's clothyng.
deutro.xxii. Abimeleche sowde salt through out Sichem. judge.it. Absolons
beauty, and the weigthe of the hear of his head.ii. Reg.xiiii. Achabs
penance.iii. Reg.xxi. Adam a gardener. gene. ii, Adam is forbodden to eat of
the tree of knowelege of good and evil. gene.ii. Adam where art thou.
gene.iii. Adams and Eues excuse Gene.iii. Adams curse. Gene.iii. Aduonterers
punishment death. Gene.xx. Leui.xx. Deu.xxii. Adonibezek. Judge.i. Adversity
proves a friend. Prou. xvii Adversity tries men, Sirac.ii. xii Add nothing
to the word of God. Prou. xxx Age has understanding. Job.xii. Age of man.
Psalm.xc. Against inticers. Deu. xiii Age is honorable Wised. iiii, Age
stands not in the multitude of years. Wisdom. iiii Ahitophels counsel.
ii. Reg. xvi Ahud thrust his dagger in king Eglons belly. Judges.iii. Alms,
and mercy redeem sin. Daniel.iiii. Angels do offer our good works unto god.
Tobi. xii. Angels food is snuisible. Tobi.xii. A^techrist and the time of his
enduraunce. Danyel.vii. Ark of god. Exo.xxv. Aarons rod. Exodusvii.
Nume.xvii. Aaron and his apparel, Exodusxxix. Aaron is anointed. Exodusxxix.
Aarons death was mourned.xxx. days. Nume.xx. Aarons years. Nume.xxiii. Asas
cry unto the Lord.ii. of the Chroni.xiiii. Assyrians are destroyde by the
aungel.iiii. Reg. ix Esaye.xxxvii. Ashes. Psalm.cviii. Assure the buylder of
Niniue. Gene.x.
B
Babel. Gene.xi. Babbling bredeth offense. Prove.x. Balaunces and true weightes.
Leui. xixx Bankettes. Pro. xi Balams ass does speak. Number.xxii. Be not over
wise. Preach.ix. Be familier with thy equal. Sirach.xiii. Beginning of sin.
Sirach.xxv. Beginning of pride. Sirach.x. Bethlehem. Miche.iiii. Beautifulnes
of women. Sirach.ix. Blessed men. Psalm.i. xxxii. xli. xciiii. cvi. cxix.
Esai.lvi. Jeremy.xvii. Baruc.vi. Beggars. Deu. xv Beactes suffered to be
eaten. Leui.xi. Bezabeel a five worekeman. Exo.xxxi. Blasphemers of God.
Leui.xxiiii. Blocks to stumble at. Leui. xix Blood is not to be eaten. Genesisix.
Le.vii. xvii Bondage of Israel. Exo.l. Body that is hanged shall not remain al
night v. upon the tree. Deuteronomy.xxi. Bread from heaven. Exo.xxvi. Bread howed
and commen.i. Reg.xxi. Breathe of life. Genesisii. Breathe of the lord. Esaias.xxx.
Brawling wife. Pro.xix. Bread of tears. Psalm.ixxx. Bring not thy servant up
delicately. Pro.xxix. Brother must mary his brothers wife, if he dye without
issue. Deu. xxv Burning bushe. Exodusiii. Birth of Esau and Jacob. Gene.xxv.
C.
Cains oblacion. Gene.iiii. Cain murdereth his brother. gene.iiii. Cain is
cursed. gene.iiii. Cains desperacion. gene.iiii. Caruer of Idols. deuteronomy. xiiiii
Casters of Idols. Iere. xv. Cattle for offringes. Leui.i. Cherubines two. Exo.
xxv Chenaniahu master of music.i. Chro. xv Christ offered himself to be
tormented. Esa.xv. Christ rides upon an ass. zacha.ix. Christ suffered for
our sins. Esaias.liii. Circumcision, and the institution thereof. ge.xvii.
Circumcision, and the time thereof. gene.xvii. Circumcision of Abram. gene.xvii.
Circumcision of the heart. Iere.iiii. Cites through the prayers of good me^ are
saved, gene.xix. Confusion of language. gene. xi Consider the end of things.
preac.vii. Conscience wounded or vexed. wised.xvii. Complaynt of the poor.
Syrac.iiii. Counselers and how many suffice. Syrach.vi. Covetous man. sirach.x.
Good counsel. pro.xi. Covetousness in all kinds of men. Iere.vi. Cluster of
grapes. nume.xiii. Creacion of heaven and earth. gene.i. Creacion of man and
woman. gene.i. Custom of marriage. genesisxxix. Cucumbers and melons. nume.xi.
Curse nor smite not thy father. Exo.xxi. Cursed is he that makes ydolles.
wised.xiiii. Curiosity in gods works is forboden. syra. iii
D
Days of man. gene.vi. Days are not like. syrach.xxxiii. David with his harp
drove away the evil spirit. i. of the kings.xvi. David faying to Goliath.i.
of the kings.xvii. David would not lay his hands upon king Saul.i. of the
kings.xxiiii. David did fast and weep for his childs life. 2. Re. 12. Dauides
answer to Gad the prophet.ii. of the kings.xxiiii. David did not build
gods temple, and why.i. of the Chroni. xxi. Dauides desire. psalm.xxvii.
xxviii. Death in the yot.iiii. of the kings.iiii. Death and life in the tongue.
prouer.xviii. Death came by the deuell. wysd.i. Death is both bitter and
sweet. Syrach.xli. Dead men know nothing. Preacher.ix. Dead men shall rise.
Esaias.xxvi. Eze. 37. Da.xii. Dedication of the auleer. machs.iiii. Deformite of
body lets a man to be a priest. Leui.xxi. Deuorcement. Deute.xxi. Dina is
enforced. Gene.xxxiiii. Disobedient child. Deute.xxi. Discrete servant.
Syrach.vii. Diet prolongeth life. Syrach.xxxvii. Dove. Gene.viii. Do good to
the dead. Syrach.vii. Doeg at Saul's commandment slew.lx. priests.i. of the
kings.xxii. Domes day.iiii. of Esoras.vii. Esaias.xiii. Daniel xii. Joel.iiii.
Sopho.i. zacha.xiiii. mala.iii. iiii. Doctrineis life. Prouer.iiii. Dreams.
Syrach.xxxiiii. Drockennes. Esa.v. Dronckardes. Joel.i. Nahum.i.
E
Earth. Gene.i. Earth was corrupt. Gene.vi. Earth shall be no more destroyed
with water. ge.ix. Eat for necessity and not for lust. preacher.x. Egiptians
eat not with the Hebrews. gene.xliii. Ely fell backwarde and brake his
neck.i. Re.iiii. Elyas fast.iii. Reg.xiiii. Elyas shall appear before vomes
day. mala.iiii. Elyas divided the water with his mantell.iiii. of the king.ii.
Eliseus sepulcher.iiii. of the king.xiii. Enoch. Syrach.xlix. Eldest child
must have double portion. Deu.xxi Entycers of maidens. Exo.xxii. Eye of the
Lord. psalm.xxxiii. xxxiiii. Easter continued.vii. days, and of the bread
that was eaten. Ezech.xlv. Esau does sell his byrthright. gene.xxv Every man
should be LORD in his owns house. Esther.i. Every man shall bear his own
offenses. eze.xviii Every man deceives god in payng of tithes. ma.iii Excess
of wine. Syrach.xxxi. xxxvii
F.
Faithful friend. Syrach.vi. Fall into the hands of god. Sirach.ii. Faithful
servant. Syrach.xxxiii. False witness. Deuteronomy.xix. False tongue and the reward
thereof. psalm.cxx. Fasting of the evil is reproved. Psalm.lxix. Fast for
sins. Syrach.xxxiiii. Fasting that pleases and displeases god. esai.iviii.
Field must not be sown with diverse sede. Leui.xix Feed thine enemy.
prouer.xxv Fear of God. Psalm.cxi. Prouer.i. Syrac.xi. Fear thy king.
Prouer.xx. Feet of the Ambassadors. Esaias.lii. Fire must burn continually
upon ye altar. le.vi Fire shall go before god at the later day. Psalm.l.
xcvii. Esaias.lxvi. Joel.ii. Fire of hell. Esaias.xxx. Fire of the wicked shall not
quench. Esa.lxvi. Finger of god. Exo.viii. First borne of all things is
gods. Exo.xiii. nume.iii. xviii. Fy^^^ serpents. nume.xxii. Flying book.
zachari.v. Four strong things.iii. Esdras.iii. Four things say never hoo.
pro.xxx. Four things that pass man's capacity. pro.xxx Four things that
disquiet the earth. pro.xxx. Four things to be feared. syrach.xxvi Four
fastes. zachari.viii. Fornicacion with stones. Iere.iii. Frewill. syrach.xv.
G
Gathering of grapes. Leui.xix. Gedeon and the number of his sons. Iudi.viii.
Give to the poor. pro.xxviii. Gelousy. Syrach.xxvi. Give not thy goods to
another sirach.xxxiii Gift of a prince given to his son, or to his servants
son. Eze.xlvi. Gifts blind men. Exo.xxiii. Deu.xvi. syrac.xii. God
repents that he made man. gene.vi. God does not repent. nume.xxiii. God will
no more curse the ground. gene.viii. God swears by himself. gene.xxii.
Esa.xlv. God blesses Jacob, and the cause why genesisxxvi. God does hold Pharos
heart. Exo.iiii. God kept Pharo, and why. Exo.ix. God is a gelouse god.
Exo.xx. God does visit sin unto the third and the fourth generation.
Exo.xx. nume.xiiii. God is full of mercy. nume.xiiii. iiii. Esd.vii. God of the
altar is the priests enheri. nu.xviii. God hardened king Sehons heart.
Deuteronomy.ii. God is nigh unto us, in all things. Deuteronomy.iiii. God must be beloved,
and how. Deuteronomy.vi. God rewards those that hate him, and how. Deuteronomy.vii. God,
and what he requires of man. Deuteronomy.x. Miche.vi. God is a mighty lord of
power.i. Reg.ii. God beholds the heart.i. Reg.xvi. God at seasons does send
even spirits to men.l. Reg.xvi. God has no pleasure in our damnacion.
tobi.iii. God teaches those that fear him, and what. Psalm.xxv. God
destroys the counselors of princes. ps. 33. God is with the contrite.
psalm.xxxiiii. God shall never fail. Psalm. C.ii. God has a respect unto the
lowly. psa.xiii. viii. God is every where. Psalm.Cxxxix. God deliteth in those
he chastneth. prouer.iii. God has a respect unto the thankful. syrac.iii.
God is merciful and wrathful. syrach.v. God hears us not, and why.
Esaias.lix. God does not forsake his people for ever. Lamen.iii. ii. Macha.vi.
God is the geuer of kingdoms. Danyel.iiii. God is a strong hold. Naum.i. God
loved Jacob, and hated Esau. Mala.i. God will bear witness against the
wicked. Malachy.ii. God suffers not his people to be long unpunished.ii.
Machab.vi. God gives the victory according to his own will.ii. Macha.xv.
Gods commandments. Exo.xx. Gods commandments must every where
bespoken of, Deuteronomy.vi. Gods manifold blessings. deuteronomy.vii. Gods curse is on
those that are hanged. Deuteronomy.xxi. Gods mercies are passing great.i. Cro.xxi.
Gods pleasure is in the humble and meke. Iu.ix. Gods bow and arrows are
ready. Psalm.vii. Gods judgments are true. psalm.xix. Gods visitacion.
psalm.lxxxix. Gods mercy shall endure for ever. psalm.ciii. Gods mercy excedeth
his works. psa.cxlv. Gods delight and pleasure, in whom? psalm.xlvii Gods
servants shall prosper. Esa.lxv. Gods repentance. Iere.xviii. Gods might and
power. Dany.ii. Gods delight. miche.vii. Good works receive reward.iiii.
Esdras.viii. Good works. psalm.cxi. Goods vaynely gotten. Prouer.xiii. Good
wife. pro.xviii. Good name. preach.vii. syrac.xli.
H.
Habelles oblacion and death. gene.iiii. Hand of god.i. Esd.viii. Ham the
father of Canaan. gene.ix. Hagars son begynge bond cannot be heir with
Isaac. genesisxxi. Hanon mysusyng David's servants.ii. of the kings.x. Happy is
the man whom god punishes. Job.v. Happy is he that is not borne.
preach.iiii. Henoche. gene.v. Help thy enemy. Ex.xxiii. He that goes out of
his sanctuary may be slain Nume.xxv. Hear the poor as well as the rich.
Deuteronomy.i. He that will not hear the Priest and the judge shall dye. deuteronomy.xvii.
Hezekia destroyed the brazen serpent iiii. Re. xviii Hezekias prayer.iiii.
Reg.xx. Esa.xxxviii. Hezekias life is prolonged.iiii. Re.xx. He that justifies
himself, condemns himself. Job.ix. Heavens are not clean in gods sight.
Job.xv. Heuinesse. syrach.xxx. He that will not hear shall not be heard.
za.vii. Hyered servants must dayelye be paid their wages. To.iiii. Hyde not
thy sins. prouer.xxviii. Honor thy mother. To.iiii. Hoorders of corn.
prouer.xi. Honor thy father, and how. syrach.iii. How a man shall use
himself with a man of might. syrach.xiii How we shall find grace in the
sight of god. Syrach.xviii. How Elephantes may be provoked to fight. Macha
vi. Hunger of the word of god. Amos.viii.
I.
Iabell. gene.iiii. Jacob, and it significacion. gen xxvii. Jacob wrestleth
with an angel? gene.xxxii. Jacobs dream. gene.xxviii. Jacobs dowe.
genesisxxviii. Jacobs love to Rahell. gene.xxix. Jacobs pollici. gene.xxx. Jacobs
humility. gene.xxxii. Jacobs name is changed. gene.xxxii. Jacob blesses his
children. gene.xlviii. Jacob held Esau by the hele, and what it means.iiii.
E. dras.vi Ose.xii. Jacob was trodden under foot, and why. esa xiii. Iabel
slew Sychara. Judge.iiii. I am that I am. Exo iii. Ieremye was sanctified in
his mothers womb. Ieremye.i. Ieremye prays for the people.ii. Match.xv.
Ieroboams hand.iii. Reg.xiii. Images graven. Deuteronomy.iiii. Innocent blood cries
unto god. gene.iiii. Imaginacion of man. gene.viii. Innocente tongue. Prouer.x.
Iniquity shall have the upper hand.iiii. Esd.v. Inheritance, and to whom it
shall descend for sack of heirs. nume.xxvii. Joseph the dremer. gene.xxvii.
Joseph's fidelity to his master. gene.xxxix. Joseph be mourns his father.
gene.xlix. Joseph commanded that his father should be enbaumed. gene.l.
Joseph commanded his bones to be taken out of Egipte. gene. l John the
Baptiste. Esaias.xl. Joshua fights against Amalech. Exo.xvil. Joshua as long as
Moses held up his hands gat the victory. Exo.xvii. Iosuas years.
Iosu.xxiiii. Ionathas bewe.ii. Reg.i. Jonas is cast into the sea. Jonas.i.
Jonas was.iii. days in the fishes bellye. Iona.ii. Israel robs the
Egiptians. Exodusiii. Israelites never iourneye but at gods commandment.
nume.ix. Israel knows not god. Esaye.i. Israel is s^yffe hearted. Ezechi.iii.
Just man lives be his faith. Aba.ii. Judith fasted all he life. Judith.viii.
K.
Keke thy mouth and keps thy life. prouer.xiii. Keep thy own counsel.
syra.xxxvii. Keye of the house of David. Esa.xxii. king O^, and his bed of
iron. Deuteronomy.iii. king David's reign.ii. Reg.v. kings should be wise and
learned. Psalm.ii. kings displeature. prouer.xvi. kings heart. prouer.xxi.
kings should drink no wine. prove.xxxi. king Zedechias eyes are put out.
Ieremi.xxxix. king Nabuchodonozor. Dan.iiij. king Antiochus.ii. Macha.v.
knowledge of wisdom. prouer.xxiiii. knowledge engendereth care. Preach.i.
L
Laban and his two wives. gene.xxix. Lamech and his two wives. gene.iiii. Law
of god should be sought at the Priests mouth. Mala.ii. Leper must be
presented to the priest. leui.xiii. Leper must dwell alone. leui.xiii. Leper,
and how the house that is infected with the Leper must be ordered. leui.xiiii.
Left handed men marvelous slyngers. i^dg.xx. Lend unto the poor. Deuteronomy.xv.
Lend not to the mighty. syrach.viii. Levites are gods. nume.iii.
Liberality brings plenty. prouer.xi. Liberality brings a man to honor.
pro.xviii. Liars with beasts. Exo.xxii. leui.xviii. xx. Lie with mankind.
leui.xviii. Life of man is but wind. Job.vii. Life of man is full of misery.
Job.xiiii. Life vncorrupt. wisd.vi. Lyghtes two. gene.i. Lyppes of a
staunderer. prouer.iiii. Lyppes of a harlot. prouer.iiii. Let is taken prisoner
and reskued. gene xiii. Lot received angels. gene ix. Lot offers his two
doughte is to the Sodomites. gene.xix. Loties wife. gene.xix. Lottes.
psalm.xxii. Lovers of money. preacher.v. Luci^er and his fall. Esaias.xiiii.
M.
Man has the dominion of all things. gene.i. Man is shaped of dust. gene.ii.
Job.x. Man gave every beast his name. gene.ii. Manne to be joined to his wife
shall leave father and mother. gene.ii. Man has the rule of the woman.
gene.iii. Man shall return into duste. gene.iii. Man mare rule sin.
gene.iiii. Man yt gatherd sticks upon ye saboth day. nu xxv Man ^yueth by the
word of god. Deuteronomy.ii. Man that is fearful, or betrout head to a wife, shall
not go to battle. Deuteronomy.xx. xxiiii. Man with xxiiii. fyngers and toes. i.
Chro.xx. Man never continues in one slate. Job.xiiii. Man at the later day,
shall receive his body again. Job.xix. Man in the sight of god is unclean.
Job.xxv. Man caryeth nothing of his riches with him. Job.xxvii. Man has all
thing in subjection. psall.viii. Man shall he recompenst, and how. psalm.xviii.
Man is altogether vanity. psa.xxxix. Man is conceived in sin. psalm.li.
Manne fades away like grass. Syrach.xiiii. Esaye.xiiii. Man has frewyll.
syrach.xv. Man shall be known be his face. syrach.xix. Man cannot rule
himself. Iere.x. Man of Inde. Jeremy.xiii. Man's meat. Man's days are
appointed. Job.xiiii. Man's time comes suddenly. prea.ix. Malice of man.
gene.vi. Mandragora. gene.xxx. Manna his taste, and lykenes. Exo.xvi. Nu.xi.
Manna was eaten.xl. years. Exo.xvi. Manna ceased. Iosue.v. Manasses returned
again to Jerusalem.ii. Cro. 33 Mary thy daughter. syrach.vii. Makers of
unrighteous laws. Esaias.x. Meke spirited. psalm.xxxvii. Mane. Thetell. Phares.
Daniel.v. Melchisedech the hye priest. gene.xiiii. Many be created, and few
preserved.iiii. Es. viii Mercy delyuereth from death. Tob.iiii. xii. Mercy and
faythfulnes must be written in ma^s heart. pro.iii. Men unmeet for the wars.
macha.iii Mynstrell.iiii. Reg.iii. Mont syon. Aba.i. Moses and why he was so
called. Exo.ii. Moses brake the tables. Erod.xxxii. Moses prays for the
people. Exo.xxxii. Moses fasted.xl. days and.xl. nights. ex. 34. de. 9 Moses
full of mekenes. Nume.xii. Moses with his rod smote the rock. Nume.xx. Moses
years. Deuteronomy.xxxiiii. Murder requires murder. Exodusxxi. Musyke garuisheth the
feast. Syra. xxxii.
N.
Nadab and Abihu for censynge before the Lord were consumed with fire. Leui.x.
Nahas answer to the men of Iabes.i. of the king.xi. Nathans answer to
David.ii. of the kings.xii. Naked we came, and naked we shall depart. Job.i.
Preach.v. Name of god. prouer.xviii. New friends. syrach.ix. Names of Christ.
Esaye.ix. Nimrod a mighty hunter. gene.x. Ninevites and their repentance.
Jonas.ii. Noah and his three sons. gene.vi. Noah was a husband man. gene.ix.
Noah planted wynes. gene.ix. Noah was dronken. gene.ix. Noah two sons couerd
his priuities. gene.ix. No man may se god and live. Exo.xxxiii. No man should
be compelde to drink. Esther.i. None good on the earth. Myche.vii. Nothing
can be hidden from god. Amos.ix. Number of all those that came with Jacob into
Egipte. gene.xlvi. Number of the Israelites that went to the wattes. Nume.i.
Number of the Levites. Nume.iii. i. Chro.xxiij. Number of the cities
appertayinnge to the Levites. Nume.xxxv Number of the connyng musitions.i.
Chro.xxv.
O.
Obedience is better then sacrifice.i. Reg.xv. Oblations with other sacrifices
and works of penance, are not acceptable without good life. Esaye.i.
Obstinate rebellions shall be devoured. Esaias.i. Offringes must be without
blemishe. Leui.i. xxii. Burnt offringes. Leui.ii. Meat offringes. Leui.ii.
Peace offringes. Leui.iiii. Sin offringes. Leui.iiii. Trespass offeringes.
Leui.v. All offeringes must have salt. Leui.ii. Offeringes of other men's
goods. syrach.xxxiiii. Offering of the righteous. syrach.xxxv. Offer not the
blind nor the lame. Mala.i. Offer for the dead.ii. Macha.xii. Old men are to
be honored. Leui.xix. Oil of gladness. psalm.xxxv Onan does spyll his seed,
and why. genesisxxxviii. One language upon the earth. gene.xi. Open a well and
cover it a gain. Exo.xxi. Against oppressors. Miche.ii. Oseas the prophet
married an harlot. Ose.i. Our sins in the latter day, shall accuse us.iiii.
Esdras.xvi. Ox that goreth a man shall dye. Exo.xxi.
P.
Patience shall be rewarded. Tobi.iii. People murmer against Moses. Exo.xv.
Perbrakyng is wholesome. syrach.xxxi. Pharo is plaged. gene.xii. Phynees and his
godly deed. Nume.xxv. Phisicions. syrach.xxxviii. Pillar of a cloud and
another of fire. Exo.xiii. Place of the lateriudgemente. Ose.iii. Place is
partaker of the peoples trouble.ii. ma.ii Pledge and how it must be restored.
Exo.xxii. Prayer with fasting is good. Toby.xii. Praise not thy self.
Prouer.xxvii. Prese not to hye. prouer.xxv. Priests liberties in Egypt.
gene.xivii. Priests coming to god must be sanctified. Exodusxix. Priests
going into the tabernacle must abstain from wine. Leui.x. Priests wives and
daughters. Leui.xxi. Priests duitie. Deuteronomy.xviii. Priests deal
faithfully.iiii. Reg.xxii. Priests should not be taxed.i. Esdras.vii. iii.
Esdras.viii. Priests ought to be honored. syrach.vii. Priests in the old
law were married, and with What weme^ they might mary. Eze. xliiii. leui. xxi.
Priests might be rou^ded, but not shaven. eze. 44. Priests do all mischefe.
Ose. vi Priests will do nothing for naught, Mala. i. Priests are gods
messengers. Mala. ii. Preach to the sinful and save thy own soul. Ezech.
iii. xxxiii. Against preachers. Ezec. xxxiiii. Preacher of lies. Miche. ii.
Polluted persons. Leui. xv. Price of an ass head.iiii. reg. vi. Pride of
women is punished. Esaias. iii. Prophet and a sear is all one.i. of the
kings.ix. Properties of a good woman. Tob. x. Prosperity of the commons is
the kings honor. prouer.xiiii. Poverty is evermore kept under. syrach.xiii.
Power ouergoeth right. Abac. i.
Q.
Quayles. Exo. xvi. Number. xi. Qualities of Judges. Exo. xviii.
R.
Rain and the continuance thereof. Genesis vii. Raven. gene. viii. Ravens brought
Elias bread.iii. of the king. xvii Rakynges are forbodden. Leui. xxiii. Rahab
the harlot was saved. Iosue. vi Rachell mourns. Iere. xxxi. Repynge of corn.
Leui. xix. Rebecca conceived two twynnes. gene. xxv. Resurrection at the later
day. Job.xix. Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy. prou. xxiiii. Reward
all gifts. syrac.xx. Reward and fruit of righteousness. Esaias.xxxii. Rejoice
to know god. Iere. ix. Rich men spurn against god. Deuteronomy. xxxii Riches have
wings. pro. xxiii. Regard no dremes. syrach.xxxiiii. Righteouse men are in
great troubles. psa. xxxiiii. Righteouse men are never forsaken. psalm. xxxvii.
Righteouse men shall rejoice at the punishment of the wicked. Psalm. lviii.
Righteous man. Eze. xviii. Rich men carry nothing with them. psalm. xlix.
Ryoters shall come to poverty. pro. xxiii. Roboams crooked answer.iii. Reg.
xii. Rulers must not be blasphemed. Exodus xxii. Rulers and officers wax
proud. Esther.xvi. Rulers with disceitfull words deceive princes. Esther.xvi.
Such rulers, such subjects. syrach.x. Against rulers. Miche. iii. Ruben.
gene.xlix.
S.
Salamons petition.iii. Reg. iii. prouer.xxx. Salamons provision for his house
hold.iii. of the kings.iiii. Salamons horse.iii. of the king.iiii. Salamons
offeringe.iii. of the king.xii. Salamons Queen's and Concubines.iii. Reg. xi.
Salamons temple shall be destroyed, and why.ii. of the Chroni. vii. Sampson slew
a lion. Judge. xiiii. Sampson with a iawe bone. etc. Judge. xv. Samaria is
besieged.iiii. Reg. vi. Samuel is given unto god i. Reg. i. Samuels sonnnes.i.
of the king.viii. Samuel to the people.i. of the king. xii Sanctificacion of
the seventh day. gene. ii. Sanger with an Ox goade. Judge. iii. Shadow of the
sun goes backward.iiii. re. xx Shame is double. Syrach.iiii. Sara say thou
art my sister. gene. xiii. Sara wills Abram to mary her maid. gene. xvi
Sara laughed. gene. xviii. Sara in very deed is Abrams sister. gene.xx. Saul a
goodly man.l. Reg.ix. Saul dyed for counselyng with a wise woman.l. Chroni.x.
Saw and the axe. Esaye.x. Seek for the old way. Iere.vi. Serpents curse.
gene.iii. Serpent of brass. nume.xxi. Sees gave place to the children of
Israel. Exodusxiiii. Sycle.Leui. xxvii. Sycles how many make a pound.
Ezech.xiv. Silver as plenty as stones.iii. Reg.viii Sins of Sodom.
Ezech.xvi. Six things that god hates. prouer.vi. Slaunderers shall be
destroyed. psalm.cx. Sychem did rauishe Dyna. gene.xxxviii. Sloggyshe persons.
prouer.x. Soth sayers are not to be regarded. Leui.xix. xx. Deuteronomy.xviii.
syrach.xxxiiii. Sodoma and how the cry of it ascended. gene.xvi Sour grapes.
Eze.xviii. Sow wretchedness and reap the same. Job.iiii. Sow tears and
reap joy. psalm.cxxvi. Sow pyllowes and bolsters. Ezeche.xiii. Sow
righteousness, and repe the fruits of well doing. Ose.x. Spare not the rod.
prove.xiii. Speak fair words unto us. Esaias.xxx. Spirit of wisdom.
Esaias.xi. Star of Jacob. Nume xxiiii. Stolen water. prouer.ix. Stony and
fleshely hearts. Eze.xi. xxxvi. Stop not thy eats from the poor.
prouer.xxi. Strangers may not be troubled. Exo.xxii. Strangers are to be
made of. Leui.xix. Strangers offer incense before the Lord. Number.xvi. Stone,
corner stone. Esai.xxviii. Strange raiment. Sopha.i. Subtilitie of the
serpent. Gene.iii. Suretishippe is hurtful. Prouer.xi. xvii. Sirach.viii. xxix.
Sweringe. Sirach.xxiii.
T
Tabernacle by day was covered with a cloud and by night with fire. Number.ix.
Tables two written with the finger of God. Exodusxxxi. Thamar and her two
twins. Gene.xxxviii. The time and years that the Israelites dwelt in Egipte.
Exodusxii. The time of deckinge and beautifiyng the women. Esther.ii. The end
of fowlines. Pro.xxii. There is none that does good. Psalm.xiiii. The dead
know nothing. Preach.ix. Three things that are allowed. Sirach.xxv Three
things belong to an ass, and three to a servant. Sirach.xxxiii Three things
that are abhorred. Sirach.xxv. Three greuouse things. Sirach.xxvi. There is no
truth. Osee.iiii. They that put their trust in god shall not be overcome
Macha.ii. The things that god does hate. zacha.viii. Thought of man.
Sirach.xxvii. Thirty silver pence. zacha.xi. Thubal. Gene.iiii. Thuball Cain.
Gene iiii. Tithes. Leui.xxviii. ii. of Esdras.xii. Cobi.i. Sirach.vii. xxv.
Tithes are the priests enheritaunce. Nu.xviii. Tobias exercised him self in
the worckes of mercy. Tob.i. Tobias was tempted with blyndnesse. Tob.ii. Tothe
for to the. Leui.xxiiii. Tower of Babilone. Gene.xi. Tree of life. Gene.ii.
Trespace that can not be restored, shall be the preistes. Nume.iii. Trouble is
necessary. Psalm.cxix. Trust another in bow nor swearde, but in God.
Psalm.xliiii. Trust in god and not in princes. psalm.cxviii. cxlvi. Trust in
no liynge words. Iere.vii. Truth will not be hard. Amos.v. Truth, of all
things is most strongest.iii. of Esdras.iiii. Truth is fled away.iiii. of
Esdras.xiiii. Things impossible.iiii. of Esdras.iiii. v. Tunicle with his
ornaments. Exo.xxviii. Turn not thy face from the poor. Tob.iiii. Two
parlous things. Syrac.xxvi.
V. W.
Veil of the temple. Exo.xxvi. Virtuous woman. Syrac.xxxvi. Vineyarde. Esaias.v.
Virgin shall bear a son. Esaias.vii. Unrighteous buylders. Iere.xxii. Victory
stands not in the multitude. Macha. 3. Vow of abstinence. Nume.xvi. Vow
unto god and fulfill it. Nume.xxx. Deuteronomy. xxiii. Psalm.l. lxvi. lxxvi.
Preacher.v. Voice is Jacobs. Gene.xxvii. Usury. Exo.xxii. Leui.xxv.
Deute.xxiii. ii. of Esdras.v. Psalm.xv. Prouer.xxviii. Eze.xviii. Usury, and
what it is. Eze.xviii. Vrias answer to David.ii. of the Kings.xi. Vza for
touching of the arcke is punyshed. Lof the Kings.vi. ^^id is smytten with the
leper ii. of the Chro. 26. Walk upon a staff. Exo.xxi. Walk with the
virtuous. Prouer.ii. Waters and the heith and countenance of them. ge. 7.
Waters of Mara were bitter. Exo.xv. Water of strife. Nume.xx. Well doing has
(...) reward. Gene.iiii. Women delivered how long they are unclean.
Leui.xii. Women are the destruction of kings. Prou.xviii. Women eat their
own children. Lamen. 4. eze. 5. Weep for the dead. Syra.xxii. xxxviii. We are
all unclean. Esaias.lxiiii. Weye thy words. Syrac.xxviii. Weyghtes and measures.
Deute.xxv. Miche.vi. Wicked men desire not to know gods ways. Job.xxi.
Wicked men's portion. Psalm.xl. Wicked kings. Prouer.xvi. Wine bread and oil.
Psalm.ciiii. Wine and strong drink. Prouer.xix. Wine byteth like a serpent.
Prouer.xxiii. Wine and wemenne. Syrach* xix. Wine temperately droncken.
Syrach.xxxi. What we ought to do, when our neyghboure^ ox or sheep do
straye. Deute xxii. What they be, upon whom the deuel has power. Tobias.vi.
What is wisdom. Wysdom.vii. Wisdom and the chief point thereof. Prouer.iiii.
Wysdom engenders travail. Preacher.i. Wysdom hyd and treasure hoorded.
Syrach.xx. Whore and whore kepers are forbodden. Deu. 22. Wife that is deuorced
may mary another. Deu. terono.xxiiii. Whose shall the first place be in the
resurrection. iiii. Esdras.ii. Who can withstand gods wrath. Job.ix. Who
shall ascend into the hill of the lord. Psalm.xxiiii. Esaias.xxxiii. Whoredom
of women. syrach.xxvi. Wyshe the king no evil. preach.x. Women must freely
consent to marriage. genesisxxiiii. Woman's curse. gene.iii. Ungodly persons do sone
vanyshe away. ps. 37.91 Word of god a lantern of light. psalm.cxix. Word of
god heals all thing. wysd.xvi. Word of god shall not return void. Esaias.lv.
Word of god is compared to fire. Iere.xxiii. Word of god is heard but not
followed. eze.xxxiii Words of slaunderers. prouer.xviii. Works shall be
rewarded. prouer.xii. Workers with spirits. Leui.xii. Wrest not the law.
Deuteronomy.xvi. Wrath of a woman. syrach xxv. Worm of conscience shall not dye.
Esa.lxvi.
Y
Year of Iubelye. Leui xxv. Yoke of god. Lame.iii.
Z
Zachary is stoned to death.ii. Chro.xxiiii.
The end of the Table,
The gospel of. S. Matthew. the first Chapter.
ALl the generacions of Abraham to David are.xiiii. generacions. And from David
unto the captivity of Babylon, are.xiiii. generacions. And from the captivity
of Babylon unto Christ, are also xiiii. generacions.

The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. when his mother Mary was
betrouthed to Joseph, before they came to dwell together, she was found with
child by ye holy ghost. Then Joseph her husband being a perfect manne, and
loathe to make an ensample of her was minded to put her away secretly.

While he thus thought, behold the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a
dreme, saying^ Joseph the son of David fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife. For that which is conceived in her, is of the holy ghost. She shall bring
forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus. For he shall save his people
from their suns.

And Joseph as soon as he awoke out of sleep, did as the angel of the lord
bad him, and took his wife unto him, and knew her not, till she had brought
forth her first son, and called his name Jesus.

The.ii. Chapter.
WHen Jesus was borne at Bethleem in Jury, in the time of Herod the king.
Behold there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem saying: where is he that
is borne king of Jews (...) we have seen his star in the East, and are come
to worship him.

When they had heard the king, they departed: and so the star which they
saw in the East, Went before them, till it came and stood over the place
where the child was. When they saw the star, they were meruelously glad:
and went in to the house, and found the child with Marye his mother, and
kneled down and worshypped him, and opened their treasures and offered unto
him gifts, gold, franckensence, and myrte.

The.iii. Chapter.
IN those days John the Baptiste came, and preached in the wyldernes of Jury,
sayenges Repent, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Bring forth therefore the fruits belonging is repentance. And se that ye
ones think not to say in your selves, we have Abraham to our father. For I
say unto you, that god is able of the stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

Even now is the axe put unto the rote of the tree: so that every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast in to the fire.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IT is written, man shall not live by breed onelys, but by ever ye word that
proceeds out of the mouth of god.

Thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only serve.

The people which sat in darcknes saw great light, and to them which sat in
the region and shadow of death, light is be gonne to shine.

From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent for the kingdom
of heaven is (...) hand.

He said unto Peter and Andrewe follow me, and I will make you fyshers of
men. And they freyghte way left their nets, and followed him.

And he went forth from thence, and saw other two brethren, James the son
of Zebede. and John his brother, in the ship with Zebede their father, men
dynge their nets, and called them. And they without taryenge left the shyrpe
and their father, and followed him.

Blessed are the poor in sprete, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

The.v. Chapter.
BLessed are they that mourn, for they shall be conforted.

Blessed are the meke, for they shall inheritte the earth.

Blessed are they, which hunger and thurst, for righteousness, for they shall be
filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall sea god.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of god.

Blessed are they which suffer persecution for ryghteousnes sake, for theyrs
is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and persecute you, and shall falslye say
all manner of evil saynges against you for my sake, Recoyce and be glad, for
great is your reward in heaven.

Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost her saltnes, what can
be salted therewith? It is thence forth good* for nothing, but to be catte
out and to be trodden under foot of menue.

Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill, cannot be
hid, neither do men light a candell, and put it under a bushel, but on a
candelsticke, and it lights all that are in the house Let your light so shine
before men, that they may se your good worckes, and glorify your father
which is n heaven.

Think not that I am come to destroy the law of the Prophets: no I am not
come to destroy them, but to fulfill them. For truly I say unto you, till
heaven and earth peryshe, one jot or one title of the law shall not escape,
till all be fulfilled.

Who so ever breaks one of these lest commandments, and teaches men so,
he shall be called the least in the kingedome of heaven. But who soever observes
and teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

Ye have heard how it was said unto them of the old time. Thou shall not
kill. For whosoever kills, shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto
you, whosoever is angrye with his brother shall be in danger of judgment.

Who so euersaieth unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of a counsel.
But who so ever says thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

When thou offereste thy gift at the altar, and there remembreste that thy
brother has ought againstethe: leave there thine offeringe before the altar,
and go thy way fir^te, and be reconsiled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift.

Agree with thine adversary quickelye, whilles thou art in the way with him,
lest that thine adversary deliver the to the judge, and the judge deliver the
to the minister, and then thou be cast into prison. Verily I say unto the,
thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the vttermoste farthinge.

Ye have heard how it was said to them of the old time. Thou shall not
commit aduoutry. But I say unto you, that who so ever looks on a wife,
lustinge after her, has committed aduoutrye with her in his heart. Wherefore
if thy right eye offend the, pluck him out, and cast him from the, better
it is for the that one of thy members perish, then that thy hole body should
be cast into hell. Also if thy right hand offendethe, cut him of, and cast
him from the. Better it is that one of thy members perish, then that all the
body should be cast into hell.

It is said: who so ever puts away his wife let him give her a testimonial
also of deuorceme^t. But I say unto you: who so ever puts away his wife
(except it be for fornication) causes her to break matrimony. And who so
ever marieth her that is deuorsed, breaks wedlock.

Again, ye have heard how it was said to the^ of old time. Thou shalt not
forswear thy self. but shalt perform thine oath to god. But I say unto
you, swear not at al, neither by heaven for it is gods seat, nor yet by the
earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of
that great king, neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou canste
not make one white here or black, but your communication shall be yea yea, and
nay nay, for what so ever is more the^ that, comes of evil.

Ye have heard how it is said: an eye for an eye: a tothe for a toth. But I
say unto you: that ye resist not wrong. But whosoever give the a blow on thy
right cheke, turn to him the other. And if any man will sue the at the law,
and take away thy cote, let him have thy cloak also. And who soever will
compel the to goo with him a mile, go with him twain.

Give to him that asks, and from him that would borowe, turn not away.

Ye have heard how it is said: thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate
thine enemy. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you. Do good to them that hate you. Pray for them which do you wrong and
persecute you, that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven:
for he makes his son to arise on the evil and on the good, and sendethe his
rain on the just and unjust. For if ye love them which love you: what
reward shall ye have? Do not the Publicans even so? And if ye be fre^dly to
your brethren only, what singular thing, d^pe? do not the Publicanes like
wise? ye shall therefore be perfect even as your father which is in heaven, is
perfect.

The.vi. Chapter.
Take heed to your alms, that ye give it not in the sight of men, to the
intent that ye would besene of them. Or else ye get no reward of your father
which is in heaven. Whenever therefore thou geuest thine alms, thou shalt
not make a trompet to be blown before there, as the Ypocrites do in the
sinagoges and in the streets for to be praised of men. Verily I say unto you,
they have their reward. But when thou do thine alms, let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand does, that thine alms may, be secret: and
thy father which sees in secret, shall reward the openly.

When thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the Ypocrites art. For they love to
stand and pray in the Synagoges and in the corners of the streets, because
they would be sent of men. Verelye I say unto you, they have their reward.
But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door to thee,
and pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly. And when ye pray, babble not much as the
Heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard, for their much bablinges
sake. Be ye not like them therefore, for you father knows whereof you have
need, before ye axe of him.

When ye fast be not sad as the Ypocrites are. For the disfigure their
faces, that they might be seen of men how they fast. Verily I say unto you,
they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, annoynte thine head, and
wash thy face: that it appear not unto men how that thou fasteste. But unto
thy father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

Se that ye gather you not treasure upon the earth, where ruste and mothes
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But gather ye treasure
together in heaven, where neither rust nor mothes corrupt, and where thieves
neither break up nor steal. For wheresoever your treasure is, there will
your hearts be also.

No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one, and love the
other, or else he shall lene to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

I say unto you, be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink, nor ye for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more
worth than meat, and the body more of value then raymente? Behold the
fowls of the air: for they sow not neither reap, nor yet carye into the
barnes: and yet your heavenly father feeds them: Are ye not much better
then they?

Which of you (though he took thought therefore) could put one cubite unto his
stature? And why cate ye the^ for raiment? Considre thelilyes of the field
how they grow, they labor not neither spinne. And yet for all that I say
unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty was not arayde like unto one of
these. Wherefore if god so clothe the grass, which to day in the field, and
to motowe shall be cast into the furnace, shall he not much more do the same
unto you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought saying: what shall we
eat or what shall we drink, or werewith shall we be clothed: After all these
things seek the gentyles. For your heavenly father knows that ye have need
of all these things. But rather seek ye first the Kingdom of heaven and the
righteousenesse thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. Care
not then for to morrow, but let the morrow care for it self: for the day
present has ever enough of his own trouble.

The.vii. Chapter.
IVdge not, that ye be not judged, for as ye judge so shall ye be judged. And
with what measure ye meat, with the same shall it be measured to you again.

Why see thou a moote in thy brothers tie, and perceauest not the beam that
is in thine own eyes? Or why say thou to thy brother: suffer me to pluck
out the moote out of thine eye, and be hold a beam is in thine own eye.
Ypocrite, first cast out ye beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to pluck out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swyne less they tread them under their fete, and the other turn again and
all to rent you.

Are and it shall be given you. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and it shall be
opened unto you. For whosoever axeth receaneth and he that sekethe* finds,
and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them.

Enter in at the strayte gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat. But strayte is
the way which leads unto life and few there be that find it.

Beware of talse prophets, which come to you in shepes clothyng, but inwardly
they be rauenyng wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire.

Not all they that say unto me, Master, Master, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does my fathers will which is in heaven.

The.viii. Chapter.
Sir I am not worthy yt thou should come under my roof, but speak the
word only and my servant shall be healed.

Verily I say unto you: I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

Master, I will follow the whither soever thou go. And Jesus said unto him:
the foxes have holes, and the birds of ye air have nestes, but the son of
the man has not whereon to rest his head.

Another that was of his disciples said unto him: master suffer me first to go
and burye my father. But Jesus said unto him: follow me and let the dead bury
their dead.

And behold the deuilles cried out saying: O Jesus the son of God what have
we to do with thee? Art thou come hither to tormente us before the time become?
And there was a good way of from them a great heard of swyne fedyng. Then the
devils besought him saying: if thou east us out, suffer us to go our way
into the heard of swyne. And he said unto them to your wates.

The.ix. Chapter.
HAd when Jesus saw the faith of them, he said to the seek of the paisie:
son, be of good chere, thy sins be forgeuen thee.

Why eats your master with Publicanes and sinners? when Jesus heard that,
he said unto them: The hole need not the physician, but they that are sick.
Go and learn what that means: I have pleasure in mercy, and not in offering.
For I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.

No man pieceth an old garment with a piece of new clothe: for then takes he
away the piece again from the garment, and the rent is made greater. Neither
do men put new wine in old vessels, for then the vessels break, and the wine
runs out, and the vessels perish. But they power new wine into new
vessels, and so are both saved together.

Then said he to his disciples: the harueste is great, but the laborers are
few. wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest, to send for the laborers into
his harvest.

The.x. Chapter.
HAd he called his.xii. disciples unto him, and gave them power over unclean
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickenesses and all manner
diseases.

These.xii. did Jesus sead, and commanded them, saying: Go not into the ways
that lead to Gentiles, and into the cities of the Samaritanes enter ye not but
go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. God and preach saying:
that the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers,
tayse the dead, cast out the de^^ls. Frelyepe have received, frelye give
again. Possess not gold nor silver, nor brass in your girdel^, nor yet
scrip toward your ioutneye, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet a
staff. For the workman is worthy to have his meat.

Into whatsouer city or town ye shall come, inquire who is worthy in it, and
there abide till pego thence. And when ye come in a house, salute the same, and
if the house be worthy, your peace shall come upon it: but if it be not
worthy your^ peace shall return to you again. And whosoever shall not
receive you, nor will hear your preaching, when ye depart out of that house or
that city, shake of the duste of your feet. Truly I say unto you, it shall be
easier for the land of Zodoma and Gomorrain the day of judgment, the for
that city.

Behold I send you forth as sheep among wolves. Be ye therefore wise as
serpenter, and innocent as doves. Beware of men, for they shall deliver you up
to the counsels, and shall scourge you in their Synagoges. And ye shall be
brought to the head rulers and kings for my sake, in witness to them and to
the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye
shall speak, for it shall be given you even in the same hour, what ye shall
say. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which
speaks in you.

The brother shall betraye the brother to death, and the father the son. And
the children shall arise against their fathers and mothers, and shall put
them to death: and ye shall be hated of al men for my name: but he that
endures to then d^ shall be saved.

When they persecute you in one City, fly into to an other.

The disciple is not above his master, nor yet the servant above his Lord.
It is enough for the disciple to be as his master is, and that the seruante he
as his Lord is, if they have called the Lord of the house Beelzebub: how
much more shall they call them of the household so?

There is nothing so close that shall not be opened, and nothing so hid,
that shall not be known.

And fear ye not them which kyl the body, and be not able to kyl the saul:
But rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body into hell.

Whosoever shall knowelege me before men, him will I knowledge also before my
father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my father which is in heaven.

Think not, that I am come to send peace in to the earth: I am not come to
send peace, but a swearde. For I am come to set a man at variau^ce against
his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law
against her mother in law: And a man's fooes shall be they of his own
householde.

He yt loves his father, or mother more then me, is not mete for me. And he
that loves his son, or daughter more then me, is not mete for me: And he
that takes not his cross and follows me, is not mete for me. He that fyndeth
his life, shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find
it.

He that receaueth you, receives me: and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me, he that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive a prophets reward: and he that receaueth a righteous man in the name
of a righteous man, shall receive the reward of a righteous man. And whosoever
shall give unto one of these lyties ones to drink a cup of cold water
only in the name of a disciple: I tell you of a truth, he shall not lose his
reward.

The.xi. Chapter.
They that wear soft clothing, are in kings houses.

Verelye I say unto you, among the children of womenne arose there not a
greater then John the Baptiste. Notwithstanding he that is less in the
kingdom of heaven, is greater then he.

From the time of John Baptiste hitherto, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and they that go to it with violence, pluck it unto them.

John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say he has the devil. The
son of man came eating and drykyng, and they say behold a glutton and
dryncker of wine, and a friend unto publicanes and ^^^^ers.

And thou Capernao^, which art lift up unto heaven, shall be brought down
to hell.

I praise the o father forde of heaven and earth, because thou have hyd these
things from the wise and prudent, and haste opened them unto babes, even so
father, for so it pleased the.

No man knows the son but the father neither knows any man the father,
save the son, and he to whom the son will open him.

Come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you. Take my
yoke on you and learn of me, for I am meke and lowly in heart: and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easi: and my burden is light.

The.xii. Chapter.
I Require mercy and not sacrifice.

They ared him saying: Is it lawful is heal upon the saboth days? because
they might accuse him. And he said unto them: which of you would it be, if he
had a ship fallen into apytte on the sabothe day, that would not take him
and lift him out? And how much is a man better then a sheep? Wherefore it is
lefull to do good deed on the saboth days.

Every kingdom divided within it self, shall be brought to naught. Neither
shall any city or household divided against it self, continu, He that is not
with me, is against me. And he that gaddeteth not with me, scatters abroad.

Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgeuen
unto men: but the blasphemy of the sprete, shall not, be forgyuen unto men.
And whosoever speaks against the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen him,
nor nether in this world, nether in the world to come.

Either make the tree good and his fruit good also^or else make the tree evil,
and his fruit evil. For the tree is known by his fruit.

O generation of Vipers, how can ye say well, when ye your selves are evil.
For of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of the
good treaasure of his heart, brings forth good things: And an evil man,
out of his evil treasure, brings forth evil things. But I say unto you,
that of every ydell word that me^n^ shall haven spoken: they shall give
arountes at the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified,
and by thy worckes thou shall be condemned.

As Jonas was three days and three nights in ye whales bellye, so shall the
son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

One said unto him: behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without,
desirynge to speak with the: he answered and said to him that told him* who
is my mother? or who are my brethren? and be stretched forth his hand over his
disciples and said: behold my mother and my brethren. For whosoever does my
fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my brother, suster, and mother.

The.xiii. Chapter.
ANd the disciples came and said to him. Why speak thou to them in
parables? He answered and said unto them: it is given unto you to know the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. For whosoever
has to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance but whosoever has not,
from him shall be taken away even that he has.

This peoples hearts are waxed gross, and their ears well dull of hearing,
and their eyes have they closed least they should see with their eyes, and
hear with ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should turn,
that I might heal them. But blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your
ears, for they hear. Verily I say unto you, that many prophets and perfaict
men have desired to see those things which ye se, and have not seen them, and
to here those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

The son of man shall send forth his angels and they shall gather out of
his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall
cast them into a furnes of fire, there shall be waylyng and knasshyng of ^eth.
Then shall thy just men shine a bright as the son in the kingdom of their
father.

Whence comes all this wisdom and power unto him? Is not this the carpenters
son, is not is mother called Marye? and his brethren be called James and
Joseph and Simon, and Judas? and are not his systers all here with us? whense
has he all these things.

A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and among his
own kynne.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
ANd when his disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
layeng: it is some sprite, and cried out for fear. And straight way Jesus
spoke unto them saying: Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid.

The.xv. Chapter.
HE that cutsseth father or mother, shall suffee death.

This people draws nigh to me with their mouths, and honors me with their
lyppes, howbeit, their hearts are far from me: but in vain they worship me
teaching doctrines, which are nothing but men's precepts.

That which goes into the mouth, defiles not the man: but that which
comes out of the mouth defiles the man.

All plants which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by
the rotes.

If the blind leede the blind, both shall fall in to the dyche.

Out of the heart come enyll thoughts, murder breaking of wedlock,
whoredom, theefte, false witness berynge, blasphemye. These ere the things
which defyle a man. But to eat with vnwasshen hands, defiles not a man.

Then came to him his disciples, and besoughte him saying: send her away,
for the follows us crying. He answered and said: I am not sent but unto the
loost sheep of the house of Israel.

It is not good to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it to whelps. She
answered and said: truth lord, nevertheless the whelps eat of the trommes,
which fall from their masters table.

The.xvi. Chapter.
AT even ye say, we shall have fair wedder, and that because the sky is
reed: and in the morning ye say, to day shall be foul wedder, and that because
the sky is cloudy and reed.

When Jesus came into the coasts of the city which is called Cesarea
Philippi, he ared his disciples saying: who^ do men say that I the son of
man am? They said: some say thou art John Baptist, some Helias, some
Ieremias, or one of the prophets. He said unto them: but whom say yt that I
am? Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art Christ the son of the living god.
And Jesus answered and said to him: Happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood has not opened unto the that, but my father which is in
heaven. And I say also unto the, that thou art Peter: and upon this rock. I
will bylde my congregation And the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. And I will give unto the, the kepes of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou byndest upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou
lowsest on earth, shall be low sed in heaven.

But Peter took him a side, and began to rebuke him saying: Master sauer thy
self, this shall not come to the. Then turned he about and said unto Peter:
come after me Satan, thou offendest me because thou sauourest not godly
things, but worldly things.

If any man will follow me, let him forsake him self, and take up his cross
and follow me. For whosoever will save his life, shall loose it. And whosoever
shall loose his life for my sake, shall find it. What shall it proffyt a man
though he should wine all the whole world, if he loose his own soul? Or else
what shall a man give to redeem his soul again with all? For the son of man
shall come in the glory of his father with his angels, and then shall he
reward every man according to his deeds.

The.xvii. Chapter.
HAd behold there came a voice out of that cloud saying: this is my dear
son, in whom I delight, here him.

I say verily unto you, if ye had faith as a grain of mustarde seed, ye
should say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder place and he should
remove, neither should any thing be impossible for you to do. How be it this
kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting.

What thynkest thou Simon, of whom do the kings of the earth, take tribute
or poll money? of their children or of strangers, Peter said unto him of
strangers. Then said Jesus unto him again: then are the children fre.

Nevertheless, lest we should offend them, go to the sea, and east in thine
angle, and take the fysshe that first comes up, and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shalt find a piece of twentye pence, that take, and pay form
and the.

The.xviii. Chapter.
THe disciples came unto Jesus saying: who is the greatest in the kingdom or
heaven? Jesus called a child unto him, and set him in the mids of them, and
said: Verelye I say unto you, except ye turn, and become as children, ye
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. whosoever therefore humbles him self
as this child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And
whosoever receaueth such a child in my name, receaueth me. But whosoever
offend one of these lytelones which believe in me, it were better for him that
a misstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth
of the sea.

Woe be unto the world because of offenses. Howebeit, it cannot be ouoyded but
that offenses shall be given. Nevertheless woe be to the man by whom the offense
comes. Wherefore if the hand, or thy foot offend the, cut him of and cast
him from the. It is better for the to enter in to lyse halt or maimed, rather
then thou should having two hands or two feet, be cast into everlasting
fire. And if also thine eye offendethe, pluck him out and cast him from the.
It is better for the to enter into life with one eye, then having two eyes to
be cast in hell fire.

Se that ye despise not one of these litelons. For I say unto you yt in heaven
their angels always behold the face of my father which is in heaven.

The son of man is come to save that, which is lost. If thy brother trespace
against the, go and tell him his fault between him and the alone, if he hear
the, thou have won thy brother, but if he hear thy not, then take yet with
the one or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all things may be
stablyshed. If he here not them, tell it unto the congregation, if he hear not
the congregation, take him as an heathen man and as a publican. Verily I say
unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: And whatsoever
ye lowse on earth, shall be lowsed in heaven.

Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree in earth upon any manner
thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of my father which
is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the mids of them.

Master how often shall I forgive my brother if he sin against me, seven
times? Jesus said unto him: I say not unto thee seven times, but seventy
times, seuentymes.

O evil servant, I forgave the all that debt because thou prayest me: was it
not mete also that thou shuldeste have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I
had compassyon on the? And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the
sailors till he should pay all that was due to him. So likewise shall my
heavenly father do unto you, except ye forgive with your hearts, each one to
his brother their trespases.

The.xix. Chapter.
IS it lawful for a man to put away his wife for all manner of causes? He
answered and said unto them: have ye not read, how that he which made man
and woman and said for this thing, shall a man leave father and mother, and
cleue unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore now are they
not twain, but one flesh. Let no man therefore put a sunder that which god
has cuppled together. Then said they to him: why did Moses command to give
a testimonial of diuorcement, and to put her away? he said unto them: Moses
because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wyfes:
but from the beginning it was not so. I say therefore unto you, whosoever
puts away his wife (except it be for fornication) and marieth another
breaks wedlock, and whosoever marieth her which is divorced, do the commit
aduoutrie. Then said his disciples to him, if the matter be so between manne
and wife then it is not good to mary.

There are chaste, which were so borne, out of their mothers belly. And there
are chaste which be made of men. And there are chaste which have made
themselves chaste for the kingdom of heavens sake. He that can take it, let
him take it.

Suffer the children, and forbid them not to come to me, for of such is the
hyngdo^ of heaven.

Why call thou me good? there is none good but one, and that is god.

If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

If thou wylt be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give it to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me.

Verily I say unto you, it is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom
of heaven. And moreover I say unto you, it is easyer for a camel to go through
the eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to entier into the kingdom of god.

Then said Peter to him. Behold we have forsaken all and follow the: what
shall we have? Jesus said unto them: verily I say to you, when the son of
man shall sit in the seat of his majesty, ye which follow me in the second
generation shall sit also upon.xii. seats, and judge the.xii. trybes of
Israel. And whosoever forsakes houses, or brethren, or systers, other father
or mother, or wife or children, or lands for my names sake the same shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

The.xx. Chapter.
THe last shall be first, and the first shall be last, for many are called, and
few be chosen.

To sit on my right hand, and on my left hand is not mine to give, but to them
for whom it is prepared of my father.

Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have dominatio^ over the^. And they
that are great exercise power over them. It shall not be so among you, but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister, and whosoever
will be chief, let him be your servant, eue^ as the son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life for the redemption of
many.

The.xxi. Chapter.
ANd Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and
bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, and
the scates of them that soulde doves, and said to them: It is written, my
house shall be called the house of prayer. But ye have made it a den of thieves.

How sone is the fig tree withered away? Jesus said unto them: Verily I
say unto you, if ye shall have faith and shall not doubt, ye shall not only
do that which I have done to ye fygge tree, but also if ye shall say unto this
mountayn, take thy self away and cast thy self into the sea, it shall be
done. And whatsoever ye shall axe in prayer (if ye believe) ye shall receive it.

The.xxii. Chapter.
THen the king came in, to viset the gestes: and spied there a man which had
not on a weddyng garmente, and said unto him, friend, how fortuned it that
thou cameste in hither and have not on a weddyng gatment? And he was even
speachelesse. Then said the King to his ministers: take and bind him hand
and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teethe, for many are called and few are chosen.

Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of god truly,
neither carest for my man, for thou considrest not men's estate.

Give to Caesar that which is Cesars: and give to god that, which is gods.

Moses had, if a man dye having no children, that the brother mary his wife,
and reyse up seed unto his brother.

In the resurrection they neither mary nor are married, but are as the angels
of heaven.

God is not the god of the dead, but of the living.

Master which is the chief commandment in the law? Jesus said to him:
love the Lord thy god with all thine heart, with all thine soul, and with all
thy mind. This is the first and the chief commandment. And there is
another like unto this. Love thine neighbor as thy self. In these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
THe Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever they
did you observe, that observe and do, but after their worckes do not, for they
say and do not. Ye and they dynde heavy burdens and grievous to be borne,
and leye on men's shoulders: but they themselves will not heave at them with
one of their fingers. All their works they do for to be seen of men. They
set abroad their phylacteries, and make large borders on their garmente, and
love to sytte vppermoste at feasts, and to have chief seats in the
Synagoges, and gretinges in the markettes, and to be called of men Rabbi. But
ye shall not suffer your selves to be called Rabbi. For one is your master,
that is to wit Christ, and al ye are brethren. And call no man your father upon
the earth. For there is but one your father, and he is in heaven. Be not called
masters, for there is but one your master, and he is Christ. He that is
greatest among you, shall be your servant. But whosoever exalts himself
shall be brought low. And he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Whosoever swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all that thereon is.
And who soever swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him that dwells
therein. And he that swears by heaven, swears by the seat of god, and by
him that sits thereon.

woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis, Ypocrites which tithe Mynte, Anyse, and
Commine, and leave the weyghtier matiers of the law undone, judgment, mercy,
and faith. These ought you to have done, and not to have left the other
undone. Ye blind guydes which strain out a gnat, and swalowe a Cammyll.

Jerusalem, Jerusalem which kylleste Prophets and stonest them which are
sent to thee: How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but ye would not.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
BEcause iniquity shall have the upper hand, the love of many shall abate. But
he that endures to the end, the same shall be safe.

As the lyghtnyng comes out of the East, and shines into the west, so shall
the coming of the son of man be.

Wheresoever a dead carkas is, even thither will the Egles reforte.

Immediatiye after the tribulacions of those days, shall the sun be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall move. And then shall appear the
sign of the son of man in heaven, and then shall all the kynreddes of the
Earth mourn, and they shall see the son of man come in the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory. And he shall send his angels with the
great voice of a trompe, and they shall gather to gether his chosen from the
four wyndes, and from the one end of the world to the other.

Heaven and earth shall perish, but my words shall abide. But of that day
and hour knows noman, no not the angels of heaven, but my father only.

Wake therefore, because ye know not what hour your master will come.

Be ye also ready, for in the hour ye think he would not, will the son of man come.

The.xxv. Chapter.
Watch for ye know neither the day nor yet the hour when the son of man
shall come.

Unto every manne that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance, and from
him that has not, shall be taken away, even that he has.

When the son of man comes in his glory and all the holy angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory, and before him shall be gathered
all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a sheep heard
deuideth the sheep from the goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right
hand, and the goats on the lift. Then shall the king say to them on his
right hand. Come ye blessed children of my father: inherit ye ye kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. For I was an hongred, and ye
gave me meat. etc. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying: Master when
saw we thee an hongred, and feed thee? etc. And the king shall answer and
say unto them, verily I say unto you: in as much as ye have done it unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me. Then shall the king
say unto them that shall be on the left hand: Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was
an hungered, and ye gave me no meat. etc. Then shall they say also, master
when saw we thee an hongred. etc. Then shall he answer them and say. Verily
I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye
did it not to me. And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous
into life eternal.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
WHat neded this waste? this ointment might have been well sold, and given to
the poor when Jesus understood yt, he said unto the^: why trouble you the
woman? she has wrought a good work upon. For ye shall have poor folk
always with you: but me shall ye not have always. And in that she casted this
ointment on my body, she did it to bury me withal. Verily I say unto you,
whersoeuer this gospel shall be preached throughoute all the world, there
shall also this that she has done, be told for a memorial of her.

As they did eat: Jesus took bread and gave thanks, brake it and gave it to
the disciples and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and
thanked, and gave it them, saying: drink of it every one. For this is my
blood of the new testament that shall be shed for many, for the remission of
sins.

And he came unto the disciples, and found them a sleep, and said to Peter:
what could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray, that ye fall not
into temptacion. The spirit is wyllyng, but the flesh is weak.

Put up thy swearde into his sheathe, for all that lay hand on the swearde,
shall perish with the swearde.

The.xxvii. Chapter.
ANd behold the veil of the temple did rent in twain from the top to the
bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones did rent, and graves did
open, and the body of many saynetes which slepte, arose and came out of the
graves after his resurrection, and came into the holy city, and appeared unto
many.

And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying: al power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth. Go therefore and teach all nations, baptising the^ in the name of
the father, and the son, and the holy ghost, teachinge them to observe all
things whatsoever I commanded you. And lo I am with you always, even until
the end of the world.

The end of the gospel of S. Matthewe.
The Gospel of S. Mark the.i. Chapter.
I Send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
the. The voice of a crier in the wilderness: prepare ye the way of ye LORD,
make his paths strayghte.

John did Baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptyme of repentance, for
the remission of sins.

John was clothed with Camilles hear, and with a gyrdell of a skyn about his
loins, and he did eat Locustes, and wyld honye, and preached saying: a
stronger then I comes after me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to slope
down and unloose. I have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with
the holy ghost.

And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth, a city of
Galile: and was baptized of John in Iordane. And as soon as he was comeout of
the water, John saw heaven open, and the holy ghost descendynge upon him,
like a dote.

And there came a voice from heaven. Thou art my dare son in whom I delight.

After John was taken, Jesus came into Galile, preacing the gospel of the
kingdom of god, and sayine the time is come, and the kingdom of God is a^
ande, repent and believe the gospel.

As ho^asked by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon ad Andrewe his brother
castinge nets into the s^, for they were fishers. And Jesus said unto them,
follow me, and I will make you fyshers of men. And straight way they forsook
there nets, and followed him.

And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the son of Zebede
and John his brother, even as they werein the ship mending their nets, and
anon he called them. And they left their father Zebede in the ship with his
hired servants, and went their way after him.

He taught them as one that had power, with him, and not as the Scribes.

And there was in their sinagoge a man vexed with an unclean sprite, that cried
saying: Let be, what have we to do with the Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to
destroy us? I know the what thou art even that holy of god.

And he cast out many deuyls, and suffered not the deuyls to speak, because
they knew him.

Se thou say nothing to any man: but get the hence, and show thy self to the
preiste, and offer for thy clensynge, those things which Moses commanded,
for a testimonial unto them.

The.ii. Chapter.
WHo can forgive sins out only god? And as Jesus passed by, he saw Leui the
son of Alphey sit at the receite of custom, and said unto him: follow me.
And he arose and followed him.

The whole have no need of the physician but the sick. I came not to caul the
rightewise, but the sinners to repentance.

No man so weth a piece of new clothe unto an old garment, for then takes he
away ye new pec^ from the old, and so is the rent worsse. In likewise, no man
pours new wine into old vessels, for if he do, the new wine breaks the
vessels, and the win runs out, and the vessels are matted, but new wine
must be powered into ne^ vesels.

The Saboth was made for man, and not man for the Saboth.

The.iii. Chapter.
And when the unclean sprites saw him, they fell down before him, and cried
saying: thou art the son of god. And he straightely charged them that they
should not utter him.

Now can Satan dryne out Satan? for if a realm be divided against it self,
that realm can not endure. Or if a house be divided against it self, that
house cannot continue. So if Satan mane insurrection against him self and be
divided, he can not continue, but is at an end.

Verelye I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto men's children, and
blasphemy where with they blaspheme. But he that blasphemeth the holy ghost,
shall never have forgeuenes, but is in danger of eternal damnation, because
they said, he had an unclean spryte.

Behold thy mother and thy brethrene seek for the without. And he answered
them saying: Who is my mother, and my brethren? And he looked round about on
his disciples, which sat in compass abonte him and said: behold my mother
and my brethren. For whosoever does the will of ^od, he is my brother, my
sister, and mother.

The.iiii. Chapter.
TO you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of god. But unto the^
that ar^ without, shall all things de done in similitudes, that when they se,
they shall see, and not discern, and when they hear, they shall hear, and
not understand, least at any time they should turn, and their sins
should be forgeuen them.

There is nothing so preuye, that shall not be opened, neither so secret, but
that it shall come abroad.

With what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be measured unto you again.

Unto him that has, shall it be given: and from him that has not, shall be
taken away even that he has.

What fellow is this, for both wind and see obey him.

The.v. Chapter.
WHen he had spyed Jesus a far of, he ran and worshipped him and cried with a
loud voice and said: What have I to do with the Jesus the son of the most
highest god? I require the in the name o^ god that thou torment me not.

All the deuilles besought him saying: Send v^into the heerde of swyne, that
we may ente^ into them. And anon Jesus gave them leave.

The.vi. Chapter.
IS not this that carpenter Maryes son the brother of James and Ioses, and of
Judah and Simon? and are not his systers he^e with us, and they were offended by
him.

And Jesus said unto them: I prophet is not despised but in his own country,
and among his own kin, and among them that are of the same household.

And he called the twelve and began to send them two and two, and gave them
power over unclean spr^tes. And commanded them, that they should take
nothing unto their iourneye save a rod only, neither scryppe neither bread
neither money in their yourses, but should be shood with sandales. And that
they should not put on two cootes. And he said unto them. wheresoever ye
enter into an house, there abide till ye depart thence: And whosoever shall
not receive you, nor hear you, wha^ ye depart thence shake of the duste that
is under your feet, for a witness unto them. I say verily unto you, it shall be
easier for Zodom and Gomor at the day of judgment, then for that city: And
they went out and preached, that they should repent: and they cast out many
deuyls. And they anointed many that were sick with oil and healed them.

It is not lawful for the, to have thy brothers wife.

When they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a
sprite, and cried out for they all saw him, and were afraid.

The.vii. Chapter.
THe Pharisees and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat
not, observing the traditions of the elders. And when they come from the
markette except they wash, they eat^ not.

This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
In vain they worship me, teaching doctrines which are nothing but the
commandments of men. For ye lay the commandments of God aparte, and
observe the traditions of men, as the wasshyng of cruses and of cups, and
many other such like things ye do.

Whosoever cursseth father or mother, let him dye for it.

There is nothing without a man that can defyle him when it enters into
him: but those things which pcede out of him, are these which defyle the man.

It is not mete to take the chyldrens bread and to cast it unto whelppes. She
answered and said unto him: even so master, nevertheless, the whelppes also
eat under the table of the chyldrens crowmes.

They brought unto him one that was deffe, and stambred in his speech, and
prayde him to put his hand upon him, and he took him a side from^ the people,
and put his fyngers in his ears and did spyt and couched his counge, and looked
up to heaven and sighthed and said unto him: Ephatha, that is to say be
opened. And straight way his ear were opened, and the stringe of his tongue
was lowsed, and he spoke plain.

The.viii. Chapter.
ANd he caught the blind by the hand and l^dde him out of the town, and sput
in his eyes, and put his hands upon him and axed him wether he saw ought: and
he looked up and said, I se the men, for I se them walk as they were trees.

Whom do men say that I am? And they answered: some say thou art John
Baptiste, some say Helias, and some one of the prophets. And he said unto
them: But whom say ye that I am? Peter answered and said unto him. Thou art
very Christ.

Peter took him aside, and began to chyde him. Then he turned about, and looked
on his disciples, and rebuked Peter saying: Go after me Satan for thou sauerest
not the things of god, but the things of men.

Whosoever will follow me, let him forsake him self, and take up his cross
and follow me. For whosoever will save his life, shall lowse it. But whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake, and the gospels, the same shall save it. What
shall profet a man if he should win all the whole world and lowse his
own soul? or else what shall a man give to redeem his soul againt?
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words, among these
aduouterours and sinful generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his father with the holy angels.

The.ix. Chapter.
A Voice came out of the cloud saying: This is my dear son, here him.

All thing: are possible to him that believes.

Lord I believe, help mine unbelief.

And when he was come in to the house, his disciples axed him secretly, why
could not we cast him out? And he said unto them: this kind can by no
another means come forth but by prayer and fasting.

By the way they reasoned among themselves, who should be the chefest. And
he sat down and called the twelve unto him, and said to them: Ye any man
desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant unto all. And he
took a child and set him in the mids of them, and took him in his arms, and
said unto them: Whosoever receaueth any such a child in my name, receaueth
me: and whosoever receaueth me, receaueth not me but him that sent me.

Whosoever is not against you, is on your part. And whosoever shall give you a
cup of water to drink for my names sake, because ye belong to Christ,
verelye I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.

Whosoever shall offend one of these lytelones, that believe in me, it were
better for him, that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
cast in to the sea. Wherefore if thy hand offend the, cut him of. It is better
to enter into life maimed, then having two hands, go into hell, into a fire
that never shall be quenched, where the worm dies not, and the fire never goth
out. Likewise if thy foot offend the, cut him of, for it is better etc. Even
so if thine eye offendethe, pluck him out, for it is better etc.

The.x. Chapter.
THe Pharisees came and axed him a question whether it was laufull for a man,
to put away his wife, to prove him. And he answered and said unto them: Whad
did Moses bid you do? And they said. Moses suffered to write a testimonial of
deuorsement, and to put her away. And Jesus answered and said unto them: For
the hardness of your hearts he wrote this precepte unto you. But at the first
creation, God made them man and woman. And for this thing sake, shall man leave
his father and mother and bide by his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh.
So then are they now not twain but one flesh. Therefore what God has
cuppled, let no man separate. And in the house dis disciples axed him
again of that matter. And he said unto them: Whosoever puts away his wife
and marieth another, breaks wedlock to herwarde, and if a woman forsake her
husband and be married to another she commits aduoutry.

Suffer the children to come unto me, and forbid them not. For of such is the
kingdom of god. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of god as a child, he shall not enter there in. And he took them up
in his arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

There is no man good but one, which is God.

Go and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me, and take up the cross.

What an hard thing is it for them that have riches, to enter into the
kyngedome of GOD.

Children how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle,
then for a rich manne to enter into the kingdom of god.

Verily I say unto you, there is no man that forsakes house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father or mother, or wife, other children, or lands for my sake
and the gospels, which shall not receive and hundred fold now in this life,
houses and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands with
persecucions: and in the world to come, eternal life,

To sit on my right hand, and on my left hand, is not mine to give, but
to them for whom it is prepared.

Ye know that they which seem to bear rule among the Gentiles, raygne as
lords over them and they that be great among them, exercise authority over
them. So shall it not be among you, but whosoever of you will be great among
you, shall be your minister. And whosoever will be master shall be servant unto
all. For even the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life for the redemption of many.

The.xi. Chapter.
And Jesus went into the temple, and beg^^ to cast out the sellers and buyers,
in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money cha^gers, and the stools
of them that sold doves, and would not suffer that any manne carried a vessel
through the temple. And he taught, saying unto them is it not written: my house
shall be called the house of prayer unto all nations* but ye have made it a den
of thieves.

Verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain, take
away thy self, and cast thy self into the sea, and shall not waue^ in his
heart, but shall believe those things which he says shall come to pass: what
soever he says shall be done to him. Therefore I say unto you. what soever ye
desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you.

When ye stand and pray forgive, if ye have any thing against any manne, that
your father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespaces.

The.xii. Chapter.
Master we know that thou art true, and carest for no man, for thou
consydreste not the degree of men, but teach the way of GOD truly.

Give to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar, and to god that, which
pertayneth to god.

Moses wrote, if a man's brother dye, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no
children, that then his brother should take his wife, and reyle v^ seed unto
his brother.

When men shall rise again from death, they neither mary, nor are married, but
are as the angels which are in heaven.

God is not the god of the dead, but the god of the living.

Thou shalt love the LORD thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, this is the first
commandment. And the second is like to this. Thou shalt love thy neighbor
as thy self. There is none other commandments greater then these.

Beware of the Seribes, which love to go in long clothinge, and love
salutacions in the market places, and the chief feats in the synagoges, and
to sit in the vppermoste tounes, and feasts, and devout widows houses, and
that under a color of long praying. These shall receive greater damnacion.

Uerelye I say unto you, that this poor wyddowe, has cast more in, then all
they which have cast into the treasure, for they all did cast in of their
superfluity: but she of her poverty did cast in all that she had, even all
her living.

The.xiii. Chapter.
THey shall bring you up to the counsels and into the Synagoges, and ye shall
be beaten, ye and shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake for a
testimonial unto them.

But when they lead you and present you, take no thought before hand what ye
shall say, neither ymagin nothing. But whatsoever is given you, at the same
time, that speak. For it shall not be ye that shall speak, but the holys
Ghost.

Whosoever shall endure unto the end the same shall be safe.

If any man say unto you, lo, here is Christ, to, he is there, believe not,
for false Christ's shall tyse, and false prophets, and shall show myracle^ and
wonders, to deceive if it were possible, even the elect. But take ye head,
behold I have showed on all things before.

Then shall they see the son of man coming in the clouds with great
power and glotye. And then shall he send his auggels, and shall gather
together, his elect from the four wyndee, and from the one end of the world
to the other.

Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not pass.

But of that day and the hour, knows no man: no not the angels which are
in heaven, neither the son himself, save the father only.

Take heed for ye know not when the time is.

Watch therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house will come:
whether at even or at mydnyghte, whether at the cock crowyng. or in the
dawning, leatle if he come suddenly, he should find you slepyng. And that I
say, unto you. I say unto all men, watthe.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHen he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the Leper, even as he sat at
meat, there came a womanne having an albiastee bore, of oyntmente called
Narde, that was pure and costlye; and she brake the box, and powered it on his
head. And there were some that were not content in them selves, and said, what
neded this waste of oyntmente? for it might have been sold for more then three
hundred pence, and been given to the poor. And they grudged against her. And
Jesus said, let her be in rest, why trouble ye her, she has done a good
work on me. For ye shall have poor with you always, and when soever ye will
ye may do them good, but me ye shall not have always. She has done that she
could, she came before hand to ancynt my body to his burying ward. Werelye I
say unto you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whose
world, this also that she has done, shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her.

The son of man goes as it is written of him, but woe be to that man, by whom
the son of man is betrayed, good were it for him, if that man had never been
borne.

And as they are, Jesus took bread, blessed and brake it, and gave to them and
said: take, eat this is my body. And he took the cup, gave thanks, and gave
it to them, and they all drank of it, and he said unto them. This is my
blood of the new testamente, which is shed for many.

Simon slepeste thou? couldeste not thou watch with me one hour? watch ye
and pray lest ye enter into temptacion the spirit is ready, but the flesh
is weak.

The.xv. Chapter.
ANd the voyle of the temple did rent in two pieces from the top to the
bottom.

The.xvi. Chapter.
GO ye into all the world, and preach the glad tidinges to all creatures, he
that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall
be damned. All these things shall follow them that believe: In my name they
shall cast out devils, and shall speak with new tongues, and shall kyl
serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They
shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

The gospel of S. Luke the.i. Chapter.
THere was in the days of Hecode the king of Jury a cercayne priest named
Zachariis, of the course of Abi^.

And his wise was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabethe. Both
were perfect before GOD, and walked in all the lowes and ordinances of the
LORD, that no man could find fault with them.

And the angel said unto him: fear not, Zacharye, for thy prayer is heard:
And thy wife Elizabeth shall bear a son, and thou shall call his name John,
and thou shall have joy and glad nesse, and many shall rejoice at his birth.
For he shall be great in the sight of the LORD, and shall neither drink
wynenor strong drink. And he shall be filled with the holy ghost, even in
his mothers womb, and many of the children of Israel shall he turn to
their LORD GOD. And he shall go before him in the spitite and power of Helyas,
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the unbelievers to the
wisdom of the just men, to make the people teady for the Lord.

After those days his wife Elizabeth conceaned, and hyd her self five
months, saying: This wise has God dealte with me in the days when he looked
on me, to take from me the rebuke that I suffered among men?

And the Angel said unto her, fear not Mart: for thou have found grace
with god.

Lo, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and shall bear a son, and shall call
his name Jesus.

He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest, and the LORD
God shall give unto him the seat of his father David, and he shall raygne over
the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end.

The holy Ghost shall come unto the, and the power of the highest, shall
ouershadowe thee, therefore also, the holy thing which shall be borne, shall be
called the son of god.

And lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation founded in mine ears, the babe
sprang in my bellye for joy.

His mercy is on them that fear him, through out all generacions.

He puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low
degree.

And thou child shalt be called the prophet of the highest. For thou shalt
go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways. And to give knowledge
unto his people for the remission of ^ynnes.

The.ii. Chapter.
ANd it fortuned while they were there, her eyme was come, that she should be
delivered. And she brought for the her first begotten son, and wrayped him
in swadlynge clothes, and laid him in a maunger, because there was no ^oume
for them within the ynnes.

Behold I bring you tydinges of greatioye, that shall come to all the people,
for unto you is borne this day in the city of David, a saueoure which is
Christ the Lord. And take this for a sign ye shall find the child,
swadied, and laid in a maunger.

And when the eighte day was come, that tha child shulbe circumcised, his
name was called Jesus, which was named of the angel, before he was conceived
in the womb.

And an answer was given him of the holy ghost, that he should not se
death, before he had line the Lord Christ.

Behold, this child shall be the fall, and resuttection of many in Israel, and
a sign which halbe spoken against. And more over the sweard shall pearre thy
soul that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened.

And Anna had been a wedowe about.iiii. score and.iiii. years, which went
never out of ye temple, but served god with fasting and prayer night and day.

And it fortuned after three days that they four de him in the temple,
sittinge in the mids of the Doctoures, both hearing them and posyng them.

He went with them, and came to Nazareth and whas obedient to them.

The.iii. Chapter.
THe word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
And be came in to all coasts about Iordane, preaching the bap time of
penance, for the remission of sins, as it is written in the book of the
sayings of Esaias the prophet, which says. The voice of a crier in
wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths strayghte: Every
valleye shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and
crooked things shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smothe and
all flesh shall se the Saueour^ of God.

O generacio^s of vipers, who has taught you in a maunger. to fly from the
wrath to come? Bring for the the due fruits of penance, and begin not to
say in your selves, we have Araha^ to our father. For I say unto you, god is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Now also is the are
leyed unto the root of the trees, so that every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.

He that has two cootes, let him parie with him that has none, and he that
has meat let him do likewise.

Do violence to no man, nether trouble any man wrongfully, but be content
with your wages.

I baptize you with water, but a stronger then I comes after me, whose shue
lachet I am not worthy to vnlouse, he will baptize you with the holy ghost, and
with fire. which has his fame in his hand, and will pourge his floor, and
will goder his corn into his barn, but the chafe will he bourne with fire
that never shall be quenched.

The.iiii. Chapter
IT is written, manne shall not live by bread only, but of every word of god.

It is written, Thou shall honor the lord thy god, and him only serve.

The spryte of the lord upon me, because he has anointed me, to preach the
gospel to the poor he has sent me, and to heal the broken hearts, to
preach delyueraunce to the captive, and sight to the blind, and freely to set
at liberte them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable pere of the
lord.

No prophet is accepted in his own country.

And in the sinagogue there was a man which had asprite of an unclean devil
and cried with a loud voice saying: Let me alone, what haste thou to do
with us, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou tome to destroy us? I know the what
thou art, even the holy of god.

And deuyls also came out of many of them tryeng and saye^g: Thou art Christ
the son of God. And he rebuked them and suffered them not to speak, for they
knew that he was Christ.

The.v. Chapter.
HE said unto Peter, launche out in to the deep, and let styppe your nets
to make a draught. And Simon answered, and said to him: Master, we have
labored al night, and have take nothing, Neuerthe latter at thy word I will
lose for the the net. And when they had so done, they enclosed a great
multitude of fyshes, and their not brake, but they made signs to their fellows
which were in the other shype, that they should come and help them. And they
came, and fyllyd both the sh^ppes that they soncke again. When Simon Peter
saw that, he fell down at Jesus knees saying: Lord go from me, for I am a
sinful man. For he was utterly astoned, and all that were with him, at the
draught of fyshe which they took, and so was also James and John the sons of
Zebede, which were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: Fear
not, from hence forth thou shalt catch men. And they brought the ships
to land, and forsook all, and followed him.

He war^ed the leper that he should go and show him self to the priest, and
offer for his clensyng according as Moses commandment was, for a witness unto
them.

When he saw their faith, he said unto him: man, thy sins are forgeuen the.

Who can forgive sins but god only?

He went forth and saw a publicane named Leui, sittynge at the rec^pte of
cullome, and said vni^ him: follow me, and he lef^e all, rose vy, and followed
him.

They that are whole need not of the physician, but they that are sick. I ^am
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

No man putteh a piece of a new garment into an old vesture, for if he do,
then breaks he the new, and the piece that was taken out of the new, agrees
not with the old. Also, no man powers new wine into old vessels, for if he
do, the new wine breaks the vessels, and runs out it self, and the
vessels perish. But new wine must be powered into new vessels, and both are
preserved. Also, no man yt dryncketh old wine, straight way can away with
new, for he says, the old is pleasaunter.

The.vi. Chapter.
WHether is it laufull on the sabothe days to do good, or to do evil? to save
ones life, or for to destroy it? And he beheld the^ all in compass, and said
unto the man: Stretche forth thy hand and he did so, and his hand was
restored, and made as whole as the other.

And it fortuned in those days that he went out into a mountain for to pray,
and continued all night in prayer to god.

Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of god. Blessed are ye that
honger now, for ye shall be satiffyed. Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye
shall laughe. Blessed are ye when men^ hate you, and thruste you out of their
company, and rail, and abhorte your name as an evil thing, for the son of
man's sake: Rejoice ye then, and be glad, for behold, your reward is great in
heaven.

Woe be to you that are rich, for you have therein your consolation. Woe be to
you that are full, for ye shall honger. woe be to you that now laugh for ye shall
waste and weep. Woe be to you when al men praise you, for so did their fathers
to yt false prophets.

Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you. Bless them that curse you.
And pray for the^, which wrongfully trouble you. And unto him that smytteth
the on the one cheke, offer also the other. And him that takes away thy
gown, forbid not to take thy cote also. Give to every man that axeth of the.
And of him yt takes away thy goods, axe the^ not again. And as ye would
that men should do to you, so do you to them likewise.

If ye love them which love you, what thank are ye worthy of? For the very
sinners love their lovers. And if you do for the^ which do for you, what
thank are you worthy of? for the very sinners do even the same. If ye lend
to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank shall ye have? For the very
sinners lend to sinners to receive as much again. Wherefore, love ye your
enemies do good and lend, lokyng for nothing again, and your reward shall be
great and ye shall be the children of the hiest, for he is kind unto the
unkind and to the evil.

Be ye therefore merciful, as your father is merciful. Judge not, and ye shall
not be judged. Condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye
shall be forgeuen. Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure pressed down.
Give together and running over shall men give into your bosoms. For with what
measure ye mete, with the same shall men mete to you again.

Can the blind lead the blind? do they not both then fall into the dyche?
The disciple is not above his master. Every manner shall be perfect even as his
master is. Why see thou a more in thy brothers eye, and consyderest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Either how canste thou say to thy brother:
Brother ^ette me pull out the moote that is in thine eye, when thou perceauest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? Ypocrite cast out the beam out of
thine own eye first, and then shalt you see perfectly to pull out the moote
out of thy brothers eye.

It is not a good tree that brings forth evil fruit: neyter is that an evil
tree that brings forth good fruit. For every tree is known by his fruit,
Nether of thorns gader men fygges, nor of busshes gader men grapes. A good
manne out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is
good. And an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
that which is evil. For of the abundance of the heart, his mouth speaks.

Why call you me Master Master, and do not as I bid you? whosoever comes to
me, and hears my sayings, and does the same, I will show you to whom he is
like. He is like a man which bylte an housse, and dyggyd deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock: when the waters arose the flud bet upon the house, and
could not move it, for it was grounded upon a rock. But he that hears and
does not, is like a man yt without foundation by it an housse upon the earth,
against which the fludde did beat, and it fell by and by, and the fall of the
house was great.

The.vii. Chapter
Lord trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my rofe. Wherefore I thought not myself worthy to come unto thee; But
say the word and my servant shall be hole.

I say unto you I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.

Behold, they which are gorgeouslye apparelled, and live delycately, are in
kings courts.

But what went ye forth to se? a prophet? ye I say to you, and more then a
prophet. This is he of whom it is written. Behold I send my messenger
before thy face, to prepare thy way before the. For I say unto you, a greater
prophet then John among wemens children is there none Nevertheless, one that
is less in the kingdom of god, is greater then he.

John Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drynkyng wine, and ye say, he
has the devil. The son of man is come and eats and drinks and ye say,
behold a man which is a glotten, and a drinker of wine, a seende of Publicanes
and sinners.

Simon, see thou this woman? I entered in to thy house, and thou gave me no
water to my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and wyped them
with the hears of her head. Thou gave me no kiss: but she sense the time I
came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. Mine head with oil thou did
not annoint, but she has anointed my feet with ointment wherefore I say unto
thee, many sins are forgeuen her, for she loved much. To whom less is
forgeuen the same does less love.

The.viii. Chapter.
UNto you it is given to know the secrets of the Kingdom of God: but to
other in similitudes, that when they se, they should not se, and when they
hear they should not understand.

No man lyghteth a candell and covers it under a vessel, neither puts it
under the table but sets it on a candelstick, that they that enter in, may
se the light. Nothing is in secret, that shall not come abroad. Neither any
thing hid, that shall not be known and come to light.

Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and whosoever has not, from him shall be
taken, even that same, which he supposed that he has.

Why mother and my brethren are these, which hear the worbe of god, and do it.

What fellow is this? for he commands both the wyndes and water, and they
obey him?

When he saw Iesue, he cried and fell down before him, and with a loud voice
said: what have I to do wc the Jesus the son of the god most hiest,

And there was there by an heerde of many swyne, fedynge on an hill, and they
besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them, and he suffered them.

The.ix. Chapter.
ANd he said to them: Take nothing to sucker you by the way, nether flaffe,
nor scripe, neither bread, neither money, nether have two coats. And
whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. And whosoever
will not receive you, when ye go out of the cite, shake of the very dust from
your feet, for a testimonye against them.

Who say ye that I am? Peter answered and said: thou art the Christ of god.

And he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him deny him
self, and take up his crosie daily and follow me. Whosoever will save his life
shall lose it. But whoseuer does lose his life for my sake, the same shall
save it. For what ^uautageth it a man to wine the whole world, if be loose him
self, or run in damage of himself? For whosoever is ashamed of me, and of my
saingee, of him shall the son of man be a shamed when he comes in his own
glory, and in the glory of his father, and of his holy angels.

And behold, two men talked with him, and they were Moses and Helias, which
appeared gloriously, and spoke of his deparryng, which he should end at
Jerusalem.

Then there arose diputation amongehtem who should be greatest. When Jesus
perceived the thoughts of their hearts, he took a child, and set him hard
by him, and said unto them. Whosoever receaueh this child in my name,
receaueth me, and whosoever receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. For he
that is least among you all, the same shall be great.

He that is not against us, is with us.

The son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nestes, but the son of man
has not where on to lay his head.

Let the dead bury their dead.

No man that puts his hand to the plowe and looks back, is ap te to the
kingdom of god.

He said unto them, the harvest is great, but the laborers are few, Pray
therefore the lord of the harvest, to send forth laborers into his haunest.
Go your ways, behold, I send you for the as lambs among wolves. Bear no
wallet neither scrippe, nor shues, and salute no man by the way. Into
whatsoever house ye enter, first say: Peace be to this house. And if the son
of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him, if not ie shall turn to
you again. And in the same house tarry still eating and drinckynge such as
they have. For the labourer is worthy of his temarde. Go not from house to
house, and into whatsoever cyueye enter, if they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you, and heal the secke that are there, and say
unto them, the kyndome of god is come nigh unto you. But into whatsoever city
ye shall e^tre, if they receive you not, go your ways out into the streates of
the same and say: even the very duste, which cleaves on us of your city, we
wype of against you.

He that hears you, hears me, and he that despyseth you desyiseth me, and
he that despyseth me, despyseth him that sent me.

Rejoice not that the spirits are under your power, but rejoice because your
names are written in heaven.

I confess unto the father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hyd
these things from the wise, and have opened them to the habes.

No man knows who the son is, but the father, neither who the father is,
save the son, and he to whom the son will show him.

Happy are the eyes, which se that ye se, for I tell you, that many prophets
and kings have desired to se those things which ye se, and have not seen
them, and to hear those things, which ye hear, and have not heard them.

Marths, Marths, thou carest, and art troubled about many things: Verily one
is needful. Mary has chosen her that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her.

The.xi. Chapter.
I Say unto you, are, and it shall be given unto yet: Seek and ye shall find.
Knock and it shall be opened unto you. For every one ye axeth, receives, and he
that sebeth fyndeth: and to him that knocks, shall it be opened, if ye son
shall are bread of any of you ye is a father, will he give him a ^ore? or if he
axe fyshe, will he for a fyshe gene him a Serpente? Or if he are an egg, will
be offer him a Scorpion? If ye then which are evil, can give good gifts unto
your children how much more shall the father of heaven give an holy spirit
to them that desire it of him.

Every Kingdom divided with in it self, shall be desolate, and one house shall
fall upon a another. So if Satan be divided with in himself how shall his
kingdom endure.

He that is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters.

Happy is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes which gave thee suck. But
he said, ye happy are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

No man lights a candell, and puts it in an preuy place, neither under a
b^shall: but on a candelsticke, that they that come in, may se the light.

Give alms of that ye have, and behold all is clean to you.

Woe be to you Phariseis, for ye tithe the mlnt and Rewe, and all manetherbes,
and pass over judgment and the love of God. These ought you to have done,
and yet not left the other undone.

Woe be to you Pharisees, for ye love the upper most scates in the Synagoges,
and gretinges in the markettes.

Woe be to you lawyers, for ye lade men with burthe^s grievous to be borne, and
ye your selves touch not the packes with one of your fyngers.

Woe be to you lawyers, for ye have taken away the keye of knowledge, ye entered
not in your selves, and them that came in ye forbad.

The.xii. Chapter.
THere is not thing covered, that shall not be uncovered, neither hyd, that
shall not be known.

Be not a frayed of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that
they can do. But I will show you, whom ye shall fear. Ieare him which after
he has killed, has power to cast into hell. Ye, I say unto you him fear.

Whosoever confesses me before men, even him shall the son of man confess
also before the angels of God. And he that denies me before men shall be denied
before the angels of god. And whosoever speaks a word against the son of
man, it shall be forgeuen him. But unto him that blasphemeth the holy ghost, it
shall not be forgeuen.

When they bring you unto the Synagoges and unto the rulets and officers, take
no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall speak: For
the holy ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought to say.

Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, neither for your body,
what ye shall put on: The life is more the^ meat, and the body is more then
raiment.

And are not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither clyme ye up to
hye. For all such things the Heathen people of the world seek for. Your
father knows that ye have need of such things, wherefore seek you after the
kingdom of god, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

Sell that ye have and give alms. And make you bags which wxe not old, and
treasure that fails not in brauen, where no thief comes, neither mothe
corrupts: For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

Happy are those servants, which the lord when he (...), shall find
wakinge, verelye I say unto you, he will girde himself about, and make them
sit down to meat, and walk by, and minister unto them.

If the good man of the house knew what houe the thief will come, he would
surely watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up. Be ye prepared
therefore for the son of man will come at an hour, when ye think not.

The servant that knew his masters will and prepared not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many scripes. But he that knew
not and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes, for unto whom much is given, of him shall be much required. And to
whom men much commit, the more of him will they are.

Suppose ye that I am come to send peace on earth? I tell you nay, but
rather debate.

I tell thee, thou departest not thence, till thou have made good the
vttermoste myte.

The.xiii. Chapter.
EXcepteye repent, ye shall all lyckewyse perish.

There are six days in which men ought to work, in them come and be healed,
and not on the Saboth day. Then answered him the Lord, and said, Vpocrite,
does not each of you, on the Sabbothe day, louse his ore or his ass from the
stall, and lead him to the water? and ought not this daughter of Abraham,
whom Satan has bound lo.xviii. years, be loused from this bond on the
Sabbath day?

And he said unto them, strive with your selves to enter in at the strait
gate, for many I say unto you will secke to enter in, and shall not be able.

Behold they are last, which shall be first, and they are first, which shall be
last.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kyllest prophets, and stonest them that are
sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the
hen gathers her neste under her wings, but ye would not. Behold your
habitacion shall be left unto you desolate: for I tell you, ye shall not see me
until the time come that ye shall say, blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
Which of you shall have an asse^or an ox fallen into a pyt, and will not
strayghte way^ pull him out on the Saboth day?

When thou art bydden to a wedding of any man sit not down in the highest
room, lest a more honorable man then thou be bydden of him and he that bad
both him and thee, come and say to thee, give this man room, and thou then
begin with shame to take the lowest room. But rather when thou art bydden,
go and sytte in the lowest room, then when he that bad the comes he may
say unto the, friend sit up hyer. Then shalt thou have worship in the
presence of them that sit at meat with thee. For whosoever exalts himself,
shall be brought low, and he that hu^bleth himself shall be exalted.

When thou makeste a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren,
neither thy kinsmen, or yet rich neighbors, lest they bydde thee again, and
a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
maimed, ye lame and the blind, and thou shall be happy, for they cannot
recompense thee. But thou shalt be recompensed at the resurreccion of the
just men.

If a man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren and systers, moreover and his own life, he cannot be my
disciple. And whosoever bear not his cross and come after me, cannot be my
disciple.

The.xv. Chapter.
I Say unto you that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner, that
repentethe, more then over nynety and nine just persons which need no
repentance.

The.xvi. Chapter.
The children of this world are in there kind. wyser then the children of
light. And I say unto you, make your friends of the wicked Mammon, that when ye
shall depart, they may receive you into everlasting habitacions.

No servant can serve two masters, for other he shall hate the one and love
the other, or else he shall lene to the one, and despise the other, ye cannot
serve god and Mammon.

That which is highely esteemed among men, is abominable in the sight of God.

Sooner shall heaven and earth perish, then one title of the law shall perish.

Whosoever forsakes his wife, and maryeth another breaks matrimonye: And
every manne which marieth her that is deuorsed from her husband commits
aduoutry also.

Son, remember that thou in thy life time receyuedst thy pleasure, and
contrary wise Lazatus pain: Now therefore is he comforted, and thou art
punished,

If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they believe, though
one rose from death again.

The.vii. Chapter.
IT cannot be avoided, but that offenses will come. Nevertheless, woe bo to
him, through whom they come: It were better for him that a mylstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea, the^ that he
should offend one of this little ones.

If thy brother trespace against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive
him. And though he sin against the seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying: it repents me, forgive him.

And the lord said: if ye had faith like a grain of mustarde sede, and
should say unto this Sycamine tree, pluck thy self up by the roots, and
plant thy self in the sea, she should obey you.

When ye have done all those things, which, are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants. We have done that which was our duty to do.

Whosoever will go about to save his life, shall lose it: and whosoever shall
lose his life, shall save it.

Whersoeuer the body shall be, thither will the Egles resort.

The.xviii. Chapter.
SHall not god avenge his elect, which cry day and night unto him, ye
though he defer them? I tell you he will avenge them and that quickly.

Suppose ye when the son of man comes that he shall find faith on the
earth?

Every manne that exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

Suffer children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of god. Verily I say unto you, whosoever receaueth not ye kingdom of
god, as this child, he shall not enter therein.

Sell all that thou haste, and distribute it unto poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come, and follow me.

With what difficulty shall they that have riches, enter in to the kingdom of
god: it is easier for a camel to go through a nedels eye, then for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of god.

Verily I say unto you, there is no man that leaves house, other father and
mother or brethren or wife, or children for the kingdom of gods sake: which
shall not receive much more in this world: and in the world to come, life
everlasting.

The.xix. Chapter.
THe son of man is come to seek and to save that, which was iost.

Well good servant, because thou wast faith full in a very litell thing, take
thou authority over ten cities.

I say unto you, that unto all them that have, it shall be given: and from him
that has not, even that he has shall be taken from him.

And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought, saying unto them, it is wry^ten: my house is the
house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

The.xx. Chapter.
THe stone that buylders refused, the same is made the head corner stone:
whosoever sto^ble at that stone shall be broken, but on whosoever it fall upon,
it will grynde him to powder.

Give unto Caesar that, which belongs to Caesar: and to god, that which
pertains to god.

The children of this world mary wives and are marred, but they which shall be
made worthy to enjoy that world and the resurrection from death, neither
mary wives neither are married, nor yet can dye anymore. For they are equal unto
the angels, and are the sons of God, in as much as they are the children of
the resurreccion.

Beware of the Scribes, which desire to go in long clothyng, and love
gretynges in the markettes, and the highest seats in the Synagoges, and chief
roumes at feasts, which diuoure widows houses, and that under a color of
long praying: the same shall receive greater damnacion.

The.xxi. Chapter.
OF a truth I say unto you, this poor wy^dome has put in more then they
all. For they all have of their superfluicie added unto the offering of God,
but she, of her penury has cas^e in all the substance that she had.

Let it stick therefore fast in your hearts, not once to study before, what
ye shall answer, for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, where against, all
your adversaries shall not be able to speak or resist.

Heaven and earth shall pass: but my words shall not pass.

Take heed to your selves, lest your hearts be overcome with surfetyng, and
drunkenness, and cares of this world, and that* that day come not on you
unawares. For as a snare shall it come on al them that sit on the face of the
earth. Watch therefore continually and pray, that ye may obtain grace to
fly all this that shall come, and that ye may stand before the son of man.

The.xxii. Chapter.
ANd he took bread, gave thanks, and gave to them saying. This is my body
which is given for you, this do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also, when
they had supped, he took the cup saying: This cup is the new testament in my
blood, which shall for you be shed.

He that is greatest among you, shall be as youngest: and he that is chief,
shall be as the minister.

Simon. Simon behold, Satan has desired you, to sifte you, as it were
wheat: but I have prayed for the, that thy faith fail not. And when thou art
converted, strength thy brethren.

Now he that has a wallet, let him take it up, and likewise his scryppe. And
he that has no swearde, let him sell his coat and bye one.

And his sweat was like drops of blood, rychlyng down to the ground.

And the lord turned back, and looked upon Peter.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and your
children, for behold the days will come when men shall say, happy are the
baren, and the wombes that never bate, and the pappes which never gave suck.
Then shall they begin to say to the mountens fall on us, and to the hills
cover us: foryf they do this to a grene tree, what shall be done to the dry?

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
ANd it came to pass as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, blessed
it, brake and gave to them. And there eyes were opened, and they knew him, and
he vanisshed out of their sight. And they said between them selves, did not
our hertes burn within us, whylle he talked with us by the way, and as he
opened to us the scriptures? Handle me and se, for spretes have no flesh and
^ones, as ye se me have.

The end of the Gospel of S. Luke.
The Gospel of. S. John. the.i. Chapter.
SN the beginning was the word, and the word was with god, and the word was
god. The same was in the beginning with god, All things were made by it, and
without it was made nothing that was made.

He came among his own and his own received him not. But as many as received
him, to them he gave power to be the sons of god, in that they believed on his
name: which were borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet
of the will of man: but of god. And the word was made flesh and dwell among
us.

The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

No man has seen god at any time.

I am the voice of a criar in the wilderness make strayghte the way of the
lord, as said the prophet Esaias.

I baptize with water, but one is come among you, whom ye know not, he it is
that comes after me, which was before me, whose shue lache^ I am not worthy
to unloose.

Behold the lamb of god, which takes away the sins of the world.

I saw the sprete descend from heaven, like unto a dove, and abide upon him,
and I knew him not. But he that sent me to baptize inwater, the same said unto
me: upon who^ thou shaltse the sprete descend and tarry still on him, the same
is he which baptiseth with the holy gho^le. And I saw and bare record that
this is the son of god.

Thou art Simon the son of Jonas, thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by
interpretation a stone.

Can there any good thing come out of Na^areth.

The.ii. Chapter
ALl men at the beginning, set forth good wine, and when men be drunk,
then that which is worsse. But thou haste kept back the good wine until
now.

Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found in the temple those that sold oxen and
sheep and doves and changers of money. And he made a scourge of small cords,
and drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen and powered out
the changers money, and ouerthrewe the tables, and said unto them that sold
doves, have these things hence, and make not my fathers house an house of
merchandise.

Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it us again. Then said
the Jews.xlvi. years was this temple a bildinge, and wylt thou tear it up in
three days? But he spoke of ye temple of his body.

The.iii. Chapter.
Verily verily I say unto the, except that a man be borne of water and of the
sprete, he cannot enter the kingdom of god. That which is borne of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is borne of the spryte, is spryte.

The wind blows where he lysteth, and thou hear his sound, but can not
tell whence he comes, and whether he goes: So is every man that is borne of
the sprete.

Verily verily I say unto the: wespeake that we know, and testify that we
have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If when I tell you eathly things, ye
believe not: How should ye believe if he shall tell you of heavenly things? God
so loved the world, that he has given his only son, that none that believe in
him should perish, but should have everlasting life. For god sent not his
son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him,
might be saved. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned. But he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of the
only son of god. And this is the condempnation that light is come into the
world, and the men loved darrknes more then light because their deeds
weteruyll. For every man that evil does, hates the light, nether comes to
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds might be know, how that they are wrought in god.

A man can receive nothing at all, except it be given him from heaven.

He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth. He that
comes from heaven, is above all, and what he has seen and heard, that he
testifies: but no man receaueth his testimonye. Howbeit, he that has recaued
his testimonye, has set to his seal that god is true. For he whom god
has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives not the spryte by
measure The father loves the son, and has given all things into his
hand. Be that believes on the son, has everlasting life, and he that
believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of god abides on
him.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Whosoever drinks of this water, shall thurst again. But whosoever shall
drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more a thyrste: but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in a well of water, springynge up into
euerlaslynge life.

Ye worship ye wot not what: we know what we worship. For salvation comes
of the Jews. But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshyppers
shall worship the father in spryte and in truth, For verily such the
father requires to worship him. God is a spryte, and they that worship
him, must worship him in pryte and troth.

Jesus said unto them: my meat is to do the will of them that sent me, and to
finishe his work.

And Jesus him self testifies, that a prophet has none honor in his own
country.

The.v. Chapter.
BEhold thou art made whole, sin no more lest a worsse thing happen unto the.

The son can do nothing of him self, but that hesyethe the father do. For
whosoever he does, that does the son also.

Neither judges the father any manne, but had committed all judgment unto the
son, because that all men should honor the son, even as they honor
the father. He that honors not the son, the same honors not the father
which has sent him. Verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my words
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into damnation, but is escaped from death unto life.

As the father has life in him self, so likewise has he given to the son
to have life in him self, and has given him power to judge, in that he is the
some of man. Maruayle not at this: the hour shall come in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth they that have
done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of damnation.

I can of mine own self do nothing at all.

If I bear wytnes of my self my witness is not true.

The works which the father has given me to fynyshe, the same works which
I do, bear witness of me that the father sent me.

How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes of God only?

The.vi. Chapter.
Labor not for the meat that shall perish, but for the meat that endures
unto everlasting life, which meat the son of man shall give unto you.

The bread of God is he, which commethe down from heaven, and gives life
unto the world.

I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes on me shall never thirst.

I am come down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will which
has sent me. And this is the fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again,
at yt last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every man which
sees the se^ne, and believes on him, have everlasting life. And I will raise
him up at the last day.

No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him.

I am that living bread, which came down from heaven: If any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever. And the bread that I wylt give, is my
flesh: which I will give for the life of the world.

Verily verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day, for my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
As the living father has sent me, even so live I by my father, and he that
eats me, shall live by me. This is the bread which came from heaven, not is
your fathers have eaten Manna and are dead, he that eats of this bread shall
live ever.

It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

Then said Jesus to the twelve, will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter
answered: Master to whom shall we go? Thou haste the words of eternal life,
and we believe and know that thou art Christ the son of the living god.

The.vii. Chapter.
THe world cannot hate you, but me it hates: Because I testify of it, that
the works of it are evil.

My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

If a man on the Saboth day receive circumcision without breaking of the law
of Moses, disdain ye at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the
Saboth day? Judge not after the utter apperaunce, but judge ryghteous judgment.

Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me, and where I am, thither can ye not
come.

If any manne thyrste, let him come unto me, and drink: he that believes on
me, as says the scripture, out of his belly shall flow ryuers of water of
life. This spoke he of the sprete which they that believed on him, should
receive.

Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he has done?

The.viii. Chapter.
Let him that is among you without sin cast the first stone at her.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men, is true.

I do nothing of my self, but as my father has taught me.

If ye continue in my words, then are ye my very disciples, and shall know
the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the dedee of Abraham.

Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He
was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there
is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own. For
he is a liar, and the father thereof.

He that is of god, hears gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because
ye are not of god.

If a man keep my sayenges, he shall never see death.

Your father Abraham was glad to se my day, and he saw it, and reioysed.

The.ix. Chapter.
ANd as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. And
his disciples aced him, saying: Master who did sin, this man, or his father
and mother: that he was borne blind? Jesus answered, neither has this manne
sinned, nor yet his father nor mother, but that the works of god should be
showed on him. I must work the works of god that sent me, while it is day.
The night comes when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I
am the light of the world.

We be sure that god hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of god
and do his will him hears he. Sense the world began, was it not heard that
any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind, if this manne were not
of god, he could have done nothing.

I am come unto judgment into this world that they which se not, might se:
and they which se, might be made blind.

The.x. Chapter.
HE that enters not in by the door, in to the shepefolde, but climeth vy some
other way the same is a these and a robber. He that goethe in by the door, is
the shepeherde of the sheep, to him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his
voice: and he cauleth his own sheep by name, and leads them out. And when he
has sense forth his own sheep, he goth before them, and the sheep follow
him, for they know his voice. A stranger they will not follow, but will fly
from him, for they know not the voice of strangers.

The good shepehearde gives his life for the sheep. An hired servant, which
is not the shepeherde, neither the sheep archis own, se the wolf coming, and
leueth the sheep, and flies, and the wolf catches them and scatters the
sheep. I am that good sheep heard, and know mine, and am known of mine. As my
father knows me, even so know I my father. And I give my life for the sheep:
and other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also must I bring
that they may hear my voice, and that there may be one flock and one
shephearde.

No man takes my life from me, but I put it away of my self. I have power to
put it from me, and have power to take it again.

I and my father are one.

Though ye believe not me, yet believe the works, that ye may know and believe
that the father is in me, and I in him.

The.xi. Chapter.
WHen Jesus heard that, he said: this infirmity is not unto death, but for
the laud of god, that the son of god might be praised by the reason of it.

If a man walk in the day he stombleth not because he sees the light of this
world: but if a man walk in the night, he stombleth, because there is no light
in him.

I am the resurreccion and the life: he that believes on me, ye though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes on me, shall never
dye.

And one of them named Cayphas which was the hye priest that same year, said
unto them: ye perceive nothing at al, nor yet consider, that it is expediente
for us, that one man dye for the people, and not that all the people perish.
This spoke he not of himself, but being hye priest that same year, he
prophesied that Jesus should dye for the people, and not for the people only,
but that he should gather together in one the children of god which were
scattered abroad.

The.xii. Chapter.
THen took Mary a pound of ointment called Nardus, perfect and precious, and
anointed Jesus feet, and wiped his feet with her hear, and the house was
filled of the sauer of the ointment. Then said one of his disciples named
Judas Iscatioth Simons son, which afterward betrayed him: why was not this
oyntmente sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor? This said he,
not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and kept the
bag, and bare that which was given. Then said Jesus, let her alone, against
the day of my burying she kept it. The poor always shall ye have with you but
me shall ye not always have.

Verily verily I say unto you, except the wheat corn fall into the ground
and dye, it bydeth alone. If it dye, it brings forth much fruit He that
loves his life, shall destroy it, and he that hates his life in this world,
shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man minister unto me, let him follow
me, and where I am, there shall my minister be. And if any man minister unto
me, him my father will honor.

Walk while ye have light, lest the darkness come on you. He that walks in
the dark, wotteth not whither he goes: while ye have light, believe on the
light, that ye may be the children of light.

And Jesus cried and said? he that believes on me, believes not on me, but on
him ye sent me. And he that sees me, sees him that sent me. I am come a
light into the world, that whosoever believes on me, should not bide in
darkness. And if any man hear my words and believe not. I judge him not. For
I came not to judge the world but to save the world.

He that refuses me, and receives not my words has one that judges him.
The words that I have spoken shall judge him in the last day. for I have not
spoken of my self: but the father which s^nte me, he gave me a commandment
what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that this
commandment is life everlasting. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the
father bad me, so I speak.

The.xiii. Chapter.
PEter said to him: thou shall not wash my feet, while the world stands.
Jesus answered him: if I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me.

He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, and is clean every
whyt.

Wot ye what I have done to you? Ye call me master and lord, and ye say well,
for so I am. If I then your Lord and master have washed your feet, ye also
ought to wash our another feet. For I have given you an ensample, that ye
should do, as I have done to you. Verily verily I say unto you, the servant
is not greater then his master, neither the messenger greater then he that sent
him.

He that receives whomesoeuer I send, receives me, and he that receives me,
receyuethe him that sent me.

A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love together, as I have loved
you, that even so, ye love another. By this shall all menns know that ye are
my disciples, if ye shall love one to another.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
IN my fathers house, are many mansions. I am the way, the truth, and the
life, and no man comes unto the father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye
had known the father* And now ye know him, and have seen him.

The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the father
that dwells in me is he that does the works: Believe me that I am in the
father, and the father in me. At the leest, believe we for the very works sake.
Verily verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, ye works that I do, the
same shall he do, and greater works then these shall he do.

He that has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves
me. And he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and
will show mine own self to him.

If a man love me and will keep my sayings, my father also will love him, and
he wylcome unto him, and will dwell with him. He that loves me not, keeps not
my sayings.

That comforter which is the holy ghost, whom my father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have told you.

The.xv. Chapter.
I Am the true ^yne, and my father is an husband man. Every branch that
bears no^ fruit in me, he will take away. And every branch that bears
fruit will he pourge, that it may bring more fruit. Now are ye clean
through the words which I have spoken unto you.

Bide in me, and let me bide in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it
felse, except it bide in the vine, no more can ye except ye bide in me. I
am the vine, and ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit. For without me ye can do nothing. If a man
bide not in me, he is cast fort he as a branch, and is withered, and men
gather it, and cast it in to the fire, and it burnethe. If ye bide in me, and
my words also bide in you, are what ye will, and it shall be done to you. Here
in is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit and be made my disciples.

Greater louethe^ this has no man, then that a man bestow his life for his
friends. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you.

If the world hate you, ye know that he hated me before he hated you. If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own. Howbeit, because ye are not
of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore hates you the
world. Remember the saying that I have said unto you: the servant is not
greater then the lord, if they have persecuted me, so will they persecute you,
if they have kept my sayings, so will they keep yours.

If I had not come and spoken unto them they should not have had sin: But
now have they nothing to cloak their sin withal. He that hates me, hates
my father. If I had not done among the^ ye works which none other man did
they should have had no sin, but now have they seen, and yet have hated both
me and my father: even ye the saying might be fulfilled that is written in
their law: they have hated me without a cause.

The.xvi. Chapter.
IT is expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away, that comforter
will not come unto you. But if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when
he is come he will rebuke the world of sin, and of righteousne, and of
judgment: of sin because they believe not on me: of rightwisenes, because I
go to my father, and ye shall see me no more, and of judgment because the
chief ruler of this world is judged all ready.

Verily verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy.

The.xvii. Chapter.
THis is life eternal, that they might know thee the only very god, and
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.

Holy father keep in thine own name, them which thou haste given me, that they
may be one, as we are.

I pray not for them alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through
their preaching that they all may ve one, as thou father art in me, and I in
the, that they may be also one in us that the world may believe that thou
haste sent me.

The.xviii. Chapter.
Astone as he had said unto the^, I am he, they went backwardes and fell to the
ground.

If I have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil, if I have well spoken, why
smyteste thou me?

For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth: and all that are of the truth hear my
voice.

The.xix. Chapter.
THen said Pylate unto him: Speak thou not to me? knoweste thou not that I
have power to crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? Jesus answered:
Thou could have no power at al against me, except it were given thee from
above. Therefore he that delivered me unto the, is more in sin.

The.xx. Chapter.
Jesus said to her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father.

Then said Jesus to them again, peace be with you: As my father sent me, even
so send I you. And when he had said that, he breathed on them, and said unto
them. Receive the holy ghost. whosoever sins ye temyt, they are remitted
unto them, and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

Thomas said unto them: except I see in his hands the print of the nails,
and thrust my hands in to his side. I will not believe.

Thomas because thou haste seen me, therefore thou beleuest: happy are they that
have not seen, and yet believe.

The.xxi. Chapter.
WHen Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he gyrde his mantell to him,
for he was naked, and sprange into the sea, the other disciples came by ship.

There are many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be
written, every one, I suppose the world could not contain the books that
should be written.

The end of the gospel of S. John.
The Acts of the Apostles. the first Chapter.
John baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized with the holy ghost, and
that within this few days.

It is not for you to know the times or the seaso^s which the father had put
in his own power.

And the same Judas has now possessed a plot of ground with the reward of
iniquity, and when he was hanged, brast a sonder in the mids, and all his
bowels gusshed out. They gave forth their lottes, and the lotte fill on
Mathias, and he was counted with the eleven Apostles.

The.ii. Chapter.
WHen the fyftyth day was come, they were all with one accord togeder in one
place, and suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been the
coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat. And
there appeared unto them cloven tounges, like as they had been fire, and it
sat upon ethe of them And they were all filled with the holy ghost, and vegan
to speak with other tounges, even as the sprete gave them vtteraunce.

Of my spryte I will power out upon al flesh.

And it shall be, that whosoever shall call on the name of the lord, shall be
saved.

David saw before, and spoke of the resurrection of Christ that his soul
should not be left in hell, nether his flesh should se corruption.

Peter said unto them, do penance and be baptized every one of you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was made unto you, and to your
children, and to all that a far, even as many as the lord our god shall call.

And all that believed kept them selves togeder, and had things commen, and
sold their possessions and goods, and departed them to all men, as every
manne had need, and they continued dailye with one accord in the temple, and
brake bread in every house, and did eat their meat togeder with gladness and
synglenes of heet praysynge god, and had favor with all the people.

The.iii. Chapter.
MOses said unto the fathers. A prophets shall the lord your god raise up
unto you even of your brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. For the time will come, that every soul,
which shall not hear that same prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
people.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THis is the stone cast a side of you buyldere, which is set in the chief
place of the corner. Nether is there salvation in any other. Nor yet also is
there any other name given to men, wherein we must be saved.

Whether it be right in the sight of god to obey you more then god, judge ye.

And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul.
Also none of them said, that any of the things which he possessed, was his
own, but had all things commen.

Nether was there any among them that lacked for as many as were possessers of
lands or hou^s, sold them and brought the price of the things that were
sold, and loyde it down at the Apostles fete.

The.v. Chapter.
A Certain manne named Ananias with Saphira his wife, sold a possession, and
kept ^waye part of the price, his wife also being of counsel, and brought a
certain part, and laid a down at the Apostles fete. Then said Peter:
Ananias, how is it that satan has sylled thine ^arte that thou should lie
unto the holy ghost, and keep away part of the price in thine own power?
How is this that thou have conceived thi^ thing in thine heart? Thou have not
lied unto men but unto god. When Ananias heard these words, he fell down,
and gave up the ghost.

They brought the sick into the streates, and l^yde them on beds and
palettes, at the least way the shadow of Peter when he came by, ^yght
shadow some of them.

We ought more to obey god, then men.

If the counsel of this work be of men, it ^yll come to naught. But if it
be of god, ye can not destroy it, least happily ye be found to strive against
god.

And they departed from the counsel, reioysyng that they were counted worthy
to suffer rebuke ^or his name.

The.vi. Chapter.
THen the twelve called the multitude of the disciples together, and said: it
is not mete that we should leave the work of god, and serve at the tablies.
Wherefore brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and
full of the holy ghost and wisdom, which we may apointe to this needful
busynes. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministr^tion of the word.

The.vii. Chapter.
ANd the patriarchs having indignation selde Joseph into Egipte, and god was
with him and delivered him out of all his adversities, and gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt which made him governor over
Egyte, and over all his land.

Moses was learned in all manner wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in
deeds and in words.

I have perfectly seen the affliction of my people which is in Egipte, and I
have heard then gronyng, and am come down to deliver them.

He that is highest of all, dwells not in temples made with hands, as says
the prophet. Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footstool, or what place is
it that I should rest in? has not my hand made all these things?

But he being full of the holy ghost, looked up sted fastly with his eyes into
heaven, and saw the glory of god, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
god, and said: Behold I se the heaven open, and the son of man, standing on
the right hand of god.

And they stoned Steven calling on and saying: Lord Jesus receive my spryte,
and he kneled down and cried with a loud voice: Lord lay not this sin to
their charges.

The.viii. Chapter.
WHen the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard say that Samaria bathe
received ^e word of god, they sent unto them Peter and John: which when they
were come, prayed for them that they might receive the holy ghost. For as
yet he was come on none of them: but they were baptized only in the name of
Christ Jesus. Then said they hands on them, and they received the holy ghost.

Thy money perish with the, because thou wenest that the gift of god may be
obtained with money.

The.ix. Chapter.
SAul Saul why persecutest thou me? And he said: What art thou lord? And the
lord said: I am Jesus whom thou persecuteste, ^s shall be hard for the to
stick against the prick. Go thy ways, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to
bear my name before the gentyls and kings, and the children of Israel. For I
will show him ^owe great things he must suffer for my names sake.

The disciples took him by night, and put him ^horowe the wall and let him
down in a basket.

The.x. Chapter.
THy prayers and all thy almeses are come up into remembrance before god.

What god has cleansed, that make thou not common or unclean.

And as it chansed Peter to come in, Cornelius ^et him, and fell down at his
feet, and worshipped (...). But Peter took him up saying: stand up, ^or even
I my self am a man.

Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing (...) a man that is a Jew, to
company or come unto an aliene: but god has showed me that I should not call
any manne commen, or vnclen^, therefore came I unto you without saying nay,
^ssone as I was sent for.

Then Peter opened his mouth and said: of a truth I perceive that god is not
perciall, but in all people, he that fears him, and worcketh rightuousenes, is
accepted with him.

The.xi. Chapter.
Count not thou those things common, which God has cleansed.

The.xii. Chapter.
THen was Peter kept in prison, but pray^ was made without ceasing of the
congregation unto God for him.

And upon a day appointed Herod araied him in royal apparel, and set him in
his seat, and made an oration unto them.

And the people gave a shoute saying: it is the voice of a god, and ^ot of a
man. And immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God
the honor. And he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.

The.xiii. Chapter.
AS they ministered to the lord, and fasted, the holy ghost said, separate me
Barnabas and Paul for the work, whereunto I have called them. Then fasted
they and prayed, and put their hands on them, and let them go.

I have found David the son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart, he shall
fulfill al my ^yll.

Be it known unto you ye men and breth^en, that through this man, is preached
unto you the forgiveness of sins: and that by him, all that believe, are
justified from all things, from which ^e could not be justified, by the
law of Moses*

Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and s^iderit was mete that the word of
God should first have been preached to you. But seeing ye put it from you, and
think your selves unworthy of ever lasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentylles, for so has the Lord commanded us.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
They returned again to Listes, and to Iconium, and Antioche, and strengthed
the disciples souls, exhortinge them to continue in the faith, affirminge that
we must through much tribulation enter into the kingedome of God. And they
ordained them elders by election i^ every congregation, and prayed, and fasted,
and commended to god, on whom they believed.

The.xv. Chapter.
Now therefore why tempe ye God, that ye would put a yoke on the disciples
necks, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.

Wherefore my sentence in, yt we trouble not the^ which from among the
gentiles, are turned to God, but that we write unto them, that they abstain
from filthiness of idolles, from fornication, from strangeled, and from blood.

For it seemed good to the holy ghost and us, to put no greuouse things to
you, more then these necessary things, that is to say: that ye abstain from
things offered to Idolles, from blood, from strangeled, and fornication.

The.xvi. Chapter.
THey were forbidden of the holy ghost, to preach the word in Asia.

And it fortuned as we went to prayer, a certain Damsel possesied with a
spirit that prophesied, met us, which brought her master and mastres much
vauntage, with prophesying. The same followed Paul and us, and cried saying:
these men are the servants of the most hye god, which show unto us the way
of salvation.

The.xvii. Chapter.
FOr all the Attenians and strangers which were there, gave themselves to
nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear new tydinges.

For as I passed by, and beheld the manner how ye worship your gods: I
found an altar wherein was written, unto unknown god. Who^ ye then
ignorauntly worship, him show I unto you.

The.xviii. Chapter.
ANd because Paul was of the same craft, he abode with Aquila and Priscilla
his wife, and wrought: their crefte was to make tents.

And Paul shore his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.

The.xix. Chapter.
ANd god wrought no small miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his
body, were brought unto the sick, napains, or partlets, and the diseases
departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.

And the evil spirit answered, and said: Jesus I know and Paul I know, but
who are ye?

The.xx. Chapter.
I have desired no man's silver, gold, or vesture. Ye know well that these
hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
THou shall not course the ruler of ye people.

The Saduces say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit.
But the phariseis grant both.

The.xxv. Chapter.
IT is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man yt he should perish
before that he which is accused, have the accusars before him, and have license
to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him.

My thinks it unreasonable for to send a prisoner, and not to show the
causes which are laid against him.

The.xxvi. Chapter.
I Showed first unto them of Damasco, and at Jerusalem, and through out all
the coasts of Iewry, and to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn
to god, and do the right works of repentance.

Here ends the Acts of the Apostles.
The Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans the.i. Chap.
FOr I am detter both to the Greeks and to them which are no Greeks, unto the
learned, and also unto the unlearned. Likewise as much as in me is, I am ready
to preach the gospel to you of Rome also. For I am not ashamed of the gospel
of Christ, because it is the power of God unto salvation to all that believe,
namely to the Jew and also to the ge^tile.

The just shall live by faith,

His invisible things, that is to say, his eternal power and godhead, are
understand and seen by the works from the creation of the world.

When they counted themselves wise, they became fools.

And as it seemed not good unto them to be known of god, even so god delivered
them up unto a leude mind, that they should do the things, which were not
comely.

The.ii. Chapter.
Think thou this, O thou man that iudgest them which do such things, and
yet do even the very same, that thou shall escape the judgment of god?
Either despisest thou the riches of his goodness, patience, and long
sufferau^ce^ and remembreste not how that the kyndenes of god leads the to
repentance. But thou after thine hard heart that cannot repent, heapest
together the treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance, when shallbe
opened the righteous judgment of god, which will reward every man according
to his deeds: that is to say, praise, honor, and immortality to them which
continue in good doing and seek eternal life. But to them that are rebellions
and disobeye the truth, and follow the iniquity, shall indignacion and wrath,
tribulacion and anguishe upon the soul of every man, that does evil of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile. To every man that does good, shall come
praise, honor, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the gentry.

Before god they are not righteous which hear the law, but the doers of the
law, shall be justified.

Their conscience bears witness unto them and also their thoughts, accusing
one another or excusing at the day, when god shall judge the secrets of me^
by Jesus christ, according to my gospel.

The name of god is evil spoken of among the gentiles through you.

He is a Jew which is hid within, and the circumcision of the heart, is the
true circumcision, which is in the spirit, and not in the letter. Whose praise
is not of men, but of god.

The.iii. Chapter.
THere is none righteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God, they all are gone out of the way, they are all
made unprofitable, there are none that doothe good no not one.

By the deeds of the law, shall no flesh be justified in the sight of god.

The righteousness no doubt which is good before god, comes by the faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe.

All have sinned, and lack the praise that is of valor before god: but we are
justified trely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom god has made a seat of mercy through faith in his blood, to show the
righteousness which before him is of valor in that he forgeueth the sins
that are passed, which god did suffer to show at this time the righteousenes
that is allowed of him, that he might be contented just, and a iustifier of
him which believes in Jesus.

We suppose that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

The.iiii. Chapter.
ABraham believed god, and it was counted unto him for rightewisenes.

To him that works, is the reward not reckened of favor: but of duty. To
him that works not, but believed on him that justifies the ungodly, is faith
counted for rightwisenes.

Blessed are they whose unrighteousness are forgeuen, and whose sins are
covered. Blessed is that man to whom the lord imputes no sin.

Where is no law, there is no transgression.

Christ was delivered for our sins, and rose again for to justify us.

The.v. Chapter.
WE also rejoice in tribulacion, for we know that tribulacion brings
patience, patience brings experience, and experience brings hope and hope
makes not ashamed, for the love of god is shead abroad in our hearts, by the
holy ghost which is given unto us.

Seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more then now:
seeing we are justified in his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him.

Likewise as by the sin of one, condemnatxion came on all men, even so by ye
justifying of one comes the righteousness that brings life upon all men.
For as by one man's disobedience, many became sinners: so by the obedience of
one, shall many be made righteous.

The.vi. Chapter.
WE are buried with him by baptime, for to d^e, that likewise as Christ was
raised up from death by the glory of the father, even so we also should walk
in a new life. For if we be grafte in death like unto him, even so must we be
in the resurrection.

Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should thereunto obey in
the iustes of it. Neither give your members as instruments of vnrighteousenes
unto sin: but give your selves to god, as they that are alive from death. Let
not sin have power over you. For ye are not under the law, but under grace.

Remember ye not, how that to whomsoever ye commit your selves as servants to
obey his servants, ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousenes?

As ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, from
iniquity to iniquity: even so now give your members servants unto
righteousness, that ye may be sanctified.

The reward of sin is death, but eternal life is the gift of god, through
Jesus Christ our lord.

The.vii. Chapter.
THe woman which is in subjection to a man is bound by the law to the man, as
long as he lives. If the man be dead, she is losed from the law of the man.
So then if while the manne lives she couple herself with another man, she
shall be counted a wedlock breaker. But if the man be dead, she is free from the
law, so that she is no wedlock breaker, though she couple her self with
another man.

I know that in me, dwells no good thing. To will is present with me, but I
find no means to perform that which is good. For I do not that good thing
which I would, but that evil do I, which I would not.

I delight in the law of god, concerning the inner man, but I se another law
in my members rebellyng against the law of my mind, and subduyng me unto the
law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death?

The.viii. Chapter.
THey that are carnal, are carnally minded, but they that are spiritual, are
ghostly minded, to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is
life and peace, because that the fleshly mind is enemy against god: for it is
not obedient to the law of god, neither can be. So the^ they that are given to
the flesh, cannot please god.

If ye live after the flesh, ye must dye, but if ye mortifye the deeds of the
body, by the help of the spirit, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
spirit of god, they are the sons of god. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage, to fear any more: but ye have received the spirit of
adopcion, whereby we cry Abba father.

I suppose that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory
shall be showed upon us.

The spirit makes intercession mightily for us, with groninges which cannot
be expressed with tongue.

If god be on ouresyde, who can be againsts us?

I am sure that neither death, neither life, nether angels, nor rule nether
power nether things present, neither things to come neither height neither
loweth, neither any other creature shall be able to depart us from the love of
god, showed in Christ Jesus our lord.

The.ix. Chapter.
THey which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of god.

He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he makes hard hearted.

God willing to show his wrath and to make his power known suffered with
long patience the vessels of wrath, ordained to damnacion, that he might
declare the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had prepared
unto glory: that is to say, us which he called, not of the Jews only, but
also of the Gentiles.

The.x. Chapter.
THe belefe of the heart justifies, and to knowledge with the mouth, makes a
man safe, for the scripture says: whosoever believes on him, shall not be
ashamed.

Whosoever shall on the name of the lord, shall be safe.

The.xi. Chapter.
EVen so at this time, is there a remnaunte left through the election of
grace. If it be of grace, then it is not of works. For then were grace no more
grace. If it be of works, then is it no grace. For then were deserving no
longer deserving.

God has wrapped al nations in unbelief. ye he might have mercy on all.

O the depnes of the aboundaunt wisdom and knowledge of god, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past fyndyng out? for who has
known the mind of the lord? or who was his counseler? other who has given
unto him first, that he might be recompensed again? For of him, and through
him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever.

The.xii. Chapter.
I Beseech you brethren, by the mercifulnes of god, that ye make your bodies a
quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto god: which is your reasonable
serving of god: and fasshion not your selves like unto this world: but be ye
changed in your shape, by the renuyng of your wits, that ye may feel what
thing, that good that acceptable, and perfect will of god is. For I say
(through the grace that unto me given is,) to every man among you, that no man
esteem of himself more then it becomes him to esteem, but that he discretely
judge of himself, according as god has beast to every man the measure of
faith.

Let love be without dissimulation. Be kind one to another with brotherly love.
Apply your selves to the time. Bless them which persecute you: bless, but
curse not. Be of like affection one toward another. Be not hye minded, but
make your selves equal to them of the lower sort. Be not wise in your own
opinions. Recompense to no man evil for evil. If it be possible, howebeit of
your part have peace withal men. If thine enemy honger, feed him. If he
thirst, give him drink. For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his
head. Be not ouerrome of evil, but overcome euel with goodness.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Let every soul submit himself unto the auctorite of the hier powers. For
there is no power of god. The powers that be, are ordained of god. Whosoever
therefore relisteth power, resysteth the ordinance of god. And they that
resist, shall receive to them selfs damnation.

Ye must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only, but also because of
conscience.

Owe nothing to any man, but love one another.

Love hurts not his neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfyllynge of the law.

Let us walk houestly, as it were in the day light: not in eating and
drinckynge, neither in chamburyng, and wantonness, nether in strife and
enu^ynge, but put ye on the Lord Jesus christ. And make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
ONe believes that he may eat all thing, another which is weak, eats
earbes. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. And let not him
which eats not, judge him that eats.

This manne puts difference between day and day. Another manne counts
all days a like. Se that no man waver in his dicu meaning. He that observes
one day, more then another, does it for the lords pleasur. And he yt
observes one day more than other does it to please the lord also. He that
eats does it to please the lord, for be gives god thanckes. And he that
eats not, cateth not to please the lord with all, and gives god thanks.

Christ therefore dyed and rose again, and reuyued, that he might be lord both
of dead and quick.

Every one of us, shall give accomytes of him klie to god.

If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitablye.
Destroy not him with thy meat for whom christ dyed.

The kingdom of god is not meat nor drink: But righteousness peace and joy
in the holy ghost

All things are pure: but it is evil for that man which eats with the hurt
of his conscience. It is good nether to eat flesh, nether to drink wine,
nether any thing, whereby thy brother ston^ bleth, either falls, or is made
weak.

The.xv. Chapter.
WE which are strong, ought to bear the frailnes of them which are weak,
and not to stand in your own conceytes.

Whatsoever things are written before time are written for our own learning,
that we through patience and conforte of the scripture might have hope.

If the gentyles be made partakers of their spiritual things, their duetye
is, to minister unto them in carnal things.

The.xvi. Chapter.
I Beseech you brethren mark them which cause diuisyon and give occasyons of
evil, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For
they that are such, serve not the lord Jesus christ, but their own bellies,
and with swear preaching and flatteryng words ^eceaue the hearts of the
innocents.

I would have you wise unto that which is good, and to be innocent as
concerning evil.

The first Epistle to the Corintians the first Chapter.
I Beseech you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak one thing, and that there be no dissension among you: but be ye knytte
together in one mind, and in one meaning. The preaching of ye cross, is to
the^ yt perish folishnes: but unto us which are saved, it is ye power of god.

The folyshnes of god is wyser then men, and the weakness of god, is stronger
then men.

God has chosen the folyshe things of the world, to confound the wise. And
god has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound things which are
mighty. And vile things of the world, and things which are despised, has
god chosen, ye, and things of no reputation, for to bring to naught things
of reputation, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence.

The.ii. Chapte
THe eye has not sent, and the ear has not heard, nether has entered into
the care of man, the things which god has prepared for them that love him.

The sprete searches all things, yethe bottom of gods secrets. For what
man knowethe the things of a man, save the sprete of a man, which is within
him? eue^ so the things of god knows no man, but the sprete of god.

The.iii. Chapter.
AS long verily as there is among you enuyynge, strife, and dissension, are ye
not carnal and walk after the manner of men.

I have planted, Apollo waired, but god gave the increace. So then nether is he
that planteth any thing, nether he that watreth: but god that gave the
increace.

Every manne shall receive his reward according to his labor.

Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
christ. If any ma^buylde on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
timber, hay, or stoble: every man's work shall appear. For the day shall
declare it, and it shall be showed in fire. And the fire, shall try every man's
work, what it is. If any man's work that he has bylt upon, bide, he shall
receive a reward. If any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be
safe him self. Never thelesse yet as it were through fire.

Are ye not ware that ye are the temple of god, and how that the sorete of god
dwells in you? If any manne defyle the temple of god, him shall god destroy.
For the temple of god is holy, which temple ye are.

If any manseme wise among you, let him be a fool in this world, that he may
be wise. For the wisdom of this world, is folyshnes with god.

The.iiii. Chapter.
WIth me it is but a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, either
of man's judgment. No, I judge not mine own self. I know naught by my self:
yet am I not thereby justified. It is the lord: that judges me. Therefore judge
nothing before the time until the Lord come, which will lighten things
that are hyd in darcknes, and open the councels of the hertes, and then shall
every manne have praise of god.

What have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have received it, why
reioysest thou as though thou had notreceaued it?

The kingdom of god is not in words, but in power.

The.v. Chapter.
Deliver that fornicator to Saran, for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spryte may be saved in the day of the lord Jesus.

If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or a worshipper
of ydoles, either a raylet, either a dronckard, or an extorcio^ner, with him
that is such, se that ye eat not.

The.vi. Chapter.
IS there utterly no wise manne among you, what not one at al, yt can judge
between brother and brother, but one brother goes to law with another, and
that under the unbelievers.

Do ye not remember how that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
god? Be not deceauers. For nether fornicatoures, nether worshyppers of ydoles,
nether whoremongers, nether weaklynges, neither abusers of them selves with the
mankind, nether thieves, nether the covetous nether dronckardes, nether cursed
speakers, neither pyllars, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not profitable.

Remember ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I now
take the members of Christ, and make the ye members of an harlot? God forbid.
Do ye not know and understand yt he which coupleth himself we an harlot, is
become one body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh But he that is joined unto
the lord, is one sprite.

All fynnes that a man does, are without the body. But he that is a
fornicatour sins against his own body. Either know ye not how that your
bodies are the temple of the holy ghost. which is in you, whom ye have of
god, and how ye ye are nor your own? For ye are dearly bought. Therefore
glorifye ye god in your bodies, and in your spretes, for they are gods.

The.vii. Chapter.
IT is good for a man, not to touch a woman, Nevertheless to avoid
fornication, let every manne have his wife: and let every woman have her
husband. Let the manne gene unto the wife due benevolence. Likewise also the
wife unto the man. The wife has no power over her own body, but the husband.
And likewise the man has not power over his own body, but the wife.

Withdraw not your selves one from another, except it be with consent for a
time, for to give your selves to fasting and prayer. And afterward come
again to the same thing, lest Satan tempte you for your incontinence.

It is better to mary, then to burn.

Let every manne where in he is called, therein abide with god.

Art thou bound unto a wife, seek not to be lowsed: Art thou lowsed from a
wife, seek not a wife. But and if thou take a wife, thou synnest not. Likewise
if a virginne Marye, she synneth not. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in
their flesh, but I fauer you.

The syngle manne cares for the things of the Lord. But he that has
married, cares for the things of the world: how kenispe please his wife.
There is difference between a virgyn and a wife. The single woman cares for
the things of the lord, that the may be pure both in body and also in
sprete. But she that is married, cares for ye things of ye world, how she may
please her husband. The wife is bound to the law assong as her husband lives:
if her husband sleep, she is at libettr, to mary wc whou^ she will only in the
lord. But she is happiar, if she do abide in my judgment.

The.viii. Chapter.
MEat makes not us acceptable to god: Nether there if we eat, are we the
better. Neither if we eat not, are we the worsse. But take heed that your
liberte cause not the weak to fall.

If meat hur: emy brother, I will ear no flesh whyll the world stands,
because I will not hurt my brother.

The.ix. Chapter.
WHo goes a warfarre any time at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyarde and
eats not of the fruit? who fedeth a flock, and eats not of the milk?

If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your
carnal things?

Do ye not understand, how that they which minister in the temple have their
finding of the temple? And they which wait as the altar, are partakers
with the altar? Guen so also did the lord ordain, that they which preach
the gospel, should live of the gospel.

Woe is to me, if I preach not the gospel.

They which run in a course, run all, yet one receaueth the reward. So run ye
ye may obtain.

I came my body and bring it into subjection, least after that I have
preached to other, I my selft should be cast away.

The.x. Chapter.
FEtte him that thinks he stands, take heed least he tall.

But god is faithful which shall not suffer you to be tempted adoue your
strength: but shall in ye mids of temptation make away to escape our.

Is not the cup of blessing which we bless partakyng of ye oloude of
christ is not the bread which we break, partakyng of the body of christ
because that we (though we be many) yet are one bread, and one body, in
as much as we all are parts takers of one bread.

Ye can not drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of the deuyls. Ye
can not be partakers of the lords table, and of the table of deuyls.

All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient. All
things are laufull to me, but al things ediffy not. Let no man seek his own
proffyt, but let every manne seek another welthe.

Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoeuerye do, do all to the praise of god.

The.xi. Chapter.
I Would ye knew that Christ is the heads of every manne. And the manne is
the woman's head, And god is christ's head.

A man ought not to cover his head, for asmocke as he is the image and
glory of god. The womanne is the glory of the manne, for the manne is not of
the woman, but the woman of the man. Nether was the man created for the womans
sake, but ye woman for ye ma^s sake. For this cause ought ye woman to have
power in her head for the angels sakes. If there be any among you that lusts
to strive, let him know that we no such custom, nether the congregacions
of god.

There must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among you
might be known

The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
thanked and brake, and said: Lake ye, and eat ye, this is my body which is
broken for you. This do ye in the remembrance of me. After the same manner he
took the cup when supper was done, saying: This do as often as ye drink it,
in the remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come: Wherefore
whosoever shall eat of this bread, or drink of the cup, unworthily, shall
be guilty of the body and blood of the LORD Let a man therefore examine
himself and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that
eats or drinks unworthily eats and drinks his own damnacion because
he makes no difference of the lords body. For this cause many are weak and
sick among you and many stepe.

If we had truly judged our selves, we should not have been judged.

The.xii. Chapter.
I Declare unto you, that no man speakinge in the spirit of god, defieth
Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the lord, but by the holy ghost.

And if one member suffer, all suffer with him if one member be had in honor
all members be glad also.

The.xiii. Chapter.
THough I had al faith, so that I could move mountains out of there places,
and yet had no love, I were nothing.

When that which is perfect, is come: then that which is imperfect, shall be
done away.

Now we se in a glass, even in a dark speaking but then shall wese face to
face. Now I know vnperfectfy, but then shall I know even as I am known. Now
abides faith, hope, and love, even these three: but the chief of these is love.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
BRethren be not children in wit. How be it as concerning maliciousnes, be
children. But in wit be perfect.

Let your wives keep silence in the congregations. For it is not permitted unto
the to speak: but let the^ be under obedience. If they will learn^ any thing,
let them are there husbands at home. For it is a shame for women to speak in
the congregation.

The.xv. Chapter.
BY the grace of god I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not in
vain, but I labored more abundantly then they al, yet not I, but the grace of
god which is with me.

By a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead. For as by
Adam al dye, even so by Christ shall all be made alive, and every man in his
own order.

Malicious speakinges corrupt good manners.

The body is sown in corrupcion, and ryseth in incorruption. It is sown in
dishonor, and ryseth in honor. It is sown in weakness, and rises in power.
It is sown a natural body, and ryseth a spiritual body.

Flesh and blood, cannot inherit the kingdom of god Neither does
corruption inherit uncorruption. Behold I show you a mystery. We shall not
all sleep: but we shall al be changed, and that in a moment and in the
twinklynge of an eye at the sound of the last trompe. For the tro^pe shall
blow, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For
this corruptible must put on inc rruptibilite, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Watch ye, sionde fast in the faith, quyte you like men, and be strong. Let
all your busynes be done in love.

The.ii. Epistle to the Corinthians, the first Chap.
FOr as the affliccio^s of Christ are plenteous in us, eue^ so is our
consolacion plenteous by Christ.

Our reioysinge is this, the testimony of our conscience that in singlenes and
godly pureness and not in fleshlye wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world, and most of all to you wards.

The.ii. Chapter:
We are unto god the sweet savor of Christ both among the^ which are saved,
and also among them which perish. To the one part we are the savor of death
unto death, and unto the other part are we the savor of life unto life. We are
not as many are, which choppe and change with the word of god, but eue^ out of
pureness, and by the power of God, and in the sight of God, so speak we in
Christ.

The.iii. Chapter.
SVche trust have we through Christ togodward, not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing, as it were of our selves, but our ablenes
comes of god, which has made us able to minister the new testament, not of
the letter, but of the spirit, for the letter kills, but the spirit gives
life. The lord no doubt is a spirit: and where the spirit of the lord is:
there is liberty.

The iiii. Chapter.
IF our gospel be yet hid, it is hid among them yt are lost, in who^ the god
of this world has blinded the minds of the^, which believe not, least the
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the Image of god should
shine on them.

Our exceeding tribulacion which is mome^tany and light, prepares an exceeding
and an eternal weight of glory unto us, while we look not on the things which
are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For things which are seen,
are temporal but things which are not seen, are eternal.

The.v. Chapter.
FOr we must all appear before the judgment leate of Christ, that every man
may receive the works of his body according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad.

Old things are passed away behold all things are become new.

The.vi. Chapter.
I Have heard the in a time accepted: and in the day of salvation have I
succored thee. Behold now is that well accepted time: behold now is yt day
of salvation. Let us give no man occasion of evil, that in our office be
found no fault: but in all things let us behave our selves as the ministers
of god.

What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what company has light
with darkness? what record has Christ with Belial? either what part has he
that believes with an in fidell? how agrees the temple of god with Idols? And
ye are the temple of that living god, as said god. I will dwell among them,
and walk among them, and will be their god, and they shall be my people.

The.vii. Chapter.
GOdly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of: when
worldly sorrow causes death.

The.viii. Chapter.
Ye know the liberality of our Lord Jesus Christ, which though he were
rich, yet for your sakes became poor, that ye through his poverty, might be
made rich.

If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not.

The.ix. Chapter.
THis yet remember how that he which sows lyrel, shall reapelitel, and he
that sows plenteously, shall reap plenteously. And let every man do according
as he has purposed in his heart, not grudging lie or of necessity, for God
loves a chereful geuer.

The.x. Chapter.
THe weapons of our war are not carnal things, but things mighty in god,
to cast bowne strong holds, wherewith we overthrow ymaginacions, and every
hye thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of god, and bring into
captivity all understanding to the obedience of Christ, and are ready to take
vengeance on al disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

Let him that reioyseth, rejoice in the Lord, for he that praises himself,
is not allowed, but he whom the lord prayseth.

The.xi. Chapter.
THese false Apostles are disceyteful workers and fashion themselves like unto
the Apostles of Christ. And no maruayle, for Satan him self, is changed into
the fashion of an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing, though his
ministers fashion themselves as though they were the ministers of
righteousness: whose end shall be according to there deeds.

Who is sick, and I am not sick? who is hurt in the faith and my heart
burns not? if I must needs rejoice, I will rejoice of mine in firmities.

The.xii. Chapter.
HAd least I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of
reuelacions: there was given unto me unquietness of the flesh, the messe^ger of
Satan to buffet me: because I should not be exalted out of measure. For this
thing besought I the lord thryse, that it might depart from me, and he said
unto me: my grace is sufficient for thee. For my strength is made perfect
through weakness, very gladlye therefore will I rejoice of my weakness, that the
strength of Christ may dwell in me.

The children ought not to lay up for the fathers and mothers, but the fathers
and the mothers for the children.

The.xiii. Chapter.
IN the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall every thing stand.

Fynnally brethren fare ye well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace and the Lord of love and peace shall be with you.

The Epistell of S. Paul to the Galathians the.i. Chap.
Nevertheless though we our selves, or an angel from heaven, preach any
other gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, hold him
as acursed.

If I studied to please men. I were not the servant of Christ.

I certify you brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me was not
after the manner of men, neither received I it of man, neither was I taught
it, but received it by the reuelacion of Jesus Christ.

The.ii. Chapter.
ANd when Peter was come to Antioche I withstode him in ye face, for he was
worthy to be blamed. We which are Jews be nature, and not sins of the
gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ. And therefore we have believed on Jesus Christ, that we
might be justified by the says of Christ, and not be the deeds of the law:
because that by the deeds of the law, no flesh can be justified.

I live verily, yet now not I, but Christ lives in me.

If righteousness come of the law, then Christ dyed in vain.

The.iii. Chapter.
EVen as Abraham believed god, and it was asscribed to him for righteousness,
understand therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children
of Abraham.

As many as are under the law, are under malediction. For it is written, cursed
is every man yt continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to fulfill them.

To Abraham and his sede was the promyses made, he says not in the seeds, as
in many, but in the sede, as in one, which is Christ.

The scripture concluded all things under sin, that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ, should be given unto them that believe.

The.iiii. Chapter.
IT is good always to be fervent, so it be in a good thing.

The.v. Chapter.
IN Jesus Christ neither is circu^cisio^ anithing worth, neither yet
uncircumcision, but faith which by love is mighty in operacion.

All the law is fulfilled in one word, which is this: thou shall love thine
neighbor as thyselfe. If pebyte and devour one another: take heed least ye de
consumed one of another.

The flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the
flesh. These are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do that which
ye would. But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the
law.

The deeds of the fleshs are manifest, which are these, aduoutry, fornicacion,
uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatrie, witcheceafte, hatred, variaunce ^ele, wrath,
strife, sedicion, sects, enuyinge, murder, dronkennes, glutteny, and such
like, of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time past, that
they which commit such things shall not inhertte the kingdom of god.

The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faithefulnesse, mekenes, temperance. Against such thereis no law.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the appetites and lusts.
If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Let us not be vain
glorious prouokyng one another and envying one another.

The.vi. Chapter.
BRethren, if any man be fallen by chance in to any fault, ye which are
spiritual help to amend him, in the spirit of mekenes: considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another burden, and so fulfill
the law of Christ. If any man seem to himself that he is sumwhat, when he is
in deed nothing, the same deceaueth himself in his ymaginacion. Let every man
prove his own word, and then shall he have reioysyng in his own self, and
not in another. For every man shall bear his own burden.

Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he repe, he that sows in his flesh,
shall or yt flesh repe corruption. But he that sows in the spryte, shall of
the spryte repe life everlasting. Let us not be weary of well doing, For when
the time is come, we shall reap without weatines. Whyll we have therefore time,
let us do good unto all men, and specially unto them, which are of the
household of faith.

God forbydde that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our lord Jesus
christ, whereby the world is crucified as touching me, and I as concerning the
world.

The Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians, the first Chapter.
BLessed be god the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly things by Christ,
according as he had chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world was
laid, that we should be saynctes, and without blame before him, through love.
And ordained us before through Jesus Christ to be heirs unto him self,
according to the pleasure of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in
the beloved.

The.ii. Chapter.
BY grace are ye made safe through faith, and that not of your selves, for it
is the gift of god, and comes not of works, lest any manne should boste
him self. For we are his worckemanshyp created in Christ Jesus unto good
worckes, unto the which, god ordained us before, that we should walk in them.

But now in christ Jesus, ye which a while ago were far of, are made nigh, by
ye blood of christ.

Now ye are no more strangers, and foreners, but citesyns with the saints,
and of the household of god, and are bylte upon the foundation of the Apostles
and prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone, in whom every bilding
coupled together grows unto an holy temple in the lord in whom ye also are
bylt together, and made an habitation for god in the sprete.

The.iiii. Chapter.
I Exhort you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,
in all humblends of mind, and meakenes, and long sufferyng, forhearing one
another through love, and that ye be diligent to keep the unity of the sprete
in the bond of peace, beying one body, and one sprete, even as ye are called
in one hope of your calling.

To every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ.

Hence forth be no more children, wauerynge and carried with every wind of
doctrine, by the wylynes of men, and craftines, whereby they lay awayte for us
to deceive us. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow
in him which is the head, that is to say christ.

As concerning the conversation in time paste, lay from you yt old man,
which is corrupt through the deceuable lusts, and be ye renewed in the spret of
your minds, and put on that new man which after the image of god, is shapen
in righteousness and true holiness.

Be angrye but sin not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath.

Let no fylthy co^municatio^ proceed out of your mouths, but yt which is good
to edify with al when need is: that it may have favor with the hearers.

The.v. Chapter.
THis ye know that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or covetous person,
which is the worshypper of ydolles, has any inheritance in the kingdom of
christ and of god.

Take heed that ye walk circumspectly: not as fools, but as wise, redemynge
the time: for the days are evil.

Be not droncke with wine, wherein is excess.

Women submytte your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the lord. For
the husband is the wives head, even as christ is the head of the congregation.

Husbands love your wives, even as christ loved the congregatyon, and gave him
self for it, to sanctifye it. etc.

Let the wife se that she fear her husband.

The.vi. Chapter.
FAthers move not your children to wrath, but bring them up, with the
nourtour and information of the lord.

Remember that whatsoever good thing any man does, that shall he receive
again of the lord: whether he be bound or fre.

Put on the armor of god, that ye may stand steadfast against the crafty
assautes of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood: but
against rule, against power, and against worldely rulers of the darcknes of
this world, against spiritual wyckednes, for heavenly things.

The Epistell to the Philippians. the first Chapter.
SO that christ be preached all manner ways, whether it be by occasion, or of
true meaning I therein joy, ye and wyllioye.

Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. I desire to be lowsed, and
to be with christ, which thing is best of all.

The.ii. Chapter.
Look ye draw one way, having one love, being of one accord, and of one
mind, that nothing be done through strese or vain glory, but that in
mekenes of mind every man esteem other better them him self. And look not
every manne on his own things, but every man on the things of other men.

God has exalted him and given him a name above al names, that in yt name of
Jesus, should every knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth, and that all tounges should confess that
Jesus Christ is the lord, unto the praise of god the father.

It is god which works in you, both the will and also the deed of good will.

All other seek their own, and not that which is Jesus christ's.

The.iii. Chapter.
BEware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of dissension. For we are
circumcision which worship god in the sprete, and rejoice in christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh.

I do judge all things but donge, that I might win christ, and might be
found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but yt
which springs of the faith which is in christ.

Brethren he folowers of me, and look on them which walk even so, as ye have
us for an ensample. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now
tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of christ, whose end
is damnation, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, which
are wordelye minded. But our conversation is in heaven, from whense we look
for a savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile
bodies that they may be fasshioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the workynge, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto him self.

The.iiii. Chapter.
BE not careful, but in all things show your peticion unto god in prayer and
supplication with geuyng of thanks.

I have learned in whatsoeuerestate I am, therewith to be content.

Every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be
gungrye, to have plentye, and to suffer need. I can do all things thoroughe
the help of christ, which strengthened me.

The Epistell of S. Paul to the Collossians, the first Chapter.
BY him were all things created, things that are in heaven, and things that
are in earth, things visible, and things invisible, whether they be majesty
or lord ship, either rule or power. All things are created by him, and in
him and he is before all things, and in him all things have their being.

The.ii. Chapter.
IN christ dwells all the fullness of the god, head bodily, and ye are
complete in him, which is the head of all rule and power, in whom also we
are circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by putting of the
sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision that is in christ, in that
ye are buried with him through baptime in who^ ye are also risen again thorough
faith, ye is wrought by ye operation of god, which raised him from death.

The.iii. Chapter.
If ye be then risen again with christ, seek those things which are above,
where christ sytteth on the tyghte hand of god. Set your affection on things
that are above, and not on things which are on the earth.

Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, unnatural
lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is worshippyng of ydolles.
For which things sake, the wrath of god comes on the children of unbelief.

And all things whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do in the name of the lord
Jesus, geuynge thanks to god the father by him.

Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Servants, be obedient unto your bodily masters in all things, not with eye
service, as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearyng god.

Ye masters do unto your servants that, which is just and equal, seeing
ye know that ye have also a master in heaven.

The.iiii. Chapter.
LEt your speech be always well favored and powdered with salt, that ye may
know how to answer every manne.

The first Epistell to the Thessalonians, the first Chapter.
Our exhortation was not to bring you to error, nor yet to uncleanness, neither
was it with gyle, but as we were allowed of god, that the gospel should be
committed unto us, even so we speak: not as though we intended to please men,
but god which tries our hearts. Neither was our conversation at any time
with flattering words; as ye well know, nether in cloked covetousness, god is
record, nether sought we praise of men, nether of you, nor yet of any
other. etc.

For what is our hope or joy, or corwne, of reioysyr^ge: are not ye it in the
presence of our lord Jesus christ at his coming? yes ye are our glory and
joy.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THis is the will of god, even that ye should be holy, and that yeshoulde
abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to keep
his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as do
the hethen, which know not god. That no man go to far and defraude his
brother in bargaynynge, because the lord is a venger of all such things as
we told you before time, and testified. For god has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness. He that therefore despises, despises not manne,
but god, which has sent his holy spryte among you.

I would not brethren have you ygnoraunt concerning them which are fallen a
sleep, that ye forowe not as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe
that Jesus dyed and rose again: even so then also which sleep by Jesus, will
god bring again with him.

The.v. Chapter.
OF the times and seasons brethren ye have no need that I write unto you: for
ye your selves know perfectlye, that the day of the lord shall come even as
a these in the night. When they shall say peace and no danger, then comes on
them soden destruction, as the trauaylynge of a womanne with child, and they
shall not escape.

Let us not sleep as do other, but let us watch and besober, for they that
sleep sleep in the night. and they yt be droncken, are droncken in the night
But let us which are of the day, be sober, atmed with the breast place of
faith and love, and with hope of salvation as an helmet. For god has not
appointed ve unto wrath: but to optaine salvation by the means of our lord
Jesus Christ which dyed for us, that whether we wake, or sleep: we should
live cogyder with him.

The second Epistel to the Thessalonians, the first Chapter.
WE our selves rejoice of you in the congregations of god over your patience
and faith, in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye suffer, which is
a token of the ryghteous indgement of god, that ye are counted worthy of the
kingdom of god, for which ye also suffer.

The.ii. Chapter.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for the lord commethe not except there
come a departing fyrs^e, and that that sinful man be opened, the son of
perdition which is an aduersarye, and is exalted above all that is called god,
or that is worshypped: so that he shall sytte as god in the temple of god, and
show him self as god.

The.iii. Chapter.
We require of you brethren in the name of our lord Ielus Christ, that ye wit,
draw your selves, from every drother that walks inordinat elye, and not after
the institution which ye received of us.

When we were with you, this we watned you of, that if there were any which
would not work, that the same should not eat.

If an^ men obey not your sayings, send us word of him by a letter, and have
no company with him, that he may be a shamed, and count him not as an enemy,
but warn him as a brother.

The.i. Epistel of S. Paul to Timothe the.i. Chapter.
THe end of the commandments is love, that comes of a pure heart, and of
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

This is a true saying: and by all means worthy to be received, ye Christ
Jesus came into the worlo to save sinners.

The.ii. Chapter.
IExhort ye therefore, ye above al things, prayers, supplicacions,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be had for all men, for kings, and for all
ye are in authority, that we may live a quiet and a peace able life, in all
godliness and honesty. For that is good and accepted in the sight of God out
Savior, which will have all men saved, and to come to the knoweledge of the
truth.

I will that women array themselves in comely apparel with shame fastenes, and
discrete behave our, not with brodred hear, other gold or pearls, or costely
array: but such as becomes women that profeste the worshippinge of god
through good works.

Let the woman learn in silence with all sublection. I suffer not a women to
teach, neither to have authority over the man, but for to be in silence. For
Adam was first formed, and then Eve. Also Adam was not deceived, but the
womaune was decepued, and was in transgression.

The.iii. Chapter.
If a man covet the office of a bishop, he desires a good work. Ye and a
bishop must be faureles, the husband of one wife, sober discrete, honestly
appareled, harberous, apt to teach, not dronken, no fyghter, not given to
filthye lucre: but gentle, abhorting fighting, abhorring couetousnee, and one
that rules his own house honeslty, having children under obedience withal
honesty. For if a man cannot tule his own house, how shall he care for the
congregation of god. He may not be a yo^g scoler, lest he swell and faule into
the judgment of the evil speaker. He must also be well reported of among
them which are without forth, lest he fall into rebuke and snare of the euel
speaker.

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their children
well, and their own housholdes.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe sprite speaks evidently that in the later times lome shall depart from
the faith, and shall give head unto sprites of error, and deuelyshe doctrine
of them which speak false through ypocrilie, and have their consciences marked
with an hot iron, forbydding to mary, and commanding to abstame from meats
which god has created to be received with giving thanks, of them which
believe and know the truth. For all the creatures of god are good, and nothing
to be refused if it be received with thanks giving, for it is sanctified by
the word of God and prayer.

Exercise thy self unto godlynes. For bodily exercise profits little, but
godlynes is good unto all things, as a thing which has promises of the life
that is now, and of the life to come.

The.v. Chapter.
SHe that is a very widow and friendless, puts her trust in god, and
continues in supplication and prayer night and day. But she that lives in
pleasure, is dead, even yet alive.

The younger widows refuse, for when they have beggunne to ware wanton, to the
dishonor of Christ, then will they mary, having damnacion, because they have
broken their first says. And also they learn to go ftom house to house idle,
yea not idle only, but also trifling and busy bodies, speaking things which
are not comely.

The elders that rule well, are worthy of doble honor, most specially they,
which labor in the word and inteachyng.

Against an elder receive none accusation, but under two or three witnesses.

Them that sin, rebuke openly, that other may fear.

Observe these things without haslye judgment, and do nothing parcially.

Lay hands suddenly on no man.

The.vi. Chapter.
IF any man be not content with the wholesome words of our lord Jesus Christ, and
with the doctrine of godlynes, he is puffed up and knows nothing, but wasleth
his brains about questions and strife of words, where of spring envy, strife,
raylinges, evil surmising and vain disputations of men with corrupt minds,
and destitute of the truth, which think that lucre is godlynes, from such
separate thy self.

When we have food and raiment, let us there with be content.

They will be rich, faule into temptacion and snares, and into many folishe and
noisome lusts which drounde men into perdicion and destruction. For
covetousness is the root of all evil* which while some lusts after, they
erred from the faith, and tangled the^ selves with many sorrows.

Charge the^ that are rich in this world, that they be not exceeding wise, and
that they trust not in the uncertain riches, but in ye living god which
gives us abou^dantly al things, to emoye the^, and that they do good, and be
rich in good works, and ready to give and distribute, laying up in store for
the^ selves a good foundation against the time to come that they may obtain
eternal life.

The.ii. Epistle to Timothe the first Chapter.
GOD has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of
soberness of mind.

Be not ashamed to testify our Lord, neither be a shamed of me, which am
bound for his sake, but suffer thou adversity also with the gospel through
the power of god, which saved us and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our deeds, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
grace was given through Christ Jesus before the world was, but is now declared
openly by ye appering of our savior Jesus Christ which has put away death,
and has brought life, and immortality unto light through the gospel.

The.ii. Chapter.
NO man that warreth entangleth himself with worldly business, and that because
he would please him that has chosen him to be Soldier, and though a man
strive for a mastry, yet is he not crouned except he strive laufully.

It is a true saying: if we be dead with him, we also shall live with him. If we
be pacient we shall also raygn with him. If we deny him, he also shall deny us.
If we believe not, yet abides he faithful. He cannot deny himself.

Strive not about words, which is to no profit, but to pervert the hertes.

The Lord knows them that are his. And let every man that calls on the
name of Christ depart from iniquity. Notwithstanding in a great house are not
only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, some for
honor, and some to dishonor. But if a man purge himself from such
fellows, he shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor, mete for the lord, and
prepared un to all good works.

Folyshe and unlearned questions put from the, remembryng that they do, but
gendre strife.

The.iii. Chapter.
Ye and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecutions: but
the evil men and disceauers shall wax worse and worse, while they deceive and
are deceived themselves.

All scripture given by inspiration of god, is profitable to teach, to
improve, to amend and to instruct in rightwisenes, that the man of god may be
perfect and prepared unto all good works.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Preach the word, be fervent, be it in season or out of season. Improve,
rebuke, exhort wc al long suffering and doctrine. For the time will come,
when they wilnot suffer wholesome doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they
(whose ears itche) get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears
from the truth, and shall be given un to fables.

I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. I have
sought a good fight, and have fulfilled my course, and have kept the faith.
From hence forth, is laid up for me a croune of righteousness which the lord
that is righteous judge shall give me at that day, not to me only, but unto
all them that love his coming.

The Epistle of S. Paul to Titus the first Chapter.
ABishop must be fautelesse, as it becomes the minister of god. Not proud
not angry, no dronkarde, no fighter, not given to filthy lucre, but herberous,
one that loves goodness, sobre minded, righteous, holy, te^perate, and such e
as cleueth unto the true word of doctrine, that he may be able, to exhibit
with wholesome learning, and to improve them that say against it.

The Cretians are always liars, euel beasts and stowe belyes.

They confess that they know god: but with the deeds they deny him, and are
abominable, and disobedient, and to all good works discommendable.

The.ii. Chapter.
ANd the elder women likewise, that they be in such raymente as becomes
holiness, not false accusars, not given to much drinkinge, but teachers of
honest things, to make the young women sobre minded, to love their husbands,
to love their children, to be discrete, chaste, huswifely good and obedient to
their own husbands, that the word of god be not euel so oken of.

The grace of god, that brings salvation unto al men, has appeared, and
teaches us that we should deem ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live sobre minded, righteouslye and godly in this present world, lokyng
for the blessed hope and glorious appering of the mighty God, and of our
saueour Jesus Christ, which gave him self for us, to redeem us, from all
vnrighteousenes, and to pourge us a peculier people unto him self, fervently
given unto good works.

The.iii. Chapter.
Warn them that they submit themselves to rule and power, to obey the
officers, that they be ready to all good works.

Not of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy he saved
us.

Folishe questions and genealogies, and braulinge and strife about the law,
avoid, for they are un profitable, and superfluous.

A man that is given to heresy, after the first and the second admonicion,
avoid, remembering that he that is such, is perverted, and synneth, even
damned by his own judgment.

The Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews the.i. Chapter.
GOD in time past diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by ye
prophets, but in these last days, he has spoken unto us by his son, whom
he has made heir of all things, by whom also he made the world.

He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers fiammes of fire.

Are not all the angels ministringe spirits sent to minister for their sakes,
which shall be heirs of salvation?

The.ii. Chapter.
HE that sanictifieth, and they which are sa^ctifed are all one.

He in no place takes on him the angels, but ye feed of Abraham takes he on
him. Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto his brechren,
that he might be merciful, and a faithful hye priell in things concerning god,
for to purge the peoples sins. For in that he himself suffered and was
tempted, he is able to sucker them that are tempted.

The iii. Chapter.
CHrist as a son has rule over ye house, whose house are we, so that we hold
fast the co^fide^te and the reidysyng of that hope, unto the end.

Take heed brethren, that there be in none of you an evil heart in unbelieve,
that he should depart from the living god: but exhort one another daily, while
it is called to day, least any of you ware hard hearted through the
deceytefulnesse of sin.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe word of god is quick, and mighty in operacion, and sharper then any two
edge sweared: and en treth through, even unto dividing a sonder of the soul
and the sprite, and of ye taintes and the mary: and judges the thought is and
theintentes of the heart: neither is there any creture invisible in the sight
of it. For all things are naked and bare unto the eyes of him, of whom we
speak

The.v. Chapter.
WE have not an hye priest, which cannot have compassion on our infirmities but
was in all points like as we are, but yet without sin.

Let us therefore go boldly unto the seat of grace, that we may receive mercy,
and find grace to help in time of need.

Every hye priest that is taken from among men is ordained for men, in things
pertayninge to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin: which can have
compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, because that
he him self also is compassed with infirmity, for the which infirmities
sake, he is bound to offer for sins, as well for his owneparte, as for the
peoples.

No man takes honor unto him self, but he that is called of god, as was
Aaron.

Christ in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and
was also heard, because of his obedience.

The.vi. Chapter.
IT is not possible, that they which were once lygted, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were become partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted
of the good word of god, and of the power of the world to come: if they fall,
should be renewed again unto repentannce: for as much as they have (as
concerning them selves) crucified the son of god a fresh making a mock of
him.

That earth which drynketh in the rain, which comes often upon it, and
brings forth earbes meat for them that dress it, receaueth blessing of
god. But that ground which bears thorns and briars, is reproved and is nigh
unto cursyng: whose end is to be burned.

God is not unrighteous, that he should forgeth your work and labor that
proceeds of love. which love ye show in his name, which have ministered unto
the saints, and yet minister.

The.vii. Chapter.
TO Melchisedech, Abraham gave tithes of all things.

Melchisedech first is by interpretation King of righteousness, after that he
is king of Salem, that is to say, king of peace, without father without
mother, without kynne, and has nether beginning of his time, neither y^^ end
of his life: but is lykened unto the son of god, and continues a pressed for
ever.

And ver^lye those children of Leui, whicheth ceaue the office of ye prestes
have a commandment to take according to the law, tithes of the people, that is
to say, of their brethren, ye though they sprange out of the loins of
Abraham.

Leuy him self also, which receaueth tythee, paid tithes in Abraham.

The law made no thing perfect, but was an introduction of a better hope, by
which hope, we draw nigh unto god.

This manne (Christ) because he endures euee has an everlasting presthoode.
Wherefore he is able also ever to save them, that come unto god by him, seeing
he ever lives, to make intercessyon for us Soche an hye priest it became us to
have, which is holy harmless, undefiled, separate from fynnes, and made hyar
then heaven, which needs not daily (as yonder hye-prestes) to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and even for the peoples sins, for
that did he once for all, when he offered up him self. For the law makes men
prides, which have infirmity, but the word of the oath that came sense the
law, makes ye son pressed, which is perfect for evermore.

The.viii. Chapter.
AFter those days says the lord, I will put my laws in their minds, and in
their hearts I will writ them, and I will be their god, and they shall be my
people. And they shall not teach, every manne his neighbor, land every man
his brother saying: know the lord. For they shall know me, from the lest to
the most of them, for I wylbe merciful over their unrighteousness and on their
sins, and on their iniquities.

The.ix. Chapter.
THe Prestes went always into the first tabernacle, and executed the service
of god. But in the second went the hye priest, alone, one every year: and not
without blood, which he offered for him self, and for the ignorance of the
people.

But Christ being an hye pressed of good things to come: nether be the blood of
goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once for all in to the
holy place, and found eternal redemption. Whersoeuer is a testament, there must
also be the death of him that makes the teilament, for the testament takes
authority when me^ are dead, for it is of no value as long as he ye made it is
a live.

Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands, which
are but similitudes of true things: but is entered into very heaven, for to
appear now in the sight of god for us: not to offer him self, often as the
hye pressed enters in to the holy place every year with strange blood, for
then must he have often suffered sense the world began. But now in the end
of the world has he appeared once to put sin to flight, by the offeringe up
of himself. And as it is appointed unto men that they shall once dye, and
then co^^eth the judgment, even so, christ was once offered to take away the
sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear again
without sin unto salvation.

The.x. Chapter.
IT is impossible that the blood of oxen and of goats should take away
sins.

This is the testament yt I will make unto them after those days says the
Lord, I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their mind I will wryt
them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where
remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin.

Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good wor^kes, and
that so mothe the more, because ye se that the day draws nigh.

If we sin willyngly after that we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful loking for
judgment, and violente fire, which shall devour the adversaries.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living god.

The just shall live by faith.

The.xi. Chapter.
HAith is a sure confidence of things, which are haped for, and a certayntie
of things which are not seen.

Without faith it is impossible to plaise god.

By faith Moses when he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos
daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the people of god then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a reason, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ
greater riches then the treasure of Egypt, for he had respect unto the
reward.

The.xii. Chapter.
WHom the lord loves, him he chastened, ye, and he scourges every son that
he receaueth. No manner chastifyng in the present time, seems to be joyous, but
grievous, nevertheless afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness
unto them, which are therein exercised.

Embrace peace with all men and holiness, without the which no man shall se the
Lord.

Esau for out break fast sold his byrthright, ye know how that afterward
when he would have inherited the blessing, he was put by, and he found no
means to come thereby again, no though he desired it with tears.

Ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the city of the living god the
celestial Jerusalem, and to an innumerable sight of angels, and unto the
congregation of the first borne sons which are written in heaven, and to god
the judge of al, and to the sprytes of just and perfect men, and to Jesus
the mediator of the new testamente, and to the sprincklyng of blood that
speaks better then the blood of Abell.

Our god is consumynge fire.

The.xiii. Chapter.
BE not forgetful to lodge strangers, for thereby have diverse received angels
into their houses unawares.

Let wedlock be had in price in all points, and let the chamber be
undefiled, for whose kepers and aduoutrars god will judge.

Remember them which have the ouersyght of you, which have declared unto you
the word of god. The end of whose conversation se that ye look upon, and
follow their faith.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange learning.

Here we have no continuyng city, but we seek one to come.

To do good, and to distribute forgette not, for with such sacrifices god is
pleased.

Ohey them that have the oversight of you, and submyt your selves to them, for
they watch for your souls, even as they that must give accountes: that they
may do it with joy, and not with grefe, for that is an unprofitable thing
for you.

The Epistell of S. James the first Chapter.
MY brethren, count it excedyng joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, for
as much as ye know how that the entryng of your faith brings patience,
and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and sound
lackyng nothing.

If any of you lack wisdom, let him axe of god which geneth to all men
indifferently, and casts no man in the teth, and it shall be given him. But
let him axe it in faith and waver not for he that douteth is like tghe waves
of the sea tossed of the wind and carried with violence. Neither let that manne
think that he shall receive any thing of the lord, a waueryng minded man, is
unstable in all his ways.

Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted, and the rich in
that he is made low, for even as the flower of the grass shall he vanishe
away. The son rises with heat, and the grass wydereth, and his fioure
falls away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes, even so shall
the rich manne perish with his abundance.

Happy is that manne that endures in temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the crown of life, which the lord has promised to them that
love him.

God tempted not unto evil, nether tempred he any manne. But every man is
tempted, drawn away, and entised of his own concupiscence.

Then when lust has conceived, she brings forth sin, and sin when it
is finished brings forth death.

Every good gift, and ruerye perfect gift, is from above, and comes down
from the father of light, with whom is no variablenes, neither is he changed
unto darrkenes.

Let every man be swyfte to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath, for
the wrath of man works not that, which is righteous before god.

Se that ye be doars of the word, and not heaters only, deceauyng your selves
with sophistry.

Pure devotion and undefiled before goo the father, is this, to visit the
faberlesse, and wyddowes in their aduersytie, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

The.ii. Chapter.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is gyltye
in all.

There shall be judgment mercyles to him, that shows no mercy, and morcye
reioyseth against judgment.

Faith if it have no deeds, is dead in it self.

I manne is justified of deeds, and not of faith only.

Is the body without the spryte is dead, even so faith without deeds is dead.

The.iii. Chapter.
IF a man sin not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to came
all the body.

The tongue is a little member, and bosteth great things. It is an vnruelyr
evil, full of deadly poison, the tongue can no man came.

If any man be wise and endued with learning among you, let him show the
worckes of conversation in mehnes that is coupled with wisdom.

The wisdom that is from above is first pure, than peasable, gentle and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without iudgyng, and
without simulation: yea and the fruit of righteousness is sowe^ in peace, of
them that maintain peace.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Ye axe and receive not, because ye axe amiss. Know ye not how that the
friendship of the world is enemitie to godwarde? Whosoever will be a friend of
the world, is made the enemy of god.

What thing is your life? It is not even a vapoure that appears for a little
time, and then vanished away.

To him that knows how to be good, and does it not, to him it is sin.

The.v. Chapter.
GO to now ye rich men, weep and howl on your wretchedness that shall come
upon you. Your riches is corrupt, your garments are mothe eaten, your gold and
your silver are cankred, and the rust of them shall be witness unto you, and shall
eat your flesh, as it were fire.

Above all things my brethren, swear not, nether by heaven, nether by the
earth, nether by any other oath. Let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay,
lest ye fall into ypocrisie.

If any of you be disealed, let him call for the elders of the congregation,
and let them pray over him, and anoynte him with oil in the name of the
Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the lord shall raise
him up, and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgeuen him.

Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed.

The prayer of a righteous manne avails much, if it be fervent.

Brethren if any of you err from the truth, and another convert him let the
same know that he which converted the sinner from goinge astraye out of his
way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins.

The.i. Epistle of S. Peter the first Chapter.
GYrde up the loins of your myno^e^, be sober and trust perfectly on the grace
that is brought unto you by the declaring of Jesus Christ, as obedient
children, not fashioning your selves unto your old iustes of ignorance: but
as he which called you is holy, even so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy.

The father without respect of person judges according to every man's works.

Ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible silver and gold from
your vain conuerrsation which ye received by the tradicions of the fathers,
but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and with out
spot which was ordained before the world was made, but was declared in the last
times for your sakes which by his means have believed on God that raised him
from death, and glorified him, that your faith and hope might be in god.

Se that ye love one another we a pute heart fervently: for ye are borne a new,
not of mortal sede, but of immortal, by the word of god, which lives and
lasts for ever.

All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass.
The grass withers and the flower falls away, but the roord of the lord
endures ever.

The.ii. Chapter.
IF so be that ye have tasted how pleasant ye lord is, to whom ye come as to
a living stone dissalowed of^ten, but chosen of god, and precious and ye ae
living stonce, are made a spiritual house, and an holy priste hode for to offer
up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to god by Jesus Christ.

Unto you which believe, he is precious, but unto the^ which believe not, the
stone which the buylders refused, the same is made the head stone in the
corner, and a stone to stumble at, and a rock to offend them whithe stomble
at the word, and believe not that whereon they were set.

Derely beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, and se that ye have honest
conversation among the gentiles, that they which backbite you as evil doers,
may se your good works, and praise god in the day of visitation.

Submit your selves unto almaner ordinance of man for the lords sake, whether
it be unto the king as unto the chief head, other unto rulers, as unto them
that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, but for ye laud of
the^ that do well. Servants obey your masters with all fear, not only if
they be good and courteous, but also though they be fromward. For it is thank
worthy if a man for conscience toward god endure grefe, suffering wrongfully.
For what praise is it, if when ye be sufferd for your fautes ye take it
patiently? but if when ye do welye suffer wrong and take it patiently, then is
there thanks with God.

Christ suffered for us, leuing us an example that we should follow his steps,
which did not sin, neither was there gyle found in his mouth: which when he
was reuyled, reuyled not again when he was buffeted, he threatened not, but
committed the cause to him that judges righteously, which his own self bare
our sins in his body on the tree, that we should be beliuered from sin
and should live in righteousness.

The.iii. Chapter.
WEmens apparel shall not be outward with broyded hear, and hangyng on of
gold, either in putting on of gorgious apparel, but let the hid in a^ of
the heart be vncorrupt with a meke and quiet sprite, which sprite is before god
a thing much set by.

It is better (if the will of god ve so) that ye suffer for well doing, then for
cuell doing.

The.iiii. Chapter.
HE which suffers in the flesh, cease from sin, ye he hence forward
should live as much time as remaynethe in the flesh, not after the lusts of
men, but after the will of god.

To this purpose was the gospel preached unto the dead, that they should be
condemned of men in the fieshe, but should live before god in the sprite.

Above al things have fervent love among you, for love covers the multitude
of sins.

The.v. Chapter.
SE that ye feed Christ's flock, which is among you, taking the ouersighte of
them, not as though ye were compelled thereto, but willinglye, not for to desire
filthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though ye were Lords over the
parishes, but that ye be an ensample to the flock, and when the chief
shepehearde shall appear, ye shall receive an incorruptible croune of glory.

God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil as a roatyng lion walks
aboote sekyng whom he may devour. Whom resist sted fast in the says,
remembering that ye do but fulfill the same afllictions, which are appointed to
your brethren that are in the world.

The second Epistel of S. Peter the first Chapter.
IN your faith minister virtue, and in veriue knowledge, and in knowledge
temperaunce, and in temperaunce patience, in patience godlynes, in godlynes
brotherly kindenes, in brotherlye kindenes love. For if these things be among
you and are plenteous, they will make you that ye neither shall be idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks
these things, is blind and gropeth for the way with his hand, and had
forgotten that he ws purged from his old sins.

The.ii. Chapter.
THere were false prophets among the people, eue^ as there shall be false
teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable sects, even
denying the Lord that has boughte them, and bring upon themselves swift
damnacion, and many shall solowe their damnable ways, by which the way of
truethe shall be evil spoken of: and through covetousness shall they with fained
words make marchaundise of you, whose judgment is not far of, and their
damnation flepeth not.

The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of the temptation, and how to
rescrue the the vniusle unto the day of judgment. For to be punished, namely
the^ that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise the
rulers.

Presumpteous are they, and stubburne and fear not to speak evil of them
that are in authority.

Of whom soever a man is over come, unto the same is he in bondage.

It had been better for them not to have known the way of right wisenes,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commaun dement given
unto them.

The.iii. Chapter.
ONe day is with the Lord, as a thousand year, and a thousand year as one
day.

The Lord is not slack to fulfill his promise, as some men count slackenes, but
is pacient to us ward, and would have noman lost, but would receive all men to
repentance.

The day of the Lord will come as a these in the night, in the which day the
heavens shall perish with terrible noise, and the elements shall melte with
heat, and the earth with the works that are therein, shall burn.

And suppose ye that the long suffringe of the Lord is salvation, even as our
dearelye beloved brother Paul, according to ye wisdom given unto him, wrote
to you, yea, almost in every Epistle speaking of such things, among which
are many things hard to be understand, which they that are unlearned and
unstable, peruerte as they do other scriptures, unto their own destruction.

The.i. Epistel of S. John the Apostle the.i. Chapter.
IF we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in
us. If we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to for give us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say we have not sinned
we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

The.ii. Chapter.
IF any manne sin, yet we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ,
which is righteous: and he it is that oblayneth grace for our sins, not for
your sins only, but also for the sins of all the world.

He that says I know him, and keeps not his commaundemetes, is a liar, and
the verity is not in him.

He that says he by death in him, ought to walk even as he walked.

He that says how that he is in the light and yet hates his brother, is in
darkness even until this time. He that loves his brother, abides in the
light, and there is none occasion of euelin him. He that hates his brother, is
in darckenes, and walks in darkness, and cannot tell wyther he goes, because
that darcknes has blinded his eyes.

Se that ye love not the world, nether the things that are in the world. If
any manne love the world, the love of the father is not in him, for all that
is in the world, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of goods) is not of the father, but of the world. And the world
vanishes away, and the lust thereof, but he that fulfylleth the will of god,
abides ever.

The.iii. Chapter.
Whosoever commits syn, commits unrighteous also, for sin is
unrighteousness, whosoever does not righteousness, is not of god, nether he that
loves not his brother.

He that loves not his brother, abides in beathe. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a man flear, and ye know that no man flear, has eternal life
abiding in him.

Whosoever has this worlds good, and syeth his brother have neade, and
shuts up his co^passio^ from him, how dwells the love of god in him?

Let us not love in word neither in tongue, but with the deed, and in
verite, for thereby we know that we are of the verite, and can before him quiet
our bertes.

He that keeps gods commandments, dwells in him, and he in him, and
thereby we know that there abides in us of the sprete, which he gave us.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Believe not every spirit, but prove whether they are of God ornot.

In this appeared the love of god to us ward, because that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love,
not that we loved god, but yt he loved us, and sent his son to make agreement
for our sins.

If we love one another, god dwells in us. and his love is perfect in us.

Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of god, in him dwells god, and
he in god,

There is no fear in love, but parsecte love cafleth out all fear, for fear
has painfulnes, he ye reateth is not perfect in love.

If a man say I love god, and yet hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can
he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love god, who^ he has not
seen?

The.v. Chapter.
GOds commandments are not grievous.

This is the victory that overcomes the world even our fay the, who is it,
that overcomes the world, but he which believes, that Jesus is the son of
God?

There are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and the
holy ghost, and these three are one. There are three which bear record, in
carth, the sprete, and water, and blood, and these three are one.

This is the trust that we have in god, that if we are any thing according to
his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hear us, what soever we are,
we know that we shall have the peticions that we desire of him.

If any man se his brother sin a sin that is nor unto death, let him are,
and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death: There is a sin
unto death, for which say I not that a man should pray All unrighteousness is
sin, and there is sin not unto death.

The world is all together set on wickedness.

The second Epistell of S. John the first Chapter.
HAd now beseech I the lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto
the, but that same which we hard from the beginning, that we should love
one another, and this is the love, that we should walk after his
commandments.

The.ii. Chapter.
Whosoever transgresses, and bydeth not in the doctrine of christ, has not
god. He that endures in the doctrine of christ, has both the father and the
son if there come any unto you, and bring not his learning, him receive not
to house, nether bid him god speed, for he that bid him god speed, is partaker
of his evil deeds.

The Epistel of S. Jude the first Chapter.
Behold the Lord shall come with thousands of saynetes, to give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among them, of all
their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
truell speakynges which ungodly synuers have spoken against him.

The Revelation of S. John. the first Chapter.
HAppy is he that redeth, and they yt hear the words of the prophesy, and
keep the things which are written therein, for the time is at hand Behold he
comes with clouds, and all eyes shall se him, and they also which persed
him.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending says the Lord almighty,
which is and which was, and which is to come.

The.ii. Chapter.
TO him that over comes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the mids of the paradise of god.

To him that overcomes will I give to eat Manna that is hid, and will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows
saving he that receaueth it.

I will give unto every one of you, according unto your worches.

To him that overco^meth and keeps my works unto the end, I will give power
over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron and as the vessels of
a potter shall he brake them to sheuers.

The.iii. Chapter.
If thou shall not watch, I will come on the as a these, and thou shalt not
know what hour I will come upon the.

He that overcomes shall be clothed in whyt array, and I will confess his name
before my father, and before his angels.

I know thy worches that thou art nether cold not hot, I would thou were
cold or hot. So then because thou art between both, and nether cold nor
hot, I will spewe the out of my mouth: because thou art rich and increased
with goods, and have uede of nothing, and know not how thou art wretched
and miserable, poor, blind and na^ed: I counsel the to bye of me gold tried
in the fire, that thou may be rich, and whyt raiment that thou may be
clothed, that thy fylthy nakedness do not a^pere, and annoynte thine eyes with
eye salve that thou may see.

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be seruent therefore and repent.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open
the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me.

To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my seat even as I
overcame and have sytten with my father, in his seat.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe first best was like a lion, the second best like a calfe, and the
third best had a face as a man, and the fourth best was like a ^yinge
egle.

The.v. Chapter.
ANd when he had taken the book, the four bestes, and the.xxiiii. elders fell
down before the lamb, having harpes and golden vialles full of odoures,
which are the prayers of saints, and they song a new song saying: thou art
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast killed,
and have redeemed us by thy blood out of all kynreddes, and tongues, and people,
and nations, and haste made us unto our god, kings, and prestes, and we shall
reign on the exche.

The.vi. Chapter.
I Saw under ye altar, the souls of the^ that were killed for the word of
god, and for the testimonye which they had. And they cried with ^ loud voice,
saying: how lang cariest thou lord holy and true, to judge and to avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?

The.vi. Chapter.
GO there was a great earth quake, and the sun was as black as sack clothe
made of heart, and the moon waxed even as blood, and the stars of heaven
fell unto the earth even as a fygge free casts from her, her fygges when she
is shaken of a myghey wind, and heaven vanished away as a scroll when it is
rolled together, and all mountains and yles were moved out of their places and
the kings of the earth, and the greatemen, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every man, bound manne, and every free
manne, hyd them selves in dens and in rocks of the hills: and said to the
hills and rocks: fall on us and hyde us from the presence of him that sits
on the seat, and from the wrath of ye lamb, for the great day of his wrath
is come, and who can endure it.

The.vii. Chapter.
ANd one of the elders answered, saying unto me, what are these which are
arayde in long white garments and whence came they? And I said unto him:
Lord thou wottest. And he said unto me: these are they which came out of
great tribulation, and made their garments large and made them white in the
blood of the lamb, therefore are they in the presence of the seat of god, and
serve him day and night in the temple, and he that sytteth in the seat will
dwellamonge them. They shall honger no more, neither thyrst, neither shall the
sun light on them, nether any heat, for ye lamb which is in the mids of
the seat, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto fountains of living
water, and god shall wype away all tears from their eyes.

The.viii. Chapter.
ANd an other angel came and stood before the altar having a golden senser
and much of odoures was given unto him, that he should offer of the prayers
of all saints upon the golden altar, which was before the seat, and the
smoke of the odoures which came of the prayers of all saints, ascended up
before god, out of the aun^elles hand.

The.ix. Chapter.
IN those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to
dye and death shall fly from them.

The.xi. Chapter.
ANd when they have finished their testimony, the best that came out of the
bottomless pyt, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great cite, which
spiritually is called Zodom and Egipte, where our lord was crucified. And they
of the people and kyndtedes, and tongues, and they of ye nations, shall see their
bodies.iii. days and a half, and shall not suffer their bodies to be put in
graves. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them and be glad,
and shall send gifts one to another, for these two prophets vexed them that
dwell on the earth. And after three days and a half, the sprete of life, from
god entered into them, and they stood up on their fece, and great feate came
upon them which saw them, and they hard a great voice from heaven saying
unto them: Come up hydder, and they ascended up into heaven in a cloud, and
their enemies saw them.

The.xii. Chapter.
ANd there was a great battle in heaven. Michael and his angels fought with the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not, neither was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon, the old serpent
called the devil, and Sathanas was cast out, which deceaueth all the
world. And he was cast into the earth, and his angelo were cast out also.

The.xiii. Chapter.
HE that kylleth with a swearde, must be bylled with aswearde.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
ANd I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harpes, and they song as
it were a new song before the feate, and before the four beasts, and the
elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hundred and. 44. M. whithe
were redeemed from the earth. These are they, which were not defiled with
women for they are virgins. These follow the lamb whethersoeuer he goes.
These were redeemed from men, being the first fruits unto god and to the
lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle, for they are without spot
before the trone of god.

And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: writ, Blessed are the
dead, which here after dye in the lord, even so says the sprite that they
may rest from there labors, but their worekes shall follow them.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Behold I come as a these, happy is he that watched and keeps his garments,
least he be found naked, and men ie his fylthynes.

The.xviii. Chapter.
ANd asmothe as she glorified her self, and lived want only, so much pour ye
in for her of punishment and sorrow.

The.xix. Chapter.
Happy are they which are called unto the lambs supper.

And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me: se thou do it
not, for I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brerhren, and of them yt have
the testimony of Jesus, worship god.

The.xx. Chapter.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, for on
such shall the second death have no power, for they shall be prestes of god
and of Christ, and shall reign with him. a. M. year.

And I saw the dead, both great and small stand before god. And the books
were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the books according
to their deeds, and the sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death and
hell delivered up the dead, which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to his deeds. And death and hell were cast into ye lake of fire. This
is ye second death, and whosoever was not found written in the book of life,
was cast into the lake of fire.

The.xxi. Chapter.
ANd I heard a great voice out of heaven saying: behold, the tabernacle of
god is with men, and he will dwell with them. And they shall be his people, and
god him self shall be with them, and be their god. And god shall wype away all
tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death nether sorrow, nether
cryenge, nether shall there be any more pain, for the old things are gone.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will gene to him that is
a thyrst of the well of the water of life free, he that overcomes shall
inheryt all things, and I will be his god, and he shall be my son. But the
featefull and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and ydolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire, and brymstone which is the second
death.

His servants shall serve him, and they shall se his face, and his name
shall be in their foreheaddes, and there shall be no might, and they need no
candle, neither light of the sun, for the Lord god gives them light, and
they shall raygne for evermore.

I am John which saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard
and seen, I fell down, to worship before the fete of the angel which showed
me these things, and he said unto me: se thou do it not, for I am thy fellow
servant, and the fellow servant of thy brethren the prophets, and of them
which keep the sayenges of this book, but worship god.

He that does evil, let him de evil still, and he which is fylthy, let
him be fylthy still, and he that is righteous, let him be more righteous, and he
that is holy, let him be more holy.

And behold I come shortly, and my reward with me, to give every manne
according as his deeds shall be.

Blessed are they, that do gods commandments, that their power may be in
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city, for
without shall be dogs and enchaunters, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
ydolaters, and whosoever loves or makes lesynges.

The end of the book, for the which God be praised.
The Table of the new Testament.
A
Abstain from blood. etc. Act.v. Abstain from fleshly Iustes.i. Pet.ii. Adam
was not deceived but Eve. i. Tim.ii. Aduoutrie in berte. Math.v. Against rich
men. Jacob.v. Agree with thine adversary. Math.v. Alms must be done
secretly. Mac.vi. Alpha etc Omega. Apo.i. xxi. All nations shall be gathered
before christ. mat xxv Al things are open to god. Heb iiii. Al power is given
unto Christ. Mat.xxvii. Al things were comment. act.ii. iiii. Al things are
pure. Romansxiiii. Al things are lawful but not expedient.i. cor.x. Al things
are created by god. Col.i. Ananias death. act.v. Al men by one man condemned.
Roma.v. An euel tree. Math.vii. Anna fasted and prayde. Luke.ii. An altar of
the unknown god. act.xvii. Antechrist the son of perdition.ii. These.ii. An
Angel appeared to Joseph. Math.i. Angels is are sent to minister for man.
Heb.i. Angels offer unto god, the prayers. etc. Apoc.viii. A great rebuke to
be barren. Lukeii. Attenians hearers and tellers of news. Act.xvii. Armor of
god. 1. These.v. A wavering minded man. Jacob.i. Avoid them that cause
division. Romansxvi Avoid (...) Tit. iiii Are and have. (...). Luc.xi. i.
John.v. Are wisdom in faith. ^ Iaco.i.
B.
Battle in heaven. Apo.xii. Be content with your wages. Luke.iii. Be fetuent
in a good thing. Gala.iiii. Be folishe in this world.i. Cor.iii. Be holy in
your conversation. i. Pet.i. Believe and be saved. John.iii. v. vi. xi Believe my
works. John.x. Believe and do greater works. etc. John.xiiii. Believe not every
sprite.i. John.iiii. Be rather a minister then a master. Math.xx. Better it is
to be single, the^ to be married.i. co.vii Better it is not to eat, then to
offend.i. Cor.viii. Better it is not to know what good is, then afterward to
do evil.ii. Pet.ii. Be perfect. Math.v. Roma.iiii. Be not children in wit, but
in malice.i. Cor.xiiii. Be not weary of well doing. Gala.vi Be content with
thine estate. Philip.iiii. Be swiste to hear, slow to speak. Iaco.i. Be rich
in good works.i. Timo.vi. Bear one another burden. Gala.vi. Be angry and
sin not. Ephe.iiii. Beware of evil doers. Phil.iii. Beware of false
prophets. Math.vii. Blasphemy against the. etc. mat.xii. mar.iii. luc.xii.
Blessed are the poor, with other. Mat.v. Lu.vi. Blessed are the dead in god.
Apo.xiiii. Blind led the blind. Mat.v. Luke.vi. Blood and body of Christ.i.
Corin.x. Bread of god. John.vi Bread of life. John.vi. Bread ye Christ does
give is his flesh. John.vi. Breakyng of bread. Act.ii. Branch cannot bear
fruit of it self. John.xv Book of life. Apo.xx. Burning lake. Apoc.xxi. Birth
of Christ. Math.i. Bind and lose. Math.xviii. By a swearde. Luke.xxii. Bishops
and their qualities.i. Timo.iii. Titum.i.
C.
Capernaum. Math.xi. Care not for the body. Math.vi. Care not for raiment.
Math.vi. Care not for to morrow. Math.vi. Cast not pearls before swine.
Math.vii. Cayphas prophesied. John.xi. Cayphas. John.ii. Cencurions faith.
Math.viii. Lukeix. Christ came to fulfill the law. mat.v. Christ has
pleasure in mercy. Math.ix. Christ came to call. etc. Math* ix. mar.ii. Lukev.
Christ came not to send peace. etc. Math.x. Christ was called a glutton.
Math.xi. Luke.vii. Christ the carpenters son. Math.xiii. Mark.vi. Christ
walked upon the sea. Math.xiiii. Mat.vi. Christ was sent to the lost
Israelites. Math.xv. Christ will not offend kings. Math.xvii. Christ paid
tribute. Math.xvii. Christ came not to be ministered unto. Mark.x. Christ cast
out the sellers and buyers. Mark.xi. Luke.xix. John.ii. Christ was laid in a
manger. Luke.ii. Christ is the resurrection, and fall of many. Lu.ii. Christ
was found in the temple. Luke.ii. Christ came to save men. Lu.ix. John.xii. i.
Ti.i. Christ was obedient to his parente. Luke.ii. Christ continued all night
in prayer. Lukevi Christ shall come suddenly upon man. Luke.xii. Christ swette
drops of blood. Lukexxii. Christ the light of the world. John.ix. Christ
came not to judge the world. John.xii. Christ came to bare witness of truth.
John.xviii. Christ brethed upon his disciples. John.xx. Christ dyed for our
sins. Roma.v. i. Peter.ii. Christ dyed and revived. Roma.xiiii. Christ was
made like to man, and why. Heb.ii. v. Christ was without sin. Heb.v. i.
Peter.ii. Christ by his own blood redeem us. He ix. i. Pet i. Apo.v. Christ
makes intercession for us. Heb.ix. Christ made agreement for our sins.i.
John.iiii Christ's poverty. Math.viii. Lu.ix. Christ's yoke is easies. Mat.xi
Christ's brethren and sisters. mat.xii. mar.iii lu. 8 Christ's spittel.
Mar.vii. viii Christ's later coming. Mar.xiii. Christ's works bear witness
for him. John.v. Christ's minister shall be honored. John.xii. Christ's poverty
enriched us. ii. corin.viii. Christ's priesthode is everlasting. Heb.vii.
Childrens bread is not mete for whelps. mar.vii Children upon the.viii. day
were circum. etc. lu.ii Children of this world, are wyser then the children of
light. Luc.xvi. Children of the resurrection shall never die. Lu xx Choppers and
chaungers of the word. etc. i. Cor.ii. Circumcision of the heart. Romansii.
Circumcision made without hands. col.ii. Commandments two. Math.xxii.
Mar.xii. Coming of the son of man. Math.xxiiii. Confession. Jacob.v.
Comforter. John.xiiii. xvi. Comforter shall judge the world. etc. John.xvi.
Clyme not to hye. Luke.xii. Cloven tongues. Act.ii. Coals of fire. Romansxii.
Cornelius worshipped Peter. Acts.x Cornelius prayers. Act.x. Correct thy self
or thou correct other. Mat.xvii Correct men's fautes secretly. Mat xviii.
Corner stone. Lu.xx. Act.iiii. Ephe.ii. i. Pet.ii. Covetous men ydoll
worshippers. Ephe.v. Covetousness is the rote of all evil. i. Timo.vi.
Creatures of god are good. i. Tim.iiii. Cretians are liars. Tit.i. Croune* of
righteousness. ii. Timo.iiii Cup of cold water. Math.x. Mar.ix.
D.
David's mind of Christ's resurrection. Act.ii. Days of work are six.
luc.xiii Day of salvation. ii. Cor.vi. Deacons. i. Timo.iii. Deeds of the law
do not justify. Romansiii. Gal.ii. Deeds of the flesh. Gala.v. Deeds shall
berewarded. Apoca.xxi. Defraude noman in bargaining. i. These.iiii. Deny god,
and he shall deny the. Mat.x. ii. Ti.ii. Death and resurrection of the dead.
etc. i. Cor.xv. Death shall fly from man. Apoca.ix Division destroys
kingdoms. mat.xii. mat.iii. Division causes desolation. Luke.xi. Difference
of days. Roma.xiiii. Divorce and for what cause. Math.v. xix. Mark.x. Do as
ye would be done to. Mat.vii. Lu.vi. Do as the priest byddeth you. Math.xxiii
Do all thing in love. i. Cor.xvi. Do nothing grudgyngly. ii. Cor.ix. Do good
unto all men. Gala.vi. Do nothing for vain glory. Phil.ii. Do all things in
the name of Jesus. Colloss.iii. Do nothing parcially. i. Timo.v. Doers of the
law shall be justified. Roma.ii. Doers shall be saved. Math.vii. Domes day with
wonderful signs. Math.xxiiii Luke.xxi. ii. These.v. ii. Pet.iii. Apoca.vi Domes
day and the time thereof is unknown to the angels. Math.xxiiii. mar.xiii
Draw one way. Philip.ii. Drunkardes with such other shall not inherit
heaven. i. Cor.vi.
E.
Endure to the end and be saved. Math.x. xxiiii. Mark.xiii. Apo.ii. Iaco.i.
Enter in at the strayte gate. Math.vii. Epheta. Mark.vii. Earthly men speak of
earthly things. John.iii. Eat not with fornicatours.i. Cor.v. Eat but
offend not. Romansxiiii Enoch and Elias. Apo.xi. Esteem not thyselfe more then
needs. Roma.xii. Esau sold his byrthright. Heb.xii. Every tree is known by
his fruit. Lu.vi. Every man shall bear his own burden. Gala.vi. Every knee
does bow to the name. etc. Philip.ii. Every man shall know god. Heb.viii. Every
man at gods coming shall se him. Apo.i. Evil doers hate the light. John.iii.
Examine thy self or ever thou receive.i. Cor.xi. Excommunicacion.i. Cor.v.
Exercise of the body profits but little.i. Ti.iiii.
F
False christ's. Mar.xiii. False prophets.ii. Pet.ii. Fast, and how men should
fast. Mat.vi Fasting with prayer drives out devils. mat.xvii. Fasting and
praying. Act.xiii. xiiii. i. Corin.vii. Faith, as a grain of mustard seed.
Mat.xvii. Faith and the power thereof. Math.xxi. Mar.xi. Faithful servant.
Luke.xix. Faith justifies man. Roma.iii. Gala.ii. Faith without love is
nothing.i. Cor.xiii. Faithful men are the children of Abraham. ga.iii Faith
and the definition there of. Heb.xi. Faith without deeds. Iaco.ii, Faith
overcomes the world.i. John.v Father and the son do al one thing. John.v
Father of all liars. John.viii. Fathers must lay up for their children.ii.
Co..xii. Fear him that may hyl both body and soul. mat.x Fear to fall into
the hands of god. Heb.x. Fear has no perfectnes.i. John.iiii. Feed Christ's
flock willingly.i. Pet.v. Fire of hell. Math.v. xviii. mar.ix. Fire and pain
everlasting. Math.xxv. Mar.xi. Fire shall try man's works.i. Cor.iii. Fylthy
communicacion. Ephe.iiii. Fyshers of men. Mark.i Luke.v. Fygge tree. Math.xxi.
Fleshly men cannot please god. Romansviii. Flesh and the sprite are contrary.
Gal.v. Follow Christ, and how. Math.xvi. mar.viii. lu. ix Folishnes and weakness
of god.i. Cor.i. Folishe questions ii. Timo.ii. Tit.iii. Forgive thy brother.
Math.xix. Forgive one another. Mat.xviii Forgive and be forgeuen. Mar.xi.
Luke.vi. Forgive him that repents. Luke.xvii. Fornicatours do sin against
their. etc.i. Cor.vi. Forsake for the love of God. Math.xix. Mar.x. Four
beasts. Apo.iiii.
G.
Gates two, a strayte and a wide. Math.viii. Gates of hell. Math.xvi. Gestes,
and what manner of gestes. etc. Luke.xiiii. Generacions from Abraham, to
Christ. Math.ii. Give good measure. Lu.vi. God of stones can raise up the
children of Abraham Math.iii. Luke.iii. God only must be worshipped.
Math.iiii. God does good to friend and foo. Math.v. God is to be beloved above
al thing. Math.x God must be honored with heart and mouth. ma.xv God shall
reward every man after his deeds. Math.xvi. Roma.ii. Apoca.ii. God is in the
mids of them that are gathered in his name. Math.xviii. God is only good.
Math.ix. Mat x. God is always with us. Math.xxvii. God will aduenge the elect.
Lu.xviii. God made all things. John.i. God cannot be seen. Joan.i. God gives
not his spirit by measure. John.iii. God must be worshipte in spirit
John.iiii. God has given all judgment. etc. John.v. God hears no sinners.
John.ix. God dwells not in temple made with. etc. Ac.vii. God is not
perciall. Act.x. God those the foolyshe and weak things of the world.i.
Corin.i. God gives increase of all things.i Cor.iii. God must judge and not
man.i. Cor.iiii. God suffers not manne to be tempted above his strength.i.
Cor x. God loves a cherefull geuer.ii. Cor.ix. God works all thing in man.
Phil.ii. God tries our hearts.i. These.ii. God has called us with an holy
calling.ii. Ti.i. God does not forget our works. Heb.vi. God loves those he
chasteneth. Heb.xii. Apo iii. God does tempte no man. Iaco.i. God would have no
man lost.ii. Pet.iii. God shall come with thousand of saints. Jude.i God will
come upon man as a thief. Apoca.iii. vi. Gods word only saves man.
Math.viii. Gods word shall not. etc. mat.xxiiii. mar.xiii. lv. xxi Gods
messenger. Mark.i. Gods great love to the world. John.iii. Gods friends.
John.xv. Gods works do declare his godhead. Roma.i. Gods kindenes ledeth a man
to repen. Roma.ii. Gods judgments are unsearchable. Roma.xi. Gods grace
does iustifye. Roma.iii. Gods liberality.ii. Cor.viii. Good works must so
be done. etc. math.v. Good worckes may be done on the sabbath day. Math.xii.
Luc.vi. xiii. John.vii. Good tree good fruit. Math.xii. Good shepeherde.
John.x. Good and perfect gifts are from above. Iaco.i. Gospel of Christ, the
image of god.ii. Cor.iiii. Glory of man.i. Pet.i.
H.
Happy be they that keep the word of god. Luc.xi. Happy servants. Luc.xii.
Happy are the baren. Luc.xxiii. Harvest is great, but few laborers. Math.ix.
Hate father and mother, and follow christ. Luc.xiiii. Hate thy life and keep
it. John.xii. Hate me and hate my father. John.xv. Hatred brings darcknes.i.
John.ii. Heard of swyne. Mat.viii. Mark.v. Luc.viii. Heaven must be taken by
violence. Math.xi. Heavenly wisdom. Iaco.iii. He that has, shall have more.
Math.xiii. xxv. Mar.iiii. Luc.viii. xix. He that is leest, shall be greatest.
Luc.ix. He loves god that keeps his commandments. John.xiiii. He that say
the that he is without sin. John.i. He that hates his brother is a man
slear.i. Io.iii. Here and then be doing. Luc.vi. Heavens rejoice at the
repentance of a sinner. Luc.xv. Hyd and close things shall be known. Math.x.
Hired servants. John x. House of god, is a house of prayer. Math.xxi. Mar.xi.
Luc.xix. Hospitalite. Heb.xiii. How man should love is lord god. marcke.xii
Humble thy self, and be exalted. Luc.xiiii. How man's body shall rise.i.
Cor.xv. Husbans love your wives. Ephe.v. Collo.iii.
I
Jesus the mediator of the new testament. he.ii. I am the true way. John.xv.
Idle words. Math.xii. Jesus a savior. Math.i. Jesus first sermon. Math.iiii.
Jesus was baptized of John. mar.i. Jesus after John was taken, began. etc.
Mark.i Jesus the son of the highest. Luc.i. Jesus meat. John.iiii. Jerusalem.
Math.v. Jesus is our advocate.i. John.ii. John the baptiste. Mat.iii. xi.
mar.i. Luc.i. John left his father to follow christ. mat. 4. mar.i John's
garments, meat and drink. mar.i. John was filled with the holy spirit.
Luc.i. John for joy sprange in his mothers belly. Luc.i. John the prophet of
the highest. Luc.i. John's preaching. Luc.iii. John baptized with water, christ
with fire. luc. 3. John.i. Act.i. John gods messanger. Luc.vii. Jonas.
math.xii. Joseph a man of perfection. math.i. Joseph fulfylleth the angels
command. math.i. Joseph ruler of all Egypt. Acts.vii. If an angel from
heaven do preach. etc. Gala.i. Inner man delight in the love of god. Roma.vii.
Ipocrites pray openly, and to be seen. Math.vi. It is not given to every man,
to know the secrets of heaven. Math.xiii. Lu.viii Jews may not company with
alienes. Act.x. Judge not. Math.vii. Romansxiiii. Judge not afte the utter
apperaunce. John.vii. Judge thy self truly.i. Cor.xi. Judgment mercyles.
Iaco.ii. Judas hanged him self. Acts.i. Iustemen shall shine like the son,
Math.xiii.
K
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. math.x. Kingdom of god. Roma.xiiii. i.
Cor.iiii. Kings three, ye star, with their offerynges. mat.ii. Keys of heaven.
math.xvi. King Herod eaten with worms. Acts.xii. Keye of knowledge. Luc.xi.
Keep your vessel in holiness.i. These.iiii.
L.
Labor for the eternal meat. John.vi. Labourer is worthy of his reward.
luck.x. Lamb of god. John.i. Lay from you that old man. Ephe.iiii. Lazarus.
luc.xvi. Law of god shall never perish. Luc.xvi. Leest and the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven. Math.v. Lend but look for no gain. Luck.vi. Leper
must show him self to ye pressed. mar.i. iii. v. Let sleep your nets. Luc.v.
Let not sin raygne in your bodies. Roma.vi. Let there be no dissension
among you.i. cor.i. Letter and the sprete differ.ii. Cor.iii. Let your words
be poudred with salt. Col.iiii. Let the righteous be more righteous. Apo.xxi.
Leave wordly things and possess heaven. luc.xviii. Leuytes paid tithes.
Hebre.vii. Lybette is where the sprete of god is.ii. Cor.iii. Life eternal.
John.xvii. Live after the flesh and dye, Roma.viii. Like pleasure like pain,
Apo.xviii. Light of the world, Math.v. Lie unto the holy ghost. Acts.vi Lock
not back. Luc.ix. Lord go from me. Luc.v. Lose thy life and save it.
Luc.xvii. Lot fyl on Mathias. Acts.i. Love your enemies. Math.v. Luc.vi. Love
declares christ's disciples. John.xiii. Love fulfylleth the law. Roma.xiii.
Love excels faith and hope.i. Cor.xiii. Love covers sin.i. Pet.iiii.
Love brings light.i. John.ii. Love not the world.i. John.ii. Love in deed
and verite.i. John.iii. Love casts out fear.i. John.iiii. Love one
another.ii. John.i.
M.
Make friends of the wicked mammon. Luc.xvi. Magdalen wrought a good work
upon christ. Math.xxvi. mar.xiiii. John.xii. Magdalens sins are forgeuen.
Luc.vii. Man lives be the word of god. mat. 4. Luc. 4. Man is known be his
deeds. mat.vii. Manne be another man's faith may be helped. Math.ix. Luc.v.
Manne can not separate that god has coupled. Mar.x. Man to abide with his
wife shall leave all thing. Marcke.x. Manne if he wylbe saved must be borne of
water and the sprite. John.iii. Manne is gods temple.i. Cor. iii. vi. ii.
Cor.vi. Man is the woman's head.i. Cor.xi. Ephe.v. Man is the glory of god.i.
Cor.xi. Man ought not to cover his head.i. Cor.xi. Manne shall be rewarded after
the worckes of his body.ii. Cor.v. Manne was created unto good worckes.
Ephe.ii Man wrestleth against the devil. Ephe.vi. Man shall once dye. Heb.ix.
Man shall vanyshe away as the flower of grass. Iaco.i. Manna. Apo.ii. Man's
angel beholds the face of god. mat. 18. Man's conscience and though shall
bear witness with him or against him. Roma.ii. Man's will is accepted according
to that he has.ii. Cor.viii. Man's end shall be according to his deed.ii.
cor.xi. Man's life. Iaco.iiii. Many and diverse walkers. Phil.iii. Mathen or leuy
the customer. mar.ii. Luc.v. Martha martha. Luc.x. Melchisedech. Hebre.vii.
Members that are noisome, must be cast away. math.v. Many are called and few
chosen. mat.xxii. Men love darcknes more then light. John.iii. Meat does not
make manne acceptable to god.i. Cor.viii. Many men pervert Paul's seynges,
to their own destruction.ii. Pet.iii. Mortify your members. Col.iii. Mortifye
the deeds of the body and live. Romansviii. Moses and Helias in the monte, and
whereof they spoke. Luc.ix. Moses learning. Act.vii. Mouth does speak of the
abundance of the heart. math.xii. Much people and few preachers. math.ix.
N
Name of Jesus. Phi.ii. Name of Jesus the name of salvation. Act.iiii. Nazareth
a city of galile. marcke.i. New wine in new vessels. math.ix. marcke.ii.
Luck. v. No man can serve two masters. Mat.vi. luc.xvi. No man without sin.
John.vii. No man knows the son, nor yet the father. Luck. x. No man
comes to the father but by Christ. John.xiiii. No man does good. Roma.iii.
No man can tame the tongue. Iaco.iii. Nothing so hyd but it shall be known.
luc. viii. xii. Nothing can depart manne from the love of god. Roma.viii.
O.
Obey the powers, and officers. Roma.xiii. Tite.ii. Hebre.xiii. i. Pet.ii. Obey
for conscience sake. Roma. xiii. Offering of the poor wyddowe. Mar.xii.
luck.xxi. Old wine is pleasaunter then new. luc.v. Old things are gone.
Apo.xxi. One brother may mary the others wife, and how. Marcke.xii. One thing
is necessary. luc.x. One flock and one shepeherde. John.x. One word
fulfylleth the law. Gala. v. Our bodies are the members of Christ.i. cor.vi.
Our ablenes comes of god.ii. Cor.iii.
P.
Paul and Barnabas. Acts.xiii. Paul a maker of tents. Acts.xviii. Paul's
miracles. Acts.xix. Paul is detter to all nacyons. Roma.i. Paul is not ashamed
of Christ's gospel. To.i. Paul does tame his body.i. Cor.ix. Paul was
unquieted in his flesh.ii. Corin.xii. Paul received his gospel by the
revelation of Christ. Gala.i. Paul withstode Peter. Gala.ii. Paul's crown and
glory.i. These.ii. Paul's Epistles in diverse places are hard to be
understood.ii. peter.iii Peter and Andrewe follow Christ. mat.iiii. mar.i.
Peter rebuked Christ. mat.xvi. mar.viii. Peter is rebuked of Christ. mat.xvi.
Mar.viii. Peter baptized in the name of Jesus. Act.ii. viii. Peter by prayer is
delivered. act.xii. Peter's shadow. Act.v. Perfect is he. etc. Math.ix. Peace
be here. mat.x. luke.x. Pharisees eat not with unwashed hands. mar. vii
Pleasure shall have pain. lukexvi. Plants not planted by god. mat.xv. Pilate.
John.xix. Poor folk ye shall always have with you, but not me. math.xxvi.
mark.xiiii. John.xii. Pray secretly. math.vi. Pray but babble not. math.vi
Pray and forgive. Mark.xi Pray for kings and rulers.i. Timo.ii. Prayers of
saynctes. Apoca.v. Praise not thy self.ii. Corin.x. Preaching of the cross.i.
Cor.i. Preach the gospel and live of the gospel.i. cor.ix Preachers are worthy
double honor.i. Tim.v. Preach in season and out of season.ii. Timo.iiii.
Pride will have a fall. Luke.xviii. Price of the things sold, were delivered to
the Apostles. Acts.iiii. Prophets have desired to se that ye se. Mat.xiii.
Prophets are not without honor. etc. Math.xiii. mark.vi. Luke.iiii.
John.iiii. Properties of scribes. mark.xii. Luke.xx. Promises were made to the
sede of Abraham, and not to the seeds Gala.iii. Prove thine own worckes
Gala.vi. Put up the swearde. math.xxvi. Pure and undefiled devotion. Iaco.i.
Q.
Quycke sacrifice. Roma.xii.
R.
Racha. math.v. Receive not those, that brynges no christ's learning.ii.
John.i. Reconcile the to thy brother, and then offer. math.v. Rejoice but
wherein. Luc.x. Rejoice in thy infirmites.ii. Cor.xi. xii. Rejoice in the cross
of christ. Gala.vi. Rejoice in temptation. Iaco.i. Rejoice in god.ii. Cor.x.
Redeem the time. Ephe.v. Reward of the blessed is great. math.v. Reward of
sin. Roma.vi. Remission of sins. John.xx. Resist not wrong. math.v.
Resist not the powers. Roma.xiii. Resist the devil.i Pet.v. Rich men enter
hardly into heaven. Math.xix. marcke.x. Luc.x. Rich men fall into diverse
snares.i. Timo.vi. Rivers of waters of life. John.vii. Ryghteousnes comes be
faith. Roma.iii.
S
Saboth day was made for man. marcke.ii. Salute no man by the way. Luc.x.
Salvation comes of the Iues. John iiii. Salomons temple was.xlvi. years a
building. John.ii. Sandals. marcke.vi. Salt of the earth. math.v. Salvation
comes of works. Ephe.ii. Saints call for vengaunce. Apo.vi. Satan knew
Christ. mat.viii. mar.i. iii. v. iii. iiii. Satan of himself can do nothing.
math.viii. Satan does change himself into an angel of light.ii. Cor.xi.
Saul Saul. Act.ix. Saduces deny the resurrection. Ac.xxiii. Sects are
necessary.i. Cor.xi. Scripture concludes al things under sin. Gala.iii.
Scripture given by the inspiration of.ii. Tim.iii. Second death. Apo.xx. xxi
Seek first for the kingdom of heaven. mat.vi. Seek not to be deuorsed.i.
Cor.vii. Seek for heavenly things. collo.iii. Sell all that thou have.
Lukexviii. Separate thy self from fond axers of questions.i. Timo.vi. Servant
is not above his lord. Math.x. Luke.vi. John.xiii. xv. Servants be obedient
to your masters. col.iii. i. Pet.ii. Shake of the dust of thy feet. Math.x.
Mark.vi. Luke.ix. x. Sinners must be openly rebuked.i. Timo.v. Sins to death,
and not to death.i. John.v. Simon I have prayed for thee. Lukexxii. Sorrow
shall turn to joy. John.xvi. Sow spiritual things and reap carnal.i.
Cor.ix. gala.vi. Sow little and repe little.ii. Corin.ix. Sorrow not for the
dead.i. These.iiii. Speak one thing.i. Cor.i. Spirit of the father spoke in
the apostles. mat.x. Spirits have no bones. Luc.xxiiii. Spirit searches all
things.i. Cor.ii. Strive to enter in at the straight gate. Luke.xiii. Steven
saw Jesus standing on the right hand of his father. Acts.vii. Steven was
stoned to death. Act.vii. Stand not in thy own conceate. Roma.xv. Strive
lawfully and be crouned. ii. Tim.ii. Strive not about words. ii. Tim.ii.
Suffer for well doing. i. Pet.ii. iii. Swear not at all. Mat.v. Iac.v.
Surfeting and drunkenness. Luc.xxi.
T.
Take no thought for the body. Luke.xii. The tree that brings not good
fruit, must be burnte. Mat.iii. The things that defile man. Math.xv.
mar.vii. The things that come out of the heart. Mat.xv. The Apostels anointed
many sick folk with oil Mar.vi. Jacob.v. The works that shall follow them
that believe. Mark.xvi. The heart is where the treasure is. Luke.xii. The dead
shall hear Christ's voice. John.v. The fathers will. John.vi. The thief
enters in by the wynd owe. John.x. The thing that is of god cannot be
destroide. Ac.v. The gift of God cannot be bought. Ac.viii. The testimony of
our conscience is our rejoicing ii. corinth.i. The tree of life. Apo.ii. The
end of the commandment is love. i. Tim.i. Three sorts of chaste men.
Math.xix. There is but one master, and one father. mar. v. There are three
things that bear record in heaven, and three in earth. i. John.v. The
institucion of the sacrament of the altar. Math xxvi. Mar.xiiii. Luke.xxii. i.
Cor.xi. This infirmity is not unto death. John.xi. Things to be abstayned
fro. Act.xv. Things written are for our learning. Romansxv. Things prepared
for those that love god. 1. cor.ii Things seen and not seen. ii. Cor.iii. Thou
shall not kill. Math.v. Thou shall not be angry. Math.v. Thou shall not commit
aduoutrie. Math.v. Thou shall not look on a woman to lust her. Matthew.v. Thou
shall not forswear thy self. Math.v. Thou art Christ the son of the living
god. Math.xvi. Mark.ii. John.vi. Thou art Peter. Mat.xvi. Thou shall not
wash my fete. John.xiii. Tithes. Luke.xi. Math.xxiii. Heb.vii. To sit on my
right hand. etc. Math.xx. Mar.x. Touch no women. i. Cor.vii. Tribulacion the
right way to heaven. Act.xiiii. Tribulacion brings patience. Roma.v. Trust
not in riches. Mark.x. i. Tim.vi Truth makes man fre. John.viii. Two coats.
Mark.vi. Luke.iii. ix. Treasure, and where it must be gathered. mat.vi. Turn
thy cheke. Math.v. Luke.vi.
V. W.
Veil of the temple. Mar.xv. Watch and be ready. Mat.xxiii. xxv Watch and be
sober. i. These.v. Watch and pray. math.xxiiii mar.xiiii. Water of life.
John.iiii. Waver not with every wind of doctrine. Ephe.iiii. Walk in the day
and night. John.xi. Walk while ye have light. John.xii. Walk in a new life.
Roma.vi. Walk honestly. Roma.xiii. Walk in humblenes of mind. Ephe.iiii.
Walk circumspectly. Ephe.v. Weddyng garment. math.xxii Wedlock must be had
in price. Hebreb.xiii. werers of soft clothyng. math.xi. Women must learn of
their husbands. i. cor.xiiii Wemens garments. i. tuno.ii. i. Pet.iii. Women
may not teach. i. Timo.ii. Women must teach their daughters, and what.
Tit.ii. Vessel of honor and dishonor. ii. Tim.ii. Vessel of wrath and
mercy. Roma.ix. Women must be under obedience and in silence. i. corinth.xiiii.
Women are the glory of man. i. corinth.xi. Weapons of our war. ii. corinth.x
Whelps, and of the crommes that fall from the table. matthewe.xv. Hole men
have no need of Physic. mat.ix. mar. ^ Who is greatest in the kingdom of
heaven. matthewe.xviii. Whom a man should fear. Luke.xii. Who can endure the
last day. apoc.vi. Who are in the presence of god. apoc.vii. Why smytest thou
me. John.xviii. Wicked men shall be cast into a turns of fire. Math.xiii.
Whereto man obeys, thereto he is servant. Roma.vi. Wind blows where he
lusts. John.iii. Wise as serpents. Math.x. Wydowes. i. Timo.v. Virgins
follow the Lord. apo.xiiii. Woe be to the offender. mat.xviii. mar.ix. Luc.xvii
Woe be to the rich. Luc.vi. Woe be to you phariseis. Luc.xi. Woe be to preachers
if they preach not. i. Cor.ix. Workman is worthy his meat. Mat.x. Works
that follow the faithful. Mar.xvi. Works of the world are euel. John.vii.
Work and of duty recover thy reward. To.iiii. Work and eat. i. These.v.
Works follow the dead. apo.xiiii. Worldly wisdom. i. Cor.iii. Word of god
sanctifies al creatures. i. Timo.iiii Word of god is quick. Heb.iiii.
Worldly frendshippe. Iac.iiii. Worship god and not men, nor angels. apo.xix.
xxi. Word of god lasts for ever. i. Pet.i. Worm of conscience. mar.ix.
Woman is subject to man. Romansvii Unprofitable servants. Luke.xvii.
Y.
Ye, ye, nay, nay. Math.v. Iaco.v.
Z.
Zacharias and Elizabeth. Luke.i.
Imprinted at London at Flietebridge by Thomas Gaultier, at the costs and
charges of Rychard Kele dwelling in in the Poultrye.


