THE Jesuits Catechism.

OR EXAMINATION OF their doctrine.

Published in French this present year 1602. and now translated into English.

With a Table at the end, of all the maine points that are disputed and
handled therein.

Printed Anno Domini. 1602.

TO ALL ENGLISH Catholics, that are faithful subjects to Queen ELIZABETH,
our most dread Sovereign: The Secular Priests that are diversely afflicted, do
wish all prosperity, justice, peace, joy, and happiness in our Lord Jesus
Christ.
IT cannot be unknown unto you all (very reverend and dear Catholics) what
great and bitter contention (raised up from hell no doubt through the
malignitie of satan) has lately fallen out amongst us, who are your
spiritual guides, and ought to have been unto you examples of humility,
charity, unity, piety, and a whole school of religious virtues. And we are
fully persuaded, that the consideration of it, does very greatly move and
perplex your catholic hearts with manifold griefs: especially, seeing we are
on both sides so confident in our own so contrary courses.

The Jesuits say unto us: Woe be to that man, by whom the scandale comes: We
the secular Priests, say unto them; Woe be unto him by whom the scandale
comes. Now whether they apply the words of our Savior Christ more rightly to
us, or we to them, therein lies the doubt, and that is the difficulty: We
both do plead for our selves: and you with the Church; must judge betwixt us
both as vmpiers of our cause. The woe is of a large extent, and will be too
heavy to be undergone by any. Expedit ei, (as the text says) it is expedient,
or far better it were (say some) for such a man, that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he drowned in the bottom of the Sea. In such a contrary
application of this so terrible a woe, you (our ancient children and faithful
Catholics) shall show your selves right worthy of these honorable titles,
and greatly benefit both us the Secular priests, and the others the esteemed
religious Jesuits, to the preventing in part of this heavy censure; if you
continue steadfast in the doctrine which you have received of us, conjoined in
one a like unity of faith, hope and charity; and shall take no offense at
these our quarrels and unbrotherly garboyles. For as S. Hierom says; Qui
scandalizatur parvulus est: He that is scandalized is but a weakling. Maiores
enim scandala non accipiunt: sound and resolute Catholics do not take
scandale at anything.

There was long since an earnest disputation amongst the Apostles, who among
them should be greater: Math. 18.
and Christ himself was chosen by them as vmpire and Judge paramount to
determine the controversy. Who accordingly hearing the matter, propounded unto
him in these words: Quis putas mayor est etc: who think thou is greater?
decided their jar, with some sharpness in this sort as the text reports.
Jesus calling unto him a little child, set him in the midst of them and said:
Amen I say unto you, unless you be converted and become as children, (that is
says Lyra in the gloss upon that place) unless you be couerted ab elatione
scil: superbiae et ambitione maioritatis, from pride and ambitious affectation
of greatness, and become humble and simple without malice or gall of sin, you
shall never enter into the kingdom of God. And furthermore, foreseeing in his
divine prescience, how such contention for superiority might prove very
dangerous in the Church, and wound the tender consciences of many weak
nouices in the catholic faith: this most wise Arbitrator (in whom be all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge bid) does continue his commination to the
better suppressing of that so dangerous an enormitie: saying, He that shall
scandalize one of these little ones, that believe in me, it is expedient for
him that a Millstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be drowned in the
depth of the sea. Upon which words the said Lyra writes in this manner, Et si
hoc generaliter dicit contra omnes: tamen hic specialiter contra Apostolos, qui
hic de dignitate vide^tur contendere, et in hoc poterant alios perdere:
Although Christ speaks these words generally to all: yet he speaks them
here specially against his Apostles, who do seem to contend here for
dignity: and therein might have overthrown many a soul no doubt, and
harmless heart.

Of these things we have thought good to put you that be Catholics in mind;
that thereby you may consider how the chiefest servant and children of God
have been subject to this ambitious humor of affecting sovereignty, and
seeking for superiority, dominion, and precedencie. John the Patriarch of
Constantinople, (though otherwise a worthy Prelate in the church of God) did
co^tende for the supremacy with Saint Gregory, that peerless pastor,
prince, prelate, and pope of Rome. And here at home it is not unknown to
those that have read or heard our English histories, what stir and
hart-burning there has been in former times, betwixt the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York about such matters, being in other respects all of them
very notable men. But never was there such an attempt in our opinions for
superiority amongst Catholics, (for we will not at this time meddle with
any heretics) since the first preaching of the Gospel of Christ, as now
lately is set on foot unhappily by the Jesuits mischievous practices. Their
order is declared by Pius Quintus to be the fifth order, Mendicantium
predicatorum, Of the begging Preachers or Friars. Ignatius their founder,
pretended to have the^ called Fratres minimi, The lowest, least, or meanest
sort of Friars: and termed this company, Io. Osorus obitu Ignatij.
Societatem minimam, The meanest or least Society: not in regard that they
were few in number at the first: but as a great Jesuit says, To signify
thereby, that his Society should yield honor to all other sorts of religious
persons as to their elder brethren, ac plane patribus, and as indeed to their
Fathers. But tell us we pray you; have these Minimes and begging Friars taken
this course? We wish with all our hearts they had taken it.

That the Apostles before they were fully instructed by the holy Ghost, should
have contended amongst themselves, who should be the greatest, being every one
of them in so high favor with their Master Christ, as they were: it might
have admitted some tolerable excuse, had not our Saviors Woe been mentioned
in the Scriptures, and denounced plainly against them, as a dreadful doom by a
sharp censure of a sorrowful clause. There wanted not some probable
pretenses; why Patriarchs and Archbishops might grow into variable oppositions
for the prerogatives of their places, themselves being personages by calling of
some equality. But that the meanest, least, and lowest order of begging Friars
should contend, not among themselves who should be the greatest: but with their
elder brethren, ancients and fathers, the most Reverenced, Respected, and
Religious persons of every profession: and not that only, but over and
besides all this, to strive to bring under their girdles the Secular Clergy,
the chief state of Priestly preheminency is a wonder as we think, the like
whereof was never heard before amongst Catholics, Ecclesiastical, Religious
or Temporal, since Christ's time till of late days, that the Jesuits are
grown to such a stubborn and unbridled head, as we fear will breed great
mischief in the Church of God, before they be well reformed and brought into
order again.

In the other contentions before mentioned, there was no fault as we takeit,
either in Saint Peter for defending his supremacy, or in Saint Gregory the
great, for mayntaining the dignity of the Sea Apostolic: or yet in the
Archbishops of Canterbury, for standing upon their right and interest, granted
before unto them by sundry of Saint Peter's successors, for the chief primacy
in and over the Church and ecclesiastical State in England; but in those that
sought to impugn them, was all the offense that was committed. And that is our
case just: who being Secular Priests now in England and elsewhere, do stand
at this present in a strong opposition against the Jesuits. We labor not for
any extraordinary superiority over them, not emulate in evil sense any of
their virtues or good endeavors (if any happily be in them:) nor intrude our
selves into their harvest, nor pry into their actions more then we are
compelled, nor insinuate our selves into their favors, nor desire to have any
dealing at all with them. Only we would be glad to keep our own places in
the Church of Christ, (which we and all our predecessors Secular Priests have
ever held, since the first propagation of the Gospel of Christ and Christian
Catholic faith and religion, by the holy Apostles after our Saviors
ascension:) and that now these begging Friars by faction and false pretenses
might not tyrannise over us.

It is strange to consider how mightily they are possessed, with pride and
ambition, and how far they have thereby prevailed. Being men of learning,
they scorn to be subject to the orders of any University: being preachers,
they will be exempted from the controlement of all or any Bishops: being
Friars, you kill them, if you tell them of any cloisters, or wish them to live
retired like right religious men indeed, or to keep the general statutes and
rules of all other religious orders. Being natural borne subjects in many
countries where they remain, no civil Magistrate, Prince, or Potentate, must
control them, nor once seem to call them to the least account for any of
their proceedings. And that which is most, being men that profess such zeal,
charity, and inward mortification, such humility and godliness: Nay, being men
forfooth of perfection ( Est enim hoc institutum viroru^ plane perfectorum:
this our institution, John Osorius.
as the said Jesuit says: is of such men as are indeed perfect:) they refuse
notwithstanding to accompany the rest of the Clergy both Secular Regular,
and religious, and the whole Church of God in one of her most soleme and
public services done to his divine Majesty, which we call our great and
solemn processions: because that by the custom of the Church, they being the
youngest and meanest, or minimes of all Mendicants or begging Friars, were to
have come last behind all the rest in that most honorable service.

But to come to our selves, and to their affectation of superiority over us,
and that in these dismal days, and in the midst of our other domestical
calamities. The Roman College, for the bringing up of students to become
Priests for England, was no sooner erected, but by sleights and false
calumniations, they got the superiority and government of it. Upon their
coming into England, how they labored to creep into men's consciences: to
insinuate themselves into Nobles and great persons estates, and to discredit
us, many Catholics do know: We our selves from time to time did easily find
the smart and inconueniene of it: and many of us to our friends have often
bewailed and complayed with sighs and tears of such their unchristian dealing
with us. Our brethren then prisoners at Wisbish, who for their virtue,
constancy and most Christian Catholic conversation, and manner of charitable
proceeding in all their actions, had worthily merited the name, not only of
the visible, but also of the most afflicted Catholic Church in England:
continued in that honor and reputation with all men, even from the beginning
of their duresse until some seven or eight years agon, that Friar Weston a
Jesuit would needs be their superior. Friar Garnet the provincial of the
Jesuits in England, was in reasonable tune with some of our brethren (very
ancient, reverend, and learned Priests) until they seemed to dislike this
attempt of Friar Westons: and then he brake with them in such bitterness as he
discovered himself very manifestly: saying, That he saw no cause why the
Secular Priests might not content themselves well enough to be subject to the
Fathers of the Society of Jesus, and added some loose reasons of that his
assertion. When both he and his subject Friar Weston perceived, that their plot
was dasned at Wisbish, and how odious a thing it grew to be, that men who
profess religion should aspire to such an unheard of superiority; they
wrought with their grand Captain Friar Parsons, that what they could not work
one way, they might in effect compass it by an other. And thence insued the
authority of our R. Archpriest, procured by most indirect, unlawful and
dishonest means. Which authority is so limited to the directions of the
Jesuits, and as it were confined to their platformes, as whilst he is only
ruled by them, and they by Friar Pasons: it had been peradventure better for
us in regard of our quietness and commodity, that they themselves had bin
appointed our Commanders, Governors and good Masters: for so having attained
directly to that which they aimed at, it is likely they would have been
content. Whereas now because they want but only the bare name of our
Arch-Prelats; their minds are so inflamed against us, as when we took
exception at the manner of our Arch-Priests advancement over us, and held that
course therein, which has ever hitherto been approved in the Church of God:
who but the Jesuits that are wholly exmpted from our Archpriest authority,
and ought to have been strangers in our affairs (had it not been
underhand, their own cause) did then, and ever since oppose themselves with
might and main against us in that action?

A principal Jesuit in Spain tells us diverse strange tales of this his
Society, John Osorius, in obitu Ignatii.
which to our understanding seem to smell of worse matter, then we are willing
to reveal at this present. He says that: Ignace their founder, is the Angel
of whom Saint John spoke, when he said: Quintus Angelus tuba cecinit, The fifth
Angel sounded his trumpet. Furthermore, alluding to another Text, he says:
That Ignatius is the weary and weak Egyptian, whom David took up to fight
the battles of our Lord: and adds, that therefore, as the soldiers cried:
Haec est praeda David: this is the pray of David: Ita nunc societas Vniuersa,
quae a munds tyrannide liberata est, non praeda Ignatij; sed Dauidis dicitur,
non societas Ignatij, sed societas Jesus nuncupatur: so now the whole Society
being delivered from the tyranny of the world, is not called the pray of
Ignatius but of David: not the Society of Ignatius, but of Jesus. And the
reason follows: Quia eos in socios Christus admiserat, because Christ had
admitted them to be his fellows. Afterward also: Nemo ergo dicat: ego sum
Pauli: ego sum Apollo: sed ego sum Christ's: Let no man say, I hold of Paul: I
of Apollo, but I hold of Christ. And let us call our selves, the fellows, not
of Ignatius but of Christ. Also the same great Father affirms: that the
Jesuits in Portugal, have already obtained the name of Apostles, and that
this Society, has so worthly labored in Christ his vineyard: Vt Catholici
omnes Iesuitae dicantur, eo quod Iesuitae eorum omnium duces ac Magistri sint:
As that in these Northren parts of the world, al Catholics are called
Jesuits, because the Jesuits are the leaders of them all, and their Masters.
In like sort he is of opinion: that the fathers of this Society, are the
Angels Clouds, and Doves, whereof the Prophet Esaias writes, saying* Qui sunt
isti qui vt nubes volant; and quasi columbae ad fenestras suas? What Angels,
are these that fly like Clouds, and as Doves to their windows? And again he
says: They are called Angeli, Angels, that is, Messengers: Eo quod maximaru^
rerum legatione fungantur: because they are Ambassadors of the greatest things
or affairs amongst mortal men: Nubes, Clouds, for their swift obedience: and
Columbae, Doves, quia fellis acerbitate caret haec pacifica societas Jesus, quo
nihil admirabilius: for that this peaceable Society of Jesus, has no gall:
as much to say, as it wants all bitterness of gall, spleen, rancour, malice and
revenge: which is as great a wonder as may be. But you will say: quorsum haec:
what of all this: are you silly men the persons that either will or dare take
upon you to confute these things thus published in print by a Spaniard: nay, by
so worthy a Jesuit: and preached for an intro^^ction to make Ignatius a Saint,
or at the least to paint him out for a man fit to be a Saint? Surely whatsoever
we can or dare do (if these follies do not confute themselves sufficiently)
we will not at this time express, as not intending to deal with many of them.
But how true it is, that the name of Christians is abolished in these Northren
Regions, and that we are all now termed Jesuits: and whether all other orders
of Religion that retain the names of their founders, are not here very
shrewdly taxed, and brought to be within the Apostles prohibition: we leave it
to your further consideration. Only for the present we say thus much: that let
the Jesuits be trumpets, David's pray, Jesus companions, Angels and Clouds, or
what else this fellow of theirs the Spanish Jesuit would have them, we much
regard not: so as again for our sakes he will be pleased to strike out the
word Doves. For notwithstanding all the Texts, we do not find them men of such
Douelike minds, and special mortification as they do make show of, but have
their passions and distempered humors as well as some others have. Mark we
beseech you, Ma. Lister.
how one of these Doves (if you will needs have them so termed) does write
against us in a little treatise not past two sheets of paper: because we only
forbore our obedience to our R. Arch-Priests very strange authority (as we
then thought) till we might be further informed of his Holiness pleasure. He
calls us Schismatikes, and men (by one of his inferences) to be cast into
hell: factious persons, dejected with the grief of our own ruin: and says
that we have lost our places amongst Priests: that we are banished from the
holy alter and ministry of the Sacraments: that our judgments are to be
contemned, and that we are condemned of the holy Apostolic Church He terms
us triflers, younglings in Divinity, fools not to be regarded what we say:
men that gather not with Christ: Newters, that do belong to the divided
kingdom, which shall be destroyed, and rebels against the kingdom of Christ.
He affirms further, that we are become Ethnicks and profane laicall persons:
that we ought to be shunned and avoided, as the Jews did shun in times past
the publicans, notorious and known sinners; and that we are infamous persons,
nothing better then south sayers, wisards, and Idolaters. And whereas amongst
other things we alleged, that his Holiness, in erecting our Arch-Presbitership
was misinformed: O mendacium: O notable lie (says this mild Dove) and
therwithall comes upon us again. Quid? What (says he) Numquid factiosis
istis licebit in re grauissima tam impune, tamque impudenter mentiri? Shall it
be lawful for these factious persons, in a matter of most importance to lie so
impudently and go unpunished?

There are also diverse other Pigeons of this flight, that out of question
either have galls, or some other very bitter matter in them, that is
equivalent to any gall whatsoever: Friar Holthy in his long and tedious letter
to a very virtuous Catholic Lady written against us: Friar Garnet in
sundry of his letters both to some of us, and also to others: Also Friar
Parsons in his late Apology: but especially in his (as we take it) last book
entitled: A manifestation of the great folly, and bad spirit of certain
Secular Priests, etc. Some little taste we will give you here of these good
Fathers mortified humor and very meek spirit, out of the said last book.
You have heard the title of it: whereunto that the whole discourse might be
suitable, he insinuates directly in this preface, That we are in a sort
possessed with many wicked spirits. And to seem to have some authority for
it: he applies these words of our Savior Christ unto us, where he says
thus. The unclean spirit went forth, and brought with him seven other spirits
more wicked then himself, and all entering, dwelt there: and the ending of
those men was worse then the beginning. Of six of these devils the chief
substance of all his book does consist; and therefore he names them directly
before he comes to his discourse, and sets them down in express words.
for the contents of his treatise. Wherein his whole drift is, to slander more
honest men then himself, and to misleade and seduce you: as though whatsoever
the Secular Priests have written, in such books, as they have been enforced
this year past to publish, for their own just defense against the Jesuits
calumniations, and bad dealings with them, did proceed only from their folly:
accompanied always with one of these six lying spirits. For example, and to
use his own words: From their manifest folly and bad spirit: from their folly
and passionate spirirt: from their folly and presumptuous spirit: from their
folly and unshamefast spirit: from their folly and malignant spirit, and from
their folly and deceived spirit. With this folly and these six wicked spirits,
he raises up tempests against us by Sea and land, and plays the Exorcist: in
such sort throughout his whole discourse: as if he had been Friar Weston
(another Pidgeon of the same Doue-coate) at Denham, when the time was (whereof
we fear a strange relation) and so deals with our said brethren, as though
either he himself or they (good men) were devils indeed. And shall we say
that this man has no gall in him, but in mildness of his speech and
simplicity of his heart is like a Dove? He that shall with any judgment
read his said treatise, will rather think he was brought up in a Crowes-nest.
Some men are much deceived, if both he and many of his crew: might not for
their stinging and poisoned writings, be better resembled to Hornets and
Dragons, then to so mild a foul as a Dove is reported to be, by all that
write of her.

But certain persons will say unto us: you see not that part of the wallet
that hangs at your own backs. It is true, that we are not ignorant how
greatly some of our said brethren are blamed, and Master Watson chiefly by
many of you (how just soever their cause be) for the bitterness of their
style; and we wish with all our hearts, that they had tempered their pens
better, not in respect of the Jesuits, but of your weakness. God forgive us all
our sins. In multis enim offendimus omnes: For in many things we offend all.
Si quis in verbo non offendit hic perfectus est vir: If any offend nor in his
speeches, he is a perfect man. But yet some further defense may be made of our
brethrens said bitterness: men's general imperfections always considered,
wherewith we often stayne even our best actions.

It must be confessed by all men that are of any understanding, that
sharpness either of speech or style, is not always to be disliked. The old
Prophets, Christ himself, his Apostles, many holy Saints and Fathers; have
used this kind of bitterness and sharp writing when they saw cause. To which
purpose much might be alleged, as also to show that oftentimes, wounds are
better then kisses, fretting tents, corasiues, and incisions, more needful
then gentle, mild, lenitiue, and over hasty skinning plasters. So as hereof
there being no question amongst us, or any other of discretion: the doubt then
is, whether the Jesuits or we have the better cause: and consequently, whether
of us may better pretend the testimony of Gods Spirit, a good conscience, true
zeal, perfect charity, and the practice of Christ, of his Apostles, and of
many ancient fathers, for the sharpenes of our writings.

Master Parsons speaks (in his said manifestation) of his own long and
accustomed practice and experience: where he says: That an evil argument may
sometimes by cunning and smooth handling, or by showing wit and learning, of
zeal or modesty, be made plausible to the vulgar Reader. And indeed therein he
has an especial gift above all men that we know. For no man's writings are
generally more spightfull and galling then his. But it is mixed with such stoods
of Crocodils tears, when he guirdeth most, as that, he then always pretends
such devotion and charity, as though every hard word he uses, went to his
very heart: and that he would not deal so roughly with any of his brethren
for his life, were it not, that (for their good and amendment) he were driven
thereunto of mere necessity. And with these fair pretenses, the simpler sort
are greatly blinded. But by his leave, it is also as certain, that if a true
cause be clearly and at the full delivered, although it be done with no such
hypocritical skill, but with some choler and heat of humor (as zeal sometime
is termed:) he is but likewise a very vulgar Reader, and of a shallow reach,
that will therefore be led to discredit the truth upon so light a ground. Men
of sound judgment will always look to the issue of the matter in question,
and not to the manner of pleading. More therefore of the cause it self,
whereupon this doubt before mentioned does arise. We hope we may truly say it,
as in the sight of God, and without all pharisaical ostentation, that we are
not ambitious: that we seek no exemptions from our lawful superior: that we
honor discipline and embrace it: that we crave to have Bishops to ouer-see,
punish, and control us when we do amiss: and that we labor chiefly in these
disastrous quarrels, to withstand so great an innovation and general disgrace
to all the Seculer Clergy in Christendom, as never yet happened, if we should
yield to be at the check and direction either of Friar Garnet, Friar Parsons,
or any, or all the Jesuits in the world. And we are the rather so earnest
against both them and their plottings to this purpose: because we likewise know
their further practices and most wicked designements, against both our Prince
and country, and how they engaged themselves with the Spaniards, her Majesty's
professed enemies. So as might the Jesuits once bear rule over al both Priests
and people (as let the state look to it in time, for they have further
prevailed here in already then we are glad of:) it would not be long before
this kingdom were brought into a general co^bustion. Is our cause then so just,
and theirs so impious, and should we be silent? Do they say unto us with
Tobias the Ammonite: That do what you can, a Fox shall be able to overthrow
all your opposition: z. Esdras. 4.
The Infanta of Spain shall be your Queen, and that sooner then you look
for: and shall we not say as it is there in the Text? Auds Deus noster quia
facti sumus despectui: convert opprobrium super caput eorum, and da eos in
despectionem in terra captiuitatis. Hear us O our God, hear us: and because
they do despise us and our endeavors, to maintain both the Church and our
country against their machinations, give them over that they may be a despised
and contemptible generation throughout all the world if in time they repent not.

Can any true hearted English Catholic, seeing how the case now stands
betwixt us and these men, be justly offended with this our zeal? Has God made
us anointed priests here amongst you, and shall we see a sword drawn out
against this Land, and not sound out our trumpet to sumon you to battle? One
tells you very plainly in his Latin Appendix (and we suppose it is our R.
Archpriest him self) that Cardinal Allen and Father Parsons, as Moses and
Iosue, iam diu proculdubio occupassent promissionis terram: had long since out
of doubt possessed this Realm of England: nisi quorundam inobedientia atque
ingratissimum obstitisset murmur: had not the disobedience of some, and their
most displeasing murmuring hindered it. It is the manner of our English Jesuits,
and of such as are Iesuited, never to mention Friar Parsons trecheries, but
they join that good Cardinal with him, to mittigate the odiousnes of his
proceedings. But how could they have gotten this land of Promise into their
fingers? Mean they by their attempt 1588? or had they before this time laid
violent hands upon her Majesty? or what had they else done, if some such
impediment as they speak of had not happened? Blessed was that disobedience, and
happy was that murmuring, that delivered this kingdom from such vncatholick
and most traiterous designements. Rather content your selves dear Catholics
to go and dwell in Babylon: then ever seek to obtain the Land of Canaan by
such cruel, barbarous, and Turkish stratagems. Are not such Jesuits or persons
whatsoever Iesuited, worthy to be detested, that dare publish their dislike of
such disobedience and murmr, as has prevented such a Chaos of all
mischiefs, as the conquering of our little land of promise would have brought
with it? Or if we have been too sharp in our encountering of the Giants (as
they falsely term us) are we not to be excused?

And as we would have you to judge of us and the rest of our brethren, that
whatsoever they have written, it proceeded of their love and zeal both to our
Church and Country: so our hearty desire is, that you would think and judge
the like of those right zealous Catholics of other Countries, that have
written against the Jesuits in the like respect, much more sharply then any of
our brethren hitherto have done. For how highly soever the Jesuits are yet in
our books, because you know them not thoroughly: yet are they already become
an odious generation in many places. In the kingdom of Swecia, their very
names are detested. The Clergy of Spain is in great dislike of them. The
religious men generally in all countries do hate them. At this instant, there
is a great and most dangerous contention in particular, betwixt them and the
Dominicans, about a special point of grace. At their first attempt to come
into France, it was foreseen by the grave Sorbonists of Paris, what mischief
they would work if they were admitted there. Afterward, they crept into that
country like Foxes by little and little, and so in process of time behaved
themselves, as not long since they have been banished thence, as men of most
pernicious, wicked, and dangerous conversation. You have heard in a word or
two, out of Osorius the Spaniard, what the Jesuits think of themselves: it
would make a large volume to recount the praises which they have elsewhere
heaped upon their founder, their society, and their fellows; according as
the saying is: Claw me and I will claw thee. You also understand as well by the
premises, as by our bretherens several treatises, what estimation we have of
them, and some have been offended with them for their plainenes therein. But
now we humbly entreat you to observe, how roundly they have been taken up
in France for halting, by men of no small credit in that State; for their
years very ancient, for their experience very wise, and for their soundnes
in the Catholic Roman religion, never impeached by any but Jesuits, who
condemn all men either for Newters or schismatics, or heretics, or at the
least for cold and lukewarm Catholics, that disclose their impieties.

Master Anthony Arnold, counselor in parliament, and heretofore counselor
and Attorney general to the late deceased Queen mother, a man thoroughly
acquainted with the proceedings of the Jesuits in France, writes as
follows, both of them, By this the Jesuits are discovered to be not only the
forerunners but also the chief captains of Antechrist; out of whose society
or sect, it is very probable homo peccati, that man of sin shall rise, ere all
be ended betwixt the secular priests and them the said sectarie Jesuits,
though for the present they remain catholic.
and somewhat of their Founder. Ignatius (says he) through the help of the
devil, hatched this cursed conspiracy of the Jesuits: who have been the
causes of such ruin as France has received. They are a wicked race, borne
to the ruin and desolation of mankind. In their fourth vow to their
General, they go thus far, that in him they must acknowledge Christ
present, as it were, If Jesus Christ should command to go and kill, they must
do so. The General of the Jesuits is always a Spanyard, and chosen by the
King of Spain. Loyola their first General was a Spanyard, Laynes the second a
Spanyard also. The third, Euerardus, was a Fleming, a subject of the King of
Spain. Borgia, the fourth, was a Spanyard. Aquauiua the fifth, now living, is a
Neopolitane, subject to the King of Spain. If their Spanish General command
them to murder, or cause the King of France to be murdered, they must of
necessity do it. They shoot at no other matter, but to establish the tyranny
of Spain in all places. All the Jesuits in the world, are bound to pray for
the King of Spain, and that once a day, as his affairs do require. They have
stirring fellows to be placed in all quarters, to execute whatsoever may tend
to the good and advancement of Spain. They had no other mark during the
wars in France: but to make the King of Spain Monarch over all
Christendom. The common proverb of these hypocrites is: one God, one Pope: and
one king of Spain, the great King catholic and universal. All their
thoughts, all their purposes, all their Sermons, all their co^fessions, have no
other white they aim at, but to bring all Europe under the subjection of
Spanish government. The Ambassador of France, when he was in Spain and
Italy, never found matter of weight wherein they had not an oar. There was
never Letter intercepted during the wars, wherein there was any pernicious
point, but a Jesuits singer was in it. In their confessions and without
witnesses, they paint not the faces, but the hearts of their scholars, with the
tincture of Rebellion against their princes and natural Sovereigns.

Matthew a Jesuit, was the principal instrument of the League 1585. And from
that year 1585. they would give no absolution to the Gentry of France,
unless they would vow and promise to band themselves against their Sovereign
( Henry the third) being a most catholic King. Barnard and Commolet, (the year
before the said League) called the King Holofornes, Moab, and Nero:
maintaining that the kingdom of France was elective, and that it belonged to
the people to establish kings: and alleging this text of the old Testament:
Thou shall choose thy brother for King. Thy brother (say they) that is to say,
not of the same lineage, or of the self same Nation, but of the same Religion,
as is this great catholic king, this great King of Spain. The said Commolet
was so impudent and bold, as to say very blasphemously, that under these
words: Deliver me O Lord out of the myer, that I may not stick in it: David
understood prophetically, the rooting out of the house of Burbon. The same
Jesuit also, Commolet, preaching at the Bastile before the Gentlemen that were
then prisoners in the beginning of the year 1589, said unto them, after a
thousand impudent blasphemies: that he that had been their King, was not their
King, plotting from thence the murder which they executed afterward. What
voice is sufficient to express the secret counsels, the most horrible
conspiracies, more dangerous then the conspiracies of Cateline, which were
holden in the Jesuits College in S. James street? Where did the Agents and
Ambassadors of Spain, Mendoza, Daguillon, Diego, Dinarra, Taxis, Feria, and
others, hold their secret meetings and assemblies, but among the Jesuits? Where
did Lowchard. Ameliue, Cruce, Crome, and such like notorious manquellers and
murtherets, build their conspiracies but amongst the Jesuits? Who made that
bloody answer to the catholic Apology, but the Jesuits? Where did the two
Cardinals which termed themselves Legates in France assemble their counsels but
only amongst the Jesuits? Where was it that Mendoza (the Ambassador of
Spain) upon All-hollow day, in the year 1589. (at what time the King entered
the Fauxburges) held his counsel, of Sixteen, but in the College of the
Jesuits? Who was President of the counsel (afterward) of those Sixteen
murderers, but Commolet, Bernard, and Father Ode Pickenar the vilest Tygar in
all Paris? Commelet preaching in S. Bartholmewes church after the murder of
the King, exalted and placed among the Angels this Tiger, this devil
incarnate, James Clement, the murderer. Who employed all their studies to
speak against the person and right of his Majesty that now reigns, as false
and slanderous matters, as possibly their wicked heads could devise, but the
Jesuits? Commol^s the Jesuit (when he preached at Saint Bartholmes, as is
aforesaid) took for his theme the third chapter of the book of Judges, where
it is reported, that Ehud slew the king of Moab, and escaped away: and after
that he had discoursed at large upon the death of their late king (and
commended James Clement) he fell into a great exclamation: saying, we have
need of an Ehud, we have need of an Ehud: were he a Friar, were he a
soldier, were he a lackie, were he a shepard, it made no great matter. Needs
we must have an Ehud: One blow would settle us fully in the state of our
affairs, as we most desire.

Alas, their purpose and burning zeal is, to murder the King living. Was it
not in the College of Jesuits at Lions, and also in the College of Jesuits in
Paris, that the resolution was last taken to murder the King in August 1593?
Are not the depositions of Barriere (executed at Melun) notorious to all the
world? Was it not Varade, Principal of the Jesuits, that exhorted and
encouraged this murderer; assuring him that he could not do a more
merritorious work in the world, then to murder the King though he were a
Catholic: and that for this deed he should go straight to Paradise? And to
confirm him the more in this mischievous resolution, did he not cause him to
be confessed by an other Jesuit? Did not these impious, godless, and execrable
murderers, give this Baerriere the blessed sacrament, employing the most holy,
most precious, and most sacred mystery of our Christian religion, toward the
murdering of the chiefest King in Christendom.

As long as the Jesuits remain in France, the king of Spaines murderers, may
be exhorted, confessed, housled and encouraged. Their minds are bloody, and
altogether imbrued with the blood of the late murdered king. They filled the
pulpits with fire, with blood, with blasphemies: making the people believe that
God was a murderer of kings, and attributing to heaven, the stroke of a knife
forged in hell. The highest point of their honor, stands in executing of
murders, terming them Martyrs which have spent their lives therein. They are
mischievous counsailors, traitors, wicked inchauntors, firebrands of mischief,
hypocrites, monsters, watchful in mischief, diligent in wickedness, wretched
caytiffes, manquellers, serpents, pernicious, and dangerous vermin, and have
no fellows in all sorts of wickedness.

And hitherto Master Arnold dispersedly. Unto whom we may add a short, but a
notable description of the Jesuits ordinary sermons (as we take it) out of
Petrus Gregorius Tholossanus, Pet. Greg de Repub. lib. 13. cap. 14.
(a great Lawier and a sound Catholic:) which does so expressly and pithilie
set them out unto us, nay to all posterity, and that in so few words, their
dispositions, pride and fury, as he that shall diligently read them, and
thoroughly digest them, may ever carry with him (if his memory be not very
dull) the right Idea of a perfect Jesuit. But before he comes to this
description, he first sets down the judgments of God against all such kind
of persons, out of king Solomon and the prophet Ezechiell. Abominatio est
Domini, omnis arrogantia. All that are arrogant (without exception) are
abominable unto our Lord. Prou. 16.
Contritionem praecedit superbia etc. Pride goes before contrition or
destruction: and a high mind before utter ruin. Vae pastoribus Israel:
Ezech. 34.
woe be to the Sheppards of Israel, etc. That which was weak ye have not
strengthened: that which was sick, ye have not healed: that which was broken,
ye have not bound up: and That which was abiected, ye have not brought
again: and that which was lost ye have not sought: sed cum austeritate
imperabatis eis et cum potentia: but ye did rule over them with austeritie and
force or potencie. Secondly, having made this way plain to his purpose, then
he shows further what manner of men the Clergy, by the testimonies of S.
Peter and S. Paul should be: and how far from such haughtines of mind, such
pride and cruelty: and with what diligence, mildnes, and gentleness, they ought
to proceed in the actions and proceedings which do belong to their calling.
Feed (says S. Peter) the flock of Christ which is amongst you: ouerseeing
them not by constraint, but willingly according to God: neither for filthy
lucre sake, but voluntarily. And S. Paul: The servant of God must not
wrangle, but be mild toward all men, apt to teach, patient, with modesty,
admonishing them that resist the truth, least sometimes God give them
repentance to know the truth. etc. Against which Apostolical rules, he
declares that the Jesuits (of whom we think he speaks) be great
practitioners, rather sorting themselves in the rank of those that Solomon and
the prophet Ezechiell before spoke of, then of the true Pastors of Gods people.

These are his words: In quo hodie maxim peccant noui quida^ Theologastri, et
zelo se traduci mentiuntur: qui in cathedris non verba modesty au: verba dei,
sed fulgura, tonitrua vomunt: dicteria, s^o^mata, gladios, ignes, furores,
Megaras, cruenta, neces debacchantur: vt potius maledicos, furiosos, dementes
coniuratores, seditiosos, inuidos pacis christianae, milites, praedones,
latrones, quam Euangelicae veritatis predicatores, et enarratores dixeris:
similes pastoribus ijs, qui austeritate imperare volunt, qui putant oues potius
necandas, quam adgregem cum lenitate reuocandas: cum tamen dictum sit de eodem
Euangelio, (cuius se enarratores esse mentiuntur eadem superbia) quod ea sit
lex gratiae, et cu^misericordia Christique beneficio et bonitate publicata. Sed
nihil est impudentius arrogantiae rusticorum qui garrulitatem Authoritatem
putant, et parati ad lites tumidi in subiectos intonant. Hoc habet proprium
doctrina arrogantium: vt humiliter nesciant infer, quod docent: et recta quae
sapiunt, recte ministare non possint etc. Atque statutum, seditionarios nunquam
ordinandos clericos, et ordinatoi deijciend^s. Wherein (that is to say, both
against the prophets and Apostles doctrine) certain new smattering Divines now
adays, do very greatly offend, who falsely pretend that they are led by
zeal, who in their pulpits and Lectures cast out, not words of modesty, or of
the word of God, but lightnings and thunderings: who as outrageous men in
railing, utter nothing but taunts, scoffs, swords, fires, rages, furies of
hell, matters of blood and murtherings. So as a man may rather term them
cursed speakers, furious persons, mad men, traitors, seditious declamers,
enemies of Christian peace, soldiers, robbers, the eues, then preachers and
expounders of the Evangelical truth, being like those pastors that will
command with severity, that rather think it meet to have their sheep
killed, then to have them with mildnes recalled to the flock. Whereas
notwithstanding it is said of the gospel (whereof lyinglie they call
themselves expositors with the same pride) that it is a law of grace and
published with the mercy, bounty, and goodness of Christ. But there is nothing
more impudent then the arrogancy of base companions, who account their prating
a kind of authority, and being ready to quarrel, they tyrannise over such as
are subject unto them. The doctrine of arrogant persons has this property,
that they cannot deliver with humility those things which they teach; nor
minister rightly their honest conceits. Now there is a statute, that stirrers
up of sedition should not be made Clergy men: and that such as are made
already, should be degraded. And thus Peter Gregorius. Whereby you may see,
that we are not the only men that have whetted their penns against the
Jesuits: nor yet that we have written half so bitterly as others have against
them. It is to be wished, that you would take these things to heart, and apply
them to the Jesuits proceedings underhand in England, but more apparantlie in
Ireland. There is an old lesson which children learn among their rules in
School, and is fit for all persons, times and seasons: Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cantum: happy are they whom other men's harms do make to
beware. Master Arnold, and Pet: Gregorius, have said sufficient to make all
the states in Europe that are not hispanized, to take heed of these fellows
and of their designements. And yet such is their plotting, and Fox-like
wilines, as by swearing and forswearing, by fawning and flattering, and by a
thousand other sleights, they so inueigle men and women that be of any good or
honorable disposition: that an other very singular wise man of high authority,
and a sound Catholic, has thought it very necessary, to add much to that
which Master Arnold, and Pet: Greg. have written: that thereby all men,
especially of state and action, may be inexcusable, if either they themselves,
or the state wherein they serve, do ever hereafter take harm by the Jesuits.

The treatise which he has written to this purpose, is entitled, THE IESVITS
CATECHISM; so termed as we think, to distinguish their new devises,
instructions, and plottings, from the sincerity of the ancient and approved
form of Christ's Catechism, which the Church of Rome hitherto has taught. In
this discourse, the Jesuits and their proceedings are more thoroughly sifted,
and that ab incunabilis, from their very cradle. By reason whereof, all these
things falling out at the beginning so badly, and sorting still from worse to
worse; the Author of this Treatise is driven oftentimes in the heat of his
zeal, to lay aside his skill in Rhetoric (which is very excellent:) and for
the discharge of his conscience to God, and the duty he owes to his country,
as also for a caveat unto all other countries, to deal very plainly: calling
men and matters by their own names, without any circumlocution or ambigu^ie.
He that has eats to hear, let him hear. This gentleman is far from the
said Spanish Jesuits conceit, either of Ignatius himself, or of his Order.

As touching Ignatius, he says, that although for his learning he was but an
Ass: Fol. 42.
yet otherwise, he was one of the cu^ningst worldlings that this our latter age
has brought sorth: and in deed a very Imposture. And whereas great account is
made of his illuminations, Fol. 39.
visions, inspirations, ecstasies, (wherein the blessed Virgin and Christ
himself talked with him,) divine instructions, (opening to him the mysteries
of the blessed Trinity, and of the holy Scriptures:) all these conte^plations
(says he) Were mere mummeries or illusions of the devil, Fol. 29.
who desired to present us with such a man, as might by his ignorance trouble
the whole state of the Church. The said Osorius the Jesuit, having in the
largest size commended Ignatius his founder: ascribes it as a special point
of appertayning to his further praise, that he left behind him scholars of his
own mould, who like wax, frame themselves to bear his express image. To
which purpose there is a very fit Text sought out in these words: Mortuus est
pater eius, Eccles. 30.
and quaesi non est mortuus, similem enim reliquit sibi post se. His father it
dead, and yet he is as if he were not dead, because he has left bebind him one
like to himself. According to which Text, the said Gentleman in his sense
shows very apparently the great resemblance betwixt Ignatius and his
offspring, and writes of them, their whole order, their qualities, and
proceedings, as here in part it insueth.

They are of the Society of Jesus, as Judas was amongst the Apostles: so many
Jesuits, so many Iudases, Fol. 23.
ready to betray their Princes or their countries whensouer occasion serves to
do it. What will you give us, will be the burden of their song to those
Princes that have most money, and we will deliver our Liege-Lord into your
hands, or trouble his State, that it may be yielded to you? Iesuitisme breeds
many complaints among the people: many iarres, Fol. 13.
dissentions, contentions, rebellions, and sundry schisms. Fol. 10.
There was never any sect more dangerous to Christian Religion then this of the
Jesuits. The devil under the habit of the Jesuits, does go about to
circumuent all the world. The Sect of the Jesuits is, Fol. 48.
a bastard religion, and a very hoch-poch of all religious orders, Fol. 55.
without any thing pure in it, or any point of the ancient Church. The divine
service of their Church, is divided from ours, Fol. 13.
their privileges make a division between the Bishops and them, the
Monasteries and them: the Universities and them: the divines of Paris and them.
Their propositions, make a division between the holy Sea and Princes. Their
Colleges are trappes to catch youth: there confessions, subornations: their
Sermons Mountebanks Markets. Fol. 106.
Their whole profession is nothing else but a particular coozning of our
private families, and a general villainy in all the countries where they
inhabit.

To receive Jesuits into a kingdom, is to receive in a vermin: which at
length will gnaw out the heart of the State both spiritual and temporal. Fol
62.
They work underhand the ruins of the countries where they dwell, Fol. 59.
and the murder of whatsoever Kings and Princes it pleases them. The name of
the Jesuits, Fol. 20.12.
ought to be odious amongst all Christians: and they blaspheme against the
honor of God, when they so entitle themselves. Without wrong to the authority
of the holy Sea, Fol. 56.
you may call the Jesuits, Papelards, and their Sect, Pape-lardy: that is,
hypocrites, and their order hypocrisy. The Jesuits are Fox-like, Fol 76.
and Lion-like. Al their worthy works are but cooznages. In all their
negotiations in France, Fol. 79.
an Asle and a Fox have been tied together. Fol. 17.
Jesuits when they lie, do say, it is to be borne with: because it is to a
good end. Fol 41.
All things (says the Jesuit) are to be taken for good, Fol. 82.
that are done to a good end. It is a Jesuitical privilege, to underset their
slanders with the time, Fol. 19.
by new cogs. In every matter be it never so small, the Jesuit cannot go by
without lying and disguising. The Jesuits never lack new lying inventions to
advance their own credit. Fol. 21.
One Justinian a Jesuit, being found in Rome to be a counterfeit, it marred the
Jesuits cookery there: for when they did speak of a facer out of matters and an
impostor, they were wont to call him, a second Justinian the Jesuit.

Much more might be here added of the particular heresies wherewith he charge
the Jesuits: also his freenes of speech, in tearming the first ten Jesuits,
Ignatius and his nine fellows, to have bin in their times very cheaters: Fol.
39.
and likewise how he proves, that in the first allowance of their whole order,
and the getting since of their privileges, they ever used cooznage, Fol. 38.
obreption, and surreption. But this may suffice to be inserted in a Letter
dedicatorie, Fol. 103.
as well to give you a glympse what the demerits, of the Jesuits are in France,
and how they are esteemed of amongst the Catholics there, that draw not with
the line of Spain against their Sovereign: as also in a sort, to stop their
clamorous mouths and pens that cry out and write so eagerly, against the
tartnes of all the books which have been lately set out by some of our
brethren: and especially the Quodlibets: as though never learned men, being
good Catholics, had used the like sharpenes of style before them: or ever
would use after them. Which immoderate clamors, both of the Jesuits, and of
their adherents, together with the consident justification of all the
proceedings which hane been plotted, and executed against us and our brethren,
by Friar Parsons: Friar Garnet, our R. Archpriest, and other their Iesuited
clawbacks, (as though they were indeed Apostolical men sent lately from God
that could not err (in a manner in their course) by reason of a certain
subordination, and sundry illuminations that are talked of among them:) caused
us when we met with this discourse, and with a translation of it: after that we
had perused the translation, and amended it in diverse parts, not only to put
it to the press, but to commend it also unto you (that without new fanglenes
are truly Catholics) with this our Preface or Epistle dedicatorie.

The author of this Jesuitical Catechism, is for his virtue, gravity,
experience, wisdom, Catholic zeal, and great learning, in these causes, so
imminent, where he is best known: and this his discourse is so suitable to such
his virtues, so substantial for the matter, so eloquent for the phrase, so
artificially compiled for the method, as neither of them both have any need,
either of ours or any other men's commendation. If the translation do content
you: if the publishing of it may benefit you: if this our Apologeticall
preface, or the book it self, or both, may be a sufficient warning, either to
you, or to the state, or to her Majesty's subjects generally; or to all, or to
any good men in particular (that love their Queen and country:) to take heed
in time of the Jesuits: to believe them by descretion, to trust them no further
then they see them: to detest their statizing: to loath their detractions, and
to beware of their Forges: (that are ever occupied in hammering out stratageme
after stratageme, the second still more pestilent then the first:) it is all
we look for, besides your Catholic supportation due to the Catholic
Priests in times of necessity, and your daily and Christian prayers: whereunto
we commend our selves, and you all, by our daily supplications, to Gods
merciful government for your protection, and to all his heavenly graces for
your direction, progression, and happy consummation through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Your friends always ready to do you service.

Faults escaped in printing.

Fol. 11. b. lin. 10. for. nona, read noua. fo 27. b. lin. 2. for perrec
dauncer, read, daunsing dizard. fol. 57. b. the last line. for instructed,
read, disdisproued. fol. 117. for, one with another, read, one another. fol.
142. for, cuffe, read ruff. fol. 165. b. lin. 17. for, grief, rage, read, the
chief rage. fol. 166. a. lin. 4. for some were to be. read, some to be. fol.
171. b. lin. 9. for, his poor. read, this poor. fol. 174. a. lin. 5. for,
thich. read, which. Other small faults have escaped, which the judicial readers
eye will easily discover and amend.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Jesuits Catechism.
CHAP. 1.
ABout two years ago departing from Paris, we met by chuance upon the
fields with six in a company that traueld our way: some of them had been at
Rome, some at Venice. When we had iournied eight days together our horses
weary, one of our consorts told us, there dwelt a Gentleman not far of, an
old acquaintance of his, who doubtless would esteem of it as a great honor
done unto him, if (upon occasion taken to refresh our selves) we would go
visit him. How soever some distasled this advise at the first, yet at last the
most voices carried it, and all of us forthwith turned out of our way unto his
house, where we found him accompanied with many other Gentlemen. Who espying
his ancient friend, gave him many cheerful embracings, and said; How comes
it to pass, that I am so fortunate, as to behold my second self this day?
Sir, at a word you are very welcome, and I think my self deeply indebted to
you, for this unexpected assault, given me with so fair a troop.

After we had severally thanked him one by one, he commanded our horses to be
set up, and a cup of wine to be brought us, and so led us through the Court
into his house: where entertayning one another with enterchangeable greetings,
he gave order for Supper to be ready in convenient time, that we might take
our rest: meane-while we fell into discourse. But as commonly it happens, that
we lay our hand upon that part of our body that grieves us most; so we begun
principally to complain of the miseries of France, brought in amongst us by
diversity of Religion, every man seeking to advance, what himself maintains
sutably to his own private passion, which he calls devotion.

There was a Jesuit in our company disguisd in apparel, a man (without
question) very sociable: There was an Advocate also, whom I well perceived to
be opposite to the Bulls, constitutions, and orders of the Jesuits. The
speech when we parleyd, rebounding from mouth to mouth, the Jesuit made
demonstration, how much our Church is bound unto their society. And believe
me Gentlemen (quoth he) if God had not sent amongst us our good Father
Ignatius, and his company, our Catholic religion had been extinguished: but as
it commonly falls out, that in punishing our offenses, after GOD has afflicted
a Country with some general plague, he applies a remedy to it again, that it
may not be utterly destroyed: so having suffered Martin Luther to infect many
Nations with his poison, it pleased him (for the cause before alleged) to
raise up another Daniel in his Church, to preserve the head thereof, from all
the venomous bitings of that Monster. And to speak what I think, I am of that
mind, that Ignace Loyhola, had his name given him, not by chance, but by
miracle, to this end no doubt, that by changing one Letter into another, as C.
into R. calling him Ignare Loyhola, for Ignace Loyhola, all posterity might
know him to be the man, which had made an end of Luthers ignorance, and of all
his followers, which upon his grounds should set any other heresies abroach
hereafter.

At this speech of his, every man began to smile, for it was delivered with so
good a grace, as it could not be offensive to any, unless the Advocate, who
with change of countenance said thus unto him. Sir, I will not suffer your
speech to fall to the ground without taking it up again. I would feign know
what miracles the Jesuits have wrought; what bounds they have set to bridle the
course of heresy; and what difference there has been in the carriage of the
one and the other? For if the Hugonotes on the one side, were the cause of the
troubles in France, in the year 1561. standing as they did upon their defense;
the Jesuit on the other side assayling us, in the year 1565. raysd up far
more fierce and great tyrannies than the former. As for your new Anagram, you
abuse your self. Ignace was in some good sort a Gentleman of Navarre, not
called Ignace Loyhola, but Ignare de Loyhola, as much to say, as Ignorant of
the Law, hold thy peace. For being as ignorant as might be, he thought it
better to be silent than to speak. Which warily acknowledging in himself, he
never showed his wit in preaching, teaching or writing, except it were at first
within the gates of Rome, where he taught young children their belief, as
Masters of pety Schools are wont to do.

This speech moved no less laughter than the former: then said the Gentleman
our host. I see no great matter of laughter here; and turning him to the
Jesuit, I believe Sir (quoth he) that you are of the Society of JESUS, the
tenor of your speech bewraies no less. To this the other answered, that it
was so indeed, and their order permitted them to be disguisd, the better to
sound every man in his humor. I am very glad of this said the Gentleman, and I
do believe, that some good Angel led you hither into my house, the rather for
that I have been long time desirous of such good company, to the end I might
know how the case stands with your Order, which I see is balanced between two
Scales, greatly commended of some, and by the same weights again much blamed
of others. But seeing there is no banquet here for servant, they shall take
away the cloth, and thanks given to God for his daily bounty toward us, we
will enlarge our selves with this point a little farther. It was performed as
he had said, and all the wayters voyded the place, he desired the Jesuit not
to be displeased, if after the manner of a Catechism, he brought in one like a
child, moving the question to his Master, for the better understanding of
his first grounds. In this manner dealt the Gentleman with the Jesuit,
desirous to be informed of the principal points of his Order, whereunto the
Jesuit readily consented. And although in very deed, for any thing I could
gather by their talk, the Gentleman was as skillful as the Jesuit: yet
playing Sacrates part, he rode after him like a Platonist, to draw from him
that which he desired, in such manner as here ensues.

CHAP. 2. What the foundation is of the society of Jesus, which the
common people call Jesuits.
Gent. YOu say you are a Jesuit, therefore of a new Religious Order. Jesuit.
Nay, rather of a most ancient, and for this cause have we taken upon us the
holy name of the society of Jesus, as imitators beyond others, of our Lord
Jesus Christ and his Apostles. Gent. You preach and teach freely every one that
will hear you. Ies. We do so. Gent. But tell me then, did the Apostles teach
little boys their Grammar, or A.B.C.? Ies. No. Gent. Then have you great
advantage of them, and it is not without some ground, that despising the name
of Christians, by which they were called, you particularly term your selves
Jesuits.

Ies. Had they taught as we do, their charity had been more complete, and
as for the name of Christians, we take it to be too proud a style. Gent.
Somewhat there is, whereby you pass them in charity and humility. You make
three vows, do you not? of Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience? Ies. Never
doubt of that. Gent. Then are you Monks. Ies. By no means, but rather
Religious men. Gent. Then your houses be Monasteries. Ies. Nothing less, we
call our habitations Colleges, wherein we have our Churches. Gent. What kind
of Cabale is this, that these men, who make ordinary vows that bind them to
their office, as other Religious persons do, yet scorn those holy names of
Monks and Monasteries, which all venerable antiquity has honored with so
much devotion? Peradventure you should have called your Colleges Gods houses.
Yet I think you made a conscience of that, because we call those Hospitalls
Gods houses, where poor beggars are harbourd; and if I be not deceived, y^^
fear nothing so much as to be poor. Well, let us go on, you wear a Frook
as Monks do, you dwell in Cloisters like other Religious men, do you not?
Ies. We know not what Cloisters mean, we shun them as a Iakes, which we
would be loath to come into; and we are apparreld not as Monks, but as Secular
Pristes. It is true, that by our first institution we fastened a hoode to our
long robes, sometime with a point, sometime with a claspe, but we quickly left
it off again, after our cause was pleaded, in the year 64. against the
University of Paris: For the Heretics said, our claspe was a fishhooke, to
catch silly peoples goods. And other more impudent then they, reported we did
were a point, like the women of the Green Castle of Tolosa.

Gent. I could wish, for the honor I bear you, that you had not renewed the
remembrance of those old complaints that were made against you. Let us leave
those bad speeches to black mouths, and suffer us in good sort to understand
what belongs unto your Order. For I desire nothing more, than to see you in
good conversation toward every man. Although being Religious persons, you
refuse the name and habit outwardly appertayning unto Monks, yet I doubt not,
but for that which is interior, touching Fastes and abstinence from certain
meats, practisd by other Religious men for the taming of the flesh, you
observe these very orderly. Ies. Quite contrary, for we are expressly forbidden
by our Statutes so to do, but it is left free to every man's devotion, wherein
is the greater merit.

Gent. there is some meaning in this, for he that should leave the Lent
arbitrarie to every man, might assure himself, it would bring in great
disorders: therefore among other Religious persons, the first Founders have
been ever careful to provide for this in chief, judging a general law
better than the particular will of any one or other Religious person whosoever.
But to proceed, what say you to Processions, which the Church has in all
antiquity much regarded (for as it appears, they were in use in Tertullians
time) I hope therefore you would not exempt your selves from them. Ies. We are
so far from approouing them, that on the contrary our Constitutions forbid us
to be there, as appears in the Constitutions afterward authorized by Pope
Gregory the thirteenth.

Gent. You are not then as I take it of the body of the University of Paris?
but if you had been matriculated as you desired in the year 64. would you have
withdrawn your selves from the professions of the Rector, where the four
Orders of begging Friars, and other religious men are present? Ies. We would.
Gent. Well then, tell me, If such a sollemne Procession should be made in
Paris, as we see, when they go to Saint Geneuiefes shrine to appease Gods
wrath, when all the Parishes, Monasteries, and high Courts also be there,
attended on with an infinite number of the Common People, would ye not go with
the^? Ies. No. Gent. Make you so small account of the counsel of Trent? Ies.
Very great, as of that where-vppon stands the confirmation of our whole Order,
manger all our enemies. Gent. Know you not what is precisely set down there,
that as well Secular Priests, as Regulers, and all sorts of Monks called to
public Processions, are enjoined to go; they only excepted, which live in
some straighter enclosure then the rest? Sure, you are not within the compass
of this exception, for in my oppinion, it is made for the Charter-house-Monkes,
and Celestines.

Ies. I conceive it so, but you must likewise understand, that Pope Gregory
dispensed with us, in the year 1576. to the prejudice of that Counsel, and
that not only by form of dispensation, but by three express prohibitions.
Gent. And yet, before this dispensation, you never kept them company,
whereupon do you ground your privilege?

Ies. Upon a persuasion that one day we shall prevail. Gent. Diseasd horses
in one stable are put a sunder, are you in that rank among religious men? I
beseech you tell me, even by way of confession, why were those prohibitions
made for you? Ies. Because you conjure me by the holy name of Confession, I
will not lie to you. Some one of our Superiors, foisted into Pope Gregory's
Bulls, that it was to this end, to wit; that we might not be hindered in
preaching, reading, and taking confessions: but to speak the truth, seeing the
four Orders of Mendicants did preach, and hear confessions, and read
Lectures in their houses as well as we, and yet forsook not the said
Processions: I take it to be a pretense far fet, and from the purpose, and
that there was rather some other cause of it; namely, that according to the
admittance of our Order, our place was to come behind, whereby we should have
wronged greatly the society of JESUS, which we take to be a superlatiue of
all others. Gent. If it be so, the sanctity of your devotion, is not without
some Fever of Ambition. Well, yet let us go forward. When you say your
canonical hours in your Churches, do you not sing in two ranks, as we do
in ours? Have you not likewise a place appointed for the Priests office, which
we call the Quier, distinct and separate from the body where the people stay
to say their prayers? Ies. To this I will not answer you by roate, but recite
the text it self of our co^stitutions; Let not our Company use a Quier for
their canonical hours, saying of Mass, or singing of other service. And if
you have well marked the Church in our College at Paris, there was no Quier at
all.

Gent. It may be your Lawmakers meant by this, that you are so privileged,
that when you pray without feeling or devotion, only with a kind of moving
your lyps softly to your selves, your prayers nevertheless are heard of GOD,
to join this privilege to your other extraordinaries. Ies. You are a scoffer.
I will tell you more, that in respect of Canonical hours, we have nothing to
bind us, to do as other men do, in singing or saying them out aloude, but we
may mutter our prayers as softly as we please. Gent. This proves our
Ancestors to be very blunt, sithence your devout souls celebrate divine
service now, altogether of another fashion, beyond the practice of antiquity.
But what say you to your Aniuersaries? do you keep them in favor of your
Benefactors? Ies. We are very nimble at taking all that is bestowed on us, yet
are we not thereby bound to keep any yearly co^memorations of it. Gent. Then
are you stark fools. Ies. Not so, but very wise and devout: for we are not
like other men, that ouercharge themselves with long Mementoes, and are compeld
to pass them all through with one Fidelium, as we say in the common French
proverb. To be short, we make too great a conscience of deceiving our
Benefactors.

Gent. See here a new Church, clean contrary to the old. Well, yet let us
go forward: You told me even now, that you make three vows, of Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience. Now amongst the least of many novelties dividing you
from us, you have 3. vows in show common with other religious persons. Ies.
Our 3. vows, vary much from theirs. Gent. Wherein? Ies. The first of our
vows is called Simple, the two other Sollemne. Gent. I beseech you decyfer
your doctrine that I may understand it, for to say truth, this is high Dutch to
me. Ies. You must know, that in these three vows, we promise Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, as other Religious Orders do: but true it is, that
in the vow Simple, there is a peculiar streine, by means whereof, for so much
and so long as we are there appointed, we may be masters of worldly goods, and
take up successions, as well in a straight line as collateral. Moreover,
although in respect of a religious state, it is not in any of our own powers to
give over our company, yet after one has made aboade with us, ten twenty, or
thirty years, more or less, our General may absolve him, and send him back
frank and free discharged from his vow to his own house, to marry if he will.

Gent. Good God, what manner of vow is this? Ies. Such as Pope Gregory has
confirmed to us. It is not strange to me to find it so strange to you, for the
great Canonist Navarre, the chiefest of all the Doctors in matters of the
Canon Law, speaking of this simple vow, gives it the name of Great and
Maruailous. Gent. He might rather have termed it Miraculous, because it lodges
riches and poverty together in one subject, a thing impossible, by common
course of nature. And that which amazeth me the more, is, that your General
can release a religious person when he thinks it meet. This in our Christian
religion was never practiced. Ies. None but the Jesuits may do it. Gent. What
is your second vow which you call Sollemne, and is as I suppose the first of
the two sollemne ones? Ies. We do nothing in that, that does smell of
novelty, more than in the simple: only from the time a man enters into it, he
loses all hope of succession, or return to his house, and is brought within
compass of all other religious men professed.

Gent. Before we proceed to that great sollemne vow, which is your third, I
would feign learn of you some other particulars of your Order. Seeing you
read Lectures of Humanity, Phylosophie, and Divinity, not only to your own
company, but to all strangers that repair to you. I doubt not, but that such
as come in among them, are not all alike appointed to their studies, for
charity begins with it self: and also that to make the^ Priests (which
should be your intention) they must hear their course. Ies. You deceive your
self. We receive an infinite company that can neither read nor write, nor
are any way fit for study afterward, nor yet to be priested, whom we call
Lay-brethren, appointed only to take care of our provision, when we stand in
need. Gent. These be voluntaries, like the Oblates, and Mias-Monkes conuerts
of other religious orders, which are but half Monks, whom the people call
Halfe-hoods.

Ies. Yet you are awry. Our Lay-brethren are precisely of our Order, like the
others as well of the vow Simple, as of the first sollemne Vow. Gent.
Nevertheless, they profess ignorance, like the Lay-brothers among the Friars
of Italy. Jes. The very same. Gent. What a mingled religion is this, built
with such variety of stones? Blessed God, what would all those good old Doctors
say, whose sanctimonie has placed them in heaven, if they should return into
the world again, and see this Family ru^e the roste, over the greatest part
of our Church? Go to, let us talk if you please, of the great sollemne vow,
which is the last. Jes. That is the perfection of our work. For in it, beside
the three substantial vows of other religious persons, we make a fourth in
particular to our Father the Pope, which we call the vow of Mission,
whereby, if it please his holiness to send us to the Turks, Pagans,
Heretics, or Schismatikes to convert them, or to bring them to the Christian
faith, we are bound to obey him without reward, taking neither gold nor silver
to defray the charge of our journey. Gent. A very pure and holy devotion, if it
be well employed. But what true records have you, that can give us sound
testimony of your exployts? Ies. Let it suffice you, that an account thereof
is kept in Rome. When the great vow is made, which is the very cloze of all
our vows, then we begin to be called Fathers, a dignity inco^municable to all
the rest. Yet is there so much humility among us, that as soon as we become
Fathers, we are wedded to so strict a poverty, that we cannot possess any
moueables in general, or particular, but are bonnde to beg our relief from
door to door, not by the ministry of brethren conuerts, as the other four
Orders of Mendicants do, but by men of most note among the Fathers.

Gent. Lo here a vow impossible to be imitated. The more you are magnified
above your fellows, the more submission and poverty you take upon you. When
you are qualefied for Jesuits, as true imitators of the Apostles, do you
think the Apostles by profession went a begging? If you be of that mind, it is
an oppinion heretofore condemned by the Church. Ies. Do you take it to be
evil, that from the abundance of our new zeal, we should add somewhat to
their ancient charity? Aduoc. This question is from the purpose (pardon me if
I interrupt you) you never yet saw a Jesuit bear a wallet up and down the
streets. Ies. Our state is not worse then the Fowls of the air, which live by
the grace of God, distributing his Manna to every man according to his will, as
he did in the old time to the children of Israel. Gent. You pay us with very
good coin, I accept of it sithence you are so content. Do you contain your
selves within the bounds of your three vows of Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience. Ies. No, for we will not like Atheists, divorce state affairs and
Religion; we think all things shall go well for the glory of God, and the
salvation of our own souls, when these be joined together. Gent. What a hotch
potch of new doctrine do you bring us now? And to say the truth, never was any
thing better spoken, then that we learn of Optatus, That religion has been
comprehended in state, not state in religion. Every one of us should wish to
have the Governors of Commonweals religious, that is, men of faith and
integrity, not playing with their consciences to favor their affairs. But
for a religious Order, to manage state matters, in the midst of their prayers,
is great irreligion, or rather heresy. Ies. That which you allege, was
Optatus his oppinion, not Ignatius.

Gent. What say you to Saint Paul, teaching, that Nemo militans Deo, implicat
se negotijs secularibus. If it be fit so to do, why did you of late years
forbid your company to meddle therein hereafter. Ies. That was a statute only
for the time. For perceiving that in the end of the year 93. all France was
inclined to peace beyond our expectation, we made that constitution to curry
favor with the state. Yet for all this, I would not have you think, that we
have here stakt our feet into the ground, and go no farther. For the same
constitutions permit us, to resolve in particular, as occasion counsels us.
Gent. A fearful permission. But what mean you by the word, State affairs?
Ies. The day would be too short to utter it. Let it content you that the
greatest and surest counsel we take, is of our own consciences, which we know
to be guided by the line and leading of our Savior. By this scrue sometime we
remove Kingdoms, punish Kings and Princes whose manners we mislike, and all for
the glory and honor of God, and of his holy Church. Gent. All the Christian
world should have you in wonderful reverence for this, and I am sorry you
should prove so unthankful now, as to abrogate such a holy law. Ies. It is
not so repeald but that it lives in our souls continually. For within these
three years, we practisd to kill the Queen of England, and the County
Maurice of Nassau, and howsoever by misfortune we faild of those two strokes,
yet we are ready to reach at them again, there, and else where, as we think
good, and as opportunity shall be offered.

Gent. Then you mix mercenary murders with state matters, call you this
joining of State and Religion both together? Ies. Why doubt you of it? Heresy
is a malady whereto fire and sword should be applied, as Empiriks deal with
desperate diseases. Gent. You could not have picked out a more fit phrase of
speech, than to liken your religion to Empiriks medicines, which the art of
Physic condemns. To use fire and sword against an Heretic, is the
Magistrates office, into whose hands God has put the sword, to punish them
that are worthy to be punished, not yours, who as religious men are called to
another function. Ies. What Magistrate dares proceed against Kings but we,
which are inspird with the holy Ghost? Gent. Is this a point of your first
institution? Ies. We have put in this our selves, by a rule of Christian-good,
to relieve our neighbors. And to show you with what piety we go forward,
when we have by our holy exhortations gaind any man of worth to execute our
dissignements, before he depart we confess him, and employ one part of his
penance to confirm him in that holy enterprise, we make him hear Mass with
devotion; We minister the blessed Sacrament of the Altar to him; this done, we
give him our blessing, for a sure pasport to go directly to Paradise. Was
there ever a more sacred and meritorious course than this? For to be brief, it
is in defense, and protection, of our Christian Catholic Church. Gent. O
christian company indeed: I would be glad to learn why our Savior Christ
being apprehended, was so sore displeased with S. Peter when he had cut off
Malchus ear? For at the first blush it seems that a man could not have
drawn his sword in a quarrel of greater merit. Ies. You say well, but you do
not weigh the text. Our Savior did not forbid Saint Peter to betake him to his
weapon, but after the blow was given, he commanded him to put it up again.
Gent. Pardon me, this answer has I know not what smack of Machiauell.

Ies. Add this unto it, that S. Peter provoked with an indiscreet zeal, would
have hindered a mystery that tended to the redemption of mankind, and we
employ the sword for the maintenance of the Church, without which mankind
would perrish. Gent. O brave and holy exposition, are you of opinion that this
course is well pleasing unto GOD? Ies. None but the Heretics of our time ever
doubted it. Gent. I am none of them, neither have I at any time inclined so to
be: yet I doubt much of this matter. Is there any thing in your Statutes
commanding you to go farther? Ies. There is. Gent. What is that? Ies. We
profess to obey the General of our Order, blindfolde, (for those be the
express words of our Constitutions) and we are bound to pin our
consciences to his sleeue: to suffer him to rule us like a boat having no
motion, but that which they give to it that row it: to leave off our work
already begun; to obey him, and acknowledge the presence of Jesus Christ in
him, as if Christ commanded us. Gent. Pertaines this to your Order? Ies. Yes I
assure you. Gent. O admirable paradox of obedience, like that of Abraham. Ies.
So it is. That example was ever in the mouth of Ignatius, teaching us that
obedience, is more acceptable to God then sacrifice. Gent. O blessed Fathers
the Jesuits, nay rather true and only Patriarchs of our Church. Doubtless
it is not without reason, that you be called Fathers after the accomplishment
of your last vow. Well then, the case so standing, if your General should
command you to procure the death, I will not say of a Prince, (for I doubt not
but you would obey him therein) but of our holy Father the Pope, would you do
it? Ies. I would take time to deliberate. Gent. If you should do so, this were
not to tie your conscience any longer unto his sleeue. Ies. You take me
unprovided, I crave respite to make you an answer. Gent. Your Order being
grounded upon all these godly and holy resolutions, surely our Church is much
bound to you, I mean, not the ancient Doctors of the Church only, but the
Apostles themselves, whom you have taught their duty. Nay, what speak I of
the Apostles? you have taught the great Master of the Mould, wherein we ought
to fashion all our actions: when contrary to the express commandment given
S. Peter, you procure the death of Kings and Princes. But what reward have you
got by this?

Ies. As much as we can desire or hope for. And amongst others, we are allowed
to give absolution of all sins and offenses how foul soever they be, except
such as are reserved to the holy Sea, wholly extreated and issuing out of
Judgments, Censures, and Ecclesiastical pains, beside that which is
comprised in the Bull usually read upon Maundy-Thursday. And for all that that
comes after, to give such order of penance as likes us, as in works of
piety, vows of Pilgrimage, except in three cases, of Jerusalem, of Rome, of
Saint James of Compostella. Also to sing Mass as well before day, as after
twelve a clock at noone-tyde, when our Superiors shall think it necessary:
To confess, and administer the Sacrament of the Eucharist: to build Chapels,
Oratories, and Churches, in all places where our General will: and all this
without leave of Bishop or Curat: Traveling through Countries, to have
portable Altars to say Mass on in every house, except places interdicted by
the holy Sea: That no Bishop in his own Diocese, may give priestly Orders to
any of our Company, though he be fit for it, without demissory Letters from our
General, who may also dispense with forbidden meats without suit to the
Bishops: and in brief, to absolve all those from censures, which are attainted
of heresy.

Gent. Here is a heap of privileges given you indeed, to the prejudice first
and chiefly of the Bishops, next of the Curats, and lastly, peradventure of
the holy Sea it self. Furthermore, this is a sollemne feast to draw the Common
people to you, and pull them from their true, natural, and lawful Pastors:
yea, this is to bring a new Schism into the Church of Christ. Ies. He that
shall come every year to perform his devotions one whole day in our house,
shall have plenary indulgence of all his sins, though he say but one Pater
noster and an Aue Marie. Gent. Another bayte to make men seek after you. Ies.
We enjoy all the privileges granted to all the four Orders of Mendicants.
Gent. They may justly be discontented, seeing you gorged with good things up to
the ears, and enjoying all their privileges. Ies. If it be so, all other
religious Orders have cause to repine as well as they; for we enjoy all their
graunts and favors. Gent. Yet are not you any way tied to their vows and
abstinences; Pius 5.7. of July. 1571. Greg. 13.3, of May, 1575.
this is ill proportiond, for this Advocate can tell you, the old Lawyers hold
it, Secundam naturam esse, vt quem sequuntur co^moda, eundem sequantur
inco^moda. And to say truth, this is another ground of jealousy and grudge
between them and you. Ies. All that I have yet deduced, concerns Gods service,
that which I mean to tell you now, looks back toward our Colleges and
Lectures. It is lawful for our General, or for such as are by him authorized,
Greg. 13.10. October. 1576. Paul. 3, 1549. Julius 3. 22. October. 1552. Pius 4. 19.
August, 1561. Pius 5. 10 May, 1571. Grego. 13. 1598. Greg. 13, 11, Feb. 1576.
to build Colleges, to set up Lectures, even Lectures of Divinity, and other
Readers in every Town without the Bishops leave: yea and our company may as
well out of the Universities, as in them, take their degrees of Bachilars,
Licentiates, Masterships, and Doctors, without examination, and be found
capable by two or three Commissioners appointed for that purpose by our
Superiors, which are not bound to seek to any Chauncellor, or Rector of other
Universities. In stronger terms, we may have whole Universities of our own
company only, where the Chauncellor or Rector is a Jesuit, as appears in the
Town of Pontumousson. We are also allowed to practice Phisique by the
authority of our Superiors, if they judge us to be capable. Gent. And crave
you no other testimony then theirs that never studied Physic? Ies. No.

Gent. I thought your General might have made a Jesuit, but no Physician, and
I would be loath to put my life into your hands vpoon any such warrant. Behold
what a fearful division you make between the Universities, especially
between the great, famous, and ancient University of Paris and your selves.
Ies. What would you more? We may geld, correct, and reform all manner of
books, wherein we find the least suspicion of heresy. Gent. What? after the
Divines of Paris have allowed them? Ies. Yea, even so. Gent. I ever took this
to be their office, and not to have appertayned to any other. Ies. Do you
think that we care a point for them? Long ago (except it were in the nonage
of our Company) we had learnd to set them at naught. True it is, that in the
year 1554. it so fell out that they censurd us, when we were but beginning to
creep out of the shell, yet were we speedily revenged on them, for we made
their censure to be ouer-waighed by the Spanish Inquisition. Therefore in
Spain (says a brave Historiographer of ours,) Seeing the Sorbons decree was
against the Sea Apostolic, by which our Religion is approved and confirmed,
Ribaden. li. 4. c. 11.
the Inquisitors of faith have by their decree, forbidden that to be read, as
false, and offensive to religious ears.

Gent. You confess you sent to the Inquisition to co^trole this good and holy
faculty of the Divines of Paris, the ancient pillar, proppe, and support, of
our Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church: and you make a Trophee of it, as
of a great victory. Ies. Let not this offend you, for at a pinch we will
grapple with the Pope, if we take him swaruing never so little from his
ancient duty. W^e held oppinion a little before King Henry the fourth came
to the Crown, (whom we now call the man of Bearne) that Pope Sixtus the fist
did err a little in favoring him: and God knows we spared him not in our
Pulpits; some likewise sought to persuade the world, that we gave him a dram to
send him packing. Gent. Regard you not the Pope whose creatures you are, and
have no authority but from him? If it be so, I take my leave of you, and lay
my hand upon my mouth. Only I wish we had some Cneius Flauius among us, to
lay open your secrets unto France, or some Tacitus to set them down in
writing, with as great liberty as your put them in execution.

The Advocate was som-what silent until we came thus far, but then he
began to break out. You shall hold your peace (quoth he) as long as you
please, so will not I, I will be that Cneuis Flauius you desire, for as he
discovered to the Romans, the perfumes which their chief Priest sold them at
so high a rate, in acknowledgement whereof he was created Tribune of the
people, that is to say, A preserver of the peoples liberty: So will I uncase
by peece-meale, that doctrine which the Jesuits have sold us heere-to-fore by
golden weight. And I persuade my self that grateful posterity finding it by
me recorded, will account me a Protector of the liberty of the Church of
France. And it may be it will come to pass, that as antiquity made a
Proverb of Cneius Flauius, saying, that he hit the birds eye: so will
succeeding ages report of me, that I have peckt out the eyes of those Crows,
that pray upon the carcasses and carrion of other beasts, and of the Jesuits,
who now live not by the bare bones only, but by the fairest revenues of our
Families. And that I hold you not long in suspense, I say and auerre, there was
never any Sect more dangerous to our Christian Religion then this: and for such
a one it has been first condemned at Rome, afterward at Paris. Nevertheless,
I will begin with France, as with her to whom I am most bound, because she
brought me forth.

This first march of the Advocate made us stand upon our guard: for hitherto
some of the company slept. And for my part, hearing him so hardy in his
promise, I turned toward him, saying; Sir, all this while have I been mute,
but now I see you upon the point ready to take Arms, to give the onset upon
this holy Company, I recover my speech, as the son of Craesus did when one
would have killed his Father. If you be the Jesuits Cneius Flauius, I will be
their Tacitus, to commit those things faithfully to writing which I learn of
you. I ever took this Society to be one of the strongest Bulwarks of our
Catholic Religion, and me thinks it were great impiety to slander them.
Aduoc. Call you that a slander, when the truth is spoken? For my part I will
say nothing, which I will not prove by writing, and take my direction from
their own Bulls and Constitutions, their speeches and confessions, drawn out
of such books, as they themselves have Printed within these 5. or 6. years,
allowed by their General to come forth. Whereunto any of the company that
stands in doubt, may have recourse if it please him. You promise very much
said I again. Aduoc. I promise nothing but I will make it good: and therewith
he pausd a while, as one that makes semblance to retire, that he may give the
greater shocke. On the other side, I took out my tables, to note every passage
he should allege, which I will show to you at large. And so every one of us
clayming interest in the Advocate to whip him, if we took him with a lie: and
contrary, if he should speak the truth, then all at once to thrust the
Jesuits out of France presently, without respite. After he had quieted
himself a little, he enterd the Listes, and made his carrere in this manner.

CHAP. 3. The censure given of the Jesuits sect, by the Divines of Paris, in
the year, 1554.
I Perceive France is partial, some favoring the Jesuits above measure,
others abhoring them again. I beseech you my Masters, (for I speak to those
that of scrupulositie of conscience foster this family in their houses) that it
would please you to give good ear to me, and if you find that to be false
which I shall produce, or that I am carried with unbridled passion, you would
not spare me. Likewise, if nothing but the truth command me, which ought to
redownd to the edification of us all, do me the favor not to credit your
first apprehensions, before you give place unto the second. You make great
account of these men, as if they were the sole arches that bear up our Church:
Let me request you to take a view of the judgment of the Divines of Paris, in
the year 1554. The Court of Parliament then troubled with the importunate
suits of these new Brethren, bringing the two Bulls of two Popes, Paulus and
Julius the third, sent them to this Faculty for their resolution, whether they
were to be received into the Realm of France again, or not? They gave up
their verdict in such form as follows.

Anno Domini 1554. die vero prima Decembris, Sacratissima Theologiae facultas
Parisiensis, post missam de S. spiritu, in aede sacra Collegij Sorbonae, ex
more celebratam, iam quarto in eodem Collegio, per iuramentu^ congregata est,
ad determinandum de duobus diplomatibus quae duo sanctissimi Domini summi
Pontifices Paulus tertius, and Julius Tertius, his qui societatis Jesus nomine
insigniri cupiuut, concessisse dicuntur. Quae quidem duo diplomata, senatus seu
curia Parlaamti Parisiensis, dictae facultati visitanda and examinanda, misso
adrem Hostiario, commiserat.

Antequam vero ipsa Theologiae facultas tanta de re, tantique ponderis tractare
incipiat, omnes and singuli Magistri nostri, palam atque aperto ore professi
sunt, nihil se aduersus summorum Pontificum authoritatem and potestatem, aut
decernere, aut moliri, aut etiam cogitare velle. Imo vero omnes and singuli, vt
obedientiae filij, ipsum summum Pontificem, vt summum and vniuersalem Christi
Jesus Vicarium, and vniuersalem Ecclesiae Pastorem (cui plenitudo potestatis a
Christo data sit, cui omnes vtriusque Sextus obedire, cuius decreta venerari,
and pro se quisque tueri, and obseruare teneantur) vt semper agnouerunt and
confessi sunt, ita nunc quoque sincere, fideliter, et libenter agnoscunt, and
confitentur. Sed quonia^ omnes, praesertim vero Theologos paratos esse oportet
ad satisfactionem omni poscenti de his quae ad fidem, mores, aedificationem
Ecclesiae pertinent, dicta facultas, poscenti, mandanti, and exigenti curiae
praedictae satisfaciendum duxit. Itaque vtriusque diplomatis omnibus frequenter
lectis articulis, repetitis, and intellectis, and pro rei magnitudine, per
mu^tos dies, menses, and horas, pro more prius diligentissime discussis and
examinatis, tum denaum vnanimi consensu, sed summa cum reuerentia and
humilitate, rem integram correctioni sedis Apostolicae relinquens, ita censuit.

Haec nona societas, insolitam nominis Jesus appellatione^ sibi vendicans, tam
licenter and sine delectu quaslibet personas, quantu^libet facinorosas,
illegitimas and infames admittens nullam a Sacerdotibus secularibus habens
differentiam in habitu exteriore, in tonsura, in horis canonicis priuatim
dicendis, aut public in templo decantandis, in claustris and silentio, in
delectu ciborum and dierum, in ieiunijs and alijs varijs ceremonijs (quibus
status Religionu^ distinguntur and conseruantur) tam multis, tamque varijs
priuilegijs, indultis, and libertatibus donata, praesertim in administratione
Sacramenti paenitentiae and Eucaristiae, idque sine descrimine locorum, aut
personarum, in officio etiam praedicandi, legendi, and docendi in praeiudicium
ordinariorum, and Hierarchici ordinis, in praeiudicium quoque aliarum
Religionum, imo etiam principium and Dominorum temporalium, contra priuilegia
vniuersitatum, denique in magnum populi grauamen, Religionis Monasticae
honestatem violare videtur, studiosum, pium, and necessarium, virtutum,
abstinentiarum, ceremoniarum, and austeritatis eneruat exercitium: imo
occasione^ dat libere Apostatandi ab alijs Religionibus, debitam ordinarijs
obedientiam, and subiectione^ subtrahit. Dominos tam temporales, qua^
Ecclesiasticos, suis inribus iuiuste private, perturbationem in vtraque politia,
multas in populo querelas, multas lites, dissidia, contentiones, aemulationes,
rebelliones, vartaque schismata inducit. Itaque his omnibus, atque alijs
diligenter examinatis and perpensis, Haec societas videtur in negotio fidei
periculosa, pacis Ecclesiae perturbatiua, monasticae Religionis euersiua, and
magis ad destructionem quam act aedificationem.

I will not iuggle with you, it may be some of this company understands no
Latin, therefore this censure being the foundation of my discourse, I will
put it into French apparel, that every man may know it.

In the year of our Lord 1554. the first of December, the most sacred faculty
of the Divines in Paris, after Mass of the holy Ghost was celebrated in the
College of Sorbons Chapel, according to their custom, this fourth time, by
oath assembled together, to determine of the two Bulls, which two holy Fathers
the Popes, Paulus the third, and Julius the third, are said to have granted to
these men that desire to be honored with the society of JESUS. Which two
Bulls, the Senate or Court of Parliament of Paris, sent by Hostiarius to the
said Faculty to be perused and examined.

Before they entreated of so high and weighty matters, all and singular our
Masters in pubique with open mouth protested, that they decreed, deuisd, and
intended nothing against the authority and power of the Pope, but all and
every of them, like obedient Children, as they ever acknowledged and confessed
him to be Christ's chief and universal Vicar, and general Pastor of the
Church, whom all sorts of both Sects are bound to obey, to honor his decrees,
and every one to defend them to his power: So now also, they do sincerely,
faithfully, and willingly acknowledge and confess the same. But because every
man, especially Divines, ought to be ready to give an answer to every one
that asks them of matters appertaining to faith, manners, and edification of
the Church, the said Faculty has thought it meet to satisfy the request,
commandment and entreatie of the Court. Therefore all the Articles of both
Bulls being often read, repeated, and conceived, and for the greatness of the
matter, many days, months, and hours, according to their custom, first
very diligently discust, and examined, at last with one consent, but with
great reverence and humility, submitting all to the controlement of the
Apostolic sea, they gave this doom.

This new Society chalenging to it self the rare title of the name of Jesus,
so licentiously, and hand ouer-head, admitting all sorts of persons how wicked,
illegitimate, or infamous soever, diffring nothing from secular priests in
outward apparel, tonsure, canonical hours, either privately to be said, or
publicly to be sung in churches, in cloistures and silence, in choice of
meats and days, in fasts and other ceremonies (whereby religious orders are
distinguished, and preserved) endowed with so many and sundry privileges,
grants, and liberties, especially in administration of the Sacraments of
penance, and of the Eucharist, and that without difference of place or persons,
as also in the office of preaching, reading, and teaching, to the prejudice of
the Ordinaries, of the Hierachicall order, to the prejudice likewise of other
religious men, nay even of Princes and temporal Lords, against the privileges
of the Universities, and to the great grief of the people, appears to
defloure monastical religion: it cuts the sinews of the painful, holy, and
necessary exercise of virtues, of abstinence, ceremonies, and austeritie, it
opens a gap to Apostacy from other religious orders, it takes away due
obedience from the Ordinaries, it unjustly depriues the Lords spiritual and
temporal of their right: It breeds a garboile in both governments, many
complaints among the people, many iarres, discords, contentions, emulatio^s,
rebellions, and sundry schisms. Therefore all these and other things of like
nature thoroughly examined and waighed. This Society appears to be in matter of
faith dangerous, to the peace of the Church troblesome, to monastical
religion ruinous, and more apt to pull down than to build up.

Was there ever a better sentence, mixed with a truer prophecy than this? And
why? There was no banding then in the field, every man slept safe in the
sincerity of his conscience toward God, there were no tumultuary assemblies,
but for four days together, and by them that had determined of it long
before. Much less minded they to oppose themselves against the authority of
the holy Sea, as we gather from their humble protestation. For this cause, the
holy Ghost after their devout invocation of him by their sacrifice, spoke
thorough the organe of this sacred faculty. And thus am I persuaded, that for
these thousand years, there was never any work of the holy Ghost greater, and
more apparent to our eyes than was this censure. The Court of Parliament of
Paris sent those Bulls only of Pope Paulus dated the year 1543. And that of
Julius the third, dated the year 1550. The Jesuits kept all the other close,
bearing date of the years 43.45.46.49.

Upon the sight but of those two ends of their ware they judged wisely what the
rest of the whole piece might be. Without any more a do, remember those three
lines. It breeds many complaints among the people, many iarres, dissentions,
contentions, rebellions, and sundry schisms: and confer them with your
discovery of their order, you shall find the Sorbons speech true. The divine
service of their Church is divided from ours, their privileges make a division
between the Bishops and them, the Monasteries and them, the Universities and
them, the Divines of Paris and them. Their propositions also, make a division
between the holy Sea and Princes. But how be these privileges maintaind? By
their Colleges, their confessions, their preaching. Their Colleges are traps
to catch youth, their confessions, subornations; their Sermons, Mounte-banks
Markets. If you believe this Jesuit here, he will say: we have no preachers
but them to defend the old Church. It is not yet above threescore years since
they were set a foot. What preachers have we had of them in Paris? One Aimond
Auger, and James Commolet. I remember none but these. On the other side, how
many has the faculty of the University in Paris bred, of learned and holy
men, never tainted with innovation? Again, did ever any man in our time hear
a Jesuit handle or expound in Pulpit or open assembly, any one text of
Scripture, either to uphold the Apostolic Sea, or lay heresy in the dust?
What is the sum of their preaching? To bite them that are absent, not to
edify them that are present, except it be to scandale kings and princes. And
that which is most admirable in this censure, is, that our divines saw the
rebellions, these new masters would raise up in time to come, against our king.
Therefore while I now embarke my self against them, it is neither giddiness,
malice, nor folly, that caries me with wind and tide. I set the venerable
faculty of the divines of Paris before mine eyes, for my Vice Admiral, to
carry the light in my navigations.

CHAP. 4. How, at what time, and by what sleights the Jesuits crept into
France.
WHen God is determined to scourge a whole Realm: he uses great and
unexpected means to perform it: it has so fallen out with us. Long before the
lamentable death of Henry the second, who lived in the year 1559. There
sprung up two sects in France, the one, in many propositions as dangerous as
the other. That of Ignatius which calls it self the society of Jesus: the
other of the Caluinists, who say they stand for reformation of religion. Both
of them planted in Paris the chief city of the kingdom for a time. It so
fell out that the Jesuits made their assemblies, and the Caluinists had their
conuenticles. The Jesuits sect is a bastard religion, of our ancient Catholic
and Apostolic Roman religion (for to say true, it has a few marks and
features of it, though none such as it ought to have) this began to be
authorized by Ma. William Prat, Bishop of Clairmont, legate du Prats bastard,
who lodged them in the house of Clairmont at Paris, and at his death,
bequeathed them (by report) threescore thousand crowns. After that they
crowded into more spacious mansions, they bought the great house of Langre in
Saint James street, where they erected a College and Monastery both together
under diverse roofes, they did read public lectures without the rector of the
Universities allowance, they administered the holy Sacraments of penance, and of
the altar to all comers and goers, without leave of the Odinarie. The
Caluinists began to preach and teach, if not altogether openly, yet not so
covertly as they did before. Witness the great assembly, surprised by the
Court of Parliament before Plessies College, where an infinite number of men
and women were taken, and after that an Advocate, a Scholemaister, and a
Damsel put to death. Thus may I say, and say truly, these two sects began to
set up their rests within Paris in S. James street, reching out to fifteen or
twenty houses one after another. And after this vowed, the one to have Jesus
name stamped upon their pistolet crowns, the Jesuits to have it set upon the
gates of their Colleges with a cross aloft, to show that they did lodge at
the sign of the cross. As the Caluinists called their religion, the reformed
religion, so the Jesuits gloried, that in some part of Italy, namely in Modena,
they were called the reformed also. And as the Caluinists whom we term Hugonots
rose up in arms in France, in the year, 1561. So the Jesuits took example
by them, and had recourse unto arms about the year 1585. to enclarge their
bounds.

If I be not deceived in the time, nor miss my mark, Henry the second died:
whereupon the Caluinists thought they might make their way fair without noise,
through the midst of France. This good king left behind him four young
princes his children under the Queen mothers charge, a stranger princess, not
allied to the great houses of France, thereby was she unfit to second them in
government of the state, and education of these children. Thus at one instant
the two sects began to increase: one by the Kings death, the other by a Bishops
decease. During the minority of our Kings, the Nobility of France covered their
ambition with a cloak of religion. New partialities grew among them, some
taking part with the old religion, others with the new: every one of them (by
the judgment of the wisest) seeking his own gain and advancement, more then
devotion. In this encounter, the ministers of whose company some were burnt
before, put up a supplication to Charles the ninth, to give them audience. This
was soon granted, and the town of Poissy appointed for this purpose, where
many Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors of Divinity were assembled
on the one side: and many Ministers, of whom Thodor Beza was the ringleader,
seconded by Peter Marter, Marlorat, Cimpoll, and some of good place and mark
among them, on the other side.

Upon the sentence of the Sorbons given in the year 1554. the Jesuits finding
their hope to be forlorn, sought to Ma. Noel Brullarte the Kings Procurator
general, in the court of Parliament of Paris, the seuerest man in his place,
that ever was seen. These men that slip no opportunity to advance themselves,
hearing of the great conference at Poissy, promised to put in their foot among
them. At that time one Ponce Congordan was their Agent in Paris, of whom
Charles Cardinal of Loraine was wont to say, he was the cunningest negotiation
that ever he knew though he had known many. He then it was that took the
matter in hand, presented his request to the Court of Parliament of Paris, not
in the name of the Society of Jesus, but in the name of the College of
Clairmount, whereby the Jesuits protested to abjure their vows, entreating the
Court to allow of their College. Which if the Court had done, it had been a
mean to allow their legacy given them. The Court according to their prudence
and piety, sent this request to the French Church then assembled at Poissy, to
determine of it. Never was there a fairer assembly, and never did assembly
bring forth more mischief to the state then that. I fear not to put the
Placard into his hands that shall write the History of our times, for they
authorized both sects without all consideration. And, which I most wonder at,
the instruments hereof were two Cardinals, men of great knowledge and zeal, no
young prentizes in the mysteries of religion, or affairs of state; one of them
had been employed in the greatest matters of this kingdom, in the time of the
mighty king Francis: the other in the time of Henry the second. The two
special were the Cardinals of Tournon and Lorraine. The first for the gravity
of his years, and consequently for the soundnes of his judgment, was
persuaded that this conference with the ministers was in no case to be
admitted, for that the entering into it was a kind of acknowledging them to be a
part of our commonweal, whom heretofore we took to be rotten members,
howsoever the nonage of the king might dispense with their opinions upon this
point. The second, in the flower of his years, upon the confidence he had in
his own wit, seconded by two great divines Dispense and Salignac, desired to
bring the matter upon the stage, flattering himself, that if they might
dispute upon Beza, the matter might easily be drawn to a head.

The most voices went with him. The Cardinal of Tournon, spying himself
supplanted in his oppinion, began to draw up the Jesuits, a fair and
glorious pretense (as seemed) to give battle to the new Religion. Herein
was he followed by a number of other Prelates, not because they did not
foresee what an infinite number of inconveniences might arise out of it, but
because they thought poisons must be purged by counterpoysons. The Scaffolds
built, the Cardinal of Loraine and Beza, played their prizes before the young
King, in the presence of many States diversely affected. The assembly broken up,
after this we had three Religions openly in France. The one, sounded nothing
but the word of GOD in their preachings: The next, took up the Name of Jesus
in their Sinagogues: The third, was our ancient Catholics, to whom we
attribute in our Churches, the honor of our faith by the only Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 5. The decree of the French-Church against the Jesuits, in the assembly
had at Poissy. 1561.
FOr all this I would not have you think my Masters, but that our French
church did put many notable ingredients into this Jesuitical poison to
qualify it. For after the recital all along the Decree, of all the
privileges and favors diversely given them, by Paul and Julius the third, and
some Letters Patent obtained by them, and reckoning made of their request
presented to the Court, and put over to these Prelates, in the end, behold what
order they set down.

The Assembly, according to the matters put to them by the Court of Parliament
of Paris, has received and does receive, has approved and does approve, the
said Society and Company, in form of a College, not of their new
institution of Religion, with express charge, that they take another title
then the Name of JESUS, or of Jesuits, and that the Bishops of the Dioces, shall
have all superiority, jurisdiction, and correction over this society and
College, to thrust out and expel from the said Company, all men of evil
life and misbehauiour. Neither shall the Brothers of this Company enterprise or
perform, any action temporal or spiritual, to the prejudice of the Bishops,
Chapters, Curats, Parrishes, Universities, or other religious, but they shall be
bound to conform themselves wholly to the disposition of the Common-lawe,
without having any right or jurisdiction, and renouncing all their former
privileges, expressly their Bulls contrary to the things aforesaid, provided
that if they fail herein, or shall hereafter procure any other; that then
this present Decree shall be void and of none effect, or exceptions to be
taken to the right of the said Assembly, and of others in all cases. Given in
the Assembly of the French Church, held by the kings commandment at Poissy,
in the great hall of the venerable religious men of Poissy, under the sign and
seal of the most reverend Cardinal of Tournon, Archbishop of Lions,
Metropolitan and Primate of France, President of the said Assembly, and of
the reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Paris, the messenger of this
request. Given under the signs of Master Nicholas Breton and William Blanchy,
actuaries and Secretaries of the said Assembly, upon Monday the 15. of
December, 1561.

Pontius Congordan their Agent, now furnished with this holy Decree, presented
it to the Court of Parliament of Paris, where it was soon ratified. Here I
will make a pause and tell you, that if ever, though not all, yet the least
part of this decree had been obeyed, I would here ask them forgiveness, and
assure my self that these Gentlemen, Marion, Pasquier, Arnault and Dole, which
have all vowed to make war upon them, would do the like. But if the request
they put up, was but a mere mummery, not only to mock the French Church
hereafter, but the Court of Parliament, and that they have made no account of
that which was commanded them, they must with one consent confess, that
neither the particular answer made by Fraunces de Montaignes, against Arnalts
impleadment, nor the venomous tooth of one Fon, (I wot not who^) stricken into
Marion and Pasquier, the one, the Kings Advocate in Parliament, the other, of
the Chamber of accounts in Paris, nor the hipocriticall request made to the
King without the Authors Name, shall ever be sufficient to prove the^ any
natural or French brood.

The Faculty of the University of Paris, denounced them at their first
arrival, to be Schismatiques, disturbers of the peace of the Church, and
monastical discipline. Afterward, the Church of France to provide for their
great disorder, allowed them by way of limitation before rehearsed,
notwithstanding all the ingredients, and coolers, put in to temper this poison,
the venim ouer-came their virtue. For as soon as they had seized upon this
sentence, they wrote upon their College gate, The College of the society of
JESUS. They followed their first course, which they have continued and will
continue so long as they remain in France. As it is the nature of the French
to be more hardy then men at the beginning, and more cold and feeble then
women in continuance: So suffered we our selves to be led away at last, by
these wit-foundred new Friars. Every man if he be not hunted hot, abandons
the public affairs, to be wedded to his own in particular.

CHAP. 6. Of the request preferred by the Jesuits to the Parliament, the year
1564. to be incorporated into the University of Paris: and how many sides
made head against them.
POntius Co^gordan for his part, did not lay him down to sleep when he saw us
weary, but thinking he had got the day, preferred a petition to the
University, in the year 1564. the tenor whereof was this. The Principal of
the College and company of Jesus, called the College of Clairmont, beseeches
you to incorporate the^ into the University, that they may enjoy the
privileges of it. The University having given them the repulse, they fled
to the Court of Parliament, where Congordan Chos Versoris for their Advocate,
the University entertaind Pasquier. The cause pleaded by these two, here was
the sport, Pasquier at the first push, showed them, that to read their request
only, was enough to overthrow them. For the foundation of their cause depended
upon the French Churches decree, which forbad them expressly to take upon them
the name of the society of Jesus, which title notwithstanding they had
inserted into their request. This was to strike the^ right upon the visor, by
means whereof, they were compeld to fly to a denial, where they took
sanctuary for the liberty of their actions, as often as they found themselves
driven into any narrow straight that might prejudice them. Versoris denied him
that framed the request, that was in plain terms Congordan, who denied
himself, by the mouth of his own Advocate whom he chose. By the negotiations
which have on their part passed between them and us, to set up their sect, An
Ass and a Fox have been tied together.

A meruallous matter, and worthy to be rung into the ears of all succeeding
ages. First, they of the new Religion, troubled us about the town of Amboise,
against the Lords protectors of the young King, Fraunces the second, partly by
the conference had at Poissy, and Geneuian preaching insinuated into France.
Lastly, by the surprise of towns, and a bloody battle fought before Dreux.
In brief, by a civil war of 18. months continuance, upon the
parcialities of Papists and Protestants, which was afterward luld a sleep with
an Edict of conniuence, our hands being yet embrued with the blood of those
troubles, and having scarce any leisure to take our breath. In this progress
by degrees, the Jesuits request was presented to the Court of Parliament, that
had ten Advocates, (as Montaignes and Fon do confess in their writings) in
respect of 13. adversaries, Mont. ca. 22 Fon. ca. 4.
which Fon reports, were six boisterous and mighty limmed bodies, to wit, the
Universities, the Sorbons, the Mendicants, the Hospitals, and the Parish
priests. With other four Lords of great authority, namely the Governor of
Paris, the Cardinal Chastilion, as protector of the University, the Bishop of
Paris, and the Abbot of S. Geniueue.

Now, can we be so senseless, as to think that so many, both of the better
and meaner sort, banded against them without cause, in a matter of so great
importance? But what were the commons? those which of late memory plagued the
Hugonots, out of all measure, raced the walls of Patriarch and Popincourt,
where they had their exercise of religion: who by order of Law procurd the
death of Gabaston, the Captain of their guard, and protector of their
attempts, together with Cagres, both the Father and the son. So many Sages of
the common people (sworn enemies to heresy) did set themselves against the
Jesuits, lying but yet in the suburbs of our civil wars; against the Jesuits
I say, who then vaunted themselves to be the scourge of Heretics. Assuredly it
cannot be, but that all those great personages, who then undertook the
quarrel against them, were persuaded that this Sect was extremely to be
feared, as well by the liberty of the French Church and general estate of
France, as of all Christendom. Besides these two great parties, there was yet
another, more strong and mighty then them both, namely, Mounsieur Mesnil the
Kings Advocate in the Court of parliament, directly opposite to them.

But for all this great multitude of partakers (says the Jesuit) the matter
came not to open trial, but was put over to counsel, as a plain argument
that the goodness of our cause did crave very much favor. Poor fool, and
young Scholar, had thou been brought up in the light of the Royal palace,
or read the course of justice of our kings, as thou art nuzled in the dust of
the Colleges, thou should have known that the high Courts admit no open
trial of great causes, they have no time nor leisure, duly to inform their
consciences. As appears by a like course held by the same Court in the month
of July, 94. And for this cause, Mounsieur Marion pleading against the Jesuits
of Lions, in the year 97. said, that a defective and imperfect prudence of the
year 64. was in some sort the occasion that the affairs of France
degenerated with the time, and waxed worse and worse. As for my self, I will
say more boldly with open face. that this matter was in the year 64. put over
to counsel by the wisdom of men, but this counsel was guided by the hand
of God, who to take vengeance of our sins, preserved the Jesuits as a devoted
instrument hung aside in the Temple, fit for the future miseries of France.

To what purpose is all this, save only this, to show you that if I detest
and abhor the Sect of Jesuits, I have no small shelters for my oppinion:
first the venerable censure of Paris, the year 1554. wherein were the greatest
Divines that ever were in France, and by name, Picard, Maillard, Demochares,
Perionius, Ory, the Inquisiter for matters of faith. The first, an admirable
preacher, whose body after his death being laid forth in his house in the
Deanery of S. Germins of Lauxerrois, the people of Paris for the sanctimony of
his life, did strive to kiss his feet: the four other his companions, were
extreme persecutors of the Heretics. I have the great decree of the French
church, in the year 61. the judgment that did second it, and finally, many
men of mark and communalty, set against them in the year 1564. Amongst these,
I may speak it for a certainty, which I ought to believe because I saw it.
There was two honorable resemblances of antiquity, Solicitors in the cause,
Bennet the Deane, and Courselles the Subdeane of the faculty of the Divinity
Schools in Paris; The one, fourscore years of age, the other, threescore and
seauenteene: both ready to depart from hence, to give up an account of their
actions in another world, at which time every man stands stricte upon his
conscience. With them was Faber Sindic, one of the wisest men that ever was
among the Sorbons.

In the winding up of all, I will set down Ma. Noell Brullarte, Procurator
general, the great Aristides and Cato of his time, which living in the year
50. withstood the receiving of the Jesuits. I tell you this, expressly to
discover how like the iugling of the Jesuits of our time, is to the former. For
Fon is so impudent as to report, that Ramus and Mercerus, after they became the
Kings Professors, revolted from our ancient Religion, and were folicitors in
this cause, and that if they had not encountered them, they had won the field:
but to avoid sedition, the Court was forced, warily to strike sail to the
tempest, by putting the matter off to counsel.

Well, but yet thou lie most impudently thou Jesuit. (Pardon me, for it is
very fit I should be in choler.) Neither Ramus nor Mercerus, for their parts
ever stirred in this, although they took part with their brethren, the Kings
Professors, because they would not separate themselves from the body of the
University.

Moreover, what likelihood is there, that the minds generally of the Parisiens
could be so suddenly changed to take part with the Hugonots. Mercerus was so
far from faction, that he had no skill in any thing but Hebrew, wherein he
spent all his time without intermission: and became so great a Superlatiue in
that tongue, that by the judgment of the best learned, he was preferred before
all the Jews. In all worldly matters he stood but for a bare Cipher. But
this is a Jesuitical privilege, to underset their slanders with the time by
new cogges. For if this Jesuit Fon durst, he would say that the town, the
University, and the faculty of Divinity in Paris, all the four orders of
Mendicants, and the Parish priests, were Hugonots, because they hindered the
matriculation of this holy Order: what other consequence can be deduced from
his speech? Oh singular and admirable impudency, yet to be excused, because it
proceeds from a Jesuit. Nevertheless, to show with what truth and integrity
I mean to confound the^ in their lying, they caused Versoris Plea to be printed
in the year 94. and he to bring the University into hatred, In the 24. and 32.
leaf of Versoris Plea.
says first and foremost, not that Mercerus but Ramus and Gallandius were made
solicitors in this cause: but this was so far from all likelihood of truth,
that every man took it for an hyperbole, by reason of the open enmity they
carried to all times, which accompanied them unto their death. This enmity,
Rablays the Lucian of our age, in the preface of his 3. book, and after him
Ioachim Bellay, a gallant Poet, in one of his chief Poems, scoffed at, with
express inventions, which are the best passages in all their books. As for
Gallandius, he was never of any other religion, then the Catholic Apostolic
Roman. I have quoated out this in particular as I pass along, to give you to
understand, that in every matter, be it never so small, the Jesuit cannot go
by without lying and disguising.

CHAP. 7. How the Jesuits were refused at Rome, and by what cunning they were
afterward received.
Never think, that if they were so evil entreated in France, they had any
better entertainme^t at Rome. At their first coming, Ignatius and his new
companions arriving there, plotted (in the year 1539) to establish a new sect
that should make the three ordinary vows of other religious, and a fourth
beyond them all, concerning mission: and that they should have a General, whom
they should be bound absolutely to obey, without any reason yielded them. I
will report it to you word for word, what was the conclusion of their assembly,
and what Massee the Jesuit says in the life of Ignatius, dedicated by him to
Aquauiua their General, which book was imprinted by his allowance.

Ergo, without controversy, one must be chosen to whom all in earth must be
obedient as if it were to Christ, Maffee. lib. 2. cap. 9. de vita Ignacij.
to his word they must swear, and esteem his beck and his will as an Oracle
of God. And after, they concluded that their General should continue in this
dignity while he lived. Moreover, that whosoever entered this profession,
should to the three solemn vows of all other religious houses, add a fourth,
to go without shrinking to whatsoever country of believers, or iufidels, it
should please the Pope to send them, and that without fee, or so much as
petition to defray their charges by the way. Thus you see in the first planting
of them, another absolute obedience to their General, in all things different
from that to the Pope, concerning their mission only. I will leave the rest of
their rule presented to Paul the third, to the examination it pleased his
holiness to make of it. He committed it to three Cardinals to discuss, which
thought good to refuse it, specially the Cardinal Guidicion. Ignatius whom I
have allowed for one of the most sharp and worldly wise men our age afforded,
knew he had played the Clarke, and in his new statute couched a greater
obedience to the General, than to the holy Sea. For this cause he reformed his
rule, and made their obedience to the Pope and their General in both alike.
These be the words of Ribadener a Jesuit, who has also written the life of
Ignatius. Rib. lib. 2. cap. 7.
The order of these Clarks must be, that by their Institution they be ready to
obey the Pope at a beck, and live by such a line as he shall well consider and
determine of. Which the Pope, at Tibur, the third of September, in the year
1539. was glad to hear. From this passage you may gather, that as soon as they
offered him absolute obedience in all things, Pope Paulus began to lend a
favorable ear unto them. Nevertheless, he stood a while in doubt to open any
broad way freely for them to enter, for in the year 1540. he allowed them no
number above threescore, afterward in the year 43. he laid the gate wide open
unto them.

CHAP. 8. Of the insolent title of the society of Jesus usurped by the
Jesuits, and how many sundry fashions they have used to authorize it.
Our whole country of France was very much offended at the proud and partial
name of Jesuits, which they took upon them. The French Church first, next to
it the Court of Parliament, expressly forbad the use of it. Mesnil the kings
great Advocate pleaded the cause, showing how odious the name ought to be among
Christians: for ripping up the reasons that moved the Bishop, the faculty of
Divinity, and the University of Paris to reject them at their first arrival;
The maine reasons were (quoth he) first the insolent name and title of Jesuits,
and verily by how much the more the name may be tolerated among Jews, Turks,
and Pagans, by so much the more it is to be refused among Christians, which do
all make profession of the law of Jesus. It is as worthy to be blamed, as if a
man should attribute and usurp unto himself alone the name of a Christian,
among Christians, the name of a French man among the French, or the name of
Parisian among the Parisians. Moreover the name of Jesus is of such dignity
and excellency, that his Disciples and Followers left it only to their Head,
and never took but the adjective of Christian, wherewith they are contented to
this day. Upon the same ground Pasquier said as much in a Plea of his. I will
begin with their name, and after descend to their propositions. First of all,
they call themselves Jesuits in the midst of Christians. Blessed God, is not
this an accusation of the Apostles? happy and renowned were those holy
Fathers, seeing our Savior Jesus Christ face to face, to hear his
exhortations daly, and after his ascension into heaven, to receive the holy
Ghost from him. Nevertheless, knowing with what humility they ought to regard
and honor that great and holy name of Jesus, they never durst call themselves
Jesuits, but Christians only, in the town of Antioch, where that name was
taken up by them: and as for matters of religion they were afterward so
handled, that as in Rome, the Popes never took upon them the name of S. Peter,
for the honor and reverence they bare to their Captain: so in Christendom was
there never any Christian baptized by the name of Jesus. All the old fathers
knew it well, that it had been blasphemy to attribute the name due to the
only Creator and Savior of mankind, unto a mere creature. You must
acknowledge then (my masters Ignatiens) that you blaspheme against the honor
of God, when you entitle your selves Jesuits. It may be you will say we do not
take upon us the name of Jesus, but of Jesuits, to let the people know that we
be Jesus followers. Why? did the Apostles and other disciples of our Lord, and
they that immediately succeeded him, briefly all the old fathers of the
Primitive Church, trace any less after him then you do? so as by some special
privilege you must borrow this title and not they? Furthermore I would be glad
to learn whether we, by withdrawing our selves from the vow of your arrogant
superstition, be shut out from the fellowship of our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ? Pasquier said well, that it is to call the Apostles in question. For
Fon the Jesuit defended afterward, that the Christians title, was a prouder
style then the Jesuits. Ignatius and his company (as they said) being desirous
to draw our Church back to the steps of the Apostles times, plotted to
minister the Sacraments of penance and of the Altar, and to preach Cods word.
And by this device they spread far without the authority of the holy Sea, and
they likewise desired to be entitled, the company of Jesus. The Apostles
ministered these two Sacraments, and carried the Gospel over all the world, was
it then permitted to these new undertakers to do the like? I deny it? For they
succeeded not the Apostles, but the Bishops, and under them the Curates. The
Jesuits devotion was built upon ignorance, by reason whereof, they ought not to
be called Jesus followers, but his forsakers, as bringers in of a new schism
into the Church. Yet have they by this erroneous proposition, qualified
themselves with the title of Jesus company. A style never given them by our
holy father, but arrogated to themselves, as manifestly appears in a passage
of their request preferred to Paulus the third, and interlaced in the Bull in the
year 1540. Whosoever in our Society (which we desire to be oderned with the
name of Jesus) is willing to war under the banner of the cross. This clause
is repeated word for word, as it lies in the Bull of Julius the third in the
year 1550. which is the confirmation of their privileges. It were absurd to
think Pope Paulus would honor them with so proud a title, who refused them at
the first, and after ward allotted them but a certain number, and that with
many scruples of conscience. Nevertheless, as the Jesuits never lackt new
lying inventions to credit them, so they bruted it abroad, that they held this
title by the faith and homage of the holy Sea. Indeed the first Chapter of
their constitutions begins in this manner. This little congregation, which by
their first institution was called the Society of Jesus, by the Sea
Apostolic. And agreeable unto this, Versoris the Advocate pleading their
cause, In the 30. leaf of Versons Plea.
alleged this passage, to show that the Pope was their Godfather, and that
they held their name by humility, not by ambition, these be the words he used.
I blame not the Advocate, a man of account: for he pleaded upon the
aduertisements given him, but I excuse not these wise men the Jesuits, which
are made liars by their own Bulls. There is no lie so impudent as that, but the
authority of the holy Sea was not sufficient to grace them by this forgerie:
they must have recourse to miracles, that is to say, to their iugling casts.
Maff. lib. 2. ca. 5. Rabad lib. 1. ca. 12.
Of late years Maffee first, and then Ribadener found out, that Ignace
accompanied with Peter Faure, and James Lainez, going through a Church, not
far from Rome, being at his prayers, fell into a trance, wherein God the
Father appeared to him, who commended Ignace and his companions to Jesus Christ
his Son, then loaded with his cross, and marked with his wounds, which
promised to take him into his protection, and said to Ignace at that instant, I
will assist thee in Rome. And as soon as Ignace went out of the Church, he
discovered to his two companions what vision he had. That this is but a tale of
a tubbe, I have no doubt at all. James Lainez succeeded him in the Generalship,
who being privy to this miracle, how comes it to pass he never signified so
much to Congordan his Agent, and Versoris his Advocate, when the cause was
pleaded? Why did he smother this great miracle when it was requisite to
disclose it? For that which was chiefly objected against them in the assembly
of Poissie, and afterward in the court of Parliament of Paris, was the
insolency of this proud title of the Society of Jesus. Why (I say) did not
Lainez and his crew, give us notice of this matter, when the French Church and
the court of Parliament forbad them this title. They did not so much then,
because neither the devil, nor his impostures, built their nests in their
pens, as they did at last. Nevertheless, this lie profited them no more the^
another which we see with our eyes. For when Maffee had told us this tale,
mark what he puts to it. And this was the chiefest cause, for which after the
Society was confirmed, he gave it especially the name of Jesus. If that be true
which this liar reports, it follows, that Ignace and his companions, took not
the title of Jesus Society, but after their order was cofirmed, yet by their
requests put up to Pope Paul, inserted into their first Bull of the year 1540.
they attributed this name unto the^. And that which greatly waighes it, is,
that four or five years after, Montaignes a Jesuit roundly confessing that to
be false which Maffee and Ribadener have written, Cap. 66. of Truth defended.
he fathers this invention upon the Pope. I answer you (says he to Arnault)
that it is the Pope which gave the name to this holy company, and the sacred
counsel that allowed them, which suffices to stop your mouth. The very same
says Fon, Fon. ca. 38.
The people gave them the name of Jesuits, because the holy Sea called them the
company of Jesus. And two leaves after, The Jesuits termed not themselves
Iusuits, but the holy Sea termed them the company of Jesus. I commend the
conscience of these two honest Jesuits, who speaking nothing of Ignaces vision
mock themselves in their souls with these two flatteries. But I cannot choose
but excuse their ignorance, for had they red their first Bull of Paul the
third, they should have found that Ignace and his companions were entitled the
Society of Jesus when they preferred their petition to the Pope.

The Advocate standing upon these contrarieties, one of the company said to
him: Me thinks you labor in vain. They have this name of Jesuits, neither
from God nor from the Pope: but only from the common people, which is a great
Philosopher and controuler of our actions. You see Fon agrees unto it: but you
must understand at large, how matters pass on this side. Being at the first
named the company or Society of Jesus, the people marking their behavior
called them Iesuists, not Jesuits, pronouncing S. and T. together. For when
their cause was pleaded in the year 64. The Advocates called them nothing else
but Iesuists. See the counsel Master Charles Moulin, one of the best lawyers
in France gave upon the receiving them. The title was this, Whether the
Jesuits be to be received in the Realm of France, and admitted in the
University of Paris. And all along his discourse speaking of them, he uses no
other term than Iesuists. A matter which you shall find avouched also in
Versoris Plea, Fol. 30. Versoris Plea.
put forth in print by them. Men qualified their title (says he) and called
them the College of Iesuists. And so it continued a little after. But they
could not leave it, for so much as they ought to have a common name fitting the
whole order and Colleges belonging to them. Which can not be that of
Clairmounte, except peradventure for the three Colleges sake founded by the
Bishop of Clairmounte: It is therefore requisite they should add the word
Iesuists. This very name was afterward in use in their own College at Paris,
when they were expeld.

It is true, that in process of time the common people for the easier
pronunciation, discarded the S. and called them Jesuits* in steed of Iesuists.
And when Pasquier printed his Epistles in the year 1586. likewise when the
Plea was printed in the year 94. And that of the Advocate Mesnil, they were
termed Iesuists according to the common custom of time. Neither was this
reformed in Versoris Plea. Take it then for certain, that they were called
Iesuists, as you may better be informed by such as lived in those days, and
this was done upon grave consideration, for no spark of true Jesus being in
them, but hypocrisy only appareld with his name, the people branded them with
the name of Iesuists. In like manner you know that from the Greek word Sophos,
which sigfies sage, in old time the word Sophister was derived, to decipher
such a one as troubled the waters of Wisdom. Therefore we do noate by the name
of Iesuists these new disturbers of Jesus and his Church. After this manner in
our time, from the word Deus, some have wrested a title of men deified, which
is a new heresy. And as God shines in his wisdom, so shall it not be from the
purpose to couple a Iesuist and a Sophister together, because a Iesuist is
nothing else but the Sophister of our Catholic religion.

Here said the Advocate, you have reason, and not only I subscribe to your
observation, but more, I hold him a heavy beast, which shall not acknowledge
them to be of the Society of Jesus. Verily they are, but just as Judas was
among the Apostles, so many Iesuies so many Iudases, ready to betray their
princes or their countries, whenever occasion serves to do it. What will you
give us (will be the burden of their song to those princes that have most money)
and we will deliver our Leege Lord into your hands, or troble his state that it
may be yielded to you. Did they not attempt the same in France, and if our
famous Henry had believed them, had they not performed it? But thanks be unto
God, they met with such a bar as the necessity of our affairs required.

CHAP. 9. That the Jesuits are called Apostles in Portugal, and in the Indies,
and with what deceits they have wrought it.
QVestionlesse, he is much deceived that makes any doubt of the society of
Jesus, for there must of force be a Jesus in their company, sithence they have
had Apostles, and such remain among them in the Realm of Portugal to this
day: an impiety certainly shameful for our Catholic Apostolic Roman
Church, that under color of a painted obedience, they say they yield to the
holy Sea, we have suffered these hypocrites to be called Apostles, not in
Portugal only, but in many other Towns and Cities also of the Indies, where
they command. This history, how disgraceful soever it be to us, deserves
notwithstanding, to be understood and known to all good men, that they may be
informed how the Jesuits have not spared for any sleights to raise their
reputation, by the downfall of the true Church of GOD.

I must tell you then, that Ignace being at Venice with his nine companions,
Peter Faure, which in Latin is called Faber, Fraunces Xauier, James Lainez,
Alphonsus Salmeron, Nicholas Bobadille, Simon Roderic, Pasquier Broet, Claudius
Iay, and John Codury. One Hosius of Navarre, Bachelor of Divinity, after many
doubts cleared unto him by Ignace, Ribad. lib. 2. cap. 6.
at last joined heart and company with Ignace, and was put into the Cataloge
with the rest, (says Ribadener,) and upon the point of their departure from
the territory of Venice, Ribad. lib. 7. cap. 5. Maff. lib. 2. cap. 4.
after their first return from Rome. Ignatius, (says the same Author) Faber
and Lainez, went to Viceria, Fraunces Xauier and Salmeron, to mount Celesius,
John Codurus and Hosius (late said to be put into their number) to Tarnisium,
Claudius Iay, and Simon Roderic, to Bassanu^, Paschasius and Bobadilla, to
Verona. It pleased God that after Ignace was appointed by his companions to go
to Rome, Maff. lib. 2. cap. 4. Ribad. lib. 2. cap. 12.
as he was saying Mass at Mount Cassin, he saw an Angel carry Hosius soul
with joy to heaven. Thus by his death, their company was reduced to their
first Cataloge of ten, that number which (I say) preferred their request to
Pope Paul the third; and you shall not find that they soon afterward
gathered any more to make up eleven or twelve, as they did with Hosius.

Now, the record tells us, that as they were at Rome attending the Popes
pleasure to give order for their plot, John the third of that Name King of
Portugal, was desirous to have some one of these new Pilgrims to send him to
the Indies, where he possessed a great part of the Country. The Portugals had by
their long and venterous nauigations, opened a way to these new found Lands,
(for so our Ancestors called them,) and they made themselves masters of them,
where the most part of the Commanders continued in their old idolatry, and
others, although they were baptized, were but rude Christians. By this means
Ma. James Gouea, sometime principal of S. Barbes College in Paris, advised
the King to choose some one of these new Pilgrims at Rome, to convert his
subjects. Gouea by the Kings appointment, wrote to Ignace, who answered him
again by Letters, that he had no authority in that case, but that all
depended upon the Popes pleasure. After a little coursing to and fro, the
charge was committed to Fraunces Xauier of Navarre, and Simon Roderic a
Portugal.

These trauaild to the King, which entertained them very graciously. Upon
their arrival, the Pope enlarged this new company to the number of
threescore: these two men were called Apostles, a title derived from them to
their Successors in that Country. Horace Turcelin a Jesuit yeeldes this reason
of it. Last of all (says he, speaking of Xauier and Rodoric, Turcel lib. 1 ca.
10. of Xauers life.
) the excellency of their virtue, and contempt of the world, was miraculous
in the eyes of the whole City. It was bruted among the commen people, that
twelve Priests, (for two were added to the ten) had combined together at Rome.
Two of the which company living among them, seemed to carry (I know not what)
show of an Apostolical life. This made the people, whether it were for the
equality of the number, or for the conformit is of life, to begin by too great
a title, to call them Apostles, and continued so to term them though much
against their wills. For the Portugalls, being no less constant in their
doings, then religious in determination, they could never be drawn to recall
that name which they had once given (as they thought) unto the truth. Nay the
matter proceeded so far, that this name grew to be imposd upon the rest of
that society, almost throughout all Portugal.

Trust me, this passage is of such desert, that I should deceive these good
men, if I should not translate it into French, to discover with how great
piety they have purchased this title. For Fraunces Xauier is honored for a
great Saint among all the Jesuits. Was there ever any impiety or imposture
greater then this, that these two hypocrites to be counted Apostles, bruted it
abroad, that two new supplies were added to their Sect, to make up the number
of twelve Apostles; and that upon this false alarm they were called Apostles.
This was against their will (says Turcelline) believe the reporter. For Xauier
took special care not to loose his title when he came into the Indies.
Tincel. 2. book of Xauiers life, cap. 3.
Therefore, as before in Portugal, so in India, he began to be commonly called
an Apostle, and the same title afterward, flowed from Francis as from the Head
to the rest of his fellows. Tell me (I beseech you) whether this be not to
renew the heresy of Manes, whose followers were called Manichees, he naming
himself the Paraclet, had twelve Disciples whom he called Apostles, and for such
he sent them abroad one by one, to other provinces, to spread abroad the poison
of his heresy through their preaching. To say the truth, Ignace never took on
him the name of Paraclet, yet was he willing enough to be accounted for another
Jesus by his company: As I will discourse to you in his proper place, when I
come to speak of their blind obedience. He did not only take this authority and
power upon himself. But resigned it over also to all the Generals of his order
that succeeded him, who in like manner have embraced the title of Apostles,
wherewith their inferiors were endowed in Portugal.

This is apparent in Rome, and yet no man sees it, but quite contrary, this
Family is there had in honourrable regard, upon a wrong conceit men have
entertained touching their absolute obedience, whereof these my Masters make
semblance unto the Pope. And shall we hereafter have any marvel to hear a
barking at the holy Sea by diversities of new opinions that fight against it?
Pardon me I beseech thee, O holy Sea, for it is the heat of my zeal devoted to
thee, that inforceth me to utter this speech. Great and unspeakable are Gods
judgments, to suffer that in the City of Rome in your sight and knowledge,
there should be a Manes, continued by successions from one to another, which
has not twelve only, but infinite Apostles dispersed here and there: God will
revenge it early or late, though it be by his enemies.

The Advocate as a man much wounded in heart, was desirous to prosecute this in
a chafe, when the Jesuit interrupting him, said, Very well sir, you are in
danger to be drawn dry. Marking your discourse you put me in mind of those
young Historiographers which imputed it for folly to Alexander the great, that
he would have all men think him to be Jupiters son, they attributed this to
his immoderate ouer-weening, nevertheless it was an excellent wise drift of
his. Can you imagine why? so long as the country of king Darius, was the mark
he shot at, he was too wise to take that title upon him, and chose rather to
thrust forward his fortune by ordinary means of arms. But as soon as he
plotted to pass into India, a kind of new world divided from ours, he would
have the people persuaded by the great Priest of Egypt that he was Jupiters
son, and from that time he would be adored as such a one, not by the
Macedonians his natural subjects, bred in the liberty of a Greek spirit: But
by the barbarous people, with such respect and belief, that from that time
forward they should take him not to be a mere Prince, but a great God that
came to the conquest of the Indies: this device took so good effect, that he
made himself Lord of the country without striking stroke. The Kings,
Potentates, and common people, saying, that their country was first vanquished
by Bacchus, then by Hercules, both sons of Jupiter: and that the whole rule
and Dominion was reserved for the coming of Alexander, a third son of his.
Think you our Society follows not this plot? you see we never took the name
of Apostles any where but in Portugal: but when we were to go to the same
Indies where Alexander had been, we thought as he did, that it was fit we
should be authorized beyond others, by a more ample, sacred, and maiesticall
title, which was to be called Apostles. It had been ill for us to challenge it
in Portugal, if Xauier had not continued it, by an intercourse of his
company, after his arrival in the Indies, to the end he might be reputed
another Saint Thomas, sent thither after the passion of our Savior Jesus
Christ. And it were impossible to recount what conquests of souls we made
there, under this holy persuasion. Ha, (quoth the Advocate) verily if this be
your fashion, I have nothing to do with you: for as when you entered Italy you
borrowed I know not what of their Mountebanks, so would you do the like of
Machiauell, in Portugal and the Indies. Mean while, you my masters that have
bragged much of your knowledge in Divinity, have very ill turned over the
history of the kings in the the Bible, from whence you gather by a continued
rank, that God took away the crowns of all the Kings of Israel as often as
they became Idolaters, either while they lived, or in all time to come never
suffered them to descend unto their children. How think you (I pray ye) that
God has left the true Kings of Portugal without heirs, and that their Realm
came into the hands of the first Prince that caught it? That one Don Anthonio a
bastard, one Katherine de Medices, Queene-mother of our King, pretended title
to it, and last of all, that one Philip King of Spain became master of it
without any great resistance. I will not discourse in partriculer of the
goodness of his title: for mine one part, I think that the best title he had,
was the justice of God, who^ it pleased, in revenge of the giddie Idolatry and
blasphemy of the kings and people, to make this realm, without trial of the
cause, pass from one family to another, by this holy title of Apostles
attributed to these hypocrites. And I persuade my self, that the King of
Spain now reigning, will one day fall into the like mischief, if he suffer
this impiety.

CHAP. 10. The impieties of William Postell a Jesuits.
But why should we think this blaphemie strange in them, if within few years
after they took the title of Apostles on them, some one of them was found so
abominable in the sight of God and man, that he called the power of our Savior
Jesus Christ in question, upon the point of our Redemption. The man I speak
of, is William Postell, against whom Pasquier declaimed in his Plea on this
manner.

For so much as they buz nothing in the cares of simple women but their piety,
which they fasten to their Robes with a claspe and a point, mark whether they
they be such indeed as they protest in words. We have the Benedictines,
Barnardines, Dominicans, Franciscans, and other like orders. At the beginning
of these professions, the authors thereof were found to be men of so holy life,
that by common consent of the Church they were registered in the Calendar of
Saints: Whereupon many drawn by their good life desired to trace after them.
Peradventure we shall likewise find, that the first of the Jesuits sect were
men of so holy and austere life, that we ought to be so far of from any
dislike of them, as on the contrary, we should rather wish to be incorporated
into them. About ten or twelve years ago one of your old Factors came to this
town, a man as far exceeding you in knowledge, as you do the simple
handy-crafts man. This was Master William Postell: we heard him preach, read,
and write. He had a large Cassack, reaching down to the middle leg, a long
Robe, girt about him, an Episcopal bonnet; accompanied with a pale and withered
face, which bewraied nothing but great austeritie: and he said Mass with many
nice ceremonies not common in the Church. All this while what did he bring
forth? One mother Jane, an impiety, an heresy, the most detestable that ever
was heard of since the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Donatists, the
Arians, the Pelagians, never did such a thing. Where preached he? Not in
mountanie or desert places, where men are wont to plant new religions: it was
in the fair heart of France, in the City of Paris. Of what Order was he? Of
this venerable Society of Jesus. Ha, believe me if your society bring such
monsters forth, if you engender so damnable effects, God grant we never be
of this society.

The Jesuits to this day deny it very stoutly, that Postell was ever of their
society: and not only deny it, but as soon as Pasquier objected it when he
pleaded the cause against them, they said it was a new addition put to his old
Plea when he printed it. Chap. 42.
Pasquier shows himself (says the wisard Fon) to have lost all the faculties
of his soul, his understanding, his will, and his memory: his understanding
is full of darkness, his will full of gale, his memory fraught with oblivion.
For when the cause was pleaded in the year 64. Postell was then alive,
confined to the Monastery of S. Martine of the fields at Paris, where he
lived until the year 1580. Nevertheless, this good pleader speaks of him as
if he had been dead long before. And a little after: last of all you must
note, that Pasquier spoke not this when he pleaded: for he had been checked for
so impudent a lie, and hissed at by the whole world that saw Postell then
present; but this was written one and twenty years after, when he defierd to
publish it. And so is he contrary to himself, forgetting to take that counsel
the Proverb gives, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, to the end he may draw up the
pieces of falsehood so close, that no body might perceive the seame.

And if you will believe me, it was not without cause the Jesuits played this
Pauin to this Perric dauncer, for if Postell were a Jesuit, they are undone.
Therefore I beseech you let us examine three things: The first, whether
Pasquier made this objection. The second, whether Postell were of their
company. And thirdly, what was that impiety which he sought to bring into
our Religion, under the name of his mother Jane? For as good fellows use to
say, The sport is worthy of a candle. Concerning the first, Pasquier never
spoke of Postell as of a dead man: to prove it, the beginning of the passage
is thus. About ten or twelve years ago, one of your company came to this
Town, a man that passes you, as much as you do the mean Artificer. By these
words you see, he spoke as of a man then living: but he added afterward, This
was Ma. William Postell, carrying back all the coherence of this discourse, to
the time of ten or twelve years past, when Postell built up an heresy upon
his Mother Jane, as you may gather from the same passage; which shows that the
Jesuits have neither understanding, judgment, nor memory, stumbling in this
manner upon Pasquier: and this is it which in the year 1594. they caused to be
imprinted, in Versoris Plea of the year 64. which was an answer to Pasquiers
Plea: if you take up the book and read it, in the 36. leaf you shall find
these words. It is objected against us, that Postell was likewise of our
company, and that by these bad fruits you may see what the tree was, I ask
them, what were the fruits of Judas, must we for them condemn our Lord and
his Apostles? And a little after; Postell was never professed in our house, he
was a very Nouice and sent away.

Would you have a more evident demonstration then this, to prove both that
Pasquier spoke of Postell living, and that he made this objection. For
otherwise, Versoris had fought with his own shadow. Let us now consider
whether Postell were of their order. And to make it good that he was, I apply
that which I even now read unto you, Versoris and Pasquier, were two brave
Champions brought to combat in the Lists before the chief Senate of France,
at the foyles. The blow delivered against Postell offended all the order, in
respect of the place he held among them. Had not he been one of them, that
great Advocate Versoris, had never winded himself away from this stroke as he
did, but rather had denied it roundly, as the Jesuits now do, thinking that
the distance of time has raced it out of remembrance, but knowing that the
truth then apparent, would have complained of him, he was not so hardy. By
means whereof, swimming between two billows, he acknowledged him to be a
Nouice of their Company, but afterward shut out of doors.

Of this expulsion you shall not be able to quoate any time. For after he
printed his book of Mother Jane, that stunke in the nose of all the world,
they would never have suffered him to become a Nouice, as likewise that is
verified, that a little after his book was condemned, and the Author confined
to the Monastery of S. Martins. As before this he was too great a man in all
kind of learning, and of the tongues, to shut him out of their company: so was
he seen publicly apparrelled after the Jesuits manner in Paris, in the
College of Lombards, with Father Pasquier Broet, and the other Jesuits, in
which house they had their first aboade. After this, when they had a College
made ready for them, and gates open in the house of Langres in S. James
street, he did eat and drink with them daily: before he was confined to the
Monastery of S. Martine. Hereby you may see, that no man then doubted he was
a Jesuit.

What was then his impiety grounded upon his Mother Jane? Being now to
bicker with these pretended nauigators of Afric, every man must understand,
that they breed as many new Monsters as men. When Postell had been many
years the Kings Professor of the Greek tongue, in the University of Paris,
he left his place, desirous to hoist sail for Palestina, as the good Ignace
did: from thence he came back to Venice, about the time of the good Ignace,
where he grew acquainted with a supersticious old beldam called Mother Jane,
whom he made his Mother. A little while after, he returned to Paris to the
College of Lombards, with his companions the Jesuits, where he printed a
book entitled, The victory of Women. In which he maintaind, that our Savior
Jesus Christ redeemed the superior world only, that is, Man; and that his
Mother Jane was sent from God to save the inferior world, that is, Women,
adding Pythagoras dreams to his impiety.

He sought to persuade men, that the soul of Saint John the Baptist was
transfused into her. And in another leaf, that the soul of Saint John the
Baptist was once in a Goldsmiths. She was apparrelled like a Jew, with a
great Gaberdine of a tawny color; she went through the City bare-headed,
and barefooted, wearing a hideous long hair, crying repentance, for the end
of the world was at hand. This new S. John the Baptist, was afterward burnt
alive by the course of justice, held in the Court of Parliament of Tolosa,
which would never take the weakness of her wit for payment. And in sooth, many
men maruailed that Postell was not executed in like manner. For his book was
sold publicly by Porters, and it cannot any way be excused; except the
Jesuits, (by I know not what external infatuations, wherewith they do inchaunt
us,) have their safe conduct for every thing. I persuade my self, that
Richeome will one day bring in this for a great miracle in his book of miracles.

We have to this day other remnants of Postell, for the same Pasquier pleading
the cause, said that Ignace was no less factious and troublesome in the
Church, then Martine Luther, that both the one and the other, were borne in one
centenary of years: Martine in the year, 1488. Ignace in the year 1491. Each
of them erected his sect, saying, he drew all his principles from the primitive
Church, that thereby they might the more easily draw the simple people to
their line, but that the Ignacian sect was more to be feared then the
Lutherans, running through a rank of reasons which he had coucht together. A
special one was, that every one of us would take heed of Luther, whom we
judged an Heretic: contrariwise, that in the behalf of Ignace, it was an
easy matter for men to be ouer-taken, by I know not what kind of
hypocritical countenance which they put on.

This sole conclusion (says Fon) shows Pasquier to be full of ignorance and
malice, and if he speak in good earnest, he is like unto that Atheist whom I
dare not name, that made such a comparison between Moses and his law, and
Mahomet and his sect, and called them both deceivers. How so? Because he that
likens Ignace to Luther, is as impious as the other, that compared Moses and
Mahomet together. Moses was expressly chosen of GOD to deliver his people out of
the captivity of Egypt, and the tyranny of the Pharaos. For Moses sake, the
sea miraculously opened it self to make him way. God appeared to Moses and
talked with him, and by his prayers, all the while he lifted up his hands to
heaven, the same great GOD made the children of Israel victorious. I do not
think any man was ever so wicked, that he durst make comparison between
Moses and Mahomet: and if there be any of that stamp, I take our Jesuits to be
as bad as he, in comparing Ignace with Moses. This comparison would be strange
to me, but ouer-looking their other Jesuitical books, I found it to be a
very familiar matter with them. For Father Haniball Codret never doubted to
write, that his company took their name from God, who made them the
companions of his dear son Jesus Christ, which so accepted of them. And in
their annual Letters of the year 1589. the Jesuits of the College of our
Lady of Loreto writing to their General, make mention of a little devil
coniurd by one of the^, in the Name of JESUS, whereat he was somewhat angry:
but when they pressed him with the name of Ignace, then began the devil to
play the devil indeed, more then he did before, such a fear had he of this
holy name. These blasphemies are the least escapes of our Jesuits: this Family
has good store of others, whereof I trust one day to make you a good and
faithful Inventory. But sithence that by leaping from one matter to another,
I stepped before I was aware upon the process and course of times, I will return
to our Ignace and his companions, to show you what their crafty conueiance
was to purchase entertainment when they came to Rome.

CHAP. II. The studies of great Ignace.
THE year 1524. Ignace began to study at Barcelona, being three and thirty
years of age, a course of life which he could not well relish; for having (as
he bragd) his mind wholly mounted up to heaven, he could not strike the wing to
come down, so low as the declensions of Nounes, which matter (says Maffe) as
it were presaging things to come, Maff. lib. 1. cap. 17. Ribad. lib. 1. cap.
13.
was furthered by the wicked enemy of mankind, especially at that time
offering him many visions, and opening to him the secret mysteries of the holy
Scripture, I think that never man spoke truer then he, for all these pretended
contemplations of Ignace, were mere mummeries of the devil, who desired to
present us with such a man, as might by his ignorance trouble the whole state
of the Church. In this conflict he spent two years at Barcelona, about the
expiring whereof, iumping over his studies, he removed to the University of
Alcala, where he made a show of study in Logique, natural Philosophy, and
Divinity. In Logique (says Maffe) he began to turn over those whom we call
Termini. In natural Phylosophie, Albert. In Divinity, the master of the
Sentences. I leave it to your considerations, whether these books were fit for
him to handle, as a man that had done all that was for him to do, who studied
his Gramer but two years, when as yet he had employed his five senses, without
taking his flight to any other dessigne; for the most conversant in learning,
are much cumbred with understanding Albertus, much more with the Master of the
Sentences, the first foundation of our School Divinity. Add to it, that the
two years he spent, one while at Alcala, another-while at Salamanca, another
University, these were but prisons and extraordinary proceedings for him: that
is as much to say, so much interruption of his imaginary studies hindered in
him. I call them imaginary, because he had no other speculations in his soul,
but by fair semblance to fashion a new Sect. All this was partly the cause,
that he perceiving his drifts to take no place in Spain, desired to see
France, and came to Paris in February 1528. And then (say Maffe and
Ribadener) knowing how little he had profited in 4. years, Maff. lib. 1. ca.
18. Rib. lib. 18. cap. 16.
as well by reason of the precipitation, as the confusion of his studies, he
deliberated to follow the broad way: Let us take Maffees book into our hands,
and mark what he discourses. And when by his experience he had found the
imbecilitie of man's mind to be such, that he can hardly endure to have many
yrons in the fire at once, condemning his former have, and forsaking from
thence forth the shortest cut, he entered the Kings high way, and attempted to
begin his studies anew. Therefore being at man's state, he disdained not to
repair every day to the College of Montagu, and in the company of babbling
children repeat his Grammar rules.

He did also much diminish his set time of prayer, and taming of his body, to
recover the more leisure and strength: yet so, that he principally never
omitted these three things. First, to hear Mass devoutly every day: Next, to
refresh him with the bread of heaven every eight day after the Sacrament of
penance: Last of all, to call himself twice in a day; to a straight account,
of all that he had spoken, done, or thought: and that comparing the day
present, with the day past, one week with another, and one month with another,
he might try and examine at a hairs breadth, how he had gone forward or backward
in his soul. Let us follow the traces of the same Maffee. Ignace being come to
Paris, Lib. 1. ca. 19.
fell so suddenly poor, that he was constrained to beg his bread every day
from door to door, and to get into S. James hospital by very humble suit,
entreating the President of that place, which was indeed a great hinderance to
him. Therefore, in Saint James hospital, which stands far off in the
Suburbs, Ignatius being driven to very great streights, by reason of so great
distance of place, he strugled with other incommodities, as well in that the
schools began in the University before day, and ended not but within the
night, he by the statutes of the hospital, could not get out of the gates
easily before sunnne rising, and must return at evening, before the sun was
set: as also that by going and coming though he were a painful and diligent
Scholar, yet he lost much of his Masters dictates, and of the exercises of
the schools. Having no other present remedy for so great detriment, he
determined after the manner of poor Scholars, to serve some of the heads,
Dostors of the University: upon condition, that such vacant times as he had
from his Masters buisines, might wholly be spent in the schools to get
learning. And a little after, seeing how Ignace went forward with his studies.
He took a far better course, that when the vacations began, he might run
out into Belgia, and sometime into England, or Britane, to the Spanish factors,
by whose bounty, having easily obtained a yearly sum of money to be paid
him by certain pensions at Paris, all the time of his studies, he might the
more commodiously give himself to his book: and when he had spent almost
eighteen months at the Latin tongue in the College of Montagu, he went into
a College, called by the name of Saint Barbara, to study Philosiphie, tarying
there three years and a half (which is the full time appointed in that
University for the course of Philosophy) he profited so well, that by the
honorable verdict of his Master ( which was John Penna the Philosopher) when
he had played his ordinary prizes, he was graced with a laurel, and other
ornaments of learning. After this, he did set upon the study of Divinity in
the schools of the Domenicans Monastery, with great travel. Ribadiner the
supply of Maffees untruths, adds, That having goue through his course of
Philosophy, he gave the rest of his time, until he was five and thirty
years of age, unto Divinity, wherein by Gods goodness, the harvest was
answerable to his seed. His meaning was to tell you, that he won as great
honor in Divinity, as he did in Philosophy, wherein he said very true,
sithence he got no more commendation in the one profession, then in the other.

I have here set forth wares which I took out of Maffees shop, whereby I
desire neither to be a gainer nor a looser. It is sit that every history
should either contain a truth, or some likelihood of it: this lier has
neither one nor other. For while Maffee would here represent the act^ons of a
good and virtuous man, he makes him such a one as knew not well how to speak
Latin, or if he did, it was but the very chattering of a Pie, that spoke
without understanding. Nevertheless, at the end of his studies, he makes him a
great Philosopher. It is not enough for a witness to depose such a thing was
done: he must render a reason of his speech, if he will be believed. Let us go
over all that I have here read unto you. First Maffee confesses, that all
Ignace his studies for the space of four years in Spain were unprofitable,
so that he was constrained to go back to the lowest forms of the college of
Montaigu with little children, to learn the first principles of his Latin
Grammar, wherein he spent eighteen months only, before he entered the course
of Philosophy. I will show you that of all this time you shall not find above
six months of study. During these eighteen months he never lost one Mass,
he kept all his Saboths, this could not be done without devotion, so that he
must at the least take up the Saturday to prepare himself: or if he went to
lectures that day, it had been to abuse the Sacrament of the Altar, to present
himself before it the day following.

Moreover, every day he fell to examining his conscience, and if you will have
me put him into his circle, a brave study certainly far passing all other:
but while he gave himself time for it, this was to distract him from his other
study whereof we now speak. His first abode, was at Saint James of Haultpas,
half a quarter of a league distant from the College of Montaigu. What a deal
of time lost he in going to and fro? The hospital gate opened late in the
morning, and shut soon in the evening, which made him copy out many lessons
every day: but that which is much more, when you consider that he was compeld
to crave alms at men's houses for his relief: his dinner was not ready for
him. To quite himself of this inconvenience, he was forced to serve a College,
a state wherein he might more easily find sustenance for his body, but not for
his soul: for being come out of a hospital, from a kind of beggerie to
service, never doubt but that he was employed in the most base and vile offices
of a College servant, which are, to make the beds, to sweep the chamber, to
brush his Masters apparel, and to beat out the dust, to hang the pot over
the fire, to run fr wine, to wash the dishes, and other small duties
depending upon this charge. Judge you what breathing time he could have for
his book. In fine, during these 18. months he made many voiages in the
vacations, as well into the Low Countries, as into England, to recover
exhibition. I would be very glad Maffee should tell me what time of vacation
was given unto the Scholars, for it is news to me. These voyages could not
be made but by long iournies by a foote-man, driven to beg his living; and
the very cut over the Sea to pass into England, is somewhat to be considered.

Put all these circumstances together, how much time had he left him for his
Grammar studies of the 18. months? at the end whereof, they make him leap
with a pitch-forke into Philosophy, which was unfit for it, and beyond all hope
he grew a great Philosopher, and afterward a profound Divine. Such Scholars as
have past the streights of Grammar and Rethorique, and have thereunto joined
the reading of Oratory Historiographers, Poets Greek and Latin, become in
five or six years space, hardly able to enter the course of Phylosophie: and
would they have us think this man, who never had six months free leisure to
learn his Grammar among children, becam a great Philosopher? All these things
give the lie openly to this history. For the same man, during the time of the
three years and a half of his course, was put into the Inquisition, before
Friar Matthew Ory, Inquisitour of the faith; And he was to be whypt in the Hall
of the College of S. Barbe, by the hands of Master James Gouea, Principal of
the house, Maff. lib. 1. cap. 20. Rib. lib. 1. cap. 3.
upon the complaint of Ma. John Penna his Tutor, because he put his fellows
out of their ordinary course of studies. And I know not with what empty show
of holiness, he perverted the excellent state and discipline of that School,
Ribad. lib. 2. cap. 3.
says Ribadener. Furthermore, in the three years of his course, he entangled
in his net one Faure, Xauier, Lainez, Salmeron, Bobadilla, Roderic his first
companions, or rather to say truth, his first Disciples, with whom he afterward
made the first stamp of his Society at Montmarter.

I learn all this, specially of Maffee, yet is this brave calculator, so
unadvised to tell us, that to make himself capable of Philosophy, he forgot
all the old illusions of the devil, to give himself the better leisure to
study, without consideration calling that the devils illusion, which Ignace
avouched to be devotion. Lay aside his Philosophy, and call to mind his study
in Divinity. He proceeded Master of Arts in March 1532. then he fell into a
long and tedious sickness, and by the Physicians counsel he changed air, and
went into Spain in the month of November 1535. Can you make him a great
Divine in three years, which never laid any foundation in Grammar or
Philosophy? And to show you that he was a great Ass, I mean in respect of
all kind of learning, and not concerning the wisdom of the world, wherein no
body came near him, this is covertly acknowledged by the Jesuits themselves,
who feed you with no fables. When Painters draw the picture of S. Hierom, they
lay a book open in his hands, to show he was a man reputed the most learned of
all our Church Doctors. And when the Jesuits represent the figure of their
Ignace, they give him a pair of beads in his hand, in token of his ignorance,
for upon these, silie women say their prayers, which can neither read nor
write. So shall you find him portraied by a sweet Ingrauer, before a Crucifix,
in the forehead of Ribadiners book, printed at Lions by James Roussin in the
year 1595. Reave de la Fon, with a kind of synceritie of conscience, a matter
very familiar with him, ^^n lib. 1. cap. 38.
frankly acknowledges the like, when he says, That never any disgraced Saint
Anthony, nor Saint Frances, nor the Apostles (a speech surely worthy of so
devout a Jesuit, to set the Apostles behind hind Saint Anthony and S. Frances.)
Were the Apostles studied, says he? they drew their Divine knowledge from the
holy Ghost: also Ignace fet his from the same holy Ghost, and though it were
less in quantity, yet was it derived from the same fountain. And trust me, I
know in good earnest, that Fon is a conscionable man, to avouch his Ignace to
be learned like Saint Anthony, who gloried that he knew nothing. It is not so
with Ignace of whom I take hold for his ignorance, but with these two ignorant
Jesuits, Maffee and Ribadiner which would make us believe he was a great
Philosopher and Divine, not considering that by publishing this in gross, they
belie him by retayle, in reckoning up the parcels of his studies.
Nevertheless, I would every man should understand after what fashion the holy
Ghost was lodged in Ignace and his companions, when they put up a supplication
to Pope Paul the third, for the approbation of their order.

CHAP. 12. That when Ignace and his companions came before Pope Paul the third,
they were plain Mounte-banks, and that the titles they gave themselves were
false.
WHich way soever I turn me, I find nothing but treachery in this Jesuitical
Family, even from the beginning of their order, when Ignace and his fellows
preferred their requests to Pope Paul the third, for the authorizing their holy
company to take the name of Jesus: the promise they made to him, was to bring
the heretics back again into the bosom of the Church, and to convert the
Turks, and other miscreants unto our faith. A work that not only required
they should bring a willing mind with them, but sufficiency and capacity to
perform it. For this cause they were ever careful not to be counted simple
scholars, for then men would have mocked them and never have called them
Divines. They were too weak to grace themselves so far, having no ground,
therefore after a smoother manner, they termed themselves Masters of Arts, not
of Spain or Italy, but of the great and famous Vninersity of Paris. And in the
neck of it, they added, that they had studied Divinity many years. The Pope,
to be resolved what fruit this new order might bring forth, committed the
matter to three Cardinals. Of these three, one was of Luca, Barthelmy
Guidicion, a very learned and holy man (by the Jesuits own testimony) who a
little before this, had made a book against new orders of religion. This man
standing as it were upon his own ground, became a puissant adversary of theirs,
and drew the two others to his opinion. But in fine, Ignace won the^ al, as well
by long importuning them, as also by a million of Masses which he made his
fellows say. These Cardinals did but dispute the question in general, touching
novelty of orders, without sounding the bottom in particular, to know whether
these great votaries issued out of Horace mountain, that was brought a bed of
a Mouse. Let us now supply their want. Montaignes speaking of their coming,
says thus: First I answer, that this company of Jesus began in Paris, Mont.
ca. 30
and that it took the first root there in ten Masters of Arts of the said
University, of which Masters one was a Biscaian, Ignace de Loiola, one a
Nauarean, Frances Xauier, two were French men, Pasquier Broet, and John Codury:
Three were Spaniards, James Lainez, Alphonse Salmero^, and Claudius Iaius: and
one a Portugal, Simon Roderic. It pleased them all to go forth Masters of
Arts in the University of Paris. And that you may learn, by reading the first
Bulls of Pope Paul the third, the tenor of which was this. For we have been of
late informed that our beloved sons, Ignatius de Loyola, and Peter Faber, and
James Lainez, also Claudius Iaius, Paschasius Broet, and Frances Xauier, with
Alphonsus Salmeron, and Simon Roderic, and John Codury, and Nicholas Bobadilla,
Priests of the Cities, and Dioceses of Pampilon, Gebennen, Seguntin, Toledo,
Visen, Ebredune, and Palestine, respectively masters of Arts graduated in the
University of Paris, and many years exercised in the study of Divinity, long
since departing out of diverse regions of the world, by the inspiration of the
holy Ghost agreed in one. I leave that that remains, containing the admirable
vow of these wandering Knights, and that which they obtained of the Pope. All
these were also inspired touching the life and coming of Pope Julius the third
to the Supreme sea, of whom they obtained their confirmation in the year 1550.
By the same quality also you shall find in Ribadiner his 3. book and 12.
chapter, where the Bull is all at large inserted, all of them say, they
proceeded Masters of Arts in the University of Paris, all studied Divinity
many years, and all were inspired by the holy Ghost. I never understood that
the holy Ghost taught us to be liers, but by these undertakers. To prove them
to you to be such, I will have no recourse but to their two great
historigraphers. For if you believe Maffee, neither Lainez, nor Salmero^, nor
Bobadilla went forth masters of Arts in Paris, but in a University bordering
upon Spain, which they call Complutensem Academia^, in the Spanish tongue,
Alcala. Let us hear what Ribadiner says. Rib. lib. 2. cap. 4.
James Lainez a young man, having gone through his course of Philosophy, came
to Paris from the University of Alcala, with Alphonsus Salmeron also a very
stripling, that came both to study and to seek out and see Ignace. In this
passage, I cannot perceive that James Lainez was made Ma. of Arts at Alcala,
and as for Salmero^, he was a young boy that came to Paris, as well to study as
to see Ignace, yet Maffee more adue^terous in this point the^ his companion,
has declared the^ to have taken their Maisterships of Arts in Spain. James
Lainez, who next after Ignace governed our Society, Maff. lib. 1. cap. 4.
and Alphonsus Salmeron of Toledo, very expert in the Greek and Latin tongues,
each of the^ having ended his course of Phylosophie at Alcala, trauaild to
Paris, partly to study Divinity, partly to see Ignace. Make these two
passages agree. Ribadiner makes Salmeron a young lad, not promoted to any
degrees; at the least, he makes no such mention of him as he did of James
Lainez: and Maffee published him to be acco^plisht in all knowledge of Greek and
Latin, and to have received his degree of Maistership in Spain. Let us dwell
upon this opinion, for I take no pleasure to make them liars, but upon good
gages.

The same Maffe, puts after these two here, Nicholas Bobadilla, and Simon
Roderic, saying; Unto these, came Nicholas Bobadilla a Palestine, a learned
young man, that had publicly professed Philosophy in Pintia, a town in
Spain, and also Simon Roderic a Portugal, a man of excellent wit. I will
therefore place Bobadilla among the Spanish Masters of Arts, because he read
a Phylosophie Lecture before he came into France, but not Roderic, whom he
makes to be a young man of great hope, and no more in these words Praestanti
indole. I know it well, that Ribadiner speaking of these 7. all at a lump,
faith; that after they were Masters of Arts, they made their first vow at
Montmartire, in the year 1534. upon the Assumption of our Lady: but he says
not, that they were all made Masters of Arts at Paris. The truth is then, if
you believe them, that four of these seven, proceeded Masters of Art at
Paris, Loyola, Faure, Xauier, Roderic, Fod. cap. 4.
and the three others in Spain, Lainez, Salmeron, and Bobadilla. And a year
after, Claudius Iay, John Codury, and Pasquier Broet, joined themselves to their
society. You shall not find either in Maffee or Ribadiner, that any of these
took any degree of School.

Thus if you give any credit to them, of these ten companions, 4. were
Graduats in Paris, three in Spain, and the three other without degree of
Maistership. And I will show you as I pass along, that Pasquier Broet was a
great Ass for all his porredge. I speak of him, because I once turned and
wound him, and put him out of breath, when he, in the house of Clairmont in
Harpe-streete at Paris, was President of the Jesuits. This fellow was a great
Idol, of whom a man may say, as in old time Ausonius said of Ruffus the
Rethoritian.

Haec Ruffi tabula est? nil verius: ipse vbi Ruffus?
In cathedra: quid agit? hoc quod et in tabula.
Is Ruffus picture here? most true: where is he?
He Is in his chair: what does he? that you see.
And for all this I deceive my self, for he never durst come into a pulpit to
preach or read a Lecture, knowing his own insufficiency. Behold now what time
these ten Champions spent in the study of Divinity: for they told Pope Paul
that they had studied it many years. Maffee testifies unto us, that when they
made their first vow at Montmartir, the greatest part of them had now gone
through their course of Divinity, and the others had begun it with a good
mind to finish it, that they might march forward together, to the conquest of
Turkish souls in Palestine, by our holy Father the Popes leave. The passage
deserves to be viewed here at length. Ignatius having by the goodness of God
gotten these companions, (speaking of the six first companions) determined to
put that in practice with all speed, which he had long hamered and cast in his
mind, that by the Popes permission he might go to Jerusalem, and either call
the bordering Nations, which in time past sincerely professed Christianity, and
after were deceived by Mahomets wicked superstition, from their miserable error
to the truth of the Gospel: or take that which followed, shed his blood, and
loose his life in so holy and glorious a cause. Neither was it hard for him to
bring the rest to the bent of his bow, which came forward already of their own
accord, and were inflamed with the love of God. And because most of them had
not yet finished their studies in Divinity, that the zeal now begun in them
might not cool again, and also that their obedience might be so much the more
acceptable to the majesty of GOD, by how much the greater necessity of
servitude and religion they imposed upon themselves, calling upon the blessed
Virgin for her protection, and upon S. Denise the Areopagite, the Parisians
Patron, in a Church in the suburbs, called Montmarter, by the mysteries of
confession and of the Eucharist, every one bound himself, that at the end of
his divinity course, when he should go forth Doctor of Divinity, presently he
should forsake the world, and seek the salvation of souls, in perpetual
poverty; and by an appointed time sail to Jerusalem, with an intent to employ
all their endeavors to convert the Infidels, and with care and study purchase
a crown of martyrdom.

If this resolution should any way be hindered, they should go to Rome at the
years end, and offer their travail to the chief Bishop, Christ's Vicar, for
the spiritual good of their neighbors, without any contract for reward, or
exceptions of times or places. This vow they made in that Church, with great
consent and alacrity, in the year after Christ's nativity 1534. 18. Kalends
of September, upon which day, the anniuersary gratulation of the virgin Mary's
assumption is celebrated. And they celebrated the same vow in the same place,
the same day together, the next and the third year after.

It Is fit this should be translated into French, for it is necessary for my
discourse that every man should understand it. I have translated these words,
Eme^so Theologiae cursu, at the end of their course, when they had proceeded
Doctors of divinity. For I see Maffee in like manner, desirous to show that
Lainez and Salmeron proceeded masters of Arts in Spain, uses the same form of
speech, vterque co^fecto Philosophiae curriculo. And Ribadiner reporting Ignace
and his companions, to have taken the like degree in the year 1534. Confecto
(says he) philosophiae cursu. From this passage you may gather, that in the
year 1534. the most part of these 7. companions, were now Doctors in Divinity,
and that the others had a purpose to finish their course. That any one of the^
was a Doctor at this time, is too loud a lie, for if it had been so indeed,
this title had never been smothered, when they put up their supplication to
Pope Paulus, in respect of those which had already taken this degree, and they
would have taken good heed to challenge no other style then Masters of Arts.
I will go farther with you, for I will make it appear, that none of these 7. or
of the other 3. that after came to them, had ever studied divinity. For if
they had ever begun the course, as Maffee avouches, and studied it many
years, this word many imports not two or three years only, but four or five
at least; we never say, that a man is in company of many persons, which is
accompanied but with 2. or three. The manner of the Divines of Paris, is, when
a man has begun his course, at the 2. years end, he must defend publicly
in the divinity Schools appointed for this purpose, where he answers under a
Doctor, his moderator, to help him when he is hard driven by the Opponent.
Having played his scholars prizes, which is called his probation, he is made
Bacheler, and from that day allowed to were a hood upon his shoulders when he
goes into the town, and a red habit of Bachelors in Schools. When our ten
Jesuits came to Pope Paul the third, they never told him they were Bachelors
in divinity, they had not the^ begun their course, nor studied divinity so
much as 2. years: where shall we now find these many years they speak of?

There can be no answer to this objection but one, that is, to confess freely,
that Maffee lies, when he says some of them were Doctors of divinity, and some
had begun their course. It may be some will say, that without matriculation in
their Divinity course in the College of Sorbons, every one of them
particularly had studied it some more, some less, after they were Masters of
Arts. For my part, I strive not for the victory, but for the truth, and I doubt
not, but that Maffee and Ribadiner also have made no bones to lie in this
point. Let us then examine what time Ignace and his company could spend in
Divinity, without entering into this course. Maffee and Ribadiner talk of
this matter, as blind men speak of colors. I will deliver you the true
history. I have searched the old Registers of Paris, for those that proceeded
Masters of Art, in and after the year 1520. until the year 1556. when
Ignace his companions, went out of France to meet him at Venice. I searched
the records of du Vale, the Universities Register, and Violet the beadle of
France, for they two keep the books. This did I in the presence of other men
of account: And mark what I found according to the order of the Alphabet which
they observe.

Peter Faure and Frances Xauier went forth Masters of Arts in the year 1529.
so says the Register book. Petrus Faber Geben: Franciscus Xauier Pampil:
Ignace in the year 1532. Ignatius Loyola Pampil: Claudius Iay^ and Simon
Roderic, in the year 1534. Claudius Iayus Gebon: Simon Rodericus Visensis:
Alphonse Salmeron, John Codure in the year 1535. by these words Alphonsus
Salmeron Tolet: Johannes Codure Ebrun. I have faithfully drawn all this out of
the Register of the French Nation, where, in the matter of Licentiats, are
comprehended Spain, Sauoy, Prouence and Italy. As for Maffees and Rabadiners
speech, auouching Pasquier Broet to be of the Dioces of Amiens, were that true,
they would have remembered it in their supplication to Pope Paul, where no
mention is made of this Dioces. The truth then is, that among three of them,
two, without doubt, never took degree in France, but in Spain; Lainez and
Bobadilla: and Pasquier Broet which is the third, proceeded in neither of both.
For that, that remains touching the study of Divinity, what is become of
those many years of Iay and Roderic, who proceeded but Masters in March,
1534. and of Salmeron and Codury, which came after them in the same degree in
the year 1535? for both our Historiographers agree, that in the month of
November 1536. they forsook Paris, to tender themselves in Italy to their
Master Ignace. As for Ignace himself, you cannot tell how to give him above
three years time of study in Divinity at the most, and much of that lost by a
lingering sickness, for which the Physicians councelled him to change the air,
whereupon he returned in o Spain, in November, 1535. yet did these great
Clerks promise by their learning, to convert heretics and infidels to our
religion. Think you that if the three Cardinals put in commission by the Pope
to examine them, had sounded the bottom of them, they should not have
descried, that upon their coming into Italy, they had even with the air,
drunk down I know not what manners and dispositions of the Mounte-banks, who
utter their Triacle in every town, and take up their standing in the market
place, with a long Oration promising to heal al manner of griefs and
diseases, with their ointments, pouders, oils, and waters: fair shows, that
commonly come to nothing.

CHAP. 13. That we have great likelihood to prove, that the approbation of the
Jesuits sect made by Paul the third, is nothing worth.
THe advocate having ended his discourse, the Jesuit replied and said: Why have
you held us so long with this friuolus matter? I see our first Fathers the
founders of our order, were not all Masters of Arts in Paris: I see some of
them were no Graduates: I see never a one of the^ was Bacheler, much less
Doctor of Divinity: I see none of them studied it: Briefly, if it may pleasure
you, I grant all you would have me. What of all this I pray you, since Pope
Paul the third authorized them, and ten years after, Julius his successor
confirmed our new profession? Popes that deserve to be believed, above all the
rules of Law, by reason of their absolute power and dignity. Let me tell you
freely, that though our good Fathers were but simple Scholars, men should
hardly find you match them, since you endeavor by your curious speech, to call
their state in question after it was allowed. You must understand, that the
Pope supplies, by the scroule of his thoughts, whatsoever wants, either in law
or action.

This had been well spoken (quoth the Advocate) if the Clarks of the Court of
Rome coppying out the Bull, had by some express declaration, put in a clause
derogatorie to the truth of the matter. Yet is not this proposition altogether
approved; as for my self, I will take good heed that I never doubt of the
authority of the holy Sea, confirmed by infinite places as well of holy
Scripture, as of the works of the ancient Doctors of the Church. Yet the case
standing as it does in that which follows, we have great reason to be
persuaded that the approbation Paul the third made of their Sect, is of no
force, not for lack of authority in him, but by reason of a plain surreption
usual among you. Mark I beseech you what I shall say unto you, as soon as
ever Ignace forsook the wars, to betake him to another kind of life: he had a
purpose to become a Captain of our Church militant. The first show he made of
it, was about the year 1536. in the University of Alcala, where he drew three
Spanish Scholars to him, Artiague, Calliste, Cazere: Maff. lib. r. cap. 17.
Rib. lib. 1. cap. 14.
and from that time had he a motion of Iesuitisme in his head. He had heard,
that Saint John the Baptist pointing to our Savior Jesus Christ, in the sight
of the Jews, called him the Lamb of God that came down from heaven, to take
away our sins: Hereupon this wise man, taking the bark from the sap, thought
he could not immitate our Savior Christ more truly, then by wearing a woollen
garment that was never died, but of the same color it has when it is taken
from the sheeps back, thus were his three companions, and he sutably clad in
Say, Quos propterea (says Ribadiner) (...) panni similitudine, Cap. 14.
Ensaialados vulgo Hispanico vocabulo appellabant: that is, Men in Say. And
before him, Maffee reported, that Natiui coloris lanea vest cuncts vtebantur.
Merchants ordinarily call it cloth, serge, or wool, bearing the color of the
beast. These four were all of one company, and among other things, they made
a show of studying Divinity. Imagine you what a pretty mask it was to see
these four great Clerks in the Divinity Schools without gown or cloak,
only suited in Say of one color. One Francis joined himself to these, who had
no leisure to apparel himself like the rest. This new kind of habit, cast
them into the Inquisition, Maff. lib. 1. cap. 17.
from whence they were brought before Master John Figuero Vicar general to the
Archbishop of Toledo, who charged them to change their habit, commanding
Ignace and Artiagu to go in black, Callist and Cazere in tawny, as for
Francis, he altered not his at all. A few months after, perceiving Ignace to
be unlearned, (...) l^b. 1. cap. 14.
he forbad him to catechize the people for the space of four whole years, in
which time he might grow capable of that office. His Disciples being unwilling
to come within the compass of law any more, forsook him utterly, and he
spying his affairs go backward, after the same manner that a little before
certain hipocrits, called the Illuminates were suppressed in Spain, he
determined to come into France, hoping to have better success here; and that
he must be singular in some point whatsoever it were, if he would prevail. I
have told you what his carriage was in Paris. At the last, he Faure, Xauier,
Laniez, Sabacro^ Bobadilla, and Roderic, made a vow in the Church of
Mon^marter, in the year 1534. upon the day of the Assumptio^, that as soon as
they had proceeded Doctors in Divinity, they should go to Palestine at the
Popes pleasure, to convert the Infidels, as I told you of late: and if any
thing fell out cross to hinder this enteprize, they should put the matter into
the Popes hands, to give such order for it, as he thought meet. There must be
much time to furnish them for the accomplishment of this vow; For by the order
of the faculty of Divinity in Paris, after the degree of Maistership, there
was a surcease of five years, which was afterward reduced to four, before a
man might begin his Divinity course. Of the seven first, and three last
compamo^s, there were but two, that according to this grave order, were sit to
begin this course: that was, Peter Faure, and Francis Xauier, Masters of the
year 1529. and so were not to be admitted before the year 1535. As for all
the rest, not one of them had made his five years preparation after his
Maistership: and one of them, Pasquier Troet, was no Master at all, and two
others, Lainez and Bobadilla, having gone forth Masters in Spain, were not
adopted in the University of Paris, and so consequently were incapable of
admission. Notwithstanding the tenor of their vow, they nevertheless to the
prejudice thereof, left France in the year 1536. and in 37. they were at Venice,
where when they had rested a few months, at mid-lent they went to Rome, as
well to get leave of the Pope to take holy Orders of priest hoode, Maff. lib.
2. cap. 3.
as also to go to Jerusalem to preach the Gospel, faining themselves, not
only to be Masters of Arts, of the chief University of Europe, but to have
studied divinity there for many years. Ribad. lib. 2. ca. 7.
The Pope entertaind their request without any great sifting the cause,
forasmuch as they confined themselves to Palestine, and that without charge to
his holiness coffers, many of the Spaniards themselves contributing to this
matter, in favor of them.

Thus these new Pilgrims received 210. Ducats, by bills of exchange at Venice,
to set their new pilgrimage afoote. I have portraied out Ignace to you for one
of the cunningest worldlings in our age. Finding his cause drawn up to such a
head, he began to forget his first vow, and to feed many towns in the
state of Venice with new assemblies. There it was concluded among the^, to
divert their voyage back again to Rome, to show Pope Paul, that news was
come of war between the Venetians and the Turk, which was a great bar to
their pretended pilgrimag^ In the City of Rome, they erected a new frame of
their society, much different from the former, and they followed it two whole
years; in which space, Pope Paul could not by any means find in his heart
to grant them their peticions, although he were urged and importuned by many,
and by Cardinal Contarer himself: for never was yet novelty destitute of a
Patron.

Now let me ^ell you an express miracle of God, that happened about the same
time, to discover these ten new enterprizers to be very cheaters. They
reported that the Seas were stopped, by reason of the wars against the Turk,
and that by this means they could not effect their first dessigne. Behold here
a new way, beyond all expectation opened to them, for the conversion of
Insidels to our religion, without any danger. All that I have spoken of in this
place, concerns their two Evangelists, and doubtless this history deserves
to be sent by sound of Trumpet through all the world.

I remembered unto you before, that John the third of that name King of
Portugal, possessed a great part of the East Indies, ill peopled, which he
desired to have converted to the truth. The fame of the devotion of this new
company, that said they had vowed these conuersions, was spread over many
Nations: the King summoned them by Letters to come to him, that under his
protection they might be dispatched into the Indies. But Ignace being subtle
and whilie, turned the deaf ear to this motion, remembering no more his first
vow made at Montmarter, nor his second vow renewed at Rome, by which he got a
good sum of money, and sent forth Xauier and Roderic only, keeping the other
seven about him. Do not you see by this, that Ignace was a states man, no
religious man, who dalied with his vow made at Montmarter?

By the matters here discoursed, you have heard what was their vow at
Montmarter, to go for the conquest of souls after their doctorship in
Divinity. That some of them said they were Masters of Arts in Paris; that
they had bestowed many years in the study of Divinity; mere fables. The
pause Julius the third made in their allowance, even when he took them at
their word, to be such men as they reported themselves to be, and that he was
very much pressed by Cardinal Contaren, their Solicitor and Protector, what
would he have done then think you, if his holiness had received any true
intelligence of their history? Me thinks that with admirable majesty, of those
venerable years he carried, I see him speak to them in this manner.

All new orders of Religion are to be suspected, and for this cause were they
forbidden by two general counsels, the one held at Rome, the other at Lions;
you present us a new religious Order, under the name of the society of Jesus,
as true followers of him and his Apostles. Your intention is derogatorie to
your profession, or to speak more properly, your profession is contrary to
your petition, and implies a contradiction. For if you be the Apostles
Scholars, one of the first lessons they taught us was, that look what has
been ordered in a general Counsel by the heads of the Church, ought to be
kept inviolable, until it be repeald by another Counsel upon just occasion.
As if all did shoot out of one stock of the holy Ghost, Placuit spiritui
sancto et nobis, they spoke in such cases, as men that divorced not the holy
Ghosts cause from the Churches, nor the Churches cause from the holy Ghosts. If
you trace after the Apostles so precisely as you protest, how comes it to pass
that by a new found order, you go about to break the ancient canonical
co^stitutions of the Church? I know it well, that being Christ's Vicar, I may
dispense with you, and I much commend your obedience to the holy Sea. But
setting aside that which has been decreed in general, and looking in
particular toward you, all things degenerate from that you now intend: I
perceive that your beginning had some taste of God, your proceeding savors
much of man, and your end smacks three or four times more of the devil.

Betaking your selves to a devotion full of perrill, you made choice of the
Martirs Church near Paris, to show you would all be ready to shed your blood
for the truths sake, as often as occasion served. A brave and holy resolution,
which cannot be praised enough. Upon this point you went to confession, all of
you heard Mass devoutly, after that you received the Sacrament, upon the day
of the Assumption of our Lady, the most solemn feast of hers: desirous that
the blessed virgin should be a witness to your vow, you continued it two
years after, the self same day and place. Here be holy circumstances enough to
tie you to the vow you made then: Let us consider now what this vow was. You
promised to God, that when every one of you had ended his divinity course, you
would renounce the world, and go to Palestine to convert the enemies of our
faith, and that if you should within one year after your Doctorships, be any
way hindered of your voyage, you should seek unto me to receive my direction.
For the first execution of so fair a plot, you made choice of the City of
Venice, for the general Rende-vous of these Pilgrims that were to go to
Jerusalem.

Before you proceeded any further, thou Ignace, (for to thee I speak in
particular, Mass. lib. 2. capit. 2.
as to the ringleader of them all) did wisely take thy journey into Spain,
to take order for your affairs and fellows. And after that, with great zeal
you took ship at Valentia to go for Venice, without any fear of Barberosse
the Turks scouring of the Seas, all of you met at Venice; you came after that
to me to receive my blessing, and pass for your travel and inhabiting
Palestine. You obtained at my hands all that you craved, you received much gold
and silver, given you by diverse men for your first earnest of the voyage, upon
this blessing you returned back to Venice, with a purpose to perform your
promise. I would saine know who diuerted you? You say the war suddenly made
between the Venetians and the Turk. What Galleys mand, what ships rigged,
what preparation saw you for this exployt? The Turk and we are continual
enemies, yet does he not refuse to give pasport and safe conduct to poor
Pilgrims, paying him his ancient trybute: did this war drive away the
religious persons that dwell near the holy Sepulcher?

Furthermore, who compeld you to alter your vow, for that which is prolonged
from one year to another, Paul. Ioui. lib. 32. hist.
is not quite broken off. Likewise, the Venetian and the Turk are now upon
entreatie of peace, and the matter either already concluded, or at a point so
to be. Besides, if the passages be stopped that way, they lie open for you to the
Indies, there is no fear in that passage, the King him self leads you by the
hand, why do you draw back? You that so late made show to go to Palestine, a
voyage subject to a thousand dangers of your lives, go now in Gods name to this
new world, and come not here to plant a new world in our old Church.

It is not the war between the Venetian and the Turk that drives you from
your first vow, it is your selves that vow what you lust. This sauors of man
more then I would it did. At your first coming from Venice to my Court, you
little know what cheer was made you by me and mine: and whether good or bad,
which of the two, I have no leisure to tell you; you found more favor then
you looked for; good countenance, kind entertainment, gold and silver to
spend by the way. For this cause you returned to Venice, you took your
shortest cut to recoyle back again to Rome, with more promises of submission
to the holy Sea, forgetting your original vow. But let us yield a little to
you as you are men, and let us take your new excuse for payment. How can I
wink at the lies you flap me in the mouth withal, to circumuent me and
betray me. You say you are all Masters of Arts, of the great and famous
University of Paris, I find three of you never took degree. You say you have
studied divinity many years: where shall I find these many? in two of the
company, that were but Masters in the year 1534. and two others in the year
1535. and these came to Venice in the year 1536. Where shall I find then (I
say) these many? in Ignace, that forsook Paris three years before he was
Master, or in that other, that never took degree? To be short, I see but two
of your company, Faure and Xauier that ever could have any leisure to follow
this study. I know it well, that if you make any lie on your part, you will
say it is to be borne withal, because it is done to a good end. A ghostly
deceit, and I tell you at a word, that Chistiani^e brooks no fraudulent
piety. Set these two particulers apart, let us come to the naked truth. How
can I dissemble the breach of your vow, wherein it cannot be but the devil had
a finger? You promised and swore to God, that you would go no further with
your enterprises, before you had ended your Divinity course: where is the end,
nay where is the beginning of it? Prick me out the time, when every one of you
severally began it. If you began it, who hindered your finishing of it? for
there was nothing in Paris to fear you. The war between the Emperor and
the French King, God be thanked, is ceased: Nothing constrained you to make
such a hot vow at Montmatter, it proceeded from your zeal, which tied you to
nothing at the first, but now the vow is made, you are bound to keep it.

Before it was made, was not this work necessary for the winning of souls,
which you promise to perform? You like auriculer confession in our Ministry,
a most holy thing: the transsubstantiation of the body of our Savior Christ
in the Sacrament, a most holy thing: If the word (most) import no more. These
be means to keep the Catholics to their old religion, yet are they not
sufficient, to convert men of a long time nousled up in Idolatry and
Mahometisme. Every one of them has in his impious superstition, certain
Maxims contrary to the Christian faith. Besides this, do not you know, that
the devil Martine Luther, (so I mean to call him, as an impe of the devil of
S. Martins) is in complet Armor against the two Sacraments, by an infinite
sort of Sophistications, ill deduced from the holy Scripture, if you learn of
him to dosse out your horns, as you have promised, this is no young Scholars
work, nor for a simple Master of Art, but for one of the wisest and best
learned Divines to take in hand. For otherwise, while you think to defend our
cause, you will betray it. What weapons must you have to foil these
miscreants? The four Evangelists, with the Commentaries of the good Doctors of
the Church, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory
the great, the first Pope of that name, S. John Chrysostom, S. Bernard, and
many others, whom the Church has enroled in the Calendar of Saints.

All these hold a course of morrall Theology, a very trenchant sword to
destroy the evil life of Christians: but that blade which I mean to speak of
now, is fittest to bring you to close fight, with point to point; One Peter
Lombard, master of the Sentences, and S. Thomas of Aquine, men worthy to be
followed in School learning. These be two Champions, by whose help we may be
sufficiently armed to buckle with our enemies, and this is no study of two or
three years, ancient discipline requires at the least six years travel in
them for public exercise, besides all the rest of our life in particular.

Since you have vowed to GOD to distill your wits through this Limbec, why would
you have me dispense with you? You that have dedicated your selves, as well to
convert Infidels as Heretics, why have you not done it? It became you to do
it, except you meant to present us with Phaetons fable of new Coach men, who
undertaking to drive the horses of the Sun, cast the whole earth into a
combustion. Had you any spark of religion in you, you have no power at all to
revoke your vow made already unto God; the place, the day, the mysteries, the
Church, (twice or thrice frequented) the things you bring with you, bind you,
without hope of dispensation. As for me, I neither will nor can dispense with
you, the law of God, and the Gospel, our canonical constitutions, my faith,
my religion, and the universal Church whereof I am the head, forbids me.

How think you, would not Pope Paul have flatly rejected them, if he had
been aduertisd of their false degrees, and their fained studies of divinity,
and of their vow made at Montmarter, seeing there belongs much labor to gain
it before it be consented to. Hereupon I doubt not, but that their order
being received and allowed by a manifest surprise and obreption, their
authorizing is void. Consequently, that all that is built upon this
foundation, is of no effect or validity. That the Jesuits, let them fortify
themselves as much as they will, by the Bull obtaind of him successively after
the first, of the year 1540. seeing the root it self it rotten, the tree can
bear no fruit at all.

Hitherto I have showed you what an Ass Ignace was, and what notable liars he
had to his companions, men altogether ignorant in divinity. I will now make
plain to you, that their sect, which they call the society of JESUS, stands
upon ignorance of the antiquity of our Church.

CHAP. 14. That the Oeconomie of our Church consistes, first, in succession of
Bishops: secondly, in the ancient orders of religion: thirdly, in the
Universities: and that the Jesuits Sect is built upon the ignorance of all
these.
NOt only the religious orders allowed by our Church, but true. Christians, by
what name or title soever they be called, are not of the Jesuits Sect,
(Christian humility forbids us to speak so proudly) but follow our Savior
and Redeemer Jesus Christ, after whose example and his Apostles, we ought to
frame our life as near as we can: that of his great and infinite mercy, he
may take pleasure in us. Ignace a very nouice, and young apprentise in the holy
Scriptures, made choice of nine companions, as raw in these matters as
himself. They bringing in their Sect, imagined themselves every way to be
comfortable to the first grounds of the Primitive Church, and for this cause,
called themselves the Society of Jesus. Let us then examine what were the first,
second, and third sort of plants by which our Church grew and what the Jesuits
institutions be: that by matching and confronting the one with the other, we
may judge of there title, they attribute to themselves this partial and
arrogant name of the Society of Jesus, above all other Christians. When our
Savior was to ascend up into heaven, he commanded all his Apostles to have a
care of his flock. This charge was three times given in particular to Saint
Peter, as to the rock upon which he had before promised to build his Church.
After that, having cast the fiery flames of his holy spirit upon them, their
whole intent and purpose was, to sow the seeds of his gospel over all the
world. Their ordinary seat was at Jerusalem, from whence they sent forth at
the beginning, here one, and there another of their company, into diverse parts
of the East, which after their travel, came back again to give up an account
of their labors, in a course held by them. And although Saint James were by
common suffrages chosen (says Iustus) particularly to be governor of the
Church of Jerusalem: yet had Saint Peter superintendance and general primacie
among the Apostles, which was not taken from him. And in the whole history of
their acts written by Saint Luke, the principal miracles were done by him, and
the general rule of this holy company was put into his hands.

Among them, were many persons devoted to religion: some called Bishops, some
Priests, of the Greek word that signifies Elders. This we learn of Saint Luke
chap. 15. and 16. of the Acts, and in the 20. following, Saint Paul, who
taking his leave of the Ephesians in the end of the Oration made to them, calls
them Bishops whom he named Priests in the beginning. It Is true that this
government continued not long among them, in so much, that as well for the good
of the Pastors of the Church, as for the flocks, the several charges of
several provinces, were given to such men as were most fit, they were called
Bishops, and to men of meaner gifts were committed Towns, Villages, and
Parishes. These the Church called Priests, who exercised their ministry by the
Bishops authority, and they were in time called Curates, you may see a very
fair picture of all this antiquity drawn by venerable Beda. Sicut duodecem
Apostolos, formam Episcoporu^ praemonstrare nemo est qui dubitet, Bid in. 10.
ca. L^c.
sic and hos septuaginta Discipulos figuram presbyterorum, id est, secundi
ordinis sacerdotes gessisse sciendum est. Tametsi primis Ecclesiae te^poribus,
vt Apostolica scriptura testis est, vtrique Presbyteri, vtrique vocabantur
Episcopi. Quorum vnum sapientiae maturitatem, alterum industriam curae
pastoralis significat. As no man doubts but that the twelve Apostles
represented the state of Bishops, so must you understand that the 70. Disciples
were a figure of the Elders, that is of Priests in the second place, although
as the holy Scripture testifies, both sorts of Priests, the first and second
were in the Churches infancy called Bishops: yet the one of them signifies
soundnes of judgment, the other pastoral travel in his Cure. I have quoted
the words expressly, to bewray the ignorance of a new Jesuit, which affirms,
Fon. ca. 27.
that Bishops and Priests were at the first both equal; herein renewing the
heresy of Aerius. Our Church general, Fuseb lib. 3. Eccle. Hist. ca. 1. and 4.
rested fifteen or fixteene years in Jerusalem, which was the common resort
of all their missions. And after, the Apostles chose diverse provinces to
themselves, and bestowed the others upon Bishops; among others, the province of
Egypt was allotted to Saint Mark, Saint Peter's scholar; his Sea was
established in Alexandria, the eight and fortith year after the nativity of our
Savior: that is, about fourteen years after his ascension. Lo here the first
plant of our Church, wherein you may gather agreeably to the course of times,
the primacie and authority of the holy Sea of Rome: the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, the Archbishopricks, and
Bishoprics, the particular Rectories, and Curates, of Towns, Buroughs, and
Villages.

The Church continued long in this state, but afterward the extraordinary
persecutions of some Emperors drove them to fly into the Deserts, to save
themselves from those cruelties, where beyond all expectation of the common
people, they devoted themselves by vow to a solitary life. Their Patrons were
two great Prophets, Plias in the old Testament, and S. John the Baptist in the
beginning of the new: but this latter was speedily put to death by Herod's
commandment, and with his life, as much as lay in him, carried away with him
from hence this great devotion. Philo the Jew, seems to attribute a renouation
to the Sea of Saint Mark in Egypt, when he says, that some one or other of
his nation, forsook their goods, and vowed a society recluse, in the exercise
of prayers and Orisons: which was a kind of shadow, but no lively picture of
the Monasteries that afterward grew up in the Church. They that Philo speaks
of, were Jews, which being Christians, seated themselves about the lake Marie
in Egypt, where, not being thoroughly instructed in our religion, Soz. lib. 2.
ca. 16. Niceph. li 8. ca. 39. Eusebius. lib. 2. ca. 16.
they iumbled Christianity and Iudaisme together: so Sozomen and Nicephorus
teach us, and Eusebius himself swarues not far from this matter.

The first of our side, which upon devotion entertand a solitary life, Saint
Hier. in vita S. Anthonij. Saint Hier. epist ad Eusto. begin. audi. fili^.
hitherto not put in practice, was Paul the aged: so says Saint Ierom, that
he learned it of Macaire and Aneathas, Saint Anthonies scholars, who far
exceeded him in holiness of life and devotion: Huius vitae (says the same S.
Hierom) author Paulus, illustrator Antonius, and vt ad superiora veniam,
princeps Johannes Baptista.

This course of life, took beginning (says he) of aged Paul, Saint Anthony
promoted it, and if you will go higher, S. John the Baptist was standard bearer
to them all. A matter worth the nothing, that as God established in his Church
two great and holy companies, one of Bishops and Priests, the other of Abbots,
Monks, and religious persons: so it pleased him to make Saint Paul a chosen
vessel of his in the first rank; and to lay the first planchers, and open the
first door, to our Monasteries, by the other Saint Paul, in the second rank.
Saint Anthony (as I told you) succeeded him, from whom, as from one great
fountain, there issued many rivers, Macharius, Aniathas, Julian, Paul the
younger, and others, in whom, God made himself known by many miracles. This
extraordinary solitude, could not easily be embraced by all devout men, but by
such as were (if I may so term them) Paradoxes. Thus some vowed a solitary
life, but after the manner of Monks. For although they withdrew themselves
from the common people, yet lived they in a Society shut up within themselves,
sequestered from the rest of the people, which course being more easy to be
borne withal, was more frequented then the first. Saint Hierom writing to
Rusticus, a man desirous to betake himself to a solitaie life. Primum
tractandum est, vtrum solus, an cum alijs in Monasterio viuere debeas. Mihi
quidem placet, vt habeas sanctorum contubernium, nec ipse te doceas. You must
first be advised (says he) whether you will live alone, or in the company of
others in a Monastery. For my part, I think it best you should have company,
and not be your own Master. When Sant Anthony, lived in Egypt, Saint
Hillarion led the same life in Syria and Palestine that he did: and provoked by
the great fame that was spread of him over all Christendom, he went to see him,
and returned very well instructed from him: Nevertheless, by a new devotion,
he began to make himself more sociable after, then he was before: On this
manner many Monasteries, never known before, were by his example erected in
Palestine, which he visited at certain times, as the Generals of religious
orders do, accompanied with many Monks. Saint Hierom discourses this at
large, in his life: and this brings me half into a belief, that the
Monasteries took their first beginning from him, and grew to be such as we see
at this day. I may well say, that at one and the self same time, there were
Anacorits in Egypt under Saint Anthony, and Monks in Palestine under Saint
Hilarion, Saint Hier. in vita Hila^ionis.
of whom I will speak anon. Ante Hilarionem nulla Monasteria erant in
Palestina, nec quisquam Monacum ante sanctum Hilarionem nouerat in Syria: ille
fundator huius conuer sationis and studij, in hac prouincia fuit. Habebat
Dominus Jesus in Aegypto senem Antonium, habebat in Palestina Hilarionem
iuniorem. Before Hilarion came, there were no Monasteries in Palestine, nor
Monks in Syria: he was the first founder of this Society and study in this
Province; our Savior Jesus Christ had aged Anthony in Egypt, and Hilarion,
younger then he, in Palestine. Saint Anthony was foure-score and ten years
when he died, and Saint Hilarion fourscore.

Now had all these men (I mean such as dwelt alone in the Desartes, and such
as lived in Couents) apparel distinct and different from the Common people.
This made Cyprian say (speaking of badde Monks) that neither the solitary
life, nor the frocke in steed of other raiment, nor the fastes, defended Monks:
Sanct Cyp. se^m. de dupl. martyr. Ep. 104.
but under this habit, many times a very worldly mind is covered. And Saint
Hierome in the life of Hilarion. Igitur Hilarion 80. aetatis suae anno, cum
absens esset Hesechius, quasi testamenti vice, breuem manu sua scripsit
Epistolam, omnes diuitias suas ei derelinquens, Euangelium scilicet and tunicam
sacceam, cucullum and Palliotum. Therefore Hilarion at foure-score years of
age ( Hesechius being absent) wrote a short Epistle to him, in steed of his
last will, bequeathing him all his riches, to wit, the Gospel, his garment of
sack, his hoode, and his cloak: This kind of habit has been continued to
this day in the Monasteries, their exercises consisted in Fastings, Prayers,
and Orisons, not so much to get their living by it, as to shun the snares and
temptations of the Devil: Hereupon none might be admittied into their company
in Egypt, that was not skillful in some manuarie trade. Thus likewise, the
least part of their care, was to become learned; this lesson they learned of
their great Patron Saint Anthony, who professed that he knew nothing, being
of opinion, that the study of learning, would hinder spiritual meditations,
and being such kind of men, they took no orders of Priesthood.

This made Saint John Chrysostom, (comparing a Priest and a true Monk
together) say, that a Priest in respect of a Monk, is like a King sorted with
a simple man that lives a private life: therefore the Monks office was, neither
to preach, nor to teach the common people. Saint Hierome writing to Paulinus a
Monk, says, If you will take the charge of a Priest upon you, if you desire
to be called to the high degree of a Bishop, dwell in towns and Castles,
that by winning other men's souls, you may save your own: But if you will be a
Monk, that is to say, solitary, what make you in towns, which are no
habitations for sole men, but for troops and multitudes?

The Bishops and Priests, have a looking glass of the Apostles, they then
succeeding in their charge, make themselves successors of their merits. And as
for us, let us set before our eyes Saint Paul, Anthony, Julian, Hilarion,
Macharius, Captains of our profession; and not to forget what the holy
scripture tells us, an Elias and an Eliseus. Our Table* is the ground, our diet
is herbs, and sometime a few small fishes, which we account for great
banquets. The same Saint Hierom, being entreated by a good son, to preach to
his Mother, Sanct. Hier. tract. de vitand. susp. cont.
thereby to reconcile her to a daughter of hers; you take me for a man (says
he) that may crowd into a Bishops chair, you understand not that I am shut up
in a Cell, sequestered from company, by vow devoted only to lament my sins
past, or shun the sins present.

Time (as I have told you) culd out two sorts of these men, the one dwelt
solitarily in the desartes, called Ancors, the others, in Couents, which the
Greeks called Coenobites, whose order and discipline Saint Hierome describes in
that notable Epistle, that begins (Audi filia.) And although the Monks were
neither Priests nor Clarks, yet by course and compass of time, their
superiors were permitted to be Priested, that they might administer the
Sacraments to them.

Thus became Saint Hierom an Abbot and Priest together: Likewise John, Bishop
of Constantinople, reproouing Epiphamus Bishop of Cypres his inferior, for
Priesting some Monks in Saint Hieromes Monastery, he made his excuse by the
multitude of Monks, which then wanted Priests to minister unto them. And Saint
Ambrose in a funeral Oration he made for Eusebius Bishop of Vercellis, among
other particularities for which he commended him, Saint Amb. sermon. 69.
this was one, that he had Priested all the Monks of his Dioces. In process
of time, Religious persons, joining holy orders to devotion, became great
nurseries of our Church: In that some of them were made Archbishops, some
Bishops, who by their holy lives, and deep learning, promoted Christian
Religion greatly. Such were Gregory Nazianzen, and Basil, both Monks, and
both Bishops, which severally erected an infinite number of Monasteries, and
religious orders, the one, in the Realm of Pontus the other, in Cappadocia:
and in them begun the discipline of Religions, which is in part transmitted
over even unto us. I omit here of purpose to touch the novelties brought in by
time, contenting my self with showing you the first root of all.

It remains, that I speak a word or two to you of our Universities, erected
as well for divinity Lectures as other human Sciences. Neither in the
Apostles times, nor long after, as our Church particularly charged with
Lectures. The Apostles office, and successively the Bishops, consisted in
preaching the Gospel and administering the holy Sacraments. We are debtors to
the Church of Alexandria for this first institution: where, in the days of
Commodus the Emperor, Panthen, a man of great learning, first opened a
Divinity school, by the authority of Julian the Bishop. And from that time,
Eusebius. lib. 5, hist. ecclesi. ca. 9.10.
(says Eusebius) the custom begun in the Church of Alexandria, was continued
unto us: namely, to have men that excelled in all knowledge and learning, to be
Doctors, and Divinity Readers.

Clemens Alexandrinus succeeded Panthen, a man very famous for his learning
among the best learned in his time. After him came Origin, who took to him
Heraclas the best of all his Scholars, these two parted the public Lectures
between them. Origin read Divinity, Astronimie, Geometry, and Arithmatique,
leaving the meaner Lectures of the Church of Alexandria to Heraclas. The other
Bishops borrowed this commendable custom of trayning up of youth: this custom
spread so far in this manner, that the Universities beginning to set learning
abroach, the Bishops became the first and last Judges of their endeavors: and
for this purpose have they a Chauncelour over them, with whom the examination
of this course, and these matters does reside. As for Monks, and religious
persons, they have no authority to read Lectures but to their own companies.

I have heretofore related, what was the first and original Oeconomie of our
Church, in Bishops, Abbots, and Universities, upon which three great Pillars
our religion stands. Now let us bring the Jesuits to the touch, that we may
know what they are. They be men apparrelled like our Priests, bearing no
outward mark of Monks, yet do they make the three substantial vows of
Chastity Poverty, and Obedience, common with other religious persons, and they
join poverty with it, as well in general as particular, by them of the last
vow, which are called Fathers, men above others devoted to preach, to
administer the holy sacraments of Penance, and of the Altar, to read public
Lectures in all Sciences to all sorts of scholars, without any subjection to
the ancient statutes of the Universities: yea and without acknowledgement of
superiority of the Bishops over the^, having their prerogative apart. But in
conclusion, for the accomplishment of their devotion, they offer to go into
all quarters of the world, where it shall please the Pope to command them, to
convert Infidels and ungodly men, thereby to renew in some sort, the ancient
practice of the Apostles. Therefore let us now consider, whether this
innovation of theyrs, may by the ancient order of the Church, deserve any
place among us, and whether they may be called the company of Jesus; if not by
privation, at the least by prevention of al other Christians.

CHAP. 15. That no man can tell, where to place the Jesuits among all the three
ancient orders of our Church: and that this is the true cause, for which they
never yet durst set in their foot into Processions.
MEn say, that dreams for the most part arise out of a long meditation
imprinted in our heads the day before, by a reflection upon some subject,
which has presented it self again in the night unto our fantasies: Thus has
it happened unto me of late, for as one of the principal things I bent my
mind unto, was the Jesuits proceedings, so it fortuned, that one night among
the rest, I dreamed this which I will rehearse unto you. And I beseech you my
Masters, not to think I tell it you, to make you merry, but in the soberest
manner that I can; the matter is of such moment, that if I should do
otherwise, I should deserve to be punished. If you will not accept it for a
dream, take it at the least for a heavenly vision, such a one as Ignace had,
when God the Father appeard to him, recommending him to his son Jesus Christ:
or else, when he showed him all the tools with which he made this great frame
of the word: or when Durus, Xauiers first disciple, saw in a desolate
Chapel, our blessed savior Jesus Christ in the shape of a child, come to
reconcile himself to the virgin his Mother that was angry with him.

As I was a sleep, me thought I saw GOD take a general surueigh of his
Church, from the passion of our savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, unto this
day: where (as it were) in a great procession, the Apostles went foremost,
followed by Popes, Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, Curates, priests,
and all those Ecclesiastical persons which are called Seculars, because they
be no Monks. In the second rank, marched those good old Fathers, the
Hermits, who were the first founders of Monasteries. After them, traced many
great Abbots and religious Orders of S. Augustine and S. Benet, from whom as
from two great conduits, flowed all other religious Orders, called Regulars.

In the reareward, came the Universities, led by their Rectors, and the four
faculties, of Divinity, Law, Physic, and Arts, with all their Officers, and a
huge company of scholars great and small. S. Peter carried the streamer
before the first, Saint Anthony before the second, and because some have
thought good so to place him, Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris and Master of the
Sententences, before the third; a man framed for this purpose at this time,
without looking back toward Master John Gerson, Doctor of Divinity, and in
his time Chancellor of the University of Paris.

Last of all came the good Ignace, with his equipage of Faure, Xauier,
Salmeron, Bobadilla, Roderic, Breet, Iay, and Codury, his first companions. And
after them, James Lainez, Fraunces Borgia, Euerard Marcurian, Claudius
Aquauiua, all of them successively, Generals of their order. Behind these,
were the Prouincialls, Rectors, Fathers, Principalls, Regents, Presidents,
spiritual and temporal coadiutors, and scholars admitted. All which,
marching after their Captain Ignace, desired to be marshald under the banner
of S. Peter first, next under S. Anthonies; lastly, under the Universities.

At the first, Ignace never doubted to be received of the Apostles, because
their preaching, administration of the sacraments of Pennace and of the Altar,
and the great vow of Mission made by the Fathers to the holy Sea, seemed to
paue the way thither very fair for them; this made him step boldly to S.
Peter. You shall be partakers of the whole discourse that passed between them. I
beseech you let it not displease you to see my Dream enjoy the privilege of
dreams, which make what personages they lust, play their parts with those that
come into our fantasies, without respect of any rule or interposition of time,
which commonly we observe in other matters.

S. Peter. Good Fathers, you are very welcome; for the maine scope of our
calling, has been to win as many souls to God as possibly we could. Ign.
This is the mark we aim at, by the particular vow of Mission which we make
to your successors in Rome. S. Peter. This is well done, how are you called?
Ign. As our vocation craves, to wit, The society of Jesus. In respect whereof,
the common people, by inspiration of the holy Ghost, have called us Jesuits: a
name which at this day, appears to be miraculously spredde over all the world,
it has pleased God it should be so. S. Pet. Nay rather the devil; which has
under your habit, gone about to circumuent all the world, this is not the
first taste we have taken of his trecheries, neither will it be last: he
watches every day to surprise the Church of God. How comes it to pass? We
which were fostred every day in the company of Jesus, to whom he imparted all
his secrets, all the while he was debased here in the flesh, and after he
ascended up to heaven, made us pertakers of his company by his holy spirit, we
(I say) never durst take this name unto us, but the name of Christians; first
in the Church of Antioch, where our holy brethren Paul and Barnabas did
govern: A title approved by the Church from our time to this day: and do you
that desire to be among us, by a new and arrogant title call your selves
Jesuits? Ign. I beseech you hold us excused, it is not pride but humility that
prouokes us to it: our Savior had two names, one proper, which is that of
Jesus, this at that time was a common name to many Jews, though men of base
and vile condition: the other is that of Christ, much more noble and
honorable: for it appertaind to none but Kings, Priests, and Prophets, Fon.
ca. 38.
men called Gods anointed: for which cause you have chosen this name, and we
contrariwise, the other of Jesus, for the small account the Jews made of it,
as meaner and lower then the other. Thus if there be any greater pride in the
choice of the one, then of the other, it may easily be judged from whence it
comes. Moreover, we do not think, that the name of Christian was imposed upon
you by the Church of Antioch, but accidentally by the voice of the common
people without judgment, it was received to be by a secret inspiratiation of
God.

At this speech a great many saints and devout men standing in the first rank,
began to murmour softly one to another, and some mutined out aloud: saying,
that without giving any further hearing unto Ignace, he and all his followers
were to be banished our Church. And that by this proposition, (the foundation
of their order) there is much Iudaisme, in Iesuitisme: for just as the old
Jews arraigned our Savior Jesus Christ: so deal these new Jews at this day
with the Apostles. The Primitive Church usurped not the Name of Jesus, although
it seemed to them to be common among the Jews, but because the Apostles, and
other true and faithful Disciples of Christ Jesus, knew the force, energie,
and exceeding greatness of this holy name. Then Saint Matthew and Saint Luke,
stepping forth, defended, M^h. ca. 1. Luc. ca. 1.
that God the Father himself gave this name by the mouth of the holy Ghost his
Ambassador, expressly sent by him, when he told the Virgin Marie, that he that
should be borne of her pure womb, should be called Jesus, (a name that
signifies a Savior,) because he should be the Savior of the world. Hereupon,
Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, Fuseb lib. 1. ca. and lib. 2. ca. 6.
made a fair commentary upon the difference of the two words. And Saint
Augustine that famous Bishop of Hippon, shows, that if God the Father gave
this name of Jesus, it was done by a secret mystery prophesied by his great
Prophet Moses, whom GOD told, he had chosen him to lead his children of Israel
to the land of promise: and for this cause, did he take another to succeed him
in his place before he died. Moses made choice of Auses, but in the choice, Aug
tom. 1^. hom. 27
changed the name of Auses into that of Jesus, that in time to come (says
this notable Affricanian, Bishop) men might know, that not by Moses, but by
Jesus, that is to say, not by the law, but by grace, Gods people should enter
the land of promise. And as the first Jesus, was not the true Jesus, but only
a figure of him: so the land of promise, was not the everlasting land of
promise, but a figure of it.

There was no Bishop of note, nor any of the ancient Doctors of the Church, in
all the first squadron, which was not of this opinion, or brought not out some
matter of attainder against Ignatius. Then Saint Peter, by his authority and
primacy over all the Church, spoke to them with an admirable Majesty on this
manner. It is neither for you, nor for us, to yield a reason of that which was
done at Antioch, when the Church of God gave the name of Christians: this was a
work of the holy Ghost. And as it is not the servants duty, to ask any
reasons of his Master, why he commands him this or that, but he ought only to
obey him: so God having charged us by his holy Spirit, to call our selves
Christians, it is not fit for any man whatsoever, to enquire the cause of it.
There is no speedier way to make men heretics, then to become curious
questionists in such matters. Therefore never think, that this name was
imposed upon us by the Suffrages of simple people.

As the name of Jesus came from God the Father, so I may speak it for a
certain truth, that by the faith and homage I yielded to our Savior at the
first, upon this word Christ, he built his Church upon me, and gave me the
Keys thereof, among the rest. For having asked the question of us all, what
men reported of him, some of the Disciples answered, that some took him to be
Saint John the Baptist; others said, he was Elias: others one of the old
Prophets. Math. 16. Luc. 8.
But whom do you (quoth he, to us his Apostles) judge me to be? I, taking
the tale out of the mouth of all the rest of my fellows, by the greatness of
zeal wherewith I was transported, answered him, Thou art the Christ, the Sone
of the living God: and presently he replied, that I speak not this of my
self, but by Revelation from God his father. And after this he declared me to
be Peter, and that upon this Rock, he would build his Church, and whatsoever I
bound on earth, should be bound in heaven. Since that upon this confession of
Christ, he built his Church upon me, this was a silent lesson he taught us of
his will and pleasure, that after his ascension into heaven, he would have his
Church to be called Christian; and upon this project, all our brethren doubted
not to take up that name at Antioch. I my self afterward, making Euodius
Bishop of that Sea, Suidas in verb Christianus.
confirmed that name of Christian in the Church. I marvel said Saint Peter,
(turning himself to Ignace) that you honoring, as you say ye do, the Sea of
Rome, where my successors sway the government, and yet at the first dash, you
have despised my decrees: were there nothing else but this to be weighed in
you, you may not so be admitted into this rank. Ign. Will you not receive us
upon the three vows we have with great holiness made, of Chastity,
Obedience, and Poverty; and that which is more, of general and particular
poverty, when we became fathers of our order? S. Peter This is another bar
that shuts you out, for although Chastity, Obedience, and Contempt of the
world, were familiar matters with us, yet did we not this by vow; that was
brought into the Church after our time, by those whom you see stand in the
second rank, and to say the troth, we never tied our devotion to poverty.

Ign. We minister the Sacraments of penance, and the communion as you did,
and we are ready to go forth for the advancement of Christianity, whither
soever it shall please your Successors to send us. S. Peter These two
Sacraments are likewise ministered by the Mendicants, of which order there be
many now in the Indies, in Palestine, and at Pera, near unto Constantinople,
to convert the Infidels, yet are they not ranged in our Squadron; you must go
to them, and let them know, there is too great odds between us and you, to
yield you any place here.

Ignace, finding himself excluded from the first station in this procession,
he was somewhat amazed, nevertheless, he thought to speed better with the
second, because he should there have to do with S. Anthony, the honor of all
the first Hermits. For I know (quoth he) that in the heat of his holy
meditations, he gloried in ignorance: and I am sure, that if he do but try
me therein, he shall find me nothing inferior unto himself. Thus devising with
himself, what might best be done to creep into his favor, he showed him,
that he had passed his time in heavenly contemplations, and not in learning, as
he had done before. Yet true it was, that his ignorance had made many learned
men, which were all priested ministering the holy Sacraments; some of them were
Preachers, and some Regents.

The holy and venerable years of this good Hermit, gave Ignace this answer:
Brethren, I commend your intention, but it is nothing like unto ours. Our
devotion, and the devotion of all the good Fathers, first founders of the
religious orders, was a solitary life, without schollership or priesthood: our
wisdom consists in continual lifting up the mind toward God, taking all
human learning to be mere vanity. And as for Ecclesiastical functions, we
take no charge of them, they depend upon the Bishops, that feed us by their
inferiors in the Church. Your Rulers are not like ours.

In Gods name my good brethren, go your way in peace, leaving us to our sweet
life, in quietness of conscience, within our Cells. Nevertheless, it may be you
shall find behind us, some shreds and remnants of ours, in in whom you may
take some root, namely, those which by permission of the holy Sea, are called
to the orders of priesthood, and may both preach, and minister the holy
Sacraments of Penance and the Alter, as you do.

Ignace passing from them to the other, Saint Benet perceiving him coming by
his gate, took the speech to himself, and said; If you be of our company,
you must either be Ancors and Hermits, or Monks and Conuentualls. Your
profession, denies you to be Ancors, and we may be easily entreated to excuse
you of it, because that life is too painful. But if you be Monks and
Conuentualls, as we are, where is your frock, your hood, and your cloak? For
Elias, the first image of our Order, and after him S. John the Baptist, both
differd from the common people in apparel. Where is the great shaven crown
upon your heads, by which S. Hierom said, that in poverty we are like to Kings
and Monarchs? where be the extraordinary fasts your society keeps, not
only beyond the common people, but beyond the Bishops and Curats? Where be the
Cloisters within your Monasteries? Heereto Ignace and his companions briefly
and roundly answered him, that they were no Monks, but religious persons only.

Is it even so, (said S. Benet) then are you a kind of quintessence of Monks.
And as the faculty of Physic admits none of these Paracelsian abstractors of
quintessences into their schools: so may not we receive the Jesuits. To reject
a Paracelsite and a Jesuit, both rhyme and reason will bear us out. Therefore
get you some whether else: for as you disdain the holy name of Monks, so are
you disdained by Monks. You proceeded Masters of Art in the University of
Paris, at the least, you presented your selves for such men to Pope Paul the
third, I counsel you to return as Masters of Art to the University, you
shall find some of your acquaintance there, it cannot be, but that some one or
other of them will entertain you.

Ignace perceiving his case grow worse and worse, mistrusted some misfortune in
his attempts, whereupon, turning himself to his companions, he said: Now we
are in question to go toward the University, I know what my behavior must
be; and although it will be easy for them to go beforme me, if I come to the
great Doctors, yet since at the first I took no course, but to teach petty
schools for children, and you after me, have read Lectures to all sorts of
scholars against our first institution, I pray you (quoth he to Father
Claudius Aquauiua,) seeing that now all my superiority over our company rests
in you, that as General of the^ all, you would take the charge to sway Master
John Gerson, it may be you shall find more favor at his hands then all the
rest. Aquauiua, not only gave him no denial, but thought his commandment
very fit to be obeyed.

Then began he and his to brag, that they taught freely, wherein he thought
his company had very much advantage of the other Regents, but his feet were
entangled: for he was more roughly handled by them then by the former, and when
they came to pell mell, because both sides had been nousled in School Ergoes,
there was the best sport of all. Now let us see them begin their
disputations. Aquauiua having framed his proposition, and propounded his
question, Gerson, one of the chiefest Doctors of Divinity that ever were in
France, spoke thus to Aquiuaua. Ger. You would feign be of our company, will
you then acknowledge our Bishop, for your superior and ours, especially in
matters concerning the instruction of youth: for he is our chief Judge in
this cause. And now as his substitute in the office of a Chancellor, and
Chanon of the Church of Paris, I carry the flagge of the University of Paris,
which is the chief of all others. Aqua. I do not understand your speech, we
have a greater Master our holy Father the Pope, which has dispensed with us
in this point, against the Bishops authority. Gers. You fail in the first
mark, this one point must send you back again to Rome, to learn your
lessons, and banish you out of all the Universities in France. But let us
proceed: our Universities are compounded of two sorts of men, the one are
Seculars, the other Regulars, in either of these, the rule and government
differs. The Seculars may be Masters of Art, Doctors of divinity, Law, or
Physic, and read Lectures after they have their degrees, to all comers, as
well within as without the Colleges; the Regulars are permitted but to go
forth Doctors of divinity, and to read to the nouices of their orders only.
Which of these two sorts are you? Answer me not I beseech you, as in the
year 1564. you answered the Rectors, and officers of our University of
Paris: they moving the like question to you, you replied twice or thrice, that
you were, Tales quales vos curia declarauerat. For the Advocate that pleaded
against you, standing upon this point, argued that you were such as were
unworthy to be enrolled in the Universities register.

Aqua. I marvel not at that, we were at that time like unto the Bear, whose
whelps seem at the first to be but a rude lump of flesh, but by the Dams
continual licking of them, in time they recover the shape of a Bear: so was
it once with us; for (to tell you truth) Ignace and his companions, never prict
it out perfectly what we were; but after we had many ways exercised our wits,
upon an obscure platform of theirs, we were not called Monks, but regular
Clerks: for so has our great Ribadmere entiteled us; Rib. lib. 2. capit. 17.
and before him, if I be not deceived, the Counsel of Trent gave us the same
style, which was published a few months after our cause was pleaded, to have
recourse to the first day of May following.

Gers. This is not to answer my question, you must answer categorically, to
bring you into one of these two predicaments, of Seculars, or Regulars. Aqua.
Did I not answer you at large, when I told you we are Regular Clarks? For
being such, we are not bound to stand to the old statutes of your
Universities, being neither pure Seculars, nor pure Regulars. And we may with
all our vows, be graduated throughout all your faculties, and read public
lectures to youth in all sciences, without seeking to, or acknowledgement of,
the authority of your Bishops. Gers. Then are you a kind of Hermophroditicall
order, such as Pasquier has published you to be in his researches of France,
for being Seculars and Regulars both together, you are neither of both. And
since you are not bound to obey our statutes, we likewise are not bound to
immatriculate you in our Universities. Aqua. Why do you refuse us, that teach
freely? Gers. Because you be very coniecatchers. The first that ever came to
teach in Paris, were Alcuin, Raban, Ian, and Claudius, venerable Bedaes
scholars, they made proclamation, that they had learning to sell: you quite
contrary, bestow it gratis. Yet is it true, that in three score years space,
you have got more treasure twice or thrice told, then all the Universities in
France ever had, since the first stone of their foundation was laid. Moreover,
were you not censured by the University of Paris? in the year 1554? Aqua. You
may say what you will, but of later memory, the same faculty of Divinity,
allowed us against the old censure; for some particular persons, having abused
the name of the University of Paris in the year 1594. in the Court of
Parliament; the Sorbons made a Decree in favor of us, by which the pursuit of
our adversaries was disalowed.

At this speech all the Sorbons shouted, you be lying Sophisters, and very bad
Grammarians. We know it well that the Advocate that first pleaded for you,
would feign have been your buckler, and after him, Montaignes of your
company, then Fon: But this is to enjoy your ordinary privilege, you know
whereof. Let the Beadle bring out our Decree and read it, for this is too much
impudency to be laid upon Christian people. Die nona Iulij, Anno Domini, 1594.
viso and audito a facultate Theology Parisiensi legitime congregata, in maiore
aula Sorbonae, libello supplici, a venerabilibus patribus sociotatis Jesus, ipsi
facultati proposito, quo quidem exposuerunt superioribus mensibus, D. Rectorem,
tam suo, quam omnium facultatum nomine, libellum supplicem supremae Parlam^^^i
Curiae obtulisse, quo petierit vt ipsi, corumque societas vniuersa, ex toto
Galliae regno pelleretur, ac credibile non esse sacratissimam facultatem, huic
petitioni consensum prebuisse. Ac propterea supplicarunt quatenus placeret
dictae facultati, declaratione testificari, huius petitionis and litis
intentae, nullo modo participes esse. Ipsa facultas, matura deliberatione super
hoc habita, in hunc modum censuit. Se quide^ censere praedictos patres
redigendos et recensendos esse in ordinem and disciplinam vniuersitatis, regno
autem Gallico esse nullo modo expellendos.

Signed, Panet dictae facultatis Bidellus.

This Decree was inserted at large in your Plea of the year 1594 and in the
44. Chapter of Fons Book: it is fit that every man should understand it.

The ninth of July, in the year of grace 1594. a view being taken by the
faculty of Divines in Paris, then lawfully assembled in the Sorbons great Hal,
of a bil of supplication, put up to the faculty, by the venerable fathers of
the society, wherein they declared, that a few months since, the Rector of the
University, as well in his own name, as in the name of all the faculties,
preferred a supplication to the high Court of Parliament, wherein he required,
that they, and all their society, might be thrust out of France, and because
it was not credible that the most sacred faculty had consented to it, therefore
they desired the said faculty, to testify by some special declaration, that
they had no hand in this matter. The faculty upon good consideration had,
certified in this manner, that for their parts they judged it fit, that the
said fathers should be brought into the order and discipline of the
University, but not by any means to be cast out of France.

The word redigere is more significant, then to bring, or reduce, which I have
used for lack of other: for the Calepins of the Latin tongue teach us, that,
Redigere, est vi quadam vel industria ducere ad aliquid vel aliquo. Call you
this an approbation of your company, when by strong hand we would have you
brought in subjection to the University, and that in this case you are not to
be hunted out of the Realm? Away with the whole cluster of new vows, draw
your selves into the Universities orders, acknowledge the Bishop your
superior, as we do, take degrees in Divinity only, and read to none but to
your own Society, as other religious do, every one in their place: we shall
then agree with you, and take your parts stoutly in the highest Courts in
France, that you ought then to live among us. Mean while, by your writings,
you do impudently and falsely, make a Trophee of this Decree, as if we had
laid the bridle in your necks; but the very sight and reading of this, foyles
you. Therefore get you packing, your Rules and Maxims impeach ours, which we of
a long time have kept in all holy and venerable antiquity.

When Gerson had pronounced this sentence, Ignace and all his first companions
vanished out of fight, and presently after that, Aquauiua spying himself and
those that were with him, left in the lurch, he cried. Since you afford us no
place in earth, maugre all the rout of you, we will have place in heaven with
Ignace and Xauier: or it shall cost us all the treasure we have here and there
in bank, but they shall be canonized. Then began all the little fry to hiss,
and the greater sort of scholars whoopt; A Fox, A Fox, will they give money
to make Ignace a Saint? Aquauiua somewhat dismayed, thought they had cried,
Osanna, Osanna, and to requite them, set him down in a chair, offering his
hand unto them to kiss, as he did to all those that came to his chamber, the
same day he was made General: but so dainly he saw that he was deceived: For
this company of wild youths baited him worse then they did before. Gerson to
pacify them, said, My sons, never think that in Rome they will have so
little wit as to make these two men Saints. The Jesuits have desired it a long
time, and to compass it, they have employed not their coin (for I think
there is no such trafick in Rome about sanctifying of souls) but all manner of
lies, cogs, and hypocrisies, to surprise the holy Sea. For how comes it to
pass think you, that within these few years, the pens of Maffee, Ribadiner
and Turcelline, have hatched so many fabulous visions, and miraculous tales of
Xauier, but to make their false testimonies serviceable for this canonization?
But the best sport I see, that as plaiers, to grace their Enterluds, bring them
upon the stage by day, with the windows shut, and candles lighted; So the
Jesuits spare for no burning Tapers in Rome, about Iguace Tomb, to make some
better show of the sanctimonie of the place. Turcel. lib. 1 ca. 16.
And the same Turlelline says, that when Xauiers body was carried into the
Town of Gonea, where it now lies, there was a great wax Candle only of a
Cubite length, lighted and set in the place, which burned continually two and
twenty days, and as many nights without wasting.

Yet have not all these Torches, to this day been able, to lighten the hearts
of the Consistory of Rome, to make these two new Saints, neither will they
ever do it, as I am persuaded. Never think so Sir, said a little wagge in the
company, for lies, and importunate suits, (matters proper to the Jesuits) will
work it out at last. Have you forgot in Boccace, how Chappellet de Prat, a
notable knave, was canonized for a Saint, by some silly souls in the
Cordeliers Monastery at Dijon? And why may it not so fall out with Ignace
Loyola, founder of the Jesuits order, seeing William du Prat, Bishop of
Clairmont was their first benefactor here in France?

Presently upon this speech they made such a noise, that if it had thundered,
you would scarce have heard it. Continuing this hurly burly, some of the best
Scholars began to clap their hands, as they do in the Schools, when the one
side and the other have argued long, and disputation cease.

With this I waked, very much astonished at this dream, wherein I find that
verified, which one William of Lorrey spoke, in the beginning of his Romant of
the Rose, saying, that every dream is not false. My dream does make it good:
I know what account the Jesuits do, and ought to make of the counsel of
Trent, as that whereupon the approbation of their society is partly grounded.
Although they have expressly commanded all Clergy men, as well Seculars as
Regulars, to go the processions, except the close Monks, Carthusians, and
Celestines. Nevertheless, the Jesuits never came there, either before that
Counsel was held, or after. It is very true that they coggd a Die, when they
got a Bull from Gregory the 13. to forbid them this matter: But this was
before their constitutions bare any prohibition.

I come now to another matter, which is, that Elizabeth Rossell, one of Ignace
favorers, Rib. lib. 3. cap. 14. Maf^. lib. 2. cap. 17.
seeking to erect a Jesuitical order of women in Rome, Ignace would never
agree to it; he knew it well, that this would have ministered matter of
laughter to all the world: for what kind of habit or place should these women
have had in their Monasteries? The religious men of Saint Benits order, S.
Barnards, S. Dominicks, and S. Fraunces, do all wear the habit appertaining
to their orders. The Jesuits are apparrelled as priests, if women should have
taken that attire to, you must have called them women priests.

Let us return to our processions, which all good and free Catholics
religiously embrace, Ignace bragged every where he was a Catholic, why then
did he forbid his society the processions? Because he knew, that if they came
among other Ecclesiastical orders, they were uncertain what place they should
take, their sect being a new bastard religion, a very hotch potch of all our
orders, without any thing pure in it, or any point of our ancient Church.
Therefore, to call them the society of Jesus, is to go out of the way, but I
will now give them a name more agreeable unto them. I remember I have read in
the Romante of the Rose, late alleged by me, that when Saint Jews brought the
Carmelites into France, from Mount Carmell, they were called the Pred-coats,
because their cloakes were striped and welted with black and white. Since then
we see the Jesuits to be a partie-colourd religion, of diverse pieces of our
ancient Church, ill suited and sowed together, you may call them and their
religion, the new Motley.

Here the Advocate held his peace, which ministered matter of talk unto the
Gentleman, who said to him, I know not how true it is, that you had such a
dream as you have told me, yet I may well say, there is much truth in it. And
more then that, you cannot paynt out these matters more lively, then by the
picture of a dream. But seeing you make reckoning of the Romant of the Rose,
me thinks by the model of it, we may more fitly call the Jesuits, Papelards,
and their company, Papelardie. Hereunto said the Advocate, I beseech you
let us not engage the authority of the holy Sea, by the quarrel of these
hypocrites. I will not, said the Gentleman, since you have bound me to harken
till you have made an end.

CHAP. 16. That without wrong to the authority of the holy Sea, you may call
the Jesuits Papelardes, and their sect, Papelardie, that is, hypocrites, and
their order hypocrisy.
We have ever yet in France embraced Popery, with all honor, respect, and
devotion, and ever yet in France, has this holy name, by many men, been by
false shows abused. When you see a soaking Usurer, and adulterer, or a
thief, mumble many Pater nosters daily at the Mass, without amendment of
his evil life; or a Monk within his cloister, under his habit, his sad look
and thin visage, nourish rancor, avarice, envy, and brocage in his heart, we
call both the one and the other Papelards, and their actions, Papelardie, what
say you then to Popery? It is the clear spring and fountain, from whence we
ought to draw the unity of our Christian faith. What is this papelardie? A
mask of popery in them, which outwardly would be esteemed to be better men
then others, and inwardly are worst of all.

This one lesson have I learned in that Romant of the Rose, where William
Lorrey represents us an Orchard, enuirond with high walls, painted with the
portraitures of Hate, Envy, Robbery, Avarice, Sorrow, and Poverty; among
which, was the picture of Hypocrisy, drawn in this manner: I will set you
down the old language, with the new of Marot, the first for his authority,
the second for his grace.

THere was an Image in my sight,
That well became an hypocrite,
Papelardie it was named:
Because in secret it is framed,
To fear no mischief to atchiue,
If none spy what it does contriue.
The looks were like a penitent,
And it appeared to lament:
A creature sweet it seemd to be,
Yet under heaven no villainy
Is found, but that it dares perform:
And it resembles much the form
That has been made to this semblance,
Set out with sober countenance.
In apparel it was clothed
Like unto a woman yealded:
In the hand it held a Psalter,
The heart did groan, the eyes did water,
With prayers to God that fained be,
And to the Saints both he and she.
It was not merry, it was silent,
As if the thoughts were ever bent
To show devotion every where,
Invested in a shirt of hair.
Fat fed she was not you must know,
Fasting had brought her very low:
She grew so pale and wan of late,
That unto her and hers the gate,
Of Paradise denied them pass.
For many people have a glass
Of flesh abated, says Gods book,
That many others they may book:
And for a little glory vain,
Gods kingdom they shall never gain.
When this Romante was compilde, Wickliffe, John Hus, Ierom of Prage, Martin
Luther, and John Calvin, were not yet borne, to make war upon the holy Sea;
for William of Lorrey, lived in the time of S. Jews, yet was the word
(Papelardie) then in use, mark whether all these particularities set down by
him, do not encounter our Jesuits? I confess, that none of them lie in hair,
and likewise, that they take no knowledge of the extraordinary fasts which
other religious persons keep. They are wisely dispenst withal, by their
statuts, but to pass over all other points, they repose themselves wholly
upon the authority of the holy Sea, as if they were the firstborn children of
the Popedom. And at other times, when you see thein upon their knees, saying
over their Beads one by one, before a Crucifix, or an image of our Lady, and
after, mark their confessions and communions before the people, with I know
not what leaden looks, fraught with hypocrisy, and notwithstanding, they
work underhand the ruin of the Countries where they dwell, and the murder of
whatsoever Kings and Princes it pleases them: and that their Masses,
confessions, and co^munions, are the directorie stars of their Machiauelian
tricks, what better name can we give them then Papelards? As for the name of
the society of Jesus, it is so proud a title, as no good men can make agree
with them, except it be to grace their hipocrifie the more. Their sect (as they
say) was first co^sorted in Paris, and sworn at Montmarter in the heart of
France. The words of Papelard and Papelardie, are French words, I think we
shall find very many that will resign them over unto them, as words every way
fitting their profession. Neither is it any disparageme^t to the merit of
Christ's cross, that these men have abused the name of Jesus, nor by their
counterfeit mortification (that I may speak as William of Lorrey does) under
the false show of popery, is the authority of the holy Sea increased or
diminised: it is strong enough to bear up it self, without any help of this
new service, or rather of this new device of the devil, to surprise us by the
name of Jesus, and so ruinate and turn topsie turuie, all religious orders,
and the holy Sea it self.

You shall never be inhibited by me, (said the Advocate) nor by any in this
company, for ought I know: for if, to follow your proposition, a Papelard be
such a one, as makes a fair show outwardly, upon his stall, but has a false
shop behind, within his soul, where all is contrary, you have proceeded
master of the Art of hipocrisy, making us understand that of Iesuitisme, which
we never knew, and you are able to read a lecture of it. And fith I see you
forward enough to second me, let me end that which I have begun, and when I
have spoken of the Jesuits sect in general, let me like an Advocate speak a
word or two of good Father Ignace, who is the mark I shoot at.

CHAP. 17. Of the fabulous visions of Ignace, and the miraculous fables of
Xauier.
NO body durst write the life of Ignace after his death, which happened in the
year 1556. it was too great a task. The first that ever attempted it, was John
Peter Maffee, a priest of that society, that dedicated 3. books of this
argument, to Claudius Aquauiua their General. This flesht Peter Ribadiner,
another priest of the same society, to make a reflection upon his fellow,
with five other books, ten years after; wherein, at the first setting out,
he endeavors to make his history appear to be without check, because that
before the establishing of their company, he, being not yet 14. years of age,
followed Ignace at Rome, so thoroughly devoted to him, that he brags he could
speak of many things he saw himself, and faithfully reckon up others, which
Jews Gonsalua, a man to whom Ignace discoursed them at large a year before,
had reported to him. Both the one and the other, were diversely instructed in
the Latin tongue, the first, by Christopher Severe, the other, by Christian
Simon Liton, both men of an other religion, whom I may not believe more then
the Jesuits, which be naturally liars, in whatsoever they think will serve to
advance their sect; persuading themselves, that it is no fraud offered unto
God, when they beguile the world with a lie for advantage.

I will rip up here, the most famous visions, which they say their great Sophy
had. Ignace, by their computation, descended of the noble house of Loyhola, was
in his tender years, sent by his Father and Mother to the Court of King
Fardinand, surnamed the Catholic, and in the year 1522. put in trust to
keep the town of Pampelune, then besieged by the French, where one of his
legs was shiuerd with a shot, and the other very sore hurt: the town
delivered, and he taken prisoner, our Nation sent him away with much kindness
to his own house. And being so sick, that the Physicians and Surgions almost
dispaired of his recovery, in the night of his great crisis, Maff. lib. 1.
capit. 2.
Saint Peter (in whom he did ever put his trust) appeared to him, promising to
cure him, as he did indeed: for from that time, his sickness began
miraculously to decline, and he grew better and better. And when he was
recovered, spending his time in reading amorous discourses, because he could
get no other books, one gave him the life of our savior Jesus Christ, and the
Legend of the Saints, which he read; and from that time grew admirable devout
desirous to change his old life, into a more austere and religious course:
whereupon, the virgin Mary appeared to him night by night, with a smiling
countenance, holding her little babe in her arms: upon this vision, he
forsook the world for ever after. But Ribadinere goes farther, and he
reports, that Ignace being at his pravers and Orisons upon his knees, before
the Image of our Lady, there happened a great earth quake in the house where
he prayed.

Now while he was drowned in his devotion, the devil appeared to him, M^ff.
lib. 1. capit. 6. R^bad lib. 1. capit. 6.
sometime fair and beautiful to look upon, sometime ghastly and hideous,
seeking to divert him from his purpose, now by fair promises, anon by fear
and terror, presented to his eyes. Entering the Dominicans Church, Maff. lib. 1.
capit. 7. Rib. lib. 1. capit. 7.
he was so ravished, that rapt into heaven, he saw the holy Trinity in three
persons and one essence, a matter that ministered argument unto him to write a
book of the Trinity, Quoquo modo potuit stilo: and here was not the end of
his miraculous visions, (says Maffee) for GOD showed him the pattern he laid
before him when he made the world. Maff lib. 1. capit. 8.
Moreover, hearing Mass in the Dominicans Church, as the Priest lifted up the
host, Ignace saw Jesus Christ in it, in body and flesh, just as he was when he
lived upon the earth.

Maflee sets it down better in Latin, Dum a sacerdote de more salutaris
hostia attollitur, vidit Ignatius tllaspecie Christum, Deum eundem, et hominem
verissime continere. Ribadiner says, that Ignace being very attentive to a
sermon he heard in Barcellona, Ribad. lib. 10. ca. 10.
Isabel Rousset, a Lady of honor, saw his head crowned with glistering beams,
like unto the sun. And in another place, that he continued 7. days together
and would eat nothing, Rib. lib. 1. capit. 6.
and he spent seven hours every day in continual prayers, and in the mean
while, whipped himself thrice every day. He would have held on this course,
with the expense of his life, if his Confessor the Sunday following, had not
commanded him to take sustenaunce, or else he would give him no absolution, as
a murderer of himself: This he did broad waking, but harken to another
history more admirable then this.

Upon a Saturday at euen-song, he fell into such an ecstasy, Rib. lib. 1.
capit. 7.
for the space of seven whole hours, without moving hand or foot, that
every man judged him to be dead; at the last, some one or other, perceiving
his heart to beat a little, they resolved to waken him: And the next Saturday,
about the same time of Vespers, as if he had been rouzed out of a dead sleep,
he began to open his eyes, calling upon the holy name of God. Maff. lib. b. ca.
5. Ribad. lib. b. ca. 11.
Both the one and the other Historiographer, speaks of the apparitio^ of God
the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son beaten and wounded, bearing his cross,
and that God the Father, recommended him to his son, entreating him to take
the Jesuits cause in Rome, into his protection; which accordingly he promised
to do. And that Ignace being retired into the Monastery of Mount Cassin, to
spend forty days together in devotion, Maff lib 2. cap. 6. Rib. lib. 2. ca. 12.
as soon as he had said Mass, Ozius, one of his companions that died at
Padua, appeared unto him, mounting up to heaven with some other company,
Splendidiore quam reliqui, habitu, gloriaque multo illustriore. Ignace hearing
that Simon Roderic, one of his crew was sick, going to visit him, Rib. lib. 2.
ca. 9.
he was certified from heaven, that he should recover, wherein he was not
deceived. He assured Peter Faur of this matter, one that gave much credit to
him. See here in effect, the visions and miracles of Ignace, nothing inferior
to those that are spoken of in the Gospels, and in the Acts of the Apostles,
nay rather in some points, far exceeding them.

To make us way to Paradise, we pass through the Sacrament of Baptism, and
when our Savior was baptized by Saint John the Baptist, at his coming out of
the water, he saw the heavens open, and the holy Ghost descending in the shape
of a Dove, and resting upon his head, and therewithal, a voice was heard, Thou
art my dear son in who^ I am well pleased. When Ignace devised to open a way
to his company, he saw God the Father and Jesus Christ his son, who said to
him, Go in peace, for I will take thy part in the city of Rome. When the holy
Ghost was represented by the shape of a bird, it was enough: but me thinks it
is more, that Ignace saw God the Father, and God the Son also, in his proper
body. Jesus Christ was tempted but once, one manner of way by the devil: Ignace
twice tempted diversely, and by very perswasiue speech. Jesus Christ fasted
forty days in the wilderness without meat or drink: Ignace fasted only seven
days, and to counterpoize the rest of Christ's fasting, he disciplind himself
thrice a day, and spent seven hours of the day upon his knees in prayer. The
man whom our Savior singled out for a chosen vessel to himself, was S. Paul:
when he wrought his conversion, he appeared not to him, but assaulted him only
with sharp speeches, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? and he was three
days blind, and did neither eat nor drink. This miracle is nothing in
comparison of Ignace, whose soul was carried into heaven, where he saw the
Trinity in three persons, and one essence: and after that, was in a trance
seven whole days together, without sight, meat, or drink. Beside all this, he
had one thing in particular showed to him (beyond all that is spoken of in the
old Testament) he saw the tools God himself occupied when he fashioned and
fitted this great frame of the world: A blessing never bestowed upon any man,
but Ignace. All we confess the transubstantiation of the body and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Alter: a matter we cannot see with bodily eyes,
but by the eyes of faith. Ignace herein passed us all, when at the elevation of
the host, he saw Jesus Christ there, God and man. I leave the shaking of the
house where he was, by an earth quake, like unto that of Paul and Silas. I
omit many other visions, specified by me heretosore; and credit me, when I had
read over Ribadiner, I found nothing in his surname and his book, but
baldarie. And as for Maffee, I think he is transformed into Morpheus, which
presents sundry shadows to men a sleep.

I doubt not, but that God was able to work all these miracles by Ignace, and
much greater to, if it had so pleasee him: he is the same God now that he was
in the Apostles days: God without beginning, and without end: but that he has
done any such thing, I ^tterly deny, and avouch these to be blasphemous
impostures, dropped by the Druell himself out of the pens of two Jesuits, to
snare simple people with their cursed superstition. I will make this matter
clear and evident. The most pregnant proofs of all are those, which we call
presumptions of law and of fact, which arise out of many particularities, when
they meet together, and when they do not agree with them, this is to deceive,
against the common sense and understanding of the people. The greatest
judgment that ever was given, was that of Salomen, between the true and the
supposed mother, for which he was called Solomon the wise, yet was this
grounded upon presumption. For my part, I think I have greater presumptious
than that Solomon had, to prove, that the pretended visions, wherewith these
two hypocrites bleare your eyes, are mists and illusions.

I will make this matter manifest, and omit the scruple tucht by me before,
that the writers hereof be Jesuits: no, this is not the point whereupon I mean
to rest. I could be content to tell you, that I make no reckoning of Maffee. He
has written so, therefore it is true, I deny it; and desire to be informed
who told it him: and I will show you my reason hereafter. The reason is,
because in the history, I build more upon Ribadiner, who says he was in his
young years in Ignace company at Rome, and that whatsoever he reports: he
heard it of Jews Gonsalua, to whom Ignace imparted it a year before he died.

Therefore this honest man the Jesuit, might well speak of all those things
which Ignace did at Rome, after he was chosen General of their order, and of
that which fell out before. I should be a scrupulous gainesayer, if I should
say, that you may not believe Ribadiner, when he tells you, Gonsalua spak it:
neither is Gonsalua, if he were alive, any Saint, but such as for whom we keep
no holy day, although he avouch he heard all these tales of Loyola. I will
tread all these matters under foot, I do believe that Ribadiner heard it of
Gonsalua, and Gonsalua, received the news of all these miracles from Ignace.
Let us now give credit to Ignace in his own cause, for none but he can say,
that Saint Peter appeard to him first, and then the Virgin Marie, that he was
two several times visibly tempted of the devil: that he saw the Trinity in
heaven, Christ Jesus in flesh and body in the host, the soul of Hozius his
companion carried to heaven, that God showed him how he made the world, that
Christ promised him to assist him in Rome: all this rests upon Ignace only,
none but he can give us testimony of it, and this makes me say, that if we
should believe it, we were very heavy headed.

If I were to rest upon this point, I should have enough to prove you ought
neither to receive nor reject all these miracles, but I will proceed. When I
asquier pleaded the cause, one of the fairest parts of it was that, with which
he stoutly challenged the Jesuits, to choke him with any one miracle that ever
Ignace wrought: he said, that all the holy Fathers, Saint Benet, Saint Dominic,
Saint Frances, and others, confirmed their new orders by many miracles done by
them, as we read in their Legends: but not any one could be found done by
Ignace. I have deliuerd you that passage, word for word, wherein he spoke of
Postles impiety. Ignace was dead eight years before this was pleaded. After
his death, all hatred toward him ceased, when men talked of his miracles; for
we cannot speak so freely of the living. This cause was prolonged seven
months and more, both in the University of Paris, and in the Court of
Parliament, when they stood upon the maine making or marring of their order.
James Laniez, companion and successor of Ignace in his generalship, either knew
these things, or ought to know them, and leisure and time enough had he to
certify. Nevertheless, in all Versoris Plea, there is not one word spoken of
visions or miracles. A sign, that these lies, were new coined by these
Papelards after the cause was pleaded. Put this to it, that all the visions
Maffee and Ribadiner reckon up, happened in Spain, before Ignace either had the
Popes blessing, or his order was allowed. And that after he was chosen
General, you shall not find in these two Jesuitical Priests, any vision
showed him from heaven, nor any miracle done while he lived, nor after his
death: yet if any miracle came from him, of force it must be either then when
the holy Sea confirmed him, or after. In Rome, you see Ignace his forecast was
good, Turs. lib. 5. ca. 16.
to bring a new tyranny into our old religion, but no mark of miracles at
all. And why think you? because all his visions happened to him in Spain, two
of them only excepted, which he had in Italy, in corners: but neither durst
he, nor his ministers, broach so gross matters in Rome. I speak expressly of
Rome, where,

Iuuenesque senesque.
Et pueri nasum Rinocerotis habent.
Will you have me lay this imposture open to your eyes, by some other issuing
from the same root? Among the companions or disciples of Ignace, there was one
Frances Xauier, appointed by him to go to the Indies at the request of King
John of Portugal. Ribadiner wrote his history, only upon report of the
country, as the farther a Jesuit goes, the louder he lies: so Horace
Tursellin, coming after the rest, reflects upon his companion, with great
increase and interest. For never did our Savior Christ while he was upon the
earth, nor after his ascension, nor Saint Peter, not Saint Paul, work so
great miracles as Xauier did in the Indies. He was a Prophet that foretold the^
things to com, he did read means thoughts, Turs. lib. 6. ca. 1. Turs. lib. 2.
cap. 18.
he made the crooked to go upright, the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, he
cured the leapers, he rid the sick of their diseases when the Physicians had
given them over: saying but a Creed, or a Gospel over men, he had a faculty to
raise the dead. For in the seventh Chapter of his second book, he finds, that
he had raised six: another time, upon his return from Iappon, spying one of
his companions laid out upon the Bear, and ready to be put into the ground, he
restored him to life again, as he had done a Pagans daughter. Turs. lib. 4.
cap. 3.
But the grace of the tale is, that she returning on foot, knew Xauier, and
told her father, this was the man, that had pulled her soul back again out of
hell. And that which was never heard of before in our religion, Turs. lib. 4.
cap. 7. and lib. 5. cap. 7.
he converted many people by Mediators and Interpretors. Likewise, he wrought
many miracles by the ministry of others, namely, by such as scarce had any
knowledge of our Church. For after he had Baptized and Catechized little
infants, Turs. lib. 2. ca. 7.
he gave them his beads, wherewith the ficke being touched, they recovered
health. Being at Meliopora, there was a rich Citizen possessed with many
devils, Xauier was entreated to go to him, but having other business, he sent a
little child to him with a cross, which being laid upon the possessed, and a
Gospel said over him, in such manner as Xauier had commanded, presently all
the devils were cast out, very much angered, that they were eiected by such a
one as was yet but a nouice in Christianity. Hoc magis indignantes (says the
author) quod per puerum pellebantur, Lib. 2. ca. 7.
and eum Neophylum. Another time it fell out so, that being requested to help
one that was possessed, because he could not go himself in person, he put
some little children in commission, teaching them their lesson what they should
do, and putting a cross in their hands. These came to the possessed, whom they
made to kiss the Cross, according to their direction, saying certain prayers
over him, which they had learned by heart, and presently, as well by the faith
of these little brats, as by Xauiers, the devil went out of the man, but he
was revenged on him at the last: For when Xauier was upon his knees before the
Virgin Marie, the devil so scracht him by the back, and belly, that the poor
man had none to fly unto but the Virgin, crying unto her: Domina opitulare,
Domina non opitulaberis? And after this, was constraind to keep his bed
until his skin was healed.

I omit a great many particulars, that I may come to other of Xauiers miracles,
as well in his life as in his death: for departing this life at Siues, his
body was rold up in quick lime, that being speedily consumed, it might not
putrify: nevertheless, being six months after carried to the Town of Goa,
where he lies, he was found to look as fresh and sound, as when he lived.
Lib. 5. ca. 12.
After he was brought to this Town, there was a wax Candle of a cubit long,
placed at the foot of his Tomb, which burnt two and twenty days, and as
many nights, and was not wasted. A man that never saw further then the length
of his own nose, having got so much favor of the Priests, as to open him
Xauiers Tomb, took the dead man's hand and rubbed his eyes with it, and
presently recovered his sight. Lib. 5. ca. 4.
Many other miracles were done by his dead corpse: But I find none so famous as
these two: for one of his Disciples, having stolen away the whip wherewith he
beat himself, and a woman called Marie Sarra did cut of a piece of his girdle,
which she wrought into silver, and wore it about her neck, these two devout
persons, cured an infinite number of all sorts of diseases, by the bare touch
of these two relics.

All these miracles were done in the Indies, and many other more if you believe
Tursellin. After the approbation of their order, Xauier was not to be compared
in sanctity with Ignace, his Superior and first founder of that society
being inspired with the holy Ghost, although not in so great measure as the
Apostles were, (says the wisdom of Fon.) And all visions ceased in him, that
day that his order was allowed, and he seated in Rome; but contrariwise, they
budded a fresh in Xauier: what causes this difference? I will tell you: If
Ignace had set down his staff in the Indies, and Xauier abode in Rome, Ignace
had wrought many miracles, and Xauier none, for in these cases, it is a great
deal better cheap to believe them, then to travel from place to place, to
enquire whether they be true or no.

All these stories, are in very deed such, as by common proverb we call old
wives fables, that is to say, fit to be told to simple women, when they sit
spinning by the fire side. One Justinian, a Jesuit in Rome, called Father
Justinian, counterfeited himself to be leaprous, to make his cure miraculous:
Again, he would have made men believe, that being shot with a Pistol through
his garment, the bullet rebounded back again from his body, without hurt, and
so by the wonderful grace of God, he was not wounded. These matters were
believed by the simple people at the first, but after they were found to be
false, this marred the whole roast of the Jesuits cookerie in Rome, for when
they did speak of a facer out of matters, and an Imposter, they were wont to
call him, a second Justinian the Jesuit.

It may be you will judge it strange. I tell you, we need not look into
Spain, nor the Indies for their forgeries, since of late years they bruted it
abroad in France, that Theodore Beza was dead, and that at his death, he was
converted to our Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion, by one of their
company: by whose example, many Citizens of Geneua had done the like, through
the travels of the Jesuits. We took it to be true a while, but after that Beza
was known to be risen again, he wrote certain French and Latin Letters, by
which he convinced their impudency. What a mint of fables will they have in
strange countries, which even in the midst of us, fear not to feed us with
such bables?

Last of all, to make the matter plain, what notable liars Maffee and
Ribadiner are, (for as I begun with them, so will I end,) Ribadiner shows us
one Ignace in Spain, who all upon the sudden having abandoned the world,
caesariem elegantem habebat, Rib. lib. 1. capit. 5.
solutam et impexa^ reliquit, vngues et barbam excrescere sunt. He had a fair
head of hair, which he laid out loose and unkempt, flaring in the wind; he
neither cut his beard, nor pared his nails. Look upon his picture in the
beginning of Ribadiners book, there is nothing so slick as he, neither his
locks, nor his beard, nor his nails grown. You may imagine by this, what is in
the rest of al their books. And to say the truth, when I see Maffee,
Ribadiner, and Turcelline, bestow so good Latin upon such lying matter, it
makes me remember our old Romants, of Piers Forest, Lancelot Dulac, Tristram
of Lions, and other aduenturous Knights of the Round-table, which had all
struck hands in amity, and sworn reciprocally on to another: in honor of
whom, many gallant pens have been set a work to make idle tales, in as good
French as that time afforded. In like manner have these three Jesuits written,
not a history, but a Romant full of fables, touching the life of Ignace and
his fellows, all wandering Knights of the travailing Robe, linked together in
a band of indissoluble society; it is fit that every thing should have his
turn.

CHAP. 18. Of Ignace his Machiauelismes, used to set his Sect a floate.
WHen the Advocate had ended his discourse, the Gentleman said to him. You may
judge what you will of those two that have written the life of Ignace, if you
can persuade me, that our age never afforded a brauer man, nor more fit to make
a new sect then he, I will take no exceptions to Ismaell the Persian Sophie.
When I speak of a sect, I beseech you my Masters be not you offended: for I
take the word in his native signification, for such a form of life and
discipline, as in old time was attributed to the Philosophers. I see three men
combined by the mystery of our time, Martin Luther, a Germane, John Calvin, a
French man, and Ignace de Loyola, a Spaniard, all three great men, I will not
speak of the doctrine of the two former, which I condemn; yet neither was
Luther nor Calvin, so great as Loyola.

The first, made an vproare in all Germany: the second, so troubled France,
that there was no safety for him but in Geneua: and the last, has made a
pudder, not only in Spain, and the provinces depending upon that Kingdom,
but in many other Nations also. And that which is more admirable, the two
former, got their credit with their pen, and the last, by writing nothing. For
as you your self have truly discoursed, Ignace was above thirty years of age
before he learned his Accedence. Long before this time, he compiled three
books in Spanish, one of them was entitled, Spiritual exercises: another, was
of the Trinity, and the third, was of the life of Jesus Christ, the virgin
Marie, and some of the Saints: nevertheless, he did wisely to stop the breath
of those books again betimes, he knew well the weakness of the style, and
with what broken timber they were built. Luther and Calvin were brought up, the
one in a Monastery, the other in Colleges, where they began to push at the
chief Governors of the Church of Rome, and scholler-like spent their time, in
contentious wits and writers. Loyola, borne of a noble family, in his youth
trained up in a great Kings court, drew his business to a head very
Gentleman-like. For being desirous to continue the new tyranny which he had
plotted, in sted of writing, which happily might be confuted, he drew all out
of heaven, that no body might speak against it.

Do not you remember, that Minos King of Creete, going about to make new laws
to his subjects, persuaded them that he had conferd with Jupiter: Lycurgus in
Sparta, with Apollo: Numa Pompilius in Rome, with the Nymph Aegeria: and
Sertorius, to purchase the more authority with his soldiers, said he was
familiar with a Do, as if one of their imaginary Gods had been transformed
into her. These are the Machiauellismes of which the old world was delivered
before Machiauell was borne. And there be a great many Machiauells among us at
this day, who never read his books; I think the same devises glided through
the soul of this great Ignace, and I assure my self, that he reckned up to
Jews Gonsalua before he died, (for so Ribadiner tell us) all his visions of
God, of the virgin Marie, of S. Peter, and of our savior Jesus Christ,
promising him all the help he could to further him at Rome; whereby he grew
in hope that in time to come, all the Generals his successors, should become
the highest Commanders.

And that which makes me wonder more, is a matter I will now acquaint you
with. We read, that when Augustus had locked himself fast into the saddle of
the Roman Empire, yet ten years after, to avoid all envy, he counterfeited
before the Senate, that he would give up his government, betake himself to a
private life, and lay aside all that imperial majesty which he had gotten:
he was much hindered herein, by the humble suit of all the Senators his slaves;
and thus by the consent of all the chief Rulers of the City, he held without
fear or ielosie, the extraordinary power he had got into his hands over that
state.

Ignace had the like conceit of his Generalship: for when he had gouernd ten
years, or there about, with absolute authority, he called together the
greatest part of the Fathers the Jesuits at Rome, and before the whole
assembly, desired them to dispense with him in the government hereafter,
because the charge was too heavy for his shoulders: But they with all
meekness, commending his modesty, denied him his request, as a matter very
prejudicial to their Order. And contrariwise, they entrated him to take care
of their constitutions, Rib. lib. 4. capit. 2.
to augment, or diminish, or qualify them as he thought good. From that day,
he took the reins into his hand, to command them in such manner as you see:
but he would not have his statuts published, before they were confirmed by a
general meeting. Mean while, he left a writing in a little coffer, in manner
of a Iournall, how things passed between the holy Ghost and him, and the
visions set down, wherewith he was inspired when he made his constitutions.

These remembrances were found after his death, and with great wonderment
presented to the general congregation held at Rome, in the year 1558. where
all that he had ordered was considered of, and from thence passed through the
hands of their Printers and Stationers. You blame Ignace in your discourse, for
all his apparitions, and you say they were impostures contrived by him, upon
which ground his society has coined many fables. Pardon me, I pray you, for
you judge of these matters like a Punie, not like a Statesman. I tell you
again, I doubt not but that Ignace has told you all his visions, whereof he
himself alone was witness. But when? Not in the flower of his age, when he
was in action; but when sickness and age had broken him, and he saw himself at
the graves brinke; persuading himself, there could be no better mean to
establish his order after his death, and confirm his statutes, then to feed
them, not with these holy, but rather fained illuminations, which he opposed
without printing of Books, against all Martin Luthers and John Caluins vain
disputes and Ergoes. Was there ever played a brauer, a wiser, and a bolder
pranke then this?

CHAP. 19. The conclusion of the first book.
THe Gentleman had scarce ended his discourse, but the Advocate answered. You
and I will enter the List together to fight it out. For all that Maffee and
Ribadiner have written of Ignace, is false, and all that you have said is true.
That which I have spoken hitherto, is by way of an introduction to the sport, I
am determined to show you now what their vows be, which I will prove to be
stuffed with erroneous and heretical doctrine, and an infinite mingle mangle
of Machiauellismes and Anabaptistries, which time has measht together.

The Advocate prepared himself to go forward, not remembering that it was high
midnight, then said the Gentleman: If you have any such purpose, it is best to
defer it until to morrow morning, the night is far spent, and you my
Masters (my new guests) are wearied with your journey, and you in particular
my good friend, (quoth he to the Advocate) are tired with talking, and we with
hearing. I arest you all, you are now my prisoners, and think not that I will
let you go to morrow: let us take a little truce with our eyes, our tongues,
our ears, and our thoughts, me thinks this discourse deserves to be prosecuted
with a fasting wit: it were fit, it should not be taken upon a sudden, but that
you should pause upon this which is already spoken, if sleep will suffer you.
Never yet was good Advocate, how well soever he were provided for a great
cause, agreeued to have put it off to another day, that he might be better
furnished: and I think you never spoke to a matter of more importance then this.

The Gentleman's advice was taken, and every man retired him into his chamber,
until seven of the clock in the morning, then every one having been at
Church to render unto God, not what every man is bound, but what every man
was able to perform: the whole company met in the Hal. The Gentleman gave his
servants straight commandment, that none of them should be so hardy as to
interrupt them, whatsoever business fell out. Now let us go on with our tale
(quoth he) for we cannot do a better deed then this: but upon this condition,
that in our speech, we rail upon no body. We may not easily be drawn to
persecute so harmless a company, as many men take the Jesuits to be.

The Advocate promised to deal honestly herein, protesting again that he
would not speak for any particular grudge he bare them, but for the common
good of all men. And to make it so appear to you (quoth he) I leave all
affectation, and flowers of Rhetorique, wherewith men of my profession use to
grace their speech. I will read those passages plainly to you, upon which, all
that I intend to do, is grounded; and if any man will put any better stuff
to it when I have done, I give him leave. For the best Art I observe, is to
show no Art at all. But since the Jesuits do now sue for a re-establishment of
them in France, I will begin with that, that touches us nearest. The Advocate
having in one of his Portmantewes all the Bulls, and constitutions, that
concern the Jesuits, and many other books of like argument, as well with
them, as against them, he laid them forth upon a green Carpet, thus as he had
done the night before, so proceeded he now to verify his speech. Let us see
him play his part upon the stage.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book of the Jesuits Catechism.
CHAP. 1. That our Church of France, and the Sect of the Iusuits, cannot stand
together.
LEt us tread all choler under foot, (says the Advocate) not as if it were
not very fit to be angry with heresy, yea and to sleep upon that anger, but
because choler sometimes besots us, and makes us fail in the duties of our
understanding. The Jesuits desire to be settled again in Paris, where-into they
entered at the first like Foxes, and afterward, filled themselves like ravening
beasts with the blood of the French: and yet, if their order have any
possibility of agreement with our Church of France, let us forget all the
miseries and calamities, that have been brought upon us by their means in our
last troubles; and let us not envy the^ their aboade in the principal City
of France. It is no small advantage for them, that would plant and spread a
new religion, to be placed in the chief City of a kingdom, by the authority
of the sovereign Magistrate.

They cast in our way two great words, to stop our mouth altogether; the name
of Jesus, to which every knew must bow, and the name of the Pope, which we
must receive with all submission and honor. But to whom do they sell their
trash? Are we any other but followers of Jesus? Are we any other then the
children of the holy Sea?

1. All of us acknowledge, by a common and general faith, that we are a part
and portion of the church of Jesus, by the merit of his passion, ever since
that we have been regenerat by the holy sacrament of Baptism.

They, by an arrogant name applied, entitle themselves and their sect,
Conference at Poissy, 1561. Act of parliament in the same year.
the society of Jesus: a title forbidden them, both by our Church of France,
and by the Court of Parliament at Paris, in the year 1561.

2. We in this country of France, auow with all humility and readiness, our
holy Father the Pope, as Primate, but not as prince of all Churches. In this
faith we live and die under him, renewing the oath of allegiance, from the day
of our baptism, to the day of our death.

Part 7. of their constable. c. 1. arti. 2.
The Jesuit, as a vassaile peculiar above others, acknowledges him for his
prince, to whom he specially renewes the oath of his allegiance, at the change
of every Pope.

3. Our church of France holds, that our holy father the Pope, is under a
general and oeconomicall counsel: so we have learned of our great divine
Gerson: so of the council of Constance: and so, when in former times any
decree came out from his holiness, to the prejudice of our Kings, or their
realm, our ancestors appeald from it, to a general Council to be held
afterward.

Cap. Noui de iudie. ext. cap. ad Apostolicae de re iudie. capit. vnam san^tam
de mayor. et obed.
The Jesuit maintains a clean contrary opinion, and that in the same sort as
the courtiers of Rome do.

4 With what dissimulation soever the Jesuit cloakes his writings now a days,
he acknowledges the Pope prince of all kingdoms, as well in matters temporal
as spiritual, because the Popes have acknowledgd themselves for such, in their
decretall sentences, and namely, of late, in their Bull of the great Iubile,
published for the year 1600. S. Peter and S. Paul, whose successors they are
called, princes of the earth: if the Jesuit doubt of this article, he is an
heretic in his sect.

Our church of France, never believed that the Pope had any power, over the
temporal estate of our Kings.

Look the chap. of this book, where we entreat of blindfold obedience.
5 The Jesuit obayes the Pope, by an obedience which he calls blindfold: a
proposition of a hard consequence for the King, and all his subjects.

A proposition also which we observe not, but stoutly improve in our Church of
France.

6 By an ancient tradition, which we hold as it were from hand to hand from
the Apostles, every Dioces has his Bishop, over who^ it is not lawful to vsurp
any authority.

Bellam. lib. 1. de indulg. cap. 11.
The whole sect of the Jesuits, is nothing else but a general infringing of the
authority of Archb. and Bish: yea the hold, that the Bishop has no other
jurisdiction or power, then that which he holds of the Pope.

7 The administering of the word of God, and of the Sacra. appertains
principally to the Archb. and Bishop: after, to the Curats within their
parishes, and to none other, except a man have permission of some of them
within their charges.

By the Bulls of 1540. and 1550.
The Jesuit gives to himself, full power to preach the word of God, and to
administer the holy sacrament of Penance and the Eucharist, wheresoever it
please him, to the prejudice of the Ordinaries.

8 Only the B. in his dioces, can dispense with the use of meats forbidden,
according as necessity requires.

The Bulls of Julius the 3. 1552.
The Jesuit acknowledges herein, none but the Superiors of his order.

9 We admit not to the order of priesthood, any that are borne in adultery or
incest. The Bulls of Paul the 3. 1546.


The Jesuit admits them without difference.

10 By our ancient canonical constitutions, Churchmen may not say Mass but
before noone.

The Bulls of Paul the 3. 1545.
The Jesuit may sing Mass after none* if it please him.

11 Our priests are forbidden to say Mass any where but in our Churches,
except for the succouring of them that are sick, and that by the permission of
the Curat.

The Jesuit may make a particular oratory within his house, and in all places
where soever he comes: and there say Mass, and have an Altar to carry about
with him.

12 One of the auncientest parts of devotion, that we have in our Church, Te^t.
lib. 2. ad v^o^em. Sib. Apul. lib. 5. epist.
are the Processions, for even Tertullian makes mention of them: and we find,
that Mamercus Bishop of Vienna, brought in the Rogation, which we observe
every year, in the week of the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Pulls of (...) 13. 1576.
The Jesuit, does not only disalow of them, but maintains that they are
forbidden him.

13 We celebrate Anniuersaries in our Church, in the remembrance of them, that
lately bestowed any goods on us by way of alms,

The Jesuit receives a pace what soever alms are given him to this end; Part
6. of th^^r constable. ca. 3. art. 6.
but yet he admits not of the Anniuersaries, nor the Obits.

14 We have in our Church, a certain place near the Altar, which we call the
Quire, where our priests say divine service, Part 6. co^st. ca. 3. art. 4. I^b.
lib. 3. cap. 22. The bull of Gre. the 13 ^^. of Octo. 1576.
apart from the common people.

The Jesuit has no such place.

15 We say our canonical hours aloude in our churches, of ordinary, that
every man may partake thereof.

The Jesuit is not bound, but that he may say them in a low voice.

16 As our country of France has always abounded in devotion above all other
Nations; so it has had special privilege of God, that all the heads of
religious orders, that have been graffed upon the ancient orders of S. Austin
and S. Benet, have vowed their perpetual houses amongst us French men: as the
orders of Clugnie, the Cistercians, the Premonstratenses, and Gramont.

There is never an order but that of the Charter House Monks, The Plea of the
Kings Advocate of M^^n^l.
whose General has not taken his habit in Dauphine. And if there be any that
make not their abode there, at the least they come often times to visit their
sheep in this our country of France. Besides that, the Generals of the
Jesuits have vowed their abode within Rome, never any of them is seen to come
into France to visit theirs: so little of any French nature have they in them.

17 We receive no Prouincials in France, of what religious order soever they
be, unless they be Frenchmen.

The General of the Jesuits sends us such, as it pleases him: A Merchandise
that cost us dear in our last troubles.

18 We in our Church of France, allow of no religious persons, which vow
themselves to the saying of Divine service in the Church, but such as wear
their habits and other monastical weeds, assigned to them by reverend
antiquity.

There is no difference betwixt the habit of a Secular Priest, and a Priest
Jesuit.

19 We have always confined our religious men within the cloisters; as well,
that there they might lead a solitary life, as also, that they might serve them
for walks, and refreshings, after their studies.

The Jesuit should have wronged his greatness, if he had conformd himself to the
fashions of other orders.

20 After that our religious men have made the three ordinary and substantial
vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, they may not return to the
world, to follow again their former course of life, no not with the consent of
their Abbots.

The Jesuits, having added to the simple vow of Iesuitisme, Greg. 13. Bull.
1584.
after the two years of their Nouiceship, the three vows common to all
religious orders; may notwithstanding, be turned over to the world again by
their General, whenever it pleases him.

21 Our religious persons, after they have made those three vows, are
incapable of all kinds of succession.

The Jesuit as long he continues in his simple vow, Greg. 13. Bull. 1584.
may enjoy any of them, as if he had not at all given over the world.

22 No man enters into other orders of religion, but with an intent to study,
that he may in time be preferred to the order of Priesthood.

The Jesuit receives men into his order, under the name of temporal
coadiutors, which make profession of ignorance, and are never admitted into
holy orders.

23 All other religous persons, have certain days, wherein they keep
extraordinary fasts and abstain from meat, which days are not common for
fasting to the rest of the people. The Jesuits, though from their very
entrance they take the name of religious persons, Rib. lib. 3. ca. 22.
yet at no hand observe any such day.

24 The ancient ordinances of our Kings, Charles, 5.6.7. admit no principals
of Colleges that are strangers, and borne without the Realm, unless at the
least they be made denezens.

The General of the Jesuits establishes in the Colleges of his order such
Rectors and Principals, as pleases him, without respect whether they be
French, or no.

25 In our religious orders, the religious are not suffered to read Lectures of
humane learning, to any but those of their own order.

The Jesuit reads to all goers and comers.

The Bull of Pius 4. 1561
26 The degree of Masters of Arts, is not given with us to any religious
person, but only the Doctership of divinity, if they be fit for it.

The Jesuit takes the degree of Masters of Arts, as well as of Doctor of
Divinity. Bull of Pius 2. 1552. and Pius 4. 1571. Pius 4. Bull 1556. Greg. 13.
Bull in May. 1573.


27 The order, that we observe in our Universities, is, that the Bishop is the
chief Judge: and for this cause, in every Cathedral Church, where there is
an University, to whom there is also a Chauncellor of the University, to whom
there is a Prebend annexed, which gives the degrees of Bachilers, Licentiats,
Masters, and Doctors, after the disputations and public trials made, in the
places of old hereunto appointed.

The Jesuit is ignorant of this form: he must have a stable by himself. At
the first, the General made Masters and Doctors of his absolute power:
afterward, these degrees were taken by the authority of the Prouincial, upon
examination by 2. or 3. deputed by him to that purpose.

28 Yea more then that, in this our country of France, no man may receive the
degree of Master or Doctor, but in famous Universities. The Jesuit, turning
topsie turuy all our ancient discipline, may make Ma. of Arts, Pius 4. 1561.
and Doctors of Divinity, wheresoever they have Colleges, though they be not
in any University.

29 In all alienations of the Church goods, which depend upon Bishoprics or
Abbeys, the communalty must assemble themselves together with the consent of
their heads, to contract, and afterward, the authority of the superior must
concur; who must depute a Promoter as he that is proctor for the good of the
Church: al which is done, to discuss and examine, whether it be fit that such
alienation be made. To the alienation of the goods of the Jesuits, Pius 5. 1568
Co^st. par. 9. cap. 3. art. 5.
there is nothing required, but the will and absolute power of the General,
without any other ceremony.

In their first confer. Gen rall. 1558. Greg. 13.18. December. 1576. Pius 4.
1561. 19. Art. Monta. in his boo^e of the truth defended. cap. 15. Pellar. de
translamp. Montaign. Chap. 15.
30 Our kings receive a subsidy of benevolence, from the churches of their
Realm, which we call Tenths.

If you will give credit to the Jesuits privileges, they are exempted from it.

31 Our kings may not be excommunicated by the Popes, as we will prove in his
place.

This rule is charged to be untrue by the Jesuits.

32 It is not in the Popes power to transsate our Realm to whom it pleases him,
for default of obedience to him, as I hope also I shall prove. The Jesuit
maintains formally, that the Pope according to the occasions of matters, may
transfer, not only kingdoms, but the Empire also, And to the end I may file
on a row other propositions, wherein they contradict us.

33 Clergy men may not be judged by a Secular Judge, Bellar. de exem. Cler.
cap. 1. Propo. 3. Propo. 4. Propo. 5.
although they kept not civil laws.

34 A Clergy man's goods, both ecclesiastical, and temporal, are free from
tributs to secular Princes.

35 The exemption of Clergy men in matters politic, as well for their
persons, as their goods, was brought in both by humane and divine law.

That which I will certify to you in my speech following, is, the doctrine of
Emanuel, a Doctor of Diuiniy, a Jesuit of Antwerp, in his Aphorisms of
confession; wherein, as he declares in his Epistle by way of preface, he
labored 40. whole years: and sets down his undoubted propositions of
confession, by order of Alphabet.

36 A Clergy man's family, is of the same Court with himself.

37 A Clergy man's goods, may be confiscated by an ecclesiastical Judge, in
such cases as a Layman may be so punished by the law.

38 A Clergy man may not be punished by a Secular Judge, for a false
testimony given before him.

39 A Clergy man being smitten by on of the Laity, may sue him before an
ecclesiastical Judge.

40 A Clergy man may use the custom and statute of Laymen for his own
profit. His meaning is, that the custom binds him not, unless it please
himself.

41 A Bishop may constrain men upon pain of excommunication, to bring in the
Testaments of the dead, and see they be executed.

42 A Bishop may charge a benefice, which he bestows, with a yearly pension
for the maintaining of a poor scholar, or Clarke.

43. A woman is not usually to have succession in Fee.

44. A Clergy man dying intestate, and having no kindred, the Church which he
served, must be his heir: but now perhaps, the chamber of the Apostolic Sea
inherits.

45. A prisoner going to execution, is not bound to confess that, which before
he untruly denied, unless otherwise some great harm may ensue.

46. A prisoner is not to be compelled by his confessor to confess his fault.

All which Propositions, directly derogate from those, which we observe by the
common law of France. And yet, that which is more mischievous and intolerable,
is that which he has in two other Articles written in this sort.

47 The rebellion of a Clergy man against his Prince, is not high treason,
because he is not subject to the Prince.

48 If a Priest in confession, have intelligence of some great danger intended
to the state, it is sufficient to give a general warning to take heed. He also
against whom evil is intended, may be warned to take heed to himself, at such
a place and time, so that the penitent be not in danger to be discovered
thereby.

Good God: Can we abide this order in our country of France? I know, that
although (God be thanked) our kings were never tyrants, yet the Jesuits
propound two Maxims, which if they should take place, every sovereign
Prince, must stand to the mercy of his people.

49 A King may be deposed by the State for tyranny, and if he do not his duty,
when there is just cause, an other may be chosen by the greater part of he
people. Yet some think, that tyranny only is the cause for which he may be
deposed.

50 He that gouerns tyranously, may be deposd by the peoples sentence, yea
though they have sworn perpetual obedience to him, if being warned, he will
not amend.

If these two Articles take place, there is no Prince, be he what he will, that
can be assured in his estate. And I pray you suppose, that this confessionary
was printed in the year 1589. that is to say, to confirm and authorize, that
which was purposed against the King deceased, in the beginning of the year,
when certain ill disposed persons would have declared him to be a tyrant.

51. We have in this country of France, an appeal, as it were a writ of
Error, of the thundering of the Apostolic Bulls; when they are found to
enterprise any thing, either against the majesty of our Kings, or against the
ancient Councels, received and approved in our Church of France, or against
the liberties thereof, or against the authority Royal, or Acts of the high
Courts. This appeal as from the abuse, I tell you, is one of the principal
sinews of the maintenance of our estate.

The Jesuit will not acknowledge it, for many causes, which touch him near,
which I will not here discover.

52 The Jesuits acknowledge none for their Judge, but the Pope, or their
General, desiring by this means, to fend us back again to that old labyrinth
of Rome, whereof our good Saint Bernard, complaind to Pope Eugenius in his
books of consolation. And thereof we saw a notable example in Bordeaux, when
Lager, Rector of the College of the Jesuits, declared that he would not obey
the Maire and Iurats, who had sent for him for the preventing of a certain
sedition: saying, that he acknowledged: them for civil Magistrates over the
Burgesses of the City, but that neither they, nor any other Judges, of what
nation, quality, dignity, and authority soever, had any power over their
society, but only our holy Father the Pope, or the General of their order.
And shall we then suffer this family to live in the midst of us? That were
indeed to receive in a vermin, which at length will gnaw out the heart of our
estate, both spiritual and temporal.

Then said the Jesuit to the Advocate, I will not be long in aunswering your
curious collections. Sess. 25. ca. 16. de regular.
For against all that you have said, I oppose in one word, the general
counsel of Trent, by which we are approved and authorized.

53 Whereto the Advocate answered, I grant that you have thirty on your part,
but we have 45. above you. This Council concerning the doctrine, is an
abridgement of all the other ancient Councels, therefore it is in that regard,
to be embrast by all devout souls: but wholly to be rejected concerning
discipline, as well Secular as Ecclesiastical; as that Council, by which our
whole Realm of France would be set on fire, if it should be received. And
they that can sent well, smell that all which was then decreed, came from the
Iesuitish souls: I mean, as concerning matter of government. If there were no
other respect but this, ye were to be banished out of France: because we cannot
allow of you, without allowing of this Council: and the approving of it, were
to make a great breach, both into the Majesty of our Kings, and into the
liberties of our Church of France.

CHAP. 2. That the Popes authorizing the Jesuit, at his first coming, never
had any persuasion, that either he could, or ought to inhabit in Frannce.
WHen the Advocate had made an end of this discourse, the Jesuit, thinking he
had some great advantage against him, began to speak thus to him. Let us lay
aside the counsel of Trent, though it be a strong fort for the confirming of
our order. At the least, you cannot deny, that we are assisted with an infinite
number of the Bulls of diverse Popes, Paulus and Julius the third, Pius the
fourth and fifth, and Gregory the thriteenth: by all which, they do not only
approve us, but gratify us with many great privileges, such as never were
granted to any other order of religion, as you might understand by me
yesterday. Whereupon it follows, that you and all other, that set themselves
to fight against us, ought to be held for heretics.

Aduoc. A great objection forsooth: for you could not possibly fight against me
with any better weapons: and I am right glad, that my whole discourse, begins,
continues, and ends, according to the authority of the holy sea.

Abs Jove principium, Iouis omnia plena. The holy Sea has approved of you,
(say you) I grant it, only to pleasure you. Therefore they that allow not of
your society, are heretics: I deny that. The College of Divines, and the
University of Paris, our whole Church of France, so many societies, so many
of worth and honor, made themselves parties against you, in the year 64. and
disalowed of you: yet for all that, ye never heard, that they were decleard at
Rome to be heretics. Insomuch, that the Popes which authorized you, never
thought that you were to inhabit in France. They knew that their dignity, is
the mother of unity in the Universal Church. They were not ignorant of the
liberties of our Church of France, wholly contrary to the profession of the
Jesuits: and that to settle them in France, had been to plant a huge sort of
schisms and divisions. Whereby you may perceive the reason, why they repeald
not the judgments that had past against these goodly Masters, as well in the
convocation of our whole Clergy at Poisie, as in the Parliament at Paris.
Following herein, by a good inspiration of God and his holy Spirit, the steps
of Paulus the third, to whom when the Jesuits presented themselves at the
first, faining that they would go into Palestine, and there settle their
aboade for the co^uerting of the Turks, Masf. lib. 2. capit. 3. Ribad. lib. 2.
capit. 7.
they were not only favorably entertaind by him, but, which is more, he
caused money to be deliuerd to them for the defraying of the charge of their
voyage. But when they returned the second time, to have a confirmation of their
new determination, Pope Paul was two whole years before he could yield to
it. And why so? Because in their first project, there was no danger to
Christendom, but only to themselves, that were the undertakers of this
matter. In the second, there was assurance for their persons, but great hazard
and danger to all Christendom. And after many denialls and refusals, although
he suffered himself to be carried away by Cardinal Co^tarens importunity,
yet he was of opinion, that not only they were not to take up their dwelling
in France, but not to continue in any other part of Christendom, but very
sparingly.

How then? Shall we think that this great Pope, would leave desolate this
new Order approved by him? No truly. And if you will examine this story
aright, you will rest satisfied. If in the year 1539. the Jesuits had made
promise of no more, but the 3. substantial vows of other religious orders, he
would never have admitted them in such a fashion as they presented themselves:
Munks, who by a title appropriated to themselves, were termed of the society
of Jesus, wearing no religious habit at all. Munks, that would not tie
themselves to their Cloisters, there to lead a solitary life, nor reduce
themselves to the extraordinary abstinence from meats, and to the fasts of
other religious orders. Munks, that would preach and administer the holy
Sacraments, without the permission of the Bishop. For all these circumstances
laid together, promise (I cannot tell what) great dissolution, rather then
edification.

What then prouokt him to receive them? First, their vow of absolute obedience
to the holy Sea: afterward, that of their Mission: by which Ignace and his
companions promised, that when soever they should be commanded by the Popes,
they would go into all heathen Countries, to dispeople them (as it were) of
Idolatry, and to plant Christianity in them. They were a company of
Argonautes, which promised to embarque themselves, not to go conquer the
golden Fleece, like ^ason, but to transport abroad, the fleece of the Paschall
Lamb, under the ensign of Jesus.

A goodly profession doubtless, in favor whereof, Pope Paulus suffered these
new pilgrims, which took the cross for the glorifying of the Name of Jesus,
to term themselves the society of Jesus, to wear the habits of Priests, not
of Munks, not to shut themselves up in Cloisters, to minister the word of God,
and the holy sacraments, one with another: for as much as they vowed themselves
to the conquest of those Countries, wherein there were no Bishops not Curats: a
conquest to be made, not with material arms, but only with spiritual. Send
them to the new found Lands, according as they promisd to go, never was there
order in greater request then this, provided, that they acquit themselves of
their promise, not by word, but effect. Transplant them into the midst of the
Christian Churches, and especially of this our Church of France, in sted of
order, you shall make disorder, of as dangerous a consequence, as the sect of
the Lutherans.

And that no man may think I make fantastical and idle discourses, in the
Bull of the year 1540, repeated all at large in that of 1550, they promise to
go, without shifting or delay, whether soever the Pope will send the^, for the
saving of souls, and aduauncing our faith, whether to the Turks, or to other
miscreants, even to those parts, which they call the Indies; or to any
heretics or schismatiks, or to any belieuers.

If the meaning were, to make new seminaries of them through all Christendom,
it were a ridiculous thing, to set the countries of believing Christians, in
the last place: besides, it seems, that these words [or to any beleeuers] are
added but by the way, and as it were for a fashion. But these great promisers
and trauailers, forgetting what their first institution was, have set up only
some doozen Colleges, such as they be, in Countries unknown to us, (at the
least if we must believe them) and have erected an infinite sort in the midst
of us, to plant thereby a new Popedom, and to trample under foot the old,
under which, the Church militant has triumphed.

We are not out of the Church of S. Peter, because we condemn these new
Friars in France, but we conform our selves without Sophistry, to the
original and primitive wills of the Popes, Paulus and Julius the third; and
though their wills had been otherwise, yet our Chapter of France, has time out of
mind, been accustomed, most humbly to make the case known to the Popes, when
they were to be carried away by the unjust importunity of particular men, to
the prejudice of the church. So did S. Martine, Bishop of Tours, an Apostle
guardian of our Country of France: so did our good Saint Jews: and yet they
were iudgd to be heretics therefore, no more then Saint Paul, when he
withstood S. Peter, who in that case yielded unto him.

CHAP. 3. That it is against the first institution of the Jesuits, for them to
teach all sorts of Scholars, human learning, Philosophy, and Divinity: and
by what proceedings and devises they have seized upon this new tyranny, to
the prejudice of the ancient discipline of the Universities.
YE may not think Gentlemen, that Ignace and his companions, when they
presented themselves to Pope Paulus, made offer to teach the youth, in such
sort, as the Jesuits since that time have done. I have showed you what his
sufficiency was in all parts of good learning. It was he that set the first
plant of their society, and knowing his own small forces, he promised only to
teach little children their Creed, as our Curats do, or their Vicars in
petty Schools: which I will prove to be true by the course of this story.

When they came first to Rome, to receive the Popes blessing against their
pretended voyage into the holy Land, Maffee says, that during their aboade,
according to the ancient custom of the Church, Mass. lib. 2. capit. 9.
they endeuourd to catechize the common people and the children from street to
street. And afterward, when they were assembled to draw their articles for
their future society: Ac simul concepta verborum formula sese obstringerent,
puerisi aetati per Catachesim instituendae. The same thing is repeated by
Ribadiner, Ribad. lib. 2. cap. 13.
who says, that this article was then agreed on by them, Pueros rudimenta
fidei doceant.

Let us come now to their Bulls, and first to that of 1540. by which, the wise
Paulus 3. fearing all the affairs of these new Associats, after much
importunity, signed their Bill, but with this charge, that they should not be
above threescore. See what the beginning and promise of this supplication was,
Quicunque in societate, quam Jesus nomine insigniri cupimus, vult sub crucis
vexillo, deo militare, et soli Domino, ac Ecclesiae ipsius sponsae, sub To.
Pontifice, Christi in terris vicario, seruire, post solemn castitatis,
paupertatis, et obedientiae votum, proponat sibi in animo, se partem esse
societatis, ad hoc potissimum institutae, vt ad sidei defensionem, and
propagationem, et profectum animarum in vita and. doctrina Christiana, per
publicas praedicaciones, and verbi dei ministerium, spiritualia exercitia, and
cantus opera, and nominatim per pueroru^. and rudiu^in Christianismo
instituitione^. And because this latter clause might receive some doubtful
construction, it is in a few words expounded, a little after in the same
Bull. Et nominatim commendatam habeant institutionem puerorum et rudium in
doctrina Christiana, december praeceptorum, et aliorum similiter rudementorum.
This is clear, and yet they might have Colleges, not every where, but in
approved Universities; and not to receive for scholars, all comers and
goers, but only them that are of their Seminary.

Possint (says the same Bull) in Vniuersitatibus habere Collegium, sen
Collegia habentia reditus, census, seu possessiones, vsibus and necessitatibus
studentium applicandas, retenta penes Praeponu^ and societatem omnimoda
gubernacione^, seu superintendentia super dicta collegia. Since the goods of the
Colleges, were appointed for them that should be students therein, it cannot
be understood of strangers, but only of them, that vow to be of their order:
whom since, they have called scholars approved. As for others, they were only
to teach little children their creed, as we see the Masters of our
Presbyteries do. That appears by this word (Puer) which signifies an age,
somewhat, but not much, exceeding the^ whom the Romans called Infants. And
indeed, when we would noate an old man, who by the feeblenes of his years
becomes a child again, we say that he does Repuerascere. An infant is he that
can neither go nor speak. Puer, is an infant that begins to go and speak,
and so is he expressed by Horace, in his book of the Art of Poetry.

Reddere qui voces iam scit puer, and pede certo signat humum. In the year
1543. it was permitted the Jesuits to receive, without any limitation of
number, all them that would be of their order. And as Pope Paulus opened the
door to them on this side, so did he shuth on another. For in the Bull of 43.
there is rehearsal made, word by word, of the privileges that were granted
them by the first, of 1540. but concerning the instructing of children in their
Creed, there is no mention at all, which I beseech you to consider. In the
years 45. and 46. their privileges were greatly encreast, and singulerly in
the year 49, yet there is no speech in any of them, of teaching children,
although in these latter, there is express mention made again, of Colleges
ordained for them of their Order.

If you desire to know the reason, and whence this diversity proceeds, I will
tell you. When by their first creation, there might be but threescore of their
society, Pope Paulus made no great dainties to open the petty Schools for
them, to teach little children their Creed: but when be set open a wide gate
for all men that would, to be of their society, then his meaning was, they
should be framed after the fashion of other religious orders and Monasteries,
which may teach no other youth, but such as are of their several Orders.

In this estate they lived till the year 49. in which Pope Paulus died, whom
Julius the third succeeded. They had to do in the beginning with a Pope, who,
albeit being ouercom by the importunities of a great many, he yielded in the
end, yet still kept them under. But upon the sudden, after his dicease, they
learned Lisander the Lacedaemonians lesson, who said, that a good Captain must
be clad in the skin of a Fox and of a Lion: a lesson afterward recommended
by Machiauill in his institution of a Prince. Look not in the course of this
story following, for any thing in your Jesuits, but Foxe-like, and Lyon-like:
and so doing you shall find that they have proved brave scholars of
Machiauell. Ignace a very wise worldling, understanding that there were many
novelties brought into the society, which he had devised, contrary to the
ancient order and discipline of our Church: so that a man could very hardly
like of them, conceived that it was needful for him to have a new confirmation
by Julius; marry he would get some new privilege by the bargain. I told you,
that by the first Bull of Paulus, the Jesuits were permitted to teach little
children the first entrance into their Creed, to preach and to have Colleges
founded to bring up, and instruct their youth, the nurserie of their Society,
and none other, and that afterward, in all the other Bulls following, although
all their privileges were confirmed, yet there was no mention of this
ordinance for instruction.

They presented their supplication to Julius, declaring at large their former,
of the year 1540. and with a trick of foxerie foisted in this word Lectiones,
which was not mentioned in the former Bull, and then they set down all that,
which had past in the other Bulls: and for their Colleges, they bring in a new
passe-right. But it is best to read the places themselves. Ignace by this new
supplication, takes up again his Quicunque in societate nostra etc. Proponas
sibi in animo se partem esse societatis ad hoc potissimum institutae, vt ad
fidei defensione^ and profectum animaru^, in vita and doctrina, Christiana per
publicas praedictiones Lectiones, and aliud Dei quodcunque ministeriu^ ac
spiritualia exercitia Pueroru^, ac rudiu^ in Christianismo institutione^.
Behold the first surprise, which lies in two points, the one in this word
Lectiones, newly put in, after the word, Praedicationes; the other, in the
Catechizing of young children, which has been taken from them ever since the
year 1543. And yet, all this is not enough for the establishing of their
Colleges, and their ordinary teaching of the youth, in such sort, as they
afterward encrocht upon these things. By these Bulls, they were permitted to
read now and then publicly in Divinity, as we see their fellow Maldonatus
did, twice upon festival days: first in expounding the Canon of the Mass,
afterward, upon the Psalm, Dixit Dominus Domino meo. Otherwise, that last
restaint to the teaching of little children, had been in vain, if the word
Lectiones, might reach to the public exercise of all sorts of learning, such
as is in other Colleges.

And in these public Lectures of Divinity, that were to be read, as Sermons
and Instructions for the adunacing of our faith, there was no innovation at all
against our ancient discipline. For although religious persons might not teach
any, but them of their own order, humane learning and Philosophy, yet they
were not forbidden to read publicly in Divinity: and so our Fathers, saw one
Cenomani a Iacobin, and one De Cornibus a Franciscan, and we of late years,
Panigarole, read public Lectures of Divinity in Paris.

All the alteration that I gather, out of this Bull 1550, is, that whereas by
that of 1540. they were forbidden to have Colleges any where, but in approved
Universities, in this of Julius the third, they are permitted to have them in
all other places. Let us read the text of the Pull, Quia tamen domus, quas
Dominus dederit ad operandum in vinea ipsius, and non ad scholastica studia,
destinandae erunt, cum valde opportunum fore alioqui videatur vt ex iuuenibus
ad pietatem propensis, and ad litterarum studia tractanda, idoneis, operarij
eidem vineae Domini parentur, qui Societatis nostrae, etiam professae, velut
quoddam Seminarium existant, possit professa Societas, ad studiorum
commoditatem, Scholarium habere Collegia, vbicumque ad ea construenda and
dotanda, aliqui ex deuotione mouebuntur. Quae simulac constructa and dotata
fuerint (non tamen ex bonis quorum collatio adsedem Apostolica^ pertinet) ex
nunc authoritate Apostolica erigi supplicamus, ac pro erectis haberi. Quae
Collegia habere possint reditus, census, seu possessiones, vsibus and
necessitatibus studentiu^ applicandas, retenta penes Praepositu^, vel
Societatem omnimoda gubernatione, seu superintendentia super dicta Collegia,
and praedictos students, quoad Rectoru^ seu Gubernatoru^ ac studentium
electionem, et eorundem admissione^, emissionem, receptionem, exclusionem,
statutorum ordinationem, and circa studentiu^ instructionem, eruditionem,
aedificationem, ac correctione^ victus, vestitusque, and aliarum rerum
necessariaru^ eis ministrandarum modum, atque aliam omnimodo gubernationem,
regimen ac curam, vt nequestudentes dictis bonis abuti, neque societas professa
in proprios vsus co^uertere possit, sed studentium necessitati subuenire.

This was the supplication which they presented, and Julius signed, wherein you
may find some obscurity in these words [Societie profest] and in other, which
I will cipher unto you when opportunity shall serve. Let it suffice, that in
this passage, there is no other novelty, but that whereas by their first Bull,
they might have no Colleges, but in approved Universities, by this, they are
permitted to have them in all places, wheresoever any man will found any
Churches of their Society, which they in their language, call Houses. These
words, Churches and Monasteries, offended their dainty ears. And moreover you
see, that the Colleges which are spoken of, annexed to their Houses, are not
ordaind but for the scholars of their Order. And in this new alteration, yet
this was not to alter any thing in the ancient government of the Universities.
For all other orders of religion in their Monasteries, scattered here and
there in their Provinces, teach their Nouices, and afterward send them to the
Universities, there to perfect their studies, and to take degrees in Divinity,
if they be found fit for it. And thence it comes, that there is not a
Monastery of any noate, that has not a house in that great and famous
University of Paris, to lodge the religious of their Order, which are to
proceed in Divinity.

See here the beginning of the ruin and general change of the ancient
estate of our Universities. We knew not what it meant, to make religious
persons Masters of Arts, and much less, to make them take their degrees in
Divinity, other where then in Universities, whether all sorts of public
trialls for learning are brought. Julius the third overthrew this wise custom,
in favor of the Jesuits. For he ordaind that a Jesuit, wheresoever he have
been student, in University, or otherwise, should take gratis all degrees, of
Bachiler, master, Licentiat, Practitioner, and Doctor, in any faculty
whatsoever; and that if any man would exact of him, that which by an honest and
laudable custom has been received of antiquity, notwithstanding, he should
go out Master or Doctor, upon the only credit and authority of his
General, and should enjoy from thence forward, all the privileges, freedoms,
and liberties that others do.

This Pope was of a very fantastical judgment. You know the story of his
great Ape, that would not be ruld by any body, but a little beggar boy, of
which he, being then Cardinal de Monte, took such a liking, that afterward
being made Pope, he gave over to him all his Benefices, and made him a new
Cardinal: whereupon, the virtuous and honorable personages of Italy, called
him Cardinal Ape. I do not think it strange then, that this Pope, pricked
forward by such an other fancy, would needs advance to extraordinary degrees,
and never before seen in the Universities, these Apes of our Catholic
religion. And that you may not think, that I will encroch upon the Jesuits
privileges, and feed you, as they use to do with an impudent lie, let us
read the text of the Bull, Nec non scholaribus (speaking of the scholars
approved of their Colleges) Collegiorum Societatis huiusmodi, in
Vniuersitatibus alienius studij generalis existentium, quod ipsi (si praeuio
rigoroso and publico examine eisdem Vniuersitatibus idorei repertifuerint,
Rectores Vniuersitatum huiusmodi, and eos gratis and amore Dei, absque aliqua
pecuniaru^ solutione promouere recusauerint) in Collegiis praedictis a
Praeposito Generali pro tempore, existente, vel de eius licentia a quouis ex
inferioribus Praepositis, vel Rectoribus huiusmodi Collegiorum, cum duobus
etiam, vel tribus Doctoribus, vel Magistris, per eosdem eligendis: scholaribus
vero Collegiorum eorundem, extra Vniuersitatis existentium, studiorum suoru^
cursu absoluto, ac rigoroso examine praecedente, a dicto Praeposito Generali,
vel de eius licentia a quouis ex Praepositis, vel Rectoribus huiusmodi
Collegiorum cum duobus etiam vel tribus Doctoribus, vel Magistris, per eosdem
eligendis, quoscunque Baccalaureatus, and Magisterij, Licentiaturae, ac
Doctoratus gradus accipere, Praepositis, vel Rectoribus, cu^ Doctoribus
huiusmodi, vt eosdem Scholares ad gradus ipsos promouere, eisdemque
scholaribus, vt postquam promoti fuerint, in eis legere, disputare, ac
quoscunque alios actus ad haec necessarios, facere, exequi, omnibus and
singulis priuilegijs praerogatiuis, immunitatibus, exemptionibus, libertatibus,
antelationibus, fauoribus, gratijs, indultis, ac omnibus and singulis alijs,
quibus alij in quibusuis Vniuersitatibus studiorum huiusmodi, rigoroso examine
praeuio, ac alias iuxta inibi obseruari solitos and requisitos vsus,
ordinationes, ritus ac mores, pro tempore promoti, de iure vel consuetudine,
aut alias quomodolibet vtuntur, potiuntur, and gaudent, ac vti, potiri and
gaudere poterunt, quomodolibet in futurum, non solum ad ipsorum instar, sed
pariformiter, and aeque principaliter absque vlla penitus differentia, vti,
potiri, gaudere in omnibus and per omnia, perinde ac si gradus huiusmodi in
eisdem Vniuersitatibus, and non eorum Collegijs accepissent.

They that have been brought up in the Latin tongue, shall find, that Julius
speaks only of Jesuits scholars. It is a clause that has relation to all
other the former Bulls, wherein there has been speech of their Colleges, and
in this particularly it is ordained, that, although the scholars of this Order
have been students in Universities, or out of them, if after they have been
well and duly examind, they be found fit, they should be freely admitted to the
degrees of Practitioners and Doctors, (a word which cannot reach to strangers)
and that, if any man would make them pay duties, it should be in the power of
their General, to creat them, or to cause them to be created: and after they
have taken their degrees, they may read, dispute, and keep all other acts
heerunto requisite; in short, that they may receive the same prerogatives that
others do.

What? will you stretch this word (read) to all goers and comers, as in other
Colleges of Masters that are Secular? No truly. For what power soever is here
granted them, it was granted as to persons that were Regular, (for so they
have termed themselves) and therefore, it was to give these new Masters and
Doctors, leave to read to their scholars allowed, as if their degrees had
been given them by the Universities. Let the Jesuit, according to his good
custom, bring all the shifts of Sophistry he can, this passage, (if a man
read it from the beginning to the end) can not be otherwise understood. If
Julius had meant that the Jesuit graduated, might read to all goers and
comers, as the Seculars do, assure your self, he would not have forgotten
to make express mention of it.

But you see (will some man say to me) how many terms he has given to the
Jesuits Lectures to authorize them. Do you think that strange? how could he
do less? since that by a new devise, never seen before, he ordained, that
upon the simple credit of the General of this Order, the Jesuits might read
Lectures to them of their order. This policy, that so weakens all the
ancient sinews of the Universities, could not be sufficiently expressed for the
authorizing of it.

I have hitherto declared unto you, what, as then, was the estate of their
Bulls, concerning their Colleges, you shall now understand their history to
this purpose. Although neither by the ancient custom of the Vnuersities, nor
by the new grant of their Bulls, they were permitted to set open their schools
to all sorts of scholars, nor to have in their Colleges any other but of
their seminary: yet finding themselves to be supported by Master William du
Prat, Bishop of Clairmont, they settled themselves in one of the Towns of his
bishopric, called Billon, where they opened their College not only to them of
their order, but also to all other the students. O singular obedience of
Frenchmen to the Church of Rome? They brag that they have Bulls from Julius
the third, permitting them so to do. At this word we thought, that the only
alleging of the title, ought to be held for a good and sufficient title: And
yet they had no title but of their own Villain, quoth I to a Gentleman of
Gascoigne: who answered me very readily, that he be believed it, because they
had chosen for their chief, College in France, the Town of Villon. They used
this word for Billon, as the Gascoigns are wont to pronounce V. for B. and B.
for V. To which I replied, that we need not to make any change of the letter;
because by our laws, we were commanded to bring into Bullion, all false and
counterfeit moneys, and that the Colleges of the Jesuits, were of that stamp.

In the Town of Billon this villainy took beginning, which afterward they
spread abroad: first to Tolosa, the^ to Paris, by means of the great legacies,
that du Prat had given them. Neither durst any of us make head against any of
their unlawful enterprises, so much did our country of France honor the Sea
Apostolik, under which they shielded themselves, though falsely. We are indeed
reverently to yield obedience to that Sea, but cooseners are not to be suffered
to abuse it for their advantage, and there is none, whom it more concerns to
look to this, then our holy Father the Pope, if he mean to preserve his
authority over all, and against all. Good God, where are our eyes? Let us
run over all their Bulls of 1540. 43.45.46.49. if you find, that they are
permitted to hold and open their Colleges, in such sort as others of the
Universities, I will yield my self to any sentence, that shall be given
against me. All their worthy actions are but coosinages, and if you speak of
them in secret to them, they will tell you, that they are the miracles which
God has wrought by their Saint Ignace. When they first presented themselves to
Paul the third to be admitted, they termed themselves Masters of Arts,
proceeded in the University of Paris, and at this day, Maffee flouting the
whole consistory of Rome, is of opinion, that three of them had proceeded
Masters in Spain, and that himself and Ribadinere, would not give any place
of maistership to Broet, Iaye and Codury. And setting open their Colleges in
France, they did but shroud themselves under the authority of the Sea
Apostolic; an authority falsely supposd by them. Whence came these illusions?
From the miracles forsooth of great Ignace, who blinded all men's eyes.

I will now return again to the course of their Bulls, that you may
understand, when this power to read Lectures to all scholars, was granted
them. After this, ensued the troubles in France, 1561, about diversity of
Religion: in the beginning whereof, the Jesuits finding this a fit time for
their advantage, not by reason of any favor to their sect, but because of
displeasure against that civil war, obtained by a manifest forgerie, new
Bulls of Pope Pius the fourth, the tenure whereof is this.

Insuper tibi moderno, and pro tempore existenti Praeposito, Generali dictae
Societatis, vt per te, vel illum, vel aliquen ex Praepositis, vel Rectoribus
Collegiorum vestrorum, tam in Vniuersitatibus studiorum generalium, quam extra
illas vbilibet consistentium, in quibus ordinariae studiorum, artium
liberalium, and Theologiae lectiones habentur, cursusque ordinarij peragentur,
vt dictae Societatis Scholares and pauperes externos, qui dictas lectiones
frequentauerint, and etiam diuites (si officiales Vniuersitatum eos promouere
recusauerint) cum per examinatores vestrae Societatis idonei inuenti sint
(solutis tamen per diuites, suis iuribus. Vniuersitatibus) in vestris Collegijs
Vniuersitatum quarumcumque, and alijs extra Vniuersitates, consistentibus
Collegijs vestris, alios quoslibet Scholares, qui inibi sub eoru^ obedientia,
directione, vel disciplina studuerint, ad quoscunque Baccalauriatus,
Licentiariae, Magisterij, doctoratus, gradus, IVXTA IVLII PRAEDECESSORIS NOSRI
TENOREM, promouere, ipsique sic promoti, priuilegijs, alijsque IN EISDEM
LITERIS contentis plenarie vti, potiri, gaudere libere ac licite valiant,
authoritate praefata co^cedimus, and amplianius: nec non praesentes literas,
and in eis contenta, de subreptionis vel obreptionis, aut nullitatis vitio, seu
intentionis defectu, puouis praetextu quaesitoue color, nullo vnquam tempore
notari, vel impugnari possint.

This decretall, was the first opener of their Colleges to all manner of
scholars: but whereupon was it grounded? Upon the Bull of Julius the third, as
it is twice repeated. Was there every any greater forgery, or more crafty
conueiance then this? For Pope Julius never had any such thought; and that is
the reason why these Sophisters, have caused to be added in the end of Pius the
fourths Bull, that no man may accuse them of obreption, or surreption, or of
any wilful fault; being desirous that every one of us should shut his eyes,
and blindfolde his understanding, that we might not take any knowledge of that
apparent shame, which is brought in a new, against the ancient honor of the
Universities, by which our Church has always been kept in strength. But the
Pope has added this word (Ampliamus) will some Jesuit of the lowest form say
to me. Was there ever any point either of state or Religion, more important, or
of greater consequence then this? I let pass that these new Masters were
permitted to be Graduats in all faculties, as it was granted by Julius his
Bull.

I grant, that by this last Bull of Pius, there Colleges were opened to all
comers and goers: both the one and the other notwithstanding, being new
schisms in our Universities. But who can abide this, that their scholars must
be admitted to practice, whether they be Jesuits or strangers, upon the
testimony of two or three of their order, so they pay their duties to the
Chauncellours, Rectors, Presidents, and vnder-Gouernours of the Universities?
Is not this to make the Superiors of Universities, no better then Registers to
the Jesuits and their scholars? Is not this to disgrace the Governors of the
Universities without desert?

Is not this, by submitting them to the conscience of their General, and two
or 3. of his, to bring in a Chaos, hotch-potch, and confusion of all things in
our Universities? And to say the truth, there is no better means then that, by
making a Seminary of Jesuits, to make altogether a nurserie of Heretics, by
committing the Doctorships and Maisterships of scholars, to the judgment of
these new Templars. Since this depends upon this one word (Ampliamus,) which
was craftily foysted in, by these master workmen in such tricks of
legerdemaine, we shall admit this new disorder: thereupon the Pope shall stop
his own ears, and our mouths, that the shifts, obreptions and surreptions of
these reverend Fathers in God, may not be discried, and all because this last
clause was added, by a Clark of the Court of Rome, that copied out the grant.
Read all the 7. former Bulls, ye shall find no such clause in any of them. Why
did they cause it to be added in this? Because they knew in their conscience,
that this last Bull was obtained by obreption, contrary to all reason. If I
should appeal to their consciences, they would make a mock at me. For the
same year, that they got this Bull at Rome, (which was 1561.) they promised in
a full assembly of the Church of France, that they would renounce all the
extraordinary privileges, that had been granted them at Rome. This
abiuration they confirmed by public oath in a full Court of Parliament, but
they never performed it. And that which is especially to be considered, they
looked to themselves very carefully, for presenting the Popes privy Bulls,
either to our Clergy, or to our Parliament. For if they had showed them, they
had been not only derided, but also abandoned, as men that had no wit.
Hitherto you have descried in them, good store of the Foxes craft, now you
shall see how they have played in Lions. For, the year 1571. they got other
Bulls of Pope Pius the fifth, of this form and substance.

Decernimus and declaramus quod praeceptores huiusmodi Societatis, tam
literarum humanarum, quam liberalium artium, Philosophiae, Theologiae, vel
cuiusuis earum facultatu^, in suis Collegijs, etiam in locis vbi Vniuersitates
extiterint, suas lectiones, etiam publicas legere (dummodo per duas horas de
mane, and per vnam de sero, cum lectoribus Vniuersitatum non concurrant) libere
and licite possint: quodque quibuscumque scholasticis liceat in huiusmodi
Collegijs, lectiones, and alias scholasticas exercitationes frequentare, ac
quicumque in eis, Philosophiae vel Theologiae fuerint auditores, in quauis
Vniuersitate, ad gradus admitti possint, and cursuum quos in eis (...)
fecerint, ratio habeatur. Ita vt si ipsi in examine suf^^^ientes inuenti
fuerint, non minus, sed pariformiter, and absque vlla penitus differentia, quam
si in Vniuersitatibus praefatis studuissent, ad gradus quoscumque, tam
Baccalaureatus, quam Licentiariae and Doctoratus, admitti possint and debeant,
eisque super praemissis licentiam and facultatem concedimus. Districtius
inhibentes, Vniuersitatum quarumcumque Rectoribus and alijs quibuscumque, sub
excommunicationis maioris, alijsque arbitrio nostro, moderandis, infligendis,
and imponendis poenis, ne Collegiorum hutusmodi Rectores and Scholares
inpraemissis, quouis quaesito color, molestare audeant, vel praesumant.
Decerrentes quoque praesentes litteras, vllo vnquam tempore, de subreptionis,
vel obreptionis vitio, aut intentionis nostrae, vel alio quopiam defectu
notari, vel impugnari nullatenus posse minusque sub quibusuis similium, vel
dissimilium gratiarum reuocationibus, l^mitationibus, and alijs contrarijs
dispositionibus comprehendi posse.

O admirable, not Philosophers, nor Divines, but petifoggers in the Court of
the Church. He that shall have need of a form of petifoging, were best have
recourse to these Bulls, wherein notwithstanding with an infinite hardines, they
have coucht the fury of the Lion. To the other they added, I know not by what
sophistry, the word Ampliamus; but in these last, there is nothing but thunder
from heaven, and Superlatiue excommunications against any man, that shall but
dare to look up in opposition against their tyranny. True it is indeed, that
least I should fall foul on the^ by mistaking, I could wish, that some Oedipus
among the Jesuits, would discipher and expound to me, that last clause: which
they should not have added, if they thought that this Bull was such an one, as
that men could not be discontent with it. In this Bull Pius the fifth, had made
exception of two hours in the morning, and one in the afternoon. Gregerie the
thirteenth by another of 1578. in steed of the two hours in the morning gives
but one. There has always been in our Jesuits, enteprise upon enterprise, to
the prejudice of antiquity. You see in effect the whole history of the
pretended instruction of the youth, by the Jesuits, and how by little and
little they have got ground, against the ancient orders of the Universities.
Having employed all sorts of unlawful devises and shifts, which are familiar,
not to learned men, but to the basest of the people; who abusing the absolute
power of the holy Sea, bring, if I may dare to say so, the Popedom and the
rest of the people to live upon alms. By these clauses of the Chancery of
Rome, they think to fight with us, with edge tools. And a Procter general,
might rebate them bravely by an appeal, as by abuse, because these Bulls were
not only wrung out by devises, but do also, directly usurp upon the
liberties of our Church of France, the ordinary rights and privileges of our
Universities. For why should not this appeal be received, since that the
Signorie of Venice, according to their wise carriage in all their actions,
knowing the disorder, that these new people bring with them, have expressly
forbidden them by an act made the 23. of December, 1591. to read public or
private Lectures to any, but those that are of their Society? Which act, a
man cannot sufficiently commend, and which proves, that we are very dullards
if we do not follow their example. It is a light which ought to serve all
nations as a Lantern to bring them into a safe Haven.

CHAP. 4. That the foundation of the deceits of the Jesuits, proceeds from the
instruction of the youth: and why our auncesters would not that the young folk
should be taught in houses of Religion.
ALL things (says the Jesuit) are to be taken for good, that are done to a
good end. What skils it that there have been devises and shifts in (...) Bulls,
so long as the Pope dispenceth with us for them: and that our intent was not
grounded but upon a Christian charity, such as the instruction of youth is,
the very plant of our Order, wherein we desire to be always the principal
laborers.

It is well said, (quoth the Advocate,) and for my part, I think that all the
charity that you have brought with you to this work, is a very coosinage. Let
a man take your charity away, and by the same means he shall take away your
coosinage. Pardon me, I pray you, if this word have escapt me, it shall
hereafter be familiar to me. For, by ill hap, thinking that all your
profession is nothing but coosinage, and having no dexterity in variety of my
speech, as many of you have, I am one of those, who call that bread and wine,
which is bread and wine, and so coosinage, that which is coosinage; unless you
like better, that I should rather call it sometimes villainy: and because this
point lies heavy upon my stomach, I will to the depth of it out of hand. If
the discipline that is tolerated in your Order be good, why is it not general
in all other, who esteem as much of charity as you do? Why are they not
suffered to receive all sorts of scholars, though strangers, as well as you?
Can it be, that our good old Fathers, faild in judgment, and that we are now
constrained to have recourse to these new Fathers. There never was wiser
discipline then that of theirs. For they thought, that always the first
objects seem fairest to children, and that their wits, like wax, receive very
easily all sorts of impressions.

They thought, that they ought not to suffer them to be seduced, but to let
them enter into religious Orders, with an honest liberty of their consciences,
whereas by going ordinarily to the Munks lectures, they might be converted in
have to that, whereof they would repent themselves afterward at leisure; when
there was no time f^^it. And by this devise, the Jesuits very easily surprise
many children of good houses, there being no snare so easy to entrap them as
this. If they perceive any of their scholars begin to affect them, them they
draw to their net, and as soon as they have taken them, they make them vanish
out of their Parents sight, to the end they may not be recouerd. It is a good
coosinage, you will say, that frees a child from the vain service of the
world. Nay rather, it is a coosinage worthy to be punished for example sake, as
you will confess when you understand the proceedings. The Rectors inform
themselves by the Regents, of the capacity of those in their forms, of their
wits, and of their behauiours. Hereof they make a Catalogue, the figure whereof
I will show you, for I have one here ready printed, as follows.

Wit. Judgment. Prudence. Experience. Profit in learning. Natuall compexion.
What talents he has, whereof use may be made in any service of the Society.

And underneath the titles, they set in every Cell, the name of some child,
his form, and his age, acccording to the quality which they suppose to be in
him. Now so it is, that every year, they send from every College Letters to
their General, which they call, yeerelie Letters, by which they advertise him
how great a number of souls they have gained, and how much their confessions
have auailed them in this regard; and their Letters they accompany with this
Catalogue, which being advisedly considered by their General, he commands the
Prouincialls or Rectors, to beware that they suffer not this bird to escape out
of their cage. After this warning, they all employ themselves in diverse manner
in this goodly and fruitful labor, one, by auricular confessions, another, by
allurements, a third, by private exhortations in his chamber, and it is
marvelous hard for a poor youth to rid himself out of their nets,
especially being so watched.

Yet I will tell you a story of a young man of great hope, in the surprisall
of whom, they faild of their purpose. They perceived, that he had many good
parts, and yet had his mind greatly inclind to devotion: they imagind
thereupon, that he would be a very fit pray for them. This youth, being
pencioner in their College at Paris, one of their Fathers began to set his
fowling Nets for him, and among other talk, asked him, if it so fell out that it
should please God to call him out of the world, what would most disquiet him at
the hour of his death. The fear of the other world, (quoth the youth) because
of the sins I have committed. What would you say then, (replies the Jesuit)
to him that should free you of this fear? I would think my self greatly bound
to him, said the youth. You may assure your self of deliverance from this
fear, (concludes the Jesuit) if you will wholly become one of ours. For our
society of Jesus, is an acquittall from all sins. This young boy being thus
managed, gave full credit to his speech, and had quickly trust up his pack to
be gone, according to the instructions he had received, which were, that
without taking leave of Father or mother, he should first go to one of their
houses which they would name to him, and there he should receive certain money
to serve his turn, till he came to another; and so having in every of these
houses money to defray the charges of his voyage, he should come at the last to
Rome, there to receive such instructions as their General would give him.

When he was upon the very point of his departure, by good hap his Father came
to see him, and found him quite changed: hereupon, he was desirous to know the
cause of his change: the boy refusd to tell him, but the Father pressed him hard,
and coniurd him with a fatherly severity, not to hide the matter from him. At
the last, he understood all that had past, whereupon he presently took him
away from that house, and after that all these fumes were vapourd out of his
brain, sent him to another College, where he profited so well, that I assure
my self, he will prove very rare in the vocation which now he follows, and
will praise and thank God as long as he lives, that it pleased him of his
gracious mercy, to deliver him from so dangerous a shipwreck.

CHAP. 5. With what cunning the Jesuits enrich themselves with the spoil of
their Nouices.
THe Jesuits winning in this sort the youth of their Colleges, as well
pencioners as strangers, would think this a small matter, if they did not also
enrich themselves with their spoils. It is a general rule, very well
understood by them, That he that confiscates the body, confiscats the goods.

I will not here make an Inuentarie of the great wealth they have gotten, as
having not been in their purses to see it, but this I will tell you, that this
practice having been often objected to them, he that made The humble
supplication to the King, affirmed, that of three or four hundred that have
vowed themselves to their Society, there are not above three or four that
have presented it with their goods: and Frances Montagnes, that made the book
De la verite defendue, says, that of two thousand, there were but two hundred.
The art of wise liars is, not to disagree in their tales, and yet both these
reports are faulty: They should say, that of three or four hundred there were
not four, and that of two thousand there were not 2. hundred that had not
bestowed their goods on them. And indeed it were impossible for the Nouice to
keep his goods from their fingering. For they have a marvelous art, and that
infallible for this effect. They have two books of Statuts, the title of the
former is, Coustitutio Societatis Jesus, which is divided into two parts: the
second is entitled, Constitutiones and Declarationes examinis generalis. These
Books I have in my possession, as also that, in which all their Bulls are
registered. In their Examination, you shall find in the fourth chapter, and in
the first, second, and third Article, that which follows for the distributing
of their goods that enter into their society.

1. Quicunque Societatem ingredi volunt, antequam in domo aliqua vel Collegio
eius viuere sub obedientia incipiant, debent omnia bona sua temporalia quae
habuerint distribuere and renuntiare, ac disponere de his, quae ipsis obuenire
possent: eaque distributio primum in res debitas and obligatoria, si quae
fuerint, and tunc quam cirtissime fieri potuerit, prouidere oportebit. Si vero
tales nullae fuerint, in pia and sancta opera fiet, iuxta illud: Dispersit,
dedit pauperibus: and illud Christi* Si vis perfectus esse, vade and vende
omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, and sequere me. Dispensando tamen haec
bona iuxta propriam deuotionem, and a se omnem fiduciam submouendo, eadem vllo
tempore recuperandi.

2. Quod si statim propter aliquas honestas caussas non relinquet, promittat se
prompte relicturum omnia post vnum ab ingressu, absolutum annum, quandocumque
per Superiorem et iniunctum fuerit, in reliquo tempore probationis, quo
completo, post professienem professi, and ante tria vota publica, Coadiutores
re ipsa relinquere debe^nt, ac pa^upe^ribus, vt dictum est, dispensare, vt
consilium Euangelicum, quod non dicit, da Consanguineis, sed pauperibus,
perfectius sequantur; and vt melius exemplum omnibus exhibeant, inordinatum
erga parents affectum exuendi and incommoda inordinatae distributionis, quae a
dicto amore procedit declinandi, atque vt ad parents and consanguineos
recurrendi, and ad inutilem ipsorum memoriam, additu praecluso, firmius and
stabilius in sua vocatione perseuerent.

O holy and Christian lesson of the Jesuits who would have a young man, that
vows himself to their society, to dispose, before he enter thereinto, not
only of all such goods, as are fallen to him, but also of all such, as may fall
to him: and it is yet more holy and marvelous, when they teach him to forget
all that affection, which God commands the child to bear to his father and
mother; and after them, to his nearest kindred, and that they ^all this
affection disordered. And that further they ordain that within the two yeerers
of his probation, he give all his goods in alms to the poor, and that he do
not leave them to those, who being next of kin, should he his heirs. And all
this is, because he might never after upon any loathing of their new rebellion,
return home to his fathers house. But I beseech our Jesuits to remember this
holy lesson: for I hope to put them in mind of it hereafter, to better purpose
in his proper place. In the mean while, let us mark what the Catastrophe of
this devout Comedy will be.

3. Si tamen dubitaretur number maioris foret perfectionis, dare vel renuntiare
consanguineis, huiusmodi bona, quam alijs propter pacem, vel maiorem ipsorum
penuriam, and iustas alias ob causas, nihilo minus ad declinandum errandi in
huiusmodi iudicio periculum, quod ab effectu sanguinis solet proficisci,
contenti esse debebunt hoc, arbitrio vnius, duorum aut trium, qui vita and
doctrina commendantur (quos vnusquisque cum Superioris authoritate elegerit)
relinquere, and in co conquiescere, quod illi perfectius, and ad maiorem
Christi Domini nostri gloriam esse censebunt.

This is that I looked for of them: after that they have made their approach
step by step, they are at last come to the wall, and there lacks nothing but to
scale it, or to enter the breach, for the winning of the Town. What may we
look for of this award upon arbitrament, but that we read of Q. Fabius Labeo,
who being chosen Arbitrator by the Senate of Rome, to decide the controversy
betwixt the Nolans and Neopolitans, concerning their bounds, after he had
surueyed the place, talking with each of them apart, he councelled the^ not to
be wedded to their own wills, but rather to choose peace then pursue their
quarrel. To which when both parts had condescended, for respect they had to
him, after he had set each of them their bounds as pleased him, he adjudged to
the people of Rome, all the ground which remained betwixt them, and for which
they had been in strife. Wherein they could not complain (says Valerius)
because they had put the matter to his honestly, and so (says this author) by
a dishonest shift, the City got a new tribute. I know well, the judgment I
give of them, will be subject to cauelling, and that some will say, that the
Gloss goes beyond the text, for some particular grudge I bear them. But I
call God to witness, that I wish not their hinderance in any thing, but as I
conceive it makes for the common good. I envy not other Monasteries, for that
they which enter into them, present them with their goods, because I do not see
that they enter thereinto by crafty enticements, but upon devotion guided by
the holy Ghost: but as for the Jesuits, they take quite another course. There
is nothing but the hand of man that cunningly works the matter by a long
train. First of all, in teaching the young boys, whether Pencioners or others,
they cast their eyes upon them that are for their purpose, and make a Catalogue
of their sufficiency and capacities, which they send (as I told you) to their
General, winning them afterward with sweet allurements. When they are once
won, they steal them away from those, to whom they appertain, and send them
into other countries, to make them forget their friends. After, when they are
fast in their nets, and are now ready to give their farewell to the world,
they are persuaded by force, to leave nothing to their father, mother, or
kindred, but to give all to the poor. But to what poor? That is not expressed.
And surely, he were of a very dull capacity that would not judge, that under
this generality, they mean to speak for themselves in particular; and that
in this choice, the young man will aim chiefly at their society, unto which he
is about to vow himself, and which he thinks to be the upholding of the
Catholic Church. To conclude, if his timorous conscience, have any scruple by
reason of the poverty of his parents, yet is he not suffered to extend his
liberality to them, but this doubt or perplexity is committed to the
judgment of two or three of their Jesuits. What is all this, but to tyrannize
over this poor man, by a long train of words and carriage of matters, and to
constrain him, when all comes to all, to bestow his goods on this poor
Society, upon which so much wealth is heapt? But if he would contest to the
contrary, they will make him at his first entrance believe, that he will
prove a disobedient child, and one that never will have any devotion to
their order.

But (as thought is free) let us suppose that these two or three pretended wise
men having given sentence in favor of their society, what appeal shall this
new Jesuit go seek to plead against them? He (I say) who for his first
lesson, receives commandment, to forget that holy trust committed to him by
God, I mean, the love of his father and mother, to obey his superiors, will
he think you, dare once lift up his eye lid to make head against them? And yet
notwithstanding, why should we blame them for this sentence? For they may say
without going so about the bush, that they are the Apostles of our time, as
they have caused themselves to be called in Portugal, and that as in the
primitive Church at Jerusalem, they that would be Christians, were bound to
bring all their goods and revenues to the Apostles feet; so these holy and
devout souls, will have all bound, who will enter inter into their society,
to make them partakers of all their goods. And for all this do you say that I
am not their most humble, and most affectionnate servant? To conculde, in all
Ribaner, I find nothing so fine, as when he tells us, that Ignatius, Rib. lib.
2. cap. 8.
and his fellows, having for a time settled their a bode with the Venitian,
went twice a day through the City to beg alms: and that one of them,
ordinarily stayed in their house, to provide for them of that little, which was
given them upon alms: And that it was Ignace that gave this charge, who
declared thereby, that what devotion soever he made show of, he had a month
mind to the kitchen too. This lesson his successors have learned very
perfectly.

CHAP. 6. That the crafty liberality of the Jesuit, in teaching the youth,
has brought the University of Paris to ruin.
I Will be more charitable to them then they are to us. Let us not envy them
the good that they get by their new guests, if by their Lectures they have
furnished us with many brave men for the government of our Realm. I pray you
tell me Gentlemen, whether your children, which you have committed to their
teaching, have gone before their companions, in matter of learning or public
charge, or no? Shall you find in the high Courts, any Presidents or
Counsailers of the Jesuits bringing up, that excel others? I do not only see
none such, but quite contrary, either we have none such at all, or very few;
in whom likewise, you shall find no other disposition but sad and heavy, no
way sociable with pubilque persons.

They that are brought up in other Colleges, not with fantastique assemblies,
but with courage, in our ancient religion, are preferred to all places of charge,
as well temporal, as Ecclesiastical. The Jesuits shoot at no other mark,
but the growth and greatness of their own Co^mon-weale, because (that I may not
lie to you) their School brings forth some men of mark, picked and chosen
among their scholars. These are such, as in their youth suborned by the
ancients, have been taken by craft, in whom age cannot quench the natural
fire that was in them. Afterward unprofitable for the Commonweal.

And verily, it was fit that God should muffle our eyes, when we first suffered
the Jesuits, not only to read, but to read gratis: that we might not perceive,
that the offer they made to the University of Paris, was like the artificial
horse the Greeks said they had made to offer to Palladiu^, the Image of the
goddess Pallas, which was in Troy. A horse, which notwithstanding, carried in
it self the ruin and destruction of the City. In this manner are we beguiled
by the Jesuits, who counterfeating to present a Pallas to France, in Paris, to
wit, their College, they have laid our famous University in the dust.

A generation of Vipers, no sooner brought forth, but they killed their mother.
For Ignace and his nine companions, when they presented themselves to Pope
Paul, were no further qualified then Masters of Arts in Paris, as I told you
of late. But with what eyes shall we see, that they who by their vows promised
poverty, as well in general, as particular, either would or could, show
liberality worthy of a Monarch, that is, to teach and take nothing? Before
they came here, the University flourisht, it was a common Port, where the
greatest part of all the Nations of Europe did ride at ancor. Which you may
perceive, as well by the four ancient and great schools standing in Straw
street, as by the Proctors of the Nations, next the Rector: For there is one
school and one procter for for the Germane Nation, under which is
comprehended, the English, Scottish, and others. If any speak of this
University, they said, learning was come to found Athens in Rome, and Rome in
Paris. The offspring of the good houses of France, either when they were first
sent out to learn, or if they had begun their studies in other Towns, yet
at last, their general Rende-Vous, was in Paris, to attain to the
accomplishment of learning there.

The Principalls, lodgd in their Colleges the scholars, whom they call
Pentioners, with moderate pentions; and of strangers, they took for their
admission, one shilling, or two at the most. The Regents had certain
beneuolences of their Auditors, which they called Fayrings, of one more, of
another less, as it pleased their Parents to bestow: for no man was bound, but
only by a certain shame, which he conceived by the honest liberality of his
fellows. The Regent had no action at all against them for the recovering of
one penny, and yet the matter was carried with such modesty, that the Regents
having swet and trauaild about the instruction of their youth, they were bound
to feast them one day in a Garden, where they brought into practice that
ancient liberty, which the Masters of Rome were wont to give to their
scholars in their Saturnalia.

No man can say, that there was one jot of covetousness in all these
proceedings, neither did you ever see any Principalls or Regents grow to great
wealth: and yet every one studied to his uttermost endeavor, with no other
intent, but to enrich himself with a good report, by being compast about in
his Lectures with a great multitude of Scholars: as indeed there is no sharper
spur to well doing then honor. The Principalls strove by a certain envy one
with another, who should have the best Regents to win commendation, and by
this means, the fame of the University of Paris was spread every where.

But upon a sudden, when it was not permitted, but tolerated in the Jesuits,
that they should open their shops, all this honorable ambition, vanished into
smoke. They called themselves Protectors of the Catholic religion: by means
whereof, the Fathers of Children, that could see no farther before them then
the length of their noses, sent their sons thither, to abide and be
instructed by them.

The scholars being not well confirmd, were very glad to save their
Gate-mony, their Fayrings, and their candles: and so their Colleges being
stuffed full, these liberal Jesuits, began to take twice or thrice so much of
their scholars for pention, as they took in other Colleges; which the
foolish fathers besotted, never denied them. Hereupon, by little and little,
the Readers and Regents of the University, waxt cold in that desire which
before they had to make themselves famous. This was, as it is with the Spleen
in our bodies, which cannot grow, without the decay of other parts. In like
sort, the growing of the Jesuit by this unlawful cunning, was the ruin of the
University of Paris, which God be thanked, now rises again, ever since the
Act of the Court of Parliament, in the year 1594.

But what is become of all this? The Principalls and Regents, in the midst of
their famous covetousness, remain poor, and the Jesuits, in the midst of their
crafty liberality, are become exceeding rich. And this is that, which
Monsiure Du Mesnill, the Kings Attorney general, very wisely said to Versoris
and Pasquier, when as they reasond of the case of the Jesuits, and the
University at the King's Bench bar; Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes. I know
that the meek Jesuit, in his supplication presented to the King, affirms,
that our holy Father the pope, has in Rome committed to them, the instruction
of the young Roman Nobility, amounting to the number of 2000. scholars, and
of five Seminaries of young men, Romans, Greeks, English, Dutch, Scottish. We
envy not either Rome or Italy this great happiness, much less the Jesuits,
who find themselves there to be very well and warm. They are permitted to
become wholly Italionate, so they get them out of France, and let us live in
quiet: and to that end, I give them these two verses following, to serve them
for Letters demissories.

Vos qui cuncta datis (rapitis tamen) ITE ALIO, ite:
Coelestes immo procul abs IESV ITE scelesti.
Or rather, by way of amplification, let them take this here.

YOu that do brag you freely learn and touch,
Houses and hu^^^ for drones you freely reach.
The course or ^^^^^ce freely you corrupt,
And Kings Ea^cts you freely interrupt.
Men's wills and f^r^^es, by you are freely caught,
By you the people freely are made naught.
And when your noses greater gain do wind,
You sing your selves, others to ^^ourn^ you b^^d,
Whom you have c^^send of their ancient seats,
Your craft, the Father of his child defeates.
Most willingly (lo here) I honor you,
O, of our Savior JESUS holy crew:
New Idols, of a new and foolish age,
Freely depart, with all your equipage.
Nay more, to pass the time as they travail over the Alps, I will give them
with all my heart a Latin Poem, that Adrian Turnebus made in favor of them, a
few months after their cause was pleaded, translated since that time verse for
verse, by Stephen Pasquier.

A Poem of Adrian Turnebus, upon the liberality of the Jesuits.
AMong the most principal and worthy personages of our age, as well for good
life, behavior, and Catholic Religion, as for all sorts of good learning, we
had in the University of Paris, that great Clarke, Adrian Turnebus, the Kings
Professor: a man praised and honored by the pens of as many, as since his
death ever writ of him, and among other religious men, Genebrard, Archbish. of
Aix, in his Chronographie. Adrianus Turnebus my Master. (says he) in the
Greek tongue, and the Kings Professor, at 53. years of age, dyed in Paris,
the 12. of June 1565. a Catholic, though the heretics gave out the contrary
of him. This learned religious person, makes it his glory, that he had
Turnebus for his Master, and bears witness of his Catholic faith, whose
witness alone is worth a hundred others. I trust the Jesuits will not be
grieved, to take this honorable commendation that he gave of them in Latin
verse, a little before his decease, translated then into French, verse for
verse, and printed at Paris.

Against Sotericus, that will needs read without stipend.
THou Soteric, who freely vaunts to read,
Persuade thy Lawyer for no fee to plead,
Which sells his speech by weight of golden hire,
And make thy Proctor no reward require,
But let him cap and curtsie for nothing:
Try if thou can the sacred Senate bring
To ask the King no stipend for their pain,
Nor benefit: If Proctors talk for gain,
And every Lawyer by his breath do thrive,
And Senators upon allowance live,
Let each good Order then be kept with them,
The Courts thy Stoic paradox condemn.
None thee believe that profit do despise.
The seats of justice here before thine eyes
Prosper by gain, and grow maiesticall,
Take away this, the Courts will have a fall.
Men will judge thee a fained hypocrite,
Not well contented with a little mite,
But say you gape for dead men's wills and treasure,
And lie in wait to hunt it out of measure;
Thus from the poor their alms is swept away,
Small things you scorn, to get some greater pray.
I wish at meaner gifts you would not grutch,
Nor heap and hale from Clairemont half so much.
What you by wicked shifts do scrape and rack,
Belongs unto the poor, not to your back.
Your piety and bounty does appear,
You crave great gifts, shun small; Devotion dear.
The love of this, has set your heart on fire,
None willingly becomes a thief for hire,
But soars aloft, in hope to part the spoil
He makes fair shows, and with a goodly foil
Draws them along, whom in his nets he shuts,
And then himself with blood and murder gluts.
Thus while you careless seem to teach for price,
Whom you may rifle of their goods, you tice.
Kindreds disherited, their wealth you share,
Whereof the laws and justice should take care.
Come now to sale, make market of your skills,
Take treble wages, give up dead men's wills,
Abstain from theft, let their bequests go free,
No scratching Harpie heereto will agree.
Then let your labors be no longer vaunted,
By your Society our lands are haunted.
Though four or five do teach, yet in your Cells
A thousand heauie-headed Drones there dwells,
Not apt to teach others, nor themselves to learn,
When ours, no maintnaunce have, but what they earne.
Not one with us that idle is, can live,
Why do you then the name of Masters give
Unto your selves, in such a Town where more
Masters have been then scholars heretofore?
Mention of this their monthly records make,
Not a Denier of Scholars will you take.
And shall such Locusts with so easy suit
Lodge in our bosom to devour our fruit?
He that no recompense will have, there-while
Watches the Realm and people to beguile.
Who will no burden be yet has no stay
Of living: this of him will wise men say,
He is a shifter, and his gain is cheated,
What Is due to him he takes not, though entreated,
What is not due, he does exact. See now
What tricks your rifled Scholars learn of you.
Their Legacies have made you fortunate,
They be the props and pillars of your state.
Of Lands and Lordships you desire good store,
With power of life and death over the poor
And blockish vulgar sort: Then if you please,
Epicures Gardens you may have for ease.
Grammarians, Masters, Doctors, and the Schools,
Scholars and Chayres must weep, you make all fools.
CHAP. 7. That the sect of the Jesuits, agrees in many things with the heresy
of Peter Abelard.
AFter that Pasquier had by his Plea laid open, the impieties and blasphemies
of the Jesuit Postell, he set himself to buckle with their* Metaphysicall
Maldonat, who some fix weeks, or two months before, in a great auditorie of
young boys, playing with his wit to the dishonor of GOD, had read contrary
Lectures. In the first, he labourd to prove by natural reasons, that there is
a God. In the second, that there is none. The Jesuits maintain at this day, by
the pen of Rene de la. Fon, that the Godhead must be proved by natural
reasons, and that a man may dispute both pro and contra, and that he which
thinks otherwise, and relyes only upon faith, is impious. This proposition,
together with their practice, which I have observed since their coming to
abide in Paris, makes me remember Peter Abelard, who was so touched to the quick
by S. Bernard: and I think I shall not at all wander from my purpose, if I
recount you the story, Maff. li. b 1. cap. 16.
the better to make comparison betwixt him and the Jesuits; especially, because
Ignace had for his first Regent in Barcelonne, one called Ardebal, in whose
name you shall find Abelard, without difference of any one letter.

Peter Abelard, coming of a very ancient and noble house of Britain, being
the eldest of five brothers (which is no small privilege in that country)
gave over all and every whit of his goods, that he might dedicate himself to
learning: wherein he was very forward, before he went out of the country. But
to the end he might be better furnished, he came to Paris, which then began to
be the fountain of all good litterature. There he found two Masters, William
Campellensis in Philosophy, and Anselm in Divinity, who read diverse lectures
in the Bishops Palace, where the University then was. Abelard had not studied
Philosophy, but that, as he was of a great, but a running wit, so he far
out-stript his companions, and became equal even to Campellensis his Regent.
And as one that was so, without taking any degree of license, of his own
private authority, he took the Doctors Chare: which being forbidden him, he
went and read at Corbueil, afterward, at Melun; from thence he came back to
Paris, where he read in the Suburbs. A certain space after, he studied
Divinity under Anselm, wherein he profited exceedingly, and upon like
extraordinary confidence in himself as before, he undertook to teach,
without the approbation of the University, to the great mislike of all the
ancients, yet not of the younger sort, who commonly take pleasure in such
novelties. As he grew wonderfully in all things, so there befell him a very
great mishap. For he got a maid of good sort with child, called Heloise, whom
he was constrained to marry privily, to satisfy her uncle, being a Canon of
the Church of Paris. Afterward, being desirous to conceal the marriage, and
having put his wife into a cloister of Nuns at Arge^tueil, her uncle taking
offense thereat, caused him a little while after to be taken at unawares, and
those parts to be cut off, by which he had offended. In the end, overcome with
shame, his wound being perfectly whole, he became a Monk in the Abbey of Saint
Denis in France, and Heloise, a veiled Nun in the Nunnery of Argentueil: yet
could not this working spirit be restrained by the ancient discipline of our
Church. For he began to set open a school, as well of Philosophy, as of
Divinity, within his Monastery, drawing to him an infinite sort of scholars.
This thing made the University of Paris to stir against him by complaint to
the Prelates. Which himself also conceales not, in a long Epistle being the
general story of his life, out of the which I have copied this passage.

Cum autem in diuina Scriptura non minorem gratiam, quam in seculari, mihi
Dominus contulisse videretur, coeperunt admodum ex vtraque lectione scholae
nostrae multiplicari, and caeterae vehementer omnes attenuari. Vnde maxim
Magistrorum inuidiam atque odium aduersum me concitaui. Qui in omnibus que
poterant, mihi derogantes, duo praecipue absenti semper obijciebant: quod
scilicet proposit^ Monachi valde sit contrarium, secularium librorum studio
detineri, and quod sine Magistro ad Magisterium diuinae lectionis accedere
praesumpsissem, vt sic inde omne mihi doctrina scholaris exercitium
interdiceretur. Ad quod incessantur, Episcopos, Archiepiscopos, Abbates, and
quascumque poterant Religiosi nominis personas incitabant. This passage I
especially note unto you, as serving marvelous fit, to be employed in this my
discourse. As he made his fame to grow by reading, so did he also by writing;
for he wrote a book, De Vnitate, and Trinitate diuina^, in favor of his
scholars, as he says. Qui humanas and Philosophicas rations requirebant, and
plus quam intelligi, quam quae dici possint, efflagitabant. Dicentes quidam
verborum superfluam esse prolationem, quam intelligentia non sequeretur: nec
credi posse aliquid nisi prius intellectum, and ridiculosum esse aliquem alijs
praedicare, quod nec ipse, nec illi quos doceret, intellectu capere possent:
Domino ipso arguente, quod caeci essent ductores caecorum.

This book offended all the Clergy of France. Whereupon, there was a Council
assembled in the Town of Soissons, where Conan, Bishop of Preuoste, and Legate
in France for the Sea Apostolic, was President. Abelard being heard speak
for himself, and his book being read; that was condemned as heriticall, and
appointed to be burnt in open market, and he the author of it, was confined for
ever into the Monastery of S. Medard, and express charge given him not once to
come abroad. He had many scholars, whereof some were become Cardinals, and
were near about Pope Innocent the second. Insomuch, that by their entreaty,
he found means to be received again into the Monastery of Saint Dennis; where
again he played the fool, though he escaped punishment for it. Thus he continued,
till at last, he had leave of the king to withdraw himself into Champaigne,
and there he built an Oratory, which he dedicated to the trinity, rather for
revenge, then devotion, that he might set himself against them that had
condemned his book. But percerceiuing that it displeased the Prelates, and
that he brought himself into danger to be censured again, he changed his name
into Paraclet (which signifies Comforter) a name particularly consecrated to
the holy Ghost: meaning, that this place had been the Haven of his comfort,
after he had past many tempests and storms. Which again offended our Church;
as he himself confesses. For although all Churches, (as I gather out of of
him) had been consecrated in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost: yet there never was any consecrated to God the father, to God the
Son, or to the blessed Spirit. To this objection, he being a great Sophister,
answered, that if Saint Paul to the Corinths, commanded that every man
should build in himself a spiritual Temple to the holy Ghost, no man should
think ill of it, that he had made a material temple. In this place, as he
that sought for nothing but novelties, he opened public schools of
Philosophy and Divinity. Whereof many scholars, that were curious, being
advertised, they left the Towns to come to him, and to stay with him, building
themselves little Lodges and Cells, where they lay upon the straw: et pro
delicatis cibis (says he) herbis agrestibus, and pane pro cibario vtebatur.
This indeed was, for him to set up a new Sect, who had been condemned by the
Church and University. The preachers declaimed against him, as a principal
heretic, that displeased by his means, the Lords Temporal and Spiritual:
but above all other, Saint Bernard took this quarrel in hand, as we see in
his Epistles. For perceiving, that notwithstanding the sentence of condemnation
given by the Council, Abelard continued opinionatiue in the teaching of his
error, under the shadow of supports, and favors he had in the Court of Rome,
writing to Cardinal Yues. Damnatus est Suessione, Bern. Epist. 193.
cum opere suo, coram Legato Romanae ecclesiae, sed quasi non sufficeret illi,
illa condemnatio iterum fatit, vnde iterum damnetur, and iam nouissimus error
peior est priore. Sequutus est tamen, quoniam Cardinales and Clericos Curie se
discipulos habuisse gloriatur, and eos in defensione praeteriti and praesentis
erroris adsumit, a quibus iudicari timere debuit, and damnari. And further:
Magister Petrus Abelardus, sine regula Monachus, sine solicitudine Praelatus,
nec ordinem tenet, nec ab ordine tenetur. Homo sus dissimilis est, intus
Herodes, foris Ioannes, totus ambiguus, nihil habens de Monacho, praeter nomen
and habitum. And writing to Pope Innocent the second. Habemus in Francia nonum,
de vtere Magistro, Theologum, qui ab incunte aetate sua, in art Dialectica
lusit, and nunc in scripturis sanctis insanit. Olim damnata and sopita dogmata,
tam sua videlicet, quam aliena suscitare conatur, insuper and noua addit. Qui
dum omnium quae sunt in coelo sursum, and quae sunt in terra deorsum, nihil
praeter nescio quid nescire dignatur, point in coelo os suum, and scrutatur
alta Dei, rediensque ad nos refert verba ineffabilia, quae non licet homini
loqui. ET DVM PARATVS EST DE OMNIBVS REDDERE RATIONEM, and contra rationem
praesumit and contra fidem. Quid enim magis contra rationem, quam ratione^
transcendere? Et quid magis contra fide^, quam credere nolle quicquid non
possis ratione attingere? Denique exponere volens illud Sapientis: Qui credit
cito, leuis est cord. Cito credere (inquit) est adhibere fide^ ante rationem.
Cum hoc Solomon non de fide in Deum, sed de mutua inter nos dixerit
credulitate. Nam illam quae in Deum est fidem, B. Papa Gregorius plane negat
habere meritum, si ei humana ratio praebeat experimentum. Laudat autem
Apostolos quod ad vnius iussionis vocem, sequuti sint Redemptorem. Scit nimirum
pro laud dictum: in auditu auris obediunt mihi: Increpatos e regione
discipulos quod tardius credidissent. Denique laudatur Maria quod rationem fide
praeuenit: and punitur Zacharias, quod fidem ratione tentauit. Et rursum
commendatur Abraham qui contra se in spem credidit. At contra Theologus noster:
Quid (inquit) ad doctrinam loqui proficit, si quod docere voluimus and exponi,
exponi non potest vt intelligatur.

Does not Saint Bernard hear bring process for our new Jesuits, when by their
natural reasons they prove and disprove, pro and conta concerning the Dietie?
Saint Bernard (I say) whom in this the Archbishop of Reims followed, and the
Bishops of Soissons, Challons, and Arras, who in the end of their letters,
write thus to the Pope: Qui ergo homo ille multitudinem trahit post se, and
populum qui sibi credas, habet, necesse est vt huic contagio, celeri remedio
occurratis. In the end, Pope Innocent interposed his decretall sentence in
these words: Communicato fratrum nostrorum Episcoporum and Cardinalium
consilio, destinata nobis a vestra discretione, capitula, and vniuersa ipsius
Petri dogmata, sanctorum Canonum authoritate, cum suo authore damnauimus, eique
tanquam haeretico perpetuum silentium imposuimus. Vniuersos autem erroris sui
sectat res and defensores, a fidelium consortio sequestrandos,
excommunicationisque vinculo innodandos esse censemus.

The Jesuits say, that Pasquier impiously accuses Maldonat the Jesuit, of
impiety, (these are the words they use) because in one of his Lectures, Fon.
ca. 36.
he had proved to his scholars by natural reasons, that there is a God, in
another, that there is none. And they themselves are wholly heretics, by the
proposition they maintain, when as thinking by the wings of their wits, to
lift themselves up above Heaven, they fall down into the bottomless pit of
Hell; or else Pope Innocent the second, Saint Bernard, and our whole Church of
France, are deceived. But because this is not the mark I aim at, my intent
being only to examine, the likeness and unlikeness, that was betwixt Ignace and
his fellows upon the one part, and Abelard that great heretic and disturber
of our University of Paris, on the other: I will put you in mind, that both
the one and other, came of great and noble houses. The difference between them
was, that Abelard was the eldest of his brethren, Ignace the youngest: he
learned, and of a great spirit, Ignace utterly ignorant of all good learning.
Thence it came, that the one would violently set up his Sect like a Lion; and
thereby sunk under the weight of his hope: the other like a Fox, who by that
means, enlarged his.

But if you take away these differences, they were very like in many other
things. Abelard writ a book of the Trinity, which was condemned by the
Church, Ignace made another of the same matter, which he himself condemned;
showing himself therein more wise and advised then the other; Abelard without
any degree of license, would needs at the first marry himself to the Chair, to
read in the University of Paris. The very same thing did, not Ignace, who was a
mere ignorant fellow, but his followers, the Jesuits. So that you shall never
find, any one of their first Regents which read in the University of Paris, to
be a Graduate. Abelard, being a religious person of the Abbey of S. Dennis,
taught both Philosophy and Divinity: the very same that our religious
Jesuits do. The University at that time took it ill, that Philosophy was
read by a Munke, to foreign scholars and strangers: and it is also one of the
principal articles of controversy with the Jesuits. Abelard read Divinity
without any degree of license, whereof the University complaind to the Prelates
of France, yet did he nothing which the Jesuits did not afterward, and do even
to this day: and it is one of the principal complaints of the University
against them. Abelard, was condemned by our Church of France: Ignace and his
fellows, first by the faculty of Divinity in Paris, afterward, by our Church
assembled at Poissy. Abelard, brought in the heresy, to prove that by natural
reasons, which depends upon our Christian faith: the Jesuits, not only follow
this damnable opinion, but maintain that he is an Athiest, and impious, who
believes in God with all humility, and likes not that a man should by natural
reasons, prove to boys, that there is a God, and that there is none. Abelard
was greatly supported in the Court of Rome by Cardinals; and that is it, which
spoils us at this day. For the Jesuits finding all favor there, abuse it, and
call all the^ heretics that rely not upon their heresies. Abelard, was a
religious, not religious, having indeed, nothing of a religious but the habit:
Which gave Saint Bernard occasion to say, that he was, Sine ratione Monachus,
qui nec ordinem tenebat, nec tenebatur abordine. I pray you tell me what order
the Jesuits keep, and by what order they are held. True it is, that Abelard
was in his habit religious, and these men know not what it means. Saint
Bernard said, that Abelard represented John Baptist outwardly, and inwardly
Herod. As for our Jesuits, I never could acknowledge any thing of Saint John
Baptist in their sermons, but much of Herod in their cruelties, to make
Princes be murdered, and to drive them out of their Realms and Dominions. Yet
there is one difference, for these fellows live fat and fair, and are not
bound by their constitutions to keep extraordinary fasts, as other orders
do: contrariwise, Abelards scholars and followers, lay upon the straw in
little cabins, and for their diet, contented themselves with bread and herbs.

To conclude, Abelard took to himself apart, the great and holy name of
Paraclet, for which he was condemned by our Divines: and with a like zeal, the
Jesuits have taken the name of Jesus, which was forbidden the^. The conclusion
was alike, for notwithstanding the mislike of our Prelates, the name Paraclet
remains yet to Abelards Oratory, which at this day by a corrupt name we call
Paraclit; and it is a house of Nuns, whereof Heloise, Abelards wife, was the
first Abbess: in like sort the name Jesus continues with the Jesuits, that
they may in all points enjoy Abelards privileges. And in my opinion, there is
not any one of them, that has hit righter upon their agreement with Abelard,
then he that in the year 1594. defended the College of Clairmont. Who, when
Arnault, had freshly objected against them in a full Court of Parliament, the
name and quality of a Jesuit, answered in scorn, that, that objection, had
been made against them before, by Master Stephen Pasquier, and that it was out
of date. One thing only is wanting in this general corespondence of Abelard
with our Jesuits: namely, such a worthy personage as S. Bernard, to be a means
to the holy Sea, against these new troublers of our Church, and our
Universities. For when I speak of him, I dare be bold to say, that God did
spread in his heart, the beams and rays of his holy Spirit, as much and more
then in any man that lived since his time.

CHAP. 8. That the Jesuit gives himself license to bring into his College
children, out of the bosoms of their Fathers and Mothers, without their leave.
AS the Jesuits put every piece of holy scripture in practice, not for
maintenance of our Church, but only of their sect, so do they maintain, that
they may draw all children to them, whether their Fathers and Mothers will or
no, (their consent being a thing not necessary) for the love and honor of
God. This rule they put in practice very religiously upon all children of good
Houses, or at least, upon as many as by any means they may lay hold on. Among
who^, having conuayed away out of sight a youth, of 15. years old, the eldest
son of Airault, Lieuetenant criminel in the siege Presidiall of Angers, a man
of especial reckning. He put up a supplication to the Court of Parliament of
Paris, that his son might be restored to him.

The parties being heard at large, the Court took order by an act of the 20.
of May, 1586. that a commission should be granted him, to inform himself of
the inticements used by the Jesuits to his son: and in the mean while,
inhibitions and restraints were sent, to the Provincial, Rector, and
Principal of the Colleges of Clairmont, forbidding them to attempt any thing
to the prejudice of the supplication presented by Airault, or to receive his
son into their Society, upon pain of amends: and it was farther enjoined
them, to give knowledge of this act, to the other Colleges of their Society.

This notwithstanding, these holy Fathers would not deliver the youth again,
so that the poor Father was feign to comfort himself, first with his tears,
and then with his pen, by writing and printing a book of the power of a
Father, wherein he showed, that it was impudently to abuse the holy Scripture,
to take them rawlie, according to the Letter only, as the Jesuits did, to the
disadvantage of Fathers. He spoke like an honest and worthy man, as he that
felt no small grief, for the stealing away of his son. I will speak without
passion, and say, that it is a hard thing, that the child should enter into
orders of religion, against the will of his Father and Mother, of who^ himself
is a good part. And yet I think it not only excusable, but commendable, when
being of a competent age, a man betakes himself to a Monastery, though his
Father and mother consent not to it: but when these things are carried by the
crafty conueyance of Munks, the matter deserves extraordinary punishment.

A few years since, there was great blame laid upon the Charter House Munks
of Paris, for having without the Fathers knowledge, received a young man into
their Order. The Prior being sent for about the matter, by the Court of
Parliament, maintaind with a wonderful resolution, that he was not bound to
turn him away. We go not to seek them (quoth he) we live a solitary life,
seuerd from the Town, within the Town: we allure them not to us by Lectures
or by conferences. Yea, contrariwise, we make express profession of silence,
and they of our order, speak to no man without leave of their Superior. If
any man of ripe age, moved by the grace of the holy Ghost, be desirous to
become one of our Order, why should we go to procure any others good will,
whom we know from his infancy by the instinct of nature, not to be disposed
to such devotion. This were to envy God a goodly sacrifice, ready to be
offered to him, and we should be coutned traitors to the general good of the
Church, if we should deal otherwise.

The Court having heard his defense, dismissed him, without pressing him any
further, which they did not on the behalf of the Jesuits, in Airaults case.
You shall understand hereafter the reasons of this diversity. Surely, if
wishing might prevail in such matters, I could desire, that all children,
before they make themselves Munks, would follow the example of Elizeus, who
would not become servant to E^^as, till he had taken his leave of his Father.
Which if perhaps they do not, being not won to that course but by themselves,
through the inspiration of God, I do not think (I will say it yet once
again,) that a man can blame them, or the Monastery that receives them. But
for the Jesuit, the matter stands quite otherwise; and I remember, that I was
one day with a poor Father enraged, who, having his son stolen and carried
away, letting loose the reins to his choler, with a troubled mind, spoke on
this manner to the Rector of the Jesuits in Paris. I did not commit my son to
thee to make a Jesuit of him, but to instruct him in humane learning, that he
might not stray from our Catholic religion, with intent to make him heir of
my will, of my goods, and of my estate, supposing that thou had some religion
in thee. But where have thou found (thou lewd fellow) that it is permitted
thee, by auricular confession, by a counterfeit devotion, by hypocritical
speeches, to seduce my poor child, to steal him from himself, to steal him
from his Father, to steal him from GOD? For why should I not call it, stealing
from God, when as for the first work of his devotion, thou teach him, to
steal himself from his Father? An innocent I may call him, to whom by reason
of the weakness of his age, and understanding, thou have given no leisure to
bethink himself in convenient time, of that which he has promised to God, by
making a vow to live a Munks life. Thou Iugler in matters of Christian
religion, which playest tricks of pass and repasse, to make a child pass, by
inuisibilities, (it is, it is not,) to the end thou may withdraw him, both
from his Fathers presence, and also from the Magistrates. And when thou have
thus done, thou have up thy general proverb, These be the works of thy holy
spirit; whom thou have always in thy mouth, as harlots are always prating of
their chastity.

Do thou think (thou wr^tch) though my first project was to bring him up in
mine own calling, yet if after he was come out of thy house, and come to
years of discretion, he would have forsaken the world, that I would have
envied him that felicity? Not to make him a Gypsy, to rogue about as thou
do all over the world, feyning that he can tell every man his fortune, when
he cannot tell his own: but to frame him after the mould of our ancient orders
of religion, and at once to shut him up in a Cloister, there to lead a
solitary life, to give himself to fasting and prayer, to wear hayre-cloth,
and so to behave himself, that his Cloister should be a Palace to him, fish
as Manna from heaven, and hayre-cloth, more soft then the finest Holland shirt
of Linen.

And, that after he had employed his solitariness in long watchings, and
devotions, he might come out of his Cloister, as a worthy and valiant
warrior, not to murder Kings, not to conquer Realms, and to sell them to him
what would offer most, but to kill sin, to subdue disordered souls, by
preaching in the midst of the churches, that which appertains to everlasting
blessedness. I call not to the Judges of this world, for revenge of this
wrong, thou detestable coosner, the great Judge of Judges shall be my auenger,
even then, when after he has chastizd the Magistrate, either for his fear, or
for his long winking at thy lewdnes, he shall cast thee into the fire, as the
Father does the rod, when he has beaten his child therewith.

I saw a poor Father, in the Jesuits College in Paris, play his part in this
sort: and to say the truth, I could have wished, that the good old man, had
somewhat brideled his choler, which me thought past the bounds of modesty:
but what modesty can a man look for in a Father, that has his son stolen
from him? There is no remedy, but he must needs be out of patience. In a
word, consider I pray you the first grief of a poor desolate Father, who
complains not that his son is become a religious person, but that it is
wrought by the Jesuits seducing, alluring, and coosning.

Did you never hear it said, that it is a great burden to our conscience,
when we marry our Children under age, because it is to teach them to hate
their vviues, before they can understand what it is to love them? So stands the
case with these young youths; enticed to this spiritual marriage. For how
soever at their first entrance, every thing laughs upon them, by reason of
the charms and sweet entertainment of their ghostly Fathers, yet afterward,
there settles an imperfection in their minds, of a long repentance for their
hastiness: and they fall to curse the year, the month, the week, the day, the
hour, and the moment, in which they were so deceived And if there be any that
escape this repentance, alas they are very few.

To conclude, as long as we mingle the bringing up of our youth with this
pretended Munkerie, we shall never be able to save our selves from this
unhappy confusion, whereof the City of Paris, (thanks be to God) is at this
day discharged. But I speak to them, who being coozned, protect, as yet, this
new monster with their authority.

CHAP. 9. Of the vow of the Jesuits, which they call the simple vow.
INtending to entreat now from henceforward, of the Jesuits simple vow, I
here vow, not to deal with them, but at their own weapons. They have bin
always hitherto so cunning that few men have had any knowledge of their
dealings. Their Bulls and their statuts are, to this day, printed within their
Colleges, so that no man knows the Printers name, neither can they easily com
into any strangers hands: which has been the cause, that no man heretofore,
durst speak so boldly of them. But as the force of truth is such, that in time
it will be discouerd, so the Caball of these Rabbines; could not be kept so
secret, but that in tract of time, their books have gotten out of their
Colleges, upon which I have framed this present discourse. I will begin with
their simple vow, a vow, which I may say is new, and monstrous, and which
cannot be tolerated in our Church, without the overthrowing thereof, at the
least in regard of religious Orders and Monasteries.

By the Lecture which the Jesuit read us yesterday, you understand, that the
first vow of their Order, is that which they call the simple vow, by which, he
that will vow himself to their Society, makes at the first the 3. ordinary
vows of all other religious Orders, namely, of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience. And although, in respect of himself, he may not after this vow,
give over his profession, yet is it in the power of the General, when he will
to dismiss him, though he have been a Jesuit 25. years: and, which is more,
as long as he goes no farther then this simple vow, he is capable of all
inheritances direct and collateral, notwithstanding the vow of poverty he
has made. Let us not detract any thing from the honor due to the one and to
the other, but let us see what discourse Montaignes has made of these matters.

By this discourse (says he, Montag. ca. 50. de sa verite defendue.
speaking to Arnault) two lies that you have made shall be refuted; The one is,
that no man ever makes this vow of poverty, but that thereby all hope of
succession is lost. For it is made in the end of the Nouiceship, as has been
said. Now, if notvvithstanding this vow of Poverty, they retain sometimes for
many years the propriety of their goods, by their Superiors leave, and are
capable of inheritances, be not offended thereat, neither call the Jesuits
covetous therefore. For this retayning, is not for them who have renounced this
right, as I said before, but for the benefit and commodity of those, that are
under their government. For if it should chance, that upon just cause they
were to be dismissed out of the Society, according to the privileges thereof,
they should thereby receive no wrong, but be able to live of themselves:
whereas otherwise, being deprived thereof, they should be driven either to
beg, or to continue in the Society, not only to the hurt and prejudice
thereof, but also to the endangering of their own bodies, yea and their souls
to.

It is a nevve Law (you will say,) true. It is new and vvonderfull, says the
great Canonist Navarre. It is a new Law, as also the simple vow of Chastity
is, which this Society makes, which hinders marriage to be contracted, and
disanuls it after it is contracted. But it cease not to be right, by being
new, as long as it is ratified by the Prince and head of the Church, who made
the Laws of other religious Orders, and the rest of the Canon Law.

The newnes of a thing, hinders not the nature of it. The new Raisins are
Raisins, as well as those of the Vine that Noe planted. All right was nevve in
the beginning, and yet ceast not thereby to be right. Sixteen hundred years
hence, this will be more ancient then the Canons of the Apostles are at this
day, which were as young fifteen hundred years a go, as this is now. The
other lie, which is also refuted by this discourse, is, that the Jesuits cast
men off, when they are spent with travail. For as they are not retained for
hope of their goods, so are they not cast off by reason of their poverty, but
for some other just cause. Otherwise, at the last, they must needs dismiss
all that make profession, because they are deprived of all their goods; and
they should receive none that is not rich, neither of which they do.

If there be any of so obstinate a nature, that he will not be amended, after
that he has been looked to, and medicind a long time, it is reason that he
should bear the punishment of his stubbornness, and that the society should
use their right. Which notwithstanding is not done but very sildome, and that
by the authority of the General only, and almost always with the liking of
them that are dismissed: whom we have not so much employed, as endured, and
waited for their amendment, 10. and sometimes 20. years. With such grief of
heart do they use this remedy; and so dearly love they the salvation of those
that are damageable to the^. And so it is plain, that you are in all things
altogether unjust to the Jesuits, in slau^dering the^, that they seduce men, by
receiving the^ into their society, and dismissing them out again.

Some man more scrupulous, Chap. 51.
and of better understanding then you, will demand, with what conscience they
can be dismissed and absolved, that have once made vow of religion, since the vow
is a bond to God, which he only can release, as a right belonging properly to
him. To that I answer, that a vow binds, according to his intent that makes
it. If any make a vow to fast after the order of the Chartehouse Munks, he
binds himself to fast, as the Charterhouse Munks do, not as one of an other
order, who observes no such fast. They that make vows in this Society, make
them according to the intent and fashion thereof; the intent is, that they
should be in such sort bound to abide in it, as that, when there shall be any
just occasion, they may be dismissed, and acquitted of their bond. Wherefore, he
that is bound, has no wrong done him, if he be constrained to keep his
promise, or if he be dismissed, because he cannot, or will not do his
endeavor, to amend himself and accomplish it. For he has made his vow with
such a condition, and volenti non fit iniuria: and he that forsakes the
Society without leave, is an Apostata, and bears reproach, and the mark of
his sin. But he that departs, by the advice, or good pleasure of his
General, who thinks it meet, upon some necessity of mind or body, or of
his parents, or for the public good, or for some other just cause, that he
should be licenced to give over, is thereby absolved from his vows.

CHAP. 10. That it cannot be excused, but that there is heresy and
Macchiauelisme in the Jesuits simple vow.
THus much the Jesuit Montaignes. Now I instantly beseech out holy Father the
Pope, and adjure all Kings, Princes, Potentates, and Lords, which fight under
his banner in our militant Church, that they would open their eyes, and every
one particularly examine his conscience, for the good of our Christian world.
With whom have I here to do? with the Jesuits; who making answer to Arnaults
Plea, would have thought they had wronged their holinesses, if according to the
ordinary simplicity of others, they had entitled their discourse thus, A
defense against Arnaults Plea; but with a proud title, they have set on the
front of their book. The truth defended for the Catholic religion, in the
Jesuits cause, against the Plea of Anthony Arnault. I take them at their word,
and will labor for the Catholic religion with them: there is nothing more
commanded us by God and his Church, then the performance of our vows. I
should abuse both the time and my pen, if I would prove this by texts out of
the old and new Testament, and by the authorities of the ancient Doctors of
the Church, since devotion first brought into our Church, the orders of
Religious Monasteries, by which we enter the three substantial vows of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. This rule has been so strictly observed,
that the Pope himself, though he have fullness of power over our consciences,
yet never gave liberty to himself, to dispense wholly with a religious person;
unless it be in favor of some sovereign Prince, for the succouring of some
very urgent necessity in his estate. And our Lord being desirous to show,
that such dispensations please him not, sometimes interposes the rigor of
justice very manifestly. That was seen long since in the Realm of Naples,
where, when all the royal line was ended in Constance, who had been a long
time a professed Nun, the public necessity seemed to claim, that she should
be disuayld, that the blood royal might be renewed by her. She was absolved
from her vow by the holy Sea, and presently married to the Emperor Frederick
the second, of which marriage, Manfrey was borne, and of him Conradin. But
never marriage brought greater ruin to Italy then this: because the Pope and
the Emperor were thereby in continual divisions under the names of the
Guelfes and Gibbilins, which lasted an infinite while. And as for the children
that came thereof, Manfrey was slain in a pitched field, and afterward,
Conradin his son taken by Charles of Aniow, king of Naples, who causd him to
be beheaded upon a scaffold. I have purposely touched this example, to show how
little God likes these vnmunkings, what authority soever he have given to our
holy father the Pope: who also has been drawn thereto with an infinite
number of respects, before be yield. But above all, it is a general rule in
Rome, that in all other families not sovereign, the Pope never makes a
religious man lay, but only changes the rigor of the first vow, into an other
more easy to bear; as we saw of late in this our country of France. When as
the Lord of Bouchage, coming of a very noble house, had made himself a
Capuchin, and that after the death of all his brethren, the necessity of the
time seemnig to call him again to worldly affairs, all that his friends could
obtain at Rome, was, the changing of his vow into that of Saint John of
Jerusalem. It was never permitted, a religious man in our Church, that had made
the vow of poverty, to succeed his parents: much less to be releast out of
his Monastery to enter again into a secular life. The Pope gives not himself
this liberty.

And shall we suffer in our Church, a religious Jesuit to succeed, and his
General to give him leave to do so, when it pleases him? Dij talem terris
auertite postem. This is no privilege, this is a new monster, Montaig. ca. 50.
and 5^*
which is brought into our Christian profession. For all this, the Jesuit
thinks to be acquitted by God, of this heresy; when he says, that there is
no more in any vow, then a man puts into it: he should say there is no more
in the play. For by rendering this reason of simple vow, he plays with God;
and is one of those scorners, of whom David speaks in in the first Psalm. In
sum, the Jesuits would say, that there simple vow is a vow, of a petty
dissimulation, and that they think to deceive God by the same Sophistry,
which the old Pagan used, when he said, Iura^^ lingua, mentem iniuratam habeo:
Which protestation, was condemned by them of the time, though they were not
Christians. So says that Jesuit, I vowed poverty with my tongue, but in my
mind I had a bird that sung an other song.

And thinking by this shift to make us like of their new doctrine, he plays
three parts at once, the Jesuit, the Heretic, and the Macchiauelist. And
whereas they say, that the great Canonist Navarre calls their simple vow,
Nouum and mirabile. Saint Bernard reproving Abelards heresy, said no less,
that, Ambulabat in maguis et in mirabilibus.

CHAP. 11. Of the Jesuits engaging the aut horitie of the holy Sea, to excuse
the heresy of their simple vow.
But these two privileges (says Montagnes) are granted us by the Head and
Prince of the Church. See how these honest men wrong the authority of the holy
Sea; and into what disorder they bring it, by making it a defense of their
heresy. I will never abide, that this come to the ears of the enemies of our
Church, but that withal, they shall understand how al things have past. The
truth is, that before Gregory 13. never any Pope was of advise to grant them
these privileges, and yet ever since the coming of Ignace, they have
practiced this simple vow, as we may see by the same Gregory's Bull, 1584.
Whereupon every good Catholic will maintain, that it was a new heresy
brought in by them, against the holy and ancient decrees. Tell me honest men,
what is become of the souls of your Saints Ig^arius Loiola, James Lainez,
Frances Borgia, and Euerard Morouie, the four first Generals of your Sect?
Where is Frances Xauier, that was canonized a Saint amongst the barbarous?
Where is Peter Faurs, Nicholas Bobadilla and Pasquier Broet? In brief, where
be the souls of all them of your Sect, that lived from the year 1540. until
the year 1584. and died in this herefie? In which year, you obtaind permission
for the time, to come, not absolutio^ for that which was past: so that it came
too late, for the^ that died before. In the mean while, we have these for
Masters, and Lecturers of our youth in their Colleges, for holy fathers, and
Divines in our Church, to preach to us. And yet, as professed heretics, in
steed of establishing again our afflicted religion, by establishing their own
greatness, they have wholly overthrown ours altogether: and have had no other
foundation of their heresy, but their own detestable covetousness.

This indeed might have been objected against us heretofore (will the Jesuit
say) but not now, by reason of this new Bull. This answer at the first sight
may seem very sufficient to stop our mouths: but when you shall understand
how, at what time, and by what cunning it was gotten, you shall find nothing in
it, but savors of a Jesuit. They have diverse vows, but I find none so
solemn, as that which I will presently declare to you; which is, to put in
execution their devises, be they good or evil, of their own private
authority, without any respect had of the holy Sea: and when they have a long
time used this very ill, they spy out occasions of troubles for the
authorizing of that their practice, as men most necessary for the maintenance
of our religion. By doing whereof, they give law to him, of whom they make show
to receive law. The fisherman fishes in a troubled water, and the Jesuit in our
troubles. In this sort began their Society, and after many refusals, was
confirmed by Pope Paul the third in the years 1540. and 43. in consideration
of the troubles that were at that time in Germany, betwixt the Catholics and
the Lutherans. In this sort they obtained of Pope Pius the fourth, their great
privilege, to disturb the ancient discipline of all Universities, in the
year 1561. That is to say, when the troubles began to rise in France, betwixt
the Catholic and Hugonot. The fame was practiced by them in 84. when father
Claudius Matthew, their Provincial of France, stirred the humors of Rome, not
only against the Hugonots, but also against the most Catholic King deceased, as
if he had favored them. And feeding Pope Gregory with an infinite sort of
vain hopes, they thought they might without danger pull of their mask, and
get that approved by him, which they never durst discover to any Pope before,
namely, the dishonestie of their simple vow. In such sort, that in June 1584.
they obtaynd the confirmation of this vow, and five months after, the deceased
King Henry the third, who wanted not his spies, made a Commission to be
published in open Parliament, against them that practiced any league in strange
countries. If there were nothing but the opposition of this time, it were
sufficient to deface the memory of that Bull of Pope Gregory, and also many
decretals of Boniface the eight, which was a professed enemy to France.

But I have yet stronger reasons on my side, for I see not that any man thinks,
that Pope Gregory ever gave any sufficient consent thereto. And that it is so,
after he has briefly discourst of the Nouiceship, he says, that the religious
making their first simple vow: In Societate^ cooptanour ac quantu^ est ex part
ipsoru^ perpetuo, ex part vero Societatis IVXTA APOSTOLICA INDVLTA, ET
CONSTITVITIONES PRAEDICT AS, tamdiu obligati sunt, quaudiu Praepositus
Generalis eos retimendos censuerit. Quod ad Societatis consernatione^ maxim
est necessariu^, ID QVE AB ILLIVS EXORDIO PROVSVIM, and post, experimento
co^probatum est. Idque initio ingressus, illis explicit manifestatur, atque
ipsi conditione^ have amplectuntur: quae eis si quos dimittere opor^eat, multo
est commodior, vt liberi potius, quam votis obligati dimittantur, alijsque
justice and rationalibus de causis. That is to say, that after the time of their
Nouiceship, and when by vow they have sworn Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience, they are incorporated into ou^ Society, for as much as to themselves
belongs, for the whole term of their life: but forasmuch as appertains to the
Society, according to the Apostolical indults and constitutions spoken of
before, they are bound to abide with us so long, as it pleases the General to
retain them. A matter very necessary for the preservation of the Society,
and provided for in the first beginning of this order, afterward, found to be
very profitable by experience. And this is at every man's first entrance,
expressly made known to him, and he accepts the condition; which is the more
commodious for such as are to be admitted, that when they shall be sent away,
they may depart acquitted and discharged of their vow, upon some just and
reasonable considerations. By this Article, you learn not, that a religious
person having made his simple vow, may inherit: but that is supplied by an
other that follows in these words: Et licet qui ad gradus professoru^ and
Coadiutoru^ formatorum nondu^ peruenerunt, bonoru^ suorum ius atque dominium,
tum alias ab iustas causas, tum etiam vt maiore^ habeat Societas libertate^,
illos si opus fuerit remitte^di, and cum minori ^ffensione dimitte^di. And
although (says the Latin) that they which are not yet come to the degree of
those that are professed, and of formed coadiutors, may possess their goods
and demaines, for many weighty reasons, especially, that the Society may have
liberty, to turn them out again, if it shall be needful, and dismiss the^ with
the less scruple, or doubt of conscience. Out of these two Articles you may
gather; First, that it is permitted to the General to absolve his religious
from their simple vow, whenever it please him, and to send him back to his
own house, freed and acquitted from his vow. Secondly, that this religious
man, may possess te^porall goods, which clause they have stretched to
successions, as you see in Montaignes. Thirdly, that since the beginning of
their order, they have used to do so. And lastly, that Gregory has co^firmd
these two privileges to the^, according to the grants that before were made
the^, and their constitutions. I will make this controversy very plain. Let us
run over the Bulls, that they had obtained before, there is not any one wherein
you shall find, that their General was permitted, to dismiss them, when he
would, or they to inherit during their simple vow. There are 23. of the^, those
of Pope Paul the 3. 1540. 43.45.46.49. Those of Julius his successor, 50. and
52. of Pius 4.61. of Pius 5.65.68.71. in March and July, of Gregory
13.72.73.75. in January and May 76. in February, July, October December 78. in
January and May. There is no mention in any of these, either for
distinguishing, or for inheriting or possessing of goods. All these Bulls have
been printed by them, in one volume, that of 84. is inserted at large in the
summary of Bulls, gathered by Matthew Toscan and in Ribadiner, in the third book
of Ignace life, Chap. 23. If they pretend that they have any other, let them
show them, because, where none are shown, it is presumed there are none. If I
have proved as I have, that in all the former Bulls, there is never a word
spoken of these two privileges, the truth is, that by these last Bulls, they
have circumuented the religious care of the holy Sea: as they did before, in
the year, 1561. when to disturb all the ancient customs of the
Universities, they gave Pope Pius to understand, that, that which he granted
them, was but a confirmation of a grant made to them by Julius the 3. This then
was a cooznage, (...), and surrection, and consequently, there is (...) to be
made of this Bull of 84. I am of opinion with the, (GOD forbid that I should
steal away any part of the truth from them in this matter, Part. 2. de constable.
ca. 4. art. 3. and form exam. ca. 6. art. 8. etc. 7. art. 1.
or in any other) thus in their constitutions, there is speech that the
General may dismiss when he will. But Pope Gregory put in his permission, not
only in consideration of these constitutions; but of the former Apostolic
graunts, which notwithstanding cannot be found. For a simple constitution of
their Order, would never have been sufficient to make Pope Gre. consent to the
infringing of all the ancient constitutions of the Church, in favor of these
new people.

I acknowledge also, that, as for this point, the Nouices, when they entered
into the course of Iesuitisme, were not ignorant of it: For 4. or 5. days
after that the Nouice enters into the house of Nouiceship, there to accomplish
his two years of probation, Constable. part. 3. c. 4. art. 5.
the Examiners are charged to deliver to him all their letters Apostolic,
their Statuts, and Constitutions; yea, the general examination that is to be
made of him: to the end, that he may inform him self of the weight of the
burden be must bear, when he shall be admitted into this Order. and that
he may not have any ground to repent himself afterward. Now since it may be
found by their constitutions, that their General is permitted to absolve the
religious from their simple vow, whenever he will, and since these
constitutions are imparted to them, it cannot be said, that they are ignorant
of this privilege of their General; and a man may say of them in this regard,
as the Jesuit Montaignes does volenti non fit imuriac if so be that this
permission be lawful to be admitted into our Christian Church, and that
Gregory was not coo^^^^d in grau^ting it to the Iesuitish Church.

But for the second privilege, whereby the religious is permitted, during the
simple vow, to inherit and possess temporal goods, not only there is nothing
for it in their ancient Bulls, but also not (...) any of their constitutions:
Yea all things fight against this intention. At the entrance into this Order,
they are bound to make a vow, both particularly and generally, of Poverty, say
the Bulls of Paulo the third, 1540. and those of Julius, 1550. And because that
perhaps may require a more precise explication they express it at large in the
4. c. of their general Examination, where they enjoin them, as I said
ere-while, to dispose, not only of the goods that they have in possession, but
also of those, which they have no otherwise but in hope. Debent omnia bo^asua
temporalia quae habuerint distribuere and renunciare, a^ disponere de his quae
ipsis obuenire possent. They must says the Latin) renounce all the temporal
goods they have, and distribute them; and likewise dispose of all that
hereafter may fall to them.

You shall note by the way, this wise resolution of the Jesuit, who appoynts,
that he, which will enter into this order, shall dispose of goods which he
has not. They are commanded to give their goods for alms to the poor, and
not to leave them to their kindred, to renounce all love they bear them, even
that which is due to their Fathers and Mothers, and all this is, to the end
they may take from them, Cap. 4. de Examine. art. 42.
all mind of returning to their Fathers houses. Vt ad parents and
consangu^neos reourrendi, and ad inutilem ipsorum memoriam, firmius and
stabilius in sua vocatione perseuera^t. That the way to return to their
kindred, and the needless remembrance of them, may be stopped, and they may
persevere the more firm and stable in their calling.

In the conclusion of all this, they have no sooner abandoned all their goods,
during the first year of their Nouiceship, but that they are permitted, after
their vow of poverty, to be heirs unto them whom they were commanded to
forget, yea the love and memory of them. Therefore I conclude, that this
privilege, for him to inherit that has made the vow of Poverty, is first
against the holy decrees of God, and of his Church. Secondly, against common
sense. Thirdly, grounded upon two inexcusable and very manifest lies, The one,
when it is supposed by the Bull, that their Constitutions permit them to
inherit, during their Simple vow, The other, when according thereto, they give
their Nouices to understand, that they may inherit after they have made the
simple vow. For contrariwise, all their Constitutions gainsay it in very
plain terms. Turn therefore and wind this Bull of Gregory which way you will,
there is nothing in it, that engages the holy Sea in favor of them.

I confess freely, that when the Jesuit Montaignes alleged, that the Prince
and head of the Church, had permitted them this unhappy vow, I began to
tremble, weighing with my self, of what consequence this permission was to all
Christendom: but when I had satisfied my self by reading the Bull, o impudent
coozners, (quoth I then) who draw in the holy Sea for warrant of your impiety.
Did ever any man set the popedom for a fairer mark then this, against our
adversaries? I would not wish any other thing in their hands then this, to
triumph over us, if it were true. This is the charity that you honest men,
which preach nothing but charity, show, to the desolation of the holy Sea, of
which you make show to be the only Protectors. And yet, if Pope Gregory had
otherwise made this grant, then to gratify you at that time, when you promised
nothing less, then to give Laws to all sovereign Princes, and to the Pope
himself, I would not seek to prevail against his Bull, either by the
ancient liberties of our famous Church of France, which cannot bear in
France such extraordinary permissions, or by the majesty of our Kings, the
Defenders of our liberties, or by the authority of our Parliaments under them,
to which the maintenance of the Ecclesiastical discipline appertains. And
much less would I advise, to appeal to a general Council to be held
hereafter, as our ancient French were wont to do in such affairs. Neither
would I stir up the faithful care of all general Proctors of Parliaments to
appeal, as from abuses, from the thundering of this Bull: which were the
shortest way.

God forbid that I should furnish the world with presidents that might be
prejudicial to the holy Sea. But if this great Pope were alive, I would cast
my self at his feet, and appeal from him to himself, and beseech him in all
humility, that it would please him to consider, whether by his absolute power,
he be able to make two contraries agree in the same subject; that contrary to
the law of God, a man should lodge riches in poverty: so that, in this article
it should seem, that both Gods law, and common sense is forgotten. I would
farther beseech him to consider, whether it were his meaning to give such a
permission, as he gives not to himself, and to grant without exception, that
thing to the General of the Jesuits, in which the Popes never dispense with
themselves: and that without regard of the vow of Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience, to which the religious are bound, the General of their order, might
absolve them when it pleased him?

Moreover, I would show him, that the Monastical vows, which one makes to
God, ought to be simple: but not according to the new learning of the Jesuits,
but to the ancient doctrine of Christians. And that as when of old time in
Rome, one past from one Family to another by adoption, it was to be pure,
simple, and without any condition; so by greater reason, when we forsake our
carnal Fathers, to be adopted a new into the family of our spiritual Father,
the Father of Fathers, we ought to enter purely and simply, and not to bring in
the Foote-like craftines of the Jesuits simple vow. Many other particularities
I could show him, which I remit to the examination of our Divinity, both
scholasticall and morrall. I will content my self only for the present, to
say, that all those demonstrations, should be superfluous, because Pope Gregory
never consented to this vow, but was deceived and coozned by the Jesuits false
information: whereas nothing is so contrary to consent as error.

CHAP. 12. That besides the heresy which is in the Jesuits simple vow, there
is also in it a manifest cooznage.
I Cannot stay my self here, when I see these hypocrites reign in our Church,
and seek to give laws to all faithful Christians: and yet sometimes it is not
necessary to make a general change, but a reformation from good to better.
And therefore, when it was demanded of the Oracle, which was the best
Religion, he answered, The auncientest. Being asked again which was the
auncientest, he answered, The best. Intending to teach us, that we are not to
reject all new things, when they are warranted by good and strong reasons.

The Jesuit Montaignes, to show that there is no cause why we should fear the
novelty of their simple vow, tells us, that 1600. years hence, it will be more
ancient then the Canons of the Apostles are now. Wherein he flouts both God
and the world. For the same may be alleged, in defense of the erroneous
doctrine of Luther, which is ancienter then that of Ignace, by three or four
and twenty years: and of all the other, who in our time have gone astray from
the ancient way of the Church I find not fault in the simple vow, with the
novelty thereof, although that be much to be feared in matter of Religion, and
especially of the Catholic Apostolick^ Roman religion; of which a man may
truly say:

Moribus antiquis res stat Romana, virisque. Romes state does stand on ancient
men and manners.

I only find fault with the heresy that is in this novelty, which cannot be
amended by length of time. Veritati praescribere nemo potest, non spatium
temporum, non patrocinia personarum, non priuilegium regionum. No body (says
Tertullian) can possibly prescribe unto the truth, Tertul. de virg. velan.
neither distance of times, nor patronage of persons, nor privilege of
Countries. Let us then consider the reasons, by which the Jesuits would give a
pasport to the novelty of their simple vow. Montaignes rendering the reason,
for which it is permitted the Jesuit religious to enherit and enjoy goods, for
all the vow of poverty made by him, says thus; Because it may come to pass,
that, after ten or twenty years, the Jesuit that shall be found incorrigible,
may be dismissed by the General of our Order, and being sent home again, we
are desirous so to deal by christian charity, that he may have no occasion to
beg. Besides, we use not this chastisement but very sildome, and almost
always with the liking of them that are dismissed. And truly this is a very
charitable revenge.

In other Orders of Religion, if any religious person behave himself
disorderly, sometimes he is disciplind openly in the Chapter House, sometimes
he is made to fast with bread and water in a dark prison, more or less,
according to his deserts, that he may serve for an example to his Brethren. By
so doing, without overthrowing the ancient vow of our Catholic religion,
and making things scandalous; that is drawn from the Munk by rigor, which by
fair means could not be obtaind. But in the holy order of the Jesuits, in
sted of chastising their disorderly religious, they are honestly invited to
ill doing, and to make themselves incorrigible when they are weary of staying
there; to the end, that their General may have occasion to send them home
again to their own houses, there to end their days, fat, fair, and rich.

What new Idea of a Commonwealth or religion is this, since they seldom use
this punishment, which I call a recompencing and reward of lewdnes? Is it meet
to turn vpside-downe the ancient constitutions of our Church, and to damn an
infinite sort of souls infected with this new faith, to the end that three or
four lewd Jesuits may live at their case?

Let us speak plain, this is not the matter. For Montaignes himself,
acknowlegeth in the end of his chapter, that their General may send them home
to their houses, not only when they have offended, but upon every other
occasion. But he (says Montaignes) that departs, with the advice and good
liking of his General, who thinks it meet, that for some necessity of mind
or body, or of his kindred, or of the public good, or some other just reason,
he should be dismissed, is absolved by this means from his vow. Whereby you may
see, that it is not under the colorable pretense of chastizing them, that they
are suffered to enter upon inheritances, (which yet were a ridiculous and
impious chastisement) but to favor their Generals power, which is greater and
more absolute, then ever the Popes was over the Universal Church.

But I pray forsooth, why do not you practice that which other religious
persons do, without innouating any thing in our Catholic, Roman Church? You
would be very sorry to do so. It is not Christian charity that leads you to
that course, but Iesuitish charity* Your whole profession, is nothing else, but
a particular coozning of our private Families, and a general vil^^nie of all
the countries where you inhabit. I will make it plain, that both these are
undoubtedly found in this simple vow. You look not after any thing but worldly
goods, riches, and possessions, though you make a show to aim at no other mrak
but heaven: If you know that your Nouice, after his two years of probation are
expired, is capable of inheriting, wherefore do you conjure him with such
circumstances and devises during his Nouiceship, to give away his goods before
he be admitted to the simple vow? Surely, he must needs be a man of weak
capacity, that will not imagine, that after this first assay, when you have
made him (for your behoof) dispossess himself of his goods, before he
become one of your Order, you hold him still in a lease, ten, twenty, or
thirty years: that is to say, so long as there is any likeli-hood of his
coming to any inheritance, that afterward, when all hope of his inheritance
fayles, you may make him enter into the second vow, which is your first
solemn vow: which being once made, he may not afterward possess any
temporal goods, nor be dismissed by his General, though he be never so
incorrigible; and from that time forward, you take such courses with him, as
they do in other Monasteries with their religious persons that offend.

But before he make this vow, the goods must either fall to him that first
catches the^, or the Jesuit must again dispose of them to the benefit of the
poor. I leave it to you Gentlemen, to think who shall be these poor. For, if
before he was taken in their nets, he could not rid himself, without
gratifying them with his goods, what may one hope for of him when he is
entangled, but the same liberality? As if it were to be presumed, that having
been brought up a long time in the midst of them, and farther, being desirous
to marry himself to the second vow, which is a solemn one, he wi^^ or ch^^st,
would, or could, distribute his goods otherwise, then to their profit, under
whose power he makes account to end his life, without any hope of release.

But to say the truth, this question is idle. For Moutaignes has answered
roundly, when he says. Chap. 50.
That this reserving of the goods, is not for them, who have tenounced this
right, but to help them afterward, if happily they should be dismissed.
Therefore, if they be not dismissed, these goods appertain to their order. Was
there ever more no^o^ions cooznage then this? Alas, I wonder not indeed, that
they very seldom dismiss their disorderly Jesuit: for in so doing, this fat
morsel would fall out of their mouth.

But why is the Jesuit during this simple vow, kept away from his kindred, why
is he sent out of one country into another, but to the end that if any new
inheritance should fall unto him? no man might certainly know what his
condition is, nor know how to call in question the right he pretend^? Well, in
the end he is freed from his vow, that he may be out of danger of all
empeachments, and hindrances. Which done, he shall prove himself to be the
right heir, and yet by a watch word betwixt him and them, he shall return
afterward to the Jesuits, to bestow his goods in alms upon them. Add
hereunto, that this is a point, that touches the estate; that by this means
it is easy for the Jesuit to make himself in time, maisler and head of many
Cities, Towns, Villages, and Castles, according to the quality of them, whom
he has drawn unto him. Let us put case, that there are a doozen Gentlemen of
good houses, that have made themselves Jesuits, and that some civil or
foreign wars, has taken away all their brethren: who now, but the Jesuits
of the simple vow shall succeed in their inheritance, and so being admitted to
their first solemn vow, shall enrich their order therewithal? And in time
they will become Monarchs.

But let us leave this point of goods: I am content that it be permitted their
General to dismiss them, and to believe that he will not enrich himself with
the spoils of great houses. See I pray you of what consequence this dismissing
is, to send into the midst of us a man, that has been trained up 10. or 20.
years, in the hypocrisy and doctrine of the Jesuits; or to speak more truly,
in their more then barbarous impieties, such as that I will declare to you in
their place. Is not this by indirect means to infect our country of France,
as we see by the effect? For how many are there in this Realm, that only by
having been their Scholars and Disciples, foster opinions, of murders,
massacres, watch-words, and rebellions against their Prince? What may you then
look for of them, that having bi^ brought up 10. or 20. years, in their
houses, return again to us, in their own country? Further I would note unto
you, that in this simple vow, there is lodged a race of men, which make
express profession of ignorance, whom they call temporal Coadrutors, by whose
means they may people a Town, and make it full of Jesuits. I conclude, that
this simple vow contains under it, Heresy, Machiauelisme, Cooznage, and above
all, a gross deceiving of the Sea Apostolic. All which, tend to the ruin of
the Familes, and commonwealths, where the Jesuits inhabit.

CHAP. 13. That the Jesuits Prouincials, take upon them to discharge their
inferiors of the simple vow, in the same sort that their General does.
IN all that I have hitherto discoursed unto you, I see not that the Jesuits
have any thing at all to allege in excuse of their simple vow. And yet that
no man may think that I am stirred against them upon any particular quarrel,
I shall be very willing to excuse them, if none but the General of their
Society may grant dismission, especially, when he is constrained to do it, by
some great and urgent necessity. Let us grant him this omnipotency over them
of his order, which our holy Father the Pope, does not give to himself, over
any other religious of our Catholic Church. But to permit a Provincial to
do it, for and in his province: not upon necessity, which has no law, but to
pleasure him, that requires absolution from his vow; I believe, that how much
soever we can be content to wink at their doings, there is no good Catholic,
that in any sort can bear it. This was practiced in the year 1594. in the
Jesuits College in Paris. There was in ^at College a Jesuit of the simple
vow, promoted by them to the holy orders of Priesthood, and who for many years
had ruled at Bourgesse, Neuers, Ponta-Mousson, and then had their first form
at Paris. This man, being weary of the hypocrisies, and other evil fashions,
which he saw reigned in all this Society, not able to bear this water any
longer in his stomach, presented himself to Father Clement du Tuits,
Prouiciall of Paris, and besought him that he might be dismissed, because it was
not his intent to abide any longer with them. Father du Puits, persuaded him to
the contrary, showing him, that although he had not made profession by the
great vow, yet having made the simple vow, of Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience, he was bound to the keeping of that, so long as he lived there, as
well as the religious of other Monasteries; and that he might not go from it,
without the consent of his Superior. Hereto the Jesuit replied. That he
neither meant, nor would go from it, of his own authority, but that his
Superior might not deny him leave, as long as he requested it. That herein,
there ought to be a mutual consent of will and power, and that as the
Superior might dismiss the inferior, without his liking, so the inferior
might compel the Superior to discharge him, though he were not well disposed to
do it: that their was as much irrigularitie in the the first proposition, as in
the second, and that if there were justice in the one, there was like in the
other. This question, surely was one of the hardest that belongs to their
Society, and if the obedience, that they all vow to their General, be such,
as I will show in this place, this doubt had need to to have been cleared by
him, and his assistants. Notwithstanding, Father du Puits being long practiced,
and thoroughly instructed in the statutes of his order, without sending to Rome;
gave him of his own private authority, his Letters Pattents of such tenor as
follows.

Clemens Puteanus Praepositus Societatis Jesus in Prounicta Franciae, omnibus
quorum interest and in quoru^ manus hae litter a venerint. S. in Domino nostro
Jesus Christo. Fide^ facio N. quamuis in Societate nostrae aliquandiu vixerit,
professionem tamen in ea non emisisse, quin potius ex causis rationi consonis,
ipso petente, liberum ab omni, erga ipsam, obligatione esse dimissum. Testamur
etiam eum ad omneis sacros ordines in eadem fuisse legitime promotion, nec
vllum scimus impedimentium quo minus eis Domino ministrare possit. In cuius rei
testimonium, eidem N. has litteras maru nostra scriptas, sigillo Societatis
nostra obsignatas dedimus. Parisiis vigefimo quarto Augusti, 1594. That is to
say, Clement Puteanus, Provost of the company of Jesus, in the province of
France, to all persons to whom it may appertain, and to whom these presents
shall come, greeting in our Lord Jesus Christ. I give you to understand, that
although the bearer hereof, have lived a certain time in our company, yet was
he not professed, but upon some good considerations moving him to request it,
we have frank and free dismissed, and set him at liberty, from any thing that
might tie him to our Society. Furthermore we certify, that he has with us
been promoted to all holy orders, and that we know no impediment why he may
not exercise his function. In witness whereof, we have made him this Pasport
under our own hand writing, and sealed it with the Seal of our Socieitie.
Given at Paris the 24. and 25. of August. 1594.

I name him not to you, in favor of whom these letters were granted. He is a
man of excellent learning, and known for such a one in the University of
Paris. A man (I say) that had spent not only some, but many years among the
Jesuits, and had taken holy orders, and read in diverse Colleges of their
Society. Yet not being one of the professed fathers, but only of the simple
vow, he procured letters dimissorie as you have heard, wherein, though it be
said (for just cause) yet if you talk with him, he will tell you, that there
was no other but only this, he would continue with them no longer, as I have
learned of himself; and you see it was at his own request, that he came away,
and not at the motion of the Superior. And surely, since Clement du Puits, used
the matter thus, I assure my self, he might do it by some mystery, that is
kept secret amongst them, without seeking the authority of the General: and
if he might, I doubt not but the like authority is granted to all the other
Prouincials. Good God, what a discipline is this? What respect and obedience
shows it to the holy Sea? The General may now defend himself by the
Gregorian Bull, of 1594. but in what Bulls will the Prouincials find, that this
power is granted them? If that upon the importunity of an inferior, he may
dismiss him, to the prejudice of the 3. religious and ordinary vows of all
substantial orders, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience? What a Religion is
this, wherein all things are permitted him against our Religion? Are not all
these jolly Masters very coozners, living in the midst of us? But you shall
find other manner of stuff in the rest of their vows, if it please you to
give me audience, as hitherto you have done.

CHAP. 14. How the Fathers Jesuits, voning poverty, by their great and third
vow, make a mock of God.
YOu have understood of the Father Jesuit here present, that after the simple
vow, they make a solemn vow, by which they add nothing to the former, but
only that by making this second, they cannot any more inherit, nor be dismissed
by their General. There remains now the third, which is the vow of three
steps, by which, besides Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience vowed by them, they
make a particular vow of Mission to our holy Father the Pope, which is to go
to the Indies, and Turkey, for the winning of souls, if they be commanded by
his holiness. But above all, I make great account of that precise Poverty,
which is enjoined them by their constitutions. Run through all the orders of
religion, there is not one of them, in which Poverty is so recommended, as
among the Capuchins, which live from hand to mouth, and put over the care for
to morrow, to the only goodness of God. Bulls of the year, 1540. and 1550.
The foundation of the professed, which are the Jesuits of the great vow, is to
vow poverty, as well ingenerall, as in particular, as it is in all the orders
of begging Friars. But because their poverty had need to be expounded, let us
see the commentaries they bring us by their constitutions. Part. 3. constit.
ca. 1. Art. 27.
They have three sorts of houses, one for their Nouices; another, for their
religious bound by their solemn vows, which they call the house where there
Church is, and another, which they call a College, for the religious, that are
bound only by the simple vow: whereof some are scholars probationers, others
coadiutors, some spiritual, some temporal.

In domibus vel ecclesiis quae a Societate, ad auxilium animarum admittentur,
redditus nulli, ne Sacristiae quidem, aut fabricae applicati, haberi possunt,
sed nec vlla alia ratione, Part. 6. constit. ca. 2. Art. 2.
ita vt penel Societatem, eorum sit vlla dispensatio, sed in solo Deo, cui per
ipsius gratiam, ea inseruit, fiducia constituatur, sine reditibus vllis, ip sum
nobis profecturum de rebus omnibus conuenientibus, ad ipsius maicrem laudem and
gloriam.

Professi viuant ex eleemosynis, in domibus, cum aliquo non mittuntur, nec
officium Rectorum, ordinarium, in Collegiis, Art. 3
vel vniuersitatibus Societatis habeant, nisi ipsaru^ necessitas, vel magna
vtilitas exigeret, nec reditibus aorum in Domibus vtantur.

Parati sint ad mendicandum ostiatim, Art. 10.
quando vel obedientia, vel necessitas id exiget. Et sit vnus; vel plures, ad
elecmosinas petendas, quibus personae societatis sustententur, destinati, quas
eleemosinas simpliciter, amore Domini nostri petent.

Non solum redditus, sed nec possessiones habeant in particulari, Art. 5.
nec in communi, Domus vel Ecclesie.

That is to say, In those houses and Churches, which the Society shall accept
of, for the salvation of souls, there shall be no revenues proper, either to
be applied to the vestrie, or to the frame and buildings, or for any other
purpose whatsoever. That the Society may have nothing to dispose of, but only
depend upon God, whom by his grace they serve, trusting that without revenues
he will provide things necessary for us, to his praise and honor.

They that are professed (that is, men of the last great and solemn vow) shall
live by alms in their houses, when they are not sent forth to any country,
nor take the ordinary charge of Rectors of Colleges, or Universities, except
it be upon necessity, or urgent utility require it, neither shall they use
the Colleges revenues in their houses.

They shall be ready to beg from door to door, when obedience or
necessity requires it. And to this purpose let there be one, or two, or more
appointed, to crave alms for the sustenance of the Society, which shall beg
the alms simply: For the love of our Savior Jesus.

The houses and Churches of the Society shall not only have no rents, or
revenues, but no possessions or inheritance, in general or particular.

Gather all these particulars together, was there ever poverty more
obstinately vowed then this? And therefore it was, that first Pius 5. and after
Gregory 13. ordained, that this Society should be placed among the orders of
Mendicants. If they would observe that which here is enjoined them, I would
excuse them with all my heart, of the heresy of their first vow. And that,
because that after they had a long time enjoyed goods, during the time of their
simple vow, at the last to make satisfaction to GOD for it, being come to the
period of their great vow, by reason whereof, they have the name of Fathers
above the other religious, yet not only they vow from thence forwards a
beggary, but also so themselves to become treasurers thereof. I would honor
them, as the true followers of S. Peter's repentance, after he had denied his
master, and would esteem them above all the other orders of Mendicants: But
when saw you the^ go with a wallet up and down the town? For all this they
live richly and plentifully, not with the Manna of God, (for they are not
children of Israel) but by a notable point of Sophistry, and see how. By the
Bull of Pau. 3. 1540. and that of Julius, 1550.
The houses, where these holy Fathers dwell, are not permitted to have any
goods, but only their Colleges are.

Now so it is, that under their Generals authority, they have all the care
and government of their Colleges. These are the old Cincinnati of Rome, that
bosted they had no gold, but commanded them that had. In like sort these
Masters, though they may have no proper reuenews but their wallet, yet do
they govern them that have good store.

This foundation presupposed, you may easily judge what will follow. For it is
reason, that being fathers, they should be fed and maintained by their
children: and it is more honesty for the^ to ask alms of their Colleges
where they command, then to straggle up and down the Towns to crave it. See
how carefully they make sheaues of Fearne for God, as Caine did. And yet
herein they are the true and lawful children of their good Father Ignatius,
who in all his actions, reserud for himself the principal care of his Kitchen.

Rih: dinere teaches us, that he, James Lainez, Ribad. ca. 2. lib. 2.
and Peter Faure, soiourning in the Venetians territory, while the other two
went about the Town to beg for their living, Ignatius tarried at home, to
make ready dinner of that little they had gotten: And that afterward, when he
was created General of his Order, he began first of all with this charge,
Atque vt quo altius ascenderat, eo se gereret submissius, Ribad. c. 11. lib. 3.
exemploque suo omneis ad pietatis studium prouocaret, culinam statim est
ingressus, in eaque per mulios dies, and coquum agens, and alia vilia
ministeria obire ^^pit. And to show (says Ribadiner) that the higher Ignace
was advanced, the more he would debase himself, to provoke all to piety by
his example, he betook him presently to the Kitchen; where he played the
Cook, and spent many days in mean and homly offices.

Well, among these matters, you see the Kitchen goes first. This was to teach
his Disciples, that in the house of godliness, which he was desirous to build,
above al things they must begin with the Kitchen: a lesson which they have
learned, and observed very well. Nothing is more familiar to them by their
Bulls and Constitutions, then beggerie, and yet never had any men better skill
to scrape up coin, that they might live at their ease. In this occupation,
they played more tricks of legier du maine, then Master Peter Patelin, or
Frances de Villon, or Panurge de Rabelais: for all that these three worshipful
Doctors did, was but in matters of trifles. But to do as our reverend Fathers
the Jesuits do, is to fish for Whales, not for Gudgins; for which purpose they
have, first the instructing of youth, which is their first hook, viz. the
allurements they use to the^, their auriculer confessions; which they know how
to employ to the benefit of their house: the visiting of the sick, the waiting
upon them to the very last gasp, that they may never be out of sight; the
extraordinary absolutions, which they say they can give them, wherewith they
feed their humor, that they may draw some rich legacy from them; the devises
of their simple vow, and a thousand other hypocritical shyfts, which they
call charity; but with this condition, that their charity begin at them
selves: because the Predicament, Ad aliquid, is not an accident to them, but
wholly the substance of their Sect.

So that one may justly call them, not the Order of Jesuits, but the ordure of
Jesuits: only by taking one letter from the one word, and putting it to the
other. For although they make show, not to meddle with retayling, yet they
sell by whole sale the administration of the holy Sacrament, deerer then
Giesie, Elizeus man, would have sold the spiritual gifts to Naaman. And I
never read so brave a passage as this notable sentence of Montaignes the Jesuit.

If God (says he) love to be importund by them that pray unto him, rich men,
which have a desire to good, Chap. 58. de la verite defendu^.
and to imitate so good an example, must have patience, when the poor do to
them, as he that gives riches, desires that one should do to him. The blessing
of God light on thee, thou Iesuitish soul. For my part, I find this short
instruction so worthy of a Jesuit, a Master proceeded in the Art of beging,
that falling from his mouth into the ear of a poor patient, it may bring
forth marvelous effects, to the behoof of this holy Order. At once, so it is,
that within these threescore years, they have raked together more treasure, by
this their sophistical beggerie, then all the Monasteries of France have done
in two or three hundred years.

CHAP. 15. That the Jesuits vow of Chastity, contains a new heresy: and
withal, a brief discourse of the title of Father, which the Jesuits of the
graund vow give themselves.
PErusing over all the vows of our Jesuits, I found something to be reproved,
as you have perceived by my former discourse, and shall by that which follows
in due place. But in the vow of Chastity, me thought there was nothing new: at
the least, I found no new thing, either in their Bulls, or in their
constitutions. Yet, reading Montaignes in his 50. chapter of his book called,
Truth defended, I perceive they have a mystery, that is not yet come to the
knowledge of the holy Sea, or of the Church, no more the^ their simple vow,
which they used by the space of forty years without any license. For, see I
pray you, what Montaignes says when he would excuse the simple vow. It is a
new Law, as well as the vow of Chastity, which they of this Society make,
which hinders marriage not yet contracted, and dissolues it being contracted.

Since Montaignes affirms it, I hold it for very true. For although it be not
so thought, yet so it is, that the author of this book, the Provincial of
Paris, was a botbomlesse Fountain of the Jesuits doctrine. At the first, I
thought that his meaning had been, that after the vow of Chastity made by
them, none might marry, under pain of having his marriage disanuld, and the
children that shall come thereof, declared to be incestuous: But afterward,
when I had bethought my self, that this law was not new, but very ancient, and
that this Jesuit called their vow of Chastity a new one, by which, marriages
already made were dissolved and disanuld, I assured my self, that by this new
vow, a married man becoming a Jesuit, breaks the holy bond of marriage, which
cannot be dissolved but by natural death.

Was there ever any heresy more prejudicial to Christendom the^ this? It is
Gods law, that they which are married by him, that is to say by his Church, may
not be seuerd and put a sunder by man, except in the case of adultery. Which
ordinance has been so strictly observed in all times of old, that when the
woman for her fault, is shut up in a Monastery, though there be no fault at
all on her husbands part, yet is it not permitted him to marry again, in our
Catho. Apostlick Roman Church, but he must bear his part of penance, for the
sin committed by his wife. So has our Church thought these two bodies
indivisible. I wot well, that some think, that the wife being convinced of
adultery in court of justice, the husband may marry another wife: But in
whether of the two is there greater error, them that so think, or the Jesuit?
They cleaving only to the letter, imagine, that God has given liberty to
marry again, because that in all other cases, save adultery, he has
forbidden the seuering of man and wife: and yet the Church never thought, that
the breach of marriage was intended in these words; for marriage is a Sacrament
that cannot be dissolved but by death: only there may be a separation of
bodies. Wherein the Ancients were so resolute, that they thought, some, as
Tertullian, upon commandment, some, as Jerome, upon counsel, that neither
of the married parties, might make any second marriage, as if their marriage
had not been dissolved by the death of the former wife or husband.

I speak this, not to approve their oppinions, for Tertullians was condemned
by the Church, and Ieroms contrould by many great personages: but to show you,
that at the least, as long as we live, the sacrament of marriage may not be
dissolved, no not for adultery. What new monster then is that, which our
Jesuits bring into the Church, that he which becomes one of their order, may
break off his marriage, without sinning thereby against his wife? So that
upon a bare coffeehouse of the husband, the poor desolate wife shall
remain unmarried, according to the laws of Iesuitisme, and yet may not marry
another husband, because the Laws of Christianity forbids it. I have heard it
said of other Orders and Monasteries, that it has fallen out sometimes, that
some intemperate and ill advised men, have become Munks, rather by despair
then devotion, because they could not obtain that folly which they sought for
of their Mistresses; but to the breach of marriage, save for adultery, upon
the only coffeehouse of the husband, possessed with a sottish devotion,
there never was any that opend a gappe, but the Jesuits, men without Christ
since first our Christian Religion began. If they so much abhor marriage,
whence comes it, that having attaind to their last vow, they call themselves
Fathers? A title indeed not so arrogant as that of Jesuit, but yet full of
ambition and pride. At the least I am sure, that S. Jerome would not have
thought well of it, who upon the fourth to the Galathians, says, that the word
Abba, signifies Father in Hebrew, and that our Savior has declared, that the
name of Father, appertains not to any but to GOD his Father, therefore it was
not to be liked, that in some Monasteries, there were that were called Abbats,
or Fathers. I think his meaning was, to speak to the heads of the Munks,
which were called Abbats: what would he say now, if he should see the Jesuits of
the great vow take this title of Fathers? For in other Orders, we call their
Superior, Abbat, as him whom the Religious persons must acknowledge for their
Father; and as for them, they are called Brothers, as if they were all his
children.

This name, Father, appertains not but to the principal dignities of the
Church, as Pope, Patriarck, and Abbat: and whereas every Jesuit of the great
vow, takes it as his portion, they show thereby, that under the feyned
simplicity of their Friars weed, they cover marvelous arrogancy. I know
they will tell me, that the Capuchins, who seem to be an order not to be
reproved, do the like: and I will answer them, that this fault of the
Capuchins, may not serve them for a warrant. Diogenes the Cynick, making a show
of despising the world, was as proud as Plato, when he vaunted in his beggerie,
that he trod Platos pride under his feet: and I will not say, that there is
no ambition under a Capuchins gray patcht gown. But yet there may be some
excuse for him: For he among them, that first thought to bring some reformation
into S. Fraunces order, meant to make them Munks like the good old Hermits,
whom of old they called Fathers. As in deed, when we read their lives, we
call them the lives of the Fathers; and when I see the Jesuits beggerie brought
to that pass the Capuchins is, I shall easily be persuaded to excuse this
title of Fathers in them. But a man may see in them, a very manifest ambition;
because, that being not content to call themselves so, they make the word
(Reverend) to be added thereto, which belongs not to any but to Cardinals and
Bishops. Look upon Bellarmins works, printed before he was a Cardinal, for
example, his book of Pardons, their title is, R. P. Roberti Bellarmini, etc.
which is by abridgement, that which we call Reverend father. Look on the life
of Frauncis Borgia, (the third General of their Order,) translated out of
Spanish into Latin, by Andrew Scot, a Jesuit. The privilege to Troguse, the
Printer at Antwerp imports, that he had leave to print; Vitam Francisci
Borgiae, tertij Societ. Jesus Generalis, a Reuerendo Patre. Andrea Shotto Latin
scriptam. The life of Frauncis Borgia, the third General of the Society,
written in Latin by the Reueuerend Father, Andrew Scot.

And truly I am sorry, for the love I bear them, that they have so ambitiously
desired this name of father, because it has been a cause, that certain
curious fellows, have employed their time in writing Anagrams upon these two
words, SECTA IESVITARVM, wherein they have found matter of shame and reproach.
As it fell out the other day, when I was in company where there was speech of
that title which they have taken, a good fellow said, that there was no reason
we should envy them that title of fathers, since they took so good order to be
so. To which another replied, that it was not so, because the conceit that
arises from these words, SECTA IESVITARVM, refutes that slander, whereunto
he for his part gave great credit. For if the prognostication of our fortunes
and manners (said he) depend upon names, according to the rule that Ier^^^
Cardan has given in his books Do Sabtilitate, there is as much and more
reason, to judge the like of Anagrams, which a man may find in the names
without loosing any one letter; as we fay in that of king Frauncis, the first
of that name, FRANCOIS DE VALOIS, DE FACON SVIS ROYAL. And in that of Estienne
Iodelle, a great Poet, Io le Delien est ne. And if that which is to be found in
these two words, SECTA IESVIT ARVM be true, it is an absolute impossibility
for them to be Fathers.

TVTE MARES VICIAS, non scortum, non tibi coniunx,
Dic Iesita mihi qui Pater esse potes?
With women you lie not, but with males rather,
Speak Jesuit, how can thou be a Father?
To which I aunswerd him, that it was mere folly to give any credit to names,
or Anagrams, as Julius Scaliger has very elegantly proved against Cardan.
Besides, I am out of doubt, that you Anagram is a liar, as I will prove by
another, that is contrary to it.

TV MATRES VICIAS, thorosque sacros,
Antistes pie, virginesque sanctas:
Hoc qui martyrio fidem propagat,
Hoc qui consilio propagat orbem,
Is vere est pater, and pater beatus:
O tuam veneror beatitatem,
Amplectorque piam paternitatem,
Iosuita Patrum Pater supreme.
Thou stainest Mothers, and the marriage bed,
Prelate, by thee are holy Virgins sped.
Who by this martyrdom graceth the sleeple,
Who by this skill begets faith in the people:
He is a father, and a father blessed,
Thy happiness I honor with the rest:
Jesuit, I bow to thy paternitee,
Father of Fathers in the highest degree.
The diversity of these two Anagrams, which is a plain contrariety, of doing
and undoing, teaches us, that there is no credit to be given to them. And I
hold it for certain, and an Article of faith, if you will give me leave to say
so, that the Jesuits keep their vow of chastity, as strictly, holily, and
religiously, as they do that of beggerie, wherefore let us not trouble our
talk with this ordure.

You are very desirous (quoth the other) to favor them without ground, and
you consider not that your Anagram lackes one letter, E. whereas mine fits all.
That which I have said to you of them, is an inseparable accident, which the
Logicians call, Poprium quarto modo. Remember the Templers, who were allowed
heretofore, under the cloak of Religion, to wander over the world, to enlarge
our faith by their swords, and what was one of the principal points, for which
they were condemned. See if the Jesuits now adays do not follow their steps:
the actions of a man, that rogues about the world, as the Jesuits do, are to
me marvelous suspicious. I believe no part of that you say, (quoth I) it is
all but lies and slanders.

CHAP. 16. Of the vow of Mission, and that by it the Jesuits mock us all, and
especially our holy Father the Pope.
IN all other orders, they that are admitted make three vows. In this of
Ignace to enthrall the good liking of Pope Paul the third, that of Mission is
added: not for his fellows, but for them, which are of the last, and great
vow. The words of their Bulls are, that they promise without shifting, to go
whether soever the Pope shall command them. Ad profectum animarum and fidei
propagationem, sieve miserit nos ad Turcas, sieve ad quoscumque alios infideles,
etiam in partibus quas Indias vocant, existentes, etc. He that caused the
defense of the College of Clairmont against the University of of Paris to be
printed 1594. says thus, speaking of the greatness and excellency of his new
vow. The defendants have a particular vow of obedience to the Pope, but circa
Missiones tantum, which is grounded upon this, that they being called by God to
aid the Church, and to defend it against the enemies thereof, such as the
Infidels and heretics are, must of necessity be sent abroad. And a little
after: And they cannot be more rightly sent then by him, that is set in Saint
Peter's chair, and gouerns the whole Church: who as the Pilot in the stern,
sticking to the helm, appoints some to the fore-ship, some to the ancor, some
to the sails and tackles, and other, to other offices in the ship. Let us
dwell a little upon this goodly sentence, ere we pass any further.

The first promise of this vow, is for the conversion of the Turks, which
follow Mahometisme, then, of all other infidels, yea even of them that inhabit
certain countries unknown to us, which they call the Indies. I pray you tell
me, if ever you understood that they went either to the country of the great
Turk the Emperor of Constantinople, or of Sophy, the Emperor of Persia, to
acquit themselves of this promise. They were never commanded to go thither by
our holy Father, will some man say to me; I grant, because those places were
too hot for them. Whither then have they gone? Into those countries that are
far from us, quas Indias vocant, which Ignace cunningly added, as a thing
harder to perform, then the conversion of Turkey: and yet he knew, being a
Spaniard, that nothing was so easy, as to undertake this charge, as you have
understood by me, when I recou^ted to you the Embassages of the Jesuits into
Portugal, Maff. lib. 2. chap. 10. Rib. lib. 2. chap. 16.
and the Indies, which were under the subjection of John the third, King of
Portugal. Do yoe think, Gentlemen, that if it had pleased the Pope to send
thither any of the four orders of the Mendicants, they would have drawn back
from this service, permitting them to go in a secular habit, as the Jesuit
does? In steed of one Xauier, that was sent thither by Ignace, there would
have been found, 500. men full of devotion and learning to perform this holy
voyage. And why so? Because it was a devotion without danger, for going
thither under the banner of a Christian king, who had power of life and death
over them, whom by fair means he would bring to our Christian Religion, it
was a voyage without fear. But as for all Turkey, which is under Princes,
enemies to Christianity, I see not that either the Pope would give them
commandment, or these worldly-wise Jesuits be any thing hasty to go
thither: and yet read the first bull, and it appears that Ignace set down the
voyage of Turkey, as the more easy to be undertaken. I would to God it had come
into the head of one of the Popes that succeeded Paul the third, to command
our Jesuits, to go to Constantinople, to convert the Mahumetans, to try in
good earnest wha^ obedience they would yield to this vow of Mission we should
have seen what miracles they would have wrought there. Hear notwithstanding,
not a new Currier, but a discourser of his most humble supplication and request
presented to the king. We live not under christian princes only, but under
heathen Pote^tates, and those that are ignorant of the law and fear of God. We
have Colled ges even in Iappon, situated to the East of our Hemisphere; we
have to the West, in Brasil, which is the beginning of America: in Lima, and
Cucham, which is the end of Peru, and the utmost part of the West: in Mexico,
which is in the middle of the two countries. To the Northward, we have in Goa,
a City and country that lies by as far from Iappon, as Iappon from Lisbon, some
6000. leagues. We have Colleges in many places of the east and west Indies.
That I may say nothing of those we have in Europe, which are a great many more
then our enemies would, and fewer by a great many then the godly and zealous of
our faith desire. Besides, the laborers of this Society, without having
Colleges prepared for the^, for the conservation of Christians, and conversion
of the heathen, frequent the countries of Mount Libanus, of Egypt, of Africa,
and of China. When I read this passage with a friend of mine, I told him that
this Jesuit without name, played in the dark; and the very liar. As of old,
Apollonius Tianneus the coozner did, alleging to the Greeks for witness of
his miracles, the Gymnosophists, that were in India. Whereupon Aeneas Goseus,
in his, Theophrast, says, that it was not without reason, that this impudent
coozner, took for warrant of his cooznages, them that were a far of, and
dwelt as it were in an other world. I said, that our Jesuits Theatins, did the
like at this, day; who to feed us with toys, send us to the same Indies, and
other countries, whereof we scarce know the names. But at this word my friend
smiling, said, that there was some Picrochole in their doing. What Picrochole
(quoth I?) I think it is the name of a devil, as Macrobe is. I perceive, quoth
he again, that ye have not studied our Rabelais, who discoursing of a great
war, that king Picrochole made upon Grandgosier, after that his foolish noule
had reckned upon the whole country of France, which he took to be already
conquered: his gallants that followed him, added thereto; And moreover, you
shall assault, the kingdoms of Tunis, of Hippo, Argier, of Bone, of Corode,
and valiantly all Barbary. Passing further, you shall take into your hands,
Maiorca, Minorca, Sardinia, Corfu, and the other Islands of the Ligustick and
Balearick Sea: and in coasting on the left hand, you shall bear rule over all
Gallia Narbonensis. Prouence, the Allobroges, Sionna, Florence, Luca: you shall
take Italy, even Naples, Calabria, Apulia, and Sicill and sack them all, and
Malta to. Afterward, we will take Candy, Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Cyclades, and
we will set upon Moria. It seems that this wise fool Rabelais, meant then in
the person of Picrochole, to paint out the imaginary victories of our Jesuits
with their wallets, though they were not then hatched. You are a merry man
(quoth I) but let us leave these tricks for the Jesuit De la Fon: For I see
nothing in this matter, but to laugh at. If the Jesuit had taken Munsters
Cosmography, he might have added many other savage countries, and it had been
hard for us to have proved him a lier. I remember that the wise Tulenus, seeing
upon a time the lawyer Balduin walking with Andrew Theuet the trauailer, said,
that they took no care to disprove one with another; because the one, had been
always in his chamber, wedded to his book, and the other, had employed his
whole time in travail, without looking upon a book: That the one might quote
many false authorities without being reproved, and the other, name many
countries where he had never been, without being contrould. The very same you
shall find in this case of the Jesuits we have in hand. It is above 40. year
since they bragd, that they had made these great conquests in the most part of
those countries. Their Statutes ordain, that when their General is dead, all
the fathers of our provinces, that are in any estate or dignity, must come to
Rome, to proceed to the election of a new successor. After the decease of
Ignace, in the year 1556. many came thither, where James Lainez was chosen, he
dead, in the year 1565. Fraunces Borgia was chosen; in neither of these
elections, though there was a great care had that the titles of all the fathers
Prouincials might be sent thither, yet I find not any one of those far
countries: and yet the names and titles of all the fathers that were brought
thither, were very carefully set down. They are bound to send letters to
their General every year from every College, to certify him how their
matters stand. I have run over all that were sent to their General Aquauiua,
in the year 1583. yet find no mention among them of any of these Colleges. It
should seem their winning of souls has been marvelous great since that
time.

Let us leave things as they be, and let us not speak upon idle imaginatio^s
but agreeable to common sense: If they be scattred in so many barbarous
countries, and have there conueried so many souls to our Christian faith, they
must needs have had the gift of tongues to convert the^. It is in the power of
our holy Father, to send them into these unknown countries, but not to bestow
upon them the gift of tongues. That was a grace of the holy Ghost particularly
reserved for the Apostles, for the spreading of our Christian faith. Consider I
pray you whether there be not likelihood of reason in that I say. Besides,
where are the savage Kings, Princes, and Lords, which after their conversion,
have come to kiss the feet of the holy father to receive his blessing? I
understand that once in 60. yers they have had a Mask in Rome, of 3. beggars
disguisd like kings, and this is all. I place therefore their vow of Mission in
the chapter of money counted, but not received: It is a very cooze^age, by
which these honest fellows dally with us. And yet this cooznage is nothing in
comparison of that, whereby they abuse our holy father. It must be granted by
every man, that he only and none but he, has authority to send into heathen
countries, for their conversion, so that no man in this case may be joined in
commission with him. But for all this, there is nothing, wherein the Jesuits
despise his authority more, then in this: the least part of this Mission
depends upon the holy Sea, and the residue is in their General. Bull of Paul
the 3. the year 1549.
Possit tamen ipsemet Praepositus pro tempore existens, suos quocumque locorum,
etiam inter Infideles, cum expedire in Domino iudicabit, mittere ac reuocare:
and per nos ac successores nostros, ad locu^ aliquem missos sine temporis certi
limitatione, cum id expedire ad Dei gloriam, and animarum auxilium visum fuerit
(super quo conscientiam dicti Praepositi oneramus) ad alia loca transmittere
libere and licite valeat. Yet let their General (says the Bull) for the time
being, whenever he shall think it expedient, send them of his order into any
heathen country whatsoever, and when he list, call them home again: and if we,
or our successors shall send any of them to any place without limitation of
time, let him, whenever he shall see it expedient for Gods glory and the good
of souls (wherein we charge the said General upon his conscience) remove them
from thence whither he shall think meet. From hence you may gather, that the
General not only may send them, as well as the Pope, but, which is more, may
alter, clippe, and curtall the Popes letters Patents, as please him. Besides,
there are none but the fathers of the last vow, bound to the Pope in this
Mission, and they make account that the holy Sea is infinitely beholding to
the^ for it. There General can do more. For he is permitted by their
constitutions, to send, as well some of them of the great vow, as of the other,
whither soever he will, without partiality, or exception of any person.

Idem Generalis in Missionibus omne^ hababit potestatem, in tamen nulla ratione
repugnando, 9. Par. constable. ca. 3. art. 9.
quae a sede Apostolica (vt in septima part dicitur) proficiscuntur. Mittere
ergo poterit omnes sibi subditos, sieve professionem emiserint, sieve non
emiserint, quos mittendos iudicauerit, ad quaslibet mundi parts, ad quoduis
tempus, vel definitum, vel indefinitum, prout ei videbitur ad quamuis actionem,
ex his quibus ad proximoru^ auxilium, Societas solet, exercendant. Poterit
etiam missos reuocare, and in omnibus denique, vt ad maiorem Dei gloriam fore
senserit, procedere. The said General (says the Latin) shall have all
authority in Missions, yet without derogating any way from those, which are
granted by the Sea Apostolic, as it is said in the seventh part. It is lawful
for him therefore, to send any of his inferiors, whether they have made
profession of the vow or not, (whom he shall think meet) to any part of the
world, for what time he please, prefixed or not prefixed, for any purpose, in
which the Society is wont to be employed, for the good of their neighbors. It
is lawful for him also, to call home them that are sent, and to do in all
things, as the shall think it most convenient for Gods glory.

I do not think it strange, that their General may countermaund them that
are sent by the Pope, because he had leave to do it, by the Bull of 1549. But
concerning that point, which depends only upon their constitutions, that the
General may send whither he will, not only the fathers professed, but all other
inferiors of his order, I cannot choose, but he greatly offended at the matter.
For to grant such liberty, is to give too much to their General, and too
little to our holy Father the Pope. Therefore, as often as they trumpet out to us
this vow of Mission, by which their fathers of the great vow are bound to the
holy Sea, they mock both him, and us. For this vow is superfluous, their
constitutions being such for their General, as I have showed you. Of which
constitutions also, they have no Pope for warrant, and they are extraordinarily
punishable for having usurped this privilege upon the holy Sea, of their own
private authority.

CHAP. 17. Of the blindfold obedience which the Jesuits owe the Pope, which at
this day they impudently deny by their new books.
PAsquiier, pleading for the University of Paris against the Jesuits, objected
to them, that they yielded a certain particular submission to the Pope, that
was utterly contrary to the liberties of our Chapter of France. A submission,
that first brought in a schissme into the Church, betwixt the popish Jesuit,
and the true catholic Frenchman. Besides, of such consequence, that if any
quarrel should happen betwixt the Popes and our Kings, the Jesuits would be as
sworn enemies to the Crown of France, as any that we foster in France.

When this objection was made against them, Verseris their Advocate, answered
never a word to it, as you may see by his Plea. But as the time has refined
their wits, so they have bethought themselves of a buckler for this blow, by a
new kind of Sophistry, saying, that they make no other particular vow to the
Pope, then that of Mission, and that in all other points, they are conformable
to us. So they would have defended themselves, in the year 1594. when their
cause was pleaded the second time in the Parliament at Paris, as you may
understand by that which I alleged out of their defenses. And Montaignes in
his book of the Truth defended, faith, that their vow is containd in these
words of their profession, Mont. c. 24.
after the three vows of Religion, Insuper promitto specialem obedientiam
summo Pontifici circa Missiones. Which signifies nothing else, but that they
which are professed, promise to obey their holy father the Pope specially,
without delay or excuse, to go into any part of the world, to the Indies, or
to the Turks, among the Infidels and heretics to convert them, or to the
Christians to aid them.

But above all, he best pleases me, which made The most humble supplication
and request to the King, for the Society of Jesus: who after he had daubd over
his cause with many hypocritical reasons, when he comes to this point of
obedience to the Pope, his book being shut up, as if by ouer-sight he had
forgot to answer it, adds by way of an appendix beside the Book, about some
twenty lines to this effect. Addition to page. 56. The same Author, has
taught our enemies to take up matter of reproach, about a vow that the professed
of our Society make to the holy Sea, upon which they have glozed, that we
promise to obey it wholly in all things, whatsoever it shall command: and that
if the Pope be a Spaniard, we will be so to if he please: which gloss, is not
only contrary to the truth, but also beside the purpose and matter. This vow,
(my Liege) contains nothing but a promise, readily to employ our selves when
it shall please the holy Sea, among the Infidels, Pagans, and Heretics, to
convert the^ to the faith. The words of the vow are. Further, I promise
special obedience to our holy Father, in the matter of Mission.

This vow contains no other particular obligation, and cannot be but
commendable, in a time wherein there is so great need of good laborers, to
succor the church in danger. And it weakens not, nor hinders in any point the
submission, obedience, and allegiance, which all subjects owe to their Princes;
the French to the King of France, the Polanders to the King of Poland, and so
of others. What cause have they then to cry out, that we make a vow to obey
wholly in all things, whatsoever shall be commanded? and that this vow will
make us Spaniards, if the Pope please? What agreement is there of such an
antecedent, with such a consequent? Let the word Spain go. I will make no
advantage of it, either for or against the Jesuit. Every Prince plays his part
upon this great stage of the world, as well as he can for the advancement of
his estate: A thing which is not unseemly for him, according to the rules of
state matters, which give Princes leave to love treasons, and hate Traitors.
Some such a one, may have aided himself by the service of the Jesuits in our
late troubles, who shall one day find, that they are very dangerous officers in
his Country, and that by experience of that which has past in France.

Let us speak only of that which concerns our present question, but without
Sophistry, at least if I may entreat so much of our Jesuit. I will assail
them with none but their own writings. In the third part of their
Constitutions, chap. 1. where their vow of obedience, as well to the Pope, as
to their Superiors, is at large described, you have these words following;
whereby every man may see, with what impudency the Jesuits lie, and that even
in their humble request which they presented to the King.

Et quoniam quae ad votu^ castitatis pertinent, interpretatione non indigent,
cum constet quam sit perfect obseruanda: nempe enitendo Angelicam puritatem
imitari, and mentis and corporis mu^ditia. His suppositis, de sancta obedientia
dicetur, quam quidem omnes plurimum obseruare, and in ea excellere studeant,
NEC SOLVM IN REBVS OBLIGATORIIS, SED ETIAM in alijs, licet nihil aliud quam
signum voluntatis Superioris, sine vllo praecepto vider^tur, Versari autem
debet ob oculos, Deus ^^ator, and Dominus noster, propter que^ homini
obedientia prastatur, and vt in spiritu amoris, and non cum perturbatione
timoris, procedatur, curandum est. Ita vt omnes constanti aanimo incumbanus, vt
nihil perfectionis cum diuina grati^ consequi possimus, in absoluta omnium
constitutionum obseruatione, nostrique instituti peculiari ratione adimplenda,
pr^termittamus, and exactissime omnes neruos virium n^strar^^^ ad hanc virtute^
obedientiae, imprimis SVMMO PONTIFICI, DEINDE SVPERIORIEVS SOCIETATIS
exhibendam, intendamus. Ita vt omnibus in rebus ad quas potest se cum charitate
obedientia extendere, ad eius vocom, perinde ac si a Christ^ Domino egrederetur
(quando quidem ipsius loco est, ac pro ipsius amore ac reuerentia, obedientiam
praestamus) quam promtissimi simus, re quauis, at que adeo litera a nobis
inchoata, nedum perfecta, studio obediendi, relicta, ad cum scopum vires omnes
ac intentionem, in Domino conuertendo: vt sancta obedientia, tu^ in
exequutione, tum in voluntate, tum in intellectu, sit nobis semper ex omni
part perfecta, cum magna celeritate, spirituali gaudeo and perseuerantia,
quicquid nobis iniunctum fuerit, obeundo, omnia iusta esse nobis persuadendo,
omnem sententiam ac iudicium nostrum contrarium C^AECA QVADAM OBEDIENTIA,
abnegando: Et idquidem in omnibus quae a Superiore dispo^^utur, vbi definiri
non possit aliquod peccati genus intercedere. Et sibi quisque persuadeat quod
qui sub obedientia vi^^nt, se ferri ac regi a diuina prouidentia per Superiores
suos, sinere debent, perinde ac si cadauer essent, quod quoquo versus se ferri,
and quacunque ratione tractari se sinit: Vel similiter atque senis baculus, qui
vbicumque and quacumque in re velit, eo vti, qui eum manu tenet, ei inseruit.
Sic enim obedi^us rem quamcunque cui eum Superior, ad auxilium totius
Religionis velit impendere, cum animi hilaritate debet exequi. Pro certo habens
quod ea ratione potius, quam re alia quauis, qua^ praestare possit, propriam
voluntatem, ac iudicium diuersum sectindo, diuinae voluntatio^ respondeb^t.
Upon which passage, the gloss has these words, Obedientia quod ad
executionem attiues, ^unc praestatur, cum res iussa completur* quod ad
voluntatem, cum ille qui obedie idipsum vuit, quod ille qui iub^t: Quod ad
intellectum, cum idipsum sentit quod ille, and quod iubetur, been iuberi
existimat: Et est imperfecta ca obedientia, in quae praeter executionem, non
est haec eiusdem voluntatis and sententiae, inter cum qui iubet, and cui
iubetur, consensio. I will recite it unto you in French, as near as possibly I
can. And because those things which belong to the vow of Chastity, need no
interpretation, for that it is certain that it must be perfectly kept; namely,
by laboring to imitate the purity of Angels, in cleannes both of mind and
body. These things granted, we will speak of Obedience, which all must
labor strictly to observe, and to excel therein And that not only in those
things which they are bound, but in other also, though they saw no
commandment for it, but only a sign of your Superiors will. God the
Creator, and our Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake Obedience is performed to
man, must always be before their eyes, and they must provide, that they still
proceed in the spirit of love, and not with perturbation of fear. So that all
of us with resolute minds, frame our selves in such sort, that we omit not any
of that perfection, which by Gods grace we may attain to, by the absolute
fulfilling of all the constitutions; and particularly, by fulfilling our
purposed intent, and that we bend our whole strength to the performance of the
virtue of obedience, First to the supreme Bishop, and then to the Superiors of
the Society. So that we be ready at this call in all things, to which
obedience with charity maybe extended as if it were our Savior Christ's own
voice, since he is in his place, and we yield obedience for love and reverence
of him: And such must our care and obedience, as that if we have begun to
make a letter, we should leave in the midst of it, being called, and apply in
the Lord, all our strength and intention to obey. That our holy obedience may
be perfect in every part, in the execution, in the will, and in the
understanding; that with great have, spiritual joy and perseverance, we
accomplish whatsoever shall be enioynd us: persuading our selves that all
things are just, denying by a certain blindfold obedience, all opinion and
judgment of our own to the contrary; and this must be obserud in all things
which are decreed by our Superior, where it is not certainly known that there
is some kind of sin.

And let every one persuade himself, that all they which live under obedience,
ought to suffer themselves to be carried and gouernd, according to the
providence of GOD by their Superiors, even as if they were dead carcasses,
which suffer themselves to be turned and tumbled, how soever, and which way
soever a man will: or as an old man's staff, which serves him that holds it in
his hand, to whatsoever he will use it, where and how he list. For so must he,
that is obedient, with cheerefulnes of mind execute, whatsoever his Superior
will employ him in, to the benefit of all Religion. Assuring himself, that he
shall fulfill the will of God better by that means, then by any other thing
that he can do, following his own will and judgment differing from it. Upon
this passage, the gloss has these words.

Obedience, concerning the execution of it, is then performed, when that which
is commanded, is done: concerning the will, when he that obeyes, wills the
same thing that he does which commands: concerning the understanding, when he
is of the same judgment with him, and thinks that which is commanded, to be
rightly commanded. And that obedience is imperfect, wherein besides the
execution, there is not this consent of the same will and judgment betwixt him
that co^maund^, and him that is commanded. Do you not see, that the Jesuits
are impudent liars, when they say, that their particular vow to the Pope, is
tied to nothing but Mission, and when they call them slaunderers that speak
otherwise of it? For this which I have here showed you, makes it manifest, that
they are bound to obedience, not only in matters of their order which binds
them, but also in all other things; and that with as straight and absolute
commandment, as any possibly can be. But before whom are they liars? Before
the majesty of their King: because the humble supplication and declaration
before mentioned, was addressed to him only.

The Jesuit thinks he sins not at all by lying impudently before his Kings
face, yea, and confirming his lie with periutie, by laying his hand on the holy
Gospells. And why so? Because, having received a commandment from his
General to lie, his vow of obedience is so precise, that he thinks he is
freed from all sin, and that he had faulted much more, if by telling the
truth, he had not obeyed him. I cannot stay my self from being angry. For if
this vow of blindfold obedience be evil, how is it that these wicked men
observe it? If it be good, how chance they disclaim it, especially, in so
high a point, and of such importance this is? As for my self, who mean to
live and die in that faith, which at the day of my Baptism, my Godfathers and
sureties promised to God for me, I will never doubt to acknowledge my self, in
the midst of all our adversaries, a Catholic, Apostolic Roman, as my
predecessors have been.

They must needs understand one thing in this their disclaim, which I am
constraind to tell them. Do not think, that the Jesuits are such men as we
are. They have two souls in their bodies, the one, a Roman soul in Rome, the
other, a French in France. That they may be welcome to Rome, they speak there
of nothing so much, as this absolute obedience, in all things that may be
commanded them by the Pope. In France they flatly deny it, for fear of
being banished from thence. For, that you may know how the case stands, our
church of France, lives under the obedience of the Church of Rome, but with
certain liberties, by means whereof, it is preserved against the practices of
the court of Rome, as well in temporal things as spiritual. The Popes are
men, made of such parts as all other men are, so that in their holinesses,
there is sometimes a little of humane corruption. If a Pope, wunne thereto by
devises, and false informations of them that are about him, should make war
upon our Kings, assure your selves, the Jesuits would be as great enemies to
them.

The Pope smites with his principal sword; which is his censures; a
declaration of heresy follows quickly after them, and then a publishing of
the Croysade. Mingle with this, the factions and preachings of the Jesuits, and
this vow of blindfold obedience, unknown to all antiquity, and assure your
self, this were to bring our Realm into a marvelous disorder. Call to mind
in what sort Pope Sixtus the fourth failed to surprise the estate of Florence,
from the house of Medices, where Julian was slain in the church as he was
hearing Mass. Imagine how it had been possible for those Lords to have saved
themselves from that unlooked for conspiracy, if there had been a band of
Jesuits in their town. Call to mind that which past of late memory in this
Country of France, under Pope Sixtus the fifth, and how we were at the first
afflicted, by his winking at and furthering our troubles. Both these had been
begging Friars, and afterward became Popes.

The one set himself against the petty Commonwealth of Florence, but at such
time; when as yet there were no Jesuits in the world. The other, led by the
Jesuits hand, was brought against the flourishing Realm of France. You shall
find, that it is not without great reason, that they disclaim their Particular
vow of blindfold obedience to the Popedom: because they know in their
consciences, that no state can ever be secure from the Popes anger, so long as
they continue there.

CHAP. 18. What shifts the Jesuits use, to cover the impieties of their
blindfold obedience.
AS the Advocate ended this discourse the Jesuit thinking that he had a new
advantage against him, spoke thus to him. You trim us here after a strange
fashion, and are so blind, that you see not in the mean while, that the
passage, which you have alleged against us, brings with it the solution of all
that which you upbraid us with. For what precise obedience so ever be enioynd
us, Chap. 25. and 29. of Truth defended.
yet is it with this condition, Vbi definiri non possit aliquod peccati genus,
there, and in such case, as that a man can perceive no kind of sin therein.
And this is that which Montaignes, one of our Order, alleged ere-while by you,
has very wisely answered.

You teach me no new thing (quoth the Advocate) and I would not have fayld to
tuch this string, though you had not interrupted me. But it is well, that you
have, had some pity of men, that by this little pause, I might take my breath
awhile. For indeed, to tell you the truth, I begin to wexe weary, yet ere I
make an end, I will acknowledge, that this clause alleged by you, is
interlated. For you gallants, never want shifts to cover your shame. Make these
four or five words, agree with the rest of the article, and I will yield you
the cause. Your vow constraines and binds you to believe, that when our holy
Father the Pope, or your Superiors enjoin you any thing, though it be not
such as by your Order is obligatorie, you are to think that GOD is in their
mouths, and that as soon as you are commanded, in the twinkling of an eye,
without gainsaying, all work set apart, yea, if it be a Letter begun, you
must of necessity obey. That in your obedience, you must bring the hand, the
heart, and the judgment all together. That you are in this matter, as a dead
carcass, or a staff, which receive no motion, but as they are thrust by him
that guides them; and to conclude, that the obedience, you must perform is
blindfold. This in short, in your vow, which you make a show to limit by these
words (so that a man find no apperance of sin in it;) can it possibly be, that
I should judge that he commands me any sin, in whom you will have the
presence of God acknowledged in commanding? Besides, do you give me leisure
to think on it, though I might perhaps do it, when as in the twinkling of an
eye I must obey? More, you ordain, that my will and judgment assist the
execution of this commandment. Whereby you take from me all examination,
meaning that I should be like a staff in the hand of an old man. And for
conclusion, this obedience, which you will have to be blindfold, should have
eyes, if it were permitted me to settle my judgment upon the goodness or badnes
of the commandment. And indeed a man must have neither eye nor judgment, no
more then you have in your blind obedience; or else he must needs say, that
these four or five words, which have been foysted by Ignace into this
Article, are void, and to no purpose. If I had nothing but this to say, yet it
were enough to make your Sophistry appear: but I will not tarry in this broad
way. It was Ignace that made this constitution. For Ribadiner acknowledges;
that all your constitutions came from him. There is not then any more faithful
interpreter of Ignace intent, then himself. Peter Maffee, a Priest of your
Society, has written his life, and that with the approbation of your General
Aquauiua; for to him the book is dedicated. I do not think that he would
have suffered it to be printed, and much less dedelicated to him, if he had
not thought that it made much for their order. Mark now what a commentary we
may draw out of this book, to show that Ignace meant, that the obedience of
them of his order should be blind.

Obedientiae studium, quibuscumque rebus potuit semper oftendit: Romano quidem
Pontifici, Maff. lib. 3. cap. 7.
cuius in verba praecipuo quodam sacramento iurauerat, it a erat praesto, vt ad
ipsius nutum sese paratum exhiberet. Confectaiam aetate, vnius baculi
adminiculo, pedibus, quocunque opus esset, peregre proficisci, vel etiam
nauigium ascendere plane exarmatum, seque eodem poutifice iub^nte, mari
ventisque, sine vlla dubitatione committere. Quem ipsius animum vir quidam
primarius cum haud satis probaret, and in eiusmodi re, consilium prudentiamque
requireret, Prudentiam quidem non obedientis, verum imperantis esse respondit
Ignatius. Et sane cum in societate nostra, virtutem hanc, caeteris virtutibus
anteferret, tum ^ihil huic laudi tam contrarium dicebat esse, quam in
Superioru^iussis and consilio examinando, moram, vel potius arrogantiam,
negabatque obedie^tis nomine dignu^ haberi oportere. qui legitimo Superiori,
non, cum voluntate, iudicium quoque submitteret. Id enim gratissimum esse Deo
holocaustum, cum omnes animi vires, ac praesertim intelligentia and men's, quae
summum in homine obt^^^t locum, in obsequium Christi coguntur. Qui vero i^^iti
ac dissentientes, actu exteriore dumtaxat, iussa praeposit orum exequerentur,
hos inter vilissima mancipia, vel pecud^s potius numer andos aiebat. And a
little after. Quinetiam in sermon quotidiano vsurpare saepe consueuerat, qui
ad Superioris nutum, voluntatis propensionem solummodo, non etiam iudicij
consensionem accomoodarent, eos, altero tantum pede intra Religionis septa
versari.

He always showed his care and obedience, by all means he could: He was at
the Bishop of Romes beck, to whom he was sworn by an especial oath. When he
was very old, he went afoot on pilgrimage, whither soever it was needful,
having nothing but his staff to rest on. Neither did he refuse to go by Sea,
whenever the said Bishop commanded him, though in a ship never so ill
provided. Which mind of his, when a certain principal man mislikt, as finding
therein want of wisdom and discretion, Ignace answered, that wisdom was not
for him that must obey, but for him that commands. And as in our Society he
prefers this virtue before other, so he was wont to say, that nothing was so
contrary to the commendation of obedience, as delay, or rather arrogancy, in
examining the reason of our Superiors commandments, and he denied that he
was worthy to be called obedient, that did not submit both his will, and his
Judgment also, to his lawful Superior. For that, said he, is a most
acceptable Sacrifice to God, when all the powers of a man's mind, and especially
the judgment and understanding, which are the most principal, are brought to
the obedience of Christ. As for them that unwillingly, and with mislike
performd the commandments of their Superior, only in outward act, he made
no more account of them, but as of most base Vassals, or rather brute beasts.
And a little after. Moreover, he was wont to say in his common speech, that
they which brought only a ready will, and nor a consent of their judgment to
the fulfilling of their Superiors will, had but one foot within the cloister
of their order.

You see what obedience Ignace would have performed, first to the Popes, and
then the superiors of his order. Let us gather the chief points of it. Behold
a man, that has one foot in the grave; he must go travail. Behold a broken
Bark in the midst of a tempestuous Sea this poor man must go aboard her, if
the Pope command. God forbids me very expressly to be amurtherer of my self,
upon pain of everlasting damnation In these two commandments, I see my death
present before mine eyes, was there ever any greater reason to say, that a man
is not bound to obey? And yet by this obedience enjoined by Ignace, not only
we are bound to obey, but if we do not, we commit a great and grievous sin.
Obey, and you sin against the express law of God. Refuse to obey, and you
sin against Ignace law, which the Jesuits take to be greater then Gods. If
Tertulian were reproved by our ancestors, because he forbid a Christian to
flee from one City to another, to save himself from persecution for religion,
as if thereby he would have us become murderers of our selves, what shall we at
this day say of this cruel proposition of Ignace? Once you see our Jesuits are
but mockers, when as to excuse the impiety of their blind obedience they add:
There, where they discern not that there is any sin. For Ignace did not only
not suffer them of his order to discern that there was any, but contrariwise,
accounted the^ worse then slaves or brute beasts, if they withstood that which
was commanded them. And that you may see better and better, what the intent of
this great Lawgiver was, see what Maffee adds. Atque ad sapientem hanc
sanctemque stultitiam caecae (vt ipse aiebat) Obedientiae, suos vt essent ad
subita and seria promptiores, interdum etiam fictis in rebus erudiebat. And
that they of his Order, might be the redier upon a sudden in earnest matters,
by this wise and holy foolishnes of blind Obedience, as he called it, he did
sometimes put them to it in jest, by occasions devised for the nonce. And upon
this proposition, he tells a tale, that one day a Priest of their Society,
being attired in his. Vestments, coming out of the Vestrie with the Challice
in his hand, as he went to say Mass, received a message from Ignace to come to
him presently; The Jesuit obeyed him and left his Vestments and Chalice. Ignace
asked him, if he did not mislike this commandment. No (quoth he) I hold it for
very good, since it came from you. Know then, quoth Ignace, that I sent not for
thee, because I had any thing to say to thee, but only of purpose to make
trial of thy obedience. And thou have done a more meritorious work, in
leaving the Sacrifice thou wast about to offer, then if thou had offered it.
So that although the Sacrament of the Altar of God, be of such importance, as
it is, yet Obedience is better then Sacrifice, as it is written. Another time,
as a Jesuit priest was hearing the confession of a young gentleman, Ignace sent
for him, to who^ when the Priest had answered, that he would not fail to come
to him, as soon as he had given absolution to the penitent, Ignace not content
with this answer, sent for him the second time. Which this Confessor seeing,
entreated the Gentleman to have patience and went presently to Ignace, who at
the first word spoke thus to him. What? Must I send twice for thee? And
sharply rebukt the man with very bitter words: not because he had any thing
for him to do, but to make him know, what obedience he must use in things that
are seriously enjoined him. If he might have entered into an examination, and
consideration of the sin, the honor, dignity, good order, and duty to the
Church, forbad these two Jesuit Priests to obey their General. But he would
not take this for payment, because it appertained not to the inferior, to
enter into consideration, whether there were sin in the matter or no; neither
is wisdom to be looked for, at his hands that is commanded, but at his that
commands. These are then indeed very dallyings, these are mockeries, these
are illusions and fancies, by which the Jesuit would abuse us, when he
alleages, that he is not bound to obey, if he find any appearance of evil in
the commandment. For contrariwise all sins are covered, and blotted out,
when he obeyes. This is that (Gentlemen) which I had to say this morning: and
because after we have fed our minds with discourse, it seems to me high time
to refresh our bodies with some nourishment, I pray you hold me excused, if I
proceed no further: yet with protestation that after dinner I will declare to
you at larg, all that seems to me to be behind of this matter.

CHAP. 19. Of the wisdom of Ignace, and the sottishnes of the new Jesuits. A
Dialogue betwixt the Jesuit, and the author of this discourse.
THe company not only yielded to the Advocates motion, but also thankt him
for the pains he had taken, and promised to take: all of us being resolved to
hear him as favorably after dinner, as we had done in the morning. But the
Gentleman said, If I be King in my house, as the Collier is in his, I appoint
this afternoon be spent in walking, and especially you particularly my good
friend, quoth he, to the Advocate; are permitted to give your thoughts leave to
play, till to morrow morning, when, if it please God, we will make an end of
our discourse. As he appointed, so it was done.

Dinner was brought in, the cloth taken away, every man rose up to go whither
it pleased him, into the Garden, into the walks into the Park, into the
fields, meadows or woods: For our hosts house had all this variety. For my
part I went to the Jesuit, whom I found reasonable well disposed, after we had
walked two or three turns together. I said to him; What think you of our
Advocate? For in my opinion, though much of his speech were to very good
purpose, yet he went somewhat too far in reproaching the^ of your order. It is
not for me to judge of him, quoth he. For if I say, he spoke well, I shall
wrong our Society: if ill, you will think it is to flatter my fellows. In
fine, which way so ever you take it, I may well be accepted against.

Away with these points of Rhetoric (quoth I) you and I are here in a place
of truth, where we are not to dissemble. Do you not remember you have read in
Herodotus, that when the wise puts off her smock in bed, by her husband, she
puts of shame to? Since you have cast off the habit of your Order. I suppose it
is very easy for you to cast off also that hypocrisy, which your ilwillers
say lodges in your Houses. You are a trauailer, and Homer could not tell how to
represent the wisdom of men better then in an Ulysses, that had seen diverse
Countries. Since you were chosen by your General to pass from country to
country, to sound the diversity of our behauiours and opinions, that you might
make report thereof to him, it is not likely, but that at one time or other,
when you are alone in the fields, you will find leisure to play the
Philosopher, in considering the carriage of your Society. Therefore I heartily
pray you; tell me plainly and truly, what your opinion is of them, and
withal, of this discourse of our Advocate. For although you are meruailously
kept under by your Constitutions, yet your thoughts are free. The Lawmakers of
your Order, was not able to take any order for them.

Then said the Jesuit, since you co^iure me in so friendly a manner, I should
be very discurteous if I should not satisfy you. The Advocate is too blame,
but not so much as some man would think. If he have spoken ill of our
Society, we are the cause of it. No man is hurt but by himself. The greatest
secret that I find in matter of religion, is, that the secret^ of them be not
made commonly known, and that every religious person, according to the
profession he makes, lives in peace of conscience. I see, that amongst the old
Priests of the Heathen law, greatest account was made of the Druides, and there
was nothing that got them so much credit, as an ancient policy, of not
leaving their doctrine in writing, but to keep it secret, and deliver it from
hand to hand, by a long tradition from their auncesters to their successors.
If we had followed the wisdom of our great and wise Ignatius, we had never
fallen into this inconvenience. For it was his opinion, that we should keep our
selves close and hidden, so that the people might have no knowledge of our
government. To the end, that our ceremonies, or to speak better, our devotions
might be seen of the people, but not read.

Our enemies then spoke of us (if I may so say) but by guess. Now our Bulls and
Constitutions are suffered to come to this and that man's handling, I doubt me
we shall be undone, and whereas many in former time honored us, hereafter
they will abhor us. And this is a point wherein I can not sufficiently praise
our Ignatius his wisdom. For although he had not only deu^sd, but put in
practice his Constitutions for the government of our Order, along while in his
life time, yet would he never publish them, neither came they abroad till after
his death; namely, till after the assembly that we held in Rome in the year
1558. We made account then, that we showed our selves worthy men, but indeed,
there was never any thing done more foolishly, as the event beats witness.

He had besides, another very wise rule, that he would never at any hand,
suffer that any of our Order, should set pen to paper to defend or justify us
when we were accused. It may be he did it in Christian charity, it may be
also in wordly wisdom. Spreta (says the wise Tacitus) exolescum: Si irascare,
agnita videntur. There never was any thing that seemed to be so prejudicial to
our Society, as the censure of the Divines of Paris, in the year 1554. Some
whose fingers itcht at it, would needs have answered it, and those of the
most worthy and sufficient of our Order, who persuaded themselves, that they
should get the better of them: But Ignace, more subtle and wise then they,
Rib. lib. 4. cap. 11.
forbad them very expressly. And it is not to be doubted, but that by this
advise, he got more advantage by silence, then all our blotters and scriblers
of paper since, have done by writing. For it is certain, that this censure by
length of time, was buried in the grave of forgetfulness, if we had not given
occasion to renew it, by pushing as well at the general estate, as at some
particular men in France.

While Ignace lived (as I told you) we were not permitted to set out our
conceits lightly to the view of the world, how well so ever we were persuaded
of them. Now adays, there is none of our Society so mean, but abuses both
his pen and his wit, without considering what good or hurt may redound to the
whole order by his writings. They please themselves in their own conceit, by a
certain itching desire to write, which afterward costs us dear, while they
set abroch many false and erroneous propositions, squared by the rule of their
own follies. And God wot, our ill-willers know too well how to make their
advantage of them.

One John Peter Maffee, first, in the year 1587. and after him, one Peter
Ribadinere, in 1592. did set out the life of our good founder Ignatius, and
Horace Turcelline, the life of Fraunces Xauier, with so many flatteries, (I
must needs say so to my great grief) absurdities, and contrarieties, that I
assure my self, I shall see some man or other ere long, that is full of
leisure and spite, make an Anotomie thereof, to the disgrace of the memory of
those two holy Fathers, and the confusion of our Order. You may think he is as
wise a Priest as our Emanuell Sa, who entiteld himself Doctor of Divinity of
our Society, when he caused his Aphorisms of confession to be printed,
wherein he bragges he had labourd forty whole years.

How many Articles find you among them, that tend not to the desolation of
Kings and kingdoms? If he had been as wise as our first Fathers, these had
been good lessons to whisper into the ears of these Idiots, that take us to
be the great Penitentiaries of the holy Sea, and to such as ordinarily come to
us to confess their great sins: but by blowing abroad all these
circumstances of sins over all his Book, it teaches us, that this Emanuell
Sa, has labourd forty whole years, to make all the world in the end perceive,
that he is none of the wifest.

As for our reverend Father Robert Bellarmin, I acknowledge him to be a very
sufficient man, as one that by his writings, has found means to purchase a
Cardinals hat. But I may say to you, as a thing too true, that he marrs our
market in making his own, as you may perceive by his books of the Translation
of the Empire, and Of the Indulgences of Rome. In the latter of which, he has
touched many particulars, which concern not pardons, and for which he had need
ask pardon of Kings and Bishops. It is not my meaning to offend him by this
speech, but if ever he and I meet together alone, I will speak two or three
words to him in his ear, and request him to write a little more modestly
hereafter, as I assure my self he will do, having now attained to that
which made him write so; were it not, that perhaps he hopes to be Pope one day.
But I think him so wise, that he will not tie his thoughts to such an
impossibility. For the wise Consistory of Rome, will never suffer a Jesuit to
come to that high degree of the Popedom, for an infinite number of reasons,
which I had rather conceal then utter.

Since the sentence pronounced against us, 1494. in Paris, I find five books
set out by our men, the rules whereof are these: 1. The Plea of Master Peter
Versoris, Advocate in the Parliament for the Priests and Scholars of the
College of Clairmont, founded in the University of Paris, plaintiues against
the said university being defendant. 2. The defense of the College of
Clairmo^t, against the Complaints and Pleas printed against them heretofore. 3.
A most humble remonstrance and supplication, of the religious of the Society
of Jesus, to the most Christian King of France and Navarre, Henry the fourth
of that name. 4. The truth defended for the Catholic Religion, in the case of
the Jesuits, against the Plea, of Anthony Arnault, by Frances Montaignes. 5.
An answer made by Rene de la Fon, for the religious of the Society of Jesus,
against the Plea of Simon Marion, made against them, the: 16. of October. 1597.
With other notes upon the Plea, and other matters concerning Stephen Pasquiers
Researches.

Assure your self, there is never a one of these gentle Writers, that in
defending us, accuses us. And although you shall find some tough-points here
and there in others, yet I cannot tell how, every where they savor of a
Scholar. When I have said this, I have said all. Our company pleases not all.
No not many French Catholics. It is a misfortune that accompanies us in the
midst of the blessings we receive of God. But such a misfortune, as we make
well the worse by an other. For if we find any man, that does not like us, by
and by we pronounce him an heretic. It is a new Privilege, that we have
given our selves to turn cursing into religion, and we think our selves
acquitted of it, if we father our injuries upon some counterfeit name. Benot
Arias, a Spaniard, a man that never erred from our Catholic Religion, caused
the Bible to be printed in Antwerpe, 1584. with some points of importance,
wherein he complains of great wrong that was done to him by our Society, Qui
cum sibi soli sapere (says he, speaking of us) soli been viuere, Iesumque
propius insequi and comitari videantur, at que id palam professi iactitent, me
qui minimum atque adeo inutilem Jesus Christi discipulum ago, odi^ b^^^^ gu^^ie.
Atque hi quod ^^^^tem (...) ^^as ba^^ audiat improbar^ audent, aliorum quos ad
came ro^ occulte^ inducere possins, ingenijs and nominibus abutuntur. Who,
thinking themselves only wise (says he speaking of us) that they only live
well, and seem to follow Jesus very near and strictly, and openly make
profession thereof with boasling, hated me without any cause, that am a poor
and unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ. And these men, because they dare not
mislike any man, that is otherwise ^el spoken of abuse the names and wits of
other whomsoever they can under hand persuade to such a course. His meaning is,
that we abuse other, men's pens against him, not daring to deal with him, by
our own. That was our our practice at that time, but since, we have found a
new course, to make books under supposed names; such as those two books that
go under the name of Frances Montagines and Rene de la Fon, which I was not
able to read without choler. And touching that book, that is said, to be made
by Montaignes, I find, that the author made choice of a name fit for his book.

Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. See what a goodly piece of work he
has made, by discovering the secrets both of our simple vow, and that of
chastity, and into what danger he has brought us amongst Kings by committing
their Crowns, to the full and bare disposition of the holy Sea. I will add
hereunto, that as our fingers are still itching, this book is translated into
Latin by one of our order, who has called Montaignes, Montanus, which was the
name of a notorious old heretic, that he might still give our enemies
occasion to speak evil of us. As for la Fon, he that devised that name,
should rather have termed him Fool, so many follies, and flatteries are there
in that book. Stephen Pasquier has writter many books which are well liked,
both in France and in other countries Montaignes in his book Of Truth
defended, makes favorable mention of him. This little fool, la Fon, to
supply his companions default, breaks out with railing on him, worse the^ a
strumpet out of the stews: And I am afraid, Pasquier that has not the gout in
his hand, will not let him be long without an answer. And so there will be
one good ^^rne for another.

Think not so, (quoth I) to the Jesuit, for when I spoke with him of it, he
answered me thus. Sir, my good friend, this disguised Jesuit, is like one of
the Shrouetuesday Maskers, who by the liberty of the day, carry blacking about
them, with which they mark every one that comes in their way; who should be
but a laughing-stocke to the people, if they would be angry at it. My
collections of France, amongst which my Plea is, carry their safe conduct in
their faces; If a man will read them, they will answer for me. If any man will
not read them, let him come to me, and I will answer for them. If any man of
learning, find any obscurity in them, I will think my self honored by him,
if it will please him, to let me clear the doubt to him. For in few words, I
persuade my self, that this Mountebank, thinking to accuse me, accuses
sometime Saint Paul, sometime Saint Luke, one while Lactantius Firmianus, an
other while, Saint Bernard, and venerable Bede: and which is more, their own
fellow Bellarmine, whose authority is of greater worth with them, then Saint
Paul's. It is a singular virtue that Jesuits have, that the further they go,
the more fools thy prove.

Would you know the reason of it? The first lesson, that is taught the^ when
they enter into their nouiceship, is absolutely to acknowledge Jesus Christ,
not only in the person of their General, but also in all other their
Superiors. Now, as soon as ever any of them comes to any degree, he makes
account, that he is to other, such as his Superiors were to him. Insomuch that
he believes, that his f^n^as^^^ll imaginations (...) articles of our faith:
and upon this vain belief, he powers out himself into a thousand fooleries.
Let it suffice you, that I mean not to give life to this abortiue book by my
answer. When their Library was fold at Paris, they ^^^d my Latin Epigram^, in
the s^^t book whereof, they shall find these four verses, which I give for a
full answer to this fool.

Carmine nescio quis not corrodente lacessit,
Respondere sibi me cupit, hand fac^am.
Rursus at ecce magis, magis insectatur and vrget,
Respondere sciat me sibi, dum taceo.
With biting verse I know not who prouokes,
Me to make answer, but I mean to cease.
Yet more and more, he follows me with strokes,
I make him answer, when I hold my peace.
You see (quoth I to the Jesuit) what I can report to you of Pasquiers
answer, whereby you may perceive, that he despises your la Fon. Whereunto
the Jesuit answered. He may deceive himself. For do not think that our Society
is engaged in all the books that I named. The policy we observe in
publishing our books, is this. The Author is like the Quiristers in Cathedral
Churches, which carry the books before others, and after that one of them
has sung a verse, he is followed by the whole body of the Quire. So is it
with our company. He that is the bearer of his book, sings first, imparting it
to the Provincial, the Rector, Fathers, and Regents, as well of the house, as
of the College where they abide. All which by a common consent, contribute
thereto particularly: so that the general frame is the Authors, but the most
part of the several pieces are many other men's. This is the first shape we
give to this matter, after which follows another. For we are expressly for
bid^^ by the consti^^^^^^, to set out any book without our Generals leave. The
book is viewed by him, or by his four Assistants, or by other deputed by him.
In brief, hold it for a most certain ground, that all the books mentioned by
^^^^^ning had this course, are approved by our whole ord^^. If it be so (quoth
I) your order is mer^^ai^ous ignorant, to suffer all these furious books to
run up and down the streets: And there need but a few of these to make your
order come back to the wallet, whence your Historiographers say it had the
beginning. That is the thing (quoth he) that greeues me most of all, to see
that out Superiors, should be so set upon a blind revenge, that thereby they
became fools with fools. But in the mean while, what said Pasquier to that
noble Epitaph, which our De la Fon makes of him, in these words?

Well, let him live yet joyfully, and write and rave if he will against the
Jesuits, he shall doat at last in his old age, until some one of this
Society, or if they disdain it, some other, for the public good, take
agenerall survey of that which he has printed, and a collection of his
follies, rauings, asscheadnes, spightfulnes, haresies, and Machiauelismes, to
erect a Tomb of ba^^full memory, wherein he shall be coffind alive, whither
the Ravens and Vultures may come a hundred leagues by the sent, and to which,
no man may dare to approach by a hundred paces, without stopping his nose by
reason of the stinck: where brambles and b^yers may grow, where Vipers and
Cockatrices may nestle, where the Skriech-howle and Bitter may sing; that by
such a Monument, they that now live, and they that shall live hereafter, may
know, that the Jesuits had for their accuser and slaunderer, a notorious liar,
a capital enemy to all virtue, and all that are virtuous; and that al
slaunderers may learn, by the loss of one proud ignorant fellow to bethink
themselves better of that which they write against religious Orders, and not
impudently to slander the holy church of God, by their infamous and
blasphemous writings.

Do you ask me (quoth I to the Jesuit) what Pasquier said of it? I will
tell you. He said to me in few words, that this Pasport did well beseem a
Jesuits soul: and he was desirous it might be engraven over the gates of all
their Colleges, as a true portraict of their charity: that every man might
know, that they did not name themselves the Society of Jesus without great
reason, who upon the Cross, prayed to God his Father for them that crucified
him.

I and the Jesuit, past the afternoon in these and such like discourses, by
which I perceived that this honest man had many good parts in him, not common
to other Jesuits. Also I found, that there is great difference betwixt him that
being shut up in his chamber, has all his wisdom from his books, and him,
that besides his books, pertakes of wise men's discourses by word of mouth. The
study of the former, has his times of breathing, but the latter, that studies
without studying, has great advantage over the other. For my part, I was
willing to be in his company, and I think I had spent the rest of the day with
him, but that ill hap (envious of my content) deprived me of it, by the coming
of two or three foolish fellows, who began to jest at me, saying, they saw
well my intent was to become a Jesuit. You may be sure of that (quoth I) if all
Jesuits were of this man's temper. So we walked, and talked one thing or an
other, till supper time: during which there was nothing but jesting and merry
talk, all carnest matters being laid aside till next morning: when all of us
being met together in the Hall, every one cast his eyes upon the Advocate,
whom the Gentleman requested to make an end of his carriere, which he did in
such sort as you shall presently understand.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book of the Jesuits Catechism.
CHAP. 1. Touching the Anabaptistrie which is found in the vow that the
Jesuits make, concerning their blind obedience to their Superiors: also, that
by the means thereof, there is not any King or Prince that can defend himself
from their stings.
I Have (says the Advocate) discoursed unto you, touching the Jesuits doctrine
and their coggings, as also, how that obtaining their privileges, they have
maliciously circumuented the holy Sea Apostolic. But I have reserved this
morning time, to treat of the affairs of the state, which they have adjoined
to their doctrine, within which, (by means of their abounding piety that
reigns amongst them) they have also intermingled that lesson which we learn
out of Machiauell, in his Treatise touching a Prince, and in the Chapter of
wickedness. For the murders and killings of Kings and Princes, are as common
among them in their consultations, as amongst the most wicked murderers that
are in the world. Besides, they have given themselves liberty, to trouble
those Realms and Kingdoms, wherein they have once had any footing.

It may be every one amongst us, will much marvel at it, but if you will
examine, (and that without passion) that blind obedience which they vow unto
this Superiors, it shall be an easy matter for you, clearly to see the truth
thereof. And mark I pray you, that I do expressly say, (unto their Superiors,)
because, though they likewise vow the same unto the Pope, yet it is not with so
precise a declaration. And that it is so, you may well perceive by this, that
in the Article which yesterday I read unto you, they speak but once of the
Pope, and many times of their Superiors: So great a desire had Ignatius Loyola
(their first founder and Lawmakers) to teach, how much this obedience ought to
be esteemed of, in regard of themselves, and their own respects.

Concerning which point, I will freely say thus much, that though in France we
admit not this particular obedience of the Jesuits toward the Pope, yet is it
without comparison much more tolerable then the other. For in respect of my
self, I will easily believe this, that the opinions of these great Prelates,
are so well ruled and grounded, that though one should vow unto them, ^he most
exact obedience that can be, yet they would not abuse it. Those Prelates are the
men (the greatest number whereof, coming from mean place) which were for
their virtues, merrits, and sufficiencies, at the first made Bishops,
afterward Cardinals, and at the last advanced to that high throne of the
supreme Pastor. In so much that their faithfulness, holiness, great experiences
and auncientie, have (as it should seem) drayned and dried up in them, all
those foolish passions, which commonly transport and carry us away. But to
speak the truth, I cannot, I dare not, I will not give the like judgment,
touching the Superiors of the Jesuits ^^^le^, because the honor reverence, and
respect that I bear to the holy Sea, forbid me so to do.

Yet notwithstanding, in their Chapter of obedience, as I have already said,
after that they have once mentioned the Pope, they speak of nothing but their
Superiors, that is to say, of their General, their Prouincials, their
Rectors: for these are they, who every one of them in regard of their Order,
bear the name of Superiors over others. And you have already heard, that by
the obedience that the inferior owes them, they are enjoined to believe, that
by their means, the commandment flows from Jesus Christ himself, and that
therefore they ought, even at the twinkling of an eye, not only to obey in
such things of their Order, as bind them, but in all others: yea, that without
lo^^ing or bidding, as we say they should obey, and tie the will to the
execution, and the judgment to the will, to the end, that the inferior may
believe, that the commandment is very iu^^, seeing that is was given unto
him. And who sees not, that this may well be resembled to a dead body, or to
staff that receives no motion, but by an other man's hand: yea to be short,
that this commandment or law is w^^hout eyes. And that therefore, to commit
this abso^^^^ commandment, to an Usher or under offic^^, and that under the
mask of Gods supposed presence, is properly to put a sword into a mad man's
hand.

And when I consider this vow, me thinks I see the Anabaptists, who said, that
they were sent from God, to reform all things from good to better, and so to
reestablish them. And as men that hammer such matters in their heads, they
caused a book of reformation to be published and dispersed. And they had for
their king, John Luydon, and under him, certain false Prophets who were their
Superiors, who made the people believe, that they ^^lked and conferred with
God, sometimes by dreams, s^metimes by lies and forgeries, and that they
undertook nothing but by Revelation from him. Afterward, they breathed their
holy Ghost, into the mouths of those whom they found best fitted for their
furious opinions, distributing and dividing th^^ through their Provinces, as
their Apostles, to draw and bring unto them, the most simple, and easy to
believe, By means whereof, they brought to their lure and whistle almost all
Germany, especially within the t^^^ of Munster, where they had established and
set up their monstrous government, one while commanding murders and
massacrings, and an other while, executing them with their own hands, in which
they pretended nothing but inspiration from God. And going about to make as a
pray unto themselves, all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates of th^^ part of
the world, they published, that they were expressly sent from GOD to drive them
away. Wh^^^upon, they made account to murder them, if men had not prevented
their purposes and practices. Now then tell (...) pr^y you, what does the great
vow of the Jesuits toward their Superiors, else import, but the obedience
of the Anabaptists? For further proof whereof, let us set before us a General
of their Order, who either thoro^^^ certain unruly passion, or particular
ignorance, went (but very ill fauouredly) to make himself a Reformer, as
well of our religion, as of all politic states: who also being in the middle
of his companions, spoke unto them after this manner.

My little children, you know, that I being here present with you to command
you, our Lord Jesus Christ is in my mouth, and therefore that you ought
thoroughly, and in every respect to yield obedience: God powered out his holy
Spirie, upon out good Father Ignace, the better thereby to sustain etc uphold
his Church, which was ready to fall by reason of the errors of the Lutherans;
errors. I say which are spread through al Europe to the great grief of al good
Catholics. Now then ^ith i^ has pleased God, to make us the Successors of
that holy-man, so it beh^^^^^th us, that a^ he himself, so we also, should be
the first workmen, vne^ly to root out the same. We see heresies reign in
many Realms, where also the subject armeth himself against his King. In some
other places we behold Princes tyrannizing over their Subjects. Here a Queen
^^^ogither heretical: not far from her: A King professing the same thing:
and other some feeding us, with far shows and allurements, the more deeply
to deceive us. It belongs to us, yea, to us I say, to defend the cause of God
and of poor subjects, not in some small s^^^blance, as our forefathers have
done, but in good earnest.

They that in former time occupied themselves therein, have drawn a false
skin over the wound, and by consequent have marred all. But we shall do a
meritorious work, to unburden countries, and kingdoms thereof. We must needs
become executione? of the sovereign justice of Almighty God, which will never
be grieved or offended, with any thing that we, as Arbitrers and Executors of
his good will and pleasure shall do, to the prejudice of such Kings as rule
wickedly, and suffer their kingdoms to fall unto them, whom in our consciences
we shall know to be wor^me thereof. How be it, you think not your selves strong
enough in your selves, to execute my commandments, yet at least, let this be
a lesson unto you, that you may teach in the midst of Gods Church. Wherein also
you must employ all the best means you have least the danger, disease, and
Gangrene; get so deep a root, that it will not easily be removed. We shall
at the length find good store of workmen and Surgions, to help us forward
herein. But above al things, apply and refer to this, all holy and necessary
provision of Confession, of Mass, and of Communicating, to the end, that we
may with greater assurance of their consciences, proceed on in this holy work
and busmes. The necessity of the affairs of Christendom commands it, and
the duty of o^^ charge, binds us thereto. These are the aduices and
councels, that I have received, from our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, who
suffered his death and passion for us, and for whose sake, as it were in
counterchaunge, we ought rather to die, then not to rid our selves of these
wicked Princes. And these, even these I say, are the aduises which I have from
God, whose Vicegerencie I exercise and execute over you, though I be unworthy.

I leave here to your own considerations, the places, examples, and
authorities of holy Scripture, which are mistaken, and this Monsiure might
allege. For of this assure your selves, these Atheologians, or maimed Divines,
will no more fail therein, then the Negromancers do, in the invocation of
their spirits, and devils, or in their healing of diseases. And yet all these
matters tend but to Anabaptistrie: or else, to the commandments of that old
dotard of the Mountain, (mentioned in our Chroniclers) and called the Prince
of the Assasines, who charmed and charged his subjects, to kill handsmooth our
Princes that went into the East to recover the holy Land. Whereupon also, there
has remained amongst us, and that even to this day, the word Assasine, as
proper against all murdering Traitors.

But is not all this found in our Jesuits? And is not this doctrine scattered
in the midst of that holy Order? Have we not seen the splintors and shiuers of
it? When the last Prince of Orange was not at the first time slain in
Antwerpe, was not this by the instigation of the Jesuits? And when at the
second time he was slain, in the year 1584. by Balthazar Girrard, borne in
the county of Burgundy? And where also Peter Pan a Cooper, dwelling at Ipres,
was sent to kill Maurice Prince of Orange and Earl of Nassaw, the other
princes s^^^ue, of whom I pray you did they take counsel? As (...) Girrard,
before he was examined he confessed, that he went to a Jesuit, whose name he
knew not, but that he was of a red hair, and Regent in the College of Trers,
who also assured him, that he had conferd touching that enterprise with three
of his companions, who took it wholly to be from God; assuring him, that if he
died in that quarrel, he should be enroled and registered in the Calendar of
the Martirs.

And the second confessed, that the Jesuits of Doway, having promised him, to
procure a Prebend for one of his children, the Provincial gave him his
blessing before he went about it, and said unto him, Friend, go thy ways in
peace, for thou go as an Angel under Gods safeguard and protection. And upon
this confession, he was put to death in the Town of Leyden, by solemn
sentence given the twentie-two of June, in the year 1598. Neither am I
ignorant of this, that the Jesuits will say, that they gave that council to
kill two Princes, who had armed themselves against their King. But I tell them,
that then the King himself must put them to death, be they never so many,
because they were the first enterprisers and attempters of our last troubles in
France, as well against the King that dead is, as against the King that
presently reigns.

But their murders have a further reach then that. For minding to stir up
Robert Bruise, a Scottish Gentleman, e^^her himself to kill, or to cause to be
killed by some other, my Lord John Metellinus, Chancellor to the King of
Scots, even of hatred toward him, because he was the Kings very faithful
subject, they caused the said Bruise, because he would not condescend and
yield unto them, to be summoned, and sore troubled at Bruxelles. And were they
not pertakers with the Iacobin, in the assault and murder that was committed
against the last French King? And have they not at sundry times. and by sundry
means, attempted to take away the (...), of the Lady Elizabeth, Queen of
England? And to be short, have they not done the like against ou^ King, both
by the means of Peter Barrier, and John Ca^^ill? from which, God has
miraculously preserved him. To every of which particularities, I will allow
his proper discourse, and begin the story of their assaults and murders, that
should have been committed by the Scottish Gentleman.

CHAP. 2. Touching an extraordinary process and course, that was held in the
Low Countries, against Robert Bruise, Gentleman of Scotland, upon the accusation
and information of Father William Chrichton, Jesuit, because he would me cause
the Chancellor of Scotland to be murdered.
MEn ordinarily give out, and grant extraordinary process, against such as
murder, or consent to murder, but to procure it, or make it against one that
would not consent thereto, this is the first of that quality that ever was
heard of. And this is the very argument of this present chapter.

A little after the death of Mary Queen of Scots, the late King of Spain,
commanded the Duke of Parma, (who was then Governor for him in the
Lowcountries) to send Robert Bruise, a Gentleman of Scotland, to the Scottish
King with Letters, in the which he promised him, men and money enough, to
revenge him self, for the death of the Queen his Mother, unto who he
protested, that he bare always a singular affection, because she had vowed,
and so declared herself, to the last gasp of her life, to be of our
Catholic Religion: which affection, he would continue to the King her sin
by successiue right: but yet so, as he should promise, to become the
inheritour, of the virtues and religion, of that good and worthy Princess.

My purpose is not largely and by peece-meale, as me say, to meat and declare,
how this matter proceeded, though I have good and faithful* Intelligences of
it. This only I will tell you, that the said Gentleman, had at the same time,
charge of certain great sums of money, for the freight of threescore ships,
to the end, that they might first serve, for transporting of victuals and
munitions into the Low Countries, and afterward, for men of war, which the
Spanyard resolved to send into England, hoping that the Queen of England,
should be assaulted on both sides.

A short time after Bruses arrival in Scotland (he having been all his young
days brought up and nourished with the Jesuits) there came thither, Father
William Crichton, a Scottish man, who some-time had berne Rector of the
College of the Jesuits at Lions. And he was in the company of the Bishop of
Dumblaine, who was sent by Pope Sixtus the 5. to the King of Scotland, to make
him offer of a marriage with the Infant of Spain, so that he would become a
Catholic, and join with them against the English.

My Lord John Metellenus, set himself against this negotiation, and for sundry
good and weighty reasons, councelled his Master not to regard it. Insomuch,
that the Bishop returned thence, without effecting any thing, leaving Crichton
in Scotland, who joined himself with Bruise, and was his companion. And because
he conceived, that Metellenus alone had turned the King from accepting the
offers made him, he purposed to show him a Jesuits ^^ick indeed. And that was
this. A catholic Lord, had invited the King and his Chancellor to a banquet.
Crichton solicited Bruise, if it would please him to lend him so^^ money, to
compass this Lord, that should give order for procuring the slaughter of the
Chauncellor, assuring himself, that by (...) of the money, he should make him
do whatsoever he would.

Bruise flatly refused, and that not only because he was sent to another end,
as he made it appear to him, by the iustructions and memorials which he had
from he Duke of Parma; but also, and that much the rather, by reason of the
shame that would fall out upon the execution of that enterprise: especially, he
having before, made show of friendship and familiarity with the Chauncellor.
Yea that, that murder, would never be thought good and lawful, being
committed in the midst of a banquet, and in the Kings presence, against whom
the iniutie should specially be performed, as well by reason of the small
account they made of his Majesty, as for the slaughter they should commit,
upon a person, who^ he entirely affected for his fidelity and wisdom. And
that if he did this deed, they should minister matter to the King, to
exasperate him against the Catholics, as murtherous, infamous, and traiterous
persons to God and the world, who to that present hour, had received all
bountiful kindnesses and courtesies from their King.

Crichton, seeing he had missed of this his match, we^^ to move him to another,
and to persuade Bruise to give fifteen hundred crowns to three Gentlemen, that
did offer to kill the Chauncellor, after some other less flau^derous and
offensive manner. But Bruise answered him, that, as in respect of the fault or
sin, it was all one, to kill a man with his own hands, and to give money to
procure such a purpose and act to be done. And that for his part, he was a
private person, that had not any authority over the life of any man, and
less over the life of the Chancellor, who was a chief man, in the execution
of the justice of the Land. Furthermore he added, that besides, he had no
charge from the Prince of P^^^^^, to employ his money in such stade ^^d
Merchandise.

Matellinus being w^^beloued of the King his Master, had two offices! to wit,
the Chauncelloure, and the chief Secretaries of estate: and that after his
death, there were two great Lords, worse then he to the Catholic* who being
favored of the King, would part between them the spoil of the other. To be
short, that for an uncertain good thing, which a man might promise unto
himself, he should not accomplish a certain evil thing, no, though a man
were assured of good to come thereby. And seeing the question was* touching the
advancing of Christian religion, this should be the means wholly to ruinate
the same, in as much, as men went about to promote i^, by slaughter and
murder, and that to the great scandale of all in general, and the perpetual
dishonor of the holy order of the Jesuits in special.

And thus spoke Bruise in his conscience, as one that having spent all his youth
in their Colleges, bare them all manner of reverence. And yet Father Crichton,
would not yield for all this: for he and his companions, have they common
places of antiquity (but yet evil alleged) to prove, that murders and such
like wicked practizes are permi^ted. By means whereof, Bruise being more
importuned then before, demanded of him, whether in a good conscience he
might consent to that enterprise, or whether he could dispense there-withall?
To which the Jesuit replied, that he could not but this, that the murder
being committed by him, and he coming to confess himself unto him, he
would absolve him of it.

Then Bruise replied in these (...); Since your reverence acknowledges* that I
must confess my self of it, you also, thereby acknowledge, that I should
commit a sin: and I for my part know not, whether, when I have done it, God
would give me grace, and enable me to confess it. And thereto I verily
believe, that the cofession of an evil, that a man has done of set purpose,
under a^ intent to confess himself thereof, and to have absolution of it, is
not greatly au^lable, and therefore the surest way for me, is not to put my
self into such hazard and danger.

And so my Master Jesuit missed at that time of his purpose. But afterward,
he know very well, to have his revenge for it. For the Duke of Parm^ being
dead, and the County Fuentes a Spaniard, and Nephew to the Duke of Alua,
coming in his place, Crichtou accused Bruise of two crimes before the said
County. The one, that he had ill managed the Kings treasure. The other, that
he was a Traitor, because he would not disburse money, to cause Metellenus to
be slame and this was the principal mark, at which the Accuser aimed. A great
fruit certainly in the Jesuit common wealth, and for which, he was worthily
kept prisones in Bruxells, full fourteen months together. For as concerning
the first point, Crichton made no great account of that: but touching the
second, he to the uttermost stood upon it: and that so much the more, because
the prisoner demind not the crime.

The process had his course. At the last; after that Bruise had been a long
time troubled and afflicted, the prisons were opened to him, and he was set
free, but not with any command to that holy Father the Jesuit, no not so much
as to repayte his good nume, or to pay his costs, damages, or losses
whatsoever. The reason whereof was)* (as a man may easily believe it) that
having attempted this devout accusation, he did nothing at all therein, but
that which might be directly referd to the holy propositions of his own Order.

CHAP. 3. Concerning the murder, which William Pa^^y a^ ^man (thrust ^^the^^^
by the Jesuits) (...) against Elizabeth. Queen of England in the year ^^84.
HE that writ the humble temons^^ance and petition to the King* (minding to
make it appear, that men slaunde^ou^^y accused the Jesuits, of having a
purpose, to attempt any thing against the Queen of England, says thus In
respect of English people, those that (...) ^^rite of these matter, (...)
witness our faithfulness and never yet durst accuse us of attempting any thing
against the Queen in her estate; and those that meant to calum^^^^ and charge
us there with all, could never fasten their lies and leasings upon out
b^b^^^^^s, and cause g^t of (...) selves, by any probable or likely reason of
truth*

But now I will show, that this Jesuit, is a second Heredotus. And let him not
think but I do him great honor, when I resemble him to that great personage,
who^ men say, was the first Father of a lying history.

William Parry. Doctor in the Laws, a man full of understanding, but ye^ more
full of his pleasures and delights, after that ^e had consumed all his own
stock and substance, and the greatest part of his wiue^ also, ye^, and charged
with a great contro^^s^e and question, against H^gh Hare, Gentleman of the
Temple, purposed in the year 1582. to take the mind and to fail into Pr^^^ce,
where being arrived, and come particularly to the city of Paris, and
purposing to be familiar with certain Enlish Gentleman, that ^^^^led ou^ of
their Co^^^^y for their religion, they doubted to be familiar with him,
thinking that he came expressly to them to spy out their actions. By means
whereof, he took his journey to Lions, and from thence to Venice, where, even
at his first entrance, because he was an Englishman, he was put into the
Inquisition: but he yielded so good an account touching Catholic religion,
that his Judges found he had a desire and duty to return: being ^^beloued of
all the Catholics, and particularly, of Father Bonnet Palmeo, a Jesuit of
great reputation amongst his own brother hood. After wards, he took a conc^t,
to do such an act, as be once did that in old time burned the Temple of Diana
at Ephesus; that so he might be spoken of for it. He plotted to kill the
Queen, his natural Lady and Sovereign, and by the same means, to set fire
on and in the fo^^e corners and quarters of England, making this the ground
work of his practice and enterprise, and that as well to deliver his
Country, from tyranny and oppression, as to advance to the Crown, Marie the
Queen of Scots, who was a Catholic Princess, and ^erest of the blood to
succeed. An oponion and conceit, that came from his own instinct and motion,
without acquainting the Scottish Queen any whit at all before his departure,
as he afterward confessed, when he was in person. But because, this
enterprise and attempt was very hawtie, and that he undertook it with a great
blow to his conscience before God, he conferred hereof with Palmi^ the Jesuit,
(who according to the ordinary Maxim and principle of that Sect) did not
only, not discourage or turn him therefrom, but greatly confirmed him, and
provoked thereto: affirming, that there was nothing in that buisines, that
could hinder him, unless it were protracting and delay. After this, he took
again the way to Lions, where, discovering himself to the Jesuits, he was
greatly praised and honored of them. A little while after, he returned to
Paris, where certain English Gentlemen, that were fugitives out of their
country, understanding of his purpose and practice, began to embrace him: and
by name, Thomas Morgan, who assured him, that so soon as he should be in
England, and should have executed his ^^teprise, he would take order, that a
puissant army should pass out of Scotland, to assure the kingdom to the
Queen of Scotland.

Now, though that Parrie seemed altogether resolute, yet was he in some sort
hindered by* sundry remorses of his conscience. And indeed, ^he communicated
the same, to certain Englishmen, that were Ecclesiastical persons, who all
labouned to remove him from it, and particularly a learned Priest, named
Watell, who wisely declared and showed unto him, that all the rules of God, and
the world, were directly contratie to his deliberation and purpose. In this his
irresolution and want of s^^^ednes, he purposed to confer with the Jesuits of
Paris: amongst whom he addressed himself to father Hanniball Coldretto, to
whom also in confession he discovered his first advice and council, and the
uncertainty into which Watell had brought him. But the Jesuits, that lacked not
perswasiue reasons, maintained unto him, that Watell, and all the other, that
put these scruples into his mind* were heretics. And having again set him
in his former course, caused him (according to their ordinary custom in such
cases) ^o^eciue the Sacrament, with diverse other Lords and Gentlemen. The
English man being thus persuaded, took his leave of them, and returned into
England, fully purposed to bring his treason to effect and issue, whereunto the
better to attain, he sought all the means he might, to kiss the Queens
Majesty's hand, saying that he had certain things of very great* importance,
to acquaint her withal. And this was about the month of Februatie, in the
year 1585. At the last, being brought before her Maistie, he largely
discoursed unto her, the history of his travail, and how, that counterfaiting
the fugitive, he had discovered all the practices and plots, that the English
Catholics had brewed or devised against her Majesty; yea, that he had
promised them, that he would be the first that should attempt her death, which
had purchased him very great credit amongst them. And yet notwithstanding,
that he would rather choose a hundred deaths, then to defile his soul with so
damnable at thought.

He was a well spoken man, of a good countenance, and such a one, as had
prepared himself to play his part, not upon the sudden, but well provided. The
Queen (who wants not her spies) knew, that one part of that which he had
spoken; was very true; which also caused her to credit the rest: and
graciously accepting of that honest liberty and freedom, which he pretended,
charged him not to depart far from the Court: and that in the mean season,
he should by letters, sound the affections of her enemies: which thing he
promised, and undertook to do: and upon this promise, feeding the Princess
with goodly shows, he did many times talk very privately with her. And
amongst other, she going one day to hunt the fallow Dear, he followed her,
never suffering her out of his eye. At last, being a good way, from her own
people, and dismounted from her horse, to refresh her self at the foot of a
tree in the wood. Parry being nigh unto her, twice had a desire to kill her;
but he was withold therefrom, by that gracious familiarity which her
Majesty used toward him. At another time, he walking after Supper with her*
in the garden of her Palace; called white Hall, which stands upon the Thames
side, (where also be) had a boat ready, with the greater speed to save him;
and to carry him away, when he had given the blow, as also he sought
opportunity for it) the Queen escaped from him to this manner.

He supposed, to draw her somewhat far from the the house, and that then he
would kill her, at the gardens end. But she returned toward her Palace, and
said unto him, that it was time to betake her to her chamber, being troubled
with heat, and the rather, because she was the next day, to take a bath by the
appointment of her Physicians: And thereupon laughing, she withal added, that
they should not draw so much blood from her, as many people desired. And with
this speeth she with drew her self, leaning Parrie much arnazed at this,
namely, that he had failed, in that his so worthy an enterprise.

Now as he behaved himself after this manner about the Q. he supposed, that he
wanted a trusty friend to second him in his attempt, and thereupon he addressed
himself to his friend Edmond Neuill, an English Gentleman, who for his
Religion and conscience sake, had his part amongst the afflictions and troubles
of England, whom also he diverse times visited: and after that he had sworn him
upon the Evangelists, not to reveal or discover that which he should tell
him, did particularly, and by peace-meale discourse to him, his whole
intention, and provoked him to take part with him therein, as one that had
great reason, lively to feel the injuries that had bin c^^mi^^ed against him:
And that this was the time and outly ^^^ane to reestablish the Catholic
Religion in England, and to set up there the Queen of Scotland: and that in
doing this, both of them should have a good portion in the booty that should
be divided. But Nenill, could at no hand well favor or like of this new
counsel. Whereupon; Parrie demanded of him, whether he had Father Allens
book, which would stand him in steed of a continual spur, to provoke him to
this enterprise, though that of himself, he were not well disposed and
prepared thereto, that by that book, i^ was permitted to excommunicate Kings,
and to depose them, yea; and to constrain and enforce them: and that civil
wars for the cause of Religion were honorable and lawful. I have very good
and ready access to the Queen, said he, as you also may have, after that you
are once known in Court. After that we have given the blow, and done the deed,
we will get into a boat, which shall be ready for us, to go down the River
withal, and from thence, we will be embarked unto the Sea, which you and I may
easily do, upon my credi^, without trouble or hindrance. Neuill, entertaining
him with goodly words, and fair promises, yet never giving him an absolute
yea, or nay, at the last resolved with himself, no longer to delay the matter,
but to advertise the Queen thereof: unto whom upon the eight of February
1584. he related all that had passed between him and Parries, who that night
supped with the Earl of Lei^^ster. The Queen being much amazed thereat,
commanded Walsingham, her chief Secretary of estate, to apprehend both the
one and the other, and yet notwithstanding, to deal gently with Parrie, the
better to draw the truth from him. Which also he did, declaring unto him, that
the Queen had received some new intelligence, of a conspiracy against her.
And because the discontented Sect, had some good opinion of him, he prayed him
to tell him, whether he had heard any thing thereof. And being twice or th^^ce
asked* touching the matter, he said, that he understood nothing of it at all.

If he had confessed the story* touching himself and Neuill, and for excuse
had joined this unto it, that what he had done therein, was done colourably,
and that so he used it, the better to sound the opinions of them, that hatched
some coffeehouse in their minds, Walsingham said afterward to sundry
persons, that they, had sent him away, fully clewed and absolved. But having
stoutly denied it, he set before his eyes Neuils deposition, which greatly
astonished him; and so for that night became his host, to hold him fast. On the
morrow morning; Parrie went to him in his chamber: and told him, that he
remembered, that he had held some discourse with Neuill, touching a point of
doctrine, contained in the answer that was made, to the book entitled, The
execution of Justice in England: by which a^^swere it was proved, that for the
advancement of the Catholic Religion, it was lawful to take away a Princes
life: But for his own part, he never spoke word touching any enterprise
against the Queen. Parrie and Neuill, were sent to diverse prisons, the latter,
because he concealed, that conspiracy six: months and more, the former, for
the treason whereof he was accused: both the one and the other were examined,
and afterward upon charge given unto them, they put down their confessions
in writing. Neuill did it the 10. of February, and Parrie the 11. and the 13.
Neuils contained the subornations, pursuits, and procurements, that Parrie had
made in respect of him: Parrie his, that he had first plotted this Treason at
Venice, being heartned thereto, by the exhortations of Palmio the Jesuit: and
that he was afterward confirmed therein, by the Jesuits of Lions: and at the
last he was wholly soeled in it, by Hanniball Coldretto, and other Jesuits of
Paris: where, upon this devotion, he had been first confessed, and afterward
received the Sacrament. And this is one point, that me thinks should not be
kept in silence, that being demanded and examined by his Judges, he
acknowledged, that when he first discoursed with, and discovered unto the
Queen, the conspiracies, that the fugitive Catholics practiced against her,
that so they might be brought again to their houses, she answered him, that
it was never her mind, to deal hardly with any for religion, but because that
under the color and shadow thereof, they had purposed to attempt mischievous
matter, against her and her state: and that for the time to come, none should
be punished for the Popes Supremacy, so long only, and so far forth, (...)
they carried themselves, like good and faithful subject. Neuill being called
again, and confronted before Parrie, persisted in his deposition, and yet it
was of no great weight whether he had done so or no, but frustrati^e rather and
needless. For Parrie had confessed enough, yea, there was found in his house,
sundry letters, instructions, and memorials, which condemned him. Besides,
whiles he was in prison, he wrote letters to the Queen, by which he very
humbly besought her, to absolve him from the fault, but not from the punishment
which it deserved.

There were appointed unto him for his Judges, Sir Christopher Wray, Knight,
Lord chief Justice of England, and diverse other great Lords of note and mark,
who caused him to be brought from the prison to Westminster, and there again
being asked and examined, in the presence of all the people, he confessed his
treasons: yea, there were read unto him, his former confessions, and the
letters that he had sent to that purpose, and other writings, tending to
verify upon him the offense wherewith he was charged; all which, he confessed
to contain truth in them: adding withal, that there had not been any
conspiracy, for the matter of Religion, from the first year of the reign of
the Queen, till then, whereof he was not partaker, excepting that touching the
Agnus Dei, or Bull rather: and that besides all this, he had put down his
opinion in writing, touching the Successor to the Crown, that so he might
the better stir the people to rebellion. This criminal cause, was in
handling, from the eight day of February, in 84. until the 25. of the same
month. Upon which day, Parrie was condemned to behanged by the neck, and that
the rope presently should be cut in two, and that he should be ripped up, and
his bowels taken out, and cast into the fire, and burned before his eyes, and
that afterward his head should be cut off, and his body hewn into four
quarters, and that he should be drawn upon a hurdle, from the prison, all
along the City of London, till he came to the place of execution. This
sentence was then pronounced against him, but yet it was not presently
executed. But the second of March, Parrie was committed to the power of such as
execute sovereign Justice: whereof being advertised by the Sherieffes of
London and Middlesex, he arrayed himself (as if a man had been going to a
mourning) with a fair long gown of black Damask, and set upon the stock of
his shirt a great cuffe curiously set, such as was never at that time in the
land. And taking his leave of other prisoners, he did with a gallant
countenance, offer for a present, to the Lieutenant of the Tower, a Ring: In
which there was set, a rich Diamond, delivering it with this speech, that he
was greatly grieved, that he was not able to pleasure him more. From thence he
was drawn upon a h^^dle to the place of execution, and being upon the ladder
some say, that he prayed the hangman that assayed to (...) the rope about his
neck, that he would not disorder or mar his cuffe: and thus died this great
Martyr of the Jesuits, promising to himself nothing less then Paradise, for
this his detestable enterprise.

And thus have I related unto you a history, of 14. or 15. months, for he
returned into England, in the month of January 83. and he was executed in
March 84. Master Antho^ie Arnauld, in his pleading, obiecteth against the
Jesuits this attempt and wicked fact whereunto Montaignes. that wrote against
him, has answered nothing at all, acknowledging by his silence, that the
objection was very true. For in objections of less consequence and weight, he
answers, and sp^reth him not. He that made The defense of the College of
Clairmont, confesses, that Parrie was put to death for that pretended treason:
but yet it was a charitable work done to him, by the deadly enemies of the
Ies^its: which indeed is nothing else but to cover himself with a wet sack.
The process against him, is kept in the Records* and Roles of Justice: And
particular enmity or hatred, could not easily prevail so far, that there he
should be condemned to death, who by his dissimulations and hypocrisies, had in
some sort gotten the Queens favor. But now ye shall hear an other tragedy,
played against the very self same Princess and Queen.

CHAP. 4. Of an other assault and murder, procured in the year 1597. by the
Jesuits against the Queen of England.
THe Jesuits miracle, when they converted Parrie, was great; but yet not so
great, nor yet of so good stuff, as that which I will now declare unto you:
for Parrie in his last confessions acknowledged, that he had had, part in all
the conspiracies, that for religion were directed against the Queen; except it
were one. But this man, of whom I will presently speak, always was and had
bin, of the religion of England, and yet notwithstanding, he was by an English
Jesuit, not only happily turned to our religion, but also induced to kill his
own Queen. Insomuch, that if his enterprise had taken good effect, it had
deserved, to be joined to the book of miracles that Jews Richeome, of the
Society of Jesus, made and published.

Edward Squ^^^, Englishman, who (...) acquaintance and place in the Q^^^he^
stable, did in the y^^^e ^^95 ^mbarque himself in the ^^e^^e with Dr^^^ to the
Newfound world. The Vessel wherein Squire was, being by the fortune of the
Sea scattered from the rest, he was taken at Gad^^ap, and was brought as a
prisoner or captive into Spain: where being breathed upon and favored by
Father Richard Wallpole, a man of great authority there, he was set at full
liberty, by the intercession and suit of that Jesuit, who began to dog and
watch him, and to deal with him: notwithstanding, finding him firm in his
English religion, he procured another prison for him, which went to, or
touched the conscience. And being committed to the Inquisition by interposed
persons, he knew so well and skilfully to handle him, that at the last he
became Catholic, perhaps upon no other respect or devotion, but that he
might get out of prison. Whatsoever the matter or manner were, there is nothing
in all this but praise worthy to the Jesuit.

Now, having gotten this first advantage against him; he suffered him not to
breathe, but sought out all sorts of cunning. to make him fall into his Nets,
declaring unto him the afflictions of the English Catholics that were in that
Country; and more particul^rly, of them that had forsaken it, and all their
goods, to the end they might live in the liberty of their conscience: and that
the Earl of Essex (then great Marshall of England, and afterward Viceroy of
Ireland) was the chief Author of all these evils and miseries: that he must
rid the country of him by poison, and that he would give him the means to
archiue thereto, without hazard or danger.

Whereunto, having in some sort persuaded him; he proceeded further, and
treated with him concerning the Queens life, which also he might as easily
bring to an end as the Earls. That this also should be a goodly sacrifice to
God* and that Squire need not fear the ^^^ger of his life or person, by reason
of the means which h^^ had opened unto him. And though this his enterprise
might fall out otherwise then he might desire, yet he should assure himself,
that he should change his present condition, into the state of a glorious Saint
and martyr in Paradise.

And he persued him in such earnest and continual manner with his persuasions,
that in the end, he made him to yield to his will and pleasure. And seeing
him now and then to wa^er* he oftentimes confessed or shro^^ him, to confirm
him therein: declaring further unto him, that he should no more admit any
co^sultation with himself, touching this point, because he was quiet in his
conscience, and that he should no more make question of it whether it were good
or ill, but stand upon the maintenance and upholding of his vow: wherein if
he failed, he should commit an unpardonable sin before God, and throw,
himself headlong into the deep pit of hell; alleging for that purpose unto
him, the example of Iephtha, who liked rather to kill his daughter, then to
infringe the vow he had made.

This poor miserable man, being thus dealt withal, passed at the last his
settled resolution to the Jesuits, who caused him yet once again to come to
confession or shrift, as the perfection of that their holy plot; he gave him
his blessing, comforted him, and put his left arm about his neck, and with
the right hand making the sign of the cross, after that he had mumbled
betwixt his teeth certain words in Latin, he said distinctlie in English:
My son, God bless thee, and make thee strong; be of good courage, I pawn
my soul for thine: and being either dead or alive, assure thy self thou
shall have part of my prayers. Upon this embracing, Squire took leave of
Wallpole, and returned into England.

Now the instruction that the Jesuit has given him, was touching a secret
poison, between two hogs bladders, which he gave him for a present: with
charge, that he should not touch it, but gloued, least he poisoned himself:
and that when the Queen would go to horseback, he should make sundry small
holes in the first bladder, with which he should rub the pummell of her
saddle, assuring himself, that of necessity the Queen laying her hand
thereupon, and bringing it to her face, this poison should be of such power,
that she should die thereof. And that he must do the like to the Earl of
Essex, who prepared himself to set sail for the Islands of Terseras, and had
gathered great troops when Squier arrived: who presenting himself to the
counsel of estate, and seeing he was very favorably received at his arrival,
he purposed to put in execution, his design and practice against the Queen,
before the Earl should take shipping, whom also he meant to follow in that
voyage: supposing, that if the poison did not work, but with length of (...),
and brought forth the effects thereof whiles he was absent, he should be
altogether free from suspi^ion. Upon this conceit, he watched all the means to
work his enterprise: he understood that the Queen would go abroad on
horseback, and entered thereupon into the stable; where also he found the horse
sadled? Then making show to see all things fit and neat, he rubbed the pummell
with the bladder, that was hid under his hand, which also was covered with a
glove, all according to the instruction that the father his Confessor had given
him; and as he was occupied about this work, he sing and said aloud, God give
the Queen long life, repeating that word sundry times. But God would not that
the poison should work. But for all this, the wicked man let not his hope go,
but supposed it would declare the working of it in some time afterward. Upon
which opinion he embarked himself six days after. And as the E^^l^ was at
the Sea between Fayall and Saint Michaell, and was ready to go to dinner,
Squier rubbed the leaning places of his chair with the same poison. And it
so^^l our, that (...) suppertime, the Earl found ^^at^so menes, and distaste
in himself whereupon Squier supposed that he had gotten the goal, but he was
deceived in this, even (...) he was in the first attempt.

Moreover, many months possed away and Wa^^pole received no news touching the
Queens death: wherefore supposing that Squier had mocked him, herefo^^ed to
revenge himself upon him therefore* and did expressly send an other English
man, who affirming that he was escaped out of the Spanish Inquisition, related
particularly and laid open all this conspiracy: and that he was of purpose
come from thence, to aduertize the Queen thereof. And though at the first,
some supposed, that this was but some stuff or scout, hole invented, by some
one o^ other of Squiers enemies, yet (as in a ma^^er of such consequence, men
may not countenance any thing, plain process was made thereof and upon this
re^^ne he was taken, and men were thereby better informed, touching the truth
of this point. And perceiving himself convicted, by such as held and
determined truth against him, and being also enforced by his own conscience,
he confessed all the matier even as it, was. And in the end, was by sentence
condemned to death, and executed in the year, 1598. A punishment indeed fi^
and meet for a Jesuit, and yet very admirable also, that the Queen of
England, had not intelligence of this treason by any other, then by him that
had given the first counsel touching the same. And if Richeome would credit
me, he shall add this miracle to his book.

CAAP. 5. That the Jesuits do at this day make show to condemn their wicked
doctrine, in all things concerning either the murdering of Princes, or
rebellion against their States.
BEfore the coming of Iusuits into our country, we knew not what it was,
handsmoth, as we say, to kill Kings and Sovereign Princes. This is a certain
kind of Merchandise and ware, that has come out of their ships, by reason of
that wicked vow of blind obedience, which they make to their Superiors,
Insomuch, as Princes laws depend at this day, upon the good mind of these
honest people. And though their profession be, as you have heard, yet do they
at this day in their books disaduance the same with many goodly speeches, of
which they are never without store. And because amongst all manslaughters and
murders, there is none more plain and evident, then these that Barriere, and
afterward Chastell, meant to commit against our Kings, I will first deal with
that of Barriere, concerning which Montaignes speaking, says that it was a
deceit or coozning, and that the Jesuits are altogether clear of it.

The truth is (says he aunswering Arnault) that Barriere deposed that he had
asked council of a Jesuit, Chap. 59. in his book of Truth defended.
concerning his purpose and practice, that is true indeed: for he came to
Varade a Jesuit of Paris, from whom, he was sent away and sharply reproved: he
declaring by his countenance and speech, that he was so far carried against
him in it, that he would not hear it in confession or shrift. This also is
true (which you made no account to deliver) that this man Barriere, asked
advice of all the world touching his enterprise, and that long time before he
did it, caused to assemble at Lions, the Divines on the other side of Saon,
there to have their advice therein, where there was not one Jesuit present.
Also, that in the Church of Saint Paul in the same City, he caused his
funerals on the second day of August to be solemnly kept, leaving there his
black scarf, and arms, as the badges and pledges of the fore-pretended
victory that would follow. Again, that he deposed, that a Jesuit of Lions,
dissuaded him from that enterprise. All which things declare in that act, the
vanity of this man, and the innocence of them, whom thou have accused, with
so cruel amplifications, and exaggerations, all tending to manifest the
ouer-running of of thy lying tongue. And though there were such a disposition
(as indeed there was not) and that it were as forcible against the Jesuits, as
any thing in the world could be, yet being wrung from them by torture and
torments, it was not any matter of importance forcible, soundly to prove it.

This Jesuit Montaignes, denies the fact: the reason is, because every
villainous and foul fact, must be denied. And he reproves Arnauld of lying,
though in all that, which I have already laid down out of him, there is not
so much as one word of truth. Let us go forward to the sentence of
condemnation, which the second Jesuit gives against his own Order, in the
very humble petition which he presented to the king.

The second crime (says he) concerning your Majesty in particular, is more
tedious and troublesome, and indeed had more need to be confuted, for to say
that we are enemies to Kings and states, without mentioning particular of
special points, is to form a proposition of too large a reach, and which
cannot easily be defended: but to affirm it in the special, will draw the
point into a narrow room. And therefore our enemies have endeavored, to bring
us within the limits and listes of the particular, saying, that we are the
enemies of your Majesty in particular, and of the state. The general
porposition, would serve for hound and horn to set the game on foot: But the
particular proposition, would blow the fall of the Dear, and finish the chase.
Sir, before in this place we declare our innocence, we humbly beseech your
Majesty, that that which is already past, specially if you hold an opinion,
that you have forgoteen and forgiven it, may not be prejudicial to our
justification.

May it please your Majesty to remember, the answer full of magnanimity of
one of your ancestors, which is in every man's mouth, by reason that it is
worthy to be noted. It behooves not a King of France to pursue the quarrels
of a Duke of Orleans. Sir, you are no less courageous then this King was,
neither shall you have less praise, but rather greater, if you vouchsafe to
say: it behooves not the King of France to revenge the quarrels of the King of
Navarre, nor the eldest son of the Church, to be incensed against all, by
reason of one man's opinion repugnant to the same Church.

May it please your Majesty then, to show us that wonted favor which you have
extended unto all your subjects, and to bury in everlasting forgetfulness,
every thing which happened in that season. May it please your Highness, here to be
informed, that we never intended any thing against your Royal person in
particular, as our adversaries have sought often times to prove against us,
and yet could never do it: And that amongst all things whatsoever, which the
Clergy, the Preachers and others, have done or said, we have said or done
far less then they reported of us unto you; and that they always carried a
tange rather of a bad gloss, then of a true text in whatsoever they did or
said. For if they now dare at high noone, and in the bright Sunshine of our
peace, charge truth with a thousand inventions contrary to truth indeed: what
might they have done then, when as amidst all the rumors and foggie clouds of
war, lying had his full course without encounter? and where truth durst not
show it self. For the time of war, is the time of lying, says the old
proverb.

If happily we may obtain that of your Majesty, we do thereby obtain the
upper hand, and the second accusation will be without force: for it has
nothing to uphold it from falling to the ground with the least touch. For by
what argument can they prove, that we in particular are enemies against your
Majesty? From what spring do they mean this hatred must proceed? And from
what premises do they infer this conclusion? Is it by reason that you are a
King? Why, our Society honors Kings: and this is approved by witnesses, by
experience, and by reason. Is it because that you are the eldest son of the
Church? We respect this quality as much, yea and rather more then the first.
Is it by reason that you are King of France? France is our native country,
and you as King are our Father. Whom shall we love, if we love not our Father
and mother? Is it by reason that you are a worthy warrier, and Captain of
Kniges, and King of Captains? This virtue makes it self at all times to be
beloved both of friends and foes. Is it by reason that you are mild in your
conversation, wise in your sentences, free in your manners, steadfast in your
promises, prompt in your actions, ready to labor, bold in danger, forward in
combat, moderate in victory, and in every thing royal? These qualities cannot
engender or bring forth hatred. but on the contrary, they are amiable in all,
but admirable in the person of a King.

This speech was appropriated in particular, to the Kings own royal person;
and a little before, near the same place, is another sentence, by which this
honest man the Jesuit vpheld, that men had wronged them, in imputing unto them,
to have as it were wrastled against the state. To these witnesses, dread
Sovereign, we add a second argument taken from the cause. Whereupon we
building, do demand, what true likelihoode there is in our profession, that
we should be enemies of Kings and of their States. Are we so ignorant of the
law of God, that we know not, that it is God that gives them? that by him
kings do govern, and by him Legifers make and give good laws? That both the
name and action of a king is a right of patronage proper to the Divine and
Supreme Majesty? and that kings bear in their royalty the image of God; and
in this calling God wills us to obey them, to honor and serve them for the
safety of their persons and the State. And if we know these things, having
both preached and written them, and again do preach and write them: how may
it be that we have so little conscience, as to hate that, which we believe that
God loves: to despise that, which he allows; to destroy that which he
maintains; to have so little judgment, as to publish one thing and do
another? Are we to be reputed religious? Nay, rather more heathenish then the
heathens themselves, then Canibals and Mainelnes, who though they can do
nothing, but show hatred and revenge, yet do they notwithstanding love their
Princes.

I praise those two sentences, (Jesuit be thou whatsoever thou art) and would
to God, that thy soul were as clean, as thy wit is fine, and as I perceive
thy words to be smoothly couched together. I cannot but love thee, inseeing
thee draw to the life, the counterfeit of those singular and admirable virtues
of soul and body, which shine in our King: and with all I must honor thee,
in seeing thee set out the picture of Obedience, which the subject owes unto
King. And sure if thy heart and my pen agree, I know thou will condemn them
all that would have attempted any thing against the person of this great
Prince, who has not yet met with his paragon, as one who in martial prowess,
has far surpassed all others. Thou carriest too noble a mind (were it not that
thou art a Jesuit) to Judge of it any otherwise. Go to now, I will show thee,
that all that which thy fellow has said, in his Truth defended, is but a
stark lie: for that which touches the deed of Barrier when he came to murder
this king, whom thou so much exaltest, was contrived by the express counsel of
thy fellows, and copartners. Not only then, when he was but simply king of
Navarre, but since he was called to the Crown of France, and reduced into the
bosom of our Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church. If again I show unto
thee, the general rebellion of France, enterprized under the title of the
holy League, which was first begun after conducted by your holy religious
persons, against one Henry the third, King of France, one of the most
Catholic kings that ever France enjoyed, what judgment will thou pass
against thy own party? I remit it even to thy own conscience, yea to the
conscience of any good Catholic, that is not a cloaked Jesuit: Nay further I
say, that these two parties, are the only vpholders of your condemnation, and
upon them grounding my opinion, I take upon me directly to show, that to
establish you again in France, were great lack of judgment and experience. I
will therefore lay down these two points in order, and first I will begin with
Barriere: afterward with Chastell: then with the Universal revolt, of the
which you Jesuits (take it amongst you) were the first authors within this
Realm.

CHAP. 6. A prodigious history of the detestable paricide attempted against
King Henry the fourth of that name, the most Christian King of France and
Navarre, by Peter Barriere, for the raising up of Jesuits.
I Will recite unto you faithfully this history of Barriere, and that you may
believe me, I will speak it upon peril of my goods, of my body, and of mine
honor: for I have learned it of a friend of mine whom I esteem of as my self,
which was then present at Melun, when this deed was done: and who spoke twice
unto Barriere in the presence of Lugoly his Judge, who saw him executed to
death, heard all that he maintained during the time of his tortures, until the
last breathing of his life, who handled the knife of the which I will hereafter
speak, who since drew out the Copy of his trial, and who by posts sent it
with speed, by commandment of the King, to make it manifestly known through
all this Realm; and lastly, being drawn forth, he made me partaker of a Copy
thereof which I have kept unto my self: and thus it is.

The King, having made peace with God, and truce with those that were his
enemies, took his progress from the city of S. Denis, to come to
Fountane-bleau, and as he entered Melun, he was advertised by Lodowic
Brancaleon, an Italian Gentleman, unto him unknown, that a soldier departed
purposely from Lions to kill him: He told the King, that he had not only seen
the party, but that he had drunk twice with him in the Iacobins Covent. And
besides he said, that this man was of a tall stature, mighty and strong of his
joints: his beard was of an abrun color: he had on a Spanish leather Ierkin,
and a pair of Oringe-tawney culloured stockings upon his legs. The King not
easily astomshed, yet full of prudence, sent for Lugoly, being then Lieftenant
general of the long gowns in the Prouostie of the Altar. To whom when he had
recited that which he had understood, commanded him to make a privy search
through the City, for this man who had been thus set forth and thus
described unto him.

The same day, the reporter saw this fellow whom he looked for in the Kings
house; but as he was in the midst of many people, so lost he the sight of him
unawares, as God would, to the end the party should be remitted until the next
day. Which Traitor, having lodged in a Hamlet, a part of the ruinated suburbs
of S. Liene, as he would have entered the City by S. Jobs gate, he was taken
upon presumption of the fore-saide marks. This was the 27. of August, 1593.
Lugoly caused him to be put in prison, where he examined him: and finding him
some. what variable, caused yrons to be put on his hands and feet, as the
importance of the matter did require.

Presently after his departure. Anna Rousse the Iaylors wife, asked the
prisoner what he would have to dinner: He answered her, that he would neither
eat nor drink, unless that he might have poison brought him. This answer
being well noted of the assistants, caused him more to be suspected, and his
actions more narrowly to be looked into. Amongst the rest, there was a Priest
prisoner, called Master Peter the Ermite, who according to the loosenes of the
time* became a soldier determined for the League, Barriere, having learned of
him, that they were both of one Society; acquainted himself with him. So,
after some conference the priest enquired of him if he had not a knife; the
other thinking to have met with his mate, answered him yea, and at that
instant time drew forth from his hose a knife, whereof the making was thus,
the blade thereof very strong about two inches near unto the handle, having a
back as other knives have, and the rest of the knife being five inches long,
di^^cut on both sides like a two edged sword, the point was made in manner of a
Barley corn, or poynard: the knife of a right murderer, as one who would not
fail of his stroke. The Priest in a smiling manner told him, it was a fit
knife to pair nails, but if it were seen it would be his death. Barriere now
requested him to lay it up for him, the which the other did promise him. But at
the same instant, he sent for Lugoly, unto whom he discoursed what had happened
betweeene them, and delivering the knife into his hands, Lugoly informed and
examined the Iailors wife, touching the poison, the Priest touching the knife,
and the Italian Gentleman of that which had past at Lions the 28. of August.
The prisoner being diverse times examined, you shall understand, that in all his
examinations, he named himself Peter Barriere, alias, La Bar, borne at
Orleans: by his first trade, a Basket-maker, and since that, enticed by one
Captain De la Cour, being in a Ladies service, whom he forsook and became a
soldier of the company of the Lord of Albigny, the space of one whole year
making wars for the League, until he was taken by the Lord De la Guest,
Governor of Issoire, where he remained some certain days. And from the time
that he served this great Lady, he had purposed to kill the king, either with
knife or pistol, in the midst of his Guards. By which act, he thought, to have
made a great sacrifice to God, in killing a King of a contrary religion to his
own. Upon which motion, being sent back again by the Lord De la Guest, he
intended to pass by Lions, where he would inquire of some religious, if he
might justly kill the King, being converted to our religion: to whom was
answered, no. And being constrained in the same place to sell his cloak, and
a pair of silk slockings to get him victuals, from Lions he passed by
Burgonie, then to Paris, and in the end, arrived at Melun, where he had lien
in a barn near Saint Liens Church. Near which place, a little before he had
received the blessed Sacrament at Bricontre-robert upon a working day, and that
he was come to the kings Court to seek a master. And that if he were put to
death, those of his confederacy would find themselves grieved. He said also,
that the knife had cost him 18. pence in Paris, and that he bought it to no
other purpose but to use at the Table.

The next day being the 29. he was examined the 4. time upon the same articles:
and amongst other points whereof he was examined, he affirmed, that being at
Lions, he might have had the Liuetenantship of the Marquis of S. Surlin, or
under him, the leading of a company of light-horsemen, if he had been willing.
Then Lugoly pressed him, and asked him, why he held for the League, and parting
thence, came to seek service in the kings Court. At these words he remained
dumb for a time, and at last said, that he had answered already as the truth
was. Four witnesses were examined against him. Brancaleon, who gave
information of Barriers counsel taken at Lions to slay the King, and who had
kept nothing hid from the Commissioners that he knew: the Iaylors wife,
examined of the poison: Master Peter the Ermite, concerning the knife: and
Master Thomas Bowcher, the Curate of Bricontre-robert being called for,
declared to have confessed him eight days before, and the next day after
communicated with him, and further, that he had told him how he had confessed
himself 4. days before in the City of S. Dennis, but not a word of any thing
concerning his attempt against the king. All these witnesses, who of him were
embraced as coadiutors, and councellers, are not only not reproved, but
withal, they attest their depositions to contain the very truth of all they
knew; Brancaleon excepted, who affirming, that he had communed with him of this
enterprise against the King, acknowledged therewith, that he had eat and drunk
twice with him in the Lacobins house. The matter after this manner examined by
Lugoly, the king caused by his Letters Patent, six Counselors of the council
of State, accompanied with two Presidents of soueraign Courts, to adiudge and
give sentence of him as he had deserved. Here needed no doubt to be put of the
lawful proceeding against him. For was it not sufficient, yea and by too too
many proofs, to declare him guilty and convinced of that crime, in the
execution whereof he was prevented? Was it not enough to convince him of the
fact, who had confessed he had a mind to kill the King before his conversion;
and missing of his purpose then, had since deliberated with 4. Munks at Lions
about the same act, to wit, whether he might justly kill him or no. In witness
whereof, he that drunk with him at that time as he pretended to come to the
Court for that purpose, had pointed him forth to the King by every particular
mark to make him known. Was there not matter enough to judge him guilty, who
had judged himself even by his own conscience from his first committing into
prison, as well by demanding for poison, as also, for the murderers knife,
whereof he was found seized? Was there not evident proof to condemn him, who
confessed, he had left the League of purpose, to come to the Court only to
seek a Master? Questionies, he was justly judged to die: And therefore by
decree the 31. of August he was condemned to be drawn upon a sledge or
tumbrell, and as he past through the streets, his flesh to be pulled of with
hot irons. This being done, to be led to the great market place, and there to
have his right hand burnt off with the knife in it: after that, to be laid upon
a scaffold, and so to have his arms, legs, and thighs broken by the
Executioner, and after his death, his body first to be consumed to ashes, and
then to be cast into the River: his house razed, his goods confiscated to the
King. Moreover, before his execution, he should be plied with questions, as well
ordinary as extraordinary, to learn by his own mouth, who had induced him
to this wicked enterprise. This was the sum of the sentence denounced against
him.

Hitherto you have seen nothing in this prisoner which charge the Jesuits of
Paris, neither likewise that he was distracted in mind, as Montaignes would
describe him, but rather a man advised, who bare off every blow in the best
manner that he could: and from whom the Judges drew by four several
examinatio^s, what they could for searching out the truth. The sentence the
same day being pronounced against him, the Interrogatories were committed to
two of his Judges, and Lugoly to see them propounded unto him, and to examine
him. This poor wretch being there brought forth, requested them, that he might
not be quartered quick, but rather give him leave, and he would to the
uttermost, confess the truth of every particular point for that matter.

First then he began to lay open every particular concerning the passage at
Lions, from point to point, at Brancaleon had delivered of him to the King, and
acknowledged, that in the said City, he had conferred with four religious
persons, to wit, a Carmelite, a Iacobin, a Capuchin, and a Jesuit: with whom he
agreed to commit this murder, and thereupon departed the next day after the
Assumptio^ of our Lady, to this intent arrived he in Paris, and lodged himself
in the street, called De la Huchet, where he inquired who was the most zealous
of Gods Church and honor in Paris. Whereunto one answered him, saying, the
Curats of S. Andrews of Arts.

Hereupon, he presently went to visit him, and recited unto him his whole
determination; wherewith the Curate seemed well pleased, and made him drink:
saying, he should gain by that act, both great glory and Paradise. But before
he proceeded any further, it were very convenient, that he should first go
visit the Rector of the Jesuits, of whom he might take more certain resolution.

Whereupon, he went to the Jesuits College, spoke with their chief
Commander, and understood by him, that he had been chosen Rector not past
three weeks before. Marry after many fair speeches, and friendly
entertainment, he concluded, that his enterprise was most holy, and that with
good constancy and courage he should confess himself, and receive the
blessed Sacrament; and so led him into his Chamber, and gave him his blessing.
And the next day following, he was confessed by an other Jesuit, to whom he
would not discover himself by his confession, but afterward received the
Sacrament in the College of the Jesuits. He likewise spoke of it to another
Jesuit, a preacher of Paris, who spoke often against the King, and adjudged
this counsel most holy, and most merritorious: And for this act intended by
him, bought the knife that was delivered into the Justices hand, the point
whereof he caused to be made sharp like a dagger point, as heretofore has
been recited.

But to return, he thus parting from Paris, went to S. Denis, where the King
was, with a firm resolution to kill him in the Church. But seeing the King so
devoutly at Mass, as appald with fear, he stayed his hand from that fact,
even as if he had lost the use of his arms, or been lame of his lymmes. From
thence he followed him to the Fort of Gournay, afterward, to
Bricontre-robert, where, after that he had been confessed and communicated
again, the King passed by, and so escaped him, while he was drawing the knife
out of his hose. Thus to be brief, he arrived at Melun, where he was taken.
And now when these Judges came to instruct him, and told him that it was ill
done, to have received twice the holy Sacrament, having this bad intention in
his mind, knowing (as he could not be ignorant thereof) that it was to his
damnation.

Then began he to lament, and said, that he was unhappy, and gave thanks unto
God, in that he had prevented him from such a wicked stroke. His confessions
were read unto him, to the which he stood, without denial of one word. His
confessions (I say) made ere ever he felt one twitch of the rope. So being from
thence drawn to the place of execution, as he was upon the Scaffold. Lugoly
willed him to tell the truth, warning him to take heed that he should not
charge any one wrongfully. Unto which he answered, that all which he had said
in the place of examination was true. Of which he asked God, the King, and the
Justices forgiveness.

This done, he had his right hand burned in flaming fire, afterward, his
arms, legs, and thighs broken, and he was put upon the wheel, where the
Judges meant to have left him languishing, till he had given up the ghost. But
there again examined, if he would say any thing for the discharge of his
conscience? He answered, that whatsoever he had said, was true, and no more
but the truth: and that there were two black Friars, which went from Lions to
the same intent, but he took upon him to be most forward to archiue the act,
for the honor of the enterprise. Thus most humbly requesting the Judges to
rid him out of his pain, that his soul by despair might not be lost with
his body. Upon these words, Lugoly, by the commandment of other Judges,
caused him to be strangled: and the next day, his body was consumed into ashes,
and the ashes cast into the River. After the execution done, which was upon
Tuesday, the 31. of August, news was brought by a Citizen of Melun to Paris,
(for the passages were free whersoeuer, by reason of a truce made:) And upon
the Sunday following, one Commolet, a Jesuit, made a sermon, about the end
whereof, he requested his audients to have patience, for you shall see (quoth
he) within few days, a wonderful miracle of God, which is at hand, you shall
see it, yea, esteem it as already come. These words uttered openly in the
presence of an innumerable multitude, caused the Judges to be most assured,
that what soever Barriere had spoken, was most true.

CHAP. 7. How the heathenish impiety of the Jesuits, had been prejudicial in
our Church, if their execrable counsel had come to an effect.
I Have most faithfully discoursed unto you, what was the proceedings of
Barriere, now ye may well gather, that what-soeuer is penned down by the
Pleader of Clairmont College, and again by Montaignes, within his fabulous
truths, are as it were old women's fables, such as we read in the most part of
their anuall Epistles, sent amongst their friends. And moreover, that Barriere
was not a plain simple and innocent man, but rather one most resolute, and
stout, who stood upon his guard as much as in him lay: yea, before the
Magistrate, and who after his condemnation, had his memory so perfect, as he
could entreat that he might not be committed to the mercy of the Wheel, or
other torture. And therefore most false is that which Montaignes gives out of
him; that he was frighted, and his memory past him, by means of the torments
he suffered. This (I say) was false; for he was never tortured, until his
confessions of the fact were all ended, as is before set down at large.

Before the sentence of death was denounced, the Judges showed no great
suspicion had of the Jesuits, but having found sufficient matter to condemn
the malefactor to death, then they all gave consent (by reason of his fact)
that he should be plied with questions, whereby he might reveal his pretenses.
So that without being put to the tortures, (seeing it was in vain to delay)
he declared each thing in particular of that which was past. And thereupon, as
you have heard, he accused 4. religious persons of Lions, and amongst others, a
Jesuit, without naming him. But the Gentlemen, by his deposition have informed
us, that it was one Petrus Maiorius. Afterward he recited what had been done
with him at Paris, in the Jesuits College there, by him that held the first
place, to wit, the Rector, whose name also he knew not. But Montaignes has
discovered him unto us by the name of Varade.

As indeed it was a thing easily known, for that he then commanded in the
College: adding thereunto, that the King being since entered into Paris,
Varade saved himself by agilitie of body, taking himself to flight; as one
that knew full well, there was no surer witness against him then his own
conscience.

As touching Commolet, there needed no other vvitnesses then those which were
at his sermon. Moreover, passages on each side were free and at liberty, by
reason of the truce made: so that many honest persons, which had withdrawn
themselves by flight into Melun, being now come back again into Paris,
understood this great miracle of which he prophesied. Concerning the rest, the
prisoner before he was put to death, persisted upon the Scaffold in all that
he had said and spoken in the place of examination: and again after that,
upon the wheel, being full of good memory and understanding; for they had
meddled with no part about him, but only the breaking of his arms, thighs,
and legs. And after he had perseuered a while in that pain, he requested
Lugoly not to occasionate his fall into despair, and that loosing his body,
he might not also therewith loose his soul. Upon which words, the said
Lugoly caused him to be strangled, after that he had given his last report unto
the Justices of all, and had received permission to do it.

Therefore, it is a most shameful lie, to publish it abroad, that Varade
found him so weak of understanding, that he could not in any wise give
credit unto him. It was a most notorious lie to say, that the confessions of
Barriere, were forceably taken from him at his examination, notwithstanding
that he was not questioned withal but twice at several times upon the
Scaffold, where he persisted upon those points which he had confessed in other
places, as I here have said. As touching other matters, of the meeting of the
Divines, and the Scarffe which was hung at S. Paul's, if there had been any
such thing, no question but he would have confessed it as willingly as he did
the rest. I come again to those flattering speeches, which the second Jesuit
feeds the King withal, to the end that his Society might be reestablished.
Where are now these fair speeches?

It behooves not (says he) the King of France to revenge the quarrels of the
King of Nauar, neither the eldest son of the Church, to be moved with an
opinion contrary to the Church. Is not this a shameless Piper, who would
again unawares overcome our king by the sound of his pipe? I have here from
the beginning recited the plausible persuasions of the Jesuits, to the end
every one might know, that there is no better to be looked for, to come from
such lying lips as they have. I have here from the beginning, set down the
history of Barriere, to the end, that each one might know, that it is
impossible to do worse, and that there is not in the world any beast more
cruel, subtle and fierce, then is the Jesuit: wherefore, all men ought by all
means possible to beware of his treasons. But I pray you, how were these Nets
spread, and of what stuff were they? Marry so long as the King was of another
religion then ours is, the Jesuits never made show of any willingness or
intent to have him murdered; no not in the greatest broils of our troubles:
And now, being reconciled to our church, upon some fear which was resident in
them, as they feigned, least that the King made himself a Catholic upon
dissimulation, this (said they) was cause of offering unto his Majesty such
cruel wars. But when? in the midst of the sworn truce, when every man
esteemed himself to be at rest wheresoever he lived, by the public and
mutual faith which every one had given one toward another, then began this
new counfell to proceed.

This Judas had never any purpose to kill the King before he became a
Catholic: because they deemed, that as long as he was plunged in his error,
the people whom they held in their rebellion, would never be drawn to live
subjected under his obedience. But as soon as he was converted, they doubting
of their fortunes, fearing least his reconciliation might reduce them being
his subjects, to their accustomed duty, they hereuppon endeavored with all
their power to prevent it, and thought by one means or other he should be
slain, to enjoy afterward that privilege which they use, and likewise to
place such a Monarch in the kingdom, as esteemed himself most strong, and one
that should stand to their devotion.

My intent and meaning is, that this matter be handled, not only before our
holy Father the Pope, and his Consistory, but also, that it should come before
the meanest person in the world, if he have any spark of religion and
judgment. For was there ever impiety more abominable then this? That our
Jesuits should have charmed such a weak spirit as this was, by the holy
Sacraments of the Church, and have enticed him to murder the king? Not because
that he was an heretic, but by reason that they suspected there was
dissimulation in his conversion.

Be it that they suspected he was but dissemblinglie converted, which I
believe not. But admit that they had suspected it, yet is it therefore of
necessity, that the life of so great a King, should depend upon their vain
imagination? and that upon this pretense, they should counsel such a
detestable murder? and barter likewise to have compacted with those, that
would undertake it, to give them Paradise for a counterchange? Besides, in
giving more scope to their wickedness, they have abused the holy Sacrament of
the Altar. O God, was there ever a wickeder Atheism since the world was a
world?

It was not only a simple King of Navarre whom they shot at, but the greatest
King that ever France enjoyed. It was not a Prince of a contrary faith to
ours, but rather him, who with all humble submission, had reduced himself
into the bosom of the Church. Now will we give care to this cogging Jesuit, I
deceive my self: but we will hear him to the end, that, that which he has
handled, may serve for a condemnation against him, and all his.

But behold, what fruit had our Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church
brought forth, if this hateful counsel had come to an effect. Doubt you not,
but that the conversion of our King, was unto the Hugonots a great cut in their
hearts. So that if any mischance had happened unto him, as touching his life, by
the Clergy, good God, how would they have set up their banners against us in
their assemblies? What subject might their Ministers have had to have thundered
out, yea, even in their Pulpets, bringing heaven and earth together, and to
have said, that it was a blow come from heaven: by reason that the King having
forsaken their Church, (these be the words which they would have used) God had
permitted it that he should be so soon taken out of the world, yea, and by
those religious Priests unto whom he yielded himself. Mighty they not have
had great occasion to have said unto them; Our Preachers in their Pulpits,
handle a thousand matters with less loss then that was?

Had it not been a means to maintain them in their errors in stedde of
preventing them? Did not all this turn to the ruin and desolation of the holy
Apostolical Sea of Rome, of which our Jesuits say they are Protectors. Their
proposition is not Catholic, but rather Anabaptisticall, the which they
revive again in minding to take away the life of Kings.

CHAP. 8. Of the murder which John Chastell (brought up at Paris, in the
Jesuits School,) sought to attempt against the King, in the year 1594.
IT happened upon Saint John Evangelists day, being the 27. of December, 1594.
after the reducing of Paris under obedience to their Sovereign, that the King
going to his Chamber, accompanied with many Princes and Lords, found himself
unlooked for suddenly strooken in the mouth with a knife, so that neither he,
nor those that were with him, could perceive it: for as soon as John Chastell
who was the Traitor, and but nineteen years of age, had given the stroke, he
dropped down the knife, and set himself in the midst of the prease. He was
but young and none would have deemed this furious enterprise to have been in
so tender years.

Every one was in a maze, and busy to think who had done that traitorous
deed, and it wanted not much, but that this young youth had made an escape.
Notwithstanding, God would not permit, that this detestable act should remain
unpunished. By chance it was, that some one casting his eyes upon him, he
became as one sore affrighted and appald with fear. But as he promised
himself to have the Paradise of Jesuits if he died one of their maytyrs, so
also he confessed this fact more readily and promptly then was looked for at
his hands. Whereupon, by decree of the Court of Parliament in Paris, he was
condemned to die. Now here the Jesuits make a great boasting of their
innocence, saying, that in his examination, and out of it also, he never
charged any one of them: but all that he had done proceeded of his own will,
and that in this confession he perseuered until the last gasp of his life. As
for my part, I have no greater argument then this, to show that the trade of
murdering was lodged within their Colleges. And where there was any exercise
of good education and study, no scholar would have undertaken such a damnable
determination, but such a one as was brought up under them. Wherefore we
remain all in one mind, that he had there studied and passed his course in
Philosophy. True it is, that it was reported, that he had not been conversant
there for the space of eight months past.

The reason of this diversity is most easy, for in the other Colleges, they
know not what it meant to instruct scholars how to murder Kings, and
specially in ours. But in the Jesuits Colleges, it is contrary, and preached
in their own assemblies nothing so much as that alone. Of the which indeed
they were but too prodigal in their Sermons: so as this young boy, having as
yet his soul infected with their poison, being newly departed from their
schools, was not altogether healed.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, soruabit adorem Testa diu. Behold how that upon
the ancient instructions and memories of the Jesuits, their Disciples suppose
to offer a holy sacrifice unto God in committing murder, yea, and that of
Princes. The same happened sometime in Italy, where there was one Cola Mentcuan,
who taught they youths of Millan in studies of humanity, and amongst the
chiefest discourses of his Dictates, he treated ordinarily of no other thing,
but happy is he who with the price of his blood, redeemeth a commo^-wealth
from the bondage of a Tyrant. These discourses took such hold with three
Gentlemen of a Town named Cases, and of the families of the Empoignane,
Viscont, and Olgiate, that having attained to ripenes of years, they cosulted
together to put in execution the instructions of their Master. And in
conclusion, upon S. Stephens day in Christmas, as John Galeas, Duke of Millan,
went into the great Church to hear Mass, they doubted not but to murder him
in open sight of all the people: though they were assured, that hardly they
should escape the furies of the Dukes guard, as it happened unto them. For in the
same place there were two of them slain, and the third who had escaped, was
taken some few days after, and led to the gallows, where he confessed, none
but himself and his fellows, as Chastell did. And nevertheless, the truth is
so well noted and known by the Historiographers of Italy, that the
instructions of Cola their Master, had been their first stirrer or prouoker.
By these means, our Jesuits are very scoffers, when they think to excuse
themselves upon the answers of Chastell. I know not whether they were such as
they affirm, but well I wot, that al their Lectures and Sermons, tend to no
other but bloodshed, exhorting men to murder: thereby yielding themselves sole
pledges and sureties, for their Paradise that will undertake this great
maister-peece of work.

CHAP. 9. That it is an heresy to approve the killing of Princes, though they
be heretics.
WIth what hypocrisy soever the Jesuits now disguise themselves in their
modern writings, yet without doubt they have both made profession of, and
taken a glory, in the murder of Kings and sovereign Princes. Besides an
ins^^te number of examples which I could allege, there is one Peter Matthew, a
Doctor of both laws, who in the year 1587. made a collection of many Latin
Poems, written by Italians; and the year following, heaped together sundry
decrees of Popes, from the time of Gregory the 9. unto Sextus Quintus. Now,
even as among those Poems, the fairest pieces are the most shameless ones, as
the Priapus of Bembus, wherein he suffers his wit to play upon the resemblance
there is between the word Mints, an hear be, and the Latin Mentula; and the
S^philis of Fracastor, wherein he describes the beginning, and and proceedings
of the Pox; so in this second collection, among all the Orders of Religion,
allowed by those Pontifical decrees, he commends none so highly as that of
the Jesuits: who valewe greatly the judgment so honest a man gives of them,
and often bring him on their stage. Now mark his discourse upon the Pauline
institution of the year 1545. Dum super seminat inimicus ho^^ Ziza^ia, adsu^^
di^i^o P^^umate ^cciti Patres societatis Jesus, qui Petri sedem illustrant* in
L^^berum arma diuini eloquij parant, TYRANNOS AGREDIVNTVR, Lollium ab agro
Dominico euellunt, and fidei Christianae praeclarissimi buccinatores, verbo and
exemplo cunctis praelucent. This passage copied out word for word by
Montaignes, is withal, translated in this sort; Whilst that the enemy of
mankind, Chap. 58.
sows Tares, behold, the fathers of the Society of Jesus, called by the holy
Ghost, who adorn S. Peter's chair, use the weapons of Gods word against
Luther, Assail Tyrants, pluck up those Tares out of their Masters field, and
as most excellent Trumpets of the Christian faith, excel all others both in
doctrine, and example. Montaignes says, he was not a Jesuit that writ this;
and I am of his mind: but this Peter Matthew was a man (I know not whither he be
now alive or no) whose spirit was altogether Iesuited, and unto whom the whole
Sect is very much beholding: for besides the Elegy, which he has made in
their behalf upon the Bull of Paulus 3. he adds unto that of Gregory 1584.
a catalogue of all their Colleges, and houses, (though there be many of them
in it, but imaginary) and understands their business no less then he, who under
the disguised name of Montaignes, has falcified the truth it self. Now were
it as natural, and familiar to Jesuits to assail Tyrants, as Lutherans, I
persuade me, that who should offer to exempt murder from their order, would
resemble a foolish Physician, that finding a body half taken, and benumbd with
a palsy, cuts off that half to save the other; for so he might be sure to
ruin both together. Here Montaignes, by a sophistical quidditie, says in the
same Chapter, that the name of a Tyrant, has no affinity with that of a king:
a good means to make one kill a Prince, and after to fall into dispute whether
he were to be held a King, or a Tyrant: for to what purpose; if not to this
end makes he such a distinction?

This question has been long ago resolved, and it displeases me, that I
must now bring it in doubt gain. After that John Duke of Burgundy, had caused
Jews Duke of Orleans, son and brother of a king, to be slain at the gate
Barbets, he produced a young Doctor of Divinity, named John Petit, whom he had
maintaind at study. This fellow came unto the porch of our Ladies Church in
Paris, and there preached before an infinite number of people this doctrine,
that the murder was justly committed, as upon the person of a Tyrant, and
proved by many false reasons, and wrested authorities the action to have bin
most tolerable. Thus got the Burgonian Duke his suit in the common opinion of
the base vulgar: and thereupon, the same error crept into the hearts of many
young Divines, who stiffly maintained, that it was lawful to kill a Tyrant:
until that Master John Gerson, Chancellor of the University of Paris (and one
of the greatest Divines that ever were in the Church) not enduring that this
damnable opinion, should win more ground, got him to the Town of Constance,
where a general Counsel was then held, and there procured this proposition to
be denounced heretical, as we learn by the 15. Session. Praecipua
sollicitudine volens haec sacrosancta Synodus ad extirpatione^ erroru^ and
haeresum in diuersis mundi partibus inualesce^tiu^ prouidere, sicut tenetur,
and ad hoc collecta est, nuper accepit quod nonnullae erroneae assertiones in
fide and bonis moribus, ac multipliciter scandalosae, totius Reipublicae statu^
and ordinem subuertere molientes, dogmatizatae sunt: Inter quas haec assertio
delata est. QVILIBET TYRANNVS potest and debet licite and meritorie occidi per
quemcunque Vasalum suu^ and subditum, etiam per insidias, vel blanditias, vel
adulationes, non obstante quocunque iuramento, seu confoederatione, factis cum
eo, non expectata sententia, vel mandato iudicis cuius^nnque. Aduersus hunc
errore^ satagens haec sancta Synodus insurgere, and ipsum funditus tollere,
decernit, and definit huiusmodi doctrinam erroneam esse in fide and in moribus,
ipsamque tanquam scandalosam, and ad frauds, deceptiones, mendacia,
proditiones, periuria vias dantem, reprobat and condemnat. Which is to say.
This holy Council chiefly desiring (as it is bound, and therefore assembled) to
provide for the rooting out of errors, and heresies, which now begin to spread
abroad in diverse parts of the world, has lately been informed, that some
divulge opinions, erroneous in faith, against good manners, and very
scandalous, tending to the subversion of the whole State, and order in States,
among which this assertion passes for current. Every Tyrant may, and ought
lawfully and meritoriously to be killed by any his Vassal, and subject, even by
ambushments or flatteries, or fair allurements: notwithstanding any oath
passed unto him, or League made with him, and without attending the sentence,
or command of any Judge whatsoever. Which this holy Counsel endeavoring to
resist, and wholly to root out, decrees, ordaines, and judges, to be erroneous
both in matters of faith, and manners: and reprooues and condemns it as a
point most scandalous, opening the way unto all manner of guiles, deceits,
lies, treasons, and periuries. An ordinance which I respect, and reverence, not
only because it was enacted in that great counsel of Constance, whereby the
abuses of the Church, and heresy, were rooted up, but in that it was derived
from our France, Gerson being the first, and principal Solicitor against the
new Divines, who then had entertained this opinion; which since that time, our
Jesuits have revived in the death of good king Heny, whom they called a Tyrant,
and had done the like to our great King now living, if God by his holy grace
had not preserved him. But because the Jesuits would seem to deny their Peter
Matthew, as not being of their Sect, what say they to father Emanuel Sa, terming
himself a Doctor of Divinity, and of their Society; who by two artcles in
his Aphorisms of confession, has maintained, that it is lawful for subjects
to kill the Tyrant, and to expel a misbeleeuing Prince out of his Realm: as
if the people could, or should give laws unto their King, whom God has given
them to be their sovereign Magistrate.

I am ashamed that I must prove, no subject ought to attatch his Prince, what
part soever he does play: but having undertaken to combat an heresy which
Jesuits have practiced by deeds, and now would feign go from it in words, I
purpose to give the^ a fulsome gorge thereof. Learn therefore of me this
lesson, Jesuit, (for I owe this duty to al Christians) we ought to obey our
kings whatsoever they be, (I will say) good or badde, this is that the wise man
teaches us in his Proverbs, S. Peter in his Epistles, S. Paul unto the
Romans, to Titus, and to Timothy, the Prophet Baruch, speaking of
Nabuchodonozer, who^ God, of all other Princes, had made to fall into a
reprobate sense; the goodly example of David persecuted by Saul. Such Kings as
God bestows on us, such are we to receive without examining, as thou do,
whither they be Kings, or Tyrants. The hearts of Kings are in the hands of God;
they execute his justice even as it pleases him to punish us, or more, or
less, whereto we are not to oppose our selves, but by our humble prayers unto
him: if we deal otherwise, we resemble those ouerweening Giants described by
ancient Poets, who offering to skale the heavens, there to sit cheek by iowle
with Gods, were in a moment tumbled down to hell by their god Jupiter. Yet ought
not a King abuse his power, but know he is a father, not to provoke his
subjects, his children, upon every slight occasion; for if he do, God the
father of Fathers, and king of Kings, will (when he least thinks of it) dart his
vengeance against him with a most dreadful and horrible arm. To conclude,
seeing that thou Jesuit, yeeldest a blind obedience to thy superiors, who are
but thy adopted Lords, thou owe it in greater measure a hundredfold unto thy
King, thy true, lawful, natural Lord, and father. Therefore art thou a most
dangerous yonker, to propose unto us in thy writings, this distinction of a
King and Tyrant; not that I know not the great difference which is between the
one and the other; but we are to blindfold our eyes under their obedience,
otherwise we shroud a rebellion of subjects against their Prince; Rebellion
which produces much more evil then the tyranny whereunto we were subject.

CHAP. 10. A memorable act of Ignace, whereupon the Jesuits have learnt to
kill, or cause to be killed, all such as stand not to their opinions.
THere remained in the confines of Spain, certain dregs of the Marranes, whom
king Ferdinand had chased out of that realm, and therefore got the title of
Catholic, a surname wherewith his successors have since adornd themselves. One
of these rascals, mounted on a Mule accoasted Ignace on the high way (somewhat
after he had changed his former life:) haning told one another to what place
they were bent, they entered into sundry discourses, and at length fell into
talk of the blessed Virgin Mary, whom the Moore acknowledged for a true Virgin
before her Conception, but not after: grounding his opinion on natural reasons,
the which have no affinity with our faith. Ignace urged the contrary, with good
devotion, that she was a Virgin both before, and at, and after her delivery,
and searched every corner of his brain to make it good. But being then a
simple nouice, and if you will needs know it, but an a. b. c. man in points of
religion, it was not for him to manage so high mysteries: so that supplying the
want of arguments (whereof he had none left) with a just choler, the Moore who
laughed at him in his mind, spurring his Mule, and giving him a full carriere,
left Ignace all alone, who chafing that he was not able to get the victory at
the blunt of the tongue, went yet to win it at the sharp with the sword; and so
resolved to pursue him amain, and presently to kill him. Notwithstanding, like
a man of a good conscience, he found himself extremely perplexed. For on the
one side, it vexed him to see a monster fraught with impiety and blasphemy,
go upon the ground; on the other, he weighed his own fear of offending the
Virgin, in sted of defending her. In this contention, suspended between yea and
no, at length he determined to take his Mules advise. He saw the fellow
pass into a cross way, and knew whether it led: wherefore, in admirable
wisdom he resolved, not to slacken the reins of his choler, but to give his
beast the bridle; on condition, that if of her own instinct she followed the
tract of that Infidel along the crosse-way, he would dispatch him without all
remission: but, as God would have it, she chose another path, by means
whereof, Ignacius suddenly appeased himself, supposing the matter happened to
his Mule by divine inspiration.

God sometimes gives advise unto false Prophets by their beasts; as we read of
Balaams Ass, and this Ignatius his Mule, without the which he had most
furiously executed his disseignment. Therefore I find no whit strange the
resignation he has made of the same fury unto his successors, with whom I
list not dispute whether it be fit or no, but send them, after his example,
unto a Mule for resolution.

At this word, the Jesuit would needs lay himself open: Excuse me, I pray
you, quoth he, me thinks you deliver not the whole matter: For Ribadinere, one
of them of whom you borrowed this history, says, that Ignatius at that time,
was surprised with a remembrance of his old Adam. Homo quippe militaris fallaci
very honoris ir^itatione olim elusus: he was fallen into this foolish opinion of
revenge, but that afterward, arriving at our Ladies Church of Mountserrat, he
hung before her alter all his weapons, after he had confessed himself, by
writing, of all his sins, three days together. Ibi optimo confessario,
totius vitae suae crimina per triduum ex scripto confessus est, illique homini
omnium primo, animi sui propositum aperuit, iumentum reliquit, gladium
pugionemque, quibus Mundo meruerat, ante aram beatissimae Matris Dei apendi
iussit: which was in the year 1522.

Truly, replied the Advocate, I heeded not those 4. or 5. lines when I perused
Ribadinere, and I thank you heartily for putting me in mind of them; for I
will use but this one point, to show your Sect to be most wicked, and most
unhappy, that having this fair, and goodly mirror of your Father and Author
before your eyes, your heads have entertaind no other objects but the disquiet
of the Realms you live in, especially of our country of France, as I will
prove immediately.

CHAP. 11. Of the holy League, brought by the Jesuits the year 1585. into
France: and that they are the cause of the Hugonots new-footing among us.
Hitherto I have discoursed unto you, of the murders, paricids, and massacres
of Kings and princes; now I will show you the ruin, and desolation of
kingdoms, procured by them, and begin first with our own. It is not for a
King of France, (says the Jesuit in his Most humble Request) to revenge the
quarrel of a King of Navarre; nor fits it the Churches eldest son, to be
sencible of what was done against an opinion contrary to the Church.

Goodly words, which I remember often, so well they please me: as though the
Jesuits had only warred against the King now living, and no way touched the
last, Henry the third, not only adorned with the title of Most Christian, a
title long ago bestowed on our kings, but who among the most Christian, was in
particular the most Catholic. We saw him in the beginning of his reign follow
the Jesuits, being charmed by them, and holding them the soundest Catholics:
afterward, the Priers Minims of Nigeon, hard by Paris, where he had his
chamber for his private prayers by night, on festival days, and for his
devotion at their Mattins at certain other seasons; then haunted he the
Capuchins and Feuillants: and with a like zeal instituted the brotherhood of
the Penitentiaries, and Whippers; and after all this, the congregation of the
Hieronimits at our Ladies of Vincennes, where he and his companions, changed
their habits, as Munks, on those days and feasts, whereon they were confined
thither.

I know well that his enemies, imputed all this to hypocrisy, for his ill hap,
or to say more truly, their unhappy shifts, would have led men to turn all
his actions to the worst. If you say, that the greatest part of such as joined
with him, did it for hypocrisy, only to please him, I believe you say most
truly, but as for him, I doubt not but he did it only to please God. It were a
want of common sense to auerre, that a King, nourished in the midst of
delights, and fulness of all pleasures, would have chosen this painful course,
had he not been drawn unto it by true zeal and devotion: he who otherwise
had ten thousand means to credit him self by: such lewd hypocrisies may fall
into the hearts of mean companions, who by religions mask strive to seize on
new greatness, but not into theirs, whose ancient right assures it them
already.

Then must the Jesuit, the hypocrite, raze this clause out of his paper, that
the war, whereof I will hereafter speak, was undertaken against a King of
any other opinion then the common: it rests to know, by whom the war was
undertaken. Some charge Princes and great Lords with it, and therein altogether
are deceived. I will deliver it at large unto you.

After the decree of the year 1564. had passed, we lived in some rest
throughout all France, until the year 1567. about which time, the enteruiew
had at Bayon between us and the Spanyard, undid us. For it put iealousies
(perhaps not without cause) into the heart of such as were not thoroughly settled.
Ielousies that bred in France ten thousand mischiefs, which to remember,
makes my hair to stare. Now let us examine the Jesuits carriage during this
loose and general corruption. A surceasing from Arms being appointed in
council, the year 64, they thought also to have had leisure enough for the
venting their ambition. When their cause was pleaded, that irregular profession
of theirs was only dealt against: the wiser sort foresaw, as in a cloud,
that this Impostume could not choose in time, but yield a malignant and
loathsome matter, though to point at it in particular, none either could, or
durst; because that outward simplicity wherewith they shadowed their inward
thoughts, surprised even such as wished the^ most evil; for they imagined the
Jesuits would have forwarded our Religion, by good examples, zealous prayers,
wholesome manners, holy exhortations, and not by Arms.

But stayed they in these terms? nothing less, they brought into their
houses, the knowledge of State matters; they made themselves Judges of Princes
actions, disposing them at their own pleasure; they contrived wars thereby
to compass their dessignes: and the Pulpits out of which they preached, were
to no other use, but as Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets, to incense our Princes in
their combats one against another. And especially, we are not to doubt of their
being the Authors, solicitors, and cherishers of our last troubles, a thing
which not only they deny not, but make their boast of in their books, as you
may find in that of the Jesuit La Fon. I undertake not in this place to recite
at large the story of these troubles, this only I will tell you, that before the
year 1576, we never had put the word League in use: it was only familiar in
Italy, the chief harbor of Jesuits. When the Parliament was held at Blois, a
Lord of some note in Paris, (whom I will not name) whose heart was wholly
Iesuited, and who on festival days, left his own Parish Church to be present
at their Masses sent to the Deputies of Paris these instructions following.

In this assembly, some labored hard to make immortal and merciless war,
against the Hugonots, and yet demanded an abatement of Subsidies: a
proposition ill sorting with the former, those Subsidies having heen introduced
of purpose to further the wars. By means whereof, the man of whom I speak,
taking first advise of the Jesuits, propounded a third course, to league
themselves against the Hugonots, and that such as willing lie enroled
themselves under the League, should be bound to contribute unto the charge of
this new war. These instructions received and published, the Deputies did
nominate a certain Prince to be their head. The last King, knowing of what
consequence this practice was, and that succeeding, it would make 3. parties in
France, his own, (which was not one properly) that of the League, another of
the Hugonots: to break this blow, discreetly affirmed, that he approved well
this League, but that be would be chief thereof: which was to the end the
League should fly no further then he was pleased to give it wings.

The first stone of our ruin being cast in this manner, the Prouosts of the
Merchants, and the Sheriffs of Paris, returning home, and loath that this
opinion of a League (which they held most holy) should miscarie, sent their
Commissions throughout all the Wards, to to the end, that such as would
contribute, should subscribe their names. The Constables bare them unto every
house, some hardier then the rest, opposed themselves, the greater number,
fearing worse, subscribed. The Commission was brought to Christopher le Tou,
chief Justice, whose memory we cannot honor too much: this good Lord,
refused not only to subscribe, but detayned the Commission it self, and the
next day, in open Court detested this unhappy innovation, as an assured
desolation to our state. His authority, his honesty, his reasons, wrought so
great effect, that every one allowed, and followed his advise. From
thence-foorth, this opinion of the League did wear away, or rather was
remitted to another season, that better might befit the purposes of such as
broached it.

Suddenly, after the Parliament was ended, Father Aimon Auger, a Jesuit, got
the King to give ear unto him through his plausible hypocrisies: And after
him, Father Claudius Matthew of Lorraine; both the which had so great part in
his good favor, that (as Montaignes testifies) he sometimes caused them to
ride along with him in his own Coach. At length, this good King, found that
these coozeners, were desirous to incroach upon the managing of State-matters
about him, Auger especially; whom for that cause, he gave order to his
Ambassador at Rome, to get him removed out of France, by Letters of
obedience from his General.

The King departing from the Parliament, pacified his subjects by an Edict of
the year 1577. the which he said was wholy his own; and yet had by his
wisdom, clean dashed the reformed Religion without bloodshed, if the Jesuits
would have vouchsafed him the leisure to finish what he had begun: Wageing in
the midst of peace, a gentle war against the Hugonots: gentle, but more
forcible in great men's oppinions then any weapons could have made it. For
although that the Edict of 77. gave some liberty unto them, yet the king
neither called them to places of judgment, nor unto offices in his Exchequer,
nor to the governments of Provinces and Towns.

He had moreover devised the order of the holy Ghost, reserved wholly for
Catholic Princes and Lords, as also, that of the Hieronimitans of our Lady of
Vincennes, where none were to appear, but Apostolical Roman Catholics, and
with whom (laying aside his most high authority) he fraternized in all kind of
devotion. Now, the presence of these, causing the others absence, believe it
was no small means to force them into the right way. For there is nothing
which the French Nobility affect so much, as to be near their King, nor any
thing that afflicts the common people more, then to be kept from Offices: this
is a disease of mind that spoils the Frenchman.

As soon as a Lawyer, or Merchant, have by their endeavors, stuffed their
Closets and Storehouses with silver, the thing they chiefly aim at, is to
bestow it on places of Judgment, or rooms in the Exchequer for their
Children: so that the new Religion began already to dissolute, and it
grieved not the Ancients thereof (who for shame, and to avoid the imputation
of lightness, stuck unto it) to suffer their children to be instructed in our
Schools, and consequently to learn there the principles of our Religion.

All matters in this sort proceeded, from ill to well, from well to better; the
Countriman plied hard his plough; the Artificer his trade; the Merchant his
traffic; the Lawyer his practice; the Citizen enjoyed his reuenew; the
Magistrate his stipend; the Catholic his own religion throughout all France,
without impeachment. The remainder of those Hugonots that lived, being
sequestered into a back corner of the kingdom; when our Jesuits seeing
themselves removed from their Princes favor, began to lay this snare to
entrap him.

Even as the Society of Jesuits, is composed of all sorts of people, some for
the pen, others for practice; so had they amongst them, one Father Henry
Sammier of Luxembourge, a man disposed for all assayes, and resolved unto any
hazard. This fellow was sent by them in the year 1581, toward diverse
Catholic Princes to sound the Foorde: And to say truly, they could not have
chosen one more fit; for he disguised himself into as many forms as objects,
one while attired like a soldiour, another while like a Priest, by and by like
a country Swain: Dice, cards, and women, were as ordinary with him, as his
prefixed hours of prayer; saying, he did not think he sinned in this, because
it was done to the furtherance of a good work, to the exaltation of Gods
glory, and that he might not be discovered: changing his name together with
his habit, according to the Countries wherein he purposed to negotiate. He
parted from Lorraine, and thence went into Germany, Italy, and Spain. The
sum of his instructions were, that foreseeing the eminent danger of our
Catholic religion, the seeming conniuence which the King gave to it, and
secret favor he yielded on the other side to the Hugonots, whereof the Duke
his brother had made himself an open Protector in the Lowe-Countries, their
holy society had resolved to undertake this quarrel under the leading of a
great Prince, making sure account of Gods assistance, seeing that it was
directed to the advancement of his holy Name, and good of his Church.

Thus Sammier got intelligence from each part, and took assurance on all
hands: but presently to manifest their proiects, the season fitted not; because
the Duke was alive, and the two brothers forces once united, were sufficient to
swallow all such as had made head against them. And this was but the preamble
unto our Troubles. In the year 83. he died. That let removed, the Jesuits
imbarqued in their quarrel such Lords as they thought good: and from thence
forward, Father Claudius Matthew Provincial of Paris, deals in the matter more
earnestly then before; sits and assists in all delibe rations, and counsels,
takes upon him a journey unto Rome, and Father Henry Sammier, another into
Spain; where they so well acquitted themselves in their Embassages, that Pope
Gregory the 13. and the Spanish King promised, each for his part, a great
sum of money toward the maintenance of this war. The Ambassadors being
once returned, we beheld Ensigns displaid, France covered with soldiers, and
many Towns surprised, wherein there never had been any exercise of new
Religion.

Now might you see three parties on foot, the Kings, very much entangled; that
of the holy League; (so was the Jesuits war entitled) and that of the
Religion; for so the Hugonots did term their faction. Pope Gregory died: then
feared the Jesuit he should loose half of his credit, for which cause father
Matthew returned back to Rome, where he found Pope Sixtus chosen, of whom to
his exceeding great contentment he obtained the like promise his predecessor
had made him before. In his return he died at Ancona, the year 1588. by means
whereof a new suit is begun by Father Odon Pigenat a Burgonian (the^ elected
Prouincial of France by decease of Matthew) which was not rejected by Sixtus.
This gave occasion to certain Catholics, not only to propound a peace, but
even to wish it in their souls. Yet not withstanding some there were, that
would have bridled our thoughts: for this proposition disliked our Jesuits.
There be two sorts of Catholics, the one called Pollititians, of worse
condition then Hugonots, because they wished for peace; the other zealous
Catholics, or Leaguers, beloved of the commmon people, because they desired
an endless war: a distinction that planted a Nurserie of wars betweeene
Catholic and Catholic, and withal, procured a peace with our common enemy.
What say I, a peace? we put hereby a sword into his hands to beat us with, we
opened him the way to raunge in, to come forward, to thrive, to increase
without our resistance, we who had enfeebled our selves by this same new
division.

Arms were taken on all hands, and yet was it not a civil war only, it was
a general throat-cutting all France over: which to remedy, our two Kings had
successively need of all their pieces: and so the Hugonot came by a good part
in their quarrel, for the maintenance, and support of the State. And the
Jesuits Colleges were manifestly the places whereto the other side usually
resorted. There were forged their Gospells in Ciphers, which they sent into
diverse countries: there were their Apostles bestowed into sundry Provinces,
some to uphold the troubles by their preaching, as their father James Commolet
within Paris, and their father Bernard Rouillet within Bourges, others to
commit murder, and bloodshed, as Varade, and the same Commolet. Not so much
but father Odon Pigenot seized in all credit, prerogative, and authority among
the Sixteen of Paris, (dregs of the vulgar, and entertainers of sedition:) A
thing all Jesuits agree on, in the books which they have published since the
year, 94.

I have said (and truly said) that Iesuitisme, argeeth with the Anabaptists
opinion in two propositions: In meddling with State matters; and in causing
Princes and Kings to be murdered, accordingly to the conueniencie of their
affairs. I will add, that in the carriage of this Jesuitical war within
France, there was some conformity of names between, this, and that the
Anabaptists undertook in Germany the year 1535. For they had one John Matthew
their chief Prophet, under John Leydon their king, and one Bernard Rotman, and
Bernard Cniperdolin, principal actors in their faction for the seducing of
simple people: even as our Jesuits had their father Clauaius Matthew, and
Bernard Rouillet. I will not here recite the other particulars of our troubles,
being contented plainly to have showed unto you, that our Jesuits were the
first Seminaries thereof: only I will discourse what fruit we have reaped by
them. God withdrawing his anger from us, would in the end appease all matters.
In this reestablishment, the Hugonots, who during our troubles think they have
been some instruments of keeping the Crown on the Kings head, as well as
other Subjects, which were Catholics, have also thought, that after the
peace was made, they ought not to be accounted as outcastes from among us:
therefore have they importuned the King by sundry requests, to restore them to
their ancient Privilege, granted them by the Edicts of Pacification, from
which, since the peace of the year 77. they have been almost wholly driven.

We have, said they, followed yours, and the last Kings fortunes during your
troubles, we have exposed our lives and goods for the upholding of your royal
estate, against the Jesuitical faction, which called in a Sraunger to make him
Lord, and Master of your Kingdom. Is it meet, that we, for our good service
to you, should loose our part in your commonwealth and government, and that
the Jesuits, for having used all the badde practices they could against you,
should bear sway, rule, and triumph in your Realm of France? What could a
wise and prudent King do in this case, being pressed with so just a Petition as
this was? What? but assent thereunto: to avoid of two mischiefs the greater,
and not to fall back into that gulf, out of which we were newly but escaped.
Tell me, I beseech you, to whom are we beholding for this last Alarm in
France, but only to our Jesuits, the firebrands of our latest troubles? Which
troubles had they not been, the Hugonots credit had been utterly
ouer-throwne. This is one bond amongst other, wherein we stand obliged to that
holy Society of Jesus.

CHAP. 12. That Auriculer confession has been used by the Jesuits, as a
chief weapon for the rebellion, and in what sort they are wont to manage it.
IN vain do we level our course to the works of piety, unless confession
lead the way, and a due and worthy repentance follow. This is the Jesuit
licenced, to exercise upon all in general that present themselves before him,
(to the prejudice of Ordinaries) but by a marvelous privilege, such as was
never granted to any Munk, no not to Curats themselves, who of all
Ecclesiastical persons, next unto Bishops, are most authorized that way. The
tenor of the Bull, granted by Paulus tertius, in the year 1545. is thus.
After he has given them permission to preach in all places, where they
pleased, he adds: Nec non illis ex vobis qui presbyteri fuerint, quorumcunque
vtriusque sexus Christi fidelium ad vos vndecunque accedentium confessiones
audiendi, and confessionibus eorum diligenter auditis, ^psos and eorum singulos
ab omnibus and singulis eorum peccatis, criminibus, excessibus and delictis
quantumcunque grauibus and enormibus, etiam sedi Apostolicae reseruatis, and a
quibusuis ex ipsis casibus, resultantibus, sententijs, censuris and poenis
Ecclesiasticis (exceptis contentis in Bulla quae in die Coenae Domini solita
est legi) ac eis pro commissis, poenitentiam salutarem iniungendis. That is, we
give leave, and permission, to as many of you, as are Priests, to hear the
Confessions of the faithful of the one, and the other Sex, from what part
soever they come unto you, and them, being diligently heard, to absolve from
all and singular their sins, crimes, excesses, and offenses, how great and
enormous soever: yea, even those, that are reserved to the Sea Apostolic, and
all circumstances thence arising, by sentence, censure or pains
Ecclesiastical, (those excepted, which are contained in the Bull, accustomed
to be read on Maundie Thursday) and to ordain to the Penitents, for the faults
by them committed, wholesome and profitable penance.

As the privileges, which they persuade themselves have been granted them
for the Catechizing, and instructing of youth, have perverted all the ancient
order of famous Universities: so this large and extraordinary license,
permitted them in matter of Confession, has been the cause, that the greatest
part of the people, have in great and heinous sins, forsaken the ancient
custom, of resorting to the Penitentiaries of Cathedral Churches, and had
recourse to the Jesuits, whom we see by virtue of this Bull, to be all of them
authorized for Penitentiaries. And God knows how far these holy and blessed
Fathers have abused it. The first breaking forth of our troubles, was in the
year 1585. at which time all that resorted to them to be confessed, if they
affirmed themselves to be good subjects, and loyal seruitors to the King (for
they were questioned upon that article) they were sent back by the Jesuits
without receiving absolution. Which being objected against them by Arnauldus,
mark I beseech you, the cold answer which they make in their defense against
his accusations. For in the 17. article it is objected (says Arnauldus) that
the said Defendants, have at diverse and sundry times, denied absolutio^ to them
that stood for the late King, from the year 1585. The said Defendaunts
answer, that the article is untrue, although themselves know, that it has
been often by sundry persons avouched, yea and deposed against them in the
presence of the late King in his closet: and what witness could there be
produced against them in this case, save only those, who had been by them
denied absolutio^? There is no smoke without some fire.

Read their annual letters of the year 1589. when grief, rage, and fury of
the last troubles began, you shall find, that the number of their confessions
was infinitely increased, and specially in the College of the Jesuits at
Paris. Totius vitae confessiones auditae trecentae. We have hear 300. total
confessions, wrote the Substitutes of the College to their General Aquauiua.
If you ask me whence this new devotion of the common people to them proceeded,
I will tell you. Our Kings represent the true image of God: Against whom this
year there happened three strange and unusual accidents; first, the rebellion
against the late king, which they colored with the title, and pretext of
tyranny: for the fairest title they could afford him, was the name of Tyrant:
secondly, the parricide committed upon his person by a Munke: and lastly, the
continuance of that rebellion, against the King that now is, for his religion.

Be you assured, that all such, as did not hold their consciences at as low a
rate, as many of the Clergy do, found themselves much disquieted upon these
accidents. Which was the cause, that during these troubles, they went to be
confessed by these vpstart Penitentiaries, some were to be resolved by them,
whether it were sin not to yield obedience to their King, others to be absolved
for the same. But this was to commit the Lamb to the Woolues custody: for
their confessions were as many instructions, or rather destructions, to teach
Rebellion: refusing to absolve them, which either were not in their consciences
fully confirmed in their revolt from the two Kings, or had any inclination to
acknowledge them for their Sovereigns. And, (which is full of horror and
detestation) their ordinary course was, before they would absolve them, to
make them swear by the holy Gospel contained in their breuiaries, never to
take these two Kings for their lawful Sovereigns.

That which I speak, I have by good information from many, that were feign to
pass through that strait, and I know one amongst the rest, more near me then
the rest, who rather then he would give credit to their doctrine, departed
from his Confessor, without receiving absolution. This teaches to the whole
body of the Realm. But as concerning private Families, the Jesuits make a
double use of ministering Confession: One is, to take information from the
Penitent, not only of his own sins, but of their demeanor likewise that
dwell with him, or with whom he dwells; nay of the whole neighborhood: as
if it were a sin in him, not to discover an other man's sin in confession,
either if he know it, or suppose that he knows it. Which is as much in
effect, as to make so many spies and carrie-tales in a Town, as there be
Jesuits Confessors. The second use, which touches them in a nearer respect,
is, that in sucking by the ear the soul of a timorous conscience, they suck
or rather swallow there-withall his goods, and possessions: by promising
abundance of Spiritual goods in the world to come after their death, to those
that shall, in their life time, be charitable to them out of their temporal
goods. A course whereby they have carried away an infinite mass of wealth, if
you believe those, that have taken upon them to write their Legend; for I know
not by what other name to in title the lives of these holy Fathers.

One point more I will add (whereof I desire to be resolved by our auucient
Doctors in Divinity) they have a rule in practice, that men are bound to
accuse themselves to their Confessor, and not themselves only, but all their
confederates likewise, and (as for the Magistrate) the malefactor being
condemned to die, after he has once made confession of his sins to his
ghostly father, is not tied to reveal it to his Judge: nay it is lawful for
him to stand in stiff denial thereof, at the time of his execution, as being
clear before God (although he persist in a lie) after he has once discharged
the depth of his conscience to his Confessor. A thing that breeds much
scruple in the mind of a Judge, who otherwise is greatly quieted in
conscience, when an offender adjudged to die, howsoever he have before time
stood in denial of the fact, yet at the time of his death confesses the truth.

CHAP. 13. Of a general assembly of the Jesuits, holden in Rome in the year
1593. wherein they are prohibited to entermedle in matters of state.
I Have formarly in this discourse, charged the Jesuits to have been both the
first sparks and the chiefest flames of our last troubles: for proof whereof
I will seek no more assured testimony then this. Aquauiua their General,
perceiving that he could not make so good advantage of these troubles, as he
had at the beginning promised unto himself, caused the Prouincialls, Rectors,
and most ancient Fathers of their Society, to be summoned to meet at a
general Synod, which he appointed to be holden in Rome. This depended some
six months, in which mean time, the King taunged himself into the bosom of
the Church, in July 1593. From that time forward, every man bent his study to
mediate a good peace through France, and to make way thereunto, were concluded
two or three several truces, the usual Calendar of a peace to ensue.

During these cessations, men had safe enter course from one party to the
other. This opportunity do the Jesuits lay hold on, (as being sent them from
heaven) to work an attempt upon the Kings person. Barriere is the man that
freely offers himself to this service, but without success. These honest
Fathers, perceiving that all their practices, as well in general as in
particular, fell short of their dessignes, made show, as if they would by
their Synod make a final end of the wars between the Princes.

In the month of Nouemb. 1593 was this decree made, Vt ab omni specie mali
abstineatur, and querelis etiam ex falsis suspicionibus, This decree is at
large set down in the accusation of the Jesuits, in the year 1594.
prouenientibus, praecipitur nostris omnibus, in virtute sanctae obedie^tiae,
and sub poena inhabilitatis ad quaenis officia and diguitates, seu
praelationes, vocisque tam actiuae qua^ passiuae priuationes, ne quispiam
publicis and seculariu^ Principum negotijs, vlla ratione se mimiscere, nec
etiam quantumuis, per quoscumque requisitus, aut rogatus, eiusmodires tractandi
curam suscipere audeat, vel presumat. Idque serio commendatur Superioribus ne
permittant nostros ijs rebus vll^ modo implicari, and si quos ad ea propensos
animaduerterent, eos loco mutandos quam primum commutent, si alicubi sit
occasio, vel periculum se eiusmodi implicationibus irretiendi.

That there may be an abstinence (says he) from all appearance of evil, and
to meet with all complaints, howsoever grounded upon wrongful surmises, be
it enjoined to our Collegiats, in virtue of the holy obedience, and upon pain
of being made incapable of any office, dignity, or promotion, and to loose
their voice or suffrage, as well active as passive, that none of the^ presume
(be he never so much thereunto prayed, and required by whomsoever) to
entermeddle in matters public, and belonging to secular Princes. And be it
straightly commanded to the Superiors, not to suffer those of our Society,
to entangle themseles by any means in such affairs: and in case they shall
observe any of them to be thereunto inclined, that they remove them to another
country out of hand, if in that place there be opportunity, or danger, to wrap
themselves into such intangles.

The Jesuits make great use of this Article, in pretending that by virtue of
this Decree, they are restrained from entermedling in those matters, and I as
great, in affirming, that notwithstanding this Decree, they have intermedled.
But o holy blinded obedience, where do thou now reside? If thou be of the
first and principal essence of their vows, it must needer follow, that all
the chief Fathers of that Order, are heretics in their sect. For, since this
great and holy decree. Father James Commolet, did notwithstanding intermeddle
in those affairs: who in a Sermon, taking his text out of the third chapter of
the Judges, wherein was mention of one Ehud, that murdered Eglon, and saved
himself by flight. After he had long time thundered, touching the death of
Henry the third, and placed the Iacobin, that accursed Judas, amongst the
souls of the blessed, at last, exclayming with open throat, he said: We stand
in need of an Ehud, be he Munke, or soldier, or soldiers boy, or shepherd,
is skills not, but we need an Ehud. We want but that feate, to bring our
matters to the pass which our souls desire. This was strongly enforced
against the^ by Arnault, but neither he that wrote the Defense against his
Accusation, nor Montaignes, have touched it in their answer: which persuades
me, that they are agreed upon that point. Wallpole the Jesuit, in the year
97. delivered a poisonous confection to Squire, therewith to make away the
Queen of England his Sovereign. The Jesuits at Doway, in 98 sent the Cooper
of Iper to kill Grave Maurice of Nassaw: have all these performed obedience to
this synodall decree?

Adieu religion of the Jesuits, (as I said to a friend of mine of that
Society) seeing your obedience has broken rank. For you do not only disobey
your particular Superiors, but that also which has been decreed in foll
chapter by your whole Order. Whereunto he wisely made answer, that I did much
misinterprete the Article, which did not bear an absolute; and simple
restraint from meddling in those affairs, but in case, the Superior perceived,
there might danger grow by intermedling therein, Si alicubi sit occasio vel
periculum se eiusmodi implicationibus irretiendi. This decree then is but
merely to blind the eyes of Princes, that they may stand less upon their
guard then heretofore they have done. And to speak truth, to deal in state
matters, and to practice the death of Princes, are as essential parts of their
function, as their Confession it self.

CHAP. 14. Whether the Jesuits have Spanish hearts, as their enemies charge them
to have, or if they be, for Who gives most.
I Hear many thunder against the Jesuits, charging them to be Spanish in heart
and affection; they on the otherside, seem to fear nothing more, then to
incur this opinion in France. I purpose presently to deliver them of this
fear, and for a need to become their Advocate in this point, not so much for
the good affection I bear them, as that the truth enioynes me thereunto. It Is
true they favored the Spanish proceedings, about the middle and end of our
troubles, (which makes them fear least the memory thereof should be revived)
but that their hearts are Spanish, I utterly deny. It proceeded not of any
especial devotion, which they had to the late King of Spain, more then to any
other Prince, but for that (following the course of Jesuits, who measure the
right and justice of a cause, by the advantage of their own affairs) they
deuote themselves usually to him, whom they suppose to have the strongest
party, and from whom they stand in expectation of greatest commodity, which
is no small secret in matters of state, for them which in their hearts stand
neutrall, and indifferent.

The same lesson was likewise put in practice in time of our last troubles, by
Pope Sixtus the fist, a man of as great wisdom and government, as ever came
in Rome. Such was the contagion of those times, after the death of the two
Brothers at Blois, that certain young Divines, infected with the poison of the
Jesuits, loosed the reins to subjects against their King, in the year 1589.
notwithstanding, themselves confessed at that time, that their advise in this
point ought not to take place, without the formal confirmation of the Sea
Apostolic. Nevertheless, Commolet the Jesuit, and his adherents, the day
following, sounded the Trumpet of war in their Pulpets, against the King
deceased, affirming withal, that it was confirmed by Decree. Whereupon insued
those outrageous disorders, which we have seen in France since that time. To
take Arms against his Sovereign, was heresy, but much greater heresy was
it, not to tarry for the allowance, or disallowance of the holy Sea. So that
this was to offer violence to two Sovereign powers at once, the spiritual
power of the Apostolical Sea, and the temporal power of the King. And Pope
Sixtus, if he had pleased, might with one stroke of his pen have extinguished
all our troubles, by exco^municating all those, who without his knowledge and
authority, had presumed to arm themselves against their King, whom he knew
to be a most devout Catholic. But he kept himself well enough from that, for
in so doing, he should have excommunicated them, who at that time had all the
strength on their part, in favor of a poor King, against whom, heaven and
earth seemed to conspire. Contrariwise, he conuented him to Rome, to answer
that he had done, against all the laws. customs, liberties, and privileges of
our Country of France.

Our King now reigning, was at his first coming to the Crown, of a contrary
religion to ours, and it pleased the Pope at the first to censure him for such
a one: but when he once came to know his valor, and that his enemies did but
feed his holiness with false bruits of imaginary victories, he began to
shrink his head out of the collar, and would never after have any hand in the
matter. And from that day forward, used the King underhand with all the
courtesy that could be desired. Neither do you think for all this, that
Sixtus stood the worse affected to the King that dead is, or the better to him
that now reigns, but he thereby out of his wisdoms, favored the more his
own proceedings. Albeit certain foolish Scholars charged him a little before
his death, that he was inclined to the Kings party: And upon this challenge,
some rash spirits have not spared to say, that he was poisoned: whereunto I
will give no credit, although it were true.

The like may be said of our Jesuits, who aim at nothing else but the
advancement of their Commonwealth, which they entitle, The Society of Jesus:
which as it has take his original and increase from nothing but from the
Troubles; so do they shoot at nothing, but to disturb those countries
wherein they remain, and in that disturbance, they ever incline to those which
are able to master the weaker part, as I will make good by an ocular
demonstration.

After they had set fire to the four corners and midst of France, and that
the late King was brought to a narrow straight, they devoted themselves to him
above the rest that was the Captain general of the League, because all things
fell happily on his side. And as long as Fortune smiled upon him, all their
Sermons were of nothing but his greatness and merrits. But when they once
perceived that he began to decline, and that he was forced to call to the
King of Spain for assistance, then began they likewise to turn their face
from the Duke, wedding themselves to the party of a King, whom they esteemed
to be exceeding mighty.

There is at this day a new King in Spain, what his good or ill fortune shall
be, is known to GOD only. For my part, it shall never grieve me, to see as
many Crowns on his head, as were on his Fathers, the late deceased King.
Imagine, that for a new opinion of war, (which is easily harbored in the
brain of a young Prince) he should break with us, and that our affairs
should have prosperous success in his dominions, be assured you should see
our Jesuits altogether French, albeit they were Spaniards by birth. These are
true birds of pray, that houer in the air.

It was well befitting the person of a sovereign prince, to play that part
which Sixtus did, but for a subject it is an ill president, and a matter of
dangerous consequence. This is to prove, that which way soever you turn your
thoughts, you shall find no reason, why the Jesuits should be nourisht within
a kingdom, who are as many (I will not say espialls, but) enemies to their
Prince, if he fortune to prove the weaker. And for a need, if there should
happen new factions in Rome, and that the Pope were put to the worst, he
himself should feel the effects thereof, notwithstanding the particular
homage, which they swear unto him at every change of the Sea.

Scarcely had the Advocate finished this discourse, but the Gentleman replied,
Take heed you be not deceived, and that this your position do not imply a
contradiction. For if the Jesuit be naturally addicted to him, that is, most
beneficial to him, as you hold, then must it of consequence follow, that he
is naturally Spanish, and not French. Will you know the cause? he is sure,
that what trouble soever he may breed in the consciences of these, and these
private men, by his nevve kind of confessions, yet shall he never be able to
get such footing in the whole Realm of France, as he has already in
Spain, wherein the supreme Magistrate is fallen from one extremity into
another. For the Spaniards, being of old accused to be half Pagans, as
holding a mungrell Religion, and not wholly Christian, do now in these
days, to purge themselves of that calumnious accusation, (for so I will
suppose it to be) they specially, and above all others, embrace the Jesuits,
esteeming them vassales to the Papacy, without all clause or exception. And
upon this opinion, they grant them in their Cities, an infinite number of
prerogatives, above the common people, yea, even above the Magistrates
themselves, whom they rule at their pleasures.

And albeit antiquity have given us in France, the title of the eldest sons
to the Catholic Apostolic Roman Church, yet is it with certain
qualifications, which the Jesuits shall never be able to remove out of our
heads, what soever show of continuation they bring to the contrary. And that
is the cause, why they, supposing their commodity would be greater, if the
Spaniard were Master of all France, then at this present it is, will evermore
lean to that side, rather then to ours, albeit they were naturally French.
These are pollititians, which cleave rather to the certain, then to the
uncertain.

Think not your self interrupted by this short Parenthesis, but if you
please, fall again into your discourse. I will do so (answered the
Advocate) and I will tell you a strange thing, which I have observed in all
their practices.

CHAP. 15. That the Jesuits were the cause of the death of Mary the Queen of
Scots, together with a brief discourse, what mischiefs they have wrought in
England.
Having hitherto discoursed of our country of France, it will not be amiss
to cut over into England, where Marie the Scottish Queen was sometimes
detayned as a prisoner to the State, for the space of 19. years. This
Princess was a most zealous Catholic, and was mightily bent, to take an
order with the Puritans of England, their Queen being once gone, who had none
nearer of blood to succeed her, then the Queen of Scots. As then the Jesuits
in the year 1582. stirred the minds of great personages, inciting them to take
Arms, so did Father Henry Sammier their Ambassador, go over into England,
to trouble the State there. He was then in the habit of a soldier, in a
doublet of Orange tawny Satin, cut and drawn out with green Taffata, a case
of pistols at his saddle bow, his sword by his side, and a Scarf about his
neck. I have it from them, that were not far from his company. Thus attired
as he was, he practiced a secret revolt with certain Catholic Lords, against
their Queen, which afterward cost them dear by the wisdom of the Lord
Treasurer.

After that, he fell in with the Queen of Scots, bearing her in hand, that
he, and those of his Society, treated with all the Catholic Princes, as
well for the reestablishing of Catholic Religion in England, as also for the
liberty of this poor desolate Princess, coniuring her by all manner of
obtestations to listen thereunto, and to dispose all her servants and subjects
to the accomplishing of so high an enterprise, assuring her for his part, to
make good to her the Realm of England. This project he laid with her, but (as
these Jesuits have naturally two hearts) he plotted far otherwise with the
aforesaid Noble men of England, in the behalf of a more puissant Prince, to
defeat his poor Lady of her future right, both he and his adherents diuerting
the principal Catholics from the service, which they had vowed to this
Princess, signifying unto them, that her means was too weak and feeble, for
them to build any hope of rising thereupon. And accordingly about the same
time, did the Jesuits publish in print, the title which that other Prince
pretended to the Crown of England. Which libel they dispersed in sundry
places of Christendom.

And albeit this was the principal mark they shot at, yet did not Sammier
desist to follow the said Queen tooth and nail. At the first hearing whereof,
she seemed to pause, foreseeing the mischief that might ensue: whereupon the
audacious Jesuit said unto her, that if she were so cold in the matter, he knew
a means, how to cut off both her, and the King of Scotland her son from all
hope of England for ever: and that it was a clause in his instructions: quod si
molesta fuisset, nec illa, nec filius eius regnarent. Insomuch as she was
constrained to yield thereunto. And at that time the late Duke of Guise, not
knowing of the factions and partialities which these men wrought under hand in
behalf of the other Prince, promised to be wholly for the Queen his Coosen.
And certainly I make no question, but he as a noble and valiant Prince, would
have gone through withal, had not the Jesuits engaged him in another new
quarrel: which he embracing on the one side, and on the other forsaking his
Coosens, was left in the lurch in the end. The Queen upon the first
intelligence of this new design, shedding abundant tears, and falling upon
her knees, cried out: Woe is me, for both my coosen, and my self are assurdly
undone. In this mean time the troubles set footing, in England by the
practices of the Jesuit: the Scottish Queens conspiracies were discovered,
wherein she wanted a head: the law proceeded against diverse: the poor
Catholics, which till that time were not molested for their consciences, were
forced to forsake their wives and children, and to leave their houses, to avoid
the Magistrates severity. Moreover, William Parrie, who was executed in 84.
confessed, that the murder of the Queen of England, which he had conspired, was
to establish the Scottish Queen in her throne, albeit she were not privy to
this plot: which confession of his, made the Queen and Counsel of England to
start, and to stand better upon their guards.

In conclusion the Scottish Queens process was comme^ced and prosecuted to
effect, she was adjudged by Parliament, to lose her head, and not long after
died a Catholic with marvelous resolution. By this you may collect, that the
Jesuits were the sole contriuers of her death: and that they are so far from
having established Catholic Religion in England, that contrariwise, by their
means, both it has been quite banished, and a number of great and worshipful
houses brought to utter ruin and destruction. By reason whereof they have
confirmed the erroneous doctrine of the Puritans, and deprived those of our
religion, of all hope, to set in foot again, unless it be by special
miracle from heaven.

CHAP. 16. That the Jesuits entermedling in matters of State, after they have
troubled whole Realms, yet do all things fall out quite contrary to their
expectation.
WHen our Savior Christ taught us, that we should give unto God, that which
belonged unto him, and to the Emperor of Rome, his right likewise, his meaning
was, that paying the Emperor his tribute, we ought also to give God his, and
in regard of him not to exceed the limits of our calling. By which reason, the
good and true religious person, ought to give himself wholly to fasting,
prayer, and heating of Sermons. I know, that the kings of this land, do
sometimes call Prelates to be of their Council, according as their own
disposition leads them, or as they find those persons meet and able for the
place, yet does it not therefore follow, that they should make that a general
rule, and president for the whole Clergy.

Were not the spirit of Division, otherwise called the Devil, seated within
the breasts of Jesuits, I would say, that there was never wiser Decree made,
then that of their Synod, in the year 1593. whereby they were prohibited to
meddle in State affairs: not only because it is forbidden by God (for that is
the least part of their care) but for that in reasoning the matter, as a
Statesman, I cannot see that ever they brought their practices to those ends
which they aimed at. They are like a March Sun, which stirs humors in our
bodies, but is to weak to dispatch and dissolve them. I will go further, such
is their ill fortune, that if they favor any party, after they have shuffled
the cards al they can, yet when the game is at an end, he whose part they take,
evermore proves the looser. Insomuch, as albeit to humane reason the Jesuit
may seem to be an enemy of some value, yet so it is, that by Gods secret
judgment, it is more for our profit to have him our enemy, then our friend. I
will prove it by five or six notable examples.

They went about to make alteration in the State of England, and to that end
bent all their strength: what followed of that their enterprise? the ruin of a
number of poor Catholics misse-led by them, which before time lived at ease
in their own houses: the death of the Scottish Queen, the establishing of the
Queen of England for a long time both in her Religion and estate.

I come next unto Scotland, as being next in place to England, where Father
William Crichton, and James Gourdon, both Scots by birth, had their residence,
Crichton took a conceit, upon some coffeehouse, to depart the land: he
takes his course directly into Spain, by the license, and permission of his
General. Whether he is no sooner come, but he practices to insinuate himself
into the Kings favor: and to that effect, draws a tree of the descent, and
petigree of the Infanta his daughter, showing therein that the Crowns of
England and Scotland, did by right appertain unto her: and to incite him the
rather to take arms against the Scottish King, he scattred abroad diffamatorie
libels against him. Whereunto the King of Spain giving no ear, Crichton
determined with himself, by letters to solicit the Catholic nobility of
Scotland to the same purpose; and to that end, wrote letters in the year 1592.
to Gourdon, and other Jesuits remaining in Scotland, whereby he gave them to
understand, in what grace he was with the King, who by his incitement was
resolved, as well for the invasion of England, as for the restoring of the
ancient religion in Scotland. But this mighty Prince, desired to have
assurance before hand from the Catholic Lords of their good affection toward
him, from whom he willed them to procure blanks ready signed, to be supplied
afterward by himself with deputations in their names, which being obtained,
he had the Kings promise for two hundred, and fifty thousand crowns, which
should be sent over to be distributed amongst them. The Jesuits of Scotland,
upon this advertisement, drew many blanks from diverse persons, which they
delivered to George Ker to carry, who being discovered by the folly and
indiscretion of Robert Albercromi a Jesuit, was apprehended with his letters
and blanks: and the Scottish King, supposing this advertisement given by
Crichton to be true indeed, caused the Baron of Fentree, a Gentleman endued
with many good parts, to be beheaded. The like had happened to the Earl of
Anguis, the chief Earl of that country, if he had not cunningly escaped out
of prison. After, in continuance of the troubles, his Castles were ruinated, as
also the Earl of Huntlies, a man of the greatest power of them all, and the
Earl of Arrols, the Constable of Scotland. All which, since that time, have
made profession of the pretended reformed religion, as well to return into
favor with the king, as to live within their own country in security of
their goods, and persons. Insomuch, as in conclusion, Scotland has lost that
small remainder of our Catholic Religion in the year 1596.

The like fell out as well in the Realm of Portugal, as of Arragon, I will
first speak of Portugal. To say that the Jesuits procured the death of King
Sebastian, as some in their writings have charged them, is hard to believe: for
as Montaignes has very well declared, they were too highly in his favor. But
mark the proceedings: among all the nations of Spain, there is none so
superstitious, as the Portugal, and of all the kings of Portugal, there was
never any more superstitious then Sebastian. The Jesuits being cunning, and
subtle headed, thought this to be a fit soil for them to plant their vineyard
in. And to win the more credit, they caused themselves at their first coming,
to be called, not Jesuits, but Apostles, putting themselves in rank with those,
that followed our Savior Christ in person. A title thich they hold as yet in
that place, as being generally assented to. The kingdom being fallen to
Sebastian, these holy Apostles conceived a hope, that by his means it might
descend unto their family, and dealt with him many times, that no man might
from thence forward, be capable of the Crown of Portugal, except he were a
Jesuit, and chosen by their Society, as at Rome the Pope is by the College of
Cardinals. And for as much as he (although as superstitious, as superstition it
self) could not, or rather durst not condescend thereunto, they persuaded him,
that God had appointed in should be so, as himself should understand by a
voice from heaven near the Sea side. Insomuch as this poor Prince, thus
carried away, resorted to the place two or three several times, but they could
not play their parts so well, as to make him hear this voice. They had not as
yet got into their company, their impostor Justinian, who in Rome fained
himself to be infected with a leaprosie. These Jesuits seeing thy could not
that way attain to the mark they shot at, yet would they not so leave it.
This King being in heart a Jesuit, determined to lead a single life. Therefore
to bring themselves into nearer employment about him, they councelled him to
undertake a iourny for the conquest of the kingdom of Fesse, where he was
slain in a pitched field, losing both his life and his kingdom together. This
then is the fruit which King Sebastian reapt by giving credit to the Jesuits.
And this which I have here discoursed unto you: I had from the late Marquis of
Pisani, an earnest Catholic, who was then Ambassador for the king of France in
the Spanish kings Court. I omit all that has since passed in that Realm, as
being impertinent to my discourse.

I come unto that which has since happened within the Realm of Arragon: wherein
you shall see the like accidents by the indiscreet doing of the Jesuits. The
people of Arragon, had in their foundation from all antiquity, very great
privileges against the absolute power of their kings: and the oath of fealty,
which they tendered their King at his Coronation ran thus. Nos qui valemos
tanto come vos, y podemos mas que vos, vos elegemos Rey, con estas y estas
conditiones intra vos y nos, que el a un que manda mas que vos. That is: We
that are as great in dignity as you, and of greater power then you, do elect
you our King, with this and this condition between you and us, that there shall
be one amongst us, who shall command above you. And under that, they specified
all their privileges, which the King promised by oath to observe most exactly.

These liberties having been infringed in the person of Antonio de Perez,
their countriman, and Secretary of Estate to the late King of Spain, he
escaping out of prison, wherein he had been long detayned in Castile, takes
his way to Arragon, where he recounts the wrongs that had been done him, to
the prejudice of the ancient privileges, and liberties of their country. His
complaint was generally applauded by all, and especially by the Jesuits, who
inwardly rejoice at any occasion of trouble and commotion. They begin by their
confessions, (one of their chief weapons) to win the hearts of diverse
subjects, against their King, in Sarragossa, the mother City of the Realm,
giving the^ counsel to rise up in arms, and in this heat every man betakes
himself to his weapons. The king of Spain on his part, armeth himself in
like manner. The Jesuits seeing the forces of the Arragonians on foot, ready
to put themselves into the field, to encounter the kings power, they turning
their coats, began by their sermons, and confessions to run a new course.

There was no more talking of privileges, they made no reckoning of the world,
but of their consciences toward God, who commanded them precisely to live in
obedience to their King: that if they would submit themselves unto him, he
would take them to mercy: a thing whereof they were well assured, having
Letters signed by him to that effect.

Upon this promise of theyrs, some particular persons retire themselves to the
Kings Lieutenant general, and obtain their pardon. By whose example many
others do the like. By this means, the Army of the Arragonians is dissolved
of it self. The King of Spaynes forces enter Sarragossa, without any stroke
strooken, where they begin to play their parts, they pull down diverse houses
to the ground, as well of the City as of the Country, put the chief of the
Nobility to death, raise a Citadell within the Town, and put a garrison into
it. And since that time, the King of Spain has commanded there absolutely,
as he does in the rest of his dominions.

Those that are ill affected to the Jesuits, give out, that they sowed the
first seeds of this rebellion, by a double carriage of the matter underhand,
which kind of dealing is very common and familiar with them. If that be true,
they are the more to be condemned. I, for my part, who am inclined to judge the
best, impute it wholly to their simplicity, and that in meddling in matters of
state, wherein (God wot) they are but Nouices, they overthrow those, that
fondly give ear unto them. Whereunto the gentleman replying; I am not (says
he) of their number, that wish them ill, for they never deserved ill of me, yet
I make no question, but when they incited the Arragonians to revolt, it was but
a iugling trick, to further the King of Spaines intendments. For, as you know
much better then my self, Kings are many times well pleased with such
rebellions, that they may thereby take occasion to suppress, and restrain the
ancient privileges of their subjects, and to reduce them into even rank with
their fellows. And this leads me, persisting in my former opinion, to
conceive more and more, that the Jesuit bears a Spanish heart, that is, a heart
naturally devoted to the King of Spain. Besides, if you take this Arragonian
history even in that sense, yet should your rule fall short: for this practice
of theirs, fell out most successefully unto them.

The Advocate made answer to the Gentleman, saying: The matter is not great,
you may conceive of it as please your self: as for me, I am of another mind,
and I am persuaded my opinion comes nearer the truth. But not to digress from
the matter in hand, you shall find no history more strange, as touching the
argument in question, then that which of late memory has happened to the King
of Poland, Stephen Batori, being also King of Sweden. This Prince being
altogether Iesuited, and having been mightily importuned by them, to be
admitted into his Realm of Sweden, at last resolved to satisfy their desire.
His ordinary residence is in Poland, and for Sweden, Duke Charles his Uncle,
is his Lieutenant general. The King, desirous to accomplish what the Jesuits
requested, signified his pleasure directly to his uncle: Charles made him
answer, that the people would never be brought to like of that Society, and
besought the King his nephew, not to grow into terms with his subjects, to
whom he had given his promise, at the time of his coronation, never to receive
the Jesuits into his Realm; whereunto the chief States of the Land had
likewise subscribed.

But he, that saw not, but by their eyes, and heard not, but by their ears,
resolved to go through withal, (notwithstanding these humble admonitions) and
to enter his realm with an Army, to make his subjects believe that he meant
good earnest: for preventing whereof, they arm themselves likewise on their
part. The matter was so carried, that the Prince was first overthrown by sea,
afterward discomfited by Land, and taken prisoner: within a while after, he
was set at liberty, and restored to his Crown, under promise to call a
Parliament, and to observe, what should therein be concluded and agreed upon.

The States were summoned, he in time of the Parliament, conveyed himself
away, leaving garrisons in certain places, which were at his devotion. Being
returned back again to Polande, by the instigation of the Jesuits, who wholly
possessed him, he gathered together the scattered boordes of his shipwrackt
Army, and implores aid of the States of Poland, to revenge the wrong which he
said was done him.

In the mean time, while he was about his preparations, (as yet he is, the
Polanders lending a deaf ear to the matter) his uncle took from him those
places, which were remaining in his subjection within Sweden, and is at the
point, to put him quite besides his kingdom, which was gotten by the prowess
of Gustaue his grandfather, and kept by the wisdom of his Father; Poland
being not very firm to him withal. And for all this his fall and overthrow,
he may thank none but the Jesuits, whose protection he would needs undertake.

After I have travailed into all these far Countries, I will return to mine
own. The Jesuits raised troubles in the state of France, under pretense to
root Caluinisme out of the land. In this quarrel the Spaniard was called to
for assistance, who entertained no mean hopes, seeing himself command within
Paris with open arms, and above all other, favored by the Jesuits, who had
the whole rule and superintendencie over that Anarchie, or confused government
of the sixteen Tyrants, set up by the multitude.

I will not say what the departure of the Spaniard was, this I will say, that
the Kings entrance into Paris was so tryumphant, as the Spaniard thought
himself happy, that he might hold his life of him by fealty and homage.
Moreover, the traiterous practices of the Jesuits, which vanished into smoke,
were the occasion, that by a decree made in the high court of Paris, themselves
were banished and expelled, as well out of the good City of Paris, as out of
the jurisdiction of that Court.

To conclude, I see not after they have raised tumults in all Countries, that
their designements sort to effect.

CHAP. 17. That the Pope has not power to translate the Crown of France from
one to another, against the dangerous position of the Jesuits: and some other
discourse tending to the same effect.
THe Jesuits, not content to have offered violence to our King in time of the
troubles, do at this day in the time of peace, by their pens, offer violence
to the Royalty it self. He that maintains in Rome, that the Pope may
transfer Empires and Kingdoms from hand to hand at his pleasure, deserves a
Cardinals hat, as Father Robert Bellarmine the Jesuit: he that maintains the
same position in France, is worthy of a hat of that color, but not of that
kind as the Cardinals. Kings die when it pleases God to call them, the
Roialtie never dies. Which is the cause that the Parliament Court of Paris,
when they accompany the funeral obsequies of our Kings, are not in mourning
weeds, but in Scarlet, the true mark and ensign of the never dying majesty
of the Crown or Royalty. One of the chief flowers of our Crown is, that our
Kings, cannot incur the censures of the Church of Rome, nor their realm be
interdicted, nor consequently transposed. It is a law not made, but bred with
us, which we have not learned, received, or by long instruction imprinted, but
a law, which is drawn, inspired, and derived into us out of the very breasts
of our Mother France, wherein we are not nurtured, but nursed, that if any
thunderbolts fortuned to be sent from Rome against the majesty of our Kings,
so as in consequence thereof, the realm might fall under the sentence of
Interditement, we are not bound to yield obedience thereunto. Neither yet for
all this, did our kings ever loose the title of Most Christian, nor we of the
Eldest sons of the Church.

The Jesuit has been condemned by a decree of the Court, he draws his chain
after him still, yet will he not cease to be a Jesuit: that is, a Seminary of
divisions, factions, and dissentions within our country. Let us then hear what
he says, who under the name of Montaignes, has published the book of the
Truth, as he intitles it, but of the forged and lying Truth. After he had
discoursed, that the Temporal state only appertained to the King, and the
Spiritual to the holy Father, who claimed no interest in their souerainties,
he affirms, that if the king happen at any time to transgress, God has put
a rod into the Popes hand to chastise him, and deprive him of his kingdom. And
this is for the behoof, Mont. cap. 15. of the Truth defended.
and for the good of Princes, (says he) who most commonly are reclaimed, and
brought to their duties, rather for fear of their Temporal estate, which they
euer-more hold deer, (though otherwise ill given) then of their Spiritual,
which they set not by, unless their conscience be the better, which is not
general to all of them.

But the Pope is no God: no more was Samuel, who executed that sentence
against Saul. So as God had anointed Saul King by the Prophet, so does he send
the sentence of his deposition by him, and by him translate the kingdom, and
anoint David king.

In the time of Osias king of Judah, the high priest (no more a GOD then
Samuel,) gave the kingdom from the father to the son, he being strooken
with leprosy for his presumption. This transposition of the Crown, was done
by the appointment of the high Priest, (according as by the Law was ordained)
and consequently the deposition of the Father.

Iehoiada was no God, but a priest, and Gods Lieutenaunt, when, after he had
caused Athalia the Queen to be put to death for her tyrannous government, he
put the scepter into the hands of Ioas, a prince of the blood, and lawful
successor to the Crown. All those were but Gods ministers to execute his
decrees, as the Pope likewise is.

And seeing God has infinite means to translate a kingdom, by the force and
weapons of Pagans, as of Moors, Turks, and other strange Nations, making the
Assyrians conquerours over the Greeks, the Greeks over the Assyrians, both of
the Jews, and the Romans of both, what milder course could he have ordained
among Christians, what way more reasonable, or more secure, then by the
mediation and authority of the head of the Church, and the common Father of
all Christians, who being specially assisted by God, and by men both learned
and religious, will in likelihood do nothing prejudicial to the right of the
lawful successors, and will proceed without passion, and withal moderation
and mildnes in a case of that importance, having an eye evermore to the honor
of God, and unto the public and private good.

In conclusion, by this learned position, which our pernicious Jesuit
maintains, the Pope has authority to transfer kingdoms from one hand to
another, when he sees cause so to do, and doing it, he is subject to no
man's control: inasmuch as if God himself may do it, then is it lawful for
his Vicar to do the like: the Pope having no less pre-eminence over Kings, in
these times of Christianity, then the Prophets had in the time of Moses law.

This fond opinion of thine, brings me to a marvelous strait, forcing me to
combat against the authority of the holy Sea. First, if you will argue this
position morallie, where shall you find that a King constituting his
Lieuetenants general in Provinces, gives them in all points as ample
authority, as himself has over his subjects? And to say, that God has
transferred his omnipotent power into any man whatsoever, is a point of
blaspemie against the Majesty of GOD. Besides, tell me Sophister, where find
you that you ought to beg such examples out of the old Testament, to transplant
them into the new?

But with such illusions do you and your associats, surprise the consciences
of the weak and ignorant multitude. For if that reason of yours were of any
value, or consequence, we should by the same, bring Circumcision into use
again at this day, because it was used under the Law of Moses. And by the same
pretext, it shall be lawful for the subject, to lay violent hands upon his
Sovereign, Judges. 3.
because Ehud murdered Eglon King of Moab, unpunished.

Seeing you term your self a Jesuit, let us follow the footesteps of Jesus
Christ; for to this mark ought all our cogitations to level, whereunto
restraining our discourse, I will make it appear, that I am a true
Cathotholicke liegeman to the Pope, and thou a true Catholic Impostor. We
consider the power of our Savior Christ in two different times: one was, when
for our Redemption he descended from heaven into the earth: the other, when
after his death and passion, he ascended from earth into heaven. The first was
the time of his humility, in respect whereof he professed, that his coming
was not to be an vmpire of their controversies, which they would have referred
to him: at what time he distinguished the power of God, from the power of the
Roman Emperor, saying; That we must yield unto God, that which belonged unto
God, and unto Caesar, that which was due unto Caesar. And being demanded of
Pilate, whether he were a king or no, he made him answer, that his kingdom
was not of this inferior world. The second was the time of his glory,
whereunto all those excellent sayings of the prophet David are to be referred:
as when he said, that the earth was the Lords: Ask of me, and I will give
thee nations and heritages, and they shall be unto thee for a possession unto
the uttermost bounds of the earth. And in another place, that he was Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings.

Let us not falsify the holy Scripture: For the more you ambitious Jesuits
apply out of it to the Pope, to authorize, not his greatness, but your own, the
more you take from him. At what time did Christ assign Saint Peter to be his
Vicar? Surely while he was yet on earth, and at the point to finish his
pilgrimage, that he might represent his person here below, in his estate of
humility: and so gave him the keys of heaven, and not of earth, to signify
unto us, that he gave him the charge of spiritual matters, without mingling
there-withall temporal business.

And certainly our ancient Popes were very ignorant, if giving themselves
the title of Seruus seruorum, they meant to represent Jesus Christ, as he is
in the fullness of his glory, and after he ascended into heaven, to sit on
the right hand of GOD his Father. In like manner was it an heresy in Luther,
to teach his folowers, that the Pope was wrongfully termed head of the church,
and Vicar general to Jesus Christ: and no less heresy was it in Ignacius,
when to oppose Luther, he affirmed that the Pope was Christ's Vicar, not only
in his estate of humility, but eue^ in his estate of glory likewise. He then
is a true Catholic liegeman to the Pope, who does acknowledge and approve his
authority, according to the original institution thereof, without any
augmentations, or additions from men.

Jesuit, I now come unto thee: let us weigh how full of danger this position of
thine is. Our Kings know best, what is expedient for the maintenance and
preservation of their estate: and like skilful Pilots, are feign sometimes to
strike sail in a tempest. This course the Pope, being carried away with other
respects, will not like of, and will perhaps summo^ our kings to co^form their
proceedings to his mind. After some two, or three admonitio^s, if they obey
not, he will proceed to censure the^, and consequently to make a divorce between
them and their subjects: or if not so, to interdite the Realm, and expose it
for a pray to any Prince, that shall be first able to possess himself of it.
Good God! into what a confusion do thou bring our State?

Jesuit, learn this lesson of me; for I will not suffer, either our countrime^
to be infected with thy poisonous propositions, or strangers that shall read
this book of thine, to conceive, that the Majesty of our kings is, by thy
coming, any whit empayred. First we maintain, and uphold it for an article
inviolable in France, that the Pope has no authority, to be liberal of our
Realm, for any man's advantage whatsoever, what fault soever our king shall be
found culpable of, none excepted. The Pope has no power, but what is given him
by commission from God; he is neither that Samuel, nor that Iehoiada, who were
commanded by God to do, what they did under the old law: for under the new,
which we call the new Testament, there is no mention of any such matter. The
Pope cannot by the power of his spiritual sword, control the temporal. I
say not therefore, that any king of France should forget himself, either in
the Catholic Religion, or in the government of his subjects, to whom he ought
to be a second father: for if he do, let him be assured, that God will sooner,
or later forget him, and avenge himself by some means unexpected, and
unthought of, but that we are to seek this redress at Rome, I flatly deny.

For this first position, I hold it to be clear: that which now I will
deliver, may seem more questionable. We hold it for another article firm and
indubitable in this Realm of France, that our kings are not subject to the
Popes excommunication. A thing, which we have received from all antiquity. I
remember I have read that Lothaire king of Austracia deceasing, left Jews his
brother, who was Emperor, and King of Italy, to be his successor. King
Charles, the Bald, uncle to them both, seized on it by right of occupation, as
lying fit for his hand. Jews had recourse to Pope Adrian, who undertook the
quarrel for him, and summoned Charles to do his nephew right, upon pain of
excommunication: but Charles would give no ear to him. By reason whereof, the
Pope went on to interpose his censures with bitter curses and comminations: and
knowing the high authority, which rested in Hingmare, Archbishop of Reims,
he enjoined him not to admit the king, to communicate with him, upon pain*
himself to be deprived of his Holiness his communion.

There was never Popes Iniunction, more just, and holy then this. For what
color could there be for an uncle to intercept his nephews right in
succeeding his own brother? Yet never was I niunction worse entertained then
this. For Hiagmare after he had imparted the letters Apostolical to diverse
Prelates and Barons of France, to be advised by them, how to carry himself in
the matter, he wrote back to Pope Adrian, what he had drawn and collected out
of their aunsweres; namely, that all of them were much offended, and agreeued
with that his Decree, alleging, that the like proceedings had not been seen,
no not when the kings were Heretics, Scismatiques, or Tyrants: and
maintayning that kingdoms were purchased by the edge of the sword, and not by
the excommunications, or censures of the Sea Apostolic, or of Prelates. And
when I urge them (said Hingmare) with the authority, which was delegate by our
Savior to Saint Peter, and from him derived by succession to the Popes of
Rome; they answer me. Petite Dominum Apostolicum vt: quia Rex and Episcopus
simul esse non potest: Et sui antecessores Ecclesiasticum ordinem (quod suum
est) and non Rempublicam (quod regum est) disposuerunt. Non praecipiat nobis
habere regem, qui nos in sic longinquis partibus adiuuare non possit, contra
subitaneos and frequentes Paganorum impetus: and nos Francos iubeat seruire,
cui nolumus seruire. Qua istud iugu^ sui antecessores, nostris antecessoribus
non imposueru^t. Quia scriptum in sanctis libris audimus, vt pro liberate and
haereditate nostra vsque ad mortem certare debeamus. That is, Tell our
Apostolical Lord, that he cannot at once be a King and a Prelate, and that his
predecessors ordered the Ecclesiastical State (which belongs unto him) and
not the temporal, (which pertaines only to kings.) Let him not inioyne us to
receive a King, who remaining in a country so far distant, cannot aid us,
against the sudden, and often incursions of the Infidels. Neither let him
command us (who of our Franchise and Freedom bear the name of Franks) to
serve him, whom we list not to serve: which yoke his predecessors never
imposed upon our Ancestors. And we find it written in holy Scripture, that
we ought to fight to the death, for our liberty and inheritance. And a little
after, Propterea si Dominus Apostolicus vult pacem quaerere, sic quaer at vt
rixam non moueat. That is; Therefore if our Apostolical Lord seek after
peace, let him so seek it, as he be not an occasion of war. And in conclusion,
Hingmare shuts up his letter with these words. Et vt mihi experimento videtur,
propter meam interdictionem, vel propter lingue humanae gladium, nisialiud
obstiterit, Rex noster, vel eius Regni primores non dimittent, vt quod
coeperunt, quaniu^ potuerint, no^ exequantur. That is; And as I find by proof,
our King, or the Peers of his Realm, are not minded, either for my
excommunication, or the sword of man's tongue (unless some other matter come to
stop them) to desist from prosecuting what they have begun.

By which letters you may understand, that the Pope took upon him, not only
to censure King Charles, the Bald, for his disobedience in so just and
rightful a cause, but to make himself Judge also of Empyres and Kingdoms:
whereunto neither the king, nor his subjects would ever assent: auouching, that
the Pope could not confound Religion with State, and that they were resolved to
withstand him, whatsoever it cost them: as being a new law, which he meant to
obtrude upon the land, to the prejudice of our kings.

It may be, some honest meaning man will say: How does this hang together? You
allow the Pope all primacie, and superiority in spiritual causes, and yet
limite his general power in your own king, though he should run astray out
of the right way. For in respect of temporal matters, I grant it; but as for
this high point of spiritual authority, all things make against that position.
Whom I answer thus. We acknowledge in France, that the Pope is supreme head
of the Catholic and Universal Church, yet is it not therefore absurd, or
inconsequent, that our Kings should be exempted from his censures.

We see that all ancient Monasteries, are naturally subject to the
jurisdiction of their Diocesans, yet are many of them by special privilege
exempted from the same. Our ancient Kings have been the first protectors of
the holy Sea, as well against the tyranny of the Emperous of Constantinople,
as against the incursions, and invasions of the Lombards, which were daily at
the gates of Rome. One king alone, Pepin, conquered the whole state, or
Herarchie of Rauenna, which he freely gave to the Pope, delivering their City
from the long siege, which Astolpho king of the Lombards had held about it. And
Charlemaine the son of Pepin, chased out of Lombardie, Didier their king, and
his whole race: making himself Master, as well of the City of Rome, as of
all Italy, where he was afterward acknowledged, and crowned Emperor of the
West by Pope Leo, whom he restored fully and wholly to his ancient liberty,
against the insolency of the people of Rome, who repined and mutined against
him. And at that time was it concluded, that the Popes elect, might not enter
upon the exercise, or administration of their functions, until they were first
confirmed by him or his successors.

I am certainly persuaded, that he and his posterity, were at that time freed,
and exempted from all censures and excommunications of the holy Sea. And albeit
we have not the express Constitution to show, yet may it be extracted out of
the Ordinances of the said Emperor, recorded by Iuon, Bishop of Chartres: Si
quos culpatores Regia potestas, Epist. 123. and 195.
aut in gratiam benignitatis receperit, aut mensae suae participes fecerit, hos
and sacerdotum, and populorum conuentus suscipere Ecclesiastica communione
debebit, vt quod principalis pietas recepit, nec a Sacerdotibus Dei extraneum
habeatur. If the king shall receive any sinner into the favor of his
clemency, or make him partaker of his own table, the whole company of the
Priests and people, shall likewise receive him into the communion of the
Church: that, that which the princes piety has admitted, be not by the
priests, held as cast off or rejected.

If then the table, or the favor of our Kings, did acquit and absolute the
excommunicated person, from the Ecclesiastical censures, we may well say,
that our kings themselves were exempt from all excommunications. Our kings had
right to confirm the Popes after their elections, a right which the Popes
allege, to have been by them remitted; then why should we be more envied then
they, if the ancient Prelacie of Rome, have privileged our kings from all
excommunications and censures whatsoever?

Sure I am that Pope Gregory the fourth, going about to infringe that
prerogative, to gratify the sons of king Jews the Mild, the son of
Charlemaine, the good Bishops and Prelates of France, sent him word, that if
he came in person to excommunicate their king, himself should return
excommunicated to Rome. A peremtorie speech I must confess, but it wrought so,
as the Pope, to cover his packing, pretended he came into France for no other
intent, but to mediate a peace between the Father and the sons, as indeed
he did: and had he stood upon other terms, he would have gone out of France
greatly displeased.

So much do we embrace this privilege of our kings, as we dare affirm,
that it had his beginning either with the Crown it self, at what time Clouis
became a Christian, or at least in the second line, within a while after our
kings had taken in hand, the defense and protection of the Church of Rome: for
so do we find it to have been observed successively in Charlemaine, Jews the
Mild, his son, and Charles the Balde, his grandchild. And since in the
third line, when our kings seemed some what to forget the right way, and that
it was requisite to extend the authority of the Church toward them, the Pope,
or his Legates, were feign to join the Clergy of France with them. In
brief, as long as all things were quiet and peaceable between the King and
his subjects, the censures of Rome were never received against our Kings.

In our ancient Records, we find a Bull bearing date from Pope Boniface the
eight, the tenor whereof is, Vt nec Rex Franciae, nec Regina, nec liberi eorum
ex communicart possint: That neither the King nor the Queen of France, nor
their children can be excommunicated.

It fell so out after that time, that the same Pope, falling at variance with
king Phillip the fair, he needs would excommunicate him, but there was never
excommunication cost Pope so dear, as that did him. For his Nuncios wear
committed prisoners, his Bulls burnt, and Boniface himself, being taken by
Naugeret, Chauncelor of France, presently after died, for very sorrow and
despite that he had received so foul a disgrace at the hands of his enemy.
Wherein Phillip did nothing, but by the counsel and consent of the whole
Clergy of France. So far was this excommunication, from falling to the
prejudice of the King and his Realm, that contrariwise, it turned to his shame
and confusion, by whom it was decreed.

Benet the 13. otherwise called Peter de Luna, keeping his sea or residence in
Auignon, having interdited Charles the sixth and his realm, the king sitting in
the throne of justice in the Parliament, or high Court of Paris, the 21. of
May, 1408. gave sentence that the Bull should be rent in pieces, and that
Gonsalue and Conseloux, the bearers thereof, should be set upon a pillorie, and
publicly notified, and traduced in the pulpit: the meaning whereof was, that
the people should be taught and informed, that the king was not liable to any
excommunication. Which decree was accordingly put in execution in the month of
August, with the greatest scorn that could be devised, the two Nuncios or
Legates having this inscription upon their Miters: These men are disloyal to
the Church, and to the King. Julius the second, offered the like to king Jews
the twelfth, and his censures were censured by a Convocation of the Clergy of
France, holden at Tours, 1510.

Not to go too far from our own times, the like censures came from Rome in
time of our last troubles, in the year 1591. and by the sentence as well of the
Court of Parliament of Paris, then removed to Tours, as of the sovereign or
high chamber, holden at Chalons in Champagnie, it was ordered, that the Bulls
should be burnt by the public Executioner, as accordingly they were. A Maxim
so grounded in the realm of France, that in the treaty of peace, which was
made in the town of Arras, in the year 1481, between king Jews the 11, and
Maximilian the Archduke of Austria, and the States of the Low Countries, the
Deputies for Maximilian and the States, treated with ours, that the King should
promise to keep and observe this agreement, and to that end he and his sons
should submit themselves to all Ecclesiastical censures: Notwithstanding the
privilege of the Kings of France, Whereby, neither he nor his Realm, might
be compeld by Ecclesiastical censures. Which treaty, was afterward confirmed
by king Jews the same year at Plessi, near unto Tours, the confirmation
carries these words: We have submitted us, and our said son, and our
Realm, to all Ecclesiastical censures, for the keeping and observing of the
said treaty: notwithstanding the privilege which we have, that we, nor our
successors, nor our Realm, ought not to be subject, nor liable to censures.
Which thing has been since that time confirmed, by a decree made in the
year 1549. Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, Archbishop of Reims, to make his
memory immortal, by a most honorable action, founded an University in Reims,
with many great privileges, having first obtained leave and permission of the
King, Henry the second, and next of the Pope, Paul the third, for so much as
concerned the spiritualties: who granted forth his Bulls very large, and
ample, containing amongst other clauses, this one.

Nos igitur piu^ and laudabile Henrici Regis, and Caroli Cardinalis desiderium,
plurimu^ commendantes, praefatum Henricum Rege^ a quibusuis excommunicationis,
suspensionis and interdicti, alijsque Ecclesiasticis sententijs and censuris,
poenis a iure vel ab homine, quauis occasion vel causa latis, si quibus
quomodolibet innodatus existat, ad effectum presentium duntaxat consequendum,
harum serie absoluentes. What greater favor, or courtesy could we expect from
Rome, then that our king without any suit of his, should be absolved from all
censures, which he could incur de iure, or de facto? Nevertheless, this
courtesy was by the Court of Parliament at Paris, as frankly refused, as it
was offered. Because in the verification as well of the Bulls, as of the kings
Letters Patent, it was enacted by a decree in Court, given the last save one
of January 1549, with this prouiso, that notwithstanding this pretended
absolution, it be not inferd, that the king has been, or hereafter may be,
any way, or for any cause whatsoever, subject to the excommunications, or
censures Apostolical, or thereby prejudice the rights, privileges, or
preheminences of the king, and of his Realm. As also the sentence given
against John Chastell, the 29. of December 1594. contained this peculiar
clause, that amongst other things, he was condemned, for having maintained,
that our king Henry the fourth, reigning at this present, was not in the
Church, until he had the approbation of the Pope: whereof he did repent, and
ask forgiveness of God, the king, and the Court.

This that I have delivered in this present discourse, does not proceed of any
sinister affection, which I bear to the holy Sea (sooner let GOD bereave me of
my life) but only to make it appear, that our kings carry together with
their Crown, their safe conduct in all places, and are not subject to the
treacherous practices of their enemies near the Pope. Notwithstanding you see,
how these accursed Jesuits, enemies of our peace, instruct us in the contrary,
that is, kindle and prepare us to revolt, in case our kings should stand in ill
terms with the Pope: which proves, that it is not without just cause, that by
a Decree of the Parliament of Paris, they have been banished out of France.

CHAP. 18. The Decree of the Parliament of Paris, against the Jesuits, in the
year 1594. and a Chapter taken out of the third book des Recerches de la
Farunce, by Stephen Pasquier.
Having dedicated this book, (says Pasquier) to the liberties of our Church
of France, Lib. 3. de^ Recer, ca. 32
I hope I shall not digress from my purpose, if I entreat somewhat of the Sect
of the Jesuits, which, to the subversion of our State, maintayneth principles
quite contrary to ours. The Jesuits having got into their hands the great
legacies, given and bequeathed them by Master William du Part, Bishop of
Clairmont, they bought Langres place lying in Saint Jacques street in the City
of Paris, where they, after their manner, established the form of a College,
and of a Monastery in diverse tenements: and taking upon them to instruct youth
without the authority of the Rector, they made suit sundry times to be
incorporated into the University. Which when they could not obtain, they
exhibited a petition to the same effect, to the Court of Parliament in the
year 1564. The University did me the honor, to choose me in a full
congregation for their Advocate. Having prepared my self for the cause, (being
armed with that sacred Decree, which the faculty of Divinity had pronounced
against them in the year 1554. where those two great pillars of our Catholic
Religion, Monsieur Picard, and Monsieur Maillard were assistants) I was
persuaded, that I was able with a free and uncontrolled conscience, to
encounter hand to hand, with this monster, which being neither Secular, nor
Regular, was both together, and therefore brought into our Church an ambiguous,
or mungrell profession. We pleaded this case two whole forenoones, Master
Peter Versoris, and I, he for the Jesuits, I for the University, before an
infinite multitude of people, who attended, to see the issue thereof: Master
Baptist du Menill, the Kings Advocate, a man of great sufficiency, was for me.
In my declaration, I alleged the irrigularitie of their profession; the
judgment, and determination of the whole faculty of Divinity, pronounced
against them ten years before: the objection made by Monsieur Bruslard, the
Kings Attorney General against their admittance, for that their vow was clean
contrary to ours, that if we should harbor them in our bosom, we should
bring in a Schism amongst us; and besides, so many espials for Spain, and
sworn enemies to France, the effects whereof we were like to feel, upon the
first change that the iniquity of time might bring upon us.

Notwithstanding for the conclusion, we were referred to Counsel. Either
party both got, and lost the day. For neither were they incorporated into the
University, nor yet prohibited to continue their accustomed readings. When God
has a purpose to afflict a realm, he planteth the roots thereof long time
before hand, These new-come guests, blind and bewitch the people by shows of
holiness, and fair promises. For, as if they had the gift of tongues, which the
holy Ghost infused into the Apostles, they made their boasts, that they
(forsooth) went to preach the Gospel in the midst of barbarous, and savage
people, they that (God knows) had enough to do, to speak their mother tongue.
With these pleasant baits did they inueigle and draw the multitude into their
snares. But as they had brought in a motly religion of Secular and Regular,
disturbing by means thereof all the Hierarchy of our Church, so did they
intend, to trouble thence-forward, all the politic states in Christendom. In
as much, as by a new invented rule, they began to mingle and confound the
State with their religion. And as it is easy, to fall from liberty to
unbridled license, so did they, upon this irriguler rule of theirs, ground the
most detestable heresy, that can be devised: affirming, that it is lawful to
murder any Prince, that should not conform himself to their principles:
treading under foot both the check, which our Savior gave to Saint Peter,
when he drew his sword in his defense, and the Canon of the Council of
Constance, whereby they were pronounced accursed, that set abroach this position.

When I pleaded the cause, I mentioned not these two propositions against them.
For though they bred them in their hearts, yet had they not as yet hatched
them: only I said, that there was no good to be hoped for of this monster: but
that they would ever put in practice either that principle, which was broched
by the old Mou^tainer, who in time of our wars beyond the Seas, dispersed his
subjects, called cutthroats, or murderers, through the the Provinces, to slay
the Christian Princes: or that horrible Anabaptisme, which sprung up in
Germany, when we were young: this should I never have imagined.
Notwithstanding, both the one and the other Maxim, has been by them put in
execution, in the sight and knowledge of all Christendom. For as concerning
the first, there is no man but knows, that they* having set foot in Portugal,
not under the title of Jesuits; but of Apostles, they solicited King Sebastian
by all manner of illusions, to make an universal law, that none might be called
to the Crown, unless he were of their Society: and moreover, elected by the
consent, and suffrages of the same. Whereunto they could not attain, albeit
they met with the most devout and superstitious Prince that could be. And not
to lead you out of our own country of France; they were the men, that
kindled the first coals of that accursed League, which has been the utter
ruin and subversion of the land. It was first of all debated amongst them, and
being concluded, they constituted their Fathers, Claudius Matthaeus a Lorrain,
and Claudius Sammier of Luxembourg, (for so are their Priests of greatest
antiquity called) to be their trumpets for the proclayming thereof over all
foreign nations. And after that time, did they with open face, declare
themselves to be Spaniards, as well in their Sermons, as public Lectures. In
favor of whom, they attempted to bring their second principle into practice,
not all the while that the King was divided from us in religion (for they knew,
that was a bar sufficient to keep him from the Crown) but as soon as they
saw him reclaymed into the bosom of the Church, they set on work one Peter
Barriere, a man resolute for execution, but weak and tender in conscience:
whom they caused to be confessed in their College at Paris, afterward to
receive the Sacrament, and having confirmed him by an assured promise of
Paradise, as a true Martyr, if he died in that quarrel, set forward this
valiant Champion, who was thrice at the the very point to execute his accursed
enterprise; and God as often miraculously stayed his hand, until at length
being apprehended at Melun, he received the just hyre of his traiterous
intention, in the year, 1593.

I speak nothing, but what mine eyes can witness, and what I had from his
own mouth when he was prisoner. View, and peruse all the impieties, that you
will, you shall find none so barbarous as this. To persuade an impiety, and
then to cover it with such a seeming mask of piety: In a word, to destroy a
soul, a King, Paradise, and our Church* all at a blow, to make way for their
Spanish and halfe-Pagan designements. All these new allegations, caused the
University of Paris, the City being brought under the Kings obedience, to
renew their former suit against them, which had been stayed before time by the
Counsels appointment. The cause was pleaded effectually and learnedly, by
Master Authonie Arnald: but when the process was brought to the very point
of Judgment, there fell out another accident, which made them proceed roundly
thereunto. John Chastell, a Paritian of the age of 19. years, a graft of this
accursed Seminary, stroke our king Henris the fourth with a knife in his
Royal Palace of the Louvre, in the midst of his Nobility. He is taken, his
process being commenced and finished, sentence ensues dated the 29. of
December, 1594. the tenor whereof follows.

Being viewed by the Court, the great Chamber, and the Tournel being assembled,
the arraignement, of process criminal, begun by the Controller of the kings
household, and since finished at the requisition and demand of the Kings
Attorney general, plaintise against John Chastell of the City of Paris
student, having made the course of his studies in the College of Clairmont,
prisoner in the prison called the Conciergerie of the Palace, by reason of the
most execrable and abominable parricide attempted upon the person of the King:
The examinations and confessions of the said John Chastell: the said John
Chastell being heard and examined in the said Court touching the said
parricide: there being heard also in the same, John Gu^ret Priest, calling
himself of the Company and Society of the name of Jesus, abiding, and
continuing in the said College, and sometimes Schoolemaister of the said John
Chastell, Peter Chastell, and Denise Hazard, the father and mother of the said
John Chastell: the conclusions of the Attorney general, all waighed and
considered. BE IT KNOWN, that the said Court has declared, and does declare,
the said John Chastell, attaynted and convicted of the crime of treason,
against God and man in the highest degree, by the most wicked and detestable
patricide, or murder attempted upon the person of the King. For repayring of
the which crime, it has condemned, and does condemn the said John Chastell,
to make an honorable amends, before the gate of the principal Church of
Paris, naked in his shirt, holding a Torch of wax burning of the weight of two
pounds, and there on his knees, to say and declare, that accursedly and
traitorously, he has attempted the said most barbarous and abominable
parricide, and wounded the King in the face with a knife; and through false and
damnable instructions, he has said in his said trial or process, that it was
lawful to murder Kings, and that the King, Henry the fourth, now reigning,
is not in the Church, until he have the approbation of the Pope: whereof he is
heartily sorry, and asks forgiveness of God, she King, and the Court. This
done, to be drawn in a doungcart to the place of execution called the Gre^e^
there to be pinched with hot pincers, on his arms, and thighs, and his right
hand, holding in it the knife, wherewith he attempted, to commit the said
murder or parricide, to be cut off: after that, his body to be dismembered,
and drawn in pieces with four horses: and his quarters and body to be cast
into the fire, and consumed to ashes* and the ashes to be cast into the wind,
and it has declared, all his goods to be forfeyted, and confiscate to the
King. Before which execution shall the said John Chastell be brought to the
rack or torture, as well ordinary, as extraordinary, to know the truth of his
confederates, and of certain cases arising out of the process: Has made and
does make inhibition, and restraint to any persons, of what quality or
condition soever, upon pain of being guilty of high Treason, not to speak or
utter the said speeches, which the said Court has pronounced, and does
pronounce to be scandalous, seditious, and contrary to the word of God, and
condemned as heretical by the sacred decrees: It does ordain, that the Priests
and students of the College of Clairmont, and all other, calling themselves of
that Society, as corrupters of youth, and disturbers of common quiet, enemies
of the King, and State, shall avoid within three days after the publication of
this present sentence, out of Paris, and other Cities, and places where their
Colleges are; and fifteen days after, out of the Realm, upon pain,
wheresoever they shall be found, the said term expired, to be punished, as
guilty and culpable of the said crime of high Treason. The goods as well
moveable, as immovable, to them belonging, shall be employed to charitable
uses, and the distribution and disposing thereof to be, as shall be ordained by
the Court. Moreover, it forbids all the kings subjects, to send any scholars
to the Colleges of the said Society, being out of the Realm, there to be
instructed, upon the like pain to incur the crime of high Treason. The Court
does ordain, that the copies of this present sentence, shall be sent abroad to
the Bayliages, and Shriualties of this jurisdiction, to be executed according
to the form and tenor thereof. It is enioind to the Baylifs and Shriefs, their
deputies general and particular, to proceed to the execution thereof after the
term, or respite thereni contained, and to the deputies of the Atturny
general, to further the said execution, to give information of all lets or
hindrances thereof, and to certify the Court of their diligence herein
performed, upon pain to be deprived of their several places and offices.
Signed by Tillet. Pronounced to the said John Chastell, executed the 29. of
December, 1594.

During these proceedings, whereupon this sentence ensued, certain Barons of
the Court, were appointed to go unto the College of Clairmont, who having
caused diverse papers to be seized, they found amongst others, certain books
written by the hand of Master John Guignard, a Jesuit priest, containing many
false and seditious arguments, to prove, that it was lawful to murder the late
king Henry the third; and instructions for the murdering of King Henry the
fourth his successor. In conclusion, this was the end both of the Jesuits,
being the Schoolemaisters, and their unhappy scholar.

Another sentence against John Guignard, Priest: Regent in the College of the
Jesuits, in the City of Paris.
Being viewed by the Court, the great Chamber and the Tournell assembled, the
trial or process criminal, commenced by one of the Counselors of the said
Court, at the requisition or demand of the Kings Atturny general, against
John Guignard, priest, Regent in the College of Clairmont, of the City of
Paris, prisoner in the prison of the Conciergerie of the Palace, for having
been found seized of diverse books, containing amongst other matters, the
approbation of the most cruel and barbarous parricide of the late King, whom
God pardon; and inductions to cause the King now reigning, to be murdered:
Examinations and confessions of the said Guygnard, the said books openly
showed, acknowledged to be framed and composed by himself, and written with
his own hand: conclusions of the Kings Atturny general: the said Guignard
being heard and examined upon the matters to him objected, and contained in
the said book: and all weighed and considered: BE IT KNOWN, that the said
Court has declared, and does declare, the said Guignard attainted, and
convicted of the crime of high treason, and to have composed and written the
said books, containing many erroneous and seditious arguments, to prove, that
it was lawful, to commit the said parricide, and was allowable to kill the
King now reigning, Henry the fourth: For repayring whereof, it has condemned,
and does condemn, the said Guignard, to make an honorable amends, naked in
his shirt, a haltar about his neck, before the gate of the principal Church of
Paris, and there kneeling, holding in his hands a Torch of wax burning, of the
weight of two pounds, to say and declare; That wickedly, accursedly, and
against the truth, he has written: that the late King was instlie slain by
Jacques Clement, and that if the King now reigning, should not die in the
wars, he ought to be killed: For the which he is heartily sorry, and asks
forginenesse of God, the King, and the Court. This done, to be led to the place
of the Grieve, there to be hanged until he be dead, upon a Gibbet, which
shall be there erected for the same purpose. And afterward, the dead body to
be consumed to ashes in a fire, which shall be made at the foot of the said
Gibbet: it has declared and does declare, all and singular his goods to be
forfeited and confiscate to the King. Pronounced to the said* John Guignard,
and executed the seventh day of January, 1595.

Another sentence against Peter Chastel, Father of John Chastell, and John
Gueret Priest, naming himself of the Company and Society of the Name of
Jesus.
BEing viewed by the Court, the great Chamber, and the Tournell assembled, the
trial, or process criminal, co^menced by the Controuler of the Kings
household, and since finished at the requisition and demand of the Kings
Atturny general, plaintiff against John Gueret, priest, naming himself of the
Company, and Society of the Name of Jesus, abiding in the College of
Clairmont, and heretofore Schoolemaister to John Chastell, lately executed by
sentence of the said Court, Peter Chastell Citizen and Draper of the city of
Paris, Denise Hazard his wife, the Father and mother of the said John Chastell:
John le Comte, and Katherine Chastell his wife: Magdelan Chastell, the daughter
of the said Peter Chastell, and Denise Hazard, Anthony Villiers, Peter
Russell, Simona Turin, Louisa Camus, their man and maid-seruaunts, Master
Claudius l' Allemant, priest, Curat of Saint Peter's of Arcis, Master Jacques
Bernard, priest, Clarke of the said charge, and Master Lucas Morin, priest,
qualefied in the fame, prisoners in the prisons of the Conciergerie of the
Palace: examinations, confessions, and denialls of the said prisoners,
confrontation being made of the said John Chastell, to the said Peter Chastell
his Father, information being given against the said Peter Chastell, the
witness therein heard, produced face to face, the process criminal intended
against the said John Chastell, by reason of the most execrable, and
abominable parricide, attempted upon the person of the King; the process
verbal of the execution of the sentence of death, given against the said John
Chastell, the 29. of December last past: The conclusions of the Kings Atturny
general: the said Gueret, Peter Chastell, Hazard being heard, and examined in
the said Court, upon the matters to them objected, and contained in the said
process: other examination, and denialls made by the said Gueret and Peter
Chastell, on the rack or torture, to them applied by order of the said Court:
and all weighed and considered: BE IT KNOWN, that the said Court, for the
causes contrived in the said process, has banished and does banish, the said
Gueret and Peter Chastell, out of the Realm of France, that is to say, the
said Gueret for ever, and the said Chastell for the term and space of nine
years: and for ever out of the city and suburbs of Paris: it is enjoined
them, to keep, and observe their sentence of banishment, upon pain to be
hanged without any other form, or manner of process: it has declared and
does declare, all and singular the goods of the said Gueret forfeited, and
confiscate to the King: and has condemned and does condemn, the said Peter
Chastell, in two thousand crowns for a fine to the king, to be employed to the
releasing and relieuing of prisoners in the Conciergerie, and to remain in
prison, until the full payment and satisfaction of the said sum: neither shall
the time of their banishment run, but from the day that he shall have fully
paid the said sum.

The said Court does ordain, that the dwelling house of the said Chastell,
shall be pulled down, ruinated, and raced, and the place made common, that no
man may hereafter build thereon. In which place, for everlasting memory of
this most wicked and detestable parricide, attempted upon the person of the
King, there shall be set up and erected, an eminent pillar of Marble, together
with a table, wherein shall be written, the causes of the said demolition, and
erection of the said pillar, which shall be made with the money arising out of
the demolition, or pulling down of the said house.

And as touching the said Hazard, le Comte, Katherine and Magdalen Chastell,
Villiers, Russell, Turin, Camus, l' Alemant, Bernard, and Morin, the said Court
does ordain, that they shall be set at liberty. Pronounced to the said
Hazard, le Comte, Katherine and Magdalen Chastell, Villiers, Russell, Turin,
Camus, l' Allemant, Bernard, and Morin, the seventh of January, and to the
said Gueret and Peter Chastell, the tenth of the said month. 1595.

These are the three sentences of the Court of Parliament of Paris, whereby it
appears, what diligence, religion and justice, was performed in the whole
proceeding, how those that were accused, were punished more or less, those
that were only suspected, freely discharged and released, in a case which
concerned the whole state of France. Let us now take a view, if you please,
of the comments, which the Jesuits have made and do make upon these sentences:
for of late they have again recovered their speech.

CHAP. 19. The Jesuits under covert terms, challenge the sentence given against
John Chastell, of injustice: and how GOD suffered him to be punished, to make
the punishment of the Jesuits more notorious to all posterity.
AGainst this Sentence, touching John Chastell, do our Jesuits outragiouslie
exclaim, and making show, as if they would excuse the Court, they accuse it of
injustice, by it committed, in condemning them.

We are (says the hypocritical Jesuit in his most humble petition presented
to the King) enemies to Kings, the state, and your person, and seducers of
youth. Against these general accusations, we first oppose the testimony of
the Court of Parliament of Paris. The Court had heard the Advocates, which
brought, and emptied their baggs, laden with these weighty accusations: it had
been with all importunity solicited to condemn us: It had above 9. months
respite to weigh and balance the cause; that is, from the last of April,
until Christmas following: It condemned us not, but suffered us to remain in
peaceable possession of our rights, reserving it self to a fitter season, to
call them to account, which had most uncharitably suggested these calumnious
accusations against us.

Think you, that this body of Justice, composed of the most famous ornaments
of the Law, which the world yields, and of the strongest and firmest members
of the state, if it had seen the least of these crimes, as sufficiently
proved, as they were maliciously objected, think you, I say, that it would
not have proceeded, to condemn us in the very instant? And having not
condemned us, has it not, by his silence, condemned our Accusers, and given
most assured testimony of our innocence? If since that time it have condemned
us, that proceeded not of the due and formal pleadings of the Advocates, or of
any advantage of law, which our adversaries had against us: it is an
inconvenience which has condemned us in costs, but not ouer-throwne our cause.

And within a few leaves after: In July 1594, at what time the process was
revived by two pleading Advocates, they charged us with Barriere, and framed
many like imputatio^s, to agranate this crime against our credit and
reputation. But all these were but blunt assertions, not sharp proofs,
proceeding from the tongue, and not from the truth, the Court made no reckoning
of them, and by their silence cleared and acquitted us.

Rene de la Fon follows his steps, and goes about to prove in like manner,
that the co^demning of Chastell, is the acquiting of all their Society: in as
much as he being racked and tortured, appeached none of them. But their
intelligence was very bad in this matter: For albeit this wretched fellow by
his aunswers, and interrogatories to him ministered, spared the names of
particulers, yet did he accuse the whole Order in general, as I will verify
hereafter more at large. Moreover, these Jesuits seem to be both of them,
altogether ignorant in the course of Judgments, pronounced by those high
Courts.

The Court (says the first) has not forthwith proceeded to judgment in this
cause, notwithstanding the sharp accusations wherewith we were charged: Ergo,
by his silence it pronounced us guiltless. Furthermore, Barriere his fact was
laid to our charge, yet the Court would not presently condemn us; Ergo, the
Court intended by silence to acquit us thereof. I beseech you, seeing you
profess your selves to be Logicians, and to have the start of all men in
scholasticall Divinity, by what principles can you make good these
conclusions? Yet are they not strange, to proceed from a Jesuits pen. For
these reverent Fathers are in place and authority, to condemn Kings without
hearing them, and to abandon their realms, and lay the^ open for a pray, to
him that can possess himself thereof^ as they did to the last King.

High and sovereign Courts, observe another manner of proceeding. They hear
the Counsel on both parties, yet rest not thereupon: but in such important
causes as this especially, they remit their judgment or sentence, to their
better leisure, and to their second thoughts. The like course was held in their
cause. Arnauld and Dole, urged in their Declarations, the tragical history of
Barriere, the Court gave no credit thereunto, and not without good
consideration. In as much as it was requisite for them to view Barriere his
trial or process, which was made at Melun by Lugoly, that they might be
thoroughly informed of what had there passed. But alas Jesuit, what is become of
thy wit? Thou do acknowledge this Court to consist of the greatest ornaments
of the Law, which the world yields: as elsewhere also, that referring both
parties to counsel, they had proceeded without passion, or partiality: and
yet in the instant, thou changest thy note, challenging it to have done
injustice, in grounding their sentence against you upon Chastell, who had not
accused you. Judges proceed indirectly, when either they want skill to judge,
or that their judgments are corrupted by hatred, favor, or other such partial
affections. Neither of these defects can be showed in the managing of your
cause, as your self confess: therefore it is presumption in us both: in you
to assay by Sophistry, out of your shallowe brain to elude this sentence: in
me, to endeavor by reasons and arguments, to maintain and uphold the fame.

Let it suffice us, that it is a Decree, or Arrest, and it is our part
therefore to rest our judgments there-vppon. In all causes, especially in
those of weight, and importance, like this, GOD is in the midst of the Judges
to inspire and direct them. Many times a man, that having heard a case pleaded
on both sides, prepared himself in his mind, either to acquit; or condemn,
this or that party, yet, when he hears the first Judge deliver his opinion,
he changes his mind: yea, oftentimes it falls out, that one word uttered by
the first, gives new light to him that secondeth, when as happily he that
spoke it, dreamt not thereon: and when it comes to the casting of the Bell,
(for by that byword do the Lawyers term the vp-shot, or conclusion of all)
they gather and collect out of the precedent opinions, a general air, or
abstract, whereupon this sentence is built.

Do thou think, that Chastells fact was the sole occasion of your fall? thou
art deceived. The Court had wisely referred the cause to counsel, giuiuing
thereby to understand, that it meant not to proceed therein either with
passion, or rash hastines, two great enemies of justice. In the mean time
happened this damnable act, committed by one of your scholars: the principals
which were before disposed to your condemning, were taken in hand a fresh: in
the handling of Chastels cause, your cause is adjudged all under one.

The indignity and detestation thereof, awaked justice in the hearts of the
Judges, which in your cause might peradventure have slept, had it not been
thereby stirred, and excited. And in all this, there is nothing wrought by man,
but by a special judgment of God, which we ought to proclayme through the
whole world. It is well known, that your College was the fountain, and
seminary of all those calamities, which we endured, during the last troubles.
There was the rebellion plotted and contrived, there was it fully and wholly
nourished and maintained; your Prouincials, your Rectors, your devout
Superiors, were the first that troad that path, they that first and last dealt
with this merchandise. Your College was the retreat, or Randeuous, of all such
as had vowed, and sold themselves as well to the destruction of the State, as to
the murder of the King: in which your doings, you at that time gloried, and
triumphed, both in your Sermons and Lectures.

The true hearted subjects, who had the Flower de Luce imprinted in their
breasts, beheld this tyranny, and sighed in their souls, for they durst not
give breath to their sighs; all their recourse was to God, that it would
please him to have compassion on their miserable estate. God suffered you to
reign five years and more, (swaying both people, Magistrate, and Prince) to
try whether there were any hope of your amendment in time. The King was no
sooner entered into Paris, but the just hatred of the people toward you, brake
forth: the University of Paris stirs against you, and reuiueth their former
suite, which had been referred to Counsel in the year 1564. the occasion
thereof was founded upon your own fresh practices, and lewd misdemeanors: the
cause is pleaded by two worthy Lawyers, Arnauld and Dole, heard with patience
discreetly, not judged forthwith, by reason of the waightines: besides, the
heat and choler of those which prosecuted the cause against them, might in time
cool, and assuage (as the manner of French men is.) The Judges never stir in
any cause, but as they are urged thereunto; otherwise they should do
themselves wrong, and men might say, they were rather soliciters, then Judges.
In this pause, the judgment of your cause was likely to have been forgotten,
when on a sudden, beyond all imagination, this fact of Chastels came to paste,
whereby the humors both of the Judges, and of the parties are stirred a fresh.

This was the hour of Gods wrath, who having long temporized with your sins,
thought it good to make Chastell a spur in the hearts of the Judges, to
incite them, to do justice as well upon you, as upon him, and that you might
all serve for an example, for posterity to wonder at. To the accomplishing of
this work, he permitted that Chastell (who had been nurtured, and brought up
in your school) should assay to put in practice your devout Lectures, and
exhortations against the King, not in the country, but in the City of Paris,
and that his dwelling should be, not in any obscure corner of the Town, but in
the very heart of the City, standing as it were in the midst of two other
Towns, and moreover, in a house right opposite to the gate of the Palace, the
ancient habitation of our Kings, and of the supreme and sovereign Justice of
France. This house belonged to the father, who was so unfortunate, as not to
reveal to the Magistrate the damnable intention of his son, whereof he had
knowledge, as himself confessed. God made special choice of that place, of
purpose to make the punishment more notorious. For in like offenses of high
Treason, the Judges are in duty bound to their Sovereign, to cause the
habitations of the malefactors to be raced, and pulled down, and there to be
engraven a memorial of the whole proceeding: for which cause this house was
ruinated, and raced by order, and in the place thereof a Pyramid or pillar
raised, bearing the memorial, not only of Chastells offense, but of the
Jesuits also, and this to stand in opposite view of this great and Royal
Palace. To the end, that our posterity may know hereafter, how highly France
is beholding to this holy Society of Jesus. Was there ever, I say not in
France, but in the whole world, a more famous or notorious punishment, then
this?

CHAP. 20. Of the Pyramid, which is raised before the Palace of Paris, and of
the sentence given in Rome, by the renowned Pasquill, concerning the
restoration of the Jesuits, sued for by themselves.
TEll me, Marble, (says the hypocritical Jesuit in his most humble petition,
speaking of the Pyramid) to record, and testify to posterity, the happiness of
a great King, and the misfortune of a great offender, what have thou to do
with a poor guiltless Society? have thou not enough of thy just burden, but
thou must charge thy self with his slander and defamation, that had no hand
at all in this fact? But since thy back has a tongue to utter falshoode, let
thy tongue answer me: and speak the truth. Who has engraven upon thy back,
that the Jesuits did provoke, or persuade an unhappy Frenchman, to murder the
most Christian King of France? what witness, what deposition, what confirmation
have thou hereof, seeing thou do take upon thee to witness it, to depose
it, to confirm it so assuredly to all the world? Have thou heard more without
ears, and seen more without eyes, then five and twenty thousand ears, and as
many eyes, were able to hear or see, at that execution of justice in the place
of the Grieve? Do thou in a bravery say more, then that offender durst say,
being urged thereunto with such rigorous tortures? Assuredly, the force of a
strong fancy or imagination is great, and wonderful: not only to cause these
prodigious effects in our minds, but even in our bodies themselves. For so we
read, that Craesus his son being dumb, recovered speech, seeing his father
in danger to be slain: and Cippus a King of Italy, sitting to behold the
fight of the Bulls, with a fixed and steadfast apprehension, fell a sleep, and
when he awaked, he felt his forehead planted with a pair of horns.

One Lucius Cossitius, greedily and furiously apprehending the pleasure, which
he expected of his wife that should be, the first night of his marriage, was
changed into a woman. Which makes me greatly fear, least this honest Jesuit,
reading in this Pyramid, the general condemnation of his brotherhood, should
be transformed into a stone, as Niobe was, when she saw her children slain.
For I already perceive by him, that he has lost the eyes both of his body
and mind, setting forth with such eagernes, the innocence of his Order, and
bearing us in hand, that this sentence was builded upon no other ground, but
Chastels offense. Seeing therefore, that of a wilful blindness, thou art
ignorant even in that, which the walls themselves can testify, and teach, and
that thou framest thy speech to a stone, I think it best that thou should
be answered by a stone, but a most ancient, and authentic stone, the great
and venerable Pasquils of Rome, who suiteth and resembles you in many points.
For as you judge Kings and Princes by certain texts of Scripture, wrested and
misunderstood, so has Pasquill been allowed from all memory, to do the like
by Popes and Cardinals, upon the same texts, ordered after his own liking, and
appetite. And as you by means of confession, come to to the knowledge of a
thousand secrets, as well of the public State, as of private families, so is
be privileged by auncie^r foundation, to receive intelligence from all
countries, whereby he lays open to the world, that which men presumed to be
hidden from all knowledge.

Considering which sympathy and argreement betwixt you and him, I make no
doubt but you will be the rather inclined to believe him. For do not think, but
this cause has been by him handled in Rome, and with mature deliberation
adjudged, that for the interest you have in him, he has left nothing undone,
as well to disanull the sentence, and deface the Pyramid, as to restore you into
France, howsoever his endeavors have wanted success. Hear therefore, what he
has written to thee in Italian, which I have translated into French, as
faithfully as I could; it may be thou will rest satisfied thereby.

Thrice reverend Father, I have perused at large the humble remonstrance and
petition, preferred by you to the Most Christian King, Henry the fourth of
that name, as also the notes and instructions delivered to Father Magius, to
present unto his Majesty for your re-establishment: which wrought in me great
pleasure, and displeasure both at one instant: Pleasure, to see the choice and
variety of good words, that abound in you, displeasure, to understand in what
evil manner your Fatherhoods have been entreated. If I mistake not, the
chief mark you aim at, is to destroy and pull down the Pyramid: for what
boot were it for you to be restored, unless this stone be taken away, whereby
you are charged with sundry crimes, which you esteem false and calumnious?

Seeing therefore your intent was to commence suite against a stone, I presumed
that the hearing of the cause, belonged absolutely to my self, and to none
other. And that you may vnderderstand, with what diligence and justice I have
proceeded in the examination thereof, I remembered that your cause had been
twice pleaded, and twice referred to counsel: First, in the year 1564.
wherein you were plantiues, suing to be incorporated into the University of
Paris: Secondly, in the year 1594. wherein the University of Paris were
plantiues, requiring that you might be instantly banished, and expelled the
land. To be thoroughly informed of the first, I required a Copy of Pasquier his
declaration against you, Versoris his Plea for you, as also of the latter, by
Mesmll, the Kings Advocate. By all which I found, that the only matter in
question at that time, was the novelty, and strange rule of your Order, being
contrary to the ancient liberties of the Church of France. And being
desirous to be yet further instructed in the matter, behold certain mutinous
spirits, present me with three books on your behalf: In the first, were
contained, the Bulls by you obtained for your commodity and advantage: In the
second, were your orders or constitutions, divided into ten parts: In the
third, the Examen, or, if I may so term it, the Abstract, or abridgement
thereof. Out of which, I collected many points, which before time were to me
altogether unknown: a simple and absolute vow, which your enemies allege to
be full of subteltie, and heresy; many extraordinary usurpations upon the
Ordinaries, and Universities: a rich kind of poverty professed by vow: a
blinded obedience to your Sup^^ion: (for as for that to the Pope, I meddle not
there withal.) your principal Bulls, wherein it seems you have surprised, and
abused the sanctity of the holy Sea. Whereupon I said, that, that villain,
whatsoever he was, that brought these books out of your Colleges, deserved to
be hanged for his pains.

It is not meet the world should know the secrets of a professed Society: It
does but open men's mouths to scanne, and descant thereupon at their pleasures,
to the discredit and disgrace of the whole Order. But seeing the offender
cannot be discovered, I think it best, that these three books be sent back
into one of your Colleges, there to receive open discipline for this offense.
This is not the first time, that senseless things have been dealt withal.
For in that manner do we read, that the Sea having trespassed against Zerxes,
that wise and prudent king of Persia, who had purposed to pass over into
Greece upon a bridge of cords, was by him condemned to be whipped. As
contrariwise, the Signiorie of Venice, to flatter and infinuate with the Sea,
is wont yearly upon Ascension day, to espouse and wed it with a Ring, which
they present unto it. I assure you, when I compared the privileges of the
Church of France, with yours, I stood greatly perplexed, what to think:
holding this with my self for a law inviolable, that housoeuer all laws were
wavering and uncertain, according to the change and alteration of times, yet
this stood firm, steadfast, and immutable, that we are to live according to the
laws of that country, wherein we defire to live. And finding your Bulls and
constitutions, to go slat against the liberties of the Church of France, it
bred no small scruple in my mind, howsoever I was inclined or devoted to favor
your cause.

Having viewed and reuiewed, the books and evidences, concerning the first
cause, which was referred to counsel: I passed over to the second instance, of
the year 1594. wherein I employed all the powers of my brain. Herein you were
not called in question for your doctrine, or profession any more, but for your
attempts, and practices, made as well against Princes and Princesses, as against
the several countries, wherein you are resident, and especially against the
Realm of Eraunce. A matter full of weight, difficulty, and of dangerous
consequence: which caused me, for the discharge of my place and conscience, to
interpose my self in this cause, contrary to that custom which I have
hitherto learned and practiced. For in other cases, I receive such packets, as
my Vassels and Subjects list to impart, giving credit thereunto upon their bare
relations. But in this, I have taken a far other course. For having perused
your petitionarie book, full of pity and compassion, I sent forth summons to
all quarters without exception, to come in, and speak their knowledge in the
matter: I directed out Commissions over all countries (according to the
prerogative, which from all antiquity has been granted me through the whole
state of Christendom) to inform me as well by letters, as by witnesses, of
what I thought requisite for your justification, commanding all Judges, of
what quality foeuer, (upon pain of a grievous fine at my pleasure) to send me
the whole process, as well criminal, as extraordinary, which had passed in
your cause; being resolved, your innocence once verified, and confirmed, to
cast down this Pyramid, and to prefer this sentence into the Inquisition. As
your selves sometimes caused the censure and determination of the Sorbone,
pronounced against you in the year 1554. to be censured by the Inquisition of
Spain. For it is not for every man to iustle with your holy Fatherhoods.

And that which pronoked me the rather hereunto, was your book, wherein
reading, to my great discomfort, the hard measure which has been shown you,
by the Court of Parliament of Paris, yet you acknowledge the said Court, to
excel all other in knowledge, justice, and religion. Upon my summons (I must
confess the truth) there appeared at the first dash a great troop of French,
English, Scottish, Arragonians, Portugalls, Polanders, Flemings, Swethlanders,
who reported much more then I desired to hear. And albeit the peoples voice be
the voice of God, (if you believe the common proverb) yet would not I for the
sequel build my judgment thereon.

Your own book, increased my scruple and doubt, much more then before, when
for your justification you say, that in the year 1593. by a general Synod,
holden by your Society at Rome, those of your Order were forbidden to
entermeddle henceforward in matters of State: which point I could not well
conceive. They are prohibited (said I) to entermeddle hence-forward in State
matters, therefore it is presupposed, that heretofore they have meddled therein.
I cannot be persuaded, that these devout and holy men, did ever apply
themselves that way: because such is the calamity of our times, that in our
State affairs, we harbor commonly more impiety then Religion, to bring our
designements to pass. And standing thus in suspense, one rounded me in the
ear, and bad me be clear of that point: for he that made The Defense of the
College of Clairmont, in 1594, has inserted (says he) the whole article in
Latin. I called for the book, and found it true, as he told me.

Another brought me Montaignes his book: read this place (says he) here you
shall find the foundation and original of our last troubles. In this book I
find, that Father Claudius Matthew, and Aimond Auger, were sometimes in high
favor with Henry the third: in so much, as oftentimes he took them into his
Coach: after he adds; That satan having cast into the Realm the Apple of
strife, suspicion, and jealousy, all things changed their course, and then was
brewed that vinegar and gall of civil dissentions, which since that time we
have seen and tasted. As to all texts, there want no comments: so in the
reading of this place, this fellow said unto me, that two words sufficed to a
good understander, and that this alteration fell out by means of the repulse,
which these two blessed Fathers received of the King, when he saw them begin to
set their hands to matters of State: and that they played as did Narses the
Eunuch, whom the Empress commanding to go and spin her distaffe: he made
answer, that he would spin her such a quill, as she, or her husband should
never be able to unwind. And indeed kept promise with her, by bringing the
Lombards into Italy.

Even so, these two honest Jesuits, being estranged from the grace and favor
of the King, would let him know, they could skill of somewhat else, then to say
over our Ladies Psalter. And to speak freely what I think, I never knew mon of
a better conscience, then are those of your Society, nor that less feared to
incur the censures of Rome. First Father Henry Sammiere, (a stirring
pragmaticall fellow) confessed, that about the year 1580, or 81, (if I mistake
not) he was sent by you into diverse Countries, to treat or commune about the
general revolt, which you intended to stir up against the late King of
France. And albeit I maintained, that it was neither true nor probable, in as
much as you had no cause at that time to attempt it; he bad me, seeing I
believed not his words, to look but upon the arraignment and trial of William
Parry an Englishman, who was executed the third of March, 1584. that there I
should find at the latter end of a certain Letter, which he wrote to the
Queen during his imprisonment, That she should find, the King of France had
enough to do as home, when she need of his help.

Parry (as Sammiere told me) departed out of England in 1582, and came into
France, where he was dealt withal by our Society to destroy the Queen of
England, and to make an innovation in the State, and when he objected, that it
would hardly be brought to pass, in as much as she were like to be aided, and
assisted by the King of France, we made him answer, that we would cut out the
King of France so much work, that his hands should be full of his own
business, without stirring to aid or succor another. Whereby it appears, that
even in those days our web was on the loome.

I had not at that time the acts of Parry his trial, but having since procured
them, I have read the Letter, and have found all true that Sammiere reported.
Who in a good meaning proceeded further, and confessed, that himself, and
Roscieux, were sent in 1584. to the King of Spain, and Father Claudius Matthew,
to Pope Gregory the 13. to understand, what sums of money they were willing
to contribute, toward the charges and maintenance of the holy League:
whereunto Roscieux replied; Yea, but this honest Munk tells you not, what a
cast of his office he showed me. For he and I riding post together, he,
perceiving one night, that I, being wearied with travail, was buried in a
dead sleep, caused fresh poast-horse to be brought him, and away he went,
leaving me in bed for a pawn: and such speed and diligence he used, as that
our whole business was by him, almost dispatched with the King of Spain, before
I could overtake him.

To bring this process to a conclusion, I caused to be brought unto me the
pleadings of Arnauld, Advocate for the University, and Dole, who was retaind
for the Curats of Paris. The answer to the same, under the name of the
College of Clairmont: Frauncis de Montaignes his book De la verite Defendue,
against Arnauld: and certain other books, or evidences, serving to the state
of the cause. I believed Sammier for so much as concerned himself: but as for
Father Claudius Matthew, I would not the memory of him should be touched upon
another man's confession. Wherefore I had recourse to the litterall proof, and
read Arnauldus his pleadings, wherein he touches him to the quick: and the
answer thereunto, contained in that Plea, which is as follows; And whereas
Arnauldus alleges, that Claudius Matthew, of the Order of the said
Defendants, has been the Author, and contriuer of the League: the said
Defendants answer, that Claudius Matthew, having spent his whole time in
their Colleges, and amongst children, living ever in the course of a Scholar,
could not have judgment, policy, industry, and authority requisite, for the
contriuing and knitting, of so great and strong a League. And be it, that the
said Matthew, endeavored to fortify the said League, as many others of all
estates and conditions have likewise done, that proves not therefore that he
was the Author, or beginner thereof. Besides, this is but one particular. And
five or six lines after, There was not one of them at the first acquanted with
his actions, and had they been, yet could they not have hindered them,
inasmuch as he was their Superior.

Comparing Arnaulds objection with this cold and faint solution, me thought
you were agreed, that France should think her self beholding to none but
your selves for her last troubles. And desiring more fully to inform my
conscience, as touching the Revolt, which happened in Paris, even in the Sorbon
it self, the seventh of January, 1589, there came a crew of Divines, being
men of credit and reputation, who certified me, that in truth, they were at
that time assembled to debate the matter, and that all the auncienter sort,
were of a contrary opinion, howsoever the younger were not, the greater part
whereof, had been scholars to the Jesuits of Paris. So as the voices being
numbered, and not weighed, it was carried away by plurality. Nevertheless,
they did not as yet altogether loose the reins to rebellion, but determined to
suspend the effect of this their conclusion, until such time as it were
confirmed and ratified by the Sea Apostolic. But the day following. Father
James Commolet, a Jesuit, sounded the drum within Paris. And that I might be
assured, if not of the whole, yet of the greatest part of the premises, by the
annual Letters of the Jesuits, of the year 1589, and moreover, by their
Pleas, I went directly to their Letters, and found in those, which were written
from your College of Paris, Doctores Sorbonici, quorum magna pars discipuli
nostri fuere: The Doctors of the Sorbone, a great part whereof have been our
Scholars. And by your Pleas: It is certain that for those few years, a
great part of the Bachelors of Divinity, and the better sort of them, have
spent the course of their studies in our College. Which caused me somewhat to
suspect, that this conclusion, had been before handled from time to time in
your Lectures.

I read in the same Letter, that notwithstanding you were inhibited by Gregory
the 13. to come at any Processions, yet as soon as the Revolt was concluded
on, one of your Society, to stir the people against their King, assembled
three or four thousand boys, which he led in procession all over the city,
with a rabble of all sorts of people at their heels. I read in another place,
that about that very time, you instituted in Lions, the Brotherhood of our
Lady, and in Burges, of the Paenitents, under the name of Ieronomitans, not to
appease the wrath of GOD, but to provoke it against the late King.

And as I was turning over your Letters, there comes in Father James
Commolet, (whom I name with all due title of honor) who with tears standing in
his eyes, (as one that at al times has tears at commandment) confessed unto
me, that the day following this determination of the Sorbone, he in a Sermon
made at the Church of Saint Meri, publicly preached, that the whole Sorbone,
was resolved to take Arms against the King, and if any should oppose
themselves, to withstand it, they ought not to think it strange, in as much as
in that number which followed our Savior, (the most perfect society that ever
was) there was one Judas found. And that thereuppon, the people ran headlong
to Arms. Wherein he ingeniously confessed his fault, in concealing from the
people, that this Resolution, was referred to the pleasure and arbitrament of
the holy Sea.

Furthermore, that the 15. of the same Month, certain of the chief and
principal Judges of the Court of Parliament, being committed prisoners to the
Bastille, he went to visit and comfort them: and for their consolation,
preached nothing else but of the tyranny of King Henry the third; thereby to
stir and excite them to rebelliou: and that he who had been their king,
should be so no longer.

Moreover, that as long as the Troubles endured, he was a Trumpet in all
Churches, to rend and deface the reputation, as well of the late King, as of
him that now reigns: but that this was usual with all Preachers, and
therefore the more excusable in him. Which Montaignes did not deny, excusing
it by the heat and choler which is incident to Preachers when they are in
the Pulpit.

With that, a troublesome fellow whispering me in the care, bad me, look to
my self: For (says he) that which he terms choler, he would say it were the
holy Spirit, if he durst. I told him, he was a busy companion, and bad him
hold his tongue, if he could. All this did Commolet confess he had done in
Paris: but Father Bernard Ronillet proceeded on further, and acknowledged, that
by his packing and preaching, he had vvithdrawne the city of Bourges, from
the obedience of the King. But above all, the Confession of Father Alexander
Hayes did most satisfy me, who entertained me with these words.

Right honorable Pasquill, seeing you charge and conjure me in the name of
God, and in virtue of the Apostolical censures, I will deliver my whole
knowledge, as well concerning the proceedings of our College at Paris, as
mine own particular actions in this business. As touching the general; I must
confess to you, that upon the first breaking out of the Troubles, we
presently instituted within our College of Paris a Brotherhoode, which we
named a Congregation in the honor of our Lady, being for that cause, called
the Congregation of the Chappelet, because the Brethren of that Company, were
bound to carry a Chappelet, or pair of Beads, and to say it over once a day.
Into this Congregation, did all the zealous and devout personages of our holy
League, cause themselves to be enrolled, the Lord Mendoza, Ambassador for the
Catholic King of Spain, the Sixteen Governors of Paris, with their whole
families, and diverse other holy and religious persons, whereof I have kept no
register, neither was it any part of my charge.

Our Congregation was kept every Sunday in a certain high Chapel, where all
the brotherhood was bound to be present, if there were no necessary cause of
let or impediment. There were we all severally confessed on the Saturdayes, and
on Sunday we received the Sacrament. When Mass was done, one of our Fathers
went into the Pulpet, and there exhorted all the Audience to continue steadfast
in their holy devotion, which at this day is in France called Rebellion, (since
it pleases the Magistrates to have it so, I cannot be against it). This done,
all the common sort departed, and those of greatest place and authority stayed
behind, to consult about the affairs of the holy League. Our good Father, Odon
Pigenat, was long time President of that Counsel. And this briefly in the
sum of what I am able to deliver, as touching the general proceedings of the
whole College.

As concering my self in particular, you must understand, that those that know
me, call me Father Alexander Hayes the Scot, who, during the troubles, was
Regent of the first Form of our College, for the space of 3. or 4. years.
Not to recapitulate the whole, but some of the principal, and most notable
acts of my history, which may peradventure give light to the residue: I read
to mine Auditors, Demosthenes his Inuectiues against Phillip king of
Macedonia, where in I somewhat suited with our good Father Commolet: for as
he wrested to his purpose, all the texts of Scripture against the n="*" A
byname, which the leaguers gave the king that now is, for that he was borne in
Biarne.
Biarnois, (give me leave to use that term before your Highness, which was then
current in Paris,) so did I play by the Philippica, which to say truth, were
not Lectures, but despightful railings against him, which I amplified
accordingly, as I was carried by a violent kind of deuotition, which I was never
able to bridle or restrain. For it was an ordinary branch of my Lectures,
that he were a happy man whosoever could kill him; and if he fortuned to die in
the execution of so blessed an enterprise, he should go directly into
Paradise, and though his soul were stained with some venial sins, yet
should it be exempted from the pains of Purgatory. And if God should so much
afflict the city of Paris, as that the Biarnois should enter, and pass
through S. James his gate, I made open protestation, that I would leap down
upon him from the highest window in our College: being assuredly persuaded,
that this fall, would serve me for a ladder, to clime up into heaven.

That day, that he first heard Mass at Saint Dennis, understanding that
certain of my Auditors had been present thereat, I debarred them the day
following from my Lecture, as persons excommunicated, forbidding them to enter,
until they were absolved for it by some of our Society. When men began to
muner about a peace, I commanded one of my Auditors, the best scholar among
them, to declaime in Greek, touching the miseries of France, and the
lamentable gulf of calamities to ensue, whereinto she was about desperately to
plunge her sellfe: (this was, as I said, the time of the conference, when
every man on both parties breathed nothing, but unity, and reconcilement) the
scholar, forgetting those particulers, which I had prescribed him, only
propounding to himself the general subject of the miseries of France,
declaimed and discoursed first of the miseries and calamities, which happen in
a Realm, by the rebellion and disobedience of the subjects: which, he said, to
be the gulf, wheinto God suffered a nation to fall, when after his long
patience, he would have them feel his hand, for some transgressions, which he
had long time suffered to go vnpunish^. Aterwards he declared, that the
misgouernance of a Prince, could not exempt the subjects from their
allegiance: which he likewise confirmed by an infinite number of examples,
showing what ill success they ever had, who were of a contrary mind. I
seeing him forsake the path, that I had prescribed, and take a far different
course, grew mightily out of patience, and made him come down out of the seat;
calling him caytife, and heretic, with many other reproachful terms. The
first day that the Reading began, after the City of Paris was reduced to the
obedience of the Biarnois, one of my scholars, coming into the college
before the hour, wrote all about my Form, God save the King. When I came in,
and espied this shameful act, my choler turned into rage, and with a fell and
terrible voice, I exclaymed, Quis ita infecit parietes nostros? Who is it, that
has thus berayed our walls? If I knew what he were that has made these
scribble-scrabbles, (for that was my term) I would cause the President of the
College to punish him openly: and after dinner, I made it to be wiped out,
adding withal, that if I might know any man hereafter, that should bescribble
the walls in that order, I would make him feel, how much I was displeased
withal. I confess freely, (right honorable Pasquill) what I have done,
neither do I fear to speak it, seeing I am now in the City of Rome, and
none of the Biarnois his Subjects, being a Scot by birth, and be it that I were
a natural Frenchman, yet am I persuaded, that all these unkindness, ought to
be pardoned me, who have always carried so good a conscience, as in playing
with my fellows, or others, I never meddled for money, but for Pater noster,
and Aue Maria only: and do steadfastly believe, that this merit alone toward
God, saved me from the Parliament of Paris, where I was in some peril: and I
assure you, had I been put to any torture either of body or mind: (of body,
being laid on the rack, of mind, by any censure of the Church) I had been
quite undone.

Thus much did I get out of father Alexander, whom I found to be another
Alexander the great amongst you Jesuits, that is, a Prince of an invincible
spirit. After I had heard him, I examined the litterall proofs. By your Pleas
I learned many things which me thought made very much against you. For Arnauld
and Dole charging you, that your College was the Spaniards Randenous, wherein
they consulted of the affairs of the holy League: you confess in your
answer, that the Ambassador Mendoza, came thither indeed on holy days to
hear Mass, and that afterward, you entreated him, to refrain, for the
avoiding of suspicion. A frivolous excuse to my judgment, for why should you
pray him to forbear that, which at that time, you took for a great honor
done unto you (if at least a man may believe the common report.) Furthermore,
it being by your adversaries objected, that a Father of the Society, Odon
Pigenat, was Captain, and Ringleader of the Sixteen, that commanded within
Paris, not only over the ordinary Magistrate, but over the chief and
sovereign, you confess that article, as well in your Pleas, as in Montaignes
his book: marry you say withal, it was to temper and moderate their actions.

At the reading of which two places, all that were present fell on laughing,
knowing Pigenat, even in those days when he had some spark of wisdom, to
be evermore ouer-caried with heat and choler. Since which time he is grown
so frantic, that he is kept within a Chamber bound and manacled. In the same
Plea, I found these words. They suppose they have deserved well of the City of
Paris, in as much as during the whole time of the troubles, they never ceased
to teach their youth, there being at that time no other College in the
University, whereas those exercises were entirely kept. Will you know the
cause? (says a man of good sort standing by) the Principals of other
Colleges, had let their hands fall, as bewayling in their souls, the miseries
that grew by this rebellion: whereas these fellows, lifted their hands up to
heaven, as thinking they had prevailed conquerers in the matter they had
undertaken. But nothing amazed me so much as a letter, which was sent into
Spain, but intercepted by Monseur de Chaseron, Governor of the Province of
Bourbon, the bearer whereof was father Matthew the Jesuit. This letter was
sent me to peruse, and the tenor of it, was as follows.

Most high and mighty Prince, your Catholic Majesty having been so
gracious unto us, as to let us understand by the most godly, and reverend
father Matthew, not only your holy intentions in the whole cause of religion,
but also more especially the good affection, and favor toward this City of
Paris. etc. And a little after. We hope, that shortly the forces of his
holiness, and your Catholic Majesty being united, shall free us from the
oppression of our enemies, who from before a year and a half until this
present, have so hemd us in on all sides, as nothing can come into the City,
but either by chance, or by strong hand: and would strain themselves to go
further, were it not that they fear those garrisons, which it has pleased
your Catholic Majesty, to appoint us. We can certainly assure your
Catholic Majesty, that all the Catholics wish and desire, to see your
Catholic Majesty enjoy the Scepter of this kingdom, and to reign over us, as
we do most willingly offer our selves into your arms, as to our Father, etc.
And on the margent somewhat lower. The Reverend Father Matthew, this present
bearer, by whom we have received much comfort, being thoroughly instructed in our
minds, shall supply the defect of our letters, to your Catholic Majesty,
humbly beseeching you to give credence to his report. This letter did mightily
incense me against your iustifications, whereupon I desired to see the answer
hereunto in your Pleas. Tenthly, Arnauld alleges, that the year 1591.
Monsieur de Chaseron intercepted certain letters written to the king of
Spain, carried by Father Matthew, of the Order of the said defendants. We
answer, that Arnauld, under correction of the Court, is ill informed, for the
said father Matthew died three years before at Ancona in Italy, that is, in the
year 1588. and by consequent could not, but by a greater miracle, then Saint
Dennis, go and come into Spain. And adds moreover, that that Matthew was a
Spanish Friar, of one of the four orders of the begging Friars. I see the same
answer to be likewise made by Mo^^^g^es, one of the chief men of your Order,
which made me presently exclaim against Arnauld: O strange impudence of an
Advocate, against an innocent Society! But one of the company interrupting
me, prayed me to take better aduisement: for (says he) if there be any
impudence herein, it is on the Jesuits part; nay rather want of common sense.
For Arnauld was far from saying, that father Cl^^d^^s Matthew was the bearer
of those letters, but an other Jesuit, whose Christen name iumpt with Matthew
his surname. Let us read his Plea. When King Philip (says he) by the Jesuits
persuasion had sent a garrison of Spaniards into Paris, and desired to have
some colorable title for that, which he held already by force, whom sent he
thither but father Matthew the Jesuit, whose Christian name was all one with the
other Mathewes surname, the Jesuit, that was the principal instrument of the
League in the year 1583. This Matthew in few days, that he abode in this
City, being lodged in the College of the Jesuits, caused this letter to be
there written and signed.

Mark (says one of the company, who against my will insulted thereupon) the
foolish sophistry of these fellows. For in their Pleas they make Arnauld say,
that which he never meant, having in plain terms distinguished between the
two Mathewes. Likewise to allege, that it was a Spanish Friar, whose name was
Matthew, carries less probability: because the four orders of the begging
Friars are not called Fathers, but Friars or brothers, and much less Reverend:
whereas in this letter the bearer is styled, the Reverend Father Matthew. Which
proves palpably, and to the eye, that howsoever the letter were written in the
name of the Sixteen seditious Governors, and Tyrants of Paris, whereof Pigenat
was the Superintendent, yet came it out of the Jesuits shop, who were as well
the composers, as the bearers thereof. Compare the date of the letter, which is
of the 2. of November, 1591. with the savage cruelty used the same month by
those Sixteen, against him that was then chief President of the Parliament of
Paris, and two other personages of name, who were attached, and executed all at
one instant, it will appear, that in all this buisines, there was nothing but
proceeded from the Jesuits. If all these evidences in writing, and confessions
by mouth, do not yet satisfy you, read the book of Rene de la Fon: you shall
see, that he acknowledges the Jesuits to have been the authors, and originals
of our last troubles, and of the general ruin of France. But forasmuch as
this Pamphlet is of great consequence to our present purpose, you must
understand, that Pasquier in two or three places of his pleadings, fortuned to
say, that the sect of the Jesuits, once taking root in France, would bring
forth a Seminary of division, between the n="*" The French, and the Spayniard.
Christian, and the Catholic: and in the end of his pleading, protests,
that whensoever this misery should come to pass, yet at the least they that
should live in those days, should acknowledge, that this age was not
unfurnished of such, as had long before, as it were from a high Tower, foreseen
the tempest to come.

In the year 1597. Monsieur Marion the Kings Advocate in the court of
Parliament of Paris, pleading against the Jesuits of Lions, recounting the
mischiefs, which this sect had caused, added these words. Wherein appears a
notable example of the true predictio^s, which God, when he pleases, inspireth
into those whom he loves. For the cause being solemnly pleaded above thirty
years ago, for the admittance, not of their Order, which was never approved
in France, but of their College into the body, and privileges of the
Vniuesity, the wisest men of that time, having indeed a singular insight into
the course of the world, foresaw eue^ in those days, that in tract of time,
they would kindle the flames of dissension in the midst of the Realm. La Fon,
the Jesuit, supposing that he meant it specially by Pasquiers Pleas, takes upon
him to answer it, but in so pleasant a manner, as I cannot but acquaint you
withal. But what are these Divine Diuiners (says he) that prophesied, so
well, so truly, so effectually of the Jesuits? Is it not possible for us to
divine at their names, and Diuinations, although our breasts swell not with the
enthusiasmes of these inspired spirits? Is not Pasquier one of them? And Marion
in the prophecies which he alleges, does he not directy point at those which
were uttered by Pasquier? If I prophecy truly, Pasquier his Pleas have made me
a Prophet. This Plea having lain buried for thirty years, and dug up
again within these three years, like an old Image laden with new Pardons,
has like a ridiculous Pasquill, spoken, and prophesied backward. That which in
the year 1564. he neither could nor durst say: returning out of hell in the
year 1594. and 95. better instructed in things, which were past already, he
has pronounced the^ like an Oracle from the tripode: and from him have I
learnt them. But the mischief will be, when these pleadings shall be one day
brought forth in their original form, to discover the new Pardons that are
pasted upon this plastred Pasquin, and when the reward of his prophecies shall
be branded upon his back.

O mighty and worthy champion, meriting to have his statue set up in the mids
of all your Colleges for having so valiantly hunted, not to covert, but to
death, the ancient enemy of your Order; was there ever man, that behaved
himself better with his perme, and his wit? Only this troubles me, that
giving such a brave onset upon this poor old man, he charge him at last to
have new forged his pleadings, and set down under the year 1594. in manner of
a prophecy those things which he had seen come to pass through France, the
year 1564. whereby this honest man does confess, that all the miseries of
France have proceeded from the Jesuits: for this was the scope of Pasquier his
Plea. And my self also acknowledge, that the holy Ghost was minded to speak by
the mouth of this Jesuit.

O how great is the force of truth, which cannot but break forth, whatsoever
fig-leaues of cunning, cloaking, or hypocrisy, we apply to cover, or disguise
it withal. Then what need have you, Right Reverend Pasquill, to trouble your
brains, with searching so many records, to know whether the Jesuits were the
authors, and contriuers of our troubles? There needs no more, but this
confession alone, which cannot be disauowed by the General, and other the
Superiors of this Order: having such a statute in the 18. article of the first
Chapter of the third part of their constitutions. Libri edi non poterunt in
lucem sine approbatione atque consensu praposits Generalis, qui eorum
examinationem tribus committat. No books shall be published without the
allowance, and consent of the General, who shall commit the examination
thereof, to three of the order. Be assured that in a matter of so great
importance, all the Jesuits books which have been produced before you, were
by them published, and set forth by the authority and approbation of their
General, or other Superiors by him authorized, and assigned to that purpose.
Therefore you may hold for true, all the confessions by them made, concerning
our troubles, and in especial, that of Rene de la Fon.

I believe as much (answered I to this praring fellow) neither does that
trouble me, but that this lewd fool, La Fon, under the allusion of two
names, should compare pasquier to Pasquin. In as much as I do not think there
lives that man of what degree soever, which may enter comparison with mine
Excellency. It is true that you say, (replied the other) but when you once
know what this Pasquier is, it will not trouble you at all: for he is one, whom
the Jesuits fear more then they love.

In conclusion, this was the course I took, to be thoroughly informed in the
first point of your Accusation, which concerns the last troubles of France.
The second remains, which touches your violent attempts upon the persons of
Kings, princes, and other great parsonages, which are in dislike with your
opinions. Setting my self to the inquiry of this point, I was presented with
a book of Peter Matthew, one of your Agents, entitled, Summa summorum
Pontificum: who speaking of you (my Masters) with all honor and respect uses
these words; Tyrannos aggrediuntur, they encounter tyrants. Which some
construed, as spoken in hatred of the late King, Henry the third, who was
slain in 89. about which time, that book was first printed at Lions. And your
Adversaries maintained, that these words were purposely inserted, after the
particide of the said King, whom you were wont to entitle by the name of Tyrant.

Contrariwise, your fellows alleged, as well in their Pleas, as in Montagnes
his book, that Matthew was not of your Order, and that therefore his sayings
ought not to be prejudicial unto you. In this controversy, I commanded
Signior Marforie, to look over the evidences fully, and wholly, and to make
me a true and faithful report thereof. His report was, that indeed Matthew
was not of the Order of the Jesuits, but that he speaks exceeding partially
on their behalf, whersoeuer he has occasion to talk of them: marry it was
hard to judge, whether his book were published before, or after the death of
Henry the third.

That skilleth not: (says another) for when he commends them for encountering
Kings, he must needs mean it, either by the breaking forth of the Troubles,
which were at that time wrought against the good King, or by the murder
committed upon his person. Take it whether way you please, they cannot clear
themselves of it, being for that point by name infinitely commended by him,
who through his whole Book, does countenance and grace them all he may.

Besides, the Jesuits of Bordeaux, would never pray for the late King, as
Montaignes also confesses. And to prove that Matthew maintains nothing, but
the general position of the Jesuits, I refer you to The Aphorisms of
Confession, made by Father Samuel Sa, Doctor in Divinity, one of their
Society, who under the letter Princeps, affirms, that a King may be deposed
by his subjects from his Crown and dignity, if he do not perform the duty
of a king. And under the letter Tyrannus: that the prince, who bears himself
like a Tyrant, may be expelled by his subjects, albeit they have sworn
perpetual obedience and allegiance unto him, in case, after he have been
admonished, he do not reform himself.

By this means, bringing all sovereign princes under the danger of their
crafty confessions, for them to resolve ignorant people, who they be, that
bear themselves uprightly in their government; the rest, that do not so,
being forthwith depriuable. Which position, agrees with that of Matthew, by
them ere-while disavowed and disclaimed.

To say truth, I wanted no sycophants in this whole inquitie of the process
against you: although I assure you, you had stout Champions, that very
skilfully could ward their blows. In this mean time, I had sent me out of
diverse countries, the sundry arraignments and trialls of several persons, who
by the instigation of Jesuits, had made, or conspired to make, attempt upon
the lives of princes. Out of England, the trial of William Parry, in the year
1584. and another of Edward Squire, in the year 1597. Out of the
Low Countries, the trials of Baltazar Girard, in anno 84, and of Peter de
Pennos in 98. Out of France, the trialls of Peter Barriere, in 93, and of John
Chastell, in 94. Above all the rest, I did most rely upon Poter Barriere his
process, wherein I found the whole order to be deeply charged, and especially
the good Fathers, Varade and Commolet. Immediately after that, comes me in a
huge train of young fellows, who, for discharge of their consciences do
confess, that being scholars in the Jesuits College, they had nothing else
preached unto them, but the murder of the Biarnois, (for so they termed the
King of France that now reigns.) In the end, I cast mine eye upon Chastells
process, which did mightily confirm me in all that the young youths had
reported. For being demanded by the Court of the Parliament of Paris, as
touching the murder which he had attempted upon the Kings person, mark the
very words of the Interrogatorie, and his aunswers.

Being demanded, where he had learnt this new Divinity? (which was to kill
Princes) He answered, it was by Philosophy.

Being demanded, whether he had studied Philosophy in the College of the
Jesuits? He answered, yea: and that under Father G^eret, with whom he had
been two years, and a half.

Being demanded, whether he had not been in the chamber of Meditations, into
which the Jesuits used to bring the most enormous sinners, to the intent, that
in that chamber they might behold the pictures of many devils, in diverse
terrible shapes, under pretense to reduce them to a better life, thereby to
affright their minds, and incite them, to undertake some great exploit? He
answered, that he had been oftentimes in the said chamber of Meditations.

Being demanded, by whom he had been persuaded to kill the King? He
answered, that he had heard in many places, that it was to be held for a most
true principle, that it was lawful to kill the King, and that those who said
so, called him Tyrant.

Being demanded, whether that argument of killing the King, was not ordinary
with the Jesuits? He answered, that he had heard them say, that it was
lawful to kill the King, and that he was out of the Church, and that they
ought not to obey him, or hold him for their King, until such time as he was
absolved by the Pope.

Again, being demanded in the great Chamber, (my Lords the Presidents and
Counselors thereof, and of the Tournel being assembled) he made the same
aunswers, and did in especial propound and maintain, that Maxim, that it was
lawful to kill princes, and by name the king that now reigns, who was not in
the church, as he said, because he had not the Popes approbation.

The truth is, this poor seduced fellow, does not particularly design, or
note any of your Society, to have taught him this damnable lesson, yet does
he not spare the whole body of your Order. And musing somewhat thereat, this
controller of your actions, that stood near unto me, told me, it was a thing
not to be wondered at: because the Jesuits lesson, when they would procure any
prince to be murdered, consisted of two branches: the first was, to give an
assured promise of Paradise, to whomsoeer could atchiue this high piece of
service, and that they should not spare to kill him, though he were in a
Church in the midst of divine service. The second, that if the party that
should attempt this, were intercepted, and delivered into the hands of the
Magistrate, to be made an example, he ought above all things to beware of
discovering, or revealing their names, by who^ he was set on work, upon
pain of eternal damnation: and certainly, in Barrieres process it appeared,
that these instructions had been given him, albeit, (not having been bred up
in the schools of the Jesuits, as Chastell was) he did not observe them
before his Judges.

After I had examined this process, I looked upon the trial of Robert, Bruce,
a Scottish gentleman, who was appeacht, and accused by Father William Crichton
a Jesuit, because he would not procure Metellinus, Chauncellor to the King of
Scots to be murdered. I enquired from whence all these tricks of
Matchiauelisme, and Anabaptisme might arise. Whereupon they showed me your
Constitutions, which enjoin you a blinded obdience to your Superiors, and
with as constant resolution to follow their commandments, as if they had
issued out of the mouth of our Savior Christ. And therwithall, they bring me
The Aphorisms of confession, made by your Emanuell Sa, and a book composed by
the Principal of the Seminary at Reims, wherein they maintain, that in
certain cases, it is lawful for the subject to kill the King.

But above all, Father John Guignard his Book, one of your Priests: wherein he
labors to prove, as well that the late King. Henry the third, was justly
slain, as also that he who now reigns, ought to be served in the same
manner. The words of his book are these. That cruel Nero, was slain by one
Clament, and that counterfeit Munke was dispatched by the hand of a true Munk.
This heroical act; performed by James Clement, as a gift of the holy Spirit,
(so termed by our Divines) is worthily commended by the Priour of the
Iacobins, Burgoin, a Confessor and Martyr. The Crown of France may, and ought
to be transferred from the house of Bourbon, unto some other: And the Biarnois,
although converted to the Catholic faith, shall be more mildly dealt withal,
then he deserves, if rewarded with a shaven crown, he be shut up into some
strict Covent, there to do penance, for the mischiefs which he has brought
upon the Realm of France, and to thank GOD, that he has given him grace,
to acknowledge him before his death. And if without Arms he cannot be deposed,
let men take Arms against him, if by war it cannot be accomplished, let him be
murdered.

These are the scandalous, and if I durst so call them, the blasphemous words
of a book, sprinkled with an infinite number of others. In conclusion, I read
with all diligence, your Petition made to the King, full of pretty flourishes,
whereby you condemn all those attempts, as forbidden by all laws both of God
and man. While I was beating my brains about these evidences. meaning to rest
upon the Sentence of the Parliament of Paris, pronounced as well against
Chastell, as against the whole Society, one of the company said unto me;
Remember that notwithstanding this Sentence, the prints of rebellion remain
still in their hearts: And to prove that this is so, you shall see Montaignes a
Jesuit, extol James Commolet, Claudius Matthew, Hanniball Coldrett^, Bernard
Rouiliet, Ambrose Varade. And after Montaignes, you shall see his Ape La Fon,
increase that number by many more, which are notoriously known to have
proceeded Doctors in the profession of murder and rebellion.

You shall see the book of miracles composed by Richeome, their General of
Aquitania, wherein amongst other things, he says, that our Lady of Buy,
wrought many miracles, during the troubles, to preserve the City against her
enemies, that is, against the King, for this City was of the contrary party.
But as for the miracles that S. Gene^iefue showed for the King, he is not too
hasty to recount them. Yet were they most evident in three cases. The first:
when the League being to set forward toward Diepe, this Saints shrine was
taken down, to carry in solemn procession: the second, was when the
Chenalier d' Aumalle, the night of this Saints feast, attempted to surprise the
Town of Saint Denis: the third, when the said shrine was again taken down in
March, anno 1594, and general procession made, for the withstanding of the
Kings forces.

Notwithstanding, all these vows, prayers, and purposes, turned to the
confusion of his enemies. For about Diepe he obtained a famous victory, beyond
all hope or expectation. The Chenalier d' Aumalle was slain within the city
of Saint Denis, when he thought himself Master of it, and all his Company
put to flight. And in conclusion, Paris yielded up to the King, within two or
three days after the taking down of the said shrine. S. Gene^iefue is the
holy Patroness of Paris. The City of Paris did in right appertain to the
king; and was therefore by her miraculously preserved, in the preventing of
these three chances. These miracles, this worthy reporter Riche^me is far
enough from mentioning: he makes a conscience of that, seeing it is in favor
of the King.

Furthermore, read Montaignes, who maintains, that the Pope may translate
kingdoms from one to another, in his book De la verite Defendu^. A plausible,
and true position in this City of Rome, but scandalous in France, and
subject to corporal punishment. These three books were printed since the
Sentence of the Court of Parliament: whereby you may gather, what devotion,
even at this day, the Jesuits bear to their King.

All this was brought to my hands, and to say truth, the greatest part of
these proofs came out of your own Colleges, a large Inventory framed as well
for you, as against you. I thoughts it not good to trust mine own judgment in
this process, but rather in the determining thereof to join others with me,
that were of long experience, and practice in these matters. Signior Marforio
advised me, to request two great personages of France to be of the
Commission: n="*" A stone in our Ladies church at Paris.
Master Piorre du Coignet, which of long has held his seat and jurisdiction,
within the Church of Paris: and another who having vowed perpetual poverty,
has from all antiquity kept his residence before the Hostel-diu, or Hospital
of Paris, and for his strange austeritie of life, is called the n="*" Le
Ieusneur, a stone of great antiquity in Paris.
Faster. I wrote my Letters to them, they at my summons appear. I deliver the
evidences to Signior Marforio, to be diligently and exactly by him perused. We
prefixed a day for judgment. Being assembled, I made it known to the
company, how mightily you found your selves agreeued with this pillar, or
Pyramid, as being a monument, to continue for ever the fresh memory of that
which had happened in France. That the matter in question was, your Restoring,
and consequently the defacing of this Pyramid. For which cause, I entreated
them to lay aside all affection, inasmuch as this judgment by them pronounced,
should be for ever celebrated by all posterity.

Marforio reports the whole process faithfully, showing himself to be no
learner in this trade. Having read, and pondered all the evidences on both
parts, and proffering in the end to deliver his opinion first, (as is the
manner of those, that make report of any cause to the Court) I entreated him to
forbear. Let us give this honor (quoth I) to the strangers. We are to sit in
judgment upon a Stone, and in my opinion, this honor is most due to Master
n="*" Stone.
Pierre, whom I would request to speak his opinion first, and to remember,
that we are in question to restore this worthy Order of the Society of Jesus,
so much honored in Rome.

Master Pierre needed not much entreatie; for presently he stood up, and with
a rough kind of speech began in this manner. How long shall these lewd
Impostors freely abuse our patience? how long shall we be so simple, to suffer
our selves to be abuse die an it be, that the Jesuits having given both fire,
and fuel to our last troubles, their College at Paris, having been the
common retreat of all such, as came into France, with a resolute determination
to make themselves Masters thereof: their Lectures so many trumpets, to
encourage their scholars to the parricides of Kings, and their principal
Agents having put weapons into the hands of many desperate souls, to murder
our King; can they (I say) be so shameless, as at his hands to crave, that they
may be restored? This were cunningly, and underhand, to commence process
against the sacred Court of the Parliament of Paris, which never did or that
receive, the least touch of imputation for any sentence passed by her, but
only herein, that in condemning this sect, she did not send all their
adherents, which were within Paris, to the gallows. For a far less offense
did that famous; and honorable Senate of Rome, long ago adiudge six hundred
slaves to death, because their master was nourthered in his own house, it
being not known by whom.

In this manner would Master Pierre have run on, had not I interrupted him
with these words: Have patience Master Pierre, have patience. Little men, like
you, are evermore subject to (...) You must remember, that you are not
Advocate; but Judge in this cause Master Pierre knowing that he had forgot
himself, changed his tune: and turning to me, said in this ^^^ner. Right
honorable Pus^p^ll, I humbly entreat your excellency, to excuse that just
grief, whereby I am carried in behalf of my country. Seeing then it pleases
you to honor me so much, as to hear my opinion first in this matter. I must
tell you, before you proceed further, that the cause be longs properly to
your own jurisdiction. For which way soever I turn my self, I see nothing
but stones. Your excellence, Signior Morforio, the right reverend Faster, and
my self, are stones, the Pyramid, a stone, the Jesuits themselves, suing to be
restored (as men altogether innocent) are undoubtedly no better them fools and
innocents, or to speak more properly very stones: say what you will, they are
as void of sense, as stones, in striving to revoke the sentence of the Court,
pronounced against them. There was never sentence had more formal proceeding
then that: and though it had not, yet could it not be retracted, but by the
ordinary form of law, which course they follow not. But admit, that
treading under foot all the essential forms of law, we should restore them to
their former estate, what fortune could they expect hereafter, but worse then
that before? we shall need no other witness, but the walls themselves, to
prove that the people of France has worn baire loath, carried the skrip, and
done pennaunce for their transgressions during the space of five years. I
pass one all other proofs, their books, whereunto only I have recourse, will
serve to condemn them. Antiquity teaches us, that Morcurie transformed
Battus the shepherd into a stone, for a treacherous part, which he played him.

Et me ^^^his profide prodie.
Me m^h^ prodis, Ovid. 2. lib. Metamor.
(...) p^^inraque pect^^^ ^^rtit. Ovid. 2. lib. Metamor.

In d^rum silicem, qui nunc quoque decit^^^ Index.
There was never Society that ever committed so many trecheries, as this of
the Jesuits against the King, and Country of France. Mercury making show to
favor, and affect them, sometimes plays with their pens, and into them
infuseth the gift of Battologie, or Loquacitie; but nothing their treacherous
practice he turns all their books into a kind of Index, or Touchstone,
making them the true touchstones or bewrayers, and the assured proofs of their
own lewdnes. I should wrong both the time, and your patience, to stand upon
particular recital of all their doings. It shall content me, in brief to say
thus much, that the Jesuits are to be pronuonced, Not receiueable.

And to this purpose do I cite that sentence, which the Jesuit, author of The
most humble Remonstrance and request, has given against his own order. But as
concerning the general state of the cause, seeing by ancient prerogative, you
are the soneraigne of sovereign Judges in cases extraordinary, my advise is,
that by virtue of your absolute authority, you add this clause unto that
sentence. First, that their house, and College at Paris, be raced and laid
louell with the ground, as sometimes was the Palace of Beutiuolio in Bologna in
Italy, whereof there remaynes no memory, but the rubbish, called at this day
the ruins of Beutiuolio. Secondly, that there be sale made of all and singular
the temporal goods of the Jesuits of France, and the money thence arising, to
be employed to the redeeming, or recovering of those demaines of the Crown;
which our King has been forced to alienate, and sell for the maintenance of
the wars, whereof they were Authors.

At these words all the company stood amazed: for he took the matter in a
far other sense, then we expected, and some muttering there was about thin
sale of their goods. Whereupon he said further: Let not this opinion of mine
seem any whit ^^e^unge unto you. If you had been bred up under the same law
that I have been, you would not think it so. The possessions where with they
are endowed in France is in respect either of their Monasteries, (which they
call houses) or of their Colleges. In the first respect, they can enjoy none:
for their own statuted forbid it in the fecond much less; because they were
never received, or allowed in France for true and lawful Colleges, capable
of legacies, and charitable contributions, further then as they promised in the
assembly at Poissi 1561. to renounce all their vows, and to raunge themselves;
(as all other Colleges did) under the obedience of their Ordinaries: which
they neither have, nor would perform since that time: and consequently neither
may, nor ought to be reputed Colleges. If you will return to the common and
ancient rules of the Roman law, which we are with all diligence to embrace,
(the common laws of a country, being not against it) there you shall find,
that if a Testator bequeath any Legacy to a College, the Legacy is good and
sufficient, if the College be approved by the Magistrates: if not, it is to be
converted to the behoof and benefit of some other College which is authorized.

The Jesuits cause was referred to Counsel, in the year, 1564. in which mean
time their quality was suspended until in 1594. it was adjudged flat against
them, they being condemned to avoid the Realm of France. Wherefore we may by
the sequel truly pronounce, that all the charitable devotions, bestowed upon
the^, are to be converted to another use, for the benefit of the commonwealth.
The Jesuits were authors of the troubles, the troubles were the causes that
some part of the Crowne-land was sold, which consequently ought by them to be
made good: that they may be the Scorpions of France, in whose death she may
find a medicine and remedy for their ve^emous bitings Christian charity,
wherewith they abound (as themselves boast) the poverty of their order, which
they proclaim quite through their statutes, the necessity, wherein our State
now is, the execution of justice for example, will have it so, for the
discharge of their own consciences.

With this word Master Pierre dis Coignet concluded, and was in some sort
seconded by the Faster his companion: not for any deep understanding that was
in him, but for that rule, which is common to men in misery, who are much
eased, when they have copartners in their affliction: he also would gladly have
seen the Jesuits kept poor, and Fasting like himself. Whereunto Signior
Morforio, and my self, would in no wise condescend, in so much as the process
was at the point to be broken off, we supposing it to be but a matter compacted
between the two Doctors of France. By means whereof, Morforio after a little
altercation began to speak.

To what purpose (says he) are all thsee censures? Recte quidem, sed quorsum
quaeso tam recte? I say not, but they are wisely handled, but to what end? Here
is much good talk spent to little purpose. You argue the matter as if the
Jesuits had now in their hands all those lands, or possessions, which have
been by way of alms bestowed upon them. I tell you, they are almost all sold,
and turned into money. Their money is in diverse banks out of your Realm, to
relieve them in a rainie day, in case they should be forced to forgo the
country of France. And if at all they have any certain reuenew, that
consists wholly in benefices, which they have caused to be united to their
Colleges, and are not capable of alienation. Have they sold them say you?
(replied Master Pierre) by what right could they do so? By authority from
their General only, which we neither approve, nor receive in France. Our
laws are far other in that point of the sale, and alienation of possessions,
belonging either to the Church, or to Societies in common. In a word all these
pretended sales are void in law. Whereat I brake into these words. You open a
gap, to an inconvenience that would spread far, and at one blow, extend to the
hurt of a number, who have no hand at all in this quarrel. Whereby you should
bring another Chaos, or confusion into the country of France, and therefore I
refer you to the ancient law of the Romans: Communis error facit ius. A
common error makes a right. Finally, after much wrangling and contention, it
was concluded and agreed amongst us, to leave the matter as we found it, and
that both the Pyratnis and the sentence of the Parliament, should stand without
any alteration in either. This was all I could obtain of the company, and
that not without some bitter words at little Master Pierre his hand, who told
me in mine ear, that he saw, I was at the point to turn Jesuit, to uphold
mine ancient greatness in the City of Rome, with men in highest place and
authority. Of all which proceeding I thought good to advertise your Fatherhood
(Right reverend Father) as he that is wholly devoted to your service. Beseeching
you not to proclayme your innocence henceforward, because some turn it to a
scoff, others to a scorn. It is a puddle, which if you did well, you should
let rest; for the more you stir it, the more will your doings stink. Your self
are the first, and last judge to give sentence against your Order. I speak to
you by name, that are the author of the Most humble Petition to King Henry the
fourth: wherein you acknowledge, that he is more barbarous, then the Barbarians
themselves, who sets himself against his Sovereign. And your Montaignes
confesses, Mont. ca. 34
that to band himself against his Prince, is the humor of an heretic. Enter
into your own consciences, and tell me if this humor did not reign in you (my
Masters) during the last troubles of France. In conclusion, I would advise
you to give order, that those of your Society forbear to write any more, or
if they do, that they be more discreet hereafter, upon pain of being expelled
out of your number.

CHAP. 21. Of the division which seems to be in the Parliaments, or
jurisdictions of France, as concerning the Jesuits, and what may be the cause
thereof.
THe Advocate, having ended his long discourse, paused a while, which gave the
Gentleman occasion to say unto him. I assure you Sir, I cannot but much commend
your invention, in representing, this matter in the person of Stones. For
seeing men will not speak, stones must: their dealinges being such as you
have showed and proved, not by proofs at randon, and uncertain, but most
infallible, and drawn out of their own books. But how comes it to pass,
that this being so notoriously known, and remaining of record, yet
nevertheless there be certain Courts of Parliament within the Realm, which
do not only receiu^ ^^em, but honor, cherish and embrace them, within their
Cities and jurisdictions. I did expect, you should ask me that question (quoth
the Advocate) and was about to have entered thereinto of my self, had you not
prevented me. Think it not strange it should be so: it is a mystery hidden
in the secret counsel of God, who has not wholly withdrawn his wrath from us,
but intends one day to use these, as his instruments to bring more plagues
upon us. Nevertheless, do not you think, but that those other Parliaments,
have some great show of reason for their doings.

Did you never see a new Testament, wherein the histories were drawn in
pictures? In that place of the Gospel, where our Savior is tempted in the
desert, Satan is pictured in the habit of a Munke. Some Lucianists stick not
to say, that thereby is understood, that the life and conversation of Munks is
Diabolical. But I am of a contrary opinion. For whosoever the Painter was,
that in this matter of the temptation, devised to cloth the Devil in those
weeds, he did it not without great consideration: judging, that this being the
true habit of piety, there was no way more ready and certain to surprise the
consciences of well meaning men, then by it.

The Devil, after he had set forth diverse mommeries of religious Orders, he
meant, to set his rest upon this: and (transforming himself into Ignacius, and
his adherents) to pretend the holy name of Jesus, and to promise by the mouth
of the Jesuits, not only terrestrial kingdoms to Princes, wherewith they
would inuest them, (as Satan did to our Savior) but also the kingdom of
heaven to such as would execute their malice, against those Kings, that were
their enemies. Wherein the Devil has not much missed of his aim. For under
this glorious name has he abused and onerreached our Popes their holiness, and
consequently a number of religious souls. And as himself is the Spirit of
Division, so is it no marvel if the Jesuits (his true and lawful children)
enjoy the same privilege, that their father does. They have caused division
between themselves, and our Prelates of France, between themselves and the
Universities, between Popes, and Kings, between Popes and other Prelates, if
now they cause a new dissension, amongst our Parliaments of France, they have
done that, which only was wanting to the full and absolute accomplishment of
the Sorbones prophecy, when in her censure of the Jesuits Sect, in the year
1554 she says: Multas in populo querelas, multas lites, dissidia,
contentiones, aemulatioues, variaque schismata inducit: It breadeth many
quarrels, controversies, discords, contentions, emulations, and many divisions
amongst the people.

The Parliament of Paris, upon mature and wise deliberation, has banished the^
out of their jurisdiction. Some other Parliaments do retain them, albeit the
attemps of Barriere and Chastell upon the person of the King, be unto them
notoriously known, and that they were the first plotters, and contriuers of
our troubles. When I think of these dissentions, I am put in mind of a
discreet answer made by King Henry the second, touching the case of Pelisson,
President of the Parliament of Chamberi, who by the sentence of the Parliament
of Digeon, was deprived of his office, besides sundry other disgraces, which he
received, upon the complaint, and information of Taboue Atturny general.
Afterward, obtaining Letters for a second examination, and and the cause being
removed to the Parliament of Paris, he was restored to his office, and Taboue
condemned to make him honorable amends, bare-headed, and in his shirt, with a
halter about his neck.

The King being informed of these proceedings in both the Courts of
parliament, wisely made answer, that he esteemed all his Judges to be men of
honesty and vprightnes: but that they of the parliament of Digeon, had judged
according to their consciences, and they of Paris, according to right and
justice. I make no doubt, but that all the Judges of other parliaments, are by
their consciences induced thereunto, but this I say, that there was never any
thing decreed in Court, more sufficiently and sincerely, then this was by the
parliament of Paris.

The other, as I suppose, are swayed by the authority of the holy Sea,
supporting the Jesuits: which is no small advantage for them to lean unto:
notwithstanding, I will oppugn them by the same authority, beseeching them
not to take in evil part this admonition, which in all duty and humility I
offer unto their considerations, not doubting, but after they have heard me,
(if at least they please to give me hearing) they will themselves condemn this
their opinion.

You have heretofore understood, how at two several times, our Jesuits had
practiced the murder of the King, and not at that time when he was divided
from us in religion, but even then when he was reconciled to our Church, in the
time of a truce, desiring nothing else but a general union, and reconcilement
of all his subjects throughout the Realm. They are highly favored at Rome, as
the Iuie, which seems outwardly to succor the wall, when as inwardly it
eats into it: but if they had ever conspired any attempt against the Popes
person, I am out of doubt, that by the Decree of that great, and holy
Consistory of Rome, their Order would have been put down, and abolished for
ever. At the least I have seen the like practice in a case not unlike, for a
matter not so dangerous for example, nor of such consequence as that, showed
upon the whole Order of the Humiliati. I will acquaint you with the history.

CHAP. 22. How the Order of Humiliatj was suppressed by Decree of the
Consistory of Rome: and that there is greater cause to suppress the Jesuits,
then the Humiliatj.
THis Order in outward appearance, (like this of the Jesuits) promised so great
sanctity, and devotion, as Cardinal Borrhomao, the Archbishop of Millan,
would needs take upon him the patronage and protection thereof. This good
Prelate, perceiving that the greatest part of them, gave themselves over to a
voluptuous, and dissolute kind of life, took in hand to reform them: which
some of them took in such indignity dignity, as that they vowed his death.

There was a Guardian of that Order resident in the City of Versellis, his
name was Girolano Lignana, who with certain other his confederats, undertakes
this execution. And to make way to their purpose, they resolved to kill Friar
Fabio Simonetta, which had the treasure of their Monastery at Millan in
keeping, and was the head of their Order. Upon this resolution they come with
a steadfast purpose to strangle him, and finding him in the Church at prayer,
God diuerted them from executing their malicious purpose, by means of a
certain jar, that happened amongst them: but in sted thereof, they stole
diverse pieces of gold, and silver plate, whereof they made money. This done,
Lignana goes to Donato Facia, a brother of their order, a desperate companion,
and altogether set upon mischief, whom he overcomes, and corrupts with
money, to undertake the murder of the Cardinal Borrhomaeo. He being in this
manner overcome, like an honest man will not break his word; but espying a
time, when this great, and holy personage was at prayers in a chapel with his
own family, he discharges a pistol upon him, which by a great miracle,
passed but through his gown. Within a while after, both he and Lignana are
apprehended, and being manifestly convicted, they are executed, and
therewithal, their Order wholly suppressed in a full Consistory at Rome, by
Pius Quintus.

The Jesuits (as I will hereafter declare) allege that this was a general
co^spiracie of the whole Order against Borrhomaeo. Wherein they lie impudently:
for it cannot be found that ever any man had a hand in the plotting, or
contriuing thereof, save only Lignana, Guardian of the Priorie of Saint
Christopher, in Versellis, with certain other private Munks. The Order was
distributed into many other Monasteries, scattered here and there throughout
Italy, who were not of counsel with this enterprise. Yet nevertheless, this
only attempt against Cardinal Borrhomaeo, though void of success, was the
chief cause, that the Order was finally suppressed.

Compare this history, with that of the Jesuits (I speak to the Judges of
other Parliaments) are we not inwardly ashamed, that at Rome there should be
such an example of justice shown upon the Humiliati, for that one of them made
an attempt against the life of one only Cardinal, whose death could be no
great prejudice to the whole College of Cardinals, and that we should suffer
this sect of Jesuits to live amongst us, which (as our selves know) has
procured two several attempts upon the person of the King, being but one in a
whole kingdom, upon whose life depend the general quiet and welfare of all
his subjects: being the worthiest prince, that ever reigned in France, any
time these 5. hundred years.

The dignity of a Cardinal, has been very great in Rome, but yet inferior
to a King of France, especially in his own kingdom. For in Rome there be
many Cardinals, but in France there is but one King. Among all the Cardinals,
I have ever honored the memory of Cardinal Borrhomaeo, but yet I cannot
conceive how the loss of him should be of so fatal consequence to Italy, as
the death of our great King to France. Nay further, (how ever I may be
censured ouer-partially preiudicate against the Jesuits) since by the last
confession of Barriere, there are challenged three other. Religious persons of
Lions, one a Carmelite, another a Iacobin, and a third a Capuchin;
notwithstanding (say our Jesuits, in their four Books published since the last
Arrest of Parliament) we must punish the particular offenders, and not censure
the whole Order.

The punishment should be proportioned to the offense. The offense being
personal, the punishment should be so to, and not inflicted upon the Order. I
will not here say, that such proceedings, as else where are injustice in
affairs of State, may be auowed for just, and that in the decimations which
were anciently made among the soldiers, when there was question to punish a
Regiment, as soon died the faultlesse as the offender: and yet was there never
any exemplary justice more agreeable to government, nor more necessary for the
maintenance of a Commonwealth. Much less will I say with the great Tacitus,
Habet aliquidex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, quod in singulos vtilitate publica
rependitur.

I will not here allege the opinion of one of the greatest Lawyers in Rome,
who was wont to say, That in cases of sedition, the first executions should be
very sharp: Afterward, when things were well appeased, the Magistrate might
slack his hand, and grow more mild. I will not now heap up all the rules
and axioms serving to this purpose, although that which concerns the life of
a King, and the dependencie thereof, admits no example, nor cannot well be
compared with any other. And howsoever some Roman Manlius may be of opinion,
that a whole body or corporation, should be liable to the personal attempt of
any of their company, especially in an attempt against the life of their king;
yet so it is, as hitherto France has not received this position. As it was
manifest in James Clement, Iacobin, who although he murdered our king, yet
proceeded they not against the Order of the Iacobins, but only against him and
his Prior, who was torn in pieces with four horses in Tours, after he was
discovered to have been his principal counselor.

Now, if there were but some few in the sect of the Jesuits, traded in this
mystery of treason, it were happily sufficient to punish the particular
offender: but the vow of treason is as familiar with them, as their other
four. That this is thus, we shall need no further proof then the tragedy of
Barriere, wherein you shall find such a pack, as besides the particulers
mentioned in the Indictment, it cannot be avoided but the whole body of their
sect, was therein much engaged. I saw of one side, a Jesuit in Lions, very
deep in the practice. I saw the murderer, not well resolved in his attempt,
come purposely to Paris to learn his lesson. But where did they bestow Aubri,
Curat of Saint Andrews of Arts, one of the most seditious of all their troop?
Happily they sent him to the Iacobins, in regard of the mischance which fell
out under the other government. Or to the Carmelites would they send him, or to
the Capuchins rather? Nothing less, for he was not assured, that in their
Monasteries, murder, especially the murder of a King, would be approved.

Whether then? Marry he sends him to them, who were great Masters in this
Art: to the house of the Jesuits, where he knew the resort of the cursed crew
to be. Jesuits, who knew by the model of confessions framed, to make strange
Geometrical proportions of sins and merrits. That to kill a king of France,
there might be a sin Ad quatuor: But to kill him with an intention to inuest
the king of Spain in his kingdom, it were a merit Ad octo. So as the merit
so much surpassing the sin, the murder was not only tolerable, but just
and lawful.

This Curat, was he in this troop? No. For Barriere found one Varade Rector of
their College, who was of old acquainted with these courses. He found
likewise one Commolet, who secretly subscribed to Varades counsel, and
afterward, by way of parable, in great iollitie before the people, maintained
it in the pulpit. And yet were there but this sole example in this kind, I
should be very injurious to challenge their whole sect: but when we see it is
their continual practice, what shall we say.

As for instance, their attempt against the deceased Prince of Orange, at
Antwerpe: Afterward, in the town of Trierres, where he was murdered: At
Doway likewise, against the Count Maurice his son: At Venice, Lions, Paris,
against the Queen of England, in the year 1584. Again, against her in
Spain, in the year 1597. In Scotland, against the Chauncellor Metellinus.
Again in France, and that in Paris, against our King, in the year 1594, by
one of their scholars, Chastell, who in open Court, before the face of the
Judges, was so shameless to maintain, that in certain cases, it was lawful
to kill his king.

Now if the rule of Logitians be true, that from many particulers a general
may be concluded, I think I may truly affirm, that their axiom, whereupon
they ground their massacring of Kings, Princes, and great personages, is as
natural, and as familiar unto them, as the rest of their vows. It is most
certain, they consented to the death of the late king, and that Guignard, one
of their order, since executed, made as I told you, a book wherein he
maintains, that the death of such offenders is meritorious: and that the king
now living, should be served so to.

Hitherto you have heard me discourse under the name of the venerable Pasquill
of Rome: notwithstanding the things themselves are serious and true. Among
others, there is a book made by the Jesuit Montaignes, Principal of the
Seminary of Reims upon the same subject, Arnauld having in his pleading
objected it unto him. Montaignes made no have to answer it, although in
things more frivolous, his pen has ever been too busy. For conclusion, all
their actions, all their plots, are barbarous and bloody. Which occasioned a
pleasant Gentleman of France, having in a little Poem briefly discovered their
deuilish practices, in his conclusion to say thus of them.

Gesum is a warre-like weapon, used by the French, as Liuie, Festus, Nonius,
and Sosipater testisie.
A Gesis sunt indita nomina vobis,
Quae quia sacrilegi, Reges torquet is in omnes,
Inde sacrum nomen, sacrum sumpsistis and omen.
Of Gesum, not Jesus, are Jesuits hight,
A fatal tool the Frenchmen used in fight;
Which since by sacrilege at Kings you throw,
From hence your holy name and fortunes flow.
Notwithstanding any thing can be said to the contrary, yet this conclusion
still must stand inviolable. The particular offender is to be punished, the
Order not to be touched, as being far from the thought of such impiety. Who
is so braine-sicke to believe it?

I will not abuse your patience, by reckoning up the tumults and seditions
they have caused in our state. I know the great Masters of our
Commonwealth, respect them as men very zealous over the good of their Country,
I beseech them to consider, whether that I have said be true or no: Other
Rhetoric I will not use to draw them to my opinion. And because I have
begun this discourse with the Decree granted in Rome against the Humiliati,
I will urge the same again, to make it plain unto you with what impudency
the Jesuits ward this blow.

CHAP. 23. The impudency of the Jesuits, to save themselves from the process
of the Consistory of Rome, granted out against the order of the Humiliati.
ARnauld first of all in the year 1594. Marion the Kings Attorney since, in
97. declare, that the Order of the Humiliati, was in our time suppressed for
less cause then the Jesuits deserve to be. The one and the other, in few
words. This is the position I maintain. Let us see how the Jesuits will ward
this blow. Montaignes writing against Arnauld says. Montaig. ca. 59.
To strengthen your weak assertion, you bring the example of the Order of the
Humiliati, which were suppressed in Italy: You are far wide, the cases are
nothing alike. The causes of their suppression are mentioned in the Bull,
namely, that they were irrigular, imperious, and incorrigible. They conspired
against their Prelat, their Protector and reformer: and the executor of the
conspiracy being taken, discovered the rest, who likewise confessed the fact.
You cannot affirm the same of the Jesuits, could you, it is like you would not
spare them. I am of the Jesuits mind, they are nothing like indeed. For the
question was there but of a Prelat, whereof there is plenty; here of a King, of
which fort we had no more, who is Gods true anointed. The conspirator of the
Humiliati was punished as soon as he was taken: the Jesuit was not, for after
they had brought him back from Paris (as to them nothing is impossible) they
found means for his escape. In truth this defense of Montaignes is full of
preuarication, and therefore La Fon denies it. Concerning the Humiliati,
(says he) it has been answered heretofore by Francis Montaignes, that they
were sensual and licentious, unlearned, irregular, without discipline,
scandalous, whose houses were Princes Palaces, their chambers garnished like
Kings Cabinites. Their Cloisters and Galleries, full of lascivious pictures.
Their Provost keeping a public Curtisan, and all the rest, of the Prouosts
diet. In the end, they were convict of treasonable practice against the person
of their Prelate, the Cardinal Borrhomeo, a man of very holy life, laboring
by all means to reclayme them. Their cause was exactly heard, the crimes
examined, debated, and judged by our holy Father the Pope, to whom the
cognizance of such causesproperly belongs; who condemned them not to depart
out of Italy, but to live confined under other religious, as Pentioners
deprived of their possessions, of whom some live at this day in Milan. And
hereof all Millan is witness, together with the Bull thereof likewise extant.
My purpose was to have made a comparison betwixt the Humiliati and the Jesuits,
thereby to show, that there is much more reason to suppress the Jesuits now,
then there was cause then to dissolve the Humiliati. But the impudency of this
last Jesuit presses me to encounter him before I pass any further. What a
strange comment is this he makes upon his fellow Montaignes? Where finds he
either in Montaignes, or in the Bull, those crimes which he mentions? where
finds he this same conspiracy in person against the Cardinal Borrhomaeo?
where finds he the Prouosts Curtisan? was there but one Provost in this
order? Had not every Priory one? Had this Provost no name? It is an use the
Jesuit has gotten, when he begins to tell tales, he leaves not till he have
told twenty. But to bring him to the touch. Let us see the Bull of Pope Pius
Quintus, it will easily appear, whether his allegations be Alchimie, or no.

PIUS EPISCOPVS SERVVS seruorum Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
QVE MAD MODVM sollicitus pater quem vnice caru^ educauit filium, via salutis
egressum reuocare cupiens, primum hortatur, indulget, praetermittit, increpat,
alia praetera atque alia tentare non desinit, dum quod expetit, modo aliquo
consequatur, omnia denique expertus, cum nihil iam proficere intelligit
desperata prorsus salute, omnem de illo parentis animum eijcit, domo expellit,
indignum existimans, qui parta haereditate fruatur: sic Romanus Pontifex, quem
diuina Maiestas patrem and pastorem omnium Ecclesia suae ordinum constituit,
sicubi quempiam sacraru^ congregationu^ a regula, and vitae praescripto
aberrare percipit, modo admonendo, modo corripiendo connititur, eam vel primis
institutis restituere, vel certe, quo pacto emendatam in aliquo statu illis
magis cohaerenti continere: omnibus tandem ad illius sanitatem conquisitis, vbi
salutaria remedia fastidire, and viam iniquitatis obstinatius procedere, atque
adeo in prauum indurescere animaduertit, vt potius confringi, quam corrigi
possit, omni curatione reiecta, de ipsaremonenda decernit, ne inueterati atque
indomiti mali vis, in alias insurgat, eisque exitio sit futura. Quod (vt
nostrum hac in re studium flagrat) cum in plurimis, tum maxim in fratrum
Humiliatorum familia enixe curanimus, nihil inexpertum relinquentes, quin illa
multis iampridem modis affecta, and si non protinus, certe accommoda rerum
moderatione directa ad pristinum institutum paulatim regrederetur. Etenim post
quam dilectus filius noster Carolus, tituli sanctae Praxedis, praesbiter
Cardinalis Borrhomaeus, huius Ordinis protector, and Apostolicae Sedis
delegatus, animaduertens dictos Fratres in luxu^ iampridem effusos esse, multa
de ratione cultus diuini, de obedientia and vita, vt antea communi, deque modo
recipiendorum and educandorum religiosorum prouidenter statuerat,
intelligeremus eos, illa caeteraque omnia regulae suae instituta, omnino
aspernari, itemque omium voluptatum varietate confertam ducere, ac praepositos,
and qui ex eo ordine rerum administrationem habebant, bonam magnamque fructuum
partem veluti propriam in vanitatibus mundanis turpitudinibusque flagitiose
profundere, innumeraque scelera committere. Nos vias omnes quae illos in aperta
huiusmodi pericula atque incommoda comecerant, excindere conati, pleraque alia
de ipsorum vita, moribus and proprietate regulae inimica, deque modo and
tempore gubernandae cuiusque praepositurae, nec non ratione administrationis
bonorum, and dispensatione prouentuum, alijsque muneribus and officijs, ad
prolapsi huius status, and disciplinae regularis reparationem maxim
conferentibus, edidimus, sperantes illa prosperos tandem successus dicto Ordini
allatura. Sed obsistente bonarum rerum perturbatore plerique omnes (quoniam
otio and desidi nimium assueuerant) regulae etsi instituta and emendationem
adhorrentes, etsi statuta and praecepta nostra communi consensu palam
acceptarunt, clam tamen quibus illa modis supprimerent comminiscentes, nefarias
protestationes in occulto fecerunt, necessarios suos, and alios potentiores
laicos ad intestinas seditiones concitarunt, suasores praeterea and impulsores
ad intimos summorum principum ministros demiserunt, qui magnis praemijs and
pollicitationibus eos pellicerent, in animos praedictorum principum inducere,
vt nos ad illam resciscendam inclinarent, multaque alia de ea tollenda prauis
artibus suut conati, vt turpem illam and flagitiosam vitam suam retinerent,
letalesque mundi voluptates sequerentur, inter quos non defuit, qui altius
praecipitatus, etiam a Catholica fide ad Haereticos, and impia illorum dogmata
declinarit. Quibus cognitis, omnium granissimum impoenitentiae peccatum in eis
animaduertimus, qui toties frustra correpti, in eadem obstinatione perdurare
contendunt, non satis habentes talia attentare, nisi and ijs qui inter ipsos
qui posse putant, illis imprimis qui saluti eorum sedulo inuigilant, exitium
machinentur, illius stimulis concitati, qui scelestum Iudam in funestum
auaritiae morbum iniecisse non contentus, etiam ad prodendum Dominum suum
pecunia impulit. Huius nimirum Spiritus nequssimi ductu, quo^dam Hieronimus
Lignana praepositus praepositurae sancti Christophori Vercellen: and plures
alij conscelerati huius ordinis, in necem dicti Caroli Cardinalis propitiatoris
sui conspirantes, vt pecuniam ad tantum nefas expeditam conficerent, de
trucidando in primis dilecto^ filio Fabio Simoneta fratre dicti ordinis,
prouentuum praepositurae Bredae Mediolanensis depositario, apud quem nummos
inuenire credebant, secreto conuenerunt, inde ad ecclesiam dictae
praepositurae, in qua ipsum orantem, laqueo suffocare decreuerant, profecti,
sed inter se de modo aggrediendi, misericordia Saluatoris nostri, discordes,
hoc conatu destiterunt, mutatoque consilio, sacra aurea and argentea furati
sunt. Quibus clam venditis, seu pignori datis, praedictus Hieronimus quendam
Donatum Faziam comprofessorem suum, Apostatam, pacta pecunia induxit vt ipsum
Carolum Cardinalom occideret, qui nacta loci and temporis opportunitate, in eum
vesperi de more in sacello cum familia precantem, vt transuerberaret, sclopum
glandibus confertum igne admoto exoneranit, sed telorum part ad vestes orantis
exinanita, alijs vtrinque in proximo violentia ictus defixit, innocentem Diuina
pietas saluum and incolumem conseruauit. Quare ambo, and quidam alij huius
nefandi criminis participes postea capitis poenas debitas persoluerunt. Quando
igitur familiam praedictam, nulli studio ad Ecclesiae Dei vtilitatem
proficienti incumbentem, nulli disciplinae Ecclesiasticae deditam, nulium
omnino futurae virtutis specimen estendentem, tam detestandis facinoribus
infectam, tam atroci sacrilegio contaminatam, and praeterea inpoenitentem atque
iccorrigibilem agnoscimus, omni de illa spe prorsus exclusa, ipsam tandem
tollere constituimus, tanquam malam arborem fructus pessimos proferentem.
Habita itaque cum fratribus nostris deliberatione matura* de illorum consilio,
and nobis attributae potestatis plenitudine, extinguimus and abolemus ordinem
praedictorum fratrim Humiliatorum, officium praepositi generalis ac
prouincialium, and quaecunque alia ministeria ordinis sic suppressi, nec non
omnia, and quaecumque statuta, consuetudines and decreta eiusdem, etiam
iuramento, confirmatione apostolica, vel alia quacumque firmitate munita, and
pariter priuilegia, and indulta generalia, and specialia, quorum omnium tenores
ac si ad verbum insererentur, praesentibus habemus pro expressis, quibuscumque
illa concepta sint formulis, nec non irritantibus alijs decretis, and vinculis
roborata: Triuamusque Generalem, ac caeteros omnes praepositos, and fratres
omnes, praeposituris, dignitatibus, administrationibus, officijs and beneficijs
Ecclesiasticis cum cura and sine cura, nec non domibus, conuentibus and bonis
immobilibus, mobilibus and se mouentibus in Italia and vbicumque gentium
constitutis, sacra quacunque, and communi supellectile, ac ipsorum omnium vsu,
vsufructa administratione ac possessione sprirituali, and temporali, ac etiam
iure and action, sieve per statuta nostrae, alias quomodolibet pertinente. Ac
tollimus eis omnimodam facultatem, vsum and auctoritatem, generalia and
prouincialia, and alia capitula de caetero celebrandi. Volumus tamen vt omnes
fratres qui nunc sunt, qui professionem regularem emiserunt, demceps in domibus
and locis, quos cis cum victu, and alijs necessarijs proxime assignandos
curabimus, omnino redigantur, vt ibi vitam ducant regularem suae professioni
conformem sub cura and visitatione ordinariorum locorum aut alterius, vel
aliorum quos eis duxerimus delegandos, vel iuxta iuris communis dispositionem
transeant ad pares vel strictiores ordinis approbatos. Nouitij vero and alij
quicunque non professi, detracto Religionis habitu ex professorum consortio,
and domibus expellantur. Quibus professoribus nominatim praecipimus atque
interdicimus ne post haec quemquam expulsorum, and omnino alium etiam vouentem,
ad professionem, vel habitum admittant, nec nouas domos, vel loca recipiant,
vel acquirant, quod si secus fiat, professio sit inanis, neminemque obliget,
neque in genere sic professum, Nouarum domorum seu locoru^ receptiones vel
acquisitiones viribus and effectu careant, and contra facientes,
excommunicationis sint sententia eo ipso innodati, a qua nullus nisi in mortis
articulo constitutus absolui possit, absque Romani Pontificis licentia
speciali. Caeterum intendentes and cultui diuino, and Ecclesiae ministris
quamprimum prospicere, omnes praeposituras, dignitates, personatus,
administrationes, officia, caeteraque beneficia Ecclesiastica, cum cura and
sine cura, quae deinceps secularia sint, per priuationem praedictam, apud sedem
Apostolicam vacantia, nec non domos, conuentus, loca, supellectilem, bona,
fructus, res, actiones and iura supradicta, eorumque proprietatem and dominium
nostrae and dictae sedis liberae dispositioni specialiter and express
reseruamus. Decernentes irritum and mane quicquid secus per praedictos, aut
quoscunque alios scie^ter vel ignoranter contigerit attentari. Voluimus aute^
vt praesentium exempla notarij publici manu, and personae in dignitate
Ecclesiastica constitutae, sigillo obsignata, eandem illam prorsus fidem in
iudicio and extra illud, vbique locorum facia ^t, quam ipsaemet praesentes
facerent, si essent exhibitae, vel ostensae. Nulli ergo. etc. Siquis autem.
etc. Datum Romae apud sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae, 1577.
Idibus Februarij, Pontificatus nostri anno sexto.

POPE PIUS, SERVANT of the Servants of GOD, in perpetual memory of this
matter.
AS a careful Father over that son whom he has brought up very tenderly,
desirous to reclayme him, when he is stepped out of the way of his salvation,
first exhorts him, favors him, pardons him, rebukes him, moreover, cease not
to try one thing after another, until he attain unto that which he desired,
and having at last made proof of all, when he sees nothing will do him good,
utterly despayring of his recovery, castes off the affection of a Father, and
thrustes him out of doors, judging him unworthy to be his heir: So the
Bishop of Rome, whom the Divine Majesty has appointed to be a Father and
Pastor of all the Religious orders in his Church, if he perceive any of these
holy Companies swerve from the rule and prescription of life they have
undertaken, endeauours sometime by admonition, sometime by correction, to
restore their ouncient institution, or at least, by some kind of amendment,
bring them in better order: After he has sought every thing that may make for
their good, when he sees them loath all wholesome remedies, and stubbornely
go on still in the way of wickedness, and perceives them to grow worse and
worse, so that they may sooner be broken then bended, careless of all cure,
he determines to remove them, least the power of an inueterate and untamed
evil, overrun others, and destroy them. Which thing (because we are
earnest in this point) both in many others, and especially in the company of
the Humiliati, we have been very careful of, leaving nothing unattempted,
but finding many flawes in them, if not altogether, yet in some convenient
measure and moderation, they might by little and little, be fashioned to their
first institution. For, after that our beloved Son Charles, of the title
sanctae Praxedis, Priest, Cardinal Borrhomaeus, Protector of this Order, and
Delegat of the Apostolic Sea, of late perceiving the said Friars to break
out into Riot, had prouidently set down many things, concerning the manner of
Gods worship, obedience, and common life, and of the manner of receiving and
education of Religious persons. We understood, that they utterly despised both
those, and all other rules of their own Order, and lived very voluptuously,
and that their Governors, together with such as had any offices in the
administration of their affairs, wickedly wasted a great part of the revenues
(as if they had been their own) in worldly vanities and filrhines, and
committed an innumerable sort of sins.

We endeavoring to cut off all those means that did cast them into so
apparent dangers and inconveniences, took order for many things hurtful to
their life and manners, and proptietie of their rule and Order, and for the
manner and time of government in every ones commandment, and also for the
menaging their goods, and disposing of their revenues: and other places and
offices, very profitable to repair the ruins of this decayed state and
regular discipline, hoping that these things would in time to come, bring good
success to the said Order. But the enemy of all good things resisting, almost
all of them (because they had been too much inured to ease and idleness)
detesting to live in order and to be amended, howsoever by common consent they
outwardly accepted our laws and precepts, yet underhand they devised all the
ways they could to suppress them. They held wicked conspiracies secretly,
they stird up their kindred and others of the Laity that were mighty, to
sedition; they sent their Brokers and Agents, to the most intrinsecall
servant of mighty Princes, to draw them by great rewards and promises, to
work us by the foresaid Princes means, to undo that we had done, and many
others did they by evil practices attempt to this purpose, that they might
continue their filthy and wicked course of life, and follow the deadly
pleasures of this world, among whom was one that fell more high and headlong
from the Catholic Faith to Heretics, and declined to their impious opinions.

Understanding of these things, we found them guilty of Impenitencie, the
greatest sin of all, who being so often reproved, straue to continue in the
same obstinacy, not thinking it enough to have attempted these things, unless
they contrived the destruction of such as were of authority among them, and
chiefly did watch diligently over their own souls, provoked heereunto by
him, who not contenting himself with plunging of Judas into the grievous
sin of covetousness, procured him also by money to betray his Master. For by
the inticement of of this wicked spirit, Hierom Lignana, once President of the
house of Saint Christopher at Verselles, and many other confederats of this
order, co^spiring the death of Charles the Cardinal their Protector, that they
might have money, to compass this heinous act, they held a conuenticle, to
murder first our beloved son Fabius Simoneta, a brother of the said Order,
Treasurer of the revenues of Breda at Millan, thinking to furnish themselves,
with such coin as was in his keeping: thence determined they to go to the
Church of the said house, to strangle him there, as he was at his prayers, but
(by Gods mercy) disagreeing among themselves, about the manner of the assault,
they desisted from that, and changing their minds, they stole away the sacred
gylt vessels of the Church. Which being secretly sold, or pawnd, the said
Hierom hired one Donatus Fazia, one of his brotherhoode, an Apostata, to murder
Charles the Cardinal, and he having spyed his time and place, finding him at
his prayers (as his manner was) with his family in a Chapel in the evening
shot of a pistol at him to strike him through, but disappointed of his
purpose, some of the bullets were defeated by his garments while he prayed,
others, by the violence of the blow, stuck in the next on either side of him:
the innocent by Gods grace was preserved: wherefore both of them, with others
that were pertakers of this fact, were afterward beheaded.

Thus when we saw this company grown unprofitable in the Church of God, live
in no order, show no sign of amendment, infected with so grievous crimes,
defiled with so cruel sacrilege, and furthermore impenitent and incorrigible,
being out of all hope of their recovery, we have at last determined to root
them out, like an evil tree that carries very badde fruit. Having therefore
thoroughly deliberated with our Brethren, by their advise, and by the absolute
authority committed to us, we utterly extinguish and abolish the whole Order
of the said Friars Humiliats, the place of their General, and Prouincials, and
all other offices of their Order thus suppressed, and also all, and all manner
of Statuts, customs, and decrees of the same, howsoever they have been
established by any oath, or confirmation Apostolical, or any other warrant,
and also all privileges and graunts, both general and special, the tenors of
all which, as if they were word for word here inserted, in these presents we
hold them for expressed, whatsoever style or form they bear, confirmd with
other decrees and clauses that may move us: And we deprive the General, and
all other their Governors, and brethren, of commandments, dignities,
administrations, offices, and ecclesiastical benefices, with cure, and without
cure, and also of their houses, Couents, and goods immoouable, mouable, and
selfe-moouing, being in Italy or any other Nation, of all holy things, and
common household stuff, of the use of all and vsufructuall administration and
possession spiritual and temporal, of right and action also, whether by our
statuts, or any other way they appertain unto them. And we take from them all
power and authority, to hold from hence-foorth, any General, Provincial, or
other Chapters. Yet we ordain, that all the Brethren now remaining, which
have made their regular profession, be from henceforth seated in such houses
and places, as we shall appoint, with things necessary for their maintenance:
that there they may live according to their rule and profession, under the Cure
and visitation of the Ordinaries of those places, or of some others, who^ we
shall appoint for that purpose; or else, that according to the direction of
common law, they may go to their equals, or to some of straighter order
already allowed.

As for the Nouices and others whatsoever not yet professed, their habit pulled
over their ears, let them be expelled the house and company of the professed.
Which professed, we precisely command, and forbid, that from henceforth they
never admit unto their profession or habit, any of them that are expelled, or
any other that would be devoted to it: Neither shall they receive or purchase
any new houses or places, if they do, the profession shall be void, and
shall bind no man, not so much as in general so professed. All erections of
such like new houses, shall be of no force, and they that shall do contrary,
shall thereby incur the sentence of excommunication: from which none, unless
it be upon the point of death, shall be absolved, without the special license
of the Bishop of Rome.

Furthermore, purposing to provide with all speed for the service of God, and
the Ministers of his church, we reserve by the foresaid deprivation, all
commandments, dignities, administrations, offices, and other Ecclesiastical
benefices, with cure and without cure, which be hereafter secular, to the holy
Sea, in their vacancie. And also the houses, Couents, places, household stuff,
goods, fruits, substances, actions, and foresaid rights, and their propriety
and dominion, specially and expressly to the free dispositon of our said Sea.
Decreeing that to be void and of none effest, whatsoever shall happen to be
wittingly or unwittingly attempted to the contrary, by the foresaid Friars or
any other.

And we will, that the transcript of these presents, taken under the hand of a
public Notarie, and sealed by the seal of an Ecclesiastical person of
dignity, shall be as autenticall, in, or out of judgment, wheresoever they be
drawn, as if these presents were exhibited and shown. Therefore to none. etc.
But if any etc. Given at Rome in Saint Peter's Palace, in the year of the
incarnation of our Lord, 1577, in the Ides of February, the sixth year of our
Pontificalitie.

This is the Bull at large, the which I took out of Mathaeus Toscanus, in his
book entitled, Summa constitutionum, and rerum in Ecclesia Romana gestarum a
Gregorio nono vsque ad Sixtum quintum. This fellow besides is a great friend of
the Jesuits. But what gather you out of this Bull? that the Humiliati were
licentious, but no mention of the particulers devised by La Fon. Besides, in
express terms, that by their plots and practices, they stirred up troubles
and seditions among Princes, In occulto. The words are, necessarios suos and
alios potentiores, ad intestinas seditiones concitarunt. And I pray you, are
not our reverend Jesuits herein their crafts Masters?

Further, you find not in this Bull, that the Order of the Humiliati were at
any time assembled to lay violent hands upon the Cardinal Borrhomaeo, their
Reformer, as the Jesuits suggest. If it had been a rout or an assembly in
person, it could not have been avoided, but their General, the Prouincialls
of their Order, and the Priors of their Monasteries, must have been of the
conspiracy, or at the least some part of them. A clause which would not have
been forgotten in the Decree that Pope Pius the fifth, and the holy Consistory
of Rome sent out, having so great intention finally to suppress them.

And this is the reason the Jesuits have laid this condemnation most falsely
upon all the Order, who had in Chapter (as they say) conspired against
Borrhomeo. Let us acknowledge a truth like the children of Christ, and not like
the disciples of Ignacius. This Order was grown very infamous, by reason of
their incontinency and licentious life, the which the good Cardinal Borrhomaeo
would have helped if it had been possible. This was (I must confess) a fault,
and that very foul and scandalous, and yet for this, it is like they should
not have been suppressed.

It is a vice whereunto naturally we are prone. Insomuch that he who would
suppress all houses of Religion where this vice abounds, especially those
which are seated in places far from resort, we may say with Tacitus, Vt
antea vitijs ita tum demu^ legibus laboraremus. And there might be peradventure
more scandale in suppressing, then in winking at their vices.

How then? What caused the suppression? It was GODS will, that unexpectedly,
Lignana, Pryor of Versellis, and some others, angry with this new reformation,
conspired against Borrhomaeo, as it is expressed in the Bull. And this riot was
the cause of the suppression: and this is the cause the Bull does recount
their disorders in general, but specially their attempt against Borrhomaeo.
The which is set down very particularly, and not the incontinencies which La
Fon recites.

What is there in this story, but will fit the Jesuits as well as if it were
made for them? They are notorious throughout the world, for the troubles raised
by them in France. And as manifest it is, that they practiced and bargained
with a stranger, to bring in a new King into this kingdom. The detestable
fact of Barriere. The howlings of Commolet to the people, to kill the King even
in the time of the truce. The people with one mouth, from the youngest to the
most aged, cried vengeance on them, so soon as the King reentred Paris. The
cause was pleaded in the name of the University, and as it falls out
oftentimes, that in matter of judgment, where the cause is of consequence,
while we fear to be negligent, we grow ouer-curious: so here the cause was
referred to counsel. GOD would so have it, that Chastell, a disciple of the
Jesuits, poisoned with their damnable positions, wounded the King with a
knife, and being taken, he maintained in the open face of justice, that he
might do it lawfully.

The haynousnes of this fact, aggrauated with other circumstances, gave
occasion of the pronouncing the process against the whole Order. Now I pray
you tell me, if the same holy Ghost, which wrought in the suppression of the
Humiliati, had not a stroke likewise in driving the Jesuits out of Paris? They
are the same things, the same proceedings, under several names. Their
difference is in these two points. The one, that the Humiliati, in being too
subject to their pleasure, sinned, yet committed such a sin as our corrupt
nature teaches us: but the Jesuits, being the principal Authors of the
troubles wherein two hundred thousand lost their lives; have sinned against
GOD, and against nature. For nature abhorres nothing more then death, which is
so cheap among the Jesuits, to the loss of others. The other difference is,
that the attempt of Lignana, was but against a Cardinal, who^ I acknowledge
willingly to be one of the holiest men our age yields: A Cardinal, whom the
College would be loath to spare, yet notwithstanding he lives, and lives in
as great reputation as ever he did. Whereas the attempt of Chastell,
endangered a King, sole in his kingdom, and such a king, as the world must
yield to be as valiant, wise, and courteous, as any before him; and by whose
death, if the treason had sorted to effect* we were to expect nothing but
horror and confusion, our old inhabitants. And yet they must be cherrished in
some part of the kingdom. But because some not remembering, or not observing
things past, others not foreseeing, less laboring to prevent dangers to come,
suffer themselves to be abused by them, accounting them the Champions and
protectors of the Catholic faith, I will make it manifest unto you, that their
sect is as dangerous as Martin Luthers, and that there is nothing the Pope has
more to fear, as prejudicial to his authority and greatness, then their
General, what shows and protestations soever they make to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CHAP. 24. That the Sect of the Jesuits, is no less dangerous to our Church
then the Lutherans.
THis position may seem at the first sight Paradoxicall, but it is true. The
distribution of the hierarchicall Order of our Church, has a proportion and
corresponde^cy with the humane body, wherein the head commands over the other
members, amongst the which there are certain noble parts as the heart, the
liver, and the lungs, without which the body cannot consist: So as he who
would take from the head to add to the noble parts, or diminish them to give
unto the head, disordering the proportion and correspondency which should be
betwixt the members, he should confound and destroy the body: So is it in our
hierarchy, the head of the Church, is our holy father the Pope, the noble parts
under him, are the Archbishops Bishops, Cardinals, Priors, and Abbots; I will
add Princes, Lords, and Universities; as for the rest of the people, they
represent the other members of the body. Martin Luther was the first who durst
traduce this head, bringing in a form of Aristocratie into our Church, making
all the Bishops in their several dioceses, equal to the Sea Apostolic.

There succeeded him, Ignactius Loyhola, some years after, who by a contrary
course, defended the authority of the holy Sea, but after such a fashion, as
he no less endamaged our Church then theirs. For pretending more zeal to the
Sea, and our holy Father, then the rest, and still intituling him to more
predominant and new authority over the Ordinaries, he and his successively
obtaynd from diverse Popes, so many Privileges, Indulgences, and Graunts, in
disadvantage of the Prelates, Monasteries, and Universities, that suffering them
to live in the midst of us, you disfigure and stain the face of the Catholic
and Universal Church. Remember what the Jesuit said to you this other day, and
you will find my words true. The difference betwixt Luther and Ignace, is, that
he troubled our Church, fighting against the head: And this, warring against
the noble parts. All extremity is a vice, virtue is ^^^ympiere betwixt both.
For mine own part, I belee^^ that the true Catholic Apostolic Roman faith,
is that, which has bin in use ever since the passion of our Savior and
Redeemer Jesus Christ, and that which has been approved be all our ancient
Doctors of the Church, of whom the meanest, had more learning and true
Christian feeling in his heart, then Luther and all his adherents, then Ignace
with all his accomplices. It is the religion wherein all good and faithful
Christians ought to live and die.

I will add further, that I had rather err with them, then run the
Wild-Goose chase, endaungering my soul with these night-growne mushrumps. But
we will be moderate in a subject of such a nature. I will not say then that I
had rather, but that I should less fear to err. For to say that Jesuits are
the only clubs to beat down the blows of Calvin and Luther, I am so far
from believing it, as I think it is a special mean to confirm them in their
erroneous opinions. I remember a friend of mine being at a Sermon, rather for
nouelty then devotion, a Minister cried out to his disciples; My brethren,
says he, God has beheld us with a merciful eye: Although Martin Luther had
been sufficient to give the Pope battle: yet so it is that Ignacius Loyhola
is come besides to aid us. For he cunningly, under color of support,
supplanteth him. What readier mean to overthrow a State, then faction and
intestine quarrels. And I pray you what other milk give these Jesuits in the
Church of Rome? Then since this Sect is his last refuge, and his principal
support, be of good cheer the day is ours. For without question the head must
be very daungerously sick, if for cure thereof, favoring this new Sect, they
utterly overthrow the noble parts. But what should be the cause of this
disorder? An imaginary vow of Mission, in favor whereof the Pope pr^^ecteth
their quarrel. For this therefore let us praise God and say as Demea said to
his brother Mitio in the Poet, Consumat, perdat, pereat, nihil ad me attinet.

These six or seven Latin words uttered against the holy Sea are
blasphemous. But this is the unbridled license of these new Preachers, who when
they are transported with their preposterous zeal, may say any thing. This
dissension concerned not the Minister: it had been his part to touch the
conscience of every good Catholic, who desires to live and die in the
bosom of the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church: yet it should be our
care, that these my Masters the Ministers insult not over us, and that their
triumphs be not grounded on the Jesuits. Consider whether they have cause to
say thus or no, for among other particulars of the censure of our Divines, in
the year 1554. this was, one, that the Jesuits would become Seminaries of
Schism, and division in our Christian Church, and that they were rather
brought in, for the ruin and desolation of it then for the edification
thereof. Wherefore, if I may be thought to err in saying that the Sect of the
Jesuits is no less prejudicial to the Church then that of the Lutherans, I
do it not without judgment, having for my warrant herein, the censure of
that venerable faculty of Divines in Paris.

CHAP. 25. Of the notorious enterprise or usurpation, of the General of the
Jesuits over the holy Sea, and that there is no new Sect which in time may be
more prejudicial to it then this.
WHen the venerable faculty of the Divines of Paris, censured the Sect of the
Jesuits, in the year 1554. they only considered of the inferior orders
as well spiritual as temporal. But for matter which concerned the holy Sea,
they went not so far, neither were they acquainted with their Bulls and
constitutions. But now that it has pleased God of his grace to enlighten us, I
will not doubt to say, that the Governor of the Jesuits, represents the person
of Lucifer, who would equal himself to his Creator. So this fellow being a
creature of the Popes, does not only usurp equal authority over his
subjects, but far greater then the Pope does exercise over the Universal
Church. They give out in Rome, that they absolutely obey the Pope, not only in
the matter of Mission, but in all other his commandments. And under this
plausible pretense, they have obtained, and daily do obtain very many
extraordinary privileges, in prejudice, and (if I might presume to say so
much) in disgrace of Archbishops, Bishops, Orders of Religion, Universities,
and the whole Catholic Church. Notwithstanding, the truth is, that they
having two Masters to serve, do without comparison, more homage to their
General, then to the holy Sea.

Ignatius Loyhola, Rib. lib. 1. Chap. 3.
a Spaniard, very honorably descended, changing his condition, changed not
his nature. Ribadinere reports, that when he was to leave his Fathers house,
pretending to go to visit the Duke of Naiare, Martin Garsia, his eldest
brother jealous of his intention, came to him privately to his chamber, and
said thus unto him; Brother, all things are great in you: Wit, Judgment,
Courage, Nobility, Favor of Princes, the peoples love, Wwisedome, Experience
in war: besides, youth and an able body. All these promise much of you, and
are exceeding full of expectation. How then, will you now frustrate on a sudden
all these our fair hopes? will you defeat our house of those garlands, whereof
we in a sort assured our selves if you would but maintain the course you have
begun? Although in years I am much your ancient, yet am I after you in
authority. Beware then, that these high hopes, which sometime we conceived of
you, prove not abortiue, ending in dishonor. Whereunto Ignace shortly
answered, that he was not unmindful of himself and his ancestors, from whom
he would not degenerat in the least degree, nor obscure their memory. And
believe me, he kept his promise. For after this unexpected change of life, he
never entertained any petrie ambitions, howsoever he altered his habit, or any
pilgrimage he made to Jerusalem notwithstanding. Cloth an Ape in Tissue, the
beast may happily be more proud, but never the less deformed.

Naturam expellas furca tamen vsque recurrer.
Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt.
Neither the meanness of his habit, nor his pilgrimage, could abate those
spirits which were borne with him. When he and his six first companions, made
their first vow at Mont Marter, he made himself their head without any
election of their part. The which you shall find in Maffeus, who witnesses,
that when by the advice of the Physicians, he was to change the air for the
recovery of his health after a long sickness, taking his iourny toward Spain,
he left Vicegerent over his companions, Peter Faure, in whom he reposed a
special trust. Caeterum (says Maffee) nequid e suo discessu res parisiensis
caperet detrimenti, Maff. lib. 2. cap. 1.
primum commilitones ad fide^ and perseuerantiam paucis adhortatus, Petrum
Fabrum and annis and vocatione antiquissimum, illis praeposuit, cui interim
obtemperarent. He had then cast off all authority and pre-eminence over them,
as it is manifest by that which follows. For it was he whom they promised to
meet at Venice at a certain day prefixed: It was he which afterward
assembled them at Vincintia, to deliberate whether they should return to Rome,
or no, there to erect their new Sect: it was he which undertook the charge as
principal. This was the cause that he, assuring himself, that when they
should proceed to eleclection would make choice of him for General of their
Order, provided before hand, that this office should not be annual, but for
life and all: with all, that the General should have absolute authority over
his subjects. Ergo sine controuersia deligendum videri, cui omnes in terris,
tanquam Christo parerent, Maff. lib. 2. chap. 9.
cuius in verba iurarent, denique cuius sibi nutum ac voluntatem instar diuini
cuiusdam oraculi ducerent. His ita constitutis deinceps quaesitum de huius
ipsius potestate, vtrum certo dierum spatio definitam, an vero perpetuam esse
oporteret: perpetuam esse placuit omnibus. After the Order was established in
Rome, and Ignatius chosen General, and that upon terms of an absolute
Governor: He who from his youth had been in arms, not in Arts, began to
bring in amongst them a tyrannous government, willing that all his Decrees,
and the Decrees of his successors, should be held just and inviolable. For
although they made show to vow like obedence to the holy Sea, and under this
protestation they were authorized in Rome, yet is it manifest, that they do
yield more obedience to their General, then to the Pope.

I say not only to their General, but to all their other Superiors, as their
Prouincials and Rectors, and especially, in their vow of Mission, their
General has more command over them then the Pope: even all, as I have more
particularly discoursed, speaking as well of the vow of Mission, as of the
blinded or hoodwinckt obedience. Therefore I conclude, and concluding shall not
be withstood by any man, which is not very passionatly partial, that the
command which the Pope and the General have over the Jesuits, is in all
points sovereign and absolute; but without comparison, more precise in the
things which concern the General. Which makes me believe, that if ever the
holy Sea received a breach, there is no Sect liker to make it, then this of the
Jesuit, their General residing in Rome. We exclaim againsts the Lutherans, and
not without cause, inasmuch as they were the first in our age that troubled the
peace of the Church. Notwithstanding, I hold not the^ of more dangerous
consequence then the Jesuits. Some childish or young scholar, will not stick
to say perhaps, that in maintayning this position, I am an heretic. All those
whom we term in France of the pretended Religion, of the Reformed, or of the
new, have no head over them: If they should admit any, they should contradict
themselves, denying the Popes primacie, and yet receiving another. They live in
an Oligarchy, or an Aristocracy. Insomuch as he, who for his knowledge or
antiquity, has any pre-eminence over the other Ministers, it is an inherent
authority for time of life, not transmissible from him to his Successors.
Besides, they want outward ceremonies, without the which, Religion works not
easily in the hearts of simple people. He among them is held a great minister,
who never read over but Caluins Institutions, or Peter Martyrs Commonplaces,
and some other modern writers. So as I doubt not, but this Sect in time will
fall of it self, as I think it had been down ere this time, if the unhappy
ambition of the Jesuits, had not so factiously withstood the wise designs of
our deceased King. I know this is not a style greatly to content the Ministers,
neither do I affect their favor: all my ambition is, to see our Catholic
Apostolic Roman Church in that dignity, and discipline, wherein it
flourished in the days of our forefathers. For conclusion, our Kings being
Catholics as they must be, if they will reign, I fear not the Hugonote in
France, who whether he will or no, shall be brought in under obedience well
enough.

But I fear the Jesuit above all, not only in France, but in Rome, because
their policy tends to the establishment of a tyranny over all, which they
will recover by little and little, if they be not prevented. They have a
General which is not annual, or for term, as those of the Friars: But
perpetual, as the Popes. Some one will say, that the like is in the chartre
house, I agree, but they are recluse and lead a solitary life in their
Cloisters, sequestered from traffic and intercourse with the world. Some will
reply, that there are diverse heads of Orders, as of Clugni, Premonstre, and
Grammond, which are for term of life, I grant it, but yet they have Statutes
and Decrees inviolable within which they are limited and confined, so that they
can do nothing preiuditiall to the rest of the Religious.

It is not so with the Jesuits, for they have nothing so certain as the
uncertainty of their constitutions. The which they can change in their
Chapters without craving aid of the holy Sea: yea, and the General himself,
in ordinary affairs of his own absolute authority, may do his pleasure.
Every man knows, that a perpetual Magistrate is more absolute then a
temporary. In the first general congregation which was held by them, in the
year 1558. Pope Paul the fourth, sent to them purposely the Cardinal
Pacochus, to advertise them his pleasure was, that their General should be
chosen for certain years, foreseeing the extraordinary greatness which he might
grow unto by this perpetual regency: Notwithstanding, overcome with their
importunities, he was in a sort content, yet sent he the Cardinal Taruense, to
signify, that he held it more convenient to be temporary, then perpetual.

This General, being thus perpetual, yet are all the dignities of his Order
temporary. Under him are the Prouincialls, according to the division of
Provinces: under them are the Rectors, who have particular authority over
their houses and Colleges; and consequently over their Fathers, and over the
Coaiutors, spiritual and temporal; and over the scholars elected: For the
heads of Colleges, they are principally appointed to be Superintendems of the
stranger scholars. These offices hold usually for three years together, yet
may they be continued or abridged at the pleasure of the General: he disposes
of the temporalties absolutely, without any consent, and exercises a world of
prerogatives, which are not permitted to our Bishops. I will deliver you every
particular in his place.

The Prouincialls are their Bishops, the Rectors are their Curats: as we
likewise call in Languedoc, Rectors, those which in all other parts of France
are called Curats. None of these I have named are perpetual, but at the will
of their General. No other dignity of Christendom, is comparable with that
of our holy Father, and yet his compared with the Generals, is less. For
after his holiness has confirmd a Bishopric, or any other promotion, his
hands are bound, he cannot displace them of his own absolute authority; they
are not Tenants at will, as the Prouincials and Rectors Jesuits. Our holy
Father, by the ancient Cannons and constitutions, cannot give power to Bishops
and Abbots, to alienate their temporalties, without special cognizance of the
cause. There is required an especial assembly to give advise, and after
consent obtained, one presents himself to the Superior, who appoints a
Proctor for the Church, to see if such alienation be necessary.

Their General may sell, morgage, allienate, and dissipate the goods of the
Church, and is not accountable when he has done. And that which is a
tyranny, the like whereof was never heard, having deputed such as shall please
him to make his sales, he may frustrate and disanull any act of theirs,
although they have not exceeded the limits of their commission. Our holy Father
assumeth no such authority, to permit such as have vowed Chastity, Poverty,
or Obedience, to recover their possessions, much less to marry, except Kings
and souerainge Princes, and that in cases of very urgent necessity. The clean
contrary is practiced by the Jesuits in their first vow, which they call the
simple vow: is not this, to attribute more to their General, then our holy
Father will assume?

I told you yesterday, that in matter of Missions, the General may send all
under him, whether he will, not only of the last vow, but of the first and
the second. This you may find in the ninth part of their Constitutions, chap.
3. Artic. 9. Here I desire to know from whence he deriueth this power, for
from the holy Sea he has it not: search all the Bulls of their Order. Well I
know, that in that of 49, of Paul the third, it is lawful for the General to
send as well as the Pope, into diverse countries for the propagation of our
faith. But this clause is to be understood of Fathers, in the last solemn vow:
for the mission of the holy Sea extends only to them. Then this must
proceed from some particular duty the other Jesuits owe unto their General.
But where is that? For neither in their simple vow, nor in their first solemn
vow, they bind themselves, either to the Pope or their General to the vow of
Mission, but only to the three substantial vows of other religious Orders.
Where then is this bond, where lies this duty hid? I believe, in the tyranny
of their General, and in their blinded obedience. And that which is strange,
this same blinded obedience, is by all them promised and sworn unto the Pope,
yet does he not exercise it, but upon the Fathers of the great and the last
vow only. Whence springs this diversity? the reason is at hand. In a
word, our holy Father has not so much power over the Jesuits, as their
General, whom their sovereign Pope, and in their irregular government, they
acknowledge ours but for fashion sake.

Let us go a little further, and look a little into their other behauiours.
They say they are subject to the ordinances of the holy Sea, I rather think
they impose laws upon it. That so it is, before the Bull of the year 1540,
first foundation of their Order, they exercised of their own authority their
assemblies, in the Charter house of Paris, they opened since their shops to all
co^mers. Before the permission they obtained in the year 1561, they exercised
forty and four years their simple vow, which is contrary to all the
constitutions of the church, before Gregory the 13. had given a safe conduit.
And as they wrought our Popes still to second their greatness, so this same
remissnes and relenting of the holy Sea, has given means to their General,
to equal himself unto him.

Let us consider our holy Father the Pope ordained of GOD, such as he is when
he is chosen by the College. The Cardinals bow themselves before him, honor
him, and kiss his hands. I think this honor is proper to his holiness. Part.
8. Constit. cap. 6. art. 6.
The General of the Jesuits has the self same kneeling, and hand-kissing
when he is chosen. And yet I will not wrong him, for I must confess, that in
some Monasteries, this likewise is observed, specially in public ceremonies:
but to take this homage of others, it is inexcusable.

I will go no further for an example then Father Claudius Aquauiua their
present General. After that he was chosen in the year 1581, and after all his
scholars had done their homage, and he had taken his chamber, Inde pater says
the first of their Letters annual for that year, cubiculum ascendens, eo die
salutanti turbae omnis generis hominum, exosculandas manus praebuit. Which is
to say; After that the Father had taken his Chamber, he offered his hands to
kiss to all manner of persons which came to salute him. What new idolatry is
this? Is not this to erect a new Pope in Rome, triumphant over the true and
ancient?

We have in our Church but one head, whom we acknowledge to be about all other
Prelates, the Vicar of God. The General of the Jesuits arrogats the same title.
In all the vows which the Jesuits make before him, they term him Gods
Lieuetenant: Part. 5. constit. cap. 3 and part. 6. cap. 1
betwixt Lieuetenant and Vicar, the difference is so nice, that I see none. And
in one place of their Constitutions, the gloss made by a Jesuit, terms him
expressly Gods Vicar. Nay they are so shameless, Gl. part. 4 Constable cap. 3.
that they are not content their General should assume this state, but
forsooth their Superiors may exact likewise of their inferiors. Omnibus
itidem commendatum sit vt multum reuerentiae, and praecipue in interiore
hominis, Part. 6. Constit cap. 1.
suis superioribus exhibeant, and Iesum Christum in eisdem considerent and
reuereantur. That it is likewise to all in general enjoined, to give great
reverence inwardly in their hearts to their Superiors, and that in them, they
reverence and acknowledge Jesus Christ.

The Jesuit Montaignes, speaking of the reverence they vow unto their General,
without disguising goes plainly to the point. If they promise (says he) to
obey their General, Montag. cap. 27.
it is in regard that he is Gods Vicar over his company. If he had said, Vicar
of our holy Father, appointed by him over his company, he had committed less
incongruitie. But as the Jesuits never want pretenses to make their shifts more
salable, they force a place or two of Scripture, to make good the usurpation of
their General the Popes rival, they say, Qui vos audit, me audit, In the Plea
of the Coll^dge of Clairmont, the year 1594 Fol. 61. and Mont. cap. 27.
and qui vos spernit; me spirnit. And they allude to the place of David
speaking of the Judges, Vos dij estis, and Deus stetit in synagoga Deorum: And
that S. Bafill said, that the Praelate representh the person of Jesus Christ.
And S. Gregory of Nazianzene, addressing his speech to the Emperor, says,
Thou hold thy Empire with Jesus Christ, with him thou commaundest on earth,
thou art the image of God.

I might more strongly allege one thing which I have from themselves, for when
the Popes, Paul and Julius the fifth, in their Bulls of the years 1540. and
50. speaking of their General, said: In illo Christum velut praesentem
agnoscant, was this with any purpose that they should usurp over theyrs this
great title? No questionless, but to use it as we see in the Counsel of Trent,
where it is said, that our Lord ascending into heaven, Sess. 14. ea. 15. where
it speaks of confession.
Sacerdotes sui ipsius Vicarios reliquit, tanquam praesides and iudices, ad
quos mortalia crimina deferantur, in quae Christi fideles inciderint, to give
them absolution.

And in another place, when reco^mending the poor to the beneficed men, he
adds, Sess. 24. ea. 8. where it speaks of reformation.
Memores eos qui hospitalitatem amant, Christum in hospitibus recipere. That is
to say, that they remember to be hospitals to the poor, for entertaining them,
they entertained Jesus Christ. Words uttered to excite charity, not to build
an Anabaptisme, which the Jesuits seem to ground upon these words, that they
should acknowledge Jesus Christ in their General, as John Leiden, the king of
Anabaptists, gave out of himself, and would have had others to believe it. But
because already I have hereof discoursed at large, I will now content my
self only to tell you this, that their General, taking upon him the
authority of Gods Vicar, has brought in a schism and division betwixt our
holy Father the Pope and him.

And although to maintain this authority, Montagnes and his suffragans, aid
him with all the places above alleged, they breed withal their cunning
another schism, of more dangerous effect then that: for that Emperors, Kings,
and Judges, may every one usurp the same state. And so at unawares, we shall
slip into the heresy of the Lutherans, who would equal Archbishops and
Bishops to our holy Father, whom notwithstanding in their several
jurisdictions, we acknowledge the Vicars of God: and yet they take not this
title upon them neither, though we yield it them, it is a title which
belongs only to the Pope, a title which no honest and faithful Christian
can deny him, and whereof he may be justly jealous, if any endeavor to rob him
of it.

But whether wander we? There is none but knows, that they are in their
several charges, the true creatures and deputies of God, and that such, since
the time of the Apostles, down to this day they have continued. There is none
likewise but knows, that the Jesuits are the Popes creatures: if any should
assume this title, the Bishops have most interest to challenge it, yet they
take it not upon them, but modestly leave it to our holy Father, and the
Jesuit, who deriueth his reputation from him, will he be thus immodest? By the
Counsel of Trent, so much renowned in Rome, there are many articles, whereby
the Bishops are restrained of many things, the which our French Church
thinks to be grounded on ordinary right; yet is it so orderd, that they may
be known to be Vicars under the holy Sea: and yet shall we permit, that
these vnderminders of our Church, shall usurp authority as immediate Vicars
of God, and not as Vicars of the holy Sea?

I confess that ordinarily, we give the term of most Reverend to our
Cardinals, and to those which are princes most illustrious. Their general
Co^sistorie has not the title of most illustrious: as we see in the great
Canonist Navarre, Aduertendum est, says he, quod per solam gestionem habitus,
Naua. com. de reg. number. 76.
per vnum, vel plures annos, in illustrissimo societatis Jesus ordine, non
videtur fieri professio tacita. You must consider (says he) that by wearing
the habit only for one or more years, in the most famous order of the
society of Jesus, a man is not thought to make secret profession.

Navarre lived in Rome under Gregory the 13, and did more honor to his
hypocrites, then we do to the great and venerable Consistory of Cardinals,
which are Counsailers in ordinary to the holy Sea. Writing to Bishops, we
entitle them, Reverend Fathers in God, and think herein we honor them
sufficiently: there is no Father Jesuit of the great vow, who has not this
title of a Bishop. The Letter written to the king of Spain in the troubles, by
our Sixteen Tigers of Paris, speaking of Father Matthew a Jesuit, terms him in
three several places, the Reverend Father Matthew. And in a great part of the
Book, there be added to the mention of his name these two Letters R. P.

When we speak unto our holy Father, we say, Your Holiness; when you speak
to the General, or other Superior of this Order, yea but unto the meanest
Father amongst the Jesuits, he takes his greatness much wronged, if you use
not this term, Your Reverence: yet we must say, they encroche not upon the
authorie of the holy seat. But why should they not impeach the authority of
his holiness, since they usurp and insult upon Christ himself, unto whom only,
our Christian Church permits Apostles? Yet suffers the General his, in some
places, to be called Apostles. This is not to turn our holy Father out of his
seat, but to put Jesus Christ out of his throne. This is not to be Gods Vicar,
but to believe that he is God himself.

When Ismaell, afterward called the Sophi, about the year 1503, attempted, by
putting the Eastern parts in combustion, to overthrow the Estate; by that
means to equal himself with the Othomans, Emperors of Constantinople, he began
first to alter and trouble the ancient religion of Mahomet, pretending that
he would reduce it to a far better pass; alleging that Mahomet, who never
took upon him higher title then the Prophet of GOD, had a brother called
Hali, who brought in under the Banner of his Brother, a Religion more austere,
whereof Ismaell took upon him to be the Restorer. And under this plausible
pretext, he made himself to be called a Prophet as well as Mahomet, altered
the ancient form of Turban among his own people, insomuch as they began to
adore him as the true Image of God, and resolutly to follow his aduertisements.
So that he assembled at the first a handful of men, after, added to them
multitudes, and shortly after, like another new Mahomet, so increased his
Army, that he was followed with six hundred thousand men, both horse and
foot, making the East to tremble. And in these his proceedings, so mingling
religion with state, conquered a great part of the Country, which his posterity
enjoys, under the great and redoubted name of Sophi.

The comparisons suit not in every particular, but if it please you to
consider what has passed, and is now in practice among our Jesuits, you shall
find they follow the same steps in Christianisme, which Ismaell first trod in
Mahumetisme. Their prophet Ismaell is the great Ignatius, who with his fabulous
visions, would bear the world in hand, that sometimes he spoke with GOD.
sometimes with Christ, sometimes with our Lady, or Saint Peter. And as Ismaell
fetched out of Hali, the pretended Brother of Mahomet, a new branch of
Religion, taken from the old stock: So Ignatius, christning him self with
this new name of a Jesuit, in sted of the name of a Christian authorized from
the Apostles, builds up a religion never auncientlie observed by our Church.

Ismaell, under this new vow, changed the ancient Turban: Ignatius inducing a
new Monachisme amongst us, yet retains not the ancient habit of Munks.
Ismaell first assembled a handful of people, after raised millions: Ignatius
does the like. Ismaell, to make himself great, mingled policy and religion
together; has not Ignatius followed him? Ismaell and his successors, were
adorned and magnified by their followers: Ignatius has been so idolatrized,
and the rest of his successors in the Generalship. But they go beyond him, for
the General of the Jesuits, will not only be honored by his followers, but by
those which are not of his sect, though happily somewhat tainted with his
superstitious hypocrisy. Ismael made himself be called the Prophet of God:
The General terms himself Gods Vicar. In all these proceedings and
practices, Ismael troubled and tormoyled the Mahometical state: And shall not
we mistrust in Rome this same new Iesuited Sophi? Whosoever suspecteth them
not, is no true and legitimate child of the holy Sea. I pray you observe a
little their increasing and their growth. The Jesuits at the first beginning,
were content to be some threescore in number; some three years after, they
kept open house, come who would and welcome: which was an anticipation
prejudicial to Ordinaries and Universities, to Kings and their kingdoms. In
the end they were not content to equal themselves with Bishops in their
Diocese, usurping their jurisdiction, but exacted more obedience over their
followers, then the Pope over us. And although there can be no certain
judgment given of future things, yet I dare say, and it is true, that in
matter of State, the predictions of good or ill, are no less infallible then
judgments Mathematical.

Toward the declining of the popular state in Rome, there grew a civil war
in France, betwixt two great factions, the Sequanois and the Heduans, which
diversely aspyred to the chief government. The Heduans, confederate with the
Romans, demanded their aid, Julius Caesar, who from his cradle never brooked
small attempts, obtained the command of the French, as well on this side the
mountains, as beyond, for five years. Besides, there were given him four
legions of soldiers, paid by the State. He, as he was a man of great leading,
and very valiant, soon brought his affairs to such a pass, that pretending
to succor the Heduans, he made the Gauls tributary to the people of Rome. In
regard whereof, at the instance of his friends, he obtained great privileges.
As for one, he obtained that Pompey, or his kinsman, might be undertaker
general, who besides the bond of alliance, might do much in favoring of
Caesar's greatness. He was of great place in the Town, and consequently very
much followed. Wise Cato the Vticen, seeing how these things were carried,
often told him very earnestly, he would overthrow the state ere he were
aware, by teaching Caesar to play the Tyrant, which he should find when it was
too late. His prediction came to pass: for after much civil war, the Empire
fell to his family. I wish to God I might be a false Prophet.

But when I consider seriously the history of our Jesuits, I am full of fear
and pensiuenes. Martin Luther directly opposed himself against the holy Sea.
The Jesuits, cunning statesmen, cover no less ambition under their long
cassocks, then Caesar, and proffer to support the Popedom, but with a
proposition of new obedience; as if I durst I would say, that they make up a
third religion betwixt the true Catholic and the Lutheran. Caesar vanquished
the French: these if we will believe it, subdued a part of the Indies with their
prattle, but yet under the favor of the Kings of Portugal, in places where he
had command. For, as for our wandering souls I do not see they had done any
great service in reducing them to the fold. Caesar, in regard of his victories,
obtaind of the State, many extraordinary privileges, not before imparted to
any: The Jesuits in reco^pense of their imaginary conquests, in unknown
countries, have obtained many privileges of the holy Sea, never hertofore
granted to them. Cato cried out, that the privileges given to Caesar, would
overthrow the commonwealth: The great faculty of Divines in Paris, declared
in the year 1554. that this Sect would become the utter desolation and ruin
of our Church. And some divining spirits, foretold long before, the tragedies
they should act in France. Caesar changed the popular State into a Tyranny:
what the Jesuits will attempt against the holy Church, is in the hand of God;
yet one thing comfort me, that this great Sea, is builded upon a surer
foundation then the Roman commonwealth. Only this I will add, that even as
our Lord Jesus Christ lodged his Divinity in a humane body for our redemption,
so long as our Prelates harbor holiness and integrity in their hearts, all
will go well with them and us. But when they shall fall once a brewing,
mingling cunning and policy with Religion, thereby thinking to maintain
their greatness, then will they overthrow them selves and our whole Church.

CHAP. 26. That there is no credit to be given to the promises and
protestations of Jesuits, for that they have no other faith, but such as makes
for the effecting of their purposes.
YOu have hitherto understood, the heresies, Machiauelisms, and Anabaptismes of
the Sect of Jesuits, the treasons, the troubles they have brought to France,
and whersoeuer else they have remaind: it is now time to sound retreat. And yet
before I do it, we must have a little skirmish with the reestablishment by them
procured, against the process of the Parliament at Paris, given rather by God
his just judgment then by men. Now in this new pursuit, he which shall
observe the time, wherein they began to remove, and the authority of him
whom they employ, shall find them cunning and worldly wise, rather then
religious. I cannot tell whether in the end they will prevail or no: For to
speak truly, importunity, and perseverance, their two principal virtues have
great advantage over the French, which are naturally without gaul when they
are flattered. I assure you, the annals of the Jesuit Magius their Deligate,
give the^ leave to use all the fair promises that may be, till they become
owners of their desire, then they may cassiere their promises, when they can
do them no further service. And that this is their practice, I can verify by
infinite instances. They were vowed to GOD as they say, in the Church of
Mont-Marter, in the year 1534. and promised to go to Jerusalem, to convert
the Turks to the Catholic Religion. And to this purpose, they came to Venice
in the year 1537. resolute to take their journey, after they had received the
blessing of Pope Paul the third, by whom they were well received by the
mediation of some who brought them thither, and there they received money for
the voyage.

Nothing hindered their enterprise, save only the favor of some Lords, with
whom they grew acquainted in Rome, by whose means they hoped to set up an
easier Sect, excusing the breach of their vow, under pretense that the passage
was stopped, by reason of the wars betwixt the Turk and the Venetian. Yet
certain it was, that the very year of their approbation, which was in the
year 1540. there was not only truce betwixt the Turk and the Venetian, but a
firm peace. What then altered their resolution? Marry even their ease, and
some other business they had at home.

In the same Church of Mont-Marter, they swore to undertake the conquest of
lost souls after they were proceeded Doctors of Divinity. That was a promise
made before the face of God, very wise and reasonable. Whereunto, besides there
synceritie of conscience, there was further required soundnes of judgment and
knowledge, to convert the Infidels. When they found a better bargain at Rome,
they remembered to forget their promise. These two first assayes, made them
afterward Masters in matter of deceit and treachery, upon all occasions that
were offered them for the advancement of their designs. In the assembly of
Poissy, the year 1561. they promised to renounce their vows, and to submit
themselves to the ordinary discipline of other Colleges. A promise which
afterward they renewed in open Parliament. Whereupon they were admitted, only
under the title of the College of Clairmont in Paris. Notwithstanding, in the
same year, they obtaynd Bulls of Pope Pius the fourth, altogether contrary and
derogatory to all the ancient privileges of our Universities. In 64. when they
preferred a petition to the Parliament, to be matriculated or incorporated into
the University, forgetting the decree of the French Church confirmed by
process, they entitled themselves the Society of Jesus, an order forbidden
them.

Pasquier, having at the first beginning of the cause objected, that the title
they took upon them, disabled their petition, they denied themselves by the
means of Versoris their own Advocate, auouching, that this happened by the
fault of Pons Congordon, who was their first principal soliciter in the cause:
insomuch, that Congordan was driven to deny himself. In Rome they obey the
holy Sea in all things by a blind obedience, as I have showed you by their
constitutions: In France (if you believe it) by the vow of Mission only, as
you may find in their defense made in 94. for the College of Clairmont, and by
Montaignes his book, and by the humble petition exhibited to the King by a
namelesse Jesuit. In Rome they acknowledge the Popeto be Lord spiritual and
temporal over all Christian Princes: Else they must directly contradict all
the extrauagant decretals which impose the same upon all Monarchies. It is a
proposition very familiar in the Cour^e of Rome. And in the Bulls appointed for
the publication of the Iubily, in the year 1600. Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
are called Princes of the earth. In France they are of another opinion, for in
their pleading in the year 94. and in the book of Montaignes, they give out,
that the Pope, has no title to temporalties, but such as he has by long
succession of time gotten in Italy. Ribadinere in the life of Ignace,
acknowledges, that all their order prayed particularly for the health of the
deceased King of Spain: now read their books, they know nothing but this
particularity, yet pray they generally for all Princes, under whose protection
they have built their nestes. In the very heat of our troubles, there was no
Cardinal so much withstood the Duke of Neuers, and the Marquess of Pisani,
sent by the King to his Holiness, as the Cardinal of Toledo, a Jesuit, the
troubles drawing to an end, none was so forward as he, to further our affairs.

During our last troubles none did so much michiefe as they, if you credit men
of great integrity and reputation, who were beholders of their tragedies. Read
their humble request and remonstrance preferred to the King, there is nothing
which this poor innocent people has in greater detestation, then that which
they sometimes so much adored. This is called among chief Pragmaticall
fellows, a fair pretense for a foul exploit. They never made question to
mingle their holy devotions with affairs of State, as they made us feel to
our pain. Seeing our troubles upon the point of appeasing, and the Kings
affairs successful and prospering, they called in anno, 39. a general
assembly in Rome, wherein it was forbidden, that any of them should intermeddle,
yet they did it. But will you have a better and more evident example then this?
If you will believe them, there is nothing* they abhore more then the Hugonots
Religion, inasmuch as they inhibit their books, of what argument soever,
forbidding expressly their scholars to read them. Oh holy men! Notwithstanding,
when they presented their request to the king, to be established, they chose a
Hugonot to be their spokseman, that by this retaining him, they might be
assured not to have him against them. These are statesmen and temporisers, who
hold all things honest and lawful, which serve their turn. As in former
times, when they spoke of a perfidious people, they named the Carthagenians,
whereof the common proverb grew, Fides Punica. The like we may now say of the
Jesuit, Fides Iesuitica: and apply that to them, which Liuie speaks of
Hanniball, Perfidia plusquam Punica, nihil very, nihil sancti, nullus Deum
metus, nullum iusiurandum, nulla religio: They privately among their friends,
make a jest of perfidiousnes and treachery; for if you ask them, What is a
Jesuit? their answer is, Every man. Implying, that they are Creatures which
vary their colors like the Camelion, according to the object. A very fit
comparison for them, for no more then the Camelion can they borrow the color
of white, which in holy scripture figureth virtue and innocence. A little
before the King entered Paris, Father Alexander Hays, a Scot, seeing the
affairs of the League very much decline, it was his chance to disgorge out of
the abundance of his heart, these words in a great audience, in the College
of Clairmont, where he read the principal lecture; Hitherto to (says he) we
have been Spaniards, but now we are constrained to be French: it is all one,
we must formalize until a fitter season. Cedendum erit tempori. These were the
words he used.

And that you may not think that this Maxim proceeds from the pliantnes of
their consciences, which they restrain or extend, as best fitteth their
profit, their good Father Ignace, first taught them this dispensation, whereof
since; they have made a particular constitution. The other holy Fathers,
founders of diverse orders of Religion, established diverse ordinances which they
fastened, if I may so speak, with nails of Diamond in tombs of brass, which
should perpetually be observed by their Munks and other Religious. In the Sect
of Jesuits, there is nothing so certain as their uncertainty, as I said of
late. In the Bull of Pope Paul the third, it is written as follows.

Et quod possint constitutiones particulares, quas ad Societatis huiusmodi
finem, and Jesus Christi Domini nostri gloriam, ac proximi vtilitate^ conformes
esse iudieauerint, condere: and tam hactenus factas, quam in posterum faciendas
constitutiones, ipsas iuxta locorum, temporu^, and reru^ qua litatem and
varietatem mutare, alterare, seu in totum cassare and alias de nouo condere
possint and valiant. Quae postea alteratae, mutatae, seu de nouo conditae
fuerint, eo ipso, Apstolicae sedis authoritate praefata, confirmatae
censeaniur, cadem Apostolica authoritate, de speciali gratia indulgemus. That
they may make (says Pope Paul) particular ordinances, which they shall judge
fit for the Society, to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the profit of
their neighbor. And that such as are already made, or shall be made
hereafter, they may change, alter or abolish, according to the variety of
place, time and occasions, and in steed of them, make new: the which so
changed, revoked, or new made, we will that they be confirmed by the foresaid
authority of the Apostolic Sea: and by the same authority, of our special
grace and favor we confirm them. I have translated this place word for word,
and yet when the Bull says in Latin, that the constitutions may be changed
as shall be fit for the Society, it must be understood, for the maintenance
and advancement of the Order. Out of this general constitution, they have
drawn one particular which is worthy to be known, in the 16. part of their
constitutions, Chapter, 5. the title beginning thus.

Quod Constitutiones, peccati obligationem non inducunt. Cum exoptet Societas,
vniuersas suas Constitutiones, declarationes; ac viuendi ordinem, omnino iuxta
nostrum institutum, nihil vltraan re declinando, obseruari: Optet etiam
nihilominus suos omnes securos esse, vet certe adiuuari, ne in laqueum vllius
peccati, quod ex vi constuationum huiusmodi, aut ordinationum proueniat,
incidant, visum est nobis in Domino, vt excepto expresso voto, quo Societas
summo Pontifici pro tempore existente tenetur, aec^tribus alijs essentialibus,
Paupertatis, Castitatis, and Obedientiae, nullas Constitutiones, declarationes,
vel ordinem vllum viuends, posse obligationem ac peccatum mortale; vel veniale
inducere. Nisi Superior ea in nomine Domini Jesus Christi, vel in virtute
obedientiae, iuberet. And a little after, Et loco timoris offensae, succedat
amor and desiderium omnis perfectionis, and vt mayor gloria and laus Christi
creat^ris ac Domini nostri consequatur.

That the constitutions may not bind any man in conscience, since the Society
desires, that all their constitutions, declarations, and order of life, should
be without evasion, conformable to our direction: and also, nevertheless
wishes to be secured, or at least succourd, that they be not snared in any sin
which may grow by their constitutions or ordinances: We have thought good in
the Lord, (exception taken to the express vow, wherewith the society is bound
to the Pope for the time being, and the three other essential vows, of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience,) that no Constitutions, declarations, or
any order of life, shall impose any yoke of mortal or venial sin upon
them; unless their Superior command those things, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, or in the virtue of obedience. And again: In stedde of fear of
offending, let love and desire of all perfection come in place, and let the
glory and praise of Christ our Lord and Maker, be the more exalted.

By the first article, it is lawful for them to change and rechange their
constitutions at their own pleasure (forsooth) for their good. By the second,
their constitutions are held (in regard of the soul) indifferent; so that the
Jesuit may break them, without committing mortal or venial sin. A law
which their great Lawgiver gave them, to the end, that to Gods honor and
glory, there might be fewer sinners in their society.

Oh holy souls! oh pure consciences! Who restrayning their inferiors from
sin, take themselves the reins, committing all manner of sin uncontrolled.
Let us examine these points without passion, and let us consider the scope of
these two propositions. By the first, no Prince shall be assured of his estate:
and by the second, no Prince shall be secure of his person in his own kingdom.
Concerning the first point, call to mind how matters have been carried for
these 25. or 30. years. There has been no Nation, where they be fostered,
but they would be tempering with their affairs of state. I think they are such
honest men, as what herein they have done; they have undertaken to do it, by
virtue of their silent Constitutions, (which the ancient Romans termed,
Senatus-Consulta tacita,) or if they did it by their own private authority,
the General were unworthy of his place should he suffer it. Further, this was
forbidden them in the year 1593, when they saw all their plots mere
frustrate.

Admit new troubles should arise, these gallants will cassiere and disanull
this last Ordinance, suffering their companions to intermedle as before. This
same Pauline, will it not breed in them a trouble-state where ever they
become? ^manuel Sa^n his Apho^ismes of confession. Montag. cap. 58.
But what are their rules in such affairs? Marry that it is lawful to kill a
Tyrant. That a King breaking and contemning the common laws of the Land, may
be deprived of his Crown by the people. That there are other causes, for the
which Princes and great personages may be slain. In what a miserable condition
shall Princes live, if the assurance of their Estate shall depend upon these
fellows?

Let us see their new constitutions of 93. I will that they meddle not at all
in affairs of state in general terms. And that particulerly, they practice
not upon the person of Princes. Are they bound to obey this? Nothing less.
Inasmuch as their Lawgiuer charge not their consciences, but in express
terms, he would otherwise have charged them, by virtue of their blinded
obedience. And this is the cause that Commolet, preaching since this new
Statute, that there wanted a new Chud to kill our King, and Walpoole
furnishing Squire with poison and instructions to kill the Queen of England
his Mistres, thought therein they sinned not, for that in their consciences
they believed, that they were to present these two souls to God.

The Anabaptist, had but one absolute obedience which he ought to his
Superior. The Jesuit has two. The one depending of his Superiors; and the
other, in his particular conscience, persuading himself, that all he does,
ten death to the glo^ie of God, and the advancement of his Church.

CHAP. 27. The conclusion of the third Book, containing the restoring of the
Jesuits, by them procured.
YOu may judge by this, said the Advocate, of what consequence, the
reestablishment is, wherewith they daily haunt and urge the King, since to
them all things are indifferent, save such as tend to the disabling and
impeachment of their Sect. All lies, trecheries, and frauds, change their
property, and become holy things, when they make for the advancement of
their Sect. GOD has twice miraculously preserved our King from their violence,
it is not due to his wisdom and foresight, how so ever very great: he owes
it to God his divine providence. These preseruations are aduertisments, whereof
he and his subjects should make their profit. The greater increase of blessings
he has received, the more ought he to acknowledge it in all humility.

My Masters the Jesuits, matchless for importunity, use the authority of
some great personages, hoping to recover interest in the King, notwithstanding
the process of Parliament, granted out against them in Paris. I beseech you
call to mind, that these venertable trechers took a time to practice against
him, not in the heat of our troubles, but when they were well calmed, when he
was reconciled to the holy Church, in time of the truce: it was the common
place as well of their Preachers as Regents. I humbly beseech his Majesty to
consider, that upon his safety, the peace of his subjects depends, and that
in vain he blames the Sea, who having escaped two several shipwracks, will
try his fortune yet the third time. Further, I beseech him to observe, what
befell in Portugal, and lately likewise happened within our memory in France.
He who in Portugal most idolatrized this Sect, was the King Sebastian, whom
the Jesuits, his principal fauourits, counseled to undertake the conquest of
another kingdom, where the oppinion is he was slain in the battle, yet he
could not be found amongst the dead. Great p^^ie, if he there miscarried, the
body of a King should want his burial, but more lamentable, if he live, as the
brute is, that he is not acknowledge.

It fell out much otherwise to our great King Henry, for so soon as he had
driven the Jesuits our of his good town and Parliament of Paris, God sent him
a genetall peace as well within his kingdom as without, and as prosperous
success in all his affairs as he could desire. These are no feigned, or
imaginary, examples which I place before your eyes, they are generally known,
and there is none but may easily judge, why this misfortune befell the one,
and this blessing fell to the other. In this most humble request, not fained,
as the Petion of the namelesse Jesuit, consists the sum of my desire, and
GOD grant my discourse may have access unto him.

I desire herein, he could be pleased to follow the counsel of the great
Consistory of Rome, against the order of the Humiliati, who after they were
once suppressed, were never after restored, although their offense was much
less against the holy Sea, then this of the Jesuits against his Majesty:
assuring you my Masters, that there is nothing does more solicit me to this
quarrel against them, then the general peace of our France, and herein I
appeal to God, before whom I do truly and sincerely speak.

The Advocate, having ended his discourse, as the opinions of men are variable
and uncertain, so were we diversely affected with that which was by him
delivered, some, grieved with the Anatomy made of their order, others, much
meruailing, never imagining there had been so much shame and abomination
among them, others, very angry, that with such unrestrained liberty, they have
been suffered to range in many parts of France uncontrolled: being
absolutely of opinion, that there was nothing near so great cause to suppress
the Templers, as to suppress these Jesuits.

Whereupon the Jesuit, for the honor which he ought to his Faction, said
unto the Advocate; I cannot tell wherein you have been wronged by our company,
and know as little what hope of reward has hired you to this combat; but well
I wot, you have no small enemies that make head against you, and that you must
cut off an infinite number of heads, (which is almost a matter impossible)
before you can well come unto the head. Consider that our company is a
venerable Senate, like unto that which was in Rome in the time of Pyrrhus, to
whom his Ambassadors reported at their return, that they had seen as many
Kings as Senators. They were wont to call those ancient Senators, Fathers, so
call we ours: and as they were the sinews of ancient Rome, so are these of
the new, I mean of the Papacy, which far passes the vain greatness of the
old Romans. Therefore before they attempt against us, let them be very well
advised: remember what happened to Minos King of Creet, for his business with the
Athenians. It was there I looked for you, quoth the Advocate, for your Company
is not the Senate you speak of, but a Monster, which has far more heads
then a Hydra, against the which I will be another French Hercules, to maule and
massacre them. Yet one boon I would entreat of you, that when you return to
Rome, you would report to your General, as I know you will, all you have heard
discoursed, and would vouchsafe the rather (at my instance) to present him with
these four verses, the which I send him in the nature of a Cartell of defiance.

If I have vsd thee otherwise then well
Jesuit, it is fit that thy revenge thou take,
But when you answer, see no lies you tell,
If thou speak truth, it would a wonder make.
Every one then began to smile, and especially the Gentleman said unto him:
I will not suffer you to go any further, it is time to cry hola, I will stop
your mouth, dinner shall decide your difference. And if you will do me the
honor to believe me, all which has betherto been said, shall be wrapped up in
the cloth: The laws of my Table are, Odi memorem compotorem. That speech had
been well uttered, said the Advocate, if we had not discoursed fasting.
Presently one couerd the table, and after dinner, our horses being made
ready, we thanked the Gentleman for his entertainment, and he likewise
thanked us for the honor he said we did him.

We were some six in company, whereof he detained the Advocate, pretending
he was to pay him the arrerage of his long absence. The other five, after they
had passed the Mountains, three of them took their way to Venice, intending
to travail to Jerusalem, to acquit themselves of a vow, which they had made
to visit the holy Sepulcher. The Jesuit and I went toward Rome, he to yield
account of his voyage, and I to see the Iubile, but especially to visit two
great Prelates, both of them bearing the name and quality of Fathers: our holy
Father Pope Clement the 8, a Father of concord and union, having by the
travail and intercourse of the Cardinal of Florence his Legate, mediated a
peace betwixt two great Kings, for the which Christendom is greatly indebted
to him: the other, father Claudius Aquauiua, General of the Jesuits, a Father,
or (to speak more properly) a Fountain of all divisions, factions, and
discords, as he who by his books, set them first a-broche in France, to the
great damage and spoil of our state. God grant, that by the example of Tho.
Aquinas, from whose house they say he is descended, he and his may hereafter,
learn the obedience and loyalty, which a subject owes in duty to his King.

To Captain Ignatius, Father and chief General over the Company of the
Jesuits.
Father Soldier, where is thy Flaske?
Take up thy dagger and thy blade,
This Author pulls off thy mask
Of crafty vows, and cogging trade.
That Jesuits are right Preachers, and therefore to be restored to their former
place in Paris, a scoffing Epigram, written to Father James Commolet the
Jesuit.
THE furious speech of a Tribune of Rome,
Persuades men to murder and commotion,
When roaring Commolet gave out his doom
In pulpet, people mused at his devotion:
He bid them kill their King, his Realm annoy,
He stird up many troubles every where,
Rage in his mouth his Country to destroy,
This holy doctrine preached the Jesuit there.
And since his tongne does civil tempests brew,
I bid this holy Tribune here adieu.
To Henry the fourth, the most Christian King of France and Navarre.
Great Henry by this Epigram is told,
What course with Jesuits he ought to hold.
FINIS.
A Table or short collection of things contained in all the Chapters of the
three Books of the Jesuits Catechism.
The first Book.
AN Introduction to the Catechism. Chap. 1 What the foundation is of the
Society of Jesus, which the common people call Jesuits. Chap. 2 The censure
given of the Jesuits Sect, by the Divines of Paris, in the year. 1554. Chap. 3
How, at what time, and by what sleights, the Jesuits crept into France. Chap.
4 The Decree of the French Church against the Jesuits, in the assembly held at
Poissy. 1561. Chap. 5 Of the request preferred by the Jesuits to the Parliament.
The year 1564. to be incorporated into the University of Paris, and how many
sides made head against them. Chap. 6 How the Jesuits were refused at Rome, and
by what cunning they were afterward received. Chap. 7 Of the insolent title of
the Society of Jesus usurped by the Jesuits, and how many sundry fashions
they have used to authorize it. Chap. 8 That the Jesuits are called Apostles in
Portugal, and in the Indies, and with what deceits they have wrought it. Chap.
9 The impieties of William Postell a Jesuit. Chap. 10 The studies of great
Ignace. Chap. 11 That when Ignace and his companions came before Pope Paul the
third, they were plain Mounte-banks, and that the titles they gave themselves
were false. Chap. 12 That we have great likelihood to prove, that the
approbation of the Jesuits Sect, made by Pope Paul the third, is nothing
worth. Chap. 13 That the Oeconomie of our Church, consists, first in succession
of Bishops: Secondly, in the ancient orders of Religion: Thirdly, in the
Universities: and the Jesuits Sect is built upon ignorance of all these. Chap.
14 That no man can tell; where to place the Jesuits among all the three
ancient orders of our Church: and that this is the true cause, for which they
never yet durst set in their foot into processions. Chap 15 That without wrong
to the holy Sea, you may call the Jesuits Pape-Lards, and their Sect
Pape-Lardi, that is, Hypocrites, and their order hypocrisy. Chap. 16 Of the
fabulous visions of Ignace, and the miraculous fables of Xauier. Chap. 17 Of
Ignace his Machiauellismes, used to set his sect a float. Chap. 18 The
conclusion of the first book. Chap. 19
The second Book.
THat our Church of France, and the Sect of the Jesuits, cannot stand
together. Chap. 1 That the Pope authorizing the Jesuit, at his first coming,
never had any persuasion, that either he could or ought to inhabit in France.
Chapter 2 That it is against the first institution of the Jesuits, for the^ to
teach all sorts of Scholars humane learning, Philosophy, and Divinity: and
by what proceedings and devises they have seized upon this new tyranny, to the
prejudice of the ancient discipline of the Universities. Chap. 3 That the
foundation of the deceipts of the Jesuits, proceeds from the instruction of
youth: and why our ancestors would not that young folk should be taught in
the houses of Religion. Chap. 4 With what cunning the Jesuits enrich themselves
by the spoil of their Nouices. Chap. 5 That the crafty humility of the
Jesuits in teaching youth, has brought the University of Paris to ruin. Chap
6 That the Sect of Jesuits agrees in many things with the heresy of Peter
Abilard. Chap. 7 That the Jesuit gives himself license, to bring into his
College children out of the bosoms of their fathers and mothers, without
their leave. Chap 8 Of the vow of the Jesuits, which they call the simple vow.
Chap. 9 That it cannot be excused, but that there is heresy and Machiauellisme
in the Jesuits simple vow. Chap. 10 Of the Jesuits engaging the authority of
the holy Sea, to excuse the heresy of their simple vow. Chap. 11 That besides
the heresy which is in the Jesuits simple vow, there is also in it, a manifest
cooznage. Chap. 12 That the Jesuits Prouincials take upon them to discharge
their inferiors of the simple vow, in the same sort that their General does.
Chap. 13 How the Father Jesuits, vowing poverty by their great and third vow,
make a mock of God. Chap. 14 That the Jesuits vow of Chastity contains a new
heresy: and withal a brief discourse of the title of Father which the
Jesuits of the grand vow give themselves. Chap. 15 Of the vow of Mission, and
that by it the Jesuits mock us all, and especially our holy Father the Pope.
Chap. 16 Of the blindfold obedience which the Jesuits owe the Pope, which at
this day impude^tly they deny by their new books. Chap. 17 What shifts the
Jesuits use, to cover the impieties of their blindfold obedience. Chap. 18 Of
the wisdom of Ignace, and the Sottishnes of the new Jesuits. A Dialogue
between the Jesuit, and the author of this discoruse. Chapter 19
The third Book.
TOuching the Anabaptistrie which is found in the Jesuits vow, which they make
of blind obedience to their Superiors: also, that by the means thereof, there
is not any King or Prince, that can defend himself from their stings. Chap. 1
Touching an extraordinary process, and course held in the Low countries,
against Robert Bruise, Gentleman of Scotland, upon the accusation and
information of Father William Critchton, Jesuit, because he would not cause the
Chauncellor of Scotland to the slain. Cha. 2 Concerning the murder which
William Parrie an English man, (thrust on thereto by the Jesuits) meant to
execute against Elizabeth Queen of England, in the year 1584. Chap. 3 Of
another assault and murder, procured in the year 1597. by the Jesuits against
the Queen of England. Chap. 4 That the Jesuits do at this day, make show to
condemn their wicked doctrine, in all things concerning either the murdering
of Princes, or rebellion against their states. Chap. 5 A prodigious history of
the detestable parricide, attempted against King Henry the fourth of that name,
the most Christian King of France and Navarre, by Peter Barrier, for the
raising up of the Jesuits. Chap. 6 How the heathenish impiety of the Jesuits,
had been prejudicial to our Church, if their execrable counsel had come to an
effect. Chapter 7 Of the murder which John Chastell (brought up at Paris in the
Jesuits school) sought to attempt against the King, in the year 1594. Chap. 8
That it is an heresy to approve the killing of Kings, although they be
heretics. Chap. 9 A memorable act of Ignace, whereupon the Jesuits have learnd
to kill, or cause to be killed, all such as stand not to their opinions. Chapter 10
Of the holy League brought by the Jesuits the year 1585. into France: and
that they are the cause of the Hugonots new footing among us. Chap. 1. That
Auricular confession has been used by the Jesuits, as a chief weapon for the
rebellion, and in what sort they are wont to manage it. Chap. 12 Of a general
assembly of the I^^^^^^ (...) in the (...) 1593. wherein they are pro^^^^^^
(...) ^lle in m^^^^rs of State. Chap. 13 Whether the Jesuits have Spanish
h^^^^^, (...) their enemies charge them to have, or if they be for who gives
most. Chap. 14 That the Jesuits were the cause of the ^e^th of Mary Queen of
Scots, together with a brief discourse what mischiefs they have wrought in
England. Chap. 15 That the Jesuits entermedling at matters of State, after they
have troubled whole Realms, yet do all things fall out quite contrary to
their expectation. Chap. 16 That the Pope has not power to translate the
Crown of F^^nce from one to another, against the dangero^^ p^^^^^ons of the
Jesuits: and some other discourse tending to the same e^^^ct^. Chap. 17 The
Decree of the Parliament of Paris, (...) Jesuits in the year 1594. And a
chapter taken out of the ^^d b^^^^^ des Reserches de la France, by Stephen
Pasquier. Chap. 18 The Jesuits under covert terms, challenge the sentence (...)
against John Chastell of injustice, and how God suff^ed him (...) ^^^ished, to
make the punishment of Iesui^^ mo^e notorious (...) posterity. Chap. 19 Of the
Pyramid which is raised before the Palace of Pa^^^; and of the sentence given
in Rome by the renowned Pasqui^ll, concerning the restoration of the Jesuits,
sued for by themselves. Chap. 20 Of the division which seems to be in the
Parlaments or I^risdictions of France, as concerning the Jesuits, and what may
be the cause thereof. Chap. 21 How the order of the Humiliati was suppressed by
Decree of the Consistory of Rome: And that there is greater cause to suppress
the Jesuits then the Humiliati. Chap. 22 Of the impudency of the Jesuits, to
save themseues from the process of the consistory of Rome, granted out
against the order of the Humiliati. Chap. 23 That the Sect of the Jesuits is no
less dangerous to our Church then the Lutherans. Chap. 24 Of the notorious
enterprise or usurpation, of the General of the Jesuits over the holy Sea, and
that there is no new, Sect which in time, may be more prejudicial to it then
this. Chap. 25 That there is no credit to be given to the promises and
protestations of Jesuits, for that they (...) no faith, but such as makes for
the effecting of their purposes. Chap. 26 The conclusion of the third Book,
containing the restoring of the Jesuits, by them procured. Chap. 27
FINIS.

