A GVIDE TO GRAND-IVRY MEN, DIVIDED INTO TWO BOOKS:

In the First, is the Authors best advice to them what to do, before they
bring in a Billa vera in cases of Witchcraft, with a Christian Direction to
such as are too much given upon every cross to think themselves bewitched.

In the Second, is a Treatise touching Witches good and bad, how they may be
known, euicted, condemned, with many particulars tending thereunto.

By RICH. BERNARD.

Prou. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just;
even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Thou shall therefore inquire and
make search, and ask, diligently, whether it be truth, and the thing
certain, Deuteronomy. 13.14. LONDON.

Printed by Felix Kingston for Ed. Blackmore, and are to be sold at his shop at
the great South door of Paul's. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE IVDGES,
Sr. John Walter, Knight, Lord chief Baron of his Mai^ties Court of Exchequer:
and Sr. John Denbam, Knight, worthy Baron of the same Honorable Court.

The Reverend and R^ligious Judges in this Western Circuit,

That wis^dome from above, with power and courage, be in and upon them from the
Lord in all causes before them, to their due praises and endless comfort.

Right worthy Judges,
SInce your Lordships sat at Tanton the last Summer Assizes, I have (as time
and leisure from other studies, and the execution of Divine duties in my
function would permit) given my self to the reading of many approved rebations
touching the arraginement and condemnation of Witches: as also treatises of
learned men, concerning the deuilish Art of Witchcraft, adding withal not a
few things, which otherwise I have learned and observed.

The occasion offered and the reasons drawing me to this study, were the
strange fitts then, and yet continuing upon some judged to be bewitched by
those which were then also condemned and executed for the same: My upright
meaning in my painestaking with Bull mistaken, a rumor spread, as if I favored
Witches, or were of Master Scots erroneous opinion, that Witches were silly
deceived Melancholikes.

This my labor in all these will clear me: which I am bold to present to
your Lordships, as a plain Country Ministers testimony of his hearty
rejoicing, that God has sent us such wished-for upright and religious Judges.

I hope it shall not be imputed as evil unto me, that I have chosen such
worthily-honoured Patrons, so learned in our Laws, of so great authority in
the execution thereof, so judicious in discerning of causes, so just in
punishing sin, and so religiously disposed to advance Virtue and Religion.

I do the more herein presume, for that I have observed your Lordships holy
attention to the Word delivered before you, and your worthy respect unto Gods
Ministers; and therefore I doubt not of a favorable acceptance of my best
service honestly intended for public good. Yet humbly nevertheless craving
pardon, if in any thing herein I have taken too much upon me, and ^o praying
heartily for your happy days, and your redoubled honor in your service of God
for our King and Country, I humbly take leave.

Batcombe. Feb. 24. Your Lordships in the tender of his service to be
commanded, RIC. BERNARD.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL.
Gerard Wood, Doctor of Divinity, and Archdeacon of Wells: and Arthur Duck D.
of the Civil Law, and Chan. to the Right Reu. Fa. the L. Bishop of Bath and
Wells.

Right worshipful,
FOR two books have I made a double choice of Patrones for p^otec^ion: because
a Treatise of this nature, neede^h shelter under both, an^ that which is
fortified, ^am Ecclesiatico, quam s^cularibrachio, will be more available, and
pass more acceptably among all sorts. The sin of witchcraft, and the
diabolical practice thereof, is omnium scelerum atrocissimum, and in such as
have the knowledge of God, the greatest apostacy from the faith, they
renouncing God, and giving themselves by a covenant to the Devil. Bad Witches
many prosecute with all eagerness; but Magicians, Necromancers, (of whom his
late Majesty gives a deadly censure in his Daemonologie) and the Curing
Witch, commonly called, The good Witch, all sorts can let alone: and yet be
these in many respects worse then the other. Would God my endeauours might so
prevail with men bound by solemn oath, that they would make conscience to
present unto you the Ecclesiastical Judges, both the Witches themselves, as
also all such as resort unto them. Impunitas peccandi licentiam peperit. Yet
the evils growing hereupon, both to bodies and souls, cannot sufficiently be
expressed. I need not, I hope, with many words entreat your good care to
suppress such foul and damnable courses: For I know, that cito dicta and
percipiunt sapie^tes, and viris reru^ suarum satagentibus non placet vrgeri:
and what need is there calcar currentibus addere?

I have heretofore purposed sometime or other to express my due respect unto
you both, as being my worshipful good friends. To the one, as justly clayming a
thankful remembrance for his so long continued love, and for not a few
favors, the true fruits of a good affection: who is to me, quia filio meo,
bengnissimus and incorrupte patronus, to whom we remain ever obliged. To the
other, for so kind and ever loving tenance, with a readiness, upon any just
occasion, to do me any lawful favor. Let it please you now, eo vuliu sereno,
quo meipsum soletis, tractare, hoc qualecunque munusculum accipere; and ^ shall
reckon so favorable ^n acceptance, as a suffici^nt recompense for my la^our and
pains. And so with due and dutiful respect I take leave,

Batcombe. Feb. 26. Your Worships at command, RIC. BERNARD.


The sum of these two books.
In the first Book.
THat Gods hand is in all crosses, who rules over Devils, and over all their
instruments.

II. That strange diseases may happen from only natural causes, and neither
be wrought by Devils nor Witches, and how to be discerned.

III. That one supposed to be possessed, or b^witched, may be a very
count^rfeit, and how he may be discovered.

IIII. That Devils may do much mischief to man and ^^ast, of themselves
(through Gods permission) without any association with a Witch, and how to know
this, with diverse Questions, concerning Satan's knowledge, his power to do
mischief, of his possessing of bodies, and of his casting out.

V. That Christian minds, may not (as commonly many do) forthwith ascribe
their crosses to Witchcraft, with the reasons of the manifold evils, which come
thereby.

In the second Book.
THat there are Witches.

II. What sorts of people are most apt to be seduced and to be made Witches.

III. How these do prepare themselves for Satan, when he enticeth to
Witchcraft.

IIII. That Satan shows ^imselfe commonly in some visible ^ape to Witches.

V. Of ^n ^xpresse league ^ade between the Spirit and ^ Witch, and how it is
ratifi^^.

VI. The proofs for this ^^ague: also why he inticeth to ^uch a contract, and
the reasons, ^^ewing how it comes to pass, that such are overtaken, to enter
unto such a covenant with the Devil.

VII. That some there are which only make a secret league with Satan, and who
these be.

VIII. That there are such as be called good Witches, and how they may be
known to be Witches.

IX. That none ought to go to these kind of witches for help.

X. That many yet nevertheless run unto them, and their reasons, which are
answered.

XI. That there are bad Witches, and here of their common practice, of their
Familiars, how they come by them, and how many things must concur, before any
can be bewitched.

XII. Of the signs to know whether one be bewitched.

XIII. What be the Witches watchwords, and their deeds which they do; both
being as signs to their Familiars to set them on w^rke.

XIIII. Who they be that are most subject to be hurt by Witches, and what the
remedies be against them.

XV. Of the means which diverse use to help themselves, when they suspect
themselves to be bewitched.

XVI. That witches may be discovered, albeit there be herein many difficulties,
and what be the causes thereof.

XVII. Of the great presumptions of the practice of Witchcraft, for which the
suspected may be brought before au^hority, and examined.

XVIII. What the maine ^oint is, by which the suspected ^ay be certainly
convicted of ^itcherie, with the evident proofs ^hereof.

XIX. The manner of exa^ining the suspected, thereby to bring him or her to
confess the crime.

XX. That all Witches are condemned by holy Writ, with the several names
therein expressed, and so of their several sorts mentioned in Scripture.

XXI. That every Witch ought to die, the imagined good, as well as the bad.

XXII. That the rude carriage of people against even the bad sort of Witches,
when they be under the power of Authority, ought to be reformed.

XXIII. In the end is added how Satan in and by his Witches strives to imitate
God in many particulars, the consideration whereof will clear the Reader^
understanding in many things re^^ lated between the Devil and the Witches,
grounded upon this his damnable imitation, to provoke the Lord to wrath, and to
dishonor his name.

A GVIDE TO GRANDIVRIE MEN. The first Book.
CHAP. I. Gods hand is first to be considered in all crosses, whatsoever the
means be, and whosoever the instruments: for he rules over all.
MAn is under the authority of his Maker, who sees all his ways and his
wandering by^aths, and to recall him, lays ^is chastisements upon him: for
afflictions come not out o^ the dust, Job. 5.6. Neither happen they by chance
as the Priests of the Philistims once spoke, 1. Sam. 6.9. but the evil of
punishment is from the Lord, Amos. 3.6.

The Lord smote all the first borne both of man and beast in Egypt, Exodus
21.29. He smote I^horam, the son of I^hosaphat, for his Turkish cruelty
toward his brethren, with an incurable disease, till his bowels fell out, 2.
Chron. 21.18, 19. Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.31. by the hand of God upon him, was
made brutish, to live like a beast. And did not Gods Angel smite Herod, Acts
12.23.
causing Worms to eat him to death?

Devils do much mischief* but even by these also does God work his will, and
these do nothing without the hand of his providence: for,

I. These wicked and unclean spiri^s, he does send, as the execu^^^ners of his
justice, as he did ^^ongst the Egyptians, Psalm. 78. ^^. also between
Abimelech (...) the Sichemites, Judge. 9.23. ^^e sent an evil spirit upon (...)
to vex him, 1. Sam. ^^ 15. and a lying spirit into the ^^uthes of the false
prophets, ^^^ing. 22. And it is plain in ^^^nt Mark that the Devils ^^^red
Christ to send them in^^ ^he herd of Swine, Mar. 5.12.

II. When he has sent them, (...) do not what they list, but ^^oceede so
far only, as he ^^^aseth, whether to hurt a ^^ns body, or his children, or
(...) goods: they are strictly li^^^tted, and cannot go beyond ^^^ir
commission, as may be ^^^ne in the story of Job, 1.12. (...) 2.6. Yea, though
they be (...) a few, but a very Legion of ^euils, they cannot enter into (...)
Swine of the filthy Gada^^nes, without Gods leave and license, Matthew 8.31.

III. As they cannot do what they will, so they cannot stay to vex or afflict
any, longer then he pleases: for he can bind the Devil by his Angels, Reu.
20.1. he can give man power over them, Mar. 6.7. and when he commands, they
must give over, though never so sore against their wills, Luke 4.35.

If he thus rule over Devils, we may well think that he has an hand over his
instruments, Witches and Sorcerers. He gave the Magicians and Sorcerers of
Egypt, leave for a while to work their feats: but when he pleased, he
restrained them, and then they could do no more, Exodus 8.19. And did not the
Witch Balaam confess, saying, Though ^alak would give him his house full of
gold and silver, he could not go beyond the Word of the Lord, to do less, or
more, Number. 12.18. although Balak thought otherwise, that Balaam could bless^
and curse whom he lifted: But if God do not cur^e, a Witches curse is of no
force, Number. 23.8. Elymas was a famous Sorcerer: but how quickly did God
confound him by the Ministry of Paul, and struck him blind, before the
Deputy and the people, Act. 13.11? Neither Devils, nor W^tches, nor wicked
men, can do any thing without the Lords leave, Genesis 19.11. and 31. 29. Isa.
37.29.

These things being so, the consideration hereof should teach men:

I. To take heed, not to provoke God to wrath, who is the God of hosts: who
has his Angels in heaven to send out against us, the powers of all his
creatures to punish us: as the fire to consume us, as he did Sodom: the waters
to drown us, as he did the Egyptians: the earth to open and swallow us up, as
it did the Rebel Corah and his company. The wicked of the world can he make to
rise up, and to kill one another, 2. Chr. 20.23. Yea, he has Devils at command
to go out and torment men, 1. Sam. 16.15. and he can let them loose to work
for Witches, that they may have their desires upon the wicked, to make men
always fear and tremble before him.

II. Being afflicted, not to curse or blaspheme, as Satan labors to make men
do, Job 1.11 and 2.5. Reu. 16.11. Scot Disc. of Witch. p. 1.2
and as the wicked will do; nor to be furiously enraged against su^pected
instruments, as vain, dissolute, and irreligious people commonly do, which
desire forth with to be revenged on them, as if it were those only that
afflicted them: But first, men ought with all reverence and fear, to
acknowledge, that all that befalls them, to be Gods hand: yea, though they
know, the Devil and his devilish instruments, to have their hands therein. Job
in his trouble said, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, Job. 1.12. His
terrors, he called them the terrors of God, Chap. 6.4. and he said, that God
scarred him with dreams, and terrified him with visions, Chap. 7. 14. Joseph
in his troubles, yea, in his brethrens unnatural d^alings, saw the Lord
therein, Genesis 45.5, 7. and said it was not they, but the Lord, that sent him
into Egypt. Yea, the Church in her great calamities, though she saw the
instruments and felt there wrath, yet she says, that God had done these
things, Lam. 1.15. and 2. 1, 7. And this acknow^edgement is sometimes in the
mouths of very Witches, confessing, that the evil befalling them and others,
is the very finger of God, Exo. 8.19. And so said Saul's servants of the evil
spirit: That he was sent of the Lord upon Saul to vex him, 1. Sam. 16.15.

2. Therefore to be patient toward the instruments, as was David toward
Shimei, who threw stones at him, railed on him, and cursed him: 2. Sam. 16.10.
He yet held his peace, because he knew the Lords will was therein, and that he
had done it, Psa. ^9.9. We may not be like to Iehoram the son of a Iezabel,
who though he knew, that the Lords hand was upon him and his people, and also
did acknowledge so much, yet was he so impatient to endure the misery, and so
hellishly enraged, as he swore to be revenged upon Elisha the Prophet, and to
take away his life, 2. King. 6.31, 33. as if he had been the cause of their
calamity. True it is, that evil instruments are to be punished, and our
patience should not hinder nor hold back the course of Justice: but this is
not to be looked unto in the first place, nor, the instruments to be pursued
with wrath and with a reuengefull spirit, as if they were only to be blamed,
and not men themselves for their sins, procuring such evils to themselves.

3. Seeing Gods hand upon us (who does not willingly grieve us, if ^ee provoke
him not, Lam. 3.33. Ier. 25.6.) this must draw us to a searching of our ways,
Lam. 3.40. to the acknowledgement of our sins, 2. Chr. 12.6.
and to confess God to be just: and so humble our selves in fasting and
prayer, leaving our ill courses, and laboring to be refo^med, and so remove
Gods hand. And afterward, if there be evident proof, and just cause, then to
proceed; Yet with charity, against wicked instruments, seeking to have them
punished, for their amendment. This is Religion: this is Christianlike: thus
ought the affl^cted to behave themselves, and not swear and stare, curse and
rage, against such as they suspect to harm them, seeking to be revenged of
them, plotting their deaths, and r^ioycing that they have their wills, and so
think all to be well: though their wai^s be wicked, going on still without
reformation, even to the pit.

And as the affl^cted should be hum^led under Gods hand, so the b^holders
looking on the^ affl^ct^ons, should not sit down to c^nsure them, because they
suffer such things; as Jobs friends did him; but should learn Christ's lesson,
thereby to see their own danger, and know, that except they repent, they may
likewise be so tormented, and perish, Luke 13. 3, 5.

CHAP. 2. Strange diseases may happen either to man or beast, and the same
originally from some natural cause, and neither effected by Devils, nor yet
proceed from Witches.
IT is the general madness of people to ascribe unto Witchcraft, whatsoever
falls out unknown, or strange to vu^gar since. I will here therefore w^i^e
down the particular instances of st^ange and wonderful diseases set down by
a learned D. C^t^a in his discourse of Emperick^. and chap. 8 of Witchcraft.
Physician; in all which is a deceiving appearance, coming near to the
similitude of bewitching, in ordinary and common apprehensions which cannot
discern o^ diseases, nor the true cause^ thereof. I will here write them out,
as I find them in his discourse, yet a little more distinctly, for common
capacities. Catalepsis.


In one kind of disease (he calls it Catalepsis or Catoche) the whole body
is as it were in a minute suddenly taken in ^he midst of some ordinary
gesture or action (whether sitting, standing, writing, or looking up to the
heavens, as D. Mason in his pract. of Phys. part 1. c. 12. Sect. 11. f^l. 136.
another Physicion speaks) and therein is continued some space together, as
if frozen, generally stark and stiff, in all parts without sense or motion;
ye^ with the eyes open and breathing freely, as if the party were a living
image. What common conceit beholding this (as it be fell to a child of one
Master Bakers of Couentry, who was thus affl^cted,) but would think there were
Witchcraft here practiced?

In another disease, (as in the Apoplexia, or in morbo attonito, Apoplexia.
as he speaks) the sick are also suddenly taken and surprised with a
senseless trance and general astonishment, or sideration and benumming of all
the limbs, void of all sense and moving, many hours together, only the
breath strives against the danger of suffocation, and still the pulse beats.

In another, The Carum.
the sick are swiftly surprised with so profound and deadly a sleep, as no
call, nor cry, nor noise, no stimulation can in many hours awake and raise
them. So was one Master Rosin of Northampton taken for the space of two days,
and two nights.

Julius the 2. Pope of that name, was thus afflicted, and Ioann^s Scotus (as
Bodin. in Daem^nomae nia, ^ib. 2. c. 6.
another writes) lying, by this sickness, as dead, was buried before he was
dead.

In another (by Galen (says he) called Coma vigilans) the sick are
doubtfully held, Coma vigilans.
in some part waking, in another part sleeping: in some respects, manners and
parts, expressing wakefull motions; sense, speech, right apprehension, memory
and imagination: but in other respects, parts and manners, as asleep, void of
the liberty and use of sense, motion, or any other faculty.

Now contrary to these former, he makes mention of diverse others, as of the
falling sickness, and of diverse kinds of conuulsions: In these diseases,

1. Some will bite their tongues, and flesh.

2. Some make fearful and frightfull outcries and shreekings.

3 Some are violently tossed and tumbled from one place to another.

4. Some froth, gnash with their teeth, with their faces deformed, and drawn
awry.

5. Some have all parts pestered, and writhen into ougly shapes: as their heads
forward, their faces backward, eyes rolling, inordinately twinkling, the mouth
disto^ted into diverse forms, grinninig, mowing, g^ping wide, or close shut.

6. Some have their limbs, and diverse members suddenly with violence
snatched up and car^yed aloft, and by their own weight suffered to fall again.

7. Some have an inordinate leaping, and hopping of the flesh, through every
member of the body, as if some living thing were there.

And as the body is metamorphosed into such strange shapes, so in some
diseases (says he) is the mind strangely transported into visions and
apparitions: Note this.
so as sometimes they will complain of Witches and Devils, broadly describing
the shapes and gestures of such as are coming toward them.

One example amongst many other, he brings of a Gentleman's daughter in
Warwickshire, his patient, afflicted in an unknown manner, and strange, to her
parents, neighbors, and to some Physicions also.

1. She had a vehement shaking, and violent casting forward of her head every
day at a set time, in a much marueiled fashion, and indeed with a loud and
shrill inarticulate sound of two sillables Ipha Ipha.

2. She had diverse tortures of her mouth and face, with staring and rolling
her eyes, sprawling and tumbling upon the ground, grating and gnashing of her
teeth.

3. Sometimes she fell into a deadly trance, therein continuing the space of a
day, representing the shape and image of death, without all sense and motion,
saving breathing and her pulse, neither was she moved with pinching, or the
like.

4. When she came out of the same, she would, as if fearfully affrighted,
cast her eyes looking backward, then on either side, and over her head, as
seeing something, and then her eyes would be staring open, and her mouth gaping
wide, with her hands and arms strongly stretched out above her head, with a
general starknesse and st^ffenesse.

5. When she was out of her fits and seemed to sleep and slumber, then her
imagination led her hands to diverse actions and m^tions, arguing folly, and
defect of reason, with her hands only feeling (without the help of any other
sense) she would dress and a^tire the heads of such women, as were by her, so
strong was her imagination to lead her feeling.

These and other particulars are mentioned; yet the causes natural, and
na^urall means were used by him, and at leng^h by the benefit of the Baths she
was cured.

In the same book^, c. 9.
Another story he records of a poor boy of ^ichley in Northamptonshire, who was
sudd^nly surprised with a vehement conuu^sion, drawing his head and heels
violently backward, carrying his whole body into a roundnesse, tumbling up and
down, with much pain and inward groaning. The p^rents held him bewitched, and
therefore sent for a wise woman, who played her witchery trick^s, but could do
nothing. The Doctor showed the natural cause to be Worms, which in some time
after, the Boy did void, and was perfectly well*

In another book of his, called the t^yall of Witchcraft, chap. 2. page 15, 16,
17. he mak^th mention of diverse sorts of persons tormented with diseases, wit^
their terrible accidents and afflictions to the body, of men, women and
children, the reason whereof could not be discerned till after death: but
their bodies being opened, the reasons in nature, were very evident in sight.

Amongst the rest, one story he relates, to show the pestilent evil of seeking
to a white Witch and Wizard, of a Gentlewoman strangely affl^cted, with
variety of strange tormenting diseases together; and being almost cured, it
was by a Wizard whispered, and thereupon believed, that she was merely
bewitched: which supposed Witches were thereupon attached, accused, arraigned,
found guilty and executed; and yet (says he) in true reason, and judicious
discerning, it is as clear, as the brightest day, that no accident befalling
her, was other then natural. An accursed crediting then of a Wizard, unjustly
occasioned the taking away of the lives of these so suspected; But though the
diseases ceased for some six years, yet some of her fits returned again in
the seventh year following, and continued longer upon her, then the other; and
now if they will believe a Wizard again, they must go and conceit other
Witches, and hang them too.

But now to leave diseases, it is good to observe the force of Fancy and
Fear, In his book against Empericks, c. ^:
whereby may be found Witches. But where? only in a foolish sconce (as he
speaks.) And to show this, he instanceth the force thereof in two women
going to a Physicion, one after another. To the one he said, she was like to
be vexed with the Sciatica, whereof he saw the apparent signs, which she
affirmed never to have had the motion of in all her life: now the same night
returning home, she was painefully and grievously afflicted with it. To the
other, coming some two or three days after, besides the pain she made
known, he by signs told her of the Crampe, which she before sensibly never
had felt, yet that night also it came to her.

Now the first party knowing how it happened to her self, and hearing the like
of her neighbor, presently concluded, that she surely was bewitched by the
Physician. But after her husband, (an understanding man) to satisfy his wives
mind being impatient during her pains) had gone and returned from the
Physician, she was altered in her opinion, and then prayed her husband to go
once more to ask him forgiveness, and if he so would, then should she be
well, and indeed so her imagination wrought, that at her husbands return, she
met him at the door, and told him that she was well.

How did a lusty young man at the Assi^es presently faint in reading a
conference of two spi^^ts, whilst the suspected Witch was at the Bar,
merely upon fear to be in danger to be bewitched, as was euid^nt by hi^
words, saying, O thou Rogue, will thou bewitch me too?

Fear and imag^nation make many Witches among country people, being
superstitiously addicted, and led with foolish observations, and imaginary
signs of good and bad luck.

Therefore seeing there may be such natural causes truly alleged for those
things, which seemed to be infl^cted by Satan, and the provocation of Witches:

I. Let such as suspect themselves to be bewitched, consider whether the cause
of their v^xation be not natural and enquir^ not of a devilish W^zard, but of
learned and judicious Physicians to know their disease, lest they suspect their
neighbors unjustly, and for a iu^t punish^ent, God give them over into the
hands of those that they do fear. So likewise should they in the loss of
their cattle, look to the na^urall causes of their death: ^or a beast and
horse may die suddenly, and not be bewitched; as an horse of one Master
Dorington in Huntingtonshire, H^w^s Chr^n. s^l. 19.
suddenly falling down dead, was opened, there was found in his heart a
strange worm round together like a Toade, but being spread, had 50. branches,
and was seventeen inches long.

II. The Gentlemen of the Grand-Iury, in case of Witchcraft, when complaints
are made; should

1. Be ^^quisitiue of the grounds leading the Complainant, why he thinks
himself, or any of his, to be bewitched? whether it be not rather from his
own fear, then from any other cause? or whether the affliction be not from
some natural cause?

2. To inquire whether he has taken advice of some learned Physicians, and
has also used their best helps, for remedy, before they enter into
consideration of the practices of Witcherie: because unless the Witchcraft be
very clear, they may be much mistaken; and better it were, till the truth
appear, to write an Ignoramus, then upon oath to set down Billa vera, and so
thrust an intricate case upon a Jury of simple men, who proceed too often upon
relations of ^eere presumptions, and these sometimes very weak ones too, to
take away men's lives.

It is undoubtedly true, that there is a very great likeness, and also a
deceivable likeness, between some diseases natural, and those that be
really and truly supernatural, coming by the D^uell and Witchery, and
therefore need the judgment of some skillful Physician to help to discern,
and to make a clear difference between the one and the other, that men may
proceed iudiciously, and so rightly with comfort of conscience, that they be
not guilty of blood.

Sometimes with a natural disease Satan may also intermix his supernatural
work, to hid^ his, and the Witches practices, under such natural ^iseases,
when they at one time work^ together. This requires great understanding, to
make a true decision, and right distinction of one from the other, by reason of
the illusion (as one says) of their d^ceiueable likenesses.

But though to the simple, the likeness be^weene both may seem one and the
same, yet the truth is, the Devil cannot so m^xe his work with a natural
disease, See Delrio in D^sq. mag. lib. 6. cap. 2. S^^ 2. ^. 3. page 967.
but the same may be detect^d in the m^ni^^st odds, and that in two things
very clearly, as I have read out of a learned Physician.

I. By the Symptoms and effects, which show themselves beyond the nature of
the disease. The natural disease, with the true causes, and proper e^fects
being first known, the other effects must needs be from the secret working of
some supernatural power. Fernel. ^ib. 2. cap. 1^. d^ abd^^is r^r^m causis.
As for exampl^ in a Conuulsion (with which a Noble young man was
extraordinarily for a long time tormented) according to the ordinary causes
thereof in nature, it bereaueth the Patient of motion: for his limbs are
stark and stiff: also it depriueth him of sense and understanding. Therefore
in a Conuulsion to have (as the young man had) an incredible swiftness of
motion, and withal understanding and sense perf^ct, it must needs be
supernatural.

II. By natural remedies discre^tly and fi^ly applied according to Art^ for
there are tw^ ways by these, to detect the finger of Satan.

1. When these natural means do lose their manifestly known^ nature, and
certainly approoue^ use and operation always i^ their due application to the
disease, whereto they properly belong.

2. Withal, when the use o^ these remedies do produce effects clean contrary
to their proper and natural oper^^ion: as when one labors of a vehement
burning ^hirst, and sha^^ receive some mo^st and cooling thing to allay the
heat, the same shall not one^y lose his nature, but also cause a greater thirst
immediately, and withal the hard closing up the mouth thereupon. This must
needs be supernatural. This second is to be added to the former, because
medicines may, for want of Gods blessing, lose their operation, and because
that God will perhaps have sometime the ^^sease to be incurable.

CHAP. 3. The supposed to be bewitched and tormented by the Devil, may be a
very counterfeit.
THere may be neither any natural disease, nor any ^upernaturall work of the
Di^ell in the seemingly afflicted ^arty: but a mere counter^^iting of actions,
motions, passions, distortious, perturbations, agitations, writhings,
tumblings, tossings, wallowings, ^oamings, alteration of speech and voice, with
ghastly staring with ^he eyes, trances and relation of visions afterward. For
there is nothing almost in things of this nature so really true, but some can
so li^ely resemble the same, as the spectators shall judge the parties to be so
indeed, as they seem to be in outward appearance.

See the Declaration of Popish imposture.
There was one Marwood, a confederate with Weston, Dibdale, and other Popish
P^iests, who did so cunningly act his part, in trembling, foaming, and raging,
when he was touched with Campions girdle, forsooth, as made the gulled lookers
^n to weep, in beholding the cogging and iuggling companion in such a seeming
miserable plight. The like I saw of a lewd girl at Wells; who to be revenged
of a poor Woman, which had justly complained against her to her Mistress,
counterfeited to be bewitched by her, and so plaide her part, as she made many
to wonder, and some to weep, as if she had been possessed.

The Boy of Bilso^.
The Boy of Bilson his counterfeiting discovered, is notorious throughout the
land; which Boy seemed to be bewitched, and cried out of a woman to have
bewitched him* and when she was brought in very secretly, he could discern it.
He had strange fi^s, and seemed therein deaf and dumb* he could writhe his
mouth aside, roll his eyes, as nothing but the white would appear, and his
head shake as one distracted. He usually would cast up his meat, vomit
pinnes, rags, straw, wrest and turn his head backward, grate with his
teeth, gape hideously with his mouth, cling and draw in his belly and guts;
groan and mourn pittiously; tell of the apparition of a spirit after his
fits, seeming like a black bird. He made water like ink sometimes, which some
tried, and wrote with it. At the mentioning of the beginning of Saint John's
Gospel: In the beginning was the Word, etc. he would fall into his fits, as if
he could not endure to hear these words: He became with f^sting very weak,
and his limbs by enduring extremities, were benumbed. And to conclude, so
resolved was he to bear out his counterfeiting, as when he was pinched often
with fingers, pricked with needles, tickled on the sides, and once whipped with
a rod (being but thirteen years old) he could not be discerned by either
shrinking, or shrieking, to bewray the least passion or feeling.

And yet was he discovered to be a counterfeit, and openly confessed the same,
and bow he came to learn these tricks, and by whom, and wherefore. At the
Assizes he cried God mercy, craved pardon of the poor Woman; and lastly,
prayed the whole Country to admit of his hearty confession and satisfaction.

To this may be added another example delivered by Master Scot, in his
discovery of Witchcraft, book 7. chap. 1. and 2. The story is of one Mildred
a Bastard of one Alice Norrington, servant to one William Spooner of Westwell
in Kent; Anno 1574. She feigned the voice of a Devil within her, distinct
from her own voice. This counterfeit Devil made answer to a great number of
questions propounded by Ministers: He named one old woman for a Witch, one old
Alice, who kept him twenty years in two bottles, on the back side of her
house, and elsewhere, and that he came in the likenes^e of two birds, and was
called Partener, and that at her instigation he had killed three, and named
who they were, with many other things: Of all which, there were many witnesses,
the names set down by Master Scot, and yet all this was counterfeited, and
found out by one Master Wotton, and one Master Darrel, Justices, she confessed,
and for the same received due punishment.

In this strange counterfeiting, it may yet verily be thought, that Satan
might therein help him and her to play so cunningly this part as they did: for
Satan is ever ready to further wickedness, especially tending to the shedding
of blood, and to further Popish Idolatry, which the Boy of Bilson was enti^ed
to do, and the Pop^sh Priests sought for to establish, in exorcising the Boy,
and professing to dispossess him of three Devils, if his parents would turn,
forsooth, Cathol^ques.

Did not our late King James, by his wisdom, learning, and exp^rience,
discover diverse counterfeits?

Of Iugglers, and their quick conueyances; as also of Tumblers* dexterity,
agilitie and viuacitie of spirit, what they can do even to work admiration^
as also of feining a voice and hollow speaking, ^uen to deceive the sharpest
apprehension: Let such as please, read Peter de L^ier de spectris, transl^ted
by Za^^^rie Jones, cap. ^.

Of a count^rfeit D^m^niacke, one for many is Martha Brosier, a French woman,
Martha Brosier.
of whom a lar^e discourse is written by the Physici^^^ of P^^^s* to the King
of France.

T^is young woman of some two and twenty years of age, had many Sp^ctator^,
Bishops, A^bat^* Eccl^si^sticall persons, Divines, R^ligious ^en, Cou^sellors
of S^^te, Ad^o^ates, Gentlemen, ^^dies and Gentlewoman, with many learned
P^ysicians, mentioned in the discourse*

She would fetch her breath very short, put her tongue ou^ very far, gnash with
her teeth* writhe her mo^th, as if she had a con^^lsion, roll and turn her
eyes, disfigure her face, with diverse foul, unseemly and deformed looks,
seem now and then to be vexed and tormented with many differen^ and furious
motions of all the visible parts of her body. There was a rumbling noise, like
the spleen under her short ribs, on the left side, and her flank she would
sha^eas a panting ^orse after a violent ^^ce; often she would utter a roaring
voice, when some read these words; Verbum caro fact^^ est, and homo factus est:
then with all her ^^rength she would play he^ gambols: sometimes lying upon
her back, she would as it were skip, and ^t four or five such life's, she
would remove her self a great way, (...) once from an Altar, to the door of
a great Chapel, to the astonishment of the beholders, as if a very devil had
carried her: And though her motions were violent and sudden, yet there seemed
no change of pulse, breath, or color. In her fi^^ she would endure witho^t
show of pain, the deep pricking of pinnes in her hands, and neck, and hardly
any sign of blood. And yet for all these things, after diverse months she was
wisely discovered to be a lewd counterfeit, and so adjudged by the Parliament,
and that judgment maintained for sound by the learned Physicians of Paris, as
is to be seen in the published discourse, wherein they give reasons of these
her practices. And whereas it was reported that she spoke in her belly and
breast, To speak in the breast or belly, with the mouth close shut.
when her mouth and lips were shut, they show* that it is no argument to prove
a Devil to be such an one, and do bring two instances; one of a woman (as
Mildred before mentioned) that could do so; and another of a Rogue, as they
call him, who by this trick and such other devices got much money.

Now of these counterfeits, some play their parts for gains, as the last
named: some for revenge, as the Wenc^ a^ Wel^: some to advance Popery, as did
Marwood: some to please others, which would have it so, In the Decla^ation of
Po^ish imposture.
as one Mairo another companion with* Westen and D^bdale, did in feining his
trances, though he was indeed no counterfeit in his disease, (called hysterica
passio) but hi^ trances he confessed to be feined: some of a pleasure they
take to gull spectators, and to be had in admiration, when they perceive their
feats and devised tricks to get credit, and by relation to be made much more
then they be, as the many false reports went of the aforesaid Martha, that she
was life up into the air, and, that she spoke Greek and Latin, and other
things, which she never did.

For when people come to see such supposed to be possessed by a Devil or
Devils; some are filled with fancyfull imaginations, some are possessed with
fear; so as they at first time on a sudden, think they hear and see more
then they do, and so make very strange relations without truth, if they take
not time, and come again, and again, to see and consider with judgment, and
with mature deliberation such deceivable resemblances.

Therefore here the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, before they write Billa vera,
are with all serious attention to look upon the seeming bewitched, and to
ponder all the circumstances, left they be deceived by a counterfeit: for such
a one, without very wary circumspection, may soon be taken for one indeed
bewitched, and that upon these grounds:

1. Through men's sudden beholding such unaccustomed strange feats, as these
counterfeits can act.

2. By their simple apprehension of the outward apparances of things, not
imagining that therein is deceit.

3. He upon their easy belief, to take it as they see and imagine also to be,
without diligent search to diue farther into the deceit.

4. By the relation of that that they have seen and heard, with not a few
additions of their own mistake, setting all out with words of wonderment, to
allure others to their vain beliefo*

5. Lastly, by the credulousnesse of too too many, receiving these reports as
true, and ouer-confidently ^^^^ing them so to be* to the settling of m^^^
opinions, that those shows are indeed subs^^n^^^, and that the party, or
parties are bewitched, without all peradventure.

Therefore let the wise Jury hee^e make diligent inquiry,

1. After the wisdom and discretion of the witnesses, whether they can
discern well between real and counterfeit acts; and how they so discern the
same.

2. What sufficient trial has been made of the supposed bewitched, as also,
by whom, and how long.

3. And to these le^ them ad, for still better satisfaction, their own
endeu^^^, to disco^^^ the iuggling tricks.

Quest.
B^^ here (...) be demanded, How Cou^^^^fe^^s may be discovered?

Answ.
To answer to this, we must consider, first, what a Counterfeit is, and
secondly, what it is that (...) endeavors to counterfeit^

1. A Counterfeite is not that truly, which he pretends to be, but only a
shadow thereof in a most cunning manner, resembling it, that by the likeness
be may deceive others, to further his own intended ends therein: so that in
the resemblance and app^rant shows lies the deceit. To this, the spectatours
must diligently take heed, observe warily, set themselves down to examine
them afterward, and to be careful not to credit any thing at first vi^w.

A Counterfeit is not restrained by the power of that which he or she (...)
shadow out, whether a thing natural, o^ supernatural* which in one, not a
Counterfeit, have a power over him or her, in whom, or on whom they be; so as
they cannot show them at their own pleasure, but when the natural, or
supernatural power works: but the Counterfeit is his own, to do his tricks
when he pleases, for his best advantage.

Therefore the judicious Spectatours, are to weigh seriously the occasion of
entering into the fits, with all circumstances, before whom, at what time, in
what place, who those be which are about him or her, what both the p^rty and
they do before, in the time of the fit, and after; and withal, to observe the
manner how the party enters, continues, and ends the fits: that out of
either some, or out of all these, his or her fraud may be disco^ered, as
undoubtedly it may in convenient time, though not on a sudden, not in the
concourse of an ignorant, wondering, talking, and amazed multitude, necessarily
to be removed, in trying a cunning Counterfei^e.

II. Having thus considered the first thing for the discovery, the next is, to
know what he goes about to counterfeite, not professedly, as Stage Players
do, the actions, manners, conditions, places, and states of men; but one of
these two, either the natural (but violent) diseases, or supernatural works
of the Devil.

If he or she counterfeite natural diseases, as the Apoplexy, the Epilepsie,
the Convulsion, the Frenzy, Histerica passio, the Suffocation of the Matrix,
or the Mother, the motion of Trembling and Pan^ing, How to discover a
Counterfeit of natural diseases.
the Crampe and Stiffness, or the diseases mingled of these, the learned,
judicious and experienced Physicians must discover him or her so counterfeiting.

But in absence of these, for the present, if any be otherwise learned, and
have books, let him or them,

I. Consider the nature of any disease, and the accidents thereof, which is to
have their times of beginning, of increasing, of full force, and so of
declination.

Now this being so, the nature of natural diseases and ^ccidents thereof, as
Physici^ns do teach: enquiry must be made, whether they began by little and
and little, increasing in time to full force: or that at the first, when they
seemed to take beginning, they at once then mounted to the utmost extr^mitie;
and do likewise cease all in a moment: then the disease and accidents thereof,
are either counterfeit, or supernatural, ^s were the Boyles on the Egyptians,
Exo. 9. Job. 1.7.
and blaynes suddenly breaking out, as did the sore boyles on Jobs body, and
were not natural.

II. Consider the fits and to what special disease those fits may be
resembled* and if any have such books, as do describe: the nature of such,
dis^eases, let them look thereinto, and compare them together* to see the
^ddes and differences between them.

III. Consider how that natural* diseases and motions thereof especially
violent* (which these undertake to counterfeite) leave the bodies wea^^^^^* the
usage pa^e, the breath panting, the pulse; changed the spirits infeebled, with
such other effects, as violent diseases, from natural causes do produce, and
leave as true testimonies of the truth thereof. If therefore after the violent
fits, the parties be strong, can walk about, talk with merry company, toss
the pot, whiffe the Tobacco pipe and such like; the disease, if it be not
supernatural, it is counterfeite; for it is not natural.

But before I leave this; one thing more may be noted, that even a Counterfeite
may have some natural disease upon him or her, and make advantage thereof,
adding their own iuggling tricks thereto. As Mahomet the Turkish false prophet
made benefit of the falling sickness, with which disease he was afflicted. So
some with mealancholy affected, may become pale and meager, and being subtle
in their invention, will thereof make use to play their prankes. Many before
named, had the Hysterica passio, and added thereto counterfeit trances. Care
therefore must be had, to difference the counterfeiting, from that which is
natural, which requires judgment. And therefore, albeit, I have set down
these, ^s some helps, where the Physician cannot be had, to inform the
Gentlemen of the Iewry; yet if it be possible, let them use the learned men's
help and advice in these things. And thus much for the discovering of a
counterfeit in natural diseases.

How to detect a Counterfeiter of diabol and supernanu. tricks.
But now if he or she counterfeit. Diabolical practices of persons bewitched
and possessed; then are the Gentlemen to acquaint themselves with the true
signs of such as be poss^ssed, so to discover the dissembler; and according
as I find in holy Scripture, they be these:

I. An extraordinary strength, accompanied with exceeding fierceness, to be
able to pull chains in sunder, and to break fetters in pieces, to cut
themselves with stones, to tear off their clothes, and to go naked; to run
into solitary and hideous places, and not to be tamed: Here is a Devil, Mar.
5.4.5. Luke 8.29.

II. When one is suddenly taken up, and thrown with violence among and in the
(...) of a c^mp^ny, and not be ^ur, Luke 4.35.

III. When one is Lunaticke, taken often and cast into the fire, or water to be
d^stroyed, Math. 17.15 M^r 9 22.

IV. When one walloweth, foameth, gnasheth with his teeth, is rent and thrown
to and fro, and withal pineth away in body, as in Mar. 9.18, 20. and that for
a very long time, to be so tormented.

V. When sight, hearing, and speech, is taken from one strangely, as in Math.
12.22. Mar. 9.25.

VI. When one is violently tormented, the spirit bruising the party, making
him or her, with tearings to foame again, and suddenly to cry out, Luke 9.39.

VII. When one speaks, in his or her fits, in an extraordinary manner, not
after their own natural or ordinary course of understanding, as did Saul, 1.
Sam. 18.10. speaking such truths, as possible they by no natural apprehension,
or by instruction, could attain unto, as did diverse possessed, concerning
Christ, who, they said, was the holy one of God. Mar. 1.24. The Son of God,
Mar. 3.11. The Son of the most high God, Mar. 5.7. and as the Pythonysse said
of Paul and Sylas, These are the servants of the ever living God, and teach
unto you the way of Salvation, Act. 16. This knowledge they had not by natural
reason: for flesh and blood revealed it not, Mat. 16 Neither did they learn it
of men: for the Jewish Teachers opposed these truths, Math. 27.43. and 26.64.
It was then the Devil in them, that knew him, who made them so speak, Mar.
1.34.

We may read in learned relations, of such, as in their fits, Lib. de abd.
verum causis, ^. 16. Bodin. de Da^ono. l. 3. c. 6.
would speak strange languages. Fernelius, an undoubted testimony, mentions,
how he saw an ignorant and frantic boy, and heard him in his madness to
speak Greek. Melanchton says, that he saw a Damoniacke woman in Saxony, who
could neither write nor read, and yet spoke both Greek and Latin.

VIII. When one diuineth, as the Pythonisse did, Act. 16. and foretells (...)
such as come to demand questions of things to come, or does reveal hidden
things. As Sleiden in his Commentary tells of Anabaptisticall Maids, when
some hid their moneys, they would ^ell where they hid the same.

IX. When holy means is used, as Christ did by his Word and power, the^ the
party to cry with a loud voice, to be sore torn, and (...) spirits departing,
to be (...) or d^ad in the judgment of the beholders, Mar. 1.26. and 9.26,
Luke 4 34 and 15.42. Thus it tell out w^^h the p^ssessed, recorded in holy
Scriptures, Let the pract^ces of Counterfeits be tried hereby, and also by the
signs of those that are bewitched. Of which (in the next book and 12.
Chapter) hereafter.

CHAP. IV. That the Devil and evil spirits, through Gods permission, may do
much evil unto the godly for their trial, and unto the wicked for their
punishment, without any association of Witches.
IT is too common a received error, amongst the vulgars, yea, and amongst not
a few persons of better capacity, that if any be vexed by a spirit, that such
are bewitched. But it is a clear truth, that the Devil may afflict man or
woman, their children and their ca^el, without the knowledge, consent or
association with any Witch.

1. The History of the Evangelists accuse the devil and unclean spirits, for
all the vexations, torments, and tortures which many possessed endured, and not
a word of any Witch, to set the Devil on work.

2. The people which brought the possessed to our Savior, complained only of
the Devil, Matthew. 15.22. Luke 9.39. They made no mention of Witches, nor (for
any thing we read) had any suspicion of them.

3. We find that God has often sent the Devil, as the Executioner of his
displeasure, without any means of a Witch, as amongst the Egyptians he sent
evil angels, as before I have showed out of Psalm. 78.49. between Ahim^lech
and the Sichemites, Iubg. 9.23. So upon Saul, 1. Sam. 16.15. And so were a
Legion sent by Christ into an Herd of Swine, Mar. 5 12. Thus we see Devils sent
immediately from God, without any instigation of Witches, who are given over of
God into the hands of the Devil: neither does God use them, as his instruments
to work by, as he does by Devils, and other wicked men, in other cases: as
he did by Nabuchadnezzer with his host, so by Cyrus, and others, to punish by
them, whom he had determined so to deal with.

4. We read that the Devil entered into the Serpent, when there was yet no
Witch, Genesis 3. He, when God gave him leave, entered into the Sabaeans, and
Chaldeans to rob Job of his cattle. He burnt his sheep with fire, blew down
the house upon all Jobs children, and killed them, and at length tormented Jobs
body, and affrighted him with visions and dreams, Job 1. and 2. and 7.12. and
without any setting on by a Witch.

5. The Scripture tells us, that Satan needs no prouoker to set him forward:
for the text says, that he compasses the world to and fro, Job 1. and goes
up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5. He
is ready, (if God give way) to be a lying spirit in the mouths of Ahabs
Prophets to seduce him, 1. King. 22. and to beguile them. See for what sins
the Devil by Gods permission seizes upon any. Delrio lib. 3. par. 1. quest.
7. sect. 2. p. 429. pride, hatred, uncleanness, persecuting the inst, falling
from truth, blasphemy, cursing, unmercifulness, and profane contempt of holy
things. See the Theater of Gods judgment in cursing.


6. Lastly, the Devil may take possession of a man or woman, not by the
instigation of another, but this may come to pass by the very parties own
default that is possessed, by inuocating the Devil, as to say, The Devil take
me, or, Would the Devil had me, if a thing be not so and so, which may be
spoken in so unhappy a time, as God may give the Devil then leave to enter, of
which there have been examples. 2. By intermeddling with curious Arts, and so
become possessed of a Devil. 3. Or by buying a familiar spirit, Bodin. de
Demonomania.
as a Gentleman did a Ring of another, wherein was, as he was told, a familiar
enclosed, of whom he would know many things. Which Ring be at length (being
displeased with the spirit for telling him many lies) one day cast into the
fire, upon which the spirit seized upon him, and became his tormentor. A just
plague to such as would confer, hear and learn of a Devil.

4. Such as will increase their skill by Satan, Cyted in Roberts his Treati^e
of Witchcraft, page 33.

De Daemono. l. 3. c. 3. p. 261.


as Hermolans Barbarus did, and as the Chymicke mekets, seeking the
Philosophers stone, but failing by their Art, have asked counsel of the
Devil, as Bodinus relates from an approved witness; it is just with God to
let the Devil possess some of them.

Thus we see the Devil may be the sole Agent, without the fellowship of a
Witch. And therefore this point the Gentlemen of the Grand-Iury are to take
into their serious consideration: lest some be unjustly prosecuted and
condemned, when the devil only is the deede-doer, as they may see in the many
instances before set down in holy Writ; and may be read in other Histories.

Also if such as be afflicted, or their friends, would consider with
themselves, how that Satan may be the sole worker; i^ would

1. Make Atheistical hearts to shake off security, and work in them a dread
and fear of God, when they shall consider a fiend of Hell, not sent of a
Witch, but of God, to be their tormentor.

2. This would cause them to seek to God for help in the first place, knowing
that he only, and none but he can ouerrule and command Satan, and make him to
give over his practices.

3. If there be any grace in them, it will cause them to use holy means, such
only as God allows of, as remedies to help them, as fasting and prayer,
with a searching of their ways, and the reformation of their lives.

4. In this case they neither can tell how, nor dare to imagine which way to
be revenged of the Devil, as the vain generation of men labour^ to be
revenged upon suspected Witches, for sending the Devil; upon which Witches
only they fly with violence, like raging* ^ygers in heart, thinking so to
remove a Devil from them, neglecting irreligiously the former sanctified
means for their comfortable deliverance.

Quest.
But you will perhaps here ask, how one may know that Satan is the only
Agent, without the consent of a Witch?

Answ.
I answer. 1. If there be not any suspicion at all of a Witch, but only some
apparition of a spirit, as I could give herein a very rare instance of an
afflicted person near by me.

2. If there be a suspicion, yet the same not just, but an idle, vain, and
foolish suspicion, without any good ground, of which idle suspicions, you shall
hear in the next Book.

3. If the suspicion be upon great probabilities, and very strong presumptions,
yet unless these do lead to prove, that the suspected has made a league and
compact with the Devil* he works not with them; but is the sole Agent: for
without this league, he will not be an Agent for Witches. How to prove this
league: see the second book, chap. 18.

4. If the suspected be proved a Witch, by making the league, yet for all this,
it may be the Devil alone, except it can be proved, that the suspected Witch
or Witches have procured Satan to afflict those, for whose cause they are
prosecuted.

For although they be Witches, yet it will not therefore follow, that every one
afflicted in their bodies, or in their children, or in their servants, or in
their cattle by Satan, are so vexed by the procurement of those Witches, except
upon further proof, which must be inquired after; as the proof of their
falling out, their malice in bitter cursing, their threats to be revenged of
them, therefore telling of evils to befall them, the ^ll accidents which happen
thereupon presently on a sudden, or in a very short time, of which more at
large in the other Book, chap. 17.

Thus by these may men discern, whether the Devil be the sole Agent or no.
Before I end this Chapter, some other Questions may be propounded touching
Spirits or Devils.

Quest. 1.
Quest. 1. What it is the Devil can do, if God be pleased to give him leave?

Answ.
Answ. To answer to this Question, I will take the Examples in holy Scripture;
and so from thence gather the particulars.

See Delrio de disq. mag. l. 2. q. 10.11.12.13.14. concerning the power of
spirits.
1. Genesis 3.1. We here learn, that the Devil may enter into a dumb creature.
2. That he can out of the same utter a voice intelligible. 3. That he will offer
conference (if any will hearken to him) to deceive. 4. That he chooses the
sub^illest creature to deceive by, and the weaker vessel to confer with. 5.
He is powerful in his persuasions to overcome.

2. Exodus 7.11.22. and 8.7. with Psalm. 78.49. He can deceive the eyesight, and
seem to change one creature into another, as a Rod into a Serpent, Water
into blood, and to make, as if Frogs were before us, and he can greatly
trouble us.

3. Judge. 9 23. He ca^ set people at odds, to deal treacherously one with
another, and to make them rise up and murder one another, as this story
shows.

4. 1. Sam. 16.14. He can trouble and terrify a man, and can also rap him
beyond himself to make him prophecy, chap. 18.10. as he did the Sybylles. He
will force to murder, chap. 19.9.

5. Job 1. and 2. He can stir up wicked men to spoil and rob us, and to kill
and murder our servants, chap. 1.15, 17. He can make fire fall down, as from
heaven, to burn and consume man and beast, chap. 1.16. He can raise a wind
to blow down our houses over our heads, and kill us, chap. 1.19. He can smite
our bodies with sore Byles all over, chap. 2.7. He can scarre us with dreams,
and terrify us with visions, Job 7.14. and 6.4.

6. 1. Sam. 28.12, 14, 19. He can counterfeit the resemblance of an holy man,
his person and his words, and relate truly things past, How the Devil can
tell things to come.
and also foretell some things to come, as they shall fall out, as here, and
as often has been found true, which he does: 1. By his knowledge of divine
prophecies, and his understanding of the drawing near of their accomplishment.
Delri^ lib. 4. cap. 1 qu. 1.2. page 529.
2. By his exquisite skill in natural things, not only by the general
causes, but the subordinate to them, with the particular operations, what
necessarily they must produce. 3. By his diligent observation of innumerable
instances, from the worlds beginning, of the periods of Kingdoms, and
Families, of the causes of their changes, and ruin, and so conclude by
experience of the like to come.

4. By his own, and his fellow Devils diligence in all places, whereby they
are acquainted with all secret plots, consultations, resolutions, and
preparations, which they will relate to others, which know them not, as
predictions, which are only that which they elsewhere see and hear. 5. By his
own persuasions, and working through his suggestions in men's hearts, and his
observing the eff^ctuall operations thereof, provoking to bring the same about,
and so can foretell what such will do. Thus he could have told of Caines
murdering of Abel, and of Judas his treason, because he had won them
thereunto. 6. By his knowledge of Gods will, to allow him to do this or that,
as he did to Job, to Abimelech and the Sichemites, of which he could have
foretold. Thus can he tell many things, as he did Saul's death, and the
Israelites overthrow.

7. Matthew. 4.3, 4. Here he dares to make an assault upon any, if thus upon our
Savior. 2. He can take men and carry them from place to place. 3. He can
set a glorious representation of these worldly things unto the eye. 4. He
labors for ^a league, and to be worshipped.

8. Matthew. 9.32. and 12.22. and 15.22. and 17.15. with Mark. 1.20. and 5.5, 7.
and 7.26. and 9.17, 18.20, 22, 25, 26. and Luke 4.35. and 7.2. and 8.29, 39.
and 11.14. and 13.11, 16. Out of all which places we may observe, that the
Devil can bereave one of his wits, and make one lunaticke, deaf, dumb, and
blind, bow the body together, so that one shall not be able to lift up
himself. He can enter in, and possess any really, and make them inuincibly
strong, and work other effects: of all which, before in the latter part of the
3. chapter.

9. Acts 8.9, 10. and 16.16. He can be witch the people, making them believe,
that his works are the great power of God: and can, by the tongue of the
possessed, divine and foretell things, and utter great praises of the servants
of God.

Quest. 2. Quest. 2.
What sorts of persons may the Devil possess?

Answ.
Answ. Children, Luke 13.6. Young folks, Mark. 7.26. Men, Mark. 5.2, 1, 23.
Women, Luke 13.16. Matthew. 15.22. yea, such as be the elect of God. Job. Chap.
1. and 2. A daughter of Abraham, Luke 13.11, 16, and Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.2.

Quest. 3.
Quest. 3. How long may people be thus vexed by Satan?

Answ.
Answ. For a long time, Luke 8.27. from a child, till one be grown up, Mar.
9.21. even 18. years Luke. 13.16.

Quest. 4.
Quest. 4. How many Devils may be in one at once?

Answ.
Answ. Seven, Luke 7.2, and more, Luke 11.26. yea a whole legion, Mark. 5.9.

Quest. 5.
Quest. 5. May not a Devil and a good Angel be together in one man?

Answ.
Answ. I think not; for of good Angels I read, that they pitch about the
godly, Psalm. 34. they guide and bear up the godly in their ways, Psalm. 91.
and are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them that be ^eyres of
salvation, Heb. 1.14. but of entering into them, I read not.

Again, that a Devil may be ventriloquus, I have heard, and read of, but
never of a good Angel to be so.

Moreover, for him to be in a godly man, there is no necessity, to plead for
him against a Devil; he having the holy Spirit, and by him the Word of God,
for instruction and comfort. And to conceit him to be in an unclean person, a
vain and loose liver, and one of an unreformed life, Jude. 19.
sensual, void of the Spirit of grace, to comfort him, is beyond all warrant
of holy Scripture.

Object. But it will be said, Object.
that two have been heard sometimes to speak in one man, one like a Devil,
in a great voice, and another pleading against him with a small voice.

Answ. What then? 1. May not one Devil counterfeit two voices, as well as one
man can, very artificially, three or four, one after another? If they speak
at once together, there is two; but it cannot be concluded, that there are
two, because of the change of voice, and one speaking after another.

Secondly, If two be supposed, they may be both Devils, for all their
pleading, as is recorded in a book inti^uled, The admirable history of a
Magician, where, in one person was a Dialogue between Verrin a little Devil,
who spoke all after an holy manner, and Beelzebub the great Devil, who spoke
wickedly, and blasphemously. The one counterfeiting the possessed, the other,
threatening and terrifying. The pretended good Angel, is the worse Devil,
soothing up the vain man in a foolish conceit of Gods great favor, as having
an Angel sent for his souls safeguard, as if he were so precious in Gods eyes,
to witness him to be his by an Angel, to whom the Lord has not vouchsafed
his Spirit to witness his Adoption, in the work of Regeneration. A very
illusion.

Quest. 6. Quest. 6.
When the Devil is in one, how he may be cast out?

Answ. 1. Answ.
Not by any power in, or of man: for Satan is the strong Man, in Matthew. 12.29.
Mark. 3.27. whom man cannot bind, or ouermaster.

2. Not by any force of Popish Exorcismes, as Romish Priests brag: for we
read of Priests, yea chief Priests, professed Exorcists, adiuring spirits in
the name of Jesus, and yet the Daemoniacke set upon them and wounded them. Io.
Bap. R^mi^ian a superior.
Moreover we may read, how Romish Exorcists have used their Exorcismes, above
a year together, upon one person, and never the better. Bodinus, I^. Billet in
the admirable H^^^ory of a ^^gician.
in his Daemonomania, tells us of a Devil, that told them, that he would not
come out for any man's sake, but for a Priest called M^tanus who was a Magician.
So little cares the Devil for a Priests power in Exorcising. See the B.
called the boy of Bilson, against the Romish Exorcists.
Their words cannot conjure a Devil: for if they could work effectually, what
need they set up so many Counterfeits, to pretend to be possessed, on whom
they might show their imagined power? To which, if any Devil has at any time
yielded, it was because he would, and not for that he was enforced thereunto,
to beguile the superstitious Exorcists and others, relying upon such means.

3. Not by the power of any great Devil, to force out another, as our Savior
teaches, Matthew. 12.25, 26. Mar. 3.23, 24. And therefore not by A^t Magic,
which believers do detest, Act. 19.19. as being the Devils invention, to which
he may voluntarily yield, to uphold the devilish Art; but by which he cannot
be forced, because both the Art and the practice is from his own self.

Therefore devils are to be cast out only by the finger of God, Luke 11.20.
even by the power of his holy Spirit, Matthew. 12.28.

And the means to have this aid of the power of God, is to be obtained by
fasting and prayer, Math. 17.21. Mar. 9.29. And this was the only means in
the Primitive Church, and not by Exorcismes, Lib. 3. c. ^. de Da^^^^mama.
as even Bodinus a Papist does witness, and cites the testimony of Austin,
Chrysostom, Clement, Sozomenus, and the practices of Saint Hilarion, who
without the host, without adiuration, without questioning with the Devil, by
only using prayer to God, cast out the Devil. In ancient times the
Daemoniackes, says the same Author, were brought into the Congregation, and
there public prayers were made to cast out the Devil, and such means have
prevailed in these our days, and warrant we have from Christ and his ancient
Church to use the same, and not these superstitious, idolatrous, and very
diabolical practices of the Romish Antichristians.

Quest. Quest. 7.
7. Whether the Devils be willing to depart easily out of the possessed?

Answ. Answ.
No verily; as appears from the plain evidence of the Scripture, by their
crying, when they were to come out. Act. 8.7. By tearing the possessed, when
they were commanded to come out, Luke 15. 42. and 4 35. By their petitioning
Christ to send them into other creatures; as swine, before they would go out,
Matthew. 8. 31. By the force of the Word, which says, that they were cast out.
By that place of Luke 9.39. which seith, that he hardly departed. Lastly, by
the Devils acknowledging it to be a torment, to be commanded to come out of
the man, Luke 8.28, 29.

If then there be no forcing of him, but by the power of God, through fasting
and prayer performed in faith: but that the Devil goes out, and leaves the
afflicted willingly: great cause there is to suspect (if there be no
counterfeiting) that the Devil does, one way or other, some greater mischief,
or else intends to return again, with seven other worse then himself, and
so make the last state of the party worse then the first, Mat. 12.45.

CHAP. V. That seeing men, or women, or beasts may be afflicted, from some
natural causes: or that some persons may counterfeite cunningly many things:
or that the Devil may be the sole worker, without consent of a Witch: people
are not rashly and in the first place to ascribe the cause to witchcraft.
IT is an evil too common amongst the ignorant vulgars, amongst the
superstitious, the popishly-affected, amongst others of a vain conversation,
which are Protestants at large, neutrals in heart, sensual, without the power
of Religion, and amongst all the generation of vain people, to think
presently, when any evil betideth them, that they, or theirs, or their cattle
are bewitched, that some man or woman has brought this evil upon them. From
which irreligious and uncharitable thought, so prejudicial to their souls
safety, many reasons may withdraw them.

I. The consideration of Gods own hand, of some natural causes, of some power
of Satan, without any Witch, as in the former Chapter is showed at large.

II. An approved truth by long experience, that such as little dream of
Witches, and lightly regard them, are hardly at any time or never troubled with
them: but on the contrary, such as ever live in suspicion of them, such as
fear them, give to them for fear, and upon any ill hap are ever dreaming,
that they are the instruments, and are most plagued by them, which plainly
shows, that this their suspicion, fear, and ascribing their harms to
Witches, do much displease God, who makes them to feel the smart thereof.

III. All do grant, which have any knowledge of the power of Witches, that
they work by the Devil; they curse, banne, threaten: but he works the
mischief. Therefore keep off the Devil, and there is no fear of a Witch.
She may bid him go, but that is, if he himself lift; or if he please, to
satisfy her reuengefull heart, he must have leave from God. For her sending
gives not, nor increases any power in the Devil, either to work his own,
or her malice upon any. If a man's own sins provoke not God, if our ways
please him, and that he hedge us about (Job 1.) we need fear neither Witch,
nor Devil. But let us cease to sin, fear God, obey him, and we shall be
safe enough.

IV. The manifold evils which happen and fall out upon this so present
imaginary conceit to be bewitched.

1. It withdraws men's minds from the consideration of Gods hand so, as they
do not humble themselves before him, as they ought.

2. It makes them think, that though it be a Devil that afflicts them, yet
that he neither is sent of God (as ill spirits sometimes be) nor that he
comes of his own malicious disposition against mankind (when the Scriptures
show the contrary) but that the Witch only has sent him, else had he not
come to torment them. So as here their thoughts are wholly upon the Witch, as
if he or she were the only commander and ruler in this action.

3. The Devil hereupon takes great advantage, and works mightily upon such
persons, which be so apt to believe themselves to be bewitched: For

First, he works in them a slavish fear, to stand more in awe of the
creature, then of the Creator.

Secondly, upon this fear, if any thing happen amiss, he suggesteth a
suspicion of this or that party to be a Witch.

Thirdly, the suspicion a little settled, he then stirs the man or woman to
utter the suspicion of this or that neighbor.

Fourthly, the Devil works credulity in those neighbors, and withal sets
them on work to second the relation, with opening of their suspicious thoughts
of the same party; and withal, to tell what they have either heard from
others, or observed from themselves, that may tend to increase the suspicion,
that such an one is a Witch.

Fifthly, through this credulity, this relation, and rumouring this suspicion,
from one rattling Gossip to another, it is taken for granted, that such an one
is a Witch, and has bewitched such a man, woman, child, servant, or beast.

Sixthly, upon this grows a general dislike, with a fear of the said party
suspected, so as others upon any ill hap, begin likewise to blame the same
party for that ill accident.

Seventhly, to make up the Devils plotted mischief herein; he makes the party
suspicious to mark all the words and deeds of the suspected, and to interpret
the worst of them, to gather matter to accuse the same of Witchcraft. And to
perform this, the Devil persuades some to seek to a Wizard for help and
counsel, which hel-hound tells them, that they are bewitched, that they live
by ill neighbors: and hereupon returning home, they publish it amongst their
neighbors, that now without all peradventure, such an one is indeed a Witch,
and has done this and that harm.

Lastly, hereupon the Devil stirs up some more impatient, more fiery and
enraged the^ the rest, to seek revenge, to hale the suspected before
Authority, to procure his or her imprisonment, and at last, perhaps, follow
him or her to death, which is that which in all these things the Devil
labored for. For he is a murderer, and delights in bloudshedding,
especially of innocent blood, as it may fall out in this case, and (as learned
men write) sometimes it does, upon only fallible presumptions.

V. And lastly, they may be drawn from this their rash conceit so sudden, and
soon in their mind, by the Scriptures silence, no where ascribing tortures,
pa^nes, vexations, anguish in mind or body, losses of cattle or other goods
to Witches; but to Gods hand, Job 1.21. Psalm. 39.9. or to men openly and
violently wronging, robbing, spoiling and killing, as in Job 1.15, 17. or to
Devils, Matthew. 15.22. Luke 9.39. but, as is said, no where in all the Bible to
Witches.

Quest.
Quest. It may here be demanded, why the Scriptures do not any where
ascribe, (as men do now) bodily harms unto Witches, seeing there is such
mention of Witches and Witchcraft in many places?

Answ.
Ans. The Scriptures of God do never assign instruments to be set on work
by him, which have not power in themselves to do what he imployeth them about,
whether it be Angel, Devil, Man, or any other creature; nor ascribes unto
them any deed, which they cannot do of themselves, without the help of some
other: But Witches are Satan's slaves, who cannot do those evils, which men
accuse them of, but the Devil does it for them. Therefore the Scriptures
ascribe the Acts to the Devil as his own, and not unto Witches (though they
consent) because they do them not themselves.

II. It is done in special wisdom from God, to teach all that be godly (for
whose sakes the Scriptures are penned, and who indeed make them their rule and
guide) to ascribe least unto Witches, or rather nothing at all in this kind to
them, as the multitude do. But to judge of a Witch as a Witch, and of her
actions, as they are in the practices of Witchcraft, distinct from the working
of the Devil, and her or his consent with the Devil in evils. For so shall
Witchcraft be detested as Witchcraft, as it ought to be; and not only because
of the mischiefs which befall men thereby, as generally men imagine, which yet
are the Devils, and not the Witches practices, as shall in the book following
be more fully declared.

A GVIDE TO GRANDIVRIE MEN. The second Book.
CHAP. I. That there are Witches.
THough some have gone about to prove that there are no Witches: yet the
contrary tenent is undeniably true, that there are Witches.

1. From the laws that God himself has made against them: 1. Forbidding the
practice of Witchcraft, and that none amongst his should be Witches, Wizards,
Necromancers, and such like, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12. 2. Forbidding any to go to
them, Leuit. 19. and 20. Isa. 8.19. 3. His commandment to put Witches to
death, Exodus 22.18. If there were no Witches, what need these laws?

II. From the History of the Bible, which names to us certain Witches, as
the Sorcerers of Egypt, Exo. 7. Iannes and Iambres, 2. Tim. 3 8. Those in
Babylon, and Persia, Dan. 2. and 5.7. Isa. 47.12. Those amongst the Philistims,
Isa. 26. and among the Nations driven out before the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 18. 12,
13. So we read of other Witches which were of Balaam, Numb. 22. Ios. 13.22.
of Iezabel, 2. King. 9.22. of Manasses, 2. Chron. 33.6. of Simon Magus, Act.
8.9. and Elymas, Act. 13.1, 2. It makes mention of the practices of Witches.
Exodus 7.2. Chr. 33. 6. Isa. 47.9. Ezekiel. 21.21 Hest. 3.7. Thirdly, it speaks
of some going to them, 1. Sam. 28.7. and sending to them, Number. 22.5. Ios. 24.9.
Fourthly, It relates how some Kings put them to death. 1. Sam. 28.3, 9. and
cut them off, 2. King. 23.24. All this should be false, if there were no
Witches.

III. From comparisons and similies fetched from Witchcraft by Samuel, 1. Sam.
15. and by Isa. 29.4. which were absurd, if there were no such thing.

IV. From Saint Paul's mentioning Witchcraft amongst the works of the flesh,
Gal. 5.20.

V. From Gods threatening damnation upon Sorcerers, Reu. 21.8.

VI. Experience of the truth, both amongst our selves and in other Countries.

VII. The confession of infinite number of Witches condemned and executed.

VIII. The truth of Histories and many relations of their arraignements, and
conviction.

IX. The laws of nations both Heathen and Christian against them. It is idle
to spend time farther in so manifest a truth, therefore hereof, thus much
briefly.

CHAP. 2. What kind and sorts of persons they be, which are most apt to become
Witches.
WItchcraft being, as S. Paul says, amongst the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.
20. one may fall into this sin, as well as into any other, if God prevent it
not.

And albeit there be men Witches, as Balaam, and Elymas; and women Witches, as
the Witch of Endor; and of both these sexes, of all sorts, young, middle and
old age; of all which, instances may be given: yet of Witches there be
commonly more women then men: this is evident,

I. From Gods publishing his Law against Witches, Exo. 22.18. in the feminine
gender. Praestigiatricem ne sinito viuere.

II. From Saul's speech, when he said, Seek me out a woman that has a Familiar
spirit, 1. Sam. 28.7. 1. Chr. 10.13, 14. In naming a woman, and not a man, it
seems that women were more addicted thereunto then men.

III. From experience it is found true here, and in all countries, especially
of hurting Witches.

IV. From Stories, and relations, even from these in our own Kingdom: as of
the Witches in Lancashire; in one of their meetings, there were of nineteen or
twenty assembled, but two or three men. The Witches bewitching, the Earl of
Rutlands children, were women. Those of VVarby were women, and but one man.
Women exceed the men, and it may be for these reasons.

1. Satan his setting upon these rather then on men, since his unhappy onset
and prevailing with Eve.

2. Their more credulous nature, and apt to be misled and deceived.

3. For that they are commonly impatient, and more superstitious, and being
displeased, more malicious, and so more apt to bitter cursing, and far more
reuengefull, according to their power, then men, and so herein more fit
instruments of the Devil.

4. They are more tongueripe, and less able to hide what they know from
others, and therefore in this respect, are more ready to be teachers of
Witchcraft to others, and to leave it to children, servants, or to some others,
then men.

5. And lastly, because where they think they can command, they are more proud
in their rule, and more busy in setting such on work whom they may command,
then men. And therefore the Devil labors most to make them Witches: because
they, upon every light displeasure, will set him on work, which is that which
he desires. See instances in Bodin, in his Daemonomania. l. 2. cap. 3. p. 144.
150. and the Confession of Mother Demdike a Lancashire Witch: for he will ask
and press to be commanded: and if he be called upon, and not set on work, it
may cost the party his or her life: so displeased is he, if he be not set on
work, which women will be ready enough to do.

But whether they be men, or women, these sorts following are the aptest to be
the Devils Scholars herein.

I pass by the Infidels, Heathen people in former ages (from whom these
abominations mentioned in Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10, 11. came into Israel) as also Pagans,
and saluage Nations now, (amongst whom, by Travelers relations, Witchcraft is
rise) and I will speak only of such sorts as be called Christians, and these
be

The sottish ignorant, whose eyes are blinded by Satan, 2. Cor. 4.4. and are
led captive by him, 2. Cor. 2.26. This appears in those Witches, which
commonly are detected amongst us, ignorant, fillie sottish persons, most of
them.

The malicious spirits, impatient people, and full of revenge, having hearts
swollen with rancor, upon the least displeasure, being bitter banners, and
cursers, and threatening requital. This is manifest, by the nature, quality,
words and deeds of Witches convicted, who have showed themselves to be such,
and ever found to be so. To these may be added,

Astrologians, Of Astrol. See Delrio. l. 4. c. 3.4.1.
monthly Prognosticatours, Diuiners, Figurecasters, Fortune Tellers, Charmers,
Obseruers of times, of luckie and unlucky days: for all these are reckoned
up, where Witches, Wizards, Inchanters, and Sorcerers are forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18.
10, 11. Isa. 47.12, 13.

Of Iuglers and their tricks, See Scot. B. 13. cap. 23.24. 34.
Iuglers also and such legerdemaine companions, who strive to deceive the eyes,
and withal use speeches, as if they dealt with a familiar, saying, Hey Jack,
up aloft, Jack, Pass, and repasse, Jack, for thy Masters advantage. Though
they thus speak, to beguile people, and sometimes with a Moales skin
stuffed, or a Rats, by candlelight in a corner, fear simple fools, doing
that they do by actiuitie and nimblenesse of the hand. Yet for that they sport
with such resemblances, and utter words, as the inuocating of a spirit: the
reality whereof is called abomination before God, it may be just with God, to
give over such, (by Law, Rogues) into Satan's snares and deceits, to make them
his own in earnest, whose they would seem to be in sport, being lewd and
vain fellows, children of disobedience, as Saint Paul speaks. To these add
Tumblers, Gipsy, Rogues, and such like, apt to be made Satan's slaves in
Witche^^e, as they be otherwise his in impiety.

Such as profess to cure diseases, but by such means, as have no reason in
the work of nature to do the cure, not has by any ordinance of God from his
Word any such operation to heal the infirmity, and therefore such remedies
must be diabolical, and the practisers either Witches already, by their
implicit faith, or the next door to Witches: such be they, as use Spells,
Charms, and which cure a wound by anointing the instrument which made it, and
such like.

To these may be added, such as D. Cotta a Physician reckons up in a discourse
of his, Empericks, Quacksaluers, Ephemerides masters, wandering Chirurgions, and
such like.

Those that are given to curiosity, to seek after vain knowledge, in pride
of heart to go beyond others, to understand secrets, and hidden things, to
know things to come. Such as these, not bounding themselves within the limits
of reason, nor of Gods revealed will, fall foul at unawares upon the Devil,
and are in great danger to be intrapped by him, and by his inticements made his
slaves. Thus was Faustus taken, Bodiu. de Daemo. l. 3. cap. 3. Detrio lib. 6,
monit. 7, 8. page 1048, 1049.
so some Alchymisters catched, seeking for the Philosophers stone.

For curiosity of knowledge, if Reason and Art fail, will move men to seek
help of a spirit, who is ready at hand attending their call, and to draw them
into this pit of Magic, Sorcery and Witchcraft. A just plague for proud and
profane wits. Of this danger speaks one Master Cooper: Mystery of
Witchcraft, page 1^.
from which he and another by Gods preventing grace, was delivered.

Those that with insatiable greediness gape after worldly wealth, and
immeasurably thirst after Honors, as did Syluester the 2. Benedict 8. Alexander
6. Ioh. 20. and 21. who gave themselves to Magic and Witchcraft, See the
Pageant of Popes and Be^^^.
and so to the Devil, to come to be Popes.

Those that be superstitious and idolatrous, as all Papists be. That of these
very many the Devil works upon to make Witches, is not to be doubted: for
Sorcery is the practice of that Whore, the Romish Synagogue, Revel. 18.23.
Secondly, it is found true, that healing Witches do use many of their
superstitious Ceremonies, Lip-prayers, Aue-Maries, Creeds, and Pater-nosters by
set numbers. Thirdly, when Popery bear sway here, then Devils and Spirits
often appeared, and at that time were many more Witches then now. Fourthly,
they allow of Coniurers and diabolical Exorcismes. Witcherie tricks,
inventions of Satan. See the Boy of Bilson.
Fifthly, where that Jewish, heathenish, and heretical religion is, there still
are innumerable Witches. De Dae^^^. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Bodin relates, that one Trescalanus a notorious Witch, in Charles the 9.
days, having his life given to discover others, told the King that there were
in his Kingdom above 300000. Also the same Bodinu; tells us, that there had
been executed in Loraine, while one man Remingius was Governor there, nine
hundred Witches. Sixthly, and lastly, we may read in the Admirable History of
a Magician, set out by Papists, and dedicated to the Q. Regent of France, that
the Devil called Verrine, justified most of the superstitious and idolatrous
practices in that Church, (...) Innocation of Saints and Angels, with the rest:
Is it not likely then, that there the Devil can have power over the Professors
of that Religion, which he so well likes, and approves of? This is evident in
this something, that so many Priests, Religious men, and religious women of
their orders, have been found to be Witches, as Bodinns has lose recorded to
posterities in his Daemonomania. Thus we see the sorts, which principally may
be ensnared by Satan, to turn Witches.

CHAP. III. Before the Devil come to solicit to Witchcraft, he sindeth some
preparedness in such parties, to give him hope to prevail.
THe miserable man or woman which becomes a Witch, makes way for the Devil
to set upon them, to make them such. He goes thither, where he is either
sure, or well hops of entertainment, Mat. 12.44, 48. He therefore watches
the time when he may best offer his service unto them.

The preparedness (besides that which is common, as impenitencie, profaneness,
inconsionableness, and irrespect to the power of Religion) are distempered
passions, and violence of affections, vain curiosities, I company, through
which occasions he takes advantage, and works to have his will. As for
example:

When any fall into a passionate sorrow, In a discourse of Spirits, by
Sebastian Michaelis D. of Divine. a Friar.
accompanied with solitariness, for some loss, as did a woman for the death
of her child: in which sorrowful melancholy mood, the Devil offered himself
to comfort her. So at that time to others also in the time of a great death,
extremely pinched, and in desperate cases, he appeared, and at length won
the former woman, and these to become Witches: for which they were afterward
(being found out, confessing how they so became such) condemned, and executed.

When a man is impatient of poverty, and will needs be rich, even against Gods
providence, here is preparation for a Devil. Fox in Acts and Monuments. ^ol.
789. Iast edition.
As we may read of a young man thus affected, to whom the Devil offered
himself to supply his wants, and to fulfill his desire, if he would become
his; to which he yielded, and wrote a band with his own blood for the
ratification.

Master Roberts treatise of VVitchcraft, p2, 46.
When one is enraged with anger, plotting revenge, here is work for the
Devil: Thus he took hold of one Mary Smith of Lynne, and brought her to be a
Witch, and to make a league with him.

Trial of Witchcraft in Lancaster.
When one is familiar with such a^ are Witches: Thus one Alice Nutter, a rich
woman in Lancashire was seduced, and one Alison D^uire, and Anne C^^tto^, which
they confessed, and were executed for their murders and Witchcrafts.

When any are addicted to the reading and study of dangerous books, enticing
to the practice of hidden Mysteries of Magic, and Enchantments. Thus was
(...) G^^fred^, See the book of the life and death of Lewis Gaufredy.
a Priest, catched, and became a Witch, a very Devil incarness, in the height
of villainies for his pride and teacheries.

Thus by these, and other like means, which may be gathered from the
confessions of Witches, they prepare themselves for Satan's temptations to draw
them to Witchcraft.

CHAP. IV. Of Satan's appearing in some uisible shape, to those that he inticeth
to Witchcraft.
WHen the Devil has once perceived a man or woman's preparedness, Delrio,
lib. 2. q. 27 Sect 1. of Satan's appearing visibly.
he takes his sit time to discover himself, in some visible form to be
seen of them.

That he can take a shape, it is not to be doubted; For,

1. He appeared in a form like Samuel to Saul, 1. Sam. 28. And Divines do
think, that the servants that came so immediately one upon another, to bring
Job heavy tidings, were Devils, Job I. and it is held, that he appeared to
Christ visibly, Matthew. 4.

Zanch. de ^per. ib. 6. die. l. 4. cap. 16.
2. Histories make mention of his visible appearing, and such as do write de
spectris, de bonis and malis Angelis, affirm as much.

3. Witches generally confess it, as we may read in the relations of those
many in Lancashire, those in Northhampton and Bedfordshire, and in all other
places.

Now these appear not in one, but in variety of shapes and forms, as in the
shape of a Man, or Woman, or a Boy, of a brown and white Dog, of a Foale, of
a spotted Bitch, of a Hare, Moale, Cat, Kitling, Rat, dunne Chicken or Owl, of
a Toade, or Crab; of these have I read in the narrations of Witches, to which
more may be added; for no doubt he can, if God permit, take any form upon him,
for his advantage to deceive; though some write, that he cannot take the form
of a Dove, or Lamb. Delrio, lib. 2. q. 28 Sect.3.


We may in reading find, that he varyeth in his appearances, according to
the nature, quality and condition of the persons to whom he presents himself.
To base fordid* filthy, nasty and blockish, more beastlike then Christian
people, he comes in the baser forms and more abhorred shapes: to some of
them in the shape of Toads, as you have heard, to be loathed, even of nature it
self, if they had not lost it. But to a Faustus, in a religious persons habit,
to Gaufredy a Priest, one of some learning and wealth, he appears in some
humane shape, like a gallant fellow, and so unto others: for he fashioneth
himself so, as he knows to be best liked, to whom he comes to show
himself, to make them his.

CHAP. V. Of the league between the Devil and the Witch, with the sealing and
confirmation.
WHen the Devil has once appeared unto them, he leaves them not, till he
get them to make an express league with him. See the testimony of many, in
Detrio lib. 5. Sect. 16. page 659. l. 2. q. 4. pa 99.


This he procuteth of some, sometimes at the first coming, sometimes of
others, not before the second, or third coming; for all yield not so readily
to this alike: but howsoever; he is so importunate for this, that he at length
prevails withal to make them yield.

The league on the man or woman's part is, In Lavesshire, Bodin. l. 2. cap. 4.
to give their souls to him (which he most commonly asks, as Witches have
confessed) and to renounce God, as has been also acknowledged by Gaufredy and
others: sometimes the Devil asks not only the soul (as he asks it o^ the
sottish sort, which care not for it, so they may think their bodies safe) but
he also asks the whole person, and sometime his goods spiritual and
temporal, as the Devil dealt with Gaufredy, In his life and death.
as he plain^ly confessed before he was burnt, who gave himself body and
soul, and all to Lucifer. The Covenant on the Devils part, is his promise, to
help the poor to food, the sick to health, the ref^ll to be (...), the
curious to knowledge, the ambitious to honor, as he did the forenamed Popes,
and the satisfying of lust to the lecherous, as he did to Gaufredy, to whom the
devil gave a seedule signed by himself, comprehending the virtue and power of
his breath, to inflame any woman or maid with lust, if he could but breathe on
them.

This league is uttered either by word of mouth, of such as cannot write; or in
writing by others, and that by their own blood: so did Faustus also the young
m^n spoken of by Master Fox: so have others done (as Bodin relates) and have
subscribed the band with their own hands; Lib 2. cap. 4. in Co^f^^. Wuri.
thus many have confessed. And Bodinus delivers it for a most certain truth,
that such as exercise the Art of Witchcraft, of what kind so ever (if the
Devil have visibly appeared) do make an express league with Satan.

This league being thus made and sealed, he has a sacrifice offered unto him
of some, and of others some (as of their ordinary Witches) he desires to
suck blood: for he will have his Covenant sealed with blood one way or other.

He sucketh in diverse parts of the body, as on the crown of the head,
Lancashire Witch.
as the boys of Bradley, on the breasts under the paps, as Alison De^ices, on
the thighs, In Bedfordshire.
as Mother Suttons and Mary her daughters, under the right ear, In Lancashire.
as Ioane Willimots: under the left flank, as Hellen Greenes: the neck, as
Philip Flowers: in the secret parts, as Margaret Flowers: the chinne, as Mother
Samuels of Warboys. Warboy Witch.
Thus the devils choose their sucking places, as they please; which they do, as
some have confessed at the change, Ellen G^^^^.
or full of the Moon, or when they are set on work by the Witches.

Besides this sucking, they leave marks upon them, sometimes like a blue spot,
as it was on Alizon Device, or like a little teate, as it was on Mother Sutton
and her daughter, of Milton Milles in Bedfordshire.

These marks are not only, nor always in the sucking place, for the mark
was not on Mother Samuels chinne of Warboys, but they be often in other very
hidden places, as under the eyebrows, within the lips, under arme-pits, on
the right shoulders, thigh, flank, in the secret parts, Bodin. de Damon. l. 2.
cap. 4.
and seat.

Now after all these assurances made between them, that Satan may claim them
for his own, then comes he to be familiar with them. All have not one
familiar spirit, but some have more then others. Some indeed have but one, as
old Denob dike: some have two, as Chattox, Ionne Flower, Witches in
Northhamptonshire.
and Willimot: some three, as one Arthur Bill: some nine, as Mother Samuels of
Warboys.

To these they give names; such as I have read of are these: Mephastophilus,
Lucifer, Warboys Witch. Leices^^gshire. Lancashire Witches. In Gifford Dial. of
Witchcraft.
Little Lord, Fimodes, David, Inde, Little Robin, Smacke, Lightfoote, Non-such,
Lunch, Makeshift, Swart, Pluck, Blue, Catch, White, Callico, Hard name, Tibb,
Hiff, Ball, Puss, Rutterkin, Dick, Pretty, Griffet and Jack. And they meet
together to Christen the spirits (as they speak) when they give the spirit a
name.

By these familiar spirits they do what they do; these they ask counsel of,
they send abroad to (...) their desires, if God give leave, and they do verily
think, that they have these spirits at command, upon the making of this
damnable and most abominable league, to do whatsoever they please to serthem
about.

CHAP. VI. De^in. l. 5. Sect. 16. p. 650.
That such an express league is made with the Devil: why he inticeth his unto
it, and how it is possible, that any Christian should so be overtaken, to
yield thereunto.
THough some may question the truth of this compact, as if such a thing could
be gained at any man's hands that knows what a Devil is, even man's mortal
and irreconcilable enemy, yet is this a certain truth.

1. From variety of Scripture, in Psalm. 58.5. the words are to be read thus;
The mutterer joining societies cunningly: that is, the Witch with spirits.

2. From the Hebrew word, Chabor, an Inchanter, Deuteronomy.(...) 18.11. Isal. 47.9,
12. which signifies one joined to another in league and society.

Now what other can that be, with whom the Inchanter is in league, but the
Devil?

3. From the confession of Witches generally. (...) Martyri^.
Cyprian (whether the ancient Father or no, I am not certain; for some
affirm, some question it) confidently from his own knowledge auerreth is,
that all make the league, as he once did, when he practiced art Magic. The
story of Faustus confirms it, and all the relations of Witches with us, as
before is noted in the other Chapter.

4. And lastly, the marks found upon Witches, and also the bloody bonds
sometime, do strengthen the truth-hereof. For the young man's bond, of whom
Master Fox speaks, was thrown into the Assembly, gathered together in prayer
for his delivery from Satan.

Quest.
If any arc why Satan so labors for this Covenant?

Answ. See for Satan's imitation of God, the last Chapter in this Book.
I answer, It may be, I. To anger the Lord in imitating him, (as h^e labors to
do in all things) but yet therein to oppose him: for as God makes a Covenant
with his, so will the devil with his: as God has his sea^e of his Covenant,
so will the devil have his marks as God confirms his by blood, so will the
Devil have blood to ratify the Covenant, which he and his make.

2. To increase the sin of the Witches, to make them desperately wicked
without hope of mercy, when they shall remember how they have renounced God,
and (...) themselves to the devil, and thereby have provoked the just wra^h of
God to their utter dam^^tion, which is that which Satan herein labors for.

3. To make them hereby surely his own, without starting back, if possibly it
may be.

4. To beguile them the more cunningly, when hereby he makes them believe,
that as they are his, so now he is theirs, at every call to be commanded, and
to do what they would have him to do, according to their lusts.

This conceit pleases them greatly, by this they grow proud in heart, that
they have spirits at command to tell them things, to teach them cures, to
revenge their wrong, to work fear of themselves in others, to have in many
things their wills and desires; by these are they so fast tied, as they always
hold on this hellish trade, even to death, except the Lord prevent some with
his more special grace.

If any wonder how it may be possible, that any reasonable soul, endued with
any knowledge of God, and of the nature of a Devil, should thus be enthralled,
let him weigh these things:

1. That man has lost the image of God, in which he was created, and is wholly
polluted with sin and corruption.

1. Job. 3.10.
2. That hereby he is become of very near kin unto the Devil, even his own
babe.

Ioh. 8.44.
3. That being his child, he will do his fathers lusts, and that, no doubt, in
one thing as well as in another; for men love darkness more then the light;
John 3.19. Ephesians. 4.19.
yea and naturally are given to work all uncleanness, even with greediness,
so captiuated are they to their lusts.

4. That man given over to his unruly passions, is violent, inconsiderate, and
vehemently greedy to have his desired ends, by what means soever he can
attain them; which makes him seek means of the Devil, to become inioyer of
his inordinate desires, regarding more the having of his present will, then
respecting his future state after death: and is more taken up to obtain what
he likes for the body and outward estate in the world, then with care of his
spiritual condition and estate before God, which the natural man very little,
or nothing at all regards.

5. That Satan has his wyles, Ephesians. 11. his de^ices. 2. Cor. 2. 11. his depth
and policies, Reu. 2.24. his snares to catch people at unawares, 1. Tim. 3.7.
2. Tim. 2.26.

6. That hereupon he being thus furnished, he dare set upon any; yea, even
upon Christ himself, to follicite him, yea, and that to a most execrable
implety, even to have Christ to fall down and to worship him a Devil; Matthew. 4.
for he watches opportunities, he seeks occasions, and the least offered,
he espyeth, and quickly takes the same, and so prevails often, not only
with the rude and so^tish, but with the greatest spirits, and sharpest wits
sometimes.

7. That he has over mere natural men a ruling power, Ephesians. 2.2. who are
already in his snare, and at his own will are taken captive, 2. Tim. 2.26.

8. And lastly, that being given over of God unto Satan's temptation in this
kind, how can they resist? Man is weak, Satan is strong, and withal subtle
to beguile, they may easily therefore yield. All these things now considered,
it is no wonder to know man to be thus seduced, and thus by this league to
apostate so from God.

CHAP. VII. That besides the former express league, there is a secret league
made with Satan by some, and who they be.
IT is a general tenent of Divines, which write of this subject, that there is
a double league, the one open and expressly made with the Devil visibly
appearing, of which in the former Chapter: the other is close, secret, and
implicit, in a mutual consent, but without any expr^sse terms from either
the one or the other, as in the former.

With this league the Devil contenteth himself sometimes, to wit, there, where
he will perceives that the party will not be brought unto the other, which is
such a one, as he intends not to employ, otherwise then about seeming good
things: or such an one, as he is contented to let him or her to make an outward
show of Religion, to go to the Church, to hear the Word, and to be able to
talk thereof, as one that has written the Mystery of Witchcraft, M. Cooper,
his Mystery of Witchcraft.
has by his experience observed.

For its very probable, that Satan deals not altogether with all his now, as
he did once amongst the Heathen, and yet now does amongst Pagans; nor as he
did with the blind sots under Popery, or with some of the better learned in
that kingdom of darkness; nor as he does with some ignorant, silly, blockish
people amongst us, incapable of the knowledge of the Truth and power of
Religion: but that now, as he has taught his Grandsonnes, the Jesuits, to
refine Popery somewhat, and to hide from their Proselites in the entrance, the
grossness of their Idolatry, to make them swallow down Popery at the first
the more easily: so has Satan done in this Art of Witcherie.

Or, it may be this, as Christ allowed some, which openly as yet did not follow
him: to have power to cast out Devils in his name, Mar. 9.38, 39, 40. who were
not, as he said, against him, nor could lightly speak evil of him; so will
Satan have some also, which shall not openly be his followers, but yet shall
work by his power, and herein also imitate Christ.

If it be asked, Who these be, that thus are by a secret league workers by
Satan?

Answ.
I answer in some sort, by way of similitude, from the direction of that place
in Mat. 9.38 40. for Satan will be Gods Ape in all things whatsoever he can,
and therefore will be also imitate, Christ herein.

1. They are such as invoke the Devil, by certain superstitious forms of
words and prayers, believing that these means can effect what they have
offered them for, and do withal earnestly desire, to have them eff^ctuall.
Now the Devil hereto consents, and affords his power, at the utterance of
the words, to bring the thing to pass which is desired: Here therefore, is a
covenant and mutual consent on both sides.

Master Perkens his discourse of Witchcraft, chap. 2.
For if a man or woman be content to use superstitious forms of invocation for
help in time of need, and in using them, desires in heart to have the thing
effected, if the Devil work the feate, there is a secret compact: for they
have desired, and he has consented.

2. They are such as do know, that neither by Gods work in nature, nor by
God^ ordinances from his Word, the things they do, are warrantable, (but
rather hear such things forbidden,) and that they also are absurd to common
reason, Deuteronomy. 18. M. Roberts in his treatise of Witchcraft, p. 67. 72.
and yet will they do them, because they find an effect answerable to their
expectation; As for example, to use Spells, and Charms, which are plainly
forbidden by God, and against which many arguments are alleged by a learned
man. Hereto add that which before I have mentioned: The healing of a wound by
anointing the instrument which gave the wound, which Ke^kerman, both by reason
and divinity proves to be Witcherie, and shows that one Anselmus the Author
thereof, was a very Witch. Anselmus Parmensis. Delr^^, ^. 1. c. 4. p 24.30.
Many other Witchery tricks better to be concealed, the^ named, many use, by
which they suppose to find help.

For if the remedy be not natural, then it is supernatural; if
supernatural, then either from God, and so has warrant from his Word, and is
ordinary, not miraculous; for that work of God has ceased long since; or else
it is from the Devil, as the works wrought by Spells, For vain and
superstitious observations, see Debio, l. 3. p. 2. q 4. Sect. 2. p^g. 446. 457.
and Charms, superstitious prayers, and such like, forbidden by God, must
needs be.

Therefore such as do these things, are in a kind of league with the Devil,
though ignorantly they think otherwise; because they are pleased to lay aside
their reason, as men, to judge of a natural working, and their Religion as
Christian men, in that they will do such things, which neither in themselves,
nor by Gods ordinance, have any power to effect that which they go about to
work by them; but only by the devils power, who therefore is very well
contented, to satisfy herein, their desire, and so is there between them a
secret compact and league.

3. As those which in Christ's name cast out Devils, though they openly followed
not Christ, yet finding success in their attempts, were not against Christ,
nor likely could speak ill of his power, by reason of their secret and
implicit faith and Covenant with Christ: so these sorts of persons, finding
their practices succesfull, are not against Satan, nor can lightly speak ill
of his working power, because of the secret and implicit league they have with
him, and especially, because of the profit they find come to them thereby.

Quest.
Quest. It may be here asked, why Satan will not urge these, to make a more
open league?

Answ.
Answ. It may be, besides the former reasons noted before, that he rests
satisfied with this thought of them, that they are on his part, because they
are not against him; as also he is content to let them please themselves with
hope of Gods mercy, for that in thus doing, they suppose they sin not, nor
are in danger of the Devil, nor under Gods wrath, as the other are, because
they fall not so foully into the pit of destruction, by an express league, as
the other sort do.

CHAP. VIII. That there are such as be called good Witches, and how they ^^^y
be known.
AS in Gods Church there be good and bad; So in this kingdom of Satan, there
are good and bad Witches.

These good for white Witches are commonly called blessers, healers, cunning
wise men; or women (for there are of both sex^s) but of this kind, many men.

These have a spirit also, as one Ioane Willimor acknowledged, In the Discourse
of Wichcr^ft, against the E. of ^uil. children.
and are in league with the Devil, as well as the bad and black Witches be.

By their spirit they learn, who are bad Witches, and where they dwell, who
are stricken, forespoken, and bewitched, and by them they learn how those do,
whom they undertake to amend; for the spirit is sent unto their patients from
them; all which the foresaid Ione VVillimot acknowledged before Authority in
her examination.

The profession of these Witches is, for the most part, to heal and cure such
as be taken, blasted, stricken, forespoken, as they use to speak, and
bewitched: all which cures they do by their compact with the Devil.

But though these Witches be almost all healing Witches, and cannot do to man,
or beast any hurt, except they procure some other to do it, yet we may find,
that some of these sometimes have the double faculty, both to bless, and to
curse, to hurt, and to heal, as it is probable Balaam had, at the least in
Balaks imagination, Numb. 22.6. For he ascribes to him the power of blessing
and cursing, as had a famous Witch, one Hartley in Lancash^re, and a woman
Witch; of both which, Master Cooper in his Mystery of Witchcraft does make
mention. But, I say, for the most part, I find them curing Witches; some more
obscure, and some more notable then others, as was the Sorcerer Simon Magus,
who be witched the people so, Act. 8.
as they verily supposed that he did that he did, by the power of God. when
the Text tells us, that it was by Sorce^ie, and ^o by the power of the Devil.

Their reward is for their curing, what people commonly will give them; some
take more, some take but a little, often nothing, and some may not take
anything at all, as some have professed, that if they should take any thing
they could do no good; of such an one Bodin makes mention, which went ^ll in
patched and ragged clothes. Here also the Devil will imitate Christ, In
Damon^. lib. 3. cap. 2.
who said Freely ye receive, freely give.

The good Witches (untruly so called) may be sundry ways known.

I. From the quality of the party, one commonly very ignorant of religion,
Deuteronomy. 18.
an oberue^ of times, of good and bad days, of good and bad luck, very
superstitious in many things not enduring willingly such as ^care God, and such
as delight in his Word. They are also fantastically proud, as Simon Magus was,
who boasted much o^ ^imselfe, as these do of their gift and power; as those in
Spain, which call themselves Salutadorres.

II. By his or her unwillingness to confer, either with godly and learned
Divines, of their Faith and good prayers, by which they profess to do such
cures, or with godly and learned Physicians, about such ^edicines as they
prescribe to procure health: both which they avoid, lest their works of
darkness should come to light, and they be discovered to be Witches.

III. By their private and secret whisperings, mumblings and muttering^ with a
low voice, (...) was the manner of Witches to do in old time, Isa. 8.19. and
29.4.

IV. By professing to be able to help such as be bewitched and forespoken:
Bodin. in Them. l. 3. c. 1. etc. 20. P^^lo Iudeus.
for the supernatural work of the devil, as in case of be^itching, ca^^ot be
cured (as learned men affirm) by any natural means: this Witches have
confessed also, and therefore must be by a league between the Devil and the
Witch.

V. By the means which they do use to help such as come to them for help:
as See Del^io, Lab. 3. cap. ^. and ^.
By only touching the party: Bodinus gives instances, who thus cured the Ague
and Toothach. 2. By saying certain prayers, as Anne Baker did, Leicestershire
Witches.
and Ioane Willimot: which be Popish set prayers many of them; as so many
Creeds, B^di^,e 3. c..5
Aue-Maries and Pater-nosters, as a Witch confessed to me. 3. By Charms and
Spells, absurd, barbarous and ridiculous forms of words, and such like means,
which have no power from natural working, nor from the ordinance of God, and
therefore must needs be from the Devil.

VI. By the remedies which these prescribe unto others to do, to have help,
as Our late reverend Diocelan B. L^kes, worthy of eternal memory said, this
was a note of Witch if not a counte^feit.
one or two medicines for all diseases, impossible in nature to be a^aileable
in so great variety, and therefore do no good, and are prescribed only to
cover their diabolical practice and Witchery. So to prescribe medicines made
of such things, as are abhorring to nature, of which Bodin makes mention.
Bodin Daemo^o. lib ^. cap. 2. and 5. See Sc^t of Witchcraft, for Charms,
Amul^^, and other things, b. 12. c. 9.14 18. Delrio lib. ^. c. 4.9.3, 4 His
Treatise of Wi^cher. pa. 53.64.66 See Bodin. Demo. l.3. cap. ^^
To prescribe Charms, popish prayers, popish superstitions, and very
Witcheries themselves, as to hang Amulets about the neck, and certain pieces
of holy Scripture, to go and scratch the suspected, to burn some of his or
her hair, or some part of the beast bewitched, to prick a needle or bodkin
under the stool where the Witch sits, to make a Witch-cake of Bakers meal,
and the bewitched parties V^ine: see for this and some others the like
vanities, in Master Roberts practices, vnbesitting reasonable men, and ^ober
Christians.

VII. By their foreknowledge to tell who those be that come to them, why, and
for whom they come. Thus could the Witch of Endor tell, that he tha^ came
disguised, 2. Sam. 28.
was Saul. Thu^ could he that made the Witchcake, tell the party which came to
him to help his wife, of whom Master Roberts does write. That such are
Witches, Bodinus brings instances out of Flanders, Lib. 3. D^^mo. cap. 5.
Portugal, France. To tell also who are bewitched, and how, and who are
Witches, and where their mark is; these be Witches: for all these things they
know by their spirit, as Ioane Willimot the Leicestershire Witch did confess;
part hereof in her first, and part in her second examination, before several
Justices. For this foreknowledge Physicians have not by their Art, neither have
these ignorant persons this by divine inspiration, and therefore by compact
with the Devil.

VIII. By showing the suspected in a Glass, Giff^dia his try all of
Witchcraft, Fernel. l. 1 c. 11. ^^ abdit rer^^^ causas. Read Pater de L^^^^ de
spectris transl. by Zach. la^^, ^^. 12. pa. 12^.
as he that made the Witch-cake did, before mentioned, who showed the Witch
Mary Smith in a Glass. Fernelius speaks of such a Witch, whom he, as
himself says, saw. This is an undoubted mark of a Witch, as one Master
Edmunds of Cambridge told me, who was one that for a time professed to help
men to goods or money stolen, who was once by the heads of the University
questioned, as he confessed to me, when he had better learned Christ, and
given over his practice that way. He told me two things (besides many others,
in a whole afternoones discourse at Castlehiningham in Essex) never to be
forgotten. 1. That by his Art he could find out him that stole from another,
but not for himself. 2. That the ground of this Art was not so certa ine, but
that he might mistake, and so peradventure accuse an honest man, in stead of
the offender, and therefore gave it over, albeit he said he might have made
two hundred pound per annum of his skill.

IX. By pains and like torment coming upon this good Witch, which is upon the
bewitched. Conference I had once with a suspected healing Witch, a man
miserable poor, and of an horrid countenance, of whom I asking how he knew a
man or beast to be bewitched, he told me by two things. First, by his trouble
in saying his prayers for the bewitched, which then he could hardly remember,
and much ado he had to make an end of them; which prayers were so many Creeds,
so many Aue-Maries, so many Pater nosters. Secondly, by the pain which would
seize on himself as soon as he began his prayers, the very same which was
upon the bewitched. This skill he learned of a woman, which taught him a
secret, but what that ground of this Witchcraft was, that could I by no means
procure him to reveal. Some know who are bewitched, as before I showed, by
their spirit, and some by some Witchery means, of which Bodinus makes mention,
and of many vain people yet put in practice, Lib. 3. cap. 11.
when they suspect a party; for which they deserved to be punished, if they had
their desert.

X. Lastly, by requiring Faith of such as come unto them: Physicians expect it
not, neither dare any truly fearing God, rob thus God of his honor (who
curses such as trust in man) and yet these Witches profess, that they cannot
heal such as do not believe in them. Lib. 3. c. 1. and 2.
This Bodinus shows by examples three or four, whereof one Healer came to a
Bishop, and willed him to trust in him to cure him, and this was in the hearing
of Bodinus himself, there in the Chamber, and one Doctor Faber, a learned
Physician. Thus may these, falsely so named good Witches, be discovered.

CHAP. IX. That none ought to go to these Wizards, Witches, blessers, healers,
cunning men or women, for help.
Delrio li. 6. Sect. 1. q. 2. pa.. 936.
THat none ought to resort to these miscreants and cursed caitises, there be
plenty of reasons.

1. The Charge and Commandment of God, forbidding the same expressly, Leuit.
19. 31.

2. It is a spiritual defilement and Whoredom, for the Scripture faith, they
go a whoring, Leuit. 20.6. and are defiled by them, Leuit. 19.31.

3. It is a dealing with the Devil, and seeking of help from him, as Ahaziah
did: 2. Kin. 1.3. Bodin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
for you have heard by the confession of a Witch, that such have a Familiar,
and some have been known to invoke the Devil to cure another: And surely
their mumbled, and senseless prayers, what are they, but watch words between
the Devil and them? I knew one, that hearing a little boy greatly tormented in
the next room where he was, went out into a backside, and staying sometime
there, returned in again, but yet in a great sweat, the boy that had cried a
whole week, ceased presently his crying: the Wizard prescribed (if the child
telt pain again) a certain medicine of diverse herbs, which I had from the
man himself: but over the head, and before he began to prescribe the
medicine, these words must be written, as they were taken from his own mouth.
Onguint manera Iaiaanquintmanera, very senseless; but in these words were
hidden the power of the medicine, and were the watchword between the Devil
and him, to effect the work. Those therefore which go to these Wizards, seek
help of the Devil.

4 It is an heathenish practice, to seek to such, I^a. 19. 3. and 65.4. 2.
King. 17.17. Now we should not be like the abominable heathen, Ie 10.2.
in any evil, much less in these abominations.

5. They which seek unto them, are commonly wicked, and evil people, haunted
themselves by an evil spirit, who suggesteth this course into them, as he did
into Saul, 1. Sam. 28. yea, such as esteem of these, and think they work in
Gods name, and by his power, are bewitched in so thinking, Act 8.9, 11.

6. It is found true by daily experience, that those which most use them, most
need them: for these Witches either breed, or nourish devilish and
uncharitable conceits, in those that seek unto them: as that they dwell by ill
neighbors; that when any ill happens unto them, to theirs, or to their
Cartell, that they are blasted, taken with an ill planet, stricken, that some
ill thing went over them, that they are ouer-looked, forspoken, and bewitched
by some one or other, and therefore they must seek for help, and this must be
of them, or of such as be like them, Wizards and Witches. By which speeches,
and wicked counsel, they are continually kept on work in daily seeking to
them, when any, the vry least cross happens unto them, because they are ever
imagining VVitchcraft, and that the only remedy for help is, to seek unto
these.

7. Learned men of all sorts generally condemn this running to these Wizards:
Saint Augustine, Lib. 10. de ^^u^t Dei. In p^. 45. In hom. 7. ad Colossenses K.
James in Demon. l. 3. c. 5. In his treatise of witch. p. 61. 62. See all that
have written on the Com. Exodus Leuit. Deuteronomy.
Saint Busili and Saint Chrysostom. Hippocrates an heathen, calls those
Nebulones, which by Satannicall means, profess to cure diseases, and says,
(mark an Heathens words) That God which purges the most desperate evils, is
our deliverance. Some Schoolmen hold it to be an Apostasy, to seek and use
help of Witches: Aquinas, Bonanen. Albertus, Durand, Scot. b. 12. c. 18. and
b. 16. c. 3. Bodin. l. 3. c. 2. and 5.
cited by Bodin. Master Roberts cites the Laws of Emperors, and the decrees
against such. All the godly and learned Divines in our days do condemn the
same, the dead by writing, the living vina voce in their Sermons.

8. They often lose their labor, for sometimes the healer is but a Counterfeit
Witch, (worthy severe punishment for deluding people:) And though a Witch, yet
can he, or she do nothing, but by the Devils help, and he himself has
confessed to the VVitch, that he cannot cure that sometimes, which at the bad
Witches instigation he has inflicted. Again, Satan, though he has his
healers, yet must they live one by another: therefore he heals for one
VVitch, one or two diseases, for another more, not for one all, and this, as it
happens by their conditions, in the bargaine-making with the Devil, when
they enter into league with the Devil. Sometime this white VVitch cannot cure
the bewitched, without the consent of the bad VVitch, which caused it, or
(which is fearful to think upon,) till the same disease be put upon some
other, or that the Witch be bewitched to death, which has inflicted the
torment upon the diseased party. All these Bodinus notes, with examples cut
of Sprangerus an Inquisitour that examined, See in Scot, book 12 chap. 7. a
notable coozening trick of such a W^tch, to make her speech true in accusing an
honest woman, for a W^tch.
had the confessions, and put to death great numbers of Witches.

These Witches, to keep their credit, often deliver their medicines with an
I^: If it do no good, come again. When they r^turne and find that the Devil
has not removed the disease, or that God being displeased, will not let them;
then the VVizards blame them, that they came not in time, or they applied not
the means aright, or that they wanted faith to believe, or at least they
acknowledged their power not great enough, and therefore they advise them to
go to a more cunning man or woman, and so direct them unto another VVitch, or
Devil, for help, worse then themselves.

9. And lastly, Leuit. 20.6.
the Lord threatens to set his face against that soul, and to cut him off
from amongst his people, that seeks unto them.

Let these reasons dissuade us therefore, from helping our selves by such
detestable means so abhorred and hated of God.

CHAP. X. That many yet run unto these Witches, and their reasons which they
allege, answered.
THere is no action so bad, but if men either get, or save thereby, there will
be both the practice, and the approbation thereof, ever by some: so are men
captiuated to the care of a bodily safety, and preservation of an outward
estate in this life. So it happens in this case, of going unto, and seeking
help of Witches, who use such reasons as these, to countenance their going to
them.

I. Such surely work by God, because they use good prayers, and good words,
and often name God.

But to answer this, let them remember that the Devil himself can use good
words, Mar. 1.24. and 5.7. Act. 17. that he can counterfeit the habit and
words of an holy man Samuel, 1. Sam. 28. 13, 15, 17. that he can turn himself
into an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11. Therefore he can teach his servants to
feign holiness. As for their prayers, they are foolish, popish, superstitious,
if not all, most of them, and some of them learned of the Devil himself,
Bodin. l. 3. c. 5.
as some have confessed.

II. That they use ointments, herbs and medicines to cure the diseased.

I answer, These are but colorings to cover their Witcherie.

1. Because they use but one medicine, and the same commonly to cure many
diseases.

2. Because they cannot cure any disease, but that which is by cherie, and
therefore they say, that such persons, or that thing is bewitched, for which
the comers to them seek remedy, showing hereby what diseases they can cure.
Therefore natural medicines to cure supernatural diseases, are used only to
hide their Witchcraft, and sorceries.

III. That it may be, as some think, that they have a gift from God, this way
to do good.

Answ. There is no reasonable probability for this, for then God would not
condemn them, nor such as seek to them: neither would he suffer his servants
to be so afflicted, (as you have heard) in using his gifts; he would not so
ill reward his servants: and this conceit of being the power of God, was in the
bewitched Samaritans, who thought so ou r^well of Simon Magus, as these
Samari^an-like bewitched people do of these silly Ma-gooses.

IV. That they have endured great torment, and great losses of cattle, and
could not otherwise find help.

Job was in another manner tormented, and received far greater losses, yet he
depended upon God, patiently waited his leisure, resolved to trust in God,
though he should have dyed, and therefore was at length delivered. A woman
which had a disease twelve years, and had spent all she had, under the hands
of Physicians to be cured, but could not, but rather grew worse, yet she
resorted not to diabolical means (that we read of) though ordinary means
failed her, but waited Gods good time, and was miraculously delivered, Mar.
5.25. 29. So another woman had a spirit of ^^fi^mi^ie, and was bound by Satan
eighteen years; yet she would not (for any thing we know) use any ill means
for her help: for the Text says; She was a daughter of Abraham, Luke 13. 15,
16. and therefore was at the length also cured.

V. That many have gone to such, and found present remedy.

1. As some have found remedy, so other some have not, even by your own
testimony; so set one against the other. 2. The lawfulness of an action is not
to be judged by the success. Wicked men in ill ways prosper sometimes, to
the hardening of their heart in evil, and so is there a spiritual plague upon
them for their wickedness, which they do not consider of. 3. We have the
Apostles lesson. Romans 3.8.
We may not do evil, that good may come thereof: the going to them God
forbids, and therefore evil: and bodily ease will not excuse the sin before
God.

4. Let such consider what before is delivered, touching such as be helped,
whether they continue well, or whether a worse evil has not after befalne
them, or whether the like has not happened to some of theirs, or to some of
their cattle, or to some of their friends, as stories show, that so it has
happened, and so it may still fall out.

VI. That they have help from these at a little or no cost at all, whereas
Physic is very chargeable.

But let such consider, that physical means is of God, in the use whereof we
may pray for a blessing; whereas this is of the Devil, and the remedy with a
curse. We cannot, we may not pray to God to find remedy in seeking to the
Devil. It Is also a miserable sparing, to spare the purse, and to damn the
soul.

VII That these speak against bad Witches, and often discover them, and
therefore cannot they themselves be bad.

This is no good argument; for he may be bad enough himself, that speaks
against another, in some thing worse then himself. As for the discovery of a
bad Witch, you have heard by the testimony and conf^ssion of a Witch, that this
they do by the Devils telling: Therefore being in league with the Devil, they
are for all these pretexts to be detested, and their villainies before God to
be abhorred.

CHAP. XI. That there are bad Witches; and here of their profession, and
practice, and how many things must concur in bewitching any thing.
ALl Witches, in truth, are bad Witches, and none good; but thus we distingu^sh
them, after the vulgar speech: It is needless to make particular proof of
this sort: History, experience, and confession of such Witches are evidence
enough.

Of this sort are men, but very many women, younger, and older, but almost all
very miserably poor, the basest sort of people, both in birth and breeding,
most incapable of instruction, and cursedly negligent, and profanely
contemners of the saving knowledge generally, people they are of ill natures,
of a wicked disposition, and spitefully malicious against any with whom they
are displeased, eagerly pursuing to be revenged.

The profession of these is, by the Devils instigation, only to do hurt. To
do mischief is their common practice: ye^ some of them also (as with the
white Witch) the Devil dispenses with, The trial of Lancashire Witches.
to help, as well as to hurt, as the Lancashire Witch Chattox could by he own
confession: and that ol^ Mother Witch Dembdike, as other Witches at the Bar
con^^ssed of her. In the arraignment of the W^tche of Warboys In Daemono. l. 3.
c. 5.
So could John Samuel the Witch of Warboys bewitch and vnbewitch, as his wife
confessed: and examples of these Bodinus gives.

All these Witches have Devils and familiar spirits, as is ^uident by the
confession of a multitude of Witches; those in La^cashire, Leicestershire,
Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire; by others in France, Germany and other places;
so as this is a truth not to be doubted of.

These spirits appear in sundry shapes, yea the same spirit to the same party
in diverse forms, as Chattox Devil called Fancy, would be sometimes to her,
like a brown Dog, sometimes like a Man, and sometimes like a Bear, as she
confessed.

These spirits are received of one from another Witch, Discovery of Leicester
Witches.
as Ioane Willimot had a spirit by William Berry her Master, who received it by
his blowing into her mouth. This Ioane afterward helped Ellen Green to two
spirits. Many such instances may be brought.

But the Devil uncalled comes and offers himself to most, as he did to
Dembdik^, to James Device, to Lewis Gaufredy, and infinite others. Some call
for one by name, through the persuasion of another, as once a boy at Bradley
calling Bun, In Wiltshire
Bun, looking up to the thatch of the house, there leapt a Toade to him, which
went up to his crown, and sucked. Some Witch calls spiri^s to g^ue them to
others, when before they have drawn them to consent to have them, as the
forenamed Willimot did, called Pusse and Hiffe, and gave them to Ellen Green.
Some Witch teaches another to use some ceremony to have a spirit, as to go
to the Sacrament, and bring away the bread, and to give it to the next thing
which they should meet, as old Dembdike advised James Device to do: ^ancaster
Witch.
or to go about the Churchyard, and to kiss whatsoever they meet. By these,
and many other such like ways these common Witches come by their spirits: for
of other Magicians I speak not here.

By these damned spirits do these cursed caytiffes work all their malice and
mischief. For these they call, when they would do harm, as far as these
spirits have power to do hurt, and then bid them do this or that for them.
Thus James Device willed Dandy his spirit to go and kill Mistress Townley.
Elizabeth Device the Mother, called Ball, her brown dog, to kill John
Robinson. Chattox called for Fansy her dog, to go and byte one Moors Cow to
kill the same.

For these spirits can do great mischief, Delrio, l. 2. q. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
1^.
if God permit, many ways. They can work upon the mind of men and women to
stir up lusts and ill passions. Gaufredy had a spirit to st^rre up lust in
any he breathed upon. In his life and death.
Philip Flower had a spirit, Leic^s^er Wi^ch.
to make one Thomas Simson to love her: other instances Master Roberts does
give. In his Treatise of Witchcraft. Roberts page 57, 58.
They can make men and women mad and frantique, as Mary Smithes spirit did
Edmund Newton. They can annoy the body many ways; the relations of the trial
and arraignment of Witches, are full of variety herein. They can kill both man
and beast, Delrio, lib. 4. part 1. q. 3. sect. 2.3, 5.
and blast corn, and do many other evils and harms: needl^sse it is to take
up time with instancing particulars: they can bespot linen clothes with
pictures of Toads, Snakes, and other vermin; as the spirit of one Hellen
Ienkenson did a Buck of clothes of Mistress Moulshow, Northhamptonshire Witch.
because she had the day before helped to search the Witch, and found the mark
upon her. Thus they work by their spirits, and else by themselves can
effectuate nothing: neither can the spirits do any thing without Gods
permissio^.

For this we must know, Delrio, lib. 3. p. 1. q. 1. page 354.
that three things must concur in the bewitching of one man, or any other thing
whatsoever.

1. Before any of Gods creatures can be annoyed, he must give way and permit
the same: this all will grant, who acknowledge a divine power and providence of
God ruling and disposing of all things.

II. Then the operation of the Devil, according to the power of God
permitting, which he knows either before, as is clear in the story of Job,
Chap. 1. and 2. also by the relation touching the Witches, which bewitched the
E. of Rutlands children; where we may read, how Ioane Flower, called for, and
willed Rutterkinne her Cat, to go and mischief the Lady Katherine, and the
Cat cried Mew, and thereby showed the Witch, that she could not do her any
hurt. Or the spirit knows not before, but when he has gone and made trial,
and then finds his power limited, as we may read in the relation of the
Warbois Witches: how Mother Samuel sent two of her spirits against Master
Throgmorton and his wife, who making trial what they could do, returned, and
told her, That God would not suffer them to prevail.

III. Before the spirit work for any Witch (though he will go for himself,
and of himself, where he has no league with the Witch) yet to do for her or
him, he will not, without their consent and will, to make them guilty with
him. The Witch therefore must do something to set him on, as to call him, to
bid him go, to give him something before he go, as an old Witch gave him a
Cock: of which we may read in Master Giffords Dialogue of Witches. So they
send, but the Devil does the harm, and not they.

Nevertheless they are made guilty of these mischiefs. 1. Because they call
them and bid these spirits do such euls. 2. Because they speak, and do such
things as please the Devils, and which they desire and counsel to have done,
while they themselves go about and do the mischief, (which though the Devils
can do) yet will they not do it for them, without these watchwords, and
signs. 3. That they think verily, that they have given them power to do the
mischiefs, laid to their charge, and thereupon they confess, they hurt such
and such persons, or killed this or that man or beast. 4. Because they assume
to themselves, a kind of glory within themselves, when the people fear them,
and they have a joy in their hearts, that they can awe others so by such
thoughts of them. 5. And lastly* by the Covenant made with the Devil, they
think, that what he does, is done by their commanding power over them, and
that they must so do, because they will have them to do so.

For these reasons may the Devils deeds be imputed to them: and they may be
said to do, what the spirits do, though their own words and deeds have no
force in them of themselves, to effect their wills; albeit Satan makes them
believe otherwise: but herein are they notably deceived, as also when they
think themselves to have him at command to do their pleasures: for,

1. The spirit will do more sometimes, then the VVitch would have him. For
Agnes Samuel a VVitch of VVarboys, i^treated the spirit Blue* that Mistress
Ioane Throgmorton might not have any such extreme ^its: but she could not
prevail with him.

2. He will not undo that sometimes which the Witch wishes to be undone
again, Dod i^ l. 3. c. 2. p. 247.
as the Witches of VVarboise, all three, endeavored to vnwitch the Lady
Cromwell, but could not.

3. He will threa^en the Witch, and offer some violence unto her, if she will
not do what he would have her, as the spirit did old Dembdike, Lanc. Witches.
who shoued and pushed her into a ditch, because she would not go and help
Chattox the Witch (whom Dembdike could not abide) to make pictures. So Chattox
spirit threw her down, because when he appeared, she would not speak unto
him. Yea, In his book de Daemon^.
Bodinus tells us, that when one called his spirit, and then did not set him
on work, he presently killed him.

4. He will annoy them, as he did Mother Samuel, tormenting her in her body
grievously: Warboys Witches.
and as he did Chattox, taking her eyesight from her, yea, and would sometimes
come gaping upon her in the form of a Bear, with open mouth, as if he would
have worried her, as she confessed.

5. He will discover the Witches practices, and will endeavor to bring them to
their confusion and end: as the spirit told Master Throgmortons children in
their fits.

Roberts in his Treat. of Witchcraft, p. 79.
6. And lastly, he will fail them, and break promise with them, in their
greatest need; as he did a famous Witch in Hungary, after she was in prison,
where wanting food, did then eat her own flesh and perished.

Thus we may see, how little command they have over spirits, but as the
spirits lift, for their own advantage.

CHAP. XII. To know whether one be bewitched, and the signs thereof.
GOd permitting, and the Devil working at the Witches command, Delrio. l. 6.
c. 2. Sect. 2. q. 3. p. 969.
man or woman, beasts or other creatures may be bewitched.

Now, to know who are bewitched, what course better can be taken, then to
gather the signs from such as certainly have been known to have been
bewitched, and that by the confession of Witches arraigned and condemned for
the same: as,

When learned and skillful Physicions can find no distemper in the body, or any
probable reason of any natural cause of such grief, pangs, and violent
vexations, as the patient in the judgment of all the beholders does endure: as
Master Throgmortons child did, when neither Doctor Barrow, nor Master Butler,
learned Physicions, could yield any sound reason of; as to neeze loud and
thick, almost half an hour together, till blood come out of the nose and
mouth: to have a great swelling, and heauing in the belly, then a passing to
the throat ready to stop her breath, to make one speechless, and set the
teeth together, to shake sometimes the leg, sometimes the arm, sometimes the
head, as it were a fever or some running palsy, to thrust out ones arm so
stiff and straight, as not possible to bow it, and such like motions as befell
those children.

When some parts of a man, now fingers, now toes doerot, and no rules of Art,
or experience can do any good, but rather the worse, by the best means; or if
seeming in the Evening to be healing, Roberts his Treatise.
in the morning to be found to have gone backward, as it did with one John
Orkton, bewitched by one Mary Smith of Linne.

When a very healthy body on a sudden shall feel violent torture, pinching
at the heart, bereauing him of sense, and so distract the patient, as he or
she is ready to tear the hair of their head, as it befell one Elizabeth
Hancock, bewitched by the forenamed Mary Smith, Relation of Lancashire Witches.
or being in health, strong and traveling by the way, to be suddenly taken,
and to fall down lame, become speechless, lose the use of one side save the
eye, to have the head drawn awry, the face and countenance deformed, hammes
lame and turned out of course, feeling within prickings, as with Elsons and
Sickles, as did one Abraham Law, bewitched by one Alizon Device, meeting him by
the way.

When two or more in the same family, or dwelling asunder, one or more in one
town, and othersome in another, are taken in the like strange fits in most
things, as were Master Throgmortons children, the Lady Cromwell, who had
visited those children and burnt some hair of the suspected Witch: So was
Master Auery, In No^tha^ptonshire.
and his sister one Mistress Belcher, dwelling in several places: for such
violent strange fits cannot come upon natural causes, so suddenly alike to
diverse persons, in so several places, except some infectious disease should
happen among them, to take it one of another.

When the afflicted party, or parties in their fits, do tell truly many
things: some things past, as the elder daughter of Master Throgmorton did, who
told what the Witch had been doing. Some things in doing: as she told where
her uncle and others were in the Town: where the Witch was, and whither going,
what they said and did when they met her. These sisters could tell in their
fits, in what case and state one and another were, at the same instant, being
8.10. or 12 miles asunder, and also when the Witch fed her spirits, and what
she said unto them, as Mistress Ioane could tell some things to come, as in her
first fit, how many in that house should be bewitched, and named the number and
persons: Also the other (as well as this sister,) told what the Witch Agnes
Samuel would do, if M. Throg. would go and speak with her; they foretold
their fits in their fits, how many afterward, and how long they should hold
them: that Mother Samuel should willingly confess her fault, and the time
when. All these proved very true: yet these things are no effects of natural
diseases.

When one shall do many things, neeze, scritch, groan pitifully, start
fearfully, heave up the belly, bounce up with the body stran^ely, become
senseless, not hearing, seeing, or feeling: to speak also many things to
purpose, and yet out of the fit to know not any thing hereof: as it happened with
these children.

When there is strength supernatural, as that a very strong man shall not be
able to keep down a child of nine years old upon a bed. So it was with one
of Master Throgmortons.

When the diseased do vomit up crooked Pinnes, Iron, page l. 2. c. 8 221.
Coals, Brimstone, Nails, Needles, Lead, Wax, Hair, Straw, or some such
like things; such have been seen to have been vomited up: as Doctor Cotta
witnesses and produces the witnesses for the same, In his trial of Witches.
Delrio, lib. 3. par. 1. q. 4. sec. 6. pa. 410.
and those learned men.

When (with other things concurring, else this is no sure sign) any do see,
not in a fancy or dream, but visibly some apparition, and thereupon some
mischief to befall them: as it did to one Master Young of London, the
appearance of a Waterdogge to run over his bed; M. Roberts Treatise, page
57.59.
and at another time one clothed in russet, with a bush beard, speaking to
him. So also Toads and Crabs, crawling about his house, after which he was
tormented. In the discourse of Witches executed at Northhampton.
So Master Auerie, whom before I have mentioned, saw as he rode in his Coach
homeward a vision, and forthwith his Coach-horses fell down dead. One Master
Engersmen in Bedfordshire, driving a Cart of corn to Bedford, saw a great
black Sow grasing, which went along with them: at length the horses brake
their carriage, and ran away to Bedford: so at the returning back they saw
the same Sow, and had the like violent course of horses: the chief man,
afterward, by a stroke of a Beetle upon his breast, fell into a trance
suddenly, and was in his senses distracted, and continued for a long time in
ecstasies and grievous perplexity.

To these may be added what formerly is written of the signs of such as the
Devil tormenteth; for what he can do without the association of a Witch,
that can he do when he is willed by the Witch to do his work. And thus much
briefly for these signs of persons bewitched.

CHAP. XIII. What those things be which Witches do, by which they do set
their spirits on work to do mischief, and by which they are said to bewitch.
THough as you have heard, See Cotta, p. 89 90, 91. Delrio, lib. 3. par. 1. q.
1. pa. 354* q. 2. q. 3.
Witches do not the harm themselves, yet do they that which the spirit will
have them to do, before he will work the mischief. The truth of these
things appears in relations of Witches confessions.
He sets them on, puts into their hearts evil thoughts: he inflameth them
with rancor, yea and appears visibly speaking to them, counselling and urging
them to do this and that; before he does the hurt, they agree; and so the
Witch sends him, who is ready enough to go of himself, but he will not, in
cases of Witchcraft.

That which the Witches do, are a^ Watch-words and Signs, that the Devil may
know, as it were, when, where, and upon whom to do mischief. The means which
they use, are diverse, and many, by which (as we commonly speak) they bewitch
man, or beast.

M. Roberts, page 46.
By cursing and banning, and bitter imprecations: this is very usual with
such: and the Devil encourages them thereto, as he did one Mary Smith of
Linne, the effect whereof fell on John Orkton, whose fingers she wished might
rot off, when he was strong and well, and so they did, and his toes too
afterward.

By threatenings with curses: as Chattox the Lancashire Witch did one Hugh
Moore, Anne Nutter and others, who dyed thereupon.

By Charms and Spells, Lib. 2. cap. 1. Scot, b. 12. chapter 16 and 17. In the
summary before the admirable History of the Magician.
the words whereof being repeated, the Diu^ll will do hurt. Bodin mentions
how a maid could get no butter, when a boy repeated a verse, till he was made
to pronounce it backward again. By a Charm did Gaufredy bewitch one Louyse
Chapeau, into whom the Devil entered.

By certain forms of words like prayers, using the name of God and the Lord
Jesus, or the Virgin Mary, whom they call our Lady; seeming hereby to call upon
them for a blessing, they use these as a Watchword for their spirits, as when
they say, Here is a good horse, God save him, etc.

By praising and by words of commendations: Li. 2. cap. 4. Lib. 9. cap. 4.
this Bodinus confirms by many testimonies: and P. de Loyer de spectris, who
cites Au. Gellius his Noctes Atticae for the same: whereupon the Italians
hearing any to praise others very much, say, Di gratia no gli diate mal d'ochio.

Delrio, l. 3. par. 1. q. 4. sect. 1. In the story of the Earl of Rut^an^s
children.
By their looks, if with an intent to hurt: thus could one Gamaliel Greet do,
into whom whilst he was swearing, a spirit like a white Mouse entered, as Ioane
Willimot, the Leicestershire Witch confessed before authority. Lib. 2. cap. 4.
Bodinus also mentions this kind of hurting, and Virgil, in this verse,
Nescio quis oculis, teneros mihi fascinat Agnos.

Bod^n. l. 2. c. 8. In the book of his life and death.
By their breath, as a Witch in the Diocese of Constance, who blowing, infected
the whole body of a man with Leprosy: so did Gaufredy bewitch with his breath.

By touching with the hand or finger, as Ellen Green, one of the
Leicestershire Witches, touched one John Patshets wife and her child in the
Midwiues arms, and then sent her spirits to witch them to death. Confessed in
his examina^ion.
For the spirit Dandy said to the Lancashire Witch James Device, when he went
to one Duckworths house, Thou have touched him, and therefore have I power over
him. A Witch touched but the breasts of a woman that gave suck, and d^yed up
her milk: this Danaeus witnesses, In Dial. de Soruarijs.
Mary Sutton, a Bedfordshire Witch, did but touch the neck of one Mr Eng^rs
servants only with her finger, and he was presently after her departure
miserably vexed.

By making pictures of Wax and Clay of those which they would bewitch, Delrio,
l. 4. par. 1. q 4. Sect. 4. lib. 2.
and either roast them, or bury them, that as they consume, so will the parties;
a notable story hereof is in Boethius of one King Duffe, See Scot. b. 12. cha.
16.
a Scottish King, which is recorded fully in the Chron. of Scotland, The
Lancashire Witch Chattox, and some others were much exercised in this devilish
practice, as their confessions in their examinations do witness. Ioane Flower,
which bewitched the Earl of Rutlands children, would curse the Lo: Rosse, and
take feathers and blood and boil them together, using many devilish speeches
and gestures, as her daughter Philip confessed.

By tying of certain knots, as Saint Jerome testifies in vita Hilarionis.

By sacrifices, as Balaam attempted: and as a woman before-named did offer a
Cock, and another a Beetle (as Serres in the French Chronicle witnesses in
Henry the 4. days) or some the very paring of nails, or but a piece of a
girdle, as a spirit asked of the forenamed Ioane Flower.

By getting something of those whom they mean to bewitch: So the Witch Flower
got the right hand glove of the Lord Rosses, which she first rubbed on the
back of her spirit Rutterkin, then put it into hot boiling water, after
taking it out, pricking it often, and wished that the Lord Rosse might never
thrive. There was a Boy at Bradley, which a spirit in for^e of a Toade called
Bun; which spirit as he confessed, told him, that to kill a man's horse, which he
rode to the water, he must get the Owner to give him something, as Bread and
Cheese, Aust. in Ciu^t. D^^. l. 18.
or what else, before he could kill him.

By the Witches giving something, as enchanted powder, ointment, herbs, yea,
or apples, or strawberries, bread, cheese, drink: this has been found true
many times.

By these (and no doubt many other ways) they work to effect their wills, and
do bewitch others.

CHAP. XIV. Who they be that are most subject to be hurt by these bad Witches:
and of the remedies against Witchcraft.
See Master Cooper his Treatise of Witches. Lib. 2. cap. 1. sect. 4.
THough God may try his dearest children this way, yet it is very seldom, and
upon their goods rather then upon their bodies: yet sometimes it has been
found, that they have prevailed to the taking away of the life of some, who
have been reputed religious.

Such as usually and most commonly are plagued by them, are,

1. Carnal Gospellers, such as profess religion^, without the power of
religion, New^rals, Time-seruers, very worldlings, Libertines, Profane, Only
Outsides, Lukewarm Laodiceans, and such like.

II. Grossly superstitious, Ier. 10.2. For superstitious observations. See
Delrio, l. 3. par 2. q. 4. s. 3, 4. p. 447, 459.
heathenish obseruers of times, of good or bad luck, or unlucky days, being
dismayed at signs, as at the power of Planets: so when they stumble at first
going out at the doors, when they meet with a splay-footed woman, or a Hare
crossing them, when they put on 1. hose or shoo before another, as the left
before the right, their bleeding suddenly at the nose, their burning of their
ear or cheek, right or left, the falling of salt, the croaking of Ravens, the
chattering of Magpies, with a thousand of other heathenish observations.

III. Such as upon any manner of cross are easily led away to think
themselves bewitched: for we commonly find where people least suspect such,
there is the most freedom from such.

IV. Those that most fear them, whom they do suspect to be Witches, and for
fear do give something unto them. For such are often paid home for this their
fear of man, when (it may be) in their course of life, they fear neither God
nor Devil, bu^ live very licenciously.

The verity of these things will appear, by observing commonly such as be
bewitched and by considering what manner of persons they be for the most part.

Therefore to prevent the power of Devils, and whatsoever Witches can do, let
us labor,

1. To entertain and uphold the preaching of the Gospel. For where it
comes, down goes the power of Witchery, Act. 8. and 13. Histories tell us,
where the Gospel came amongst the Heathen, there this hellish power of Devils
and spirits, greatly diminished: Bodi^. l. 3. c. 1. p. 230.
as in Norway, and those other Northern coasts. And do we not see, that where
the Word is faithfully preached, and people obedient thereto, how these places
are, either not at all, or very rarely troubled with Witches? Where Popery and
profaneness is, with contempt of preaching, or vile neglect thereof, there
such miscreants are rife. Number. 23.23. In or against either reading.
For surely there is no Enchantment in Jacob, nor any Divination in Israel.

II. With outward means labor to bring forth fruits worthy the Gospel, and
amendment of life: for God hedgeth the virtuous man about, Job 1. so as Satan
cannot come at him, without very special license from God, and that only for
a trial: The Angels of God do also pitch their Tents about such, Psalm. 34.
yea, and have charge over them to keep them in their ways, Psalm. 91.11, 12.

III. To have holy and Religious duties in our families, to pray with them
rising up, and lying down, and to lift up our hearts in holy and heavenly
eiaculations in our going out, and in performing the duties of our particular
callings: For, Pray continually, says the Apostle, 1. These. 5. And Saint James
tells us, that the prayer of a righteous man avails much, Iam. 5.16.
if it be fervent. David did not only serve God openly in the Tabernacle, but
returned home, to bless his house, 2. Sam. 6.20. And Job every day sacrificed
to God, and sanctified his children and family, Chap. 1.5. And God gave to
Israel a Law to sanctify their houses.

IV. To go ever well armed against these rulers of darkness, Devils and
evil spirits, furnished with the heavenly furniture and spiritual weapons, of
which the Apostle speaks, Ephe. 6.14, 18.

V. Being thus qualified, and thus armed, to trust in God only, who will keep
thee under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 91. and fear no Witches, nor Devils;
knowing ever this, that they cannot do the very least harm to any of the
least creatures of God, without leave from him: no, not to enter into the Swine
of the very Gadarens. Therefore rest on him, and when any cross happens, say
with an holy subjection to his will, It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good, 2. Sam. 15.26. It is the Lord that gives, it is the Lord that takes
away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.21.

CHAP. XV.
Of the means which have been used by diverse to help themselves, when they
think they, or any thing they have is bewitched.

Of Charms and other detestable remedies used by vain people, see Scot. b.
12. chap. 21.
IT is a miserable thing to see the vanity of people in so clear light of Gods
Gospel, how they run yet, either to unlawful, or to weak and very
uncertain means, to relieve themselves in cases of suspected Witchcraft, as
these and such like; for I will recite only the most usual.

I. To run to a White Witch, and to seek help so from the Devil, and to
put in practice his or her tricks of witcherie (of which before) to drive away
a Devil, and to help the bewitched: an vgodly course as before is proved, and
accursed before God.

II. To beat the suspected, as Master Enger did Mary Sutton the Bedfordshire
witch, upon which, his servants were well; so one William Faireborne did bear
Anne Baker, the Leicestershire Witch, whereupon his son Thomas recovered and
amended. Sometimes such effects follow after, but we must remember,

1. That this is not ever so, as fell out with one Henry Mills, who had ill
nights after.

2. Except it be by the appointment of the Magistrate, it is against the Law
of man, and being a private revenge, is against the Law of God.

3. This then being evil, we may not do it, Romans 3.8.
that good may come thereof, its no means of Gods appointment.

4. The torment upon the party is by the Devil, which sometimes the Witch
cannot remove, if she would: the three Witches of Warboyse, would have
vnwitched the Lady Cromwell, but could not: if she do, it is by making a
prayer to him; of which Bodin gives a fearful example of a Witch, Li. 3. c.
5.
praying to the Devil, to cure one whom she had bewitched: And if the Devil
do cease to torment, it is because he would nourish this reuengeing practice
against both Gods Law, and against the Law of the land; we may not violently
iniure others, because they have hurt us.

III. To burn something of the Witches, which, what effect it may have to
heal the bewitched, I know not, nor upon what ground, either in natural
reason or in religion: but this I am sure of, that when the Lady Cromwell, made
some hair of Mother Samuels to be cut off, and her hairelace with it to be
burnt, the children of Master Throgmorton were not the better, and the Lady was
bewitched soon after, so as when Mother Samuel had tried her husband, and
after, her daughter to vnwitch her, they could not. For they may send their
spirits to do mischief, but it appears by this, that the Devil, except he
list, is not at their command to help and heal the party.

IV. To fetch the suspected, In the trial of the Witches at Northampton.
and to scratch him or her to get blood, as one Master Auery and his sister did
scratch two Witches, and drew blood of them at Northhampton, and presently
found ease: but this must we know,

1. That albeit they had a little ease, while the Witches were with them, yet
they were no sooner out of sight, but he and she were in their old fits, and
more vehemently tormented then before. This is then no certain remedy.

2. It is no lawful remedy, no more then beating the suspected. Violence upon
private motion, is a revenge, and we may not offer it to another, to ease our
selves.

3. This is a remedy which the Devils themselves have confessed to practice,
The Warbois Witches.
and which the Devil has strengthened some to be able to do: as you may read
in the Relation of Master Throgmortons children in four several places,
especially of one Mary, a little child, kneeling on her knees, The child but 9.
years old.
who scratched the young VVitch a big maid, whilst the child was in her fit,
and said that the spirit bade her do it; that the spirit willed her not to
pity the Witches crying, that the spirit held down the Witch to her, that it
forced her to scratch, stretching forth her arms, and straining her fingers,
whether she would or no, to do it. Is this a good and Christian remedy,
wherewith the Devil is so well pleased? Neither for all the scratching did the
children amend, but were again in their fits, and that often afterward. Yea I
have read, See Giff^rds discourse of Witches.
that a woman VVitch willed voluntarily one to scratch her to help him.

V. Some in the fits bring in the suspected, and make the same to Touch the
afflicted party.

This may be used, but yet no resting thereupon: for,

1. I have showed, that by touching they bewitch people: the sign is therefore
uncertain.

2. By the suspecteds presence, though sometime the afflicted has had ease, as
was proved in Master Throgmortons children often; yet in that relation we find
two things: First, that at Mother Samuels presence, when Mistress Jane
Throgmorton began her fits, she grew worse, and the rest fell into their fits
at another time, as soon as they saw her. Secondly, that the said Mother
Samuel, when she perceived afterward, that the children were the better for
her being with them, made a new composition with the Devil, that they should
be ill wen she was with them, and this the children in their fits revealed
openly. So that the Witches presence or absence is but a very uncertain
means, seeing that is of no force either way, but as they make their league
with the Devil: for there is no natural reason for it, nor divine ordinance.

There was another trial used very often by M. Trogmorton, to bring his
children out of their fits, which was this: to make the Witch to say, I charge
thee, thou devil, as I love thee, and have authority over thee, and am a
Witch, and guilty of this matter, that thou suffer this child to be well at
this present: and by and by the child should be well.

But here note, that the Story tells us, that one of the spirits was the
author and counselor to this, and told one of the children in her fit, that if
Agnes Samuel were made to speak these words, the child should for the present
be well. What warrant they had to take the Devils instruction, and to make her
use these words, so cursed and fearful, I leave to the judgment of the wise
and religious.

VI. Some go to them, and threaten the suspected, to carry them before
authority, to prosecute law against them, and to hang them; and thereupon some
have been well. L. 2. c. 1 and l. 2. c. 5.
Bodinus gives diverse instances hereof.

Roniglus in Daemonolatria, l. 3. c. 3.
This may be used: they may be threatened with the course of justice, to make
them fear.

But this is no certain remedy: for some Witches are so far from being hereby
moved to cease their Witcheries, as on the contrary they are the more provoked
to evil, as was Mary Smith of Linne, who being threatened by James Scot, that
he would hang her, if his wife had any such fits, as aforetime she had, did
soon after bewitch her again, and she was tormented as formerly she had been.

This and such other like means people do use for ease and help, but they are
either uncertain or unlawful. The best is Fasting and Prayer, True means. Of
Popish superst. remedies, see Delrio, l. 6. c. 2. S. 3. q. 3.
to remove a devil, as before has been delivered: for God only can free us
from Devils and Witches, and his means appointed must we only use, and therein
expect from him a blessing.

CHAP. XVI. That Witches may be discovered, though there be many difficulties
therein, and the causes thereof.
IT is not to be doubted, but that Witches may be detected; this is certain.

1. From God, in the giving of his Law against Witches, Exo. 22.18. Thou shall
not suffer a Witch to live. Which implies a discovery of them, or else it
could never be put in execution, and so should be a law to no purpose.

2. From History: First divine: for Saul found our Witches, and executed the
Law upon them, 1. Sam. 28. And so did good Josias, 2. Kin. 23.24. Secondly, we
have Chronicles and many relations made of the evident discourse of Witches.

3. How trials in our own country at many Assizes.

So as it is clear that Witches may be discovered, though it cannot be
denied, but that there are some difficulties therein, and that for these reasons:

I. Because of the secrecy of the grounds of Witchcraft so close and hidden, as
being one of the greatest works of darkness committed this day under the Sun.

II. For that from natural causes may arise very strange tortures, pangs and
torments, as if the afflicted were bewitched in the judgment of most ordinary
apprehensions.

III. Because of cunning counterfeits, who can so lively express the outward
and visible apparances of such as are bewitched, as if they were indeed really
possessed and bewitched.

IV. For that witnesses may feign their accusations, yea and confirm them by
oath to be true: of which we have a notable example of one Grace, or rather
graceless, Sowerbutts, enticed by a Priest or Jesuit called Tomson, alias
Southworth, In the trial of the Witches of Lancaster.
to accuse her own Grand mother, her Aunt, and another woman, all three
Protestants, of Witchery, and that she had by them been afflicted, and seen
them in their practices of Witchery, in the night, sometimes in one place, and
sometimes in another, naming when, where and how, and the ground of all this
was, because they would not become, forsooth, Roman Catholics: a bloody
practice, fit for a Romanist, and very unnatural.

V. Because of the strong imagination of such as suspect themselves to be
bewitched, which will make them think verily that they see strange
apparitions; and for fear will dream of the suspected, and so may cry out and
talk of him or her in their fearful dreams, the fantasy being oppressed.
And if the disease called the Mare, happen to such an one, then their sweating,
their moving, and struggling, with an imagination of one creeping upon them,
from the feet to their breast, (they awaking in fear and trembling) will make
them say and swear too, that they are bewitched.

VI. For that vain persons many times are the pursuers of the suspected, who
are so transported with rage and uncharitable desire of revenge, (they still
fearing some harm by them, except they can rid them out of the way) that they
will ouer-diligently gather matter to strengthen their suspicions: some out
from mere imagination; some from words and deeds taken in the worst sense;
some from the sight of some creature on a sudden, as a Cat, Weasell, Polcar, or
such like, late in the evening, where they saw not any before; some from idle
relations of superstitious neighbors; some from accidents happening upon others,
upon a suspected person, and (their falling out; and if the pursuers be of some
ability, to these shall be added the too confident auouching of some
flatterers, that such an one is a Witch, and all tending to further the rage of
the pursuer, to bring the suspected to his or her end.

VII. Because there may concur many seeming probabilities, which commonly mis
lead many for want of judgment, and for want of thoroughly weighing the weight
of them in such a case, taking such presumptions for sufficient proof, when
they are nothing so.

VIII. And lastly, for want of deep search into the subtilty of Satan, who (as
is proved) often works without any association, or league with the Witch: yea
(as is also before declared,) the diseases or death of men or beasts may be
merely natural, and no work of Satan therein at all, and yet even in these
things he has his mischievous devices, to make them to be cast upon some man
or woman, altogether innocent of the same and thus he does it.

He knows when his power is granted him of God to do hurt to man or beast,
also he knows the growing of a natural disease in man or beast: he knows
the ripening thereof, and at what time it will break out. Now mark, before
his own act, or that in nature break out, he stirs up some occasion to
make the party, man or woman, to be afflicted in their persons, or cattle, to
fall out with some angry neighbor, man or woman, either immediately, or some
small time before; that so this act of his own, or of nature may be imputed
unto that angry waspish-natured and shrewd-tongued neighbors, so come to be
reputed a Witch: which he having gained by two or three such pestilent
practices, he sets wicked people on to follow such an one to death, that
innocent blou^ may be shed, and many become guilty thereof, which he thirsts
after. A mischi^uous subtlety of all the wise-hearted Grand-Iury Gentlemen
seriously to be considered of. And this should make angry malicious natures,
such as be given to cursing, railing and bitter speeches, to be reformed, even
in this respect, lest God punish them, by giving them over unto this bloody
practice of Satan, to their shame and destruction.

For these reasons it happens, that it is an hard thing to discover the
practices of Witchcraft, without more diligen^ search, then is commonly used to
detect Witches.

CHAP. XVII. That there are some great presumptions of a Witch, for which he or
she may be brought before authority to be examined.
Of weak conjectures. De^io, l. 5. sect. 4.
I Will not here trouble my self to set down the many surmises of people that
such and such are Witches, because they be the vain co^ceits of the
addleheaded, of silly fools, or of ^rattling gossips, or of superstitiously
fearful, or of fansiefull Melancholicks, or of discomposed and crazed wits, as
a Divine speaks. But here I will set down such probabilities, as may justly
cause the suspected to be questioned, as these:

I. To be much given to cursing and imprecations, upon light occasion, and
withal to use threatenings to be revenged. And presently thereupon evil to
happen, and this not once, or twice, to one or two, but often, and to diverse
persons.

This is a great presumption (all these circumstances withal considered)
because Satan offers himself (as before is showed) unto such, and such means,
we find that Witches use to bewitch men and beasts; yet is this but a
presumption, for that many are so bitter spirited, that they will curse and
ban, and threaten revenge, and yet be no Witches. Also Satan is subtle, as is
noted in the former Chapter, to make use of Gods leave given to himself, and
of the working of natural diseases, which upon cursings break out, as is
caused thereby.

II. An implicit confession, when any come and accuse them, for vexing them,
hurting them, or their cattle; they shall hereupon say, You should have let me
alone then: as Anne Baker a Witch, said unto one Miles: or, I have not hurt you
yet, as Mother Samuel said to the Lady Cromwell, when she caused her hair to
be burnt: or to say to one, I will promise you that I will do you no hurt,
upon this or that condition, as others have said. These kind of speeches are
in manner of confession of their power of hurting, and yet but a presumption;
because such speeches have been, and are used upon diverse occasions, by others
which are no Witches.

III. The suspecteds diligent inquiry after the sick party, and an
ouer-inquisitiuenesse to know how such an one does, falling sick presently
upon his or her cursing and threatening, with the suspecteds coming to visit
him or her unsent for, especially after they be forbidden the house. Thus have
those done which have been found condemned for Witches: yet but a presumption,
because man's heart being reuengefull, and having cursed and threatened, and
hearing of some sudden mischance, is so taken up with a cursed joy, as makes
him or her thus to do, and yet by no league with the Devil. For Salomons words
may not only be applied to Witches, but even to all others, as an inbred evil
in man's heart, Rejoice not at the fall of thine enemy. And for coming being
forbidden, it is the impudency of some of the poorer sort, rude and
ill-mannered to do so, and to bring some small thing to curry favor again.

IV. The naming of the suspected in their fits, and also where they have been,
and what they have done here or there, as Master Throgmortons children could
do, Relation of Warboys Witches.
and that often, and ever found true. This is a great presumption; yet is this
but a presumption; because this is only the devils testimony, who can lie, and
that more often then speak truth. Mar. 1.25.
Christ would not allow his witness of him in a point most true: nor Saint
Paul in the due praises of him and Sylas. Act. 16.
His witness then may not be received, as sufficient in case of ones life. He
may accuse an innocent, as I showed before out of M. Edmunds giving over his
practice to find stolen goods. And Satan, we read, Job 1.
would accuse Job to God himself to be an hypocrite, and to be ready to be a
blasphemer. And he is called the Accuser of the Brethren. Revel. 12.
Albeit I cannot deny, but this has very often proved true: yet seeing the
devil is such an one, as you heard, Christian men should not take his
witness, to give in a verdict upon oath, and so swear that the D^u^ll has
therein spoken the truth. Be it far from good men to confirm any word of the
devil by oath, if it be not an evident truth, without the Devils testimony,
who in speaking the truth, has a lying inten^, and speaks some truths of
things done, which may be found to be so, that he may wrap with them some
pernicious lie, which cannot be tried to be true, but must rest upon his own
testimony to ensnare the blood of the innocent.

V. An apparition of the party suspected, whom the afflicted in their fits
seem to see. This is a great suspicion: for some bewitched have cried out,
seeing those who were suspected to be Witches, and called upon them by name, as
Mistress Belcher in Northamptonshire, of Ioane Vaughan, M. Engers man, or Mary
Sutton of Bedfordshire. So did M. Throgm. children upon Mother Samuel: P. de
Loyer de spectris.
yet this is but a presumption, though a strong one: because these apparitions
are wrought by the Devil, who can represent unto the fantasy such as the
parties use to fear, in which his representation, he may as well lie, as in
his other witness. For if the devil can represent the Witch a seeming Samuel,
1. Sam. 28.
saying, I see Gods ascending out of the earth, to beguile Saul; may we not
think he can represent a common ordinary person, man or woman unregenerate
(though no Witch) to the fantasy of vain persons, to deceive them and others,
that will give credit to the Devil?

VI. The common report of neighbors of all sorts, if withal the suspected be
of kin to a convicted Witch, as son, daughter, brother, sister, niece, or
nephew, or Grandchild, or a servant man or maid, or of familiar acquaintance
with such an one. This is a cause of suspicion: For common reports of near
neighbors of all sorts do arise out of some shows, and Witches are known to
endeavor to make others Witches, such as they daily converse with, as Mother
Samuel of Warboys did her daughter: old Dembdike the Lancashire Witch did her
granddaughter, and grandson, her daughter and a neighbor of hers; yet all
this is but a presumption; because a common report may arise, though not upon
no grounds, yet upon very weak grounds, being duly examined: and though
witches do labor to make others like themselves; yet we find, when Mothers
have been executed for witchery, some of their children have not only been
no Witcherly miscreants, but by Gods mercy, have become religious and zealous
Christians, of which I could give some instances.

VII. The testimony of a Wizard, the cunning man or woman; this may be a great
presumption: for who can better discover a Witch, then a witch? and many have
bin found such, whom the Wizard has accused to be Witches. But yet this is but
a presumption; because, if he be not a counterfeit (taking upon him to know
more then he does) but indeed a very Witch; yet is his testimony sometime the
testimony only of the di^ell, by whom he comes to know another to be a
Witch, and not upon his own knowledge; and though in this case he be found to
speak true sometimes, yet may he lie also, being instructed by the father of
lies.

But as concerning this Witness, if a Wizard happen to cast out of himself an
accusation against another without asking, it may be used for a presumption:
but none may go to such an one to ask his testimony, nor use his skill to
discover a Witch, no more then for this end, to go to the devil himself.

To use a sieue and a pair of sheeres, with certa^n words: To put something
under the threshold, where the suspected goes in, or under the stool where he
or she sits, and many such witchery tricks and illusions of Satan to be
detested.

To burn some clothes in which the sick party lies, for to torment the
Witch; to burn part of the creature in pain; to burn alive one, to save the
rest; and to make the Witch to come thither: These are execrable sacrifices
made to the devil, to be abhorred of all true Christians. Bodinus in Daemo. l.
3. c. 5.
The Romans in old time put to death such as by Magic would discover thieves,
to come by their goods stolen. Christians then should abhor these
abominations. Some think it lawful to try one suspected, by casting him or her
into the water, and bind their arms acrosse: and if they sink not, but do
swim, then to be judged Witches, as M. Enger tried upon Mary Sutton, In
Bedfordshire.
the first time bound as before, and then she swamme like a planke: then was
she sear^hed, and the mark found; and by counsel given him, she was the
second time cast into a Mill-damme very deep, thus bound; her right thumb to
her left toe, and her left thumb to her right toe, who sat upon the water,
and turned round like a wheel, as in a whirlepoole, yet they had her tied in a
rope, lest she should have sunk.

But Doctor Cotta does by many reasons, See also against this, Delrio, l. 4. c.
4. q. 5. Sec. 3. page 655. In his trial of Witches. cap. ^4. See M. Perkins
against this in his discourse of Witchcraft, cap. 7. Sect. 2.
dissuade from this trial, as not natural, nor according to reason in nature,
and therefore must come from some other power, but not of God: for that were a
miracle, which we are not now to expect from God, and therefore this strange
work is from the Devil. The objections made he answers fully. There needs
no miraculous means more to detect Witches, then other secret practices, and
it is an adulterous, and unbelieving generation to look for a sign: and what
is this but a presumptuous expectation of an extraordinary revelation from God
without warrant? Of other unlawful trials, see Delrio, lib. 4. c. 4. sect. 6.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the maine point to convict one of witchcraft, and the proofs
thereof.
TO convict any one of witchcraft, is to prove a league made with the Devil. In
this only act stands the very reality of a Witch; without which neither she
nor he (howsoever suspected, and great shows of probability concurring) are
not to be condemned for witches. Without this league, they be free, though the
Devil hurt men's bodies, kill their ca^tell, and that ill haps fall out, upon
his or her cursing.

This is the principal point to be enquired after in all enquiries; this must
be only aimed at; all presumptions must tend to prove this, and to discover
this league; without which, no word, no touching, no breathing, no giving nor
receiving, are of force to bewitch any.

If this be not proved, all the strange fits, apparitio^s, naming of the
suspected in trances, sudden falling down at the sight of the suspected, the
ease which some receive when the suspected are executed, be no good grounds
for to find them guilty of witchcraft, and to hang them.

This league therefore, though never so secretly made, is to be discovered;
seeing it is that only which makes a Witch, and by which all is done, which
justly can be laid to her or his charge.

Now, they that make this league, have a Familiar spirit. For this is true, as
soon as the league is made, the spirit, one or more, is familiar with them, as
before is proved. This was proof sufficient of a Witch in Saul's, and Josias
time. 1. Sam. 28. 2. Kin. 23.24.
Tthen Witches were known to have familiar spirits: and such have they now, by
which, after the league made, they work all their mischiefs.

Now the Witch thus in league and familiarity with the Devil, is convicted by
these Evidences:

Lib. de Cor^. milit. and Bapt. See Bodin. De Michaelis his desc. of Spirits.
Annot. Perkins and others. Delrio, lib. 1. p. 130. l. 2. p. 198.
1. By a Witches mark, which is upon these baser sort of witches, and this by
sucking, or otherwise by the Devils touching, experience proves the truth of
this, and innumerable instances are brought for examples. Tertullian found this
true, and says, It is the Devils custom to mark his: God has his mark for
his, Ezekiel. 9. Reu. 7. and 14. The Beast will have his mark, Re. 13. (who is
the Devils Lieutenant) so the Devil himself will have his mark: see the
relations of Witches, and the witness of many learned me^, writing of Witches
and witchcraft. Therefore where this mark is, there is a league and a familiar
spirit.

Search diligently therefore for it in every place, and lest one be deceived
by a natural mark, note this, from that. This is insensible, and being
pricked will not bleed. When the mark therefore is found, try it, but so as
the Witch perceive it not, seeming as not to have found it, and then let one
prick in some other places, and another in the mean space there: its sometimes
like a little teate, sometimes but a bluish spot, sometimes red spots like a
fleabiting, See the life and death of Lewis Gau^ridus.
sometimes the flesh is sunk in and hollow, as a famous witch confessed, who
also said, that Witches cover the^, and some have confessed, that they have bin
taken away; but, says that VVitch, they grow again, and come to their old
form. And therefore, though this mark be not found at first, yet it may at
length: once searching therefore must not serve: for some out of fear, some
other for favor, make a negligent search. It is fit therefore searchers should
be sworn to search, and search very diligently, in such a case of life and
death, and for the detection of so great an height of imp^ety.

II. By Witches words: as when she or he has been heard to call upon their
spirits, or to speak to them, or to talk of them to any, enticing them to
receive such Familiars, offering one, and counselling to do something to get
one. Also, when they have been heard telling of the killing of some man or
beast, or of the hurting of them, or when they have not only threatened revenge
upon any, or their cattle, but have foretold particularly what shall happen to
such an one, and the same sound true, and their boasting afterward thereof.
Furthermore, if they have been heard to speak of their transportation from
home to certain places of their meetings with others there, Bod^n. his
Daemon^. Detrio, lib. 2. q. 16. de d^sq. magicae.
of which transportations stories make mention: and also the relations of the
Lancashire Witches meeting at Malkin Tower, some 20. together, and were carried
by spirits in l^kenesse of Foales, as those Witches confested.

These speeches are to be inquired after, and who can witness them: for they
prove the league and familiarity with the devil.

III. By the Witches deeds, as when any have seen them with their spirits, or
seen to feed some creatures secretly, or where the Witch has put such, with
the smell of the place, which (as very learned men do auo^c^, and is found
true by experi^nce) w^ll stink detestably. A^^o, when it can be found, that
they have made Pictures (as the Lancashi^^ Witches did) hellish compositions,
Delrio, in disq. mag. li. 2. ^ar. ^. q. 4. s. 4.
or any such Witchery Arts, as is before mentioned, cha. 13. Moreover when they
give any thing to any man, or other creature, which immediately causes either
pains, or death.

IV. By the Witches ecstasies, which some of them have been found in, of which
Peter de Loyer, Cap. 1^.
in his book de spectris. gives lively instances, with which the delight
hereof Witches are so taken, as they will hardly conceal the same, but will
tell it to one or other; and if they do not, it cannot be, but at one time or
other they will be found therein.

V. By some one or more fellow Witches, confessing their own witchcraft, and
bearing witness against others, so as they can make good the truth of their
witness, and give sufficient proof thereof: as that they have seen them with
their spirits, or that they have received spirits from them; that they can
tell, when they used Witcherie tricks to do harm; or that they told to do
harm; or that they had done; or that they can show the mark upon them; or
that they have bin together in their meetings, and such like, as the Lancashire
Witches gave testimony one against another of these things.

VI. By some witness of God himself, happening upon the execrable curses of
Witches upon themselves, praying God to show some token, if they be guilty, as
fell upon Mother Samuel the Warboys Witch, who by bitter curses upon her self,
seeking to clear her self, wishing some sign to be showed, if she were
guilty, presently her chinne did bleed, the very place where her spirits did
suck, as afterward sh^e confested. So one I^nn^t Pr^st^ a York^h^re (...) was
brought to the (...) one M. Lister bewitched by her to death, which she no
sooner did touch, but the corpse bled fresh blood. Such an evidence sometimes,
though not always, is given from God, when he is so pleased to detect such
malefactors guilty of blood.

VII. By the Witches own confession of giving their souls to the devil, and
of the spirits which they have, and how they came by them.

If any think that it is almost impossible to make Witches confess^ thus much,
they are deceived; for I find by Histories exceeding many to have confessed,
and in our own Relations of arraigned and condemned Witches, wherein I find
how a Witch has confessed the fact, to the afflicted, being brought unto him,
and charged with bewitching him: as Alizon Device did to John Law. So to the
afflicted friends, as did Mother Samuel to M. Throgmorton. Some to Justices,
when they were examined, as did the Lancashire and Rutland Witches. Some to the
Judges so freely, as made the Judges and the Justices to admire thereat, as
they did at Lancaster. Some in terror of conscience, truly apprehending the
fearfulness of their league made, as did one Magdalen a French Gentlewoman,
seduced by Lewis Gaufredy, who also himself at length made a large con^ession
before his death.

We see therefore, that Witches may be brought to confess their Witchcraft.
And thus much for the sound evidences, more then presumptions, upon which they
may be found guilty, and justly be condemned, and put to death.

CHAP. XIX. Of the manner of examining Witches.
THere is required great diligence, wisdom and circumspection in the
examination of a Witch. It were fit and necessary for such as be in
authority, and have Witches brought before them, that they should be men, in
some sort, well seen in treatises of witchcraft, to know how to proceed
understandingly in detecting them, and ^o be able to judge when the witnesses
speak to the point.

That which the witnesses speak in this case, may be reduced to three heads.

1. To weak conjectures, which are commonly alleged by the weaker sort,
arising out of their own imaginations, or idle speeches of some others. All of
this kind the wise examiner may draw together, to make so of all, perhaps, a
presumption; and in hearing the suspected par^ies answer to these, may collect
matter of more weight.

2. To strong presumptions, such as are before set down, cha. 17. which are
much to be insisted upon

3. To suffi^ient proofs, o^ which in the former Chap. last before.

The proof of the first, if no further presumptions can be made, may cause a
watchful ^y^ over the suspected, and do deserve a sharp admonition (...)
authority, that the party take heed for increase justly of any (...) though
light suspicions, for the time to come, and so to sen^ her or him home again,
if the Law will permit.

The second sort, which ar^ great presumptions, being justified by some
witnesses, are just cause of the suspecteds imprisonment, and are worthy, after
trial at the bar (though not of death) yet of very severe punishment for the
same, such as the wisdom of the Judge, and the laws will allow of.

But good evidence for the third, makes the party or parties justly guilty of
death, and they ought to dye for the same.

Now, concerning the parties to be examined, they are many and in this order to
be brought in, and that apart, and not in the hearing one of another.

1. Is the afflicted party, if he o^ she can come to give testimony. This party
is to be questioned in these things:

1. How, when and where, and upon what occasion the pain hap^ed to him or her?
2. How they be in their fits? what understanding or memory they retain, and
with what apparitions their minds be troubled? 3. How the fit ends, and how
they be aft^r the same? By th^se may be gathered the natural or supernatural
quality of the disease. 4. Whether they have had the judgment of some learned
and judicious Physician, touching the nature of the disease? 5. Why they should
think the disease to come by Witchcraft, and not rather, either to be a
natural disease, or Satan's work, through Gods permission, without any league
with a Witch? 6. and lastly, who it is they do^ suspect, and upon what good
grounds?

II. Are the friends, father, mother, brethren, sisters and such as are near,
and daily attend the affl^cted in their fits?

1. The same questions may be demanded of these also. 2. They are to be
questioned in the presump^^o^s very thoroughly, as they be, in chap. 17. Lastly,
whether any search has been made, to find the mark? If they have searched
and found any, then how they know it from a natural mark? If search have not
been made, then to command some fittest for the purpose, to make diligent
search.

3. Are indifferent neighbors. But some are fearful, superstitious, or
children, or old silly persons, whose testimonies are to be heard, but not
easily credited, as being persons in such a case as this is, very much subject
to mistaking. See P. de Loyer in lib. de spectri^, his many reasons hereof.
Other neighbors, such as be of understanding, well advised and conscionable,
are to be questioned, and their testimonies regarded.

In questioning of these, it is to be demanded, 1. Whether they have seen the
party or parties in their fits, and how often? 2. What the life and course of
such has been? 3. What they think of the disease, whether natural, or by the
devil, or whether the party does not counterfeit, and their reasons every way?
4. What they think of the suspected party, his or her life and conversation? 5.
If they suspect any, then upon what grounds? And here inquire of them the
presumptious, and the more evident proofs.

4. Are suspected adversaries, either to the afflicted, or to the suspected
Witch. Though ill will, we say, never speaks well, as being willing wilfully to
mistake: yet is ill will desirous to find matter, and will pry very narrowly
into every thing, to discover what they desire to find. Therefore though it
be wisdom to suspect ill will, yet may some things be found out by them,
which otherwise may be mistaken, or lie hid.

Inquiry may be made of these: 1. Touching the afflicted person, what his
conversation is; and whether there be any probability of counterfeiting? Then
concerning the suspected, what he or she is, and why thought to be Witches?

5. The Physician, if use have been made of him. It is very necessary to have
his judgment in this case, to know whether the disease be natural, as he
upon mature deliberation, and diligent search has found it? or whether there
be any counterfeiting herein? or if the disease be not natural, yet whether
Satan may not mix with it his supernatural power, beyond the force of the
disease? These are for Physicians to judge: And therefore it is very requisite
to have the advice of some judicious Physicia^ herein.

6. The report of a White or good Witch, as the people call him or her. This
Witch must be brought before Authority, and it must be demanded of him or her,
1. What they have reported of the suspected party? 2. Upon what grounds they
have thus accused the said party? for such an one may know the other to be a
witch, one of these two ways: 1. Either upon some inward acquaintance; and so
either by sight has observed, or by conference has learned so much from the
suspected, or 2 By his own familiar spirits, as before I have showed by
example in chap. 8. in one Ioane Willimot.

Now, if such an one be a Witch indeed; he or she can discover the other,
and can tell where their mark is, what be their practices of Witchcraft, and
so is able to convince the other of the crime. Therefore such a witness in
these things must be diligently examined. And if he or she cannot bring
sufficient proof to make the accusation good, such an one deserves severe
punishing, for their speeches against the suspected.

VII. Are the suspected Witches whole family able and fit to answer, and to
give evidence, also such as be known to have had inward familiarity with the
suspected? These upon the parties present apprehension, are to be brought
before Authority also, and forthwith, upon their attaching, to be kept asunder
from the suspected, and one from conferring with another, except it be openly
heard what they say: for these of all other are most likely to be able to
detect the suspected, in his or her secret sayings, or doings. At their
apprehension, then also to search the house diligently, for pictures, or
powders, bones, knots, po^s, or places where their spirits may be kept,
ointments, and for hair cut, books of Witchcraft, or charms, and such like.

These are to be examined, 1. of the suspecteds cursings and threatenings. 2. Of
his or her much inquiry after the afflicted party, how he does; and when he or
she began to be so inquisitiue; as whether, upon some present falling out, and
after his or her cursing and threats? 3. In hearing the party to be il,
whether he or she boast any thing, or rejoiced thereupon, with the reasons
thereof? After the examination of these presumptions, then to inquire further:

1. Whether they have seen him or her call upon any spirit, or to speak of it
to them, or to have seen them feeding them, or found any secret place to be
suspected, and giving forth a noisome and stinking smell?

2. Whether they have heard the suspected to foretell of mishaps to befall any,
or heard them speak of their power to hurt this or that, or of their
transportation, to this or that place, or of their meetings in the night there?
or known them to have used charms or spells?

3. Whether they have seen them with any other suspected of Witchcraft, and to
have secretly received any thing from them, and what it was? To have made any
pictures? or to have used any other tricks of Witchcrafts? See Delrio, l. 5. s.
3. p. 711.

4. Whether they have desired to have something belonging to the afflicted,
before the same party were afflicted? or whether the suspected he or she did
get any thing, to send or to carry to the foresaid afflicted, and what fell out
thereupon? and what the suspected did at his or her return;

5. Whether they ever found the suspected in any ecstasy or trance, when and
where? and what he or she has told them thereupon afterward?

6. What he or she has been heard to say or do upon the afflicted? his or her
crying out of the said suspected in the fits or trances; and of his after
accusing the suspected out of the fits? whether before hearing they should be
apprehended, fear of death surprised him or her, and being apprehended, if he
or she sought to get out of the way?

Now, while these sorts are in examining, it were very good, in the mean
space, to have a godly and learned Divine, and somewhat well read in the
discourses of Witchcraft and impieties thereof, to be instructing the
suspected, of the points of salvation, of the damnable cursednesse of
Witchcraft, and his or her fearful state of death eternal, if guilty and not
repentant. That thus by Gods blessing, in the Ministers instruction, and his
earnest praying for a blessing before he begin, the suspected may be happily
prepared to confession before Authority, when he or she is examined.

VIII. After all the rest, is the suspected to be examined, but alone also at
the first, from the hearing of all the other witnesses, or examinates.

The examination of this must be according to the answers of the others, and
their proofs and reasons, and that in the order as they were examined, and to
make this suspected to answer distinctly to every oftheir testimonies against
him or her.

In thus orderly examining him or her suspected to mark his or her downe-cast
looks, Delrio, l. 5. Sect. 4.723.
fear, doubtful answers, varying speeches, contradictions, cunning euasions,
their lying, or defending of this or that speech and deed, or excusing the
same. Also to observe, if any words fall from him or her, tending to some
confession, as to say, If you will be good unto me, I will tell you, etc.

And whether he or she can be brought to shead tears, Delrio, lib. 5. Sect.
4.726, number. 25.
or no: for it is avouched by learned men, upon experience in many trials of
Witches, that a Witch indeed, will hardly or never shead a tear, except God
work the grace of true repentance, which will appear by a free confession.

If after this examination alone, he or she will not confess, then to bring
the witnesses, one by one, to his or her face, to just fie their former
testimonies; and to hear his or her answers again, and to mark how they
either agree or disagree from the former.

If n^ne of these will work to bring them to confess, then such as have
authority to examine, should begin to use sharp speeches, and to threaten with
imprisonment and death. And if the presumptions be strong, Delrio, l. 5. Sect.
7. p. 735.
then if the Law will permit (as it does in other countries in this case) to
use torture, or to make a show thereof at least, to make them confess, as many
have done hereupon in other Countries.

But this extremity shall not need, if thus an examination be made, as it
ought to be, and withal, that prayer be made to God for a blessing in
proceeding thereto; as once in France, upon the examination of that grand Witch
Lewis Gaufredy, See his life and death.
before noble Commissioners? One o^ these being (as the story says) zealously
affected, when he perceived how cunningly the Witch by his answers soug^t to
blind the eye of Justice, and that they could not catch him; he entreated the
rest to pray with him; which having been done with one accord, the wretch in
his answers was so confounded, as he was taken in his own words, and so by Gods
hand, being thereto enforced, he fell to a full confession of his fearful
Apostasy from God; and so was condemned and burnt alive, as Witches be there.

CHAP. XX. The holy Scriptures do condemn all sorts of Witches.
THe distinctions of Witches into good and bad, is only according to the use of
speech amongst the people: for Witches are all bad, and condemned by God, not
only for that they do hurt, but because they are Witches.

Yea such Witches God does condemn, as abomination to him and to be rooted
out, as men of all sorts both heretofore, and yet now too many, are over
favorable unto: this is clear and manifest many ways: as

1. By the words of the Law, where it is said, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live: as if it had bine said, If thou shall find one that is a Witch: though
such an one as thou could be contented to wink at, and to pass by (as
people now do such as be called with us, good Witches) yet shall thou not
suffer him or her to live; no more then a bad Witch: If a Witch, then ought he
or she to die for the same.

II. By the examples of all recorded in the Scriptures, whom we find to be such
kind of Witches, as got credit and estimation, love and liking (as good Witches
do, and not as the bad, hatred and ill will) with Potentates and great persons
in the world, as did the M^gicians and Sorcerers with Pharaoh, Exo 7. and 8.
Isa. 47 12. Ez^k ^2.21. Dan 3.7.
with Nab^chadnezar and B^lthazzar. As did (...) Simon Magus with (...) who was
held to be the great power of God, Act. 8. likewise Elymas was with Sergius
Paulus, and the Pythonisse with her masters, Act. 1^.
Act. 16.

Such they were, as by great persons were sent for, as those in Egypt and
Caldea. Such as they would make use of, as Balak did of Balaam, Number 22. 2 King.
21.6. 1. Sam 28. Isa. ^.19. Ier. 27.9. Leuit. 19.31. and 20.6. Isa. 19.3.
as Manasseh did of Wizards, and as Saul did of the Witch of Endor. Such they
were, as many of the people(as ours do too, to good witches) sought unto,
inquired after, Ier. 27.9. resorted unto, yea and counseled one another to
seek unto, whom they heard and believed, as they did their false prophets. To
these they had regard, and after these, as the Scripture speaks, they went a
whoring Such they were as were openly known among the heathen, as among the
Egyptian^, Exo. 7. Ca^aa^te^ Deu. 18.1^. P^ilistims. Isa. 2 6 and Caldeans,
Dan. 2 and 5 and al^^ amongst the Israelites, as appears by their resorting
to them, and yet these God utterly condemned, howsoever men esteemed of them.

III. By all the means given unto them, by which these sorts are set forth,
and rather such as be now held good Witches, then such as be held cursing and
bad Witches.

1. Is Chosem, Deuteronomy. 18.10. 2. King. 17 17. which comes of Chasam, Futura
praedixit. a Diuiner foreshewing things to come. Such, people delighted in, and
consulted with, Ier. 27. 9 Ezekiel. 21.26. Such an one was Balaam, ^0.13.22.

2. Is Megnonen or Gnonen, Deu. 18.10. Gnanan, Nubem abduxit, this is called a
Southsayer excontemplatione coeli, aut nubium, eorumque color and motu aliquid
praedicere: obseruator nubium: A gazer on the heavens, and from the Clouds to
foretell something. To these did the people give ear, Ier. 27.9. and such an
one was Manasseh. 1. Chr. 33.6.


3. Is M^nachesh. Deu. 18.10. Of Nachash, explorauit, Scrutator, a searcher
out, qui dies vel hor as explorat, and so conjectures and foretells. An
Obseruer of times, to know when it is best to begin a business, as Hamans
Witches did, Hest. 3.7. and 9.24.
by casting lots before him. 2. Chr. 33.6.
Of this Manasseh also was guilty.

4. Is Mechashshepth, Deuteronomy. 18.10. Isa. 47.12. of Chaphash, Magiam exercuit, a
Magician, one that can deceive the eyesight, by making something appear to the
sight, otherwise then it is: Such Pharaoh called to him to oppose Moses, those
two, Iannes and Iambres, of whom S. Paul speaks: and hereof also was M^nasseh
guilty, 2. Chron. 33.6.

5. Is Choreb, Deuteronomy. 18.11. of Chabar, consociatus est: an Inchanter, or
Coniure^: one joined in league with another, as the Witch is with (...) Devil:
Such an one used ch^rmes to tame Serpents, Psalm. ^8.6. Many such were in
Babylon, Isa. 47.9. This is the same that Lachash is, Eccl. 10.11. Incantatio.
(...) Ob, Deuteronomy. 18.11. Leuit. 20.27. one which has a spirit, in Hebrew is
called Ob, which in him or her do give answer to such as come to inquire of
them: such an o^e was the Witch of Endor, 1. Sam. 28, Quaerite mihi mulierem;
babentem Ob, or Pythonem: Such an ^ue was ^he Pythonesse, which brought her
Masters much gain, Act. 16. Such as have this spirit within the^, make answer
out of their belly, of things past, present and to come, to such ^s come to
enqu^re of them; their bodies being swollen like a bottle ^ or speaking low, as
out of the ground, a whisperer, Isa. 29.4. and hereupon he or she is called
Ventriloquus. (...).
To such the people had regard, Leu. 19.31. and encouraged one another thereto,
Isa. 8.19.

7. Is Iidgnoni. Deuteronomy. 18.11. of Iadang, nouit, a Wizard, 1. Sa. 28.9. one also
that can foretell things, and so called for his or her knowledge, as now we
term a wiseman, such an one a wise man, or a wise woman. After this sort the
people also sought, Leuit. 19 31. and ^0.6.

8. Is Doreshel-hammathim, Deuteronomy. 18.11. Con^ulens mortuos, a Ne^romancer, one
that consulteth with the dead, Isa. 8.19. to know what he would desire of them.
To which perhaps may allude that supposed speaking of Dives, of o^^ rising from
the dead to tell his brethren what they should do, Luk 16.

9. A^e Ha^t^^m, Isa. 19.3^ o^ At ^^^udo, ^uch as whisper with secret and (...)
words, as our white Witches do, in endeavoring to help man or beast. To these
the Egyptians sought, as they did to their Idols, as the Prophet shows. Isa.
19.3.
These are by us translated, Charmers.

10. Are Chartummim, Exo. 7.11. Some do call them Iuglers, deceivers,
beguiling the sight: some hold them to be casters of Natiuities, P. de Lo^er
de spectri^, c. 12.
Genethliaci; which tell people their fortune, by the time of their birth: and
they are called Chartummim, from their making of circles, and Characters: being
compounded of Cheret, calamus, a quill or pen, and Ataman, clausit, shut up.
These are only the names expressed in the Hebrew tongue, in all the old
Testament, which set out rather good Witches, then these cursing bad Witches,
which none can abide, but such as be of their society.

In the new testament we find, only the word Magus, (...). Artem magica^
exe^cens.
a Magician, Act. 8. The Septuagints translate the Hebrew words by diverse
Greek words, 2. Chro. 33 ^. Mich. 5.6. Leuit. 19.26. and 19.31. 1 Samuel 28.3, 9.
to set out rather the good, the^ bad witch. As Cledomizomenos from his same:
another Apophthegnomenos for his short and sententious speaking: 2 Kin. 21.6.
another Ornithescopos, because he foretold things by flying of birds: another
Eggastromuthus, one speaking out of the belly: another Gnostes from knowledge,
a Diuiner. So that all the names of Hebrew and Greek in the old and new
Testament, run upon such Witches, as the world does follow after, rather then
upon this hurting, and cursing, which I note not, as if these could do no
harm, but,

1. To show how cross God is, in his judgment and condemnation of Witches,
from the common course of men, who wholly, and only fly upon the black
Witches, hunt them, imprison them, and hang them (as they deserve well) but
they can pass by these white Witches, whom the holy Scriptures do so decipher
to us, and condemn. These they can countenance and maintain: because these
can satisfy their vain curiosities, their inquisitiue natures, idle
fantasies; yea and sometimes their mischievous purposes: but the end of such
courses will be bitter: let Saul and Manasseh be a warning to all this kind.

2. To manifest the bloody malice of Satan in these latter times against
mankind, who has stirred up such cruel Witches, as be wholly upon revenge,
tormenting men, and women, and their cattle, making a trade of killing and
murdering, of which sort the Scriptures hardly give an instance, except it be
in Balaam hired to curse Gods people. It may be, others could and did
mischief: but it cannot be concluded, either from the instances of examples,
or from their names, except, perhaps, somewhere the Septuagint do use the word
Pharmacos, which yet is used, as well in the better, as in the worse sense.

Let us therefore learn to follow the Lord, hate Witches, Wizards, Magicians,
Southsayers, Fortune Tellers, Astrologians, Inchanters, Iuggling companions,
dealing with Sorcerie and Witchcraft.

1. For the great dishonor offered to God by these hellish miscreants, in the
entrance, in the practice, and end of their devilish Arts.

2. In conscience to Gods commandment, utterly forbidding to regard such,
Leuit. 19.31. for it is spiritual whoredom, and defilement, Leuit. 20.6.

3. Because such as used them first, were Heathen, as Egyptians, Canaanites,
Philistims^ and Chaldeans: such as in Israel followed the heathenish customs,
were wicked and ungodly: as Saul, who was a murderer, 1. Sam. 22. a profane
neglecter of Gods worship, 1. Chron. 13.3. and one whom God had forsaken had
taken his spirit from, 1. Sa. 16.14. an evil spirit was upon him, to whom God
vouchsafed no answer by sacred means, 1. Sam. 28.16. and therefore he fell to
Witches. And what was Manasseh, but an Idolater, and an obseruer of times, and
so fell to Witchery, and to such as had familiars? And the people which
delighted in these, were haters of the true Teachers, and believed false
prophets, Dreamers, and Diuiners, Ierem. 27.9. And with us, what are they which
regard these sorts, but ^ither superstitious Papists, or Neuterals, or Atheists?

4. The evil which in the end will ensue to such as hearken to these; Delrio,
l. 6. page 1042. m^nit. 3. and 4
what got Saul by going to them? They may soothe up for a time these vain
persons, but at length the Devil will pay them home: Examples abroad, and in
Histories, and within our selves observed, may terrify all good Christians
from seeking unto, and regarding of such. For it is plainly said, that the Lord
sets his face against such, to cut them off, Luke 20.6. And if God be
against them, what may they look for in the end?

CHAP. XXI. That all sorts of Witches ought to dye, even because they be
Witches.
THere ought no such distinction of Witches to be made into good and bad,
Delrio, lib. 5. s. 16. pa 775, 776, 777.
blessing and cursing, white and black Witches, as thereby either sort should
escape death. They may differ in name, but al are abomination to the Lord, and
ought to dye.

Exodus 22.18. Leuit. 20 27.
1. The Law of God says, without exception; Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live. If a Witch, justly convicted, death is due to such an one.

2. They all make a league with the Devil: an act so execrable, to renounce
God, and to b^ take themselves to the devil, as for this thing only they
deserve death in the highest degree.

Delrio, lib. 6* pa. 1042.
3. For these abominations the Lord utterly destroyed the Canaanites, Deuteronomy.
18.12. and plagued Manasseh, 2. Chron. 33.6. which wickedness of his was so
abhorred of God, as in his displeasure he mentioned it many years after by
Jeremy, as a cause of removing the Jews from their land, and of leading them
away captive into a strange land, Ier. 15.4.

4. Idolaters ought to dye, Exodus 22.20. and 32.28, 29. and inticers to
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.9. because they worship Devils, Psalm. 106.37.1. Cor. 10.20.
Reu. 9.20. Delrio, lib. 5. sec 4. pa. 719.
But Witches worship devils, they invoke them, crave help of them, work by
them, and do them homage, sacrifice to them, and they do it not to stocks and
stones so mediately to the Devil, as other Idolaters do, but immediately to
the very devil himself. And therefore are the greatest Idolaters that can be,
and so most worthy of death.

It will be granted that bad Witches ought to dye, Incu^^ and (...)
as being guilty some of murder, other some of committing filihinesse with
Devils, by the confession of innumerable Witches; and for much mischief, and
manifold harms which they do.

But still some doubt of so round dealing with the white Witches, which cure
folk, and do as they imagine great good, tell wonders, and delight their
hearers, and sometimes their beholders.

The imagined good Witches, the Coniurer, Enchanter, Magician, Southsayer, and
the rest ought to dye; for besides the former reasons;

1. As has been proved; the course of the Scriptures is generally against
these.

2. Saul and Josias put these sorts to death, 1. Sa. 28.2. Kin. 23.24. In his
Daemono. l. 1. c. 7.
and King James in his book says of Magicians and Necromancers, that they
ought to be dealt with, as Sorcerers.

Bodin. Daemo lib. 3 c. 2.
3. In other Countries such have been put to death. In Flanders was there a
Magician, which by curing many diseases became famous, and was reputed a holy
man, covering his Witchery, with appointing people to fast, to say their Pater
noster, and to go on Pilgrimage to this or that St, but his Magic practices
being found out, he had his desert. Lib. 3. cap. ^.
In France there was a woman Witch, which did cure some with a pretended
medicine, and by saying these words, In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, and of St Anthony, and St Michael, thou may be cured
of thy disease, commending withal the party to hear Mass nine days: but for
all this, she had judgment to be burnt for her Witchcraft.

For these healers are oftentimes hurting Witches withal, and all healers do
entice people from God, in requiring faith of them, and do cause the people to
run a whoring after them, as Moses speaks, Leu. 20.6. Being therefore in
league with Satan, being abominable Idolaters, intising people from their faith
in God, they are worthy to die.

See Master Roberts his Treatise of Witchcraft, from page 75. to the end.
4. Very Heathen Emperors have put to death such as were Necromancers, such as
used to cure diseases, such as would undertake to foretell success of wars,
and such have bin exiled, if not put to death, as would by Art. Magic;
discover them, see examples of these in Bodins Daemonomania. Bodin. li^. c. 1.
and 5. and l. 44. cap. 5. Delrio, lib. 5. sec. 4. p. 719, 720, 721.


They offend then that countenance them, that prevent their apprehension, their
judgment, and just deserved punishment.

CHAP. XXII. That the bad Witches in their trial, persecution, conviction, and
condemnation, should be dealt with, as is befitting, in the course of Justice.
IT is miserable to behold how maliciously, how ragingly, in bitterness of
spirit, the rude headless multitude, and other vain people cry out against
these sorts of wretched Caytifs, saying, ^ye upon them, Away with them, Hang
them, and some of them stick not to curse them. A brutish and unchristianlike
carriage.

It is true that their sin is very grievous, hateful to God, and to be
detested of all true Christians, as an execrable falling from God, into the
deepest service of the devil: but yet let men consider:

1. A difference between their fearful sin, and their persons; hate the one,
but not the other.

2. That Satan is a powerful Deceiuer, and Seducer, who can make an Eve in
Paradise, (being in the state of perfection) to believe him, the Devil, before
God.

3. That by nature corrupt, we are no less apt to be misled by him, Ephesians.
2.1, 2. Col. 3.3, 7.
then they; walking in sins and trespasses, according to the course of the
world, and according to the Prince of darkness, in inordinate affection, and
other lusts, being foolish, disobedient, Titus 3.3. Ephesians. 2.
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice, envy,
hateful, and hating one another. Thus by nature are we the children of wrath,
and bemyred with the filth of sin, as well as they.

4. That therefore our difference arises not, from within our selves, as from
our own wisdom, will and power: but we are kept from their Apostasy, either
by Gods restraining power: as he kept the King of Gerar Abimelech from
Adultery: as also Pharaoh from Abraham's wife: or by his converting grace; so
every one must say with Saint Paul: By the grace of God, I am that I am.

5. Consider, that some so dreadfully catched by Satan, may be Gods servants,
and be converted; as was Manasseh, and also Saint Cyprian, of whom before. And
did not such as used curious Arts, even Magic, turn to God and believe?

Therefore let us behold in them a spectacle of man's misery, as being left of
God unto the power of the Devil, and so be moved with compassion, to pray for
their conversion. In our selves preserved, behold the merciful goodness of
our God, and so be stirred up to praise his name. Thus shall we make a good
use of both, and behave our selves as sober Christians ought to do.

CHAP. XXIII. Satan strives to imitate God, in whatsoever he may, as far as
God will permit him.
MAny things may seem very strange, and hardly to be believed, which are
related to be done between the Devil and Witches. But all this will seem no
wonder, if men do wisely consider, that Satan endeavors to be an imitator
of God, not to please him, but rather to cross him, and to beguile these
hellish Apostates, and to increase the more their sins, and just condemnation.

Behold, What the Lord does:
1. The Lord has his set Assemblies for his servants to meet together.

2. The Lord has his Sabbaths.

3. The Lord has visible Congregation which consist of good and bad persons,
learned and unlearned, but of these the last are the most.

4. Amongst these is the use of Baptism, where they give to the baptized a
name.

5. The Lord makes a Covenant with his people, and they with him.

6. The Lord confirms his covenant with blood.

7. The Lord marketh his.

8. The Lord gives to those that are his, his Spirit and gifts withal.

^. These do honor the Lord and worship him.

10. These call upon the Lord, when they would have his help.

11. The Lord had some which wrought by his power, though they by open
profession did not follow him.

12. The Lord requires faith of such as seek to him for help.

13. The Lord had such as by words cured diseases, by prayer, and did anoint
the party infirm: so by some things brought them from the sick, and carried
to the sick again, Iam. 5. Mark. 6.13. Act. 19.12.

14. The Lord by his servant raised some from the dead, 1. King. 17.21. Act. 9
40.

15. The Lord had such as freely used their gift of healing, Mat. 10.8.

16. The Lord had some, which by cursing and threatening procured evil upon
others, 2. King. 2.24. Act. 13.

17. The Lord tied his to certain rules, and ordinances in his service, and
sometimes to a certain number, Ios. 6.15.1. Kin. 17.21.

18. The Lord makes some to be his, either by his own immediate in spiration,
and speaking to them, or wins them to him by his instruments.

19. The Lord appointed some burnt offering for atonement, and so to free his
from some evils.

20. In the Scripture is found the cutting of hair and burning it, Number. 6.18.
the writing of words, and the blotting of them out a gain, and to give them
unto one, Number. 5.23. also the giving of a potion. Number. 5.^7.

21. The Lord cast some ^f his unto trances, in which they saw many things, and
seemed to be in other places, Ezekiel. 3. 14. and 11.^.24. and 40. 2. Re^. 1.

22. The Lord would take some of his, and suddenly carry them from one place to
another bodily, Act. 8.39.

23. The Lord had such as could tell of things past, things present, but
hidden, and of things ^o come.

24. In the Scripture is told of curing one disease, and the same to fall upon
another. 2. Ki. 5.27.

25. The Lord had such as could work miracles and strange wonders.

26. The Lord by his heavenly work moves men to holy actions, as preparatiues
to further them to a better knowledge of him; when he shall be pleased fur^her
to reveal himself, Act. 8.28.

27. The Lord spoke by a beast unto a Witch, Number. 22.28.

28. The Lord ordained sacrifices to be offered unto him.

29. The Lord has promised earthly blessings, to stir up people to serve him.

Behold, What Satan does:
1. So the Devil has his set meetings for his Magicians and Witches to come
together.

2. So Satan with his Witches have their times, which they call their sabbaths.

3. So the meetings of these are of good and bad Witches, some learned, and
some ignorant, but of these the greatest number.

4. So it is amongst these; for they meet to christen (as they speak) their
spirits, and give them names.

5. So does Satan and the Witches covenant one with the other.

6. So does Satan ratify his covenant with blood.

7. So Satan marketh his.

8. So Satan gives to his a Familiar or Spirit, and gifts to do this or that
trick of Witchcraft.

9. So these do homage to Satan, and worship him.

10. So when these would have help, they call upon their Spirit, or Devil.

11. So Satan has some which work by his power, though they make no open or
express league with him.

12. So does Satan by his instruments require says of such as come to him for
help.

13. So has Satan such as seem by words to cure diseases, so by forms of
prayers and by oils: also by bringing something from the sick party, and
carrying the same back again.

14. So Satan makes show by his servants to raise up the dead, 1. Sam. 28.

15. So will the Devil have such as shall profess to cure for nothing.

16. So Satan has such, which by cursing and threats procure mischief to
others.

17. So Satan tyeth his Witches to certain words and deeds in going about his
service, and to observe ^^bers, to do a thing so and so often, 3. times, 7.
times, etc.

18. So Satan makes some Witches by inward suggestions, and his speaking to
them, or by using other Witches to gain them to him.

19. So Satan has taught his to burn something (as a sacrifice to him for an
atonement) to free the bewitched from pain.

20. So Satan teaches his to cut off hair, and burn it, and to write a
charm and blot it out, and then give it one, also to use ^otions; thus seeming
by these imitations to have Scriptures or warrant.

21. So the Devil casts some of his into trances, in which they seem to
themselves to be in other places: where they verily believe that they see and
do many things.

22. So Satan will take some of his, and carry them bodily from one place to
another, Del. de disq. Mag. l. 2 q. 16 and l. 5. s. 16. p. 760.

23. So Satan has his, whom he teaches to tell of all these sorts of things.

24. So we may find how, when a disease is cured by a Witch, it is transferred
sometime upon another person or creature.

25. So Satan has his Magicians and Sorcerers, to work wonders, Exo. 7.

26. So Satan by his hellish suggestions and operation, stirs up people to
think of, plot and purpose euil^; so preparing them for himself, to accept of
his counsel when he appears to them.

27. So Satan speaks to witches sometimes in forms of beasts, and sometimes in
the very creatures themselves.

28. So Satan has taught his to offer sacrifice, Number. 23.

29. So Satan promises such things to Witches, as Motives to serve him, Mat. 4.



Thus we see in these few things, how Satan observes the Lords doings and
sayings, and therein strives to be like him. The truth of these things on Gods
part is evident out of the holy Scripture: on Satan's part the truth is set out
before in these two books confirmed by many testimonies in the Margin every
where.

The end of publishing these (not hitherto set forth by any) is to show some
ground of those things which we find related in the writings of men, and to
be done between Witches and Devils, which otherwise may seem to be beyond all
credit, an^ to be rejected as fabulous; which if Wierus, Scot and others had
known, and diligently weighed, they had not so lightly esteemed of the true
relations of learned men, and imputed the strange actions, undoubtedly done by
Witches, and Devils, only to brainesicke Concei^s, and mad Melancholy.

FINIS.

