THE PROTESTANTS THEOLOGY, CONTAINING, The true solutions, and grounds of
Religion, this day mainteyned, and entreated, betwixt the PROTESTANTS, AND
CATHOLICS.

WRITTEN, By the R. F. F. VVilliame Patersoune Religious Priest, Conuentuall of
Antwerpe, Preacher of Gods word, And Vicar General of the holy Order of S.
AVGVSTIN, Through the Kingdom of Scotland.

THE I. PART.

The seech you brethren marked them diligently who cause Schism and Heresy
contraire to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them, for they
that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but there own (...), and with
fear speech, and flatery, deceive the hearts of the simple.

AD ROMANOS. 16. IMPRINTED. With License. Anno M.DC.XX.

APPROBATIO.
LIBRVM Hunc vulgari lingua inscriptum [THE PROTESTANTS THEOLOGY.] a R. P. F.
Guilielmo Patersonio Scoto (Sacri or ^inis Eremitarum, S. Augustini
Presh-Amu^^p Professo, and per Scot^^m ci^^^^m Sancti Ordinis Vicario Generals)
conscriptum a me visum, and examena^um, nihil reperi, Catholicae fidei, aut
bo^is moribus contrarium, contine^e. Verumetiam valde ^tilem, and apprimc
idoneum su^e ad confutationem, sieve conuersionem Haereticorum sentio. Ideoque
prelo ac luce dignum iudico. Quod testor manu propria.

Mechliniae: die decimo quinto Aprilis. 1620. Thomas Wortingtonus. Prot. Apost.
S. Theologiae Doctor.

PRAEMISSA Debita informatione super contentis in hoc libro, cui titulus [THE
PROTESTANTS THEOLOGIE] auctore, R. P. F. Guilielmo Patersonio, Scoto Ordinis
Eremitarum S. Augustine Presb. etc. cundem praelo dignum censui.

Mechliniae 9. Maij. 1620. Petrus vanden Wicle S. Th. Licent. Metropolit.
Ecclesiae Mechliniensis Archidiaconus, Librorum Censor.

EGO F. Ioanes Aughemius, Fratrum Eremitar. Ordinis S. Augustini, per Belgium
Prior Prouincialis, vt liber vulgars lingua inscriptus [THE PROTESTANTS
THEOLOGIE] a R. P. F. Guilielmo Patersonio Ordinis S. Augustini Sacerdote
compositus, and a diuersis visus and examinatus, in lucem edatur, permitto, and
facultateni concedo. In quorum fidem has nostras manu nostra subscriptas and
figillo munitas dedi.

Gandaui in nostro S. Augustini Monasterio, 12. October. 1620. Fr. Ioannes
Aughemius Prouincialis.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE AND POTENT LORD, L. ARCHBALD CAMBEL, BARRON Of Cowhill,
and Lochaw: Sheriff of Tarbet, and Argyll, Lord High Justice of Scotland:
Lord of Cambell, Lorne, and Kintyre: Great Master of his Ma^ies House,
Lieutenant of Tarbet, and Argyll, Earl of Argyll: and one of his Majesty's
secret Counsel of Scotland.
F. W. P. A. Wishes all Happiness, with increase of Honor, and all good
fourtune.
IN ancient times passed (MOST HONORABLE LORD) it has been the coustume, as
witnesses Flau. Veg. in Prol. lib. de re milit. To dedicat, and present Books,
unto Princes, and great men; the reason is, says he, for so much as any thing is
not well begu^ne, except (first under God) Princes, and noble men, favor,
protect, and commend it; neither do any thing beseem Princes, and noble men
better the^ books; who as they are the heads, and Governors of others, it
agrees with reason (if it were possible) that they should know all things:
because, that as in the head, consist the senses, which govern, and ruell the
whole body; even so in like manner, Princes and Pote^tates, who are the heads
and Governors of families, and other people, should be seen in all sciences,
and virtues, for the governing of others. For if the Planetes, which guide, and
rule this inferior world, are replenished with greater influence of light, and
virtue, then the other stars in the firmament, even so are Princes, and
Nobles, the planetes, and governors of this world, more illuminated with
greater light of wisdom, knowledge, and power, for the governing of others;
that by the influe^ce of wisdom, and knowledge in the^, wherewith they are
replenished of God, they might ruell, and guyd others; for as Cyrus says, he
is not worthy of any dignity, and authority, that is not better, then others:
and if Aristole met^^ says, that all men desires naturally to know, and this
natural disposition, dependes on reason, it follows that Princes, and Noble
men, should have this knowledge in the^ perfect, for that which all me^
naturally desires to know, the knowledge thereof is more proper specially to be
in Noble Men, and Princes. And therefore seeing your L. is one of these Princes,
and Noble men, in whom as in a planet consists the governing, and rulling of a
most ancient family, and surename of Cambell, with the authority, and
dominion, over the sherifdomes of Argyll, and Tarbet, with the preeminent
dignity, honor, and power of an Earl, in the ancient kingdom of Scotland:
Whose wisdom, virtue, and nobility, has been the occasion to present unto
your L. these my labors, lieuing under hope so to esteem of them as well
becomes your L. Honor, wisdom, and understanding: for it is not unknown to
all the nation, the estate, and quality of the Earls of Argyll, to have been
prudent, wise, noble, and liberal, maintayners of Virtue, protectors, and
commenders of the same, whose fame is immortal. and to report the verity it
cannot be denied, but that the Earls of Argyll are amongst the principal
Noble men in the land, equal in estat, in antiquity very ancient, in lineage
and succession without interruption, of Mariadge descended of most Noble
progenitors, very honorable in fame, vnspoted in loyalty, fidel to there
Prince, true to there country, honest in conversation, Catholics in
profession, friendly to there genealogy, loueing to their nythbours, liberal
to their servants, fearful, and merciful to their enemies, bou^tifull to the
poor, charitable to strangers, discret, honest, and amiable to all persons,
the renown of them is for ever; what virtue could be in humane nature, that
was not manifested and approved in the^. And as for wordly prefermentes to whom
were they inferior, unto which preeminent dignity, honor, and authority, your
L. (iu. e) succeeds, and inioyes. Is not your L with the principal Earls
equal and in nothing inferour? Is there any almost higher honors, and more
excellent, or famous, the^ to be one of his Ma^^es Counselors, and familiars,
great Co^mander of his Ma^^es house, Sheriff, and Lieutenant of two ample
Sherifdomes, hvghe Lord justice of Scotland, in Parlaments, also to bear the
sword of honor, as for preuiledges, and jurisdiction, no Prince, or Noble in
Scotland is co^parable: And for dominions, terretories, Castles, and palaces,
pastures, hunting fowling, and fishings, more rightly your L. may be called a
little Regulas then a subject. And therefore in respect of your L. antecessors
and their progeny, unto whom your L. has succeeded, being a branche of the
same stock, indewed with them in all natural gifts, and full of moral
virtues, with equallitie of estat: It must follow with reason to live, and die,
with the^, in the true religion, and in the true worship of Christ, and to
approve your L. self to be the true issue of such loyal parents; and a myrror
to others in times to come; yt who already has known your L. course of ly^e
and conversation, and present exemple of life may thereby glorify God, and in
that your L. have been an persecutor, now to give a true testimony of a
confessor, and to acknowledge your L. vocation to be extraordinary of God, who
now has illuminated your L. understanding in the knowledge of his truth, and
how he has wrought in your L. according to the multitude of his mercies, a
strange alteration, much from the nature of your L. education, and profession
to which the whole Kingdom of Scotland can bear testimony of your L.
profession in Heresy, and of the monuments of your L. Yeall, and Valor, which
are yet to be seen extant in the land, Symtomes proceeding from an evil cause,
whose fervor, yeall, and temerous presumption was greatly to be regrated to
see the issue of such noble Carholicke antecessores degenerat, indewed with so
many good parts of nature to follow such irrational courses of Heresy, in which
your L. was nourished and instructed, brought up at the feet of Gamaliell,
weell versant in the circumstances of puritanisme, perfect in the oppinions of
Calvin, yealous and fervent in profession, in life an another Solon, in
gravity conformable with the Rabbis of the new Gospel in little Israel, in
yeall most fiery, in spirit repugnant, in will perverse, in knowledge ignorant,
to wraith suddenly moved, in reuendge foreward, in execution most ready, with
Saull making hauock, putting co^fide^ce in the multitude of men, and in polyce
of wordly wites, more then in the truth, esteeming more the honor of the
world, then the glory of God, or the honesty of the cause. and albeit there is
no polyce or strenth against God, who out of evil bringes good, who govern
otherwise the^ man disposes, which may be seen in the conversion of your L.
to the Catholic Faith; who in end has disposed, all; for the best, to bring
your L. an other Paul, out of Saull, and of an veshell of dishonor, an veshell
of honor, that in time coming your L. may recall to mind the infinite
goodness of God, your L. former estat, and peril: his vocation and
cooperating grace. And therefore in consideration, of Gods manifold benefits
toward your L. and of the wisdom; and graces wherewith your L. is indewed,
has moved me more bold to dedicate this Treatise, called, The Protestants
Theology to your L. partly for your L. comfort, and vtility, that when vacant
time shall present, your L. may read, and peruse this Book, in which your L.
shall perceive the miserable estat, and condition of all Heretics out of the
Church of God; and now having opportunatie to redeem the time past, your L.
may make profit, and lay up in Heaven a treasure, that shall not faill,
approving your L. self like another Julius Caesar, of whom it is said, that at
all times either he had a lance in his hand, or the Iliades of Homer, that when
the wares impedite him not, the^ was he reading Homers Iliades, that out of the
I hilosophers sayings, he might learn wisdom; eue^ so I doubt not, but when
your L. shallbe vacant of wordly besines, your L. will follow that renowned
Caesar, in which little Treatise, I Hope your L. shall find great conte^tement
of mind, and sufficient matter to discover the Heretics Hypocrysie, and false
Religion, and also shall be an help to others to come to the knowledge of the
truth, who (allace) are like the Israelites in Egypt, more willing to live in
slavery of Pharao, then to suffer pains to go the Land of Chanaan, and
preferes more the wraithfull contena^ce of Pharao, rhen the holy Land: and
likewise for the good of these, who are moral and desirous to know the truth,
who in end are like the Jews, who loved more the honor of the world the^ the
glory of God. And likewise for the good of such who like Atheistes, live like
the Prodigal son, contented to live miserable, and to full their bellyes
with the husks of error, instead of other fruictes of verity, considering with
themselves their misery and condition in Heresy as in a far Country from
their Parents, and natural soyll, may come to remorse of conscience to
condemn their own prodigal course, and ignorance of life, and to make
recourse to there parents, who pities the misery of their children. And
likewise for all sorts of persons who knowing no better, and are ready to
embrace all noualties, whose ears are filled with descant of Religions, and
the innumerable Sects, that every day appears: or with the vntouned harmony
of blasphemy against the Papists. And therefore for the good of many as well as
of your L. and upon the joy of your L. conversion, and fervent yeall in
profession, with hope of perseuera^ce, and in congratulation of Gods benefits
toward your L. and in calling your L. to the knowledge of the truth, and in
making your L. an child of God, and one member of the Catholic Church, who
likewise has illuminated your L. eyes with the oil of his grace, that the
ignorant blindness of heresy may be expelled, and in pulling you out of the
golfe of perdition, from the slavery of Egypt, and the basse captivity of
Babylon, from the worish Jealousy of Heresy, and from eternal damnation, unto
salvation, for the Joy of the Angels, for the perfection of life, comfort of
Catholics, conversion of heretics, and in end for the participation of
glory, has ministered the occasion of boldness to present this Treatise to your
L. for the subject of this Treatise requyres such a patron whose yeall in
Heresy affore time without the knowledge of Gods truth, may be in the verity,
and with the true knowledge of God: may not only protect, and accept of this
Treatise but also by your L. magnificent liberality to give a testimony of your
L. yeall to assist and concur, for the affecting of the second Treatise, in
which fyftie questions shall be entreated. Reposing confidently this Treatise in
the mean time to be acceptable to your L. to an other occasion, wishing your
L. with all my heart, all Heavenly blessings with incresse of wordly Honor, and
the success of good fortune. Farewell

Your L. humble Seruitoure. F. William Patersoune Augustine.

The Preface TO THE READER.
THE Blessed Apostle S. Paul not without instruction of the Holy Ghost, do
forsee the troubles and calamities of the Church of Christ, Prognosticates
saying, 1. cor. 11. There must be Heresies amongst you, to that intent, that
they who are perfeict and approved amongst you, might be known. In which grave
predictio^ two things is to be observed, the one is for our comfort, and the
other is for our instruction: that by the one, to wit Heresy, we be not
dismayed or much offended when we see in the holy profession of our Christian
Religion, Heresies Sects, and Schisms to arise, that then we foresaeke not
the field of our faith; wherein we warefare to God, 1. cor. 9. and runs not,
as at an uncertain thing, neither fightes, as 'an that beats the winds but
runs to obtain, and fightes to vinne the reward. And likewise that we late
not go the steadfast hold of our hope, but holding it sure, and cleaving fast
to the Rock of our faith, against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail
neither infidelity to have access, Cyp. Epist. 55. ad comm. PP. If therefore
we see by the verdict of the Apostle, that Heresies must be, which in effect
brust out in the days of the Apostles, as bade weeades springs up amongst the
corns in the good husbandry of our Lord, and as cockle owersowede of the
enemy in the good field of God. For in the days of the Apostles there wa^ted
not most wicked Heretics, as Simon Magus, Her nogines, Philectus, Hymenaeus,
Alexander, and Nicolaus: who are mentioned in the Scripture, to have wauered,
and been inconstant in the faith: and after the knowledge of righteousness to
have turned back from the verity: and to have maintained erroneous opinions,
and teached false doctrine for lucre cause. With those also brust out others
as the Ebionists, Cerinthus, Marcio^, against whom S. Paul, S. Peter, S. John,
and S. Jude, has written discouring the^, and their doctrine, vvth there
manners, the which wicked persons were so dru^ned in the sees of Heresies, and
delighted themselves in their poysonable opinions of errors, yealous and fyrie
to mantaine the same with their blood. So that to this present day, there has
been no age free of Heresy, neither was the world so perfect in Faith and
Religion in the days of the Apostles more then now: neither is the world so
perfect yet, as not to have many simple people in it; neither is the simple
people so happy, as to keep themselves securly humble, and in the obedience of
the doctrine of the Church; neither is the obedient fully secure not to be
deceived, of subtle and crafty men; neither is the subtle and crafty Heretic
so careful of his credit and honesty to moderat his perverse opinion and
malice, to spare and forbear to maintain open falsehoods, and old dampened
opinions, to entangle, and snare the ignorantes, and simple people. Wherefore
the Apostle prognosticates Heresies to be that me^ ben forewarnde and fortold,
that as Heresies must be, and with it subtility and malice that when men
behold the one, to be circumspect not to be deceived, and trapped in the
other, against whom Christ our Saluiour exhortes us totake head of false
Prophets who are clothed in sheape skins and are inwardly reaweing wolves,
Matthew. 7. And S. John biddes not believe every spirit, but try them, and
decerne them whether they be of God, or no? But who is this prudent, and wise,
that can not be deceived? and who has that gift to decerne spirits? seeing
Heresy it self is of the Scripture, and deceit and malice is of the devil,
that old serpent, for made not Satan this potion out of Scripture, when he
said Genesis 3. Eritis sicut dij, his deceat and malice is discovered in calling
him an Serpent, as it is written: and erat serpe^s calidior, cunctis animantibus
terrae gen 3. Therefore how shall men of good judgment know the^, and
farelesse how shall the ignorant and lai-persones try truth, from falsehood:
sound doctrine, from error: heresy, from true Religion: seeing it is common in
this age, and taught every man to read the Scriptures and by them to decerne
spirits truth and falsehood, heresy and true Religion. I wish from my heart (if
it please God) that as holy Scripture is the true trial thereof, that it were
as evident and plain to all men to seike the trial therein, which the whole
learned* and holy men from the Apostles times, has judged the contrary, that
the Scripture is a book of difficulties as S Aust. says, lib. 2. de doct.
Christi cap. 6. Many things are dark and obscure in the Scriptures, and it
has been so provided of God, to the intent that our pride may be taymed with
traueill, and our knowledge not cloyed with facility, which quickly contemns,
what has been easily learned. In this same mind is S Hier. in Ezech. cap. 45.
saying, All prophecy and interpretation of the Scriptute contains the truth
in darkness and obscurity, to the intent that the scollers and learned within,
may vudersta^d, but the rude people without, may not know what is said, least
we should cast precious perles before hoges, if the treasure of Gods secrets,
should be opened to every man. To amplify at more lenght, the difficulty
thereof, Epiph. in Anchoratu, says, The Scripture tells all truth, but we
have need of a good understanding, and perseverance to know God, and his word.
Likewise, Orig lib. 7. in leuit. There is in the Gospel, says he, the letter
that kills; and this destroying letre is not only in the old, buc also in the
new Testament to him that understands it not spiritually what is said. Which
difficulty Tert. in praesc affirms, saying, I am not a feared to say, that
the Scriptures themselves have been so disposed by the will of God, that they
might minister matter unto Heretics. And therefore seeing the Apostle
prognosticates that Heresy must be, which could not be without the Scripture,
which is an ample field for all sects, the greater should be our prudence and
wisdom to beweere of their deceat and subtilities, lest they bring to pass
which S. Paul feared saying, that as the Serpent deceived Eua through his
subtility, even so your senses may be corrupted and to fall away from the
simplicity which is in Christ Jesus. For such false Apostles are decetfull
workers transfigurating themselves in the Apostles of Christ. Neither is it
marueil that they so appear, for their master Satan can transfigure himself
in an Angel of light, therefore it is not a great matter, if his ministers can
transfigurat themselves in the appearance of ministers of righteousness, whose
end shall be according to their works. Secondly to deceat, and craft is never
anexed malice, envy, ialousie, calu^nies, which must, proceed from Heresy, as
Christ himself defines saying: ex fructibus eoru^ cognoscetis eos, mat. 7.
which fruicts are so manifest and evident, that they cannot be obscured, and
denied: is their slanderous reports, inuections, lies, skooffs, and
blasphemies against God, and his Church, unknown to the world: no? in which
doing they have follovved and imitated the Manicheis as, witness, S Aug. lib.
de vtilit. cred. c. 1. who exceeded all other Heretics before them, that
with open mouth sela^dered the Church of Christ, and charging her with
sensles and prodigious dostrines and errors, outfaceing their blasphemies
with bitter inuections, and calumnies, to affray the ignorant people from the
bosom of the Catholic Church, and by setting them selves in the stoll, as
fearful bogelles to affray children, that they might not know the verity,
through there deceat and malice, neither whether the Church is, but their
synagogue, manasseing and treatning to join all to there co^uentickle, like
foullars who having laid the lyme vvands by the spring and water side, go
about to stope all other waters round about, and do set skar crows over
them, that the poor birds, not knovving vvher to make succourse to find
waters, not of chose, but of very necessity, at last most light in their
snayres, which evidently appear in the Heretics of this age, ever with
Heresy to have malice adjoined with it: as experience has proved in
Scotland, that in the beginning, Heresy was so delectable to the whole estait
of the land, after, with what subtility, policy, and craft, it is
established, in so far, that it is pointly registered in the books of Parlamet,
and the profession of their faith is acted word to word for a perpetual
memory and the vvholl body of the kingdom is coacted to svveir, and to
subscriue this new faith, who refuses, either Protestant, or Catholic: the^
malice, inuy, hatred, and blasphemy must force then, what by excommunication
and horning: or by prisonement, confiscation of goods, exill, or death; they
believe no man whom onse they conceive jealousy of, their malice is in
reconciliable, that they are in will, and desire after the mind of Caligula,
who wished the heads of all the Romans to stand on ma^s body, that at one
blooe he may beheade them al. And therefore to effectuat their malicious
desires, and that the poison of their heart may be made known, they evvomat
clamorous raillings, and blasphemies against the Pope of Rome and al Catholic
people, that thereby the ignorant being onse snared in their heresy, anon are
drou^k with the same poyso^ of blasphmy, fury, hatred and malice against
Catholics and Priests, that they are like made, and frented people: and that
they came home from their sermonds no less feirce and fyrie then sogeres from
the warlyke speeches of their Captain exhorting them to the fight: or as it is
said of the citizins of Abdera that onse hearing a furious Tragedy in a heat
summer day, they were so stricken with such a fit of frenzy, through the
vehement heat of the soune, that many days they did nothing but act the same
Tragedy, with furious gestures in there straites. Was not the lyk tragedy
acted in S. Iohnstoun; and through all Scotland: in what frenzy and madness
were the people that in one year they raised, throwdown, and demolised all the
abbayes, Churchs, Chappells, and Hospitalls in the whole land, with
perseverance in blaspheming, condemning, skoffing, freting, raiging* and moking
God and his Church. These holy purita^e Sancts are full of zeall, to evomat
such heinous and abominable blasphemies for poor and sound doctrine,
dissembling credit and honesty, who are known enemies, they want in their
sermons and make ample disgressions, to geet with men of small judgment the
name of a great preachour, and to be called a cunning clerk, that as S. Austen
says, Any man of very small learning may do the same, to prate upon palpable
follies, and to be inuectiue, which custom is deduced from the Manicheis, who
made long sermons with much gravity, long graces etc. against whom S. Aug. lib.
1. de morib. eccl. c. 10. writes adiudging suchlyke toys wicked, which do
no way concern us, for they speak upon old wyfes tailles, and childish
bables, for in that, in which they are most earnest in approving, and confuting
matter of Religion against tht Catholics, the more they show themselves to
want judgment, and whosoever is seduced and deceived of them to follow Heresy,
conde^neth not the Catholic Church, but shows himself ignorant and to lack
judgment. For the nature of Heresy, is to blind the understanding, and
induce ignorance. And therefore as S. Cyp. lib. 1 epist. 3 says that of the^,
who are profane and out of the Church, no things is to be expected but a
deprauat mind, a deceitful tongue, cankered malice, and sacrilegious lies,
whosoever shall give credit to these professors, shall suffer with them the
sentence of damnation, at Christ coming to judge the world. In like manner S.
Auste^ sermon. 22. de verb. Apost. declaring the cause of the peruersitie of
heretics and with what malice and hatred satan has spyred them, that they so
continue in their wicked course against conscience and all moral reason, is
more the fear of the shame of the world, then the fear of God, or love of
their soul. Lest there religion being detected, and discovered it should be
said to them, why have you deceived us so long? why did you seduce us? wherefore
told ye us so many falls things? regarding more the weakness of men to reprehend
their folly, then the inuinciblenes of the truth, which must prevail. Whose
description of doctrine and manner is not neadfull to be produced of us
Catholics, when sufficiently of Luther, and others, they are described, as ane
Anatomy to the object of all beholders, as reports Theod. Fabrit. in locis
comm. in art. Luth. page 4. and 5 saying, The natures of these Viperes are
such, that they can cavil deceatfully with words: making the Scriptures a
noise of wax, they show their impious and ingenious spirit to turn, and alter
the sense by the meaning of the Apostles, in which they are admirable doctors,
surpassing in skill, and wite of all the learned and profound men of this world.
For they are governed by a maligna^t spirit wh does possess and be which their
wits, and are inradged with satanicall virule^cy against Gods Church, and her
professors. They cannot eshew but must interpret the Scripturs wrong, for in
this they are for all the world like spidders that suck poison out of fair and
fraga^t flours the venom not being in the flours but in themselves. And
therefore as heresy must be: It is not without our profit, to wit for our
instruction, seeing that heresies are, and suffered to be, to that intent yt
they who are perfect in his Church, might be known: for by Heresies the* Church
is tried as gold be the fire, and as ye sea yt is moved with te^pests, casts
out his froth and filth (ye poor waters keep his bo^ds and course) so the
Church in time of tribulation, and storms of heresy voydes away the fooll and
unclean members out of her, the sound and faithful remain under her
Catholic rowfe, and abides in the faith onse received, and believed. For in
time of Heresy and Schism, ye part of every good Christian man must be, to
do as good sogers, to ru^ne to their captain and general, looki^g to him, and
expecting to be directed, how, and when to stryke: and as the modest and gentle
passager, when ye tempest and storms arises to disordre their passage,
sufferes with hartly mind, ye master to ruell the stern, meddling not with
that, yt which he has not skill of* Even so when privy rebels, and wicked
members of Christian religion, sow seditious schisms, and preaches heresy,
troubli^g thereby ye quiet and settled co^scie^ces of true belieuers: every
Christian man, and especially the lai and inferior sort ought to cleave to
their heads, and ruelers in Christ Church, meddling not with any point of
religion called in controversy, but lock to be directed, as they have been
always, in all former ages by there Catholic Pastors, to vvho^ they are
commanded by the Apostle to obey, and submit themselves, no less the^ the
soger to his captain, or ye passager to the schipper, and master of the ship.
Therefore after the example of the Apostle, I have set down the Protestants
opinion and sound doctrine, that the modest and discret Reader may judge with
equity, that their profession is real heresy and contains nothing but filthy
abominable assertions, without any good grounds either of Scripture, or
reasone. That in vveighing the balance in thy hand of judgment and
understanding thou may save thy soul which is lost if thou remain in the
profession with them, who will go about to save his soul, will learn the
verity. And therefore Gentle Reader, I have set down in this Protestant
Theology there own words lest some would say, that I do belie them, which
to do I am very loath, but to observe charity, as I would they should do the
like to me: and whereas Gentil Reader, that thou had not the full work
accomplished, blame me not, I lippened to men's promises who has failled, when
I have brought this book so far on the way, for my own part I am sorry that
it is manked, or abriged if poverty has not been my impediment,
notwithstanding to my ability with the curtosie of some goods friends out of
the zeall of their devotion. This first part of my book is commed to light
expecting opportunatie and frienship to effectuat the other part, which
God-willing in his own time shall be seen. Therefore enjoy this for the
present, and pity my poverty bidding the hartly fairewell.

Thy friend in Christ F. VV. P. A.

THE PROTESTANTS THEOLOGY.
QVAESTIO. I.
WHerefor (good Christians) adheere ye, and join, rather to the Papists
Church, and faith, than to our reformed Church, seeing our Church, and faith, is
the true Catholic faith, and is from the Apostles them selves delivered Call.
praef. ad Franc. Gal. Reg.

ANSVER.
The Catholic Roman faith was long before the reformed.
WHEREFOR praefere ye not, the Roman-Catholik-Church, and her faith, before the
Lutheran, Caluinian, or any other sect, what soever, under pretense of
reformation, with a whorish applaud? for as God was before the devil appeared,
euin so his true Church, and faith, out of all dout is more ancient than the
false, and was before it ever appeared, for when the husbandman hade soowed his
good seed in the field (than after) came the enuyous man, and owersowed cockle:
as is said Matthew. 15. but our Catholic Roman Church, faith and religion, by the
rest is long before the reformation, The Church and her crew faith is from the
time of the apostles.
ordeered, and printed in the tables of verytie, forasmuch seeing that these
many ages it has been from the time of the Apostles, and long before has
prevented the reformed, nether can any of their writers, or centurians, show,
and declare, as yet any forcible, and sufficient argument, what time, place, or
by what author any corruption, entered in the Catholic Roman Church. Morouer
there was none (except heretics) who believed these things, contrary to the
doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church: or have proposed, to be believed, which
they dogmatically indeed believe, and peruersly propound to be believed, if
they can as yet show, and declare, An honest challenge.
let them approve them selves men, for their souls good, and the honor of their
reformed religion, and for the satisfaction of many, halting betwixt their new
opinions, and our old Roman Catholic doctrine.

Morouer we may easily declare and demonstrate, these your dogmaticall
opinions, and paradoxes; in which you do discrepat, The new reformed religion
is long sensed condemned.
and disagre from us, long since to be condemned, and to be tried real
heresies, out of diverse sectaries already condemned by the Church. also what
time, place, increas, procedings and author, of who^ they weer oppugned, and
gainsaid: It is bulded on the old heresies already condemned.
which when they weere brought to light, and made known to all men, did all
savor of heresy, novelty, and change of religion: with no long apparent
continuans of long keiping possession, or perseuerant time, as shall be in every
place, and argument of this book observed, the man, and his opinion, the
oppugner, and contradictor, the censor, and judgment; the age, and time.

And therefore as for our part we shall first let Tert de praescr. haret. c. 32.
as a defender of the Catholic Roman faith, step into the field, with whom we
demand, Tert. demandes of the heretics their entres.
and inquyre of your new nouation and vpstatt reformation (because you claim
the Catholic Church, and her name unto you) in this manner asking of you, by
these interrogations [saying as he said, to the heretics in his tyme] What do
you in my place, and be none of mine? lykwyse by what right Marcion, Luther,
Calvin, cut ye down my woods, by what lice^se Vale^tin, Luther, Calvin, made
into my fountains: by what authority Appelles, Luther, Calvin, break you my
bounds: mine is the possession; why do ye rest here, to sow, and pasture at
your pleasure? mine is the possession: Tertul defendes the Catholic name to
aperte in to him as to a lawful successor of the Apostles.
long since I possessed it: and first I did possess it: I show the first
original of the owners: to whom the thing was proper, thus he. Morouer our
holy father S. August. lib. de vtilit. cred c. 7. as an other martial champion
enters in the field against the heretics of his time, who usurped the
Catholic name, [and sayes] there is one Church, All heresy confess one Church.
as al confess, and if you look on the wholl compass of the world, it
exceeds all other in number, as they affirm that know: also she is more
sincere in doctrine of the treuth; and there is one Catholic Church, Diverse
heresies heth given diverse names to her; bot culd never deface her of the
Catholic name.
to which diverse heresies have given different names, when as every on of them
have their proper name, which they dare not deny: by which it may easily
appear, to whom the name Catholic (of which al are desirous) ought to be
attributed. This word Catholic made him to boast, and outface the enimyes
[saying] contr. epist. fund. c. 4. I may not omit this wisdom, This name
catholic mad^s him to boost against heresies.
which you deny to be the Catholic Church, there ar diverse other things, which
do most justly retain, and hold me in her bounds, as unity, there hold me
the consent of people, Consent of people authority, and the name Catholic held
S Augastin in the Church.
and nations, the authority which had her beginning by mirackles, nourished by
hope, augmented by charity, confirmed by antiquity: there do hold me the
succession of Bishopes, unto this present day from the very seat of Peter: to
whom our Lord commended the feeding of his sheep after his resurrection, to
the Episcopal dignity of the present Bishop: and last the name catholic does
hold me in the unity of the Church, Not without cause the churh has retained
the name Catholic.
which name this Church has always, not without cause, among so many
different sects of heresies, in such sort obtained, that although all heretics
desire to be called Catholics: yet if a stranger should demand, where is the
assembly of the Catholic Church? No heresy can show their church for
catholic.
there is no heretik, that dares assign him his temple, or his preiching-hous,
for Catholic. Likewise in his Symbol (says he) we do believe the holy Church,
that is Catholic, for the heretics, and schismatikes, do call their
congregations Churches: but the heretics believing those things of God, which are false, Heretics by error do violat the faith. Schismatikes by making
divisions violated unity. They apertein not to the Catholic church.
do violate the faith: and the schismatikes, by unlawful diuisio^s, do separat
them selfs from brotherly charity, although they believe in all things the
same with us. And for this cause, nether do the heretics, or schismatikes,
apertain to the catholic Church. And again S. Aug. lib. de unit. eccles. c. 4.
says, all those that believe that our lord JESUS CHRIST is come in the flesh,
in which he was borne, and has suffered, and that he is the Son of God, with
God, and one with the Father, and the only immutable word of the father, by
whom all things weer made, but do in such sort dissent from his body, which is
his Church, that their communion is not withal them, with whom the Catholic
Church does participate, but ar in some divided part, it is a manifest token,
that they are not in the catholic Church. and lykwise Prosper (says) that he
who does communicate, He who accordes with the universal Church is a Catholic.
Under S. Cyprian* the people where called Catholics.
with this universal church, is a Christian, and, a Catholic; and he that does
not communicate, is an heretik, and an Antichrist. And Pacianus (says) the
people under S. Cyprians charge have never been called otherwise, then
Catholics Now amongst thiese testimonies, what place have our reformed, to be
named with a catholic title, whom (as S. Aug. says) dissension, and division
makes heretics. And again in his Epist. 152. ad donatist. Whosoever is
divided from the Catholic Church [sayes he] how laudable soever he seem to
live, for this only crime, No heretik nor schismatik how soever he live well,
can not be saved out of the church.
that he is only separated from the unity of the Church, he shall be also
secluded from life, and the wrath of God shall remain on him. This same argument
has Fulgentius lib. de fid. ad Pet. diac. cap. 29 (saying) hold for most
certain, and dout not in any manner, that no heretik, or schismatik, baptized in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, if he be not in unity, with the
catholik-Church, although he give great alms, and shede his very blood for the
name of CHRIST: yet can he in no wise be saved. Thus the fathers in the
primitive time, wholly affirm, how so ever they agree with the Catholics in
all the artickles of the belief, and in holy Scriptur, yet not being in the
unity of the catholic church, can not be saved. What shall we say of the
modern heresies, that deny the artikles of there belief, The ignorance of
heresy to pretend which is no thaires.
and pervert the Scripture in adding, and diminishing, in glossing, and
commenting, in changing, and chopping: and yet will pretend the Catholic
Church, and her name. But in vain, as S. Augustine says to the Donatistes, you
accord with us in baptism, and in the belief, and in all other Sacraments of
our Lord: but in the Spirit of unity, and in the place of peace, and last in
the catholic Church, No heresy could ever atteine to the name Catholic, how
soever they weere desirous to have it.
you are not with us, and therefore heretics, separated, and cut of from the
church, and nothing pertinent to this name Catholic. For we see evidently
this name kept, S. Augustein in the right faith, for no heretik could obtein
the name of the Catholic Church, although every heresy did much desyr to
obtein it. The reason is, because that all heresies, be but parts and peculiar
sects, of some country, or the doctrine of a small time. The word Catholic
betokenes ane universal profession.
Where as the word Catholic, does betoken a certain universal profession,
enduring from the beginning, to the ending, and spread abrod thorovv all
parts, but those who began their doctrine, after the apostles time, were ever
named of their masteres, The heresies have their names of the inuentors of that
sect.
as the Arians, of Arrius: the Lutherans, of Luther: and the Caluinists of
Calvin: but they in the contrary were called Catholics, who kept the
universal faith, which the Apostles had first taught: and which was
continued alvvayes in the whole Church. And for that S. Augustine tract. 22. in
Ioh. We have received the holy Ghost, He has received the holy Ghost, that
keeps unity, and gif we rejoice of the faith with the name.
if we love the church, and if we be knit, and conjoined together, by
charity, if we do all exalt, and rejoice to be a catholic, as well in faith,
as in name. Here upon Pacianus Epist. 1. ad Symphron. says, be not angry good
brother, and do not afflict thy self, a Christian is my name; The word
Christian is the forname, and the word Catholic is the surname.
and a Catholic is my surname; by the former, I am called, and by the second, I
am made manifest. Therefore this name is no ways attributed to those, who are
enemies to this name, and has it in scorn, and mockery, that justly they
discover there corrupt affection, The corrupt affections of heretics to this
name Catholic.
and heretical malice toward the word, in so much, that some of them calls
it a void, and vain word, some again a graceless term, and fruitles name,
so the old* heretics as S. August. cont Gaud. lib. 2. cap. 25. (says) called
it a humain fiction, Their intention is to put out of memory the name Catholic.
by their evil nature, and quality, they give diligence to abolish and
extinguish both the verity of our faith, and the name consonant thereunto,
therefore their name declare the^ sufficiently what they are, prognosticating
of them as they are, and as Justinius in triphone says, Heretics were
prognosticat to com before they came.
there shall arise many false Christ's, and false Prophet, and they shall seduce
many of the faithful, and are distinguished amongst us taking their names of
certane men, as every on was author of one new doctrine, and of these some were
called Marcionists: Basilidanes: other Saturnists: others agane of late
Lutheranes: Their names and profession is after the name of men, and so fail
to be called Catholic.
Caluinists: Protestants: Puritanes: and therefore in this, they fail to be
called Christianes, as says Athan. in apol. secund, and Lact. firm. lib. 4. c.
30. de vera sapientia. Therefore heretics, and there Reformed faith, is not
learned of the Apostles, fathers, and predecessors of the Church, but partly
borrowed of some other heresy: or partly by fantastical, and new invention;
and so no faith but invention, neither Apostolical, but Pharisaicall, The
reformed faith ^is lyk a painted man.
nether Catholic, but particular: which is no more faith in effect, than a
painted man is a man. For this cause, S. Hieron, Epist. ad Pamach. reproaches,
and taxes the heretics (saying) Wheir for after fourhundrith years past labor
ye to teach, which before we have not known, for unto this present day, The
world was Catholic. Christian before their faith was known.
without your doctrine, the world was Christian. And Tertull. de praes.
haeretic. repelles their vain boast, concerning any Catholic title, saying,
who ar ye? from whence? and when came ye? where have ye lurked so long? And S.
August. no less scorns them saying to the Donat. S. Aug. admiration from
whence they are come.
From whence have ye apeared? of what soil, have ye sprunge out? over what
sea, have ye comed? or what heaven have ye fallen from? And lykwise Opt. Melet.
lib. 2. contr. Parm. (Says) in dirision to the heretics: Opt. Mel. derides
them, asking the original of their church.
Show the original of your Church, who would challenge to you the holy
Catholick-Church. And as Valor. Max. lib. 6. in principio says, for
conclusion, that as the name of God is a most certain pledge of humane
salvation, As the name of God is a sauegard to salvation: so is the Catholic
name a sauegard to al beleueres.
and a sauegard for man, so is this name Catholic a sauegard to al Christian
belieuers: and theirfor we have great reason, to adheere; and join our self
to the Catholik-Church: and not to your reformed, which has no affinity, nor
any thing of a Catholic Church, or name in it.

Morouer these, and diverse reasones, persuade me, Reasone, persuades man to
believe the Roma^-Church to be Catholic.
the only Roman Catholic faith, to be accepted as true Apostolical doctrine,
but yours, and others suchlyk, under pretext color of reformation, to be
repudiat, as very fleeting dregs, of heresy. Which shall not be difficill to
prove. For the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. that there is one comen, and saving
faith, in expressing these words, there is one God, one faith, one Baptism.

This Church is praised of the Apostles own mouch.
And first, for that is the true, and Apostolical faith which the Apostel,
praising God, and writting the Romans cap. 1. does say, your faith is published
through the whole world. But our faith (which is hated, and dispraised by name
of Papistry, and proprie) is that same Roman faith. This Catholic church is
hated of all heretics, and calumniated.
Seeing no man as yet, by any sure reason, could show the Roman Church from that
time, to discrepat or disagree in any substantial point, or that either
Bishope, counsel, or any Catholic person do dissent from the Roman Church in
essentialles; or yet the pastors of our Church, Amongst the pastors of the
Roman Church there is no varia^ce in essentialles.
at any time to vary, from them in substantial things; yea in the smal-lest
artickles what soever; but all to accord and agree with the Catholic faith, and
to favor, no opinion of heresy. Therefore our Papisticall and Roman faith,
has obtained the title of the Catholic and Apostolical name. That richtly
others sects discovered, this is only to be adjudged, and believed, of all
men, for true Catholic, and Apostolical, and yours for heresy.

True faith most be received and believed of hearing and not by reading of
books or revelations.
The second reason is, the true faith, which who ordinarily declares, or teaches
to any other, it must be first by the ear received of the Church of God, by the
preaching of Christ, as the apostell affirms, Romans 10. faith is by hearing,
and hearing is by the word of Christ, [as he would say] true faith is conceived
not immediately by revelation, or reading of the Scriptures: but by those
things, which are hard of the preacher, and mediatly by external doctrine: and
the doctrine trewly that is hard, or to be hard, consistes in the word of God,
preached by the Church. But the reformed faith teached by Luther, and Calvin,
and their faith is not by hearing, and external doctrine, which they ever
received in the Church; from any pastor, doctor, bishope, or any other having
authority of mission, The Protestants preiching is nether by the word of God,
nether of the church.
or ever had commission of any man to preach that reformed faith. Therefore
their reformed faith is no true faith.

The minor is evident, because they can not produce any doctor nor pastor, (if
they can, do it) from whom they have received their doctrine. For the
assertiones, written by Luther him self. declare the contrary. Who in his book
of Seruill liberty, Luthers glory him to dissent from all the fathers of the
Church.
obiectes against Erasmus Rotterd. in the cause of frewill, publicly to vant,
and boast him to depart, and dissent from the doctrine of all the former
pastores of the Church, and declared by the mouth of the Church; and to oppose
him self co^traire to Dion. Areop. Iren. Clem. Cypr. Arnob. August etc. Whose
doctrine in the course of frewill delivered of the elders, to be true Catholic
doctrine, and authorized of the mouth of the Church. We (says Luther) beliue,
Luther adjudged all the fathers blind and ignorant in the Scriptures.
and preach, that the fathers all, these many ages past, plainly have been
blind, and most inexpert, ignorant, and unlearned in the holly Scriptures. And
therefore for conclusion of this minor their preaching, and doctrine is not of
the Church, nor of any pastor of the Church, and consequently no faith, nether
word of God.

True faith should begin at Ierusaie^.
The third reason is, the preaching of the true faith, ought to begin at
Jerusalem, and after to go abrod through all the parts of the world, as it is
written in S. Luc. 24. it behooved that penance, and remission of sins, should
be preached in his name to all nations beginning at Jerusalem, but the
preaching of Luther, and Caluins reformed faith, has not begone at Jerusalem,
The reformed faith begane in Germany and in Geneue, and in particulare corns.
nether is it spread abrod through the world, and therefore it is no true faith.

The minor is evident, for Luther begane in Wittemberg, in Saxony; and Calvin
in Geneua, in Sauoye: their preachings. They never saluted Jerusalem, nether is
their reformed faith far spread abroad: nether has it ben in Asia, Africa,
Greece, Egypt: nether in many Kingdoms of Europe: and farlesse through the
world: nether to the midst of it. And although the Church (as they say) is
old, and aged, yet their Synagogue is more apparent to be at an end: Divisions
and sects are futer tokens of an^ end.
for their own diuisiones, and daily mutations, are prognostications of an end,
for the Euangellist says, Luc. c. 1. every Kingdom divided in it self shall be
desolat, and this desolation, appears rightly in the propagation of sects:
for some are Sacramentaries, In what number of sects the reformed fallin whil,
they forsake the Catholic Church.
some Confessionistes, some fierce, some slacker, some contra-deuills, some
hellishe devils, some two Sacramentaries, other three Sacramentaries, some
superintendents, some Luther-Caluinists, some anti-Caluinists, some
new-Pelagians, some new Manicheans, some Puritans, some Gomaristes,
contra-Puritanes, Arminians, etc. What a rabble and a degenerat crew of sects,
and each one has the new reformed Church, and the new no faith, In vain they
would be called Catholics where Satan has his dominion it tendes to
desolation.
and are not ashamed to claim the Catholic name to them, and the Church of
Christ, Where Antichrist has his desolation, and abominable confusion of
sects. And therefore their religion, reformation, and faith, is nether
religion, faith, nor Gospel.

The Protestants says without warrandes.
There exception here can not be omitted undiscovered, in that they affirm, and
say, them to hold the same doctrine, which begann at Jerusalem, there upon to
assume to them the Apostolical, and Catholic faith

This exception is in vain, for when soever any heretik did appare, he said,
and affirmed the same, Christ answer e our Catholic beg nn^g.
but evil proved, here upon Christ ^eencounters their folish-cauilling-lies,
who has not placed the doctrine, but the beginning of the Evangelical
preaching, to take place at Jerusalem, for he says, True doctrine is no^ known
but preaching, and to preachers.
beginning at Jerusalem, to wit, the self preachers, for the doctrine is not
known, except by preaching, as the Apostel says, how shall they believe in
him, in whom they have not heard: and how shall they hear, without preaching?
therefore the preacher, and the doctrine must begin first at Jerusalem. The
preacher and the doctrine most begin at Jerusalem.
Which the new reformed preachers have not done, therefore their doctrine, and
reformed faith is nether Apostolical, nor Catholic.

All Churches has one beginning of the Apostolical preaching beginning at
Jerusalem.
For all particular Churches, have one original, and commun beginning to wit,
the Apostolical pr aching, beginning at Jerusalem, and after by the same
Apostles spread abrod in diverse nations. It ^est now after so many ages, that
albeit the Churches of the other Apostles has perished, not w h standing only
Peter's the Prince of the Apostles, to wit the Church of Rome, Rome Church
stands by singular privilege of God, and that in it is livly authority.
by the singular benefit of God, to remain: Where many years he teached, and in
it, ended his life. which as, S. Aug Epist 162. ad Glorium, says, has ever
been resident with the authority of the apostolical chair. And theirfor for
verification of our mission, doctrine, and faith, we make manifest, and declare
one original, to be of the Apostles, for Peter him self first of all other
has preached in Jerusalem and also from this seat, when as yet the seats of
the other apostles weer extant: The church of Rome is chief of all other seats
when the Apostles were a-liue. All the fathers defended there original by this
church. True faith should be undoubted in all things.
not with standing as chief of all others, and hereto many holy fathers, and
the true Senators of the world. have inferred and induced punctually, the
orignall of their churches, against the heretics of their time. As Tertull. de
praesc. haeret. 2. con. lib 3. c. 3. Epiph. haret. 27. aug. 4.

The fourth reason is, that the true Catholic faith ought to be undoubted in
all things, the which the Church proposes to be believed, so that it is most
certain to us, the thing which we are commanded to belief, to be such like, for
other ways it should not be true faith, because faith is the substance of
things hoped (this is the true proper, and sure fundament) and an argument of
nothing seen. Heb. 9. and this is the true definition, of our Catholic faith:
and the vndoubtenes there of, to depend on the Church. But the Reformed faith
of Luther, and Calvin, is not undoubted, and first I prove, The Protestants
faith is full of doutes.
because in matters of greatest importance, and moment of faith, they disagree
one from the other extremly. For Luther, (omitting many to touch a few
discrepants) in his book de capt. bap. printed anno 1520. about the beginning,
does acknowledge only one Sacrament, if we do speak, says he, according to the
custom of the Scripture: Luther and Calvin vary in the number of the
Sacraments.
notwithstanding after he takes occation for the time, to place three, bapt.
the Lords supper, and penance.

Far other ways, disputes Calvin, in his Parnassus, lib. 4. instit. cap. 18..
19, whil he reckneth two Sacraments, saying besides these, none other is
institute of God, and yet the Church of the faithful, ought not to acknowledge
any other. Notwithstanding a little after in the same book, Order a Sacrament
acknowledged of Calvin.
cap. 19.. 31. he sings an other thing, placeing order, amongst the Sacraments:
there rests imposition of hands, says he, which in true, and lawful
ordination, I grant to be a Sacrament.

Bread and wine to be turned in to the body and blood of Christus is Luthers
opinion.
Again Luther in his book de abroganda miss. pri. plainly teaches, that Christ
when he said: this is my body: and this is my blood: changed the bread into his
body: and the wine into his blood: and likewise in his Sermon. de Euchar. it is
not there bread, says he, and wine, but only the species of bread, and wine.
Calvin called bread and wine Sacramental symboles.
Contrariwise, Calvin denied his body, and blood corporally, and essentially,
to be in the Eucharist, but only spiritually, and sacramentally, as lib. 4
instit. c. 17.. 5. for that we confess him to be no other way, in the
Sacrament, tha^ by the eating of faith, neither can he no other ways be
presupposed, who in his first. says, bread and wine, says he are signs,
which do represent the invisible food, that we receive of the flesh, and blood
of Christ, by faith.

Morouer how variable, and inconstant is Luther, in the other artickles of the
faith. Luth. is so variable in the artikles of our faith that in one artkle he
is noted of 36 errores.
That in one artikle of the communion of the one kind, or under both: he is
convinced of 36. filthy errors, as Cochlaeus Reherseth at length.

In this giddiness labors Calvin, whill in his book adu. gentil. and in
diverse his epistles to the Polonians, affirms some time Christ the Sone of
God to be equal to his father (forth with in his 2. of instit. cap. 14.. 3.)
the same aequalitie he retractes, Calvin is also variable in his opinion
concerning the equality of Christ with his father.
and subjects it to the Father, alswell the divine nature, as the humane, for
treating how Christ in the day of judgment is to deliver up the kingdom, to
God, his father: than (says he) the name it self, and the croun of glory: and
what soever he received of his father, he shall again subject to the father,
that God may be all in all.

In conclusion of this, their reformed faith, is not undoubted, nether which
they propound, to be believed is of the giddiness of Heretics, whose
variablenes, and inconstancy is like to the winds of the heaven, and therefore
no faith, nether religion is the profession of the reformed.

The last reasone is, true faith does declare, and show the true God: true
salvation: True faith shows the true God, salvation, and a good life. The
Protestants faith is clean contrary.
and the true way to live well: as also to escheu all kind of filthynes: and
uncleanness: and such is the Catholic Roman faith, and not Luthers, or
Caluins, which contain many things contrary to right reasone; against divine
and humane laws, and natural good maneres.

As first that infantes believe in Baptism. Luth, Luther says that infantes
believe in Baptism. Calvin that yt was decreed of God the sin of Adam.
Caluiu says that God has ordened some to life, and some to death: and this is
called his predestination. Calvin makes God author of sin.
contr. Cochl. Anno 23.

Secondly, that it was decreted of God, that Adam should sin. Calu. lib.
instit. 3. c. 23.. 7.

Thirdly, that God has decreed some to eternal life, and other some to
eternal condemnation, and this is his preordination, for all is not created to
a like condition, therefore as each one, is made to his own proper end, wither
to life, or to death, (we say) that he is predestinat of God. Calvin. lib. 3.
institut. cap. 21.. 5.

Morouer, he makes God the author of sin, and to work iniquity. For (says
he) he moueed Absalon to commit incest, in that (says he) that Absalon with an
incestuous commixtion, defiled his fathers bed, and did commit a detestable
crime: not with standing God pronuncis, this work, to be his deed, and not
Absalones. Calu. lib. 1. inst. cap. 18.. 1. and ibid. c. 17. 8. Morouer, in the
same book, and chapter (he says) that God not only used the works of the
wicked, but also governed their counsel, and effects and to be author of all
their scelerous deeds.

Again, he goes about to gloss, and defend the majesty of God from sin,
and accusation, whill in the same book both he purges God, and makes him
author of sin, and now (says he) from whence are the evils of Job, and the
disobedience of Helies children; which immediately before, he has alleged, and
proved to be of God, and in the end plainly declaires, and affirms, God to be
the author of sin. how soever these Censorists-Papists would of lykelyhood
have these to happen, by his idle permission. Calu. lib. 1. cap. 14.. 16 and
cap. 18.. 4.

Calvin says man has no freewill but does of necessity. A man is justified
by only faith and all good works are sin.
Likewise has he not extinguished, and robbed man of freewill, but to be ruled
by necessity. Calu. lib. 1. cap. 15.. 1.

Morouer Calvin teaches a man, to be justified by only faith, and good works
not only to be unprofitable, but to be abominable: and how soever they be done
of the righteous man, they are ever sin, and abominable in the sight of God.
Calu. lib. 3. instit. cap. 11.. 19. in this manner, and paradoxes, plays the
reformed, applying against the law of right reasone, and all good manners, The
end that heresies intendes.
and for the teaching of the true faith, unto the knowledge of God, and
salvation, and to live Godly, and well. but their new no faith, and heretical
reformation, makes an open way to all kind of wickedness, and to damnation.
and by this way the reformed, blindes, and obscures the knowledge of God, which
is made known by true faith, in teaching strange doctrine, not to salvation, but
to condemnation, and auouching such damnable paradoxes, and opinions to the
liberty of the flesh, to the following of all sensualite, and wikednes, and
for conclusion this is the profane bragg of the protestants to call them
selfs which they are not, no more then an ape is a man, so no more ar the
reformed, catholics, albeit they desire to be so called. Whose reformation is
invented by the private invention of particular men, Heresy is by tolleration
of some particular man now allowed now disproued.
and manteined by private affection of some private prince, some times for forty
years or fyftie as new faithes ar accustomed to be received, now allowed, now
disprowed, now embraced, now disliked, so that this private faith is far from
the catholic faith which from the beginning has been received, and without
interruption has continued. this faith may no ways be devysed of man or
invented by man, or upon affection allowed, and approwed, but it must be
learned of the church, for faith is by hearing, Bot treue faith is by hearing
of the church.
and not be reading, or revelation, as we see in the vocation of S. Paul to be
a chosen vessel of God, he was sent to Ananias in Damascus to learn of him,
what he should do, also Cornelius a godly man, and fearing god, although he
might have been taught of the angel, that appeared to him, yet was he not, but
by that same angel was commanded to send to Ioppa, for Simon Peter to com to
him, and he shall show thee, Says he, what thou ougthest to do. So that this
treu Catholic faith which the Roman church holds is of Gods ordinance, and
learned of our predecessors and not as the reformed fatth is, It is ane evil
thing not to believe the church.
devised and fained of new inventions. for as S. Leo, says, to Eutichian, What
is, more wicked, than to have ungodly opinions, and no^ to believe the church,
and the holy fathers of the church, whose wisdom, and learning is in
admiration to the world, and therefore in the fight of all the world, the
reformed is condemned, in usurping, their faith, and name, for Catholic whose
entries, and progress, is nether of God, nor for God, nor savor no point, of
the catholic faith, nether of the catholic name. for they are allienat from
this church and consequently from god him self for as S. August says he shall
not have god for his father, that will not have the church for his mother.

OBJECTION.
Our faith is pure. reformed, and is Catholic, forasmuch as it is free, of the
errors, and superstitions of the papistis, and therefore this, our reformation
is to be preferred, and is more Catholic, then the papists faith is.

ANSVER.
TOo late have thou spru^g up, vain boaster, that with these vain words, and
suchlyk illusiones thou labores to seduce, and blind so many learned men in the
church of God, or perchance thou think them to be children lying in craddles
that in singing of such triflinge songs thou can make them slumber, or rather
stumble.

The protestants reformation, admittes no power* spiritual or temporal.
What purity ^s in yowr faith, how reformed, and how long catholic, that more
justly it may be called deformed, and the in bringer of all deformatio^, and
destruction of all ecclesiastical powere the which reformation admits no
policy, and no ecclesiastical form, but damnes the rites of all former ages,
Derides the cannones of the Church, They deride the canons of the Church and
Scoffs at the fathers.
mockes, and scoffs the holy fathers, howsoever they weer near the time of
the Apostles. for evidence does not Call. lib. 3. instit. cap. 4.. 38. condemn
all the ancient fathers, whose books ar extant, in speaking of satisfaction:
and that in his fourth book of instit. cap. 12.. 20. says he.

Calvin conde^nes the ancient fatheres and presses them to have sown
superstition in the Church.
In all he will not excuse the ancient fathers but that they have sowed the
seed of superstition, and have given occasion to Tyranny, which thereafter a
rose in the church, and than forth with began the superstitious observance of
Lent, thus he. and thus is the beginning of the reformation, and the purity of
the gospel, to bolster heresy, for treuth, and verity. It may be called a
renouation of old damned heresies, harken good friends, and I shall declare the
assumtion, and the effect of this reformation, first the true church of God,
visible in all the countries of the world, (in this reformed churches opinion)
to have perished, and to remain, and a bide in some certain places of the
world, obscure, and hid, of this mind was the Donatists: as witness, Opt.
meleu. lib. 2. cont parm. and S. Ang. lib. de Unit. Eccl. cap. 12. this same
doctrine of reformed faith, The Church to have perished, was the old heretics
opinion with the reformers.
has Calvin teached, that the church of Christ, has perished, and remains
invisible, aganst the plain tenor of the Scriptur. Call. lib. 4. cap. 2.. 2.

Secondly the Arrianes taught, the son, not to be aequall to the father in
deity as witness, Epiph. heresy 69.

The sone is not equal with the father.
And the same grounds, has Calvin for his reformation. lib. 2. inst. c. 14.. 3.

God is the author of sin.
Thirdly, Florinus held opinion, God to be the author of sins, as Eusebius. lib.
5. c. 20.

And the same opinion is stoutly defended of Calvin. lib. 1. just cap 18. 4 5.
and lib. 1. cap. 15. 16.

Man is instified by only faith.
Fourtly, man to be justified, and saved by only faith* and not by works, was
the opinion of Simon Magus, and Eunomius, as S. Aug. haer. 54. and Iren. lib. 1
cap. 20.

The same doctrine teaches Luth. in Sermon. de piscat Petri, We should come only
with Ysaac (says he) that is with faith: and the servants and asses, that is
works, it behoweth to leave them below, and a side. And in an other Sermon in
that subject (Sic Deus dilexit mundu^.) if thou com (says he) with Sackes full
of good works, it behooves thee to lay the^ down otherwise thou can not
enter into heaven. And Calvin there make his bragg in his third book of inst. cap
11.. 14. Now plainly the reader does behold (says he) with what oequitie the
Sophistical papists do cavil, and judge our religion, when we say Aman is
justified by only faith.

Man has no freewill.
Fyftlie Manicheus condemned, and denied frewill. as S. Aug. haeres. 49.

The same has Luther renewed as in his book of Servill will cont. Eras. and
suchlyk, Call. lib. 2. cap. 2.. 4.

This name of frewill has ever been extant with the Latins, but with the
Greeks (...) is a word much more arrogant. Mariadge and Virginity is alyk in
merit.


Sixtlie Iouinian, made Marriage alyke in dignity and merit, to Virginity, and
plainly to have taught fasting and abstinence to be of no merit as S. Hier.
observes. lib. 1. and 2. cont. Iouian.

These same subjects teaches Luther, and Calvin, Luther in his epithalamio,
and Call. lib. 4. c. 12.. 19. and cap. 13.. 3.

what if I should repeat the erroneous opinions of the Albigenses, Waldens.
Wiclif. Hussites, Abailardes, Baer^^ garians, Almarik, and suchlyk abominable
sects condemned long since of the Church, and of all general counsels
accursed. and yet not withstanding these are the patrones, The old heretics ar
the patrones of the new heretics.
and Rabbis of the reformed, who weer renewers of Heresy, inuentors of
noualties, whose begininge, and progress is known, to be wrapped in errore
and superstition, while they think to be free, ar snared in blindnese of
understanding, and in hardness of heart, They are blind through the hardness of
there heart.
and endured goes headlonge to perdition, as reprobated of God through the
hardness of their own heart, and therefore if any man censure, and judge with
equity, the reformed they have no faith, no religion, no name but the name of
particular men, as Caluinists, and Lutherans, and of suchlyk monsters, already
condemned And therefore for conclusion let the catholic Roman faith live, and
reign, to whose camp I admon she all adversaries not to approach, for treuely
it is pleasant, and delectable to be a protestant, but more Secure to die a
Catholic* therefore let every good Christian eschew, and flee from the
Lutherans, and Galuinistes, who ar particular sects, seeing each, Gentell
reader flee the heretics for they promise much and porforme but little.
one of them promisseth with Faustus Manicheus to give a new illumination, and
a new reformation, every on of them endeuoreth to draw the into his sect, but
take heed, and be warned, and cry with S. Hieron. epist. ad Damas. (Meletius,
Vitalis, and Paulinus, also Luther; Calvin; and Rotman: and all other
sectaries, do say, that they have the true and Christian faith) so said the
heretics of old, so says the modern, perchance aman might believe, if one
said it, but two, and three do say, and they all do lie. what hunting make they
to make a proselite; and a child of hell: o times, o maneres, o monsters what
absurdities follows this new reformation, as is rehearsed, that Christian men
are brought in that perplexity of mind, to stad hummering, and in consultation
with them selves, what side to be on, what religion to embrace, what faith to
believe, A conclusion descrybinge them to who^ they are lyk.
for they them selves, that are the rabbis of this reformation are departed
from the testament of the Catholic church, (to wit from unity, peace, and holy
obedience) and ar Joined to the gentilles (to do the very works of the
gentilles) and ar sold to do evil, 1. Machab. 1. v. 16. Matthew. 26.
and mantein the evil, and to condemn the righteous, and to bring perdition
to the souls of men, throw their filthy, and damnable persuations. Matthew. 7.
O frindly enemies kissing with a venomous mouth: having sugered lips to ly.
O wolfes hypocrisy, under a lambs countenance to deceave. Genes 3.
O cruel wound, under pretext of a charitable medicine. Iudicum 14.
O serpents narration, full of envy, and malice, to our first parents; O
desembled sighs, 2. Reg. c. 20.
and gronings, the hypocritall Tears of Dalila. 2. Match. c. 13.
O Ioabs trechorous salutation, to Amaza. O Triphons wicked banquet, to
Ionathas. O Gabonit policy to deceave Israel, what else ar all the heretics,
do they not pretend simplicity, innocence, perfection, religion, and cloth
the^ selves with the catholic name, when all is falsehood, and wickedness, that
they pretend* and thus the prophet says, they protect them selves, putting
their hope in an vntreuth and falshoode. Isa 68. being men void of grace, and
destitute of the fear of the Lord, and ar become the children of this world to
be wise in their generation, and to be destitute of all knowledge concerning
God, and so in the end to perish miserably.

QVAESTIO. II. Of the damnable, and special faith of the Heretics.
Wherefore do the Papists reject our special faith, which gives secure
consolation to the faithful. Luth. art 10.11.12. Call. lib. 3. inst. cap 2..
16.17.

ANSWER.
THAT special faith by which arises sure confidence, by reasone of Christ's
imputative justice, merit, and satisfaction, in beleueing with your selves
sins to be remitted, and to be just* and of God predestinat to eternal
lyffe, as also undoubtedly to obtain the inheritance of the k^ngdome of God.
This security, Only faith is deadly, and fight against God. and the Scriptures.
and confidence is false, and full of deadly poison. and seals your obcecat,
and blind conscience to go forward teme^rously, in presumption against God,
and his wisdom, revealed in holy Scriptures, which reclames, this assertion to
be, false, vain, With stands nothing.
and foolish, and by consequence, accursed; As these evident testimonies
witness, And first Ecclesiast. says, that a man knows not, Man's
rygh^eousnes, and predestination is uncertain in this life,
whether he is worthy of Love, or hatred but, all things ar kept uncertain to
the end* Eccl. cap. 9. v. 1. The which words, ar spoken of righteous-men, who
are not guyltie of any sin in them selves, for the preacher has said a
little before that there are ryghteous, just, and wise men, whose state of
rychteousnes in this life, and predestination is uncertain. Secondly the same
preacher pronunceth plainly to reconcyled persons with God, Reconciled
persons at not without fear of the remitted sin.
saying, of the forgiven sin, be not without fear. Eccles 5. v 5. therefore,
what certainty, and security, can be presupposed, when we are commanded to
fear, the forgiven sin. Thridly, S. Paull 1. Cor. cap. 4. v. 4. Speakinge of
the judgment of conscience, says, as touckinge me, I pass little to be judged
of you, or man's judgment; nor I judge not my self.

Justification is a hiden secret, so that of hide things, no man is sure and
farrles secur and certain.
For I know no thing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. which all do
sound incertantie in justification, and no confident security: as though he
would say, the justification of man, is so hid, and secret, that albeit no
man be guilty, and faulty, of sin in him self: yet notwithstanding, a man
may not therefore promise to him self undoubted justification. as all the
fathers do expound this place: as, Ambr. Chryso. Theoph. Theod. Anselm etc.

Unto which accordes. S. Chry. oper. imperf. in Mat. hom. 38. No man (says he)
is vnder-propped, and vpholden with so great firmness, and strength, that he
can be secure of his justification, A presu^ptious temeritie in the
protestants.
thus he. their for all heretikos, puritanes, and whatsoever sectaries may be
ashamed of their temerous presu^ption in persuadinge, and assuringe to them
selves predestination, and justification, which neither the Apostles, neither
fathers, nor holy Church has ever presumed, to ascribe to them selves.

The temeritie of this only faith detected, does demonstrate the presumption,
Special faith is no ways revealed of God as a thing certain to be believed.
and foolishnes of them in this formal argument.

No man can believe any thing surely, in the certainty of faith, except the
self same be revealed of God. Therefore in particular, me to be just, with
habitual righteousness, at no time is revealed. (excluding the singular
privilege of Gods divine revelation, which is geuin to veriefewe) therefore it
can not be that I can believe the certainty of suchlyk faith, to be revealed
of God, which sightes against him self as an axio^ to an impossibility.

In treue faith no man can believe false things.
Moreover, no man can or may believe falsely in heavenly faith: but this is
falsely believed of many, them selves to be just. For the verification of the
same, does not the Lutheranes, believe them selves to be just, but the
Caluinistes iniust? But the protestants faith beliues falstie many things.
and treuly contrary wise the Caluinistes believe the^ selves to be just, and
the Lutheranes iniust. For every sect belieueth their ovne to be just, but
others unjust. Therefore it is of necessity this special faith to be iniust,
and false, for wherefore is it trewer which the Lutheranes does believe, than
that which the Caluinistes believe, for every one of the^ obiectes to the other
the inspiratio^ of the spirit, and each one chale^dge an other of error?
Therefore only, and speciall-faith, is no faith, and no thing else but deceit,
Only faith is invented for the liberty of the flesh. Eunomius opinion about
only faith, his policy, good life, that many were deceived by him.
and Satan's subtlety to cosen, and deceive the simple, and only invented to
defend the liberty of the flesh. Of this opinion was Eunomius (as says S.
August. lib. de haeres. ad quod vult Deum) to affirm this presumption, of
security of Salvation, by only faith, which this day the modern sectaries
defend. yea (S. Aug. says) that the enemy was so subtle, and of good manners
of lif, that many believed him. Moreover, he affirmed, that no evil could
harm any man, nether perseverance in sin, if he were participant of that
faith, which of him was teached and defended; therefore it follows by this only
faith, Only faith brings no effect with it.
no remission of sins, no justification, no security; for what profits the
doctrine of this faith, when the effect profits not, the effect is remission of
sins, and when this faith conferres not remission of sins, to what end is
it? for an heretic has not thereby remission of sins. I prove the argument
thus. Falls religion is an high offense to God.
God is highly offended with false religion, and with them that believe, and
follow the same, nether have they forgiunesse with God: but it is well known,
that the Lutherans, and Caluinistes in matters most important in Christian
religion do disagre and vary wonderfully among them selves; The Luthera^s and
Caluenists vary greatly among them selves about justification and remission
of sins.
and consequently, the one part is opposite to the other, striving and
contending about religion, therefore they in so believing this only faith, which
is false in it self, offend God, and ar in the wrath of God, so that in this
offense, and wrath, they can have no forgiveness of their sins, and yet all
heretics teach constantly this point to all me^, that they believe securely
and persuade them selves of the remission of their sins and by this
presumption, and arrogant confidence they believe false religion to the
offendinge of God, and to their own just judgment.

Only faith is satanicall and deuilishe for each heretik follows his own
inspiration and is contrary one to and other.
Morouer, the doctrine of this only faith is Sathanicall and deuilish; for
Luther belieueth his sins, to be fogiuen him, and it is so according to his
faith: the Caluiniste lykwise beleues his sins, to be remitted to him, and it
is so according to his faith: but Luther denies them to by remitted to Calnin*
behold how they accord in belieueing one thing, and subuerte their own
Gospel, and both these heretics have received that doctrine, which aperteineth
not to the Euangell of Christ, therefore of their own mouth they are conuniced:
For, seeing the Caluinistes says, Believe God to be appeased, and reconciled
with thee and he is appeased, and thy sins ar forgiven: and this same the
Lutheranes believe, According to their own censure one of the^ erres and in
Verity both erres. Only faith takes away the fear of God.
and yet according to their own censure, and judgment, the one erres, and both
pervert the word of God in teaching false religion, and do haynouslie offend
God, and abide in his wrath; and consequently obtain no remission of sins.
Moroner, this only faith takes away fear from men, and settes the severity of
Gods judgment at naught, because it induces men to persuade them selves
assuredly of Gods mercy, and commandes security, and peace of conscience; The
heretik by this only faith reaches men to be secure for God is not to be feared
as a judge but as a father.
for they are bold to say, God is to be feared, not as a rigorous judge, and not
as a revenger of sins, but as a benign father; for Calvin says, if we think
God a severe judge, than is faith torn, and rent, with the memory of divine
judgment, and therefore justifying faith should be lame, if we think God to be
such a judge, whom we believe to be a benign father, and this their doctrine of
only faith, is to free, and exempt God of his justice, contrary to the holy
Scriptur, which declares the mercy, and judgments of God, as Psalm.. 110. and
in the first commandiment he declaires him self a revenger of sin. Exodus 20.
saying, The Scriptur declaires God to be a just judge, and Zealous.
I am the Lord thy God Zealous, visitinge iniquity. for if he be not to be
feared, as a revenger of sin, to what effect ar these places in Scripture.
Eccles. 5. the most highest is a patient rewarder: and suchlyk if the forgiven
sin be without fear. Again Matthew. 10. fear him who may destroy both soul
and body, in hellfyre and Malach. 1. The son does honor his father, and the
servant his master: if therefore I be a father, wheer is my honor? and if I be a
Lord, and master, where is my fear. and Sal. Pronerb. 28. (says) blessed is
the man, that is ever fearful* by other places as Hier. cap. 5.1 Cor. 9. Psalm.
2. Psalm. 37. and Psalm 50. Psalm. 118 Psalm. 82. Eccles. 7. Eccles 1. Which
passadges condemn this only faith, which would bring the fear of God, and his
judgments in oblivion. They teach the judgments of God at but to fraye us,
and not to fear us.
And to be of no validity, and force, as a thing to fraye us, and not bo fear
us. And in this manner all heretics, in the begininge teach, to approach, and
mount, to the supreme fruit of faith, to wit, security, forgiveness of
sins, peace of conscience, and the settinge of all fear of God a side, from
one extremity to an other, without any midst, and whill they place sinners
in the stars in presumption, and ambition, with Lucifer, Heretics are false
iustifyers and true neckbreakers.
in iustifyinge them by only faith, they percipitat them in condemnation: and
so prove false iustifyers, and treue-neckebreekeres. for as S. August. in Psalm
5. says, Fear is a great saueguarde to them, that go forward to salvation,
yet not in security in this life, for if the Apostell who knew nothing in him
self reprehensible, or sinful, was not secure: much less any heretik
following his own reprobat sense.

Only faith usurps the office of Christ to judge of the hid thoughts of men?
Morouer this only faith, does usurp the office of Christ our judge, in
pronouncinge iudgme^te, of the thoughts of men, which only God does search.
for whosoever in mind does serve the flesh, and sin, can not please God.
Romans 8. Who ar in the flesh, and walk according to the flesh, they can not
please God: but no man is certain, whether sin reign in him or no, No man
is certain of his own perfection nether can justify him self albeit he be
innocent to him self.
or to walk after the flesh: their for no man is certain, that he pleases
God, if any be certain that he walks after the flesh, he is more certain
of this virtue, than the Apostle Paull 1. Corinthians. 4. Who was not bold to
judge him self, whose conscience accused him in no thing guyltie, or
reprehensible of sin for he did read of the Prophet (Delicta quis intelligit)
that is, who knows his sins. Psalm. 18. Therefore he prays to be cleansed of
his hid sins, again Sal. Proverb. 21. There is away that seems to a man
just, and the end thereof, leads to death. and cap. 15. all ways of a man
seems right to him self but God knows the heart. therefore the Apostell did
temperat his sayings, The Apostles modesty in his own judgment of
justification. The heart of man is a depth unsearchable to man.
with fear, least perchance by ignorance, he had sinned. for the heart of man
is a depth, and what is more profound then this depth? Psalm. 41. for men may
speak, and may be seen mouinge, and workinge, and hard speak; but of whom
is his heart penetrated? of whom is his thoughts beholden? what he means,
within him self? What within, he may think, what he would, what he would not,
who shall comprehend this depth? hearing the Apostell, saying, I know nothing
in my self, yet do I not judge my self: would any believe such a profunditie to
be in man, that this depth to him self is not known in wkome it is? this
profunditie of infirmity, appeared not to S. Peter, S. Peter knew not his own
weakness in his rash promises: how shall a man know of his full perfection
which is justification.
when he knew not what was to be done in him self, when rashly he promissed to
dye for our Lord, Matthew. 26. Therefore is any man secure in this life, which is
called a warrfaire and temptation? and as, Hierem. 17. says, the heart of man
is froward, and inscrutable, who shall know it? so that no man, knows, what
is in man, except the spirit of man, which is in him, and yet treuly the spirit
him self not fully: for when the Apostle says, I esteem little to be judged,
of you, or of man: but addinge thereto: nether do I judge my self: wherefore?
because I cannot give a treu sentence of my self: for although I am nothing
guyltie, yet in this, I am not justified. God knows in man that he knows not
in him self.
for God hears, and sees in the heart of the thinker, that he nether hears,
nor sees in him self, that thinks. For this cause, Hier. 17. says, thou
know, I have not desired the day of man: and if this my day smyled on me,
nether judge I my self, because nether do I know my self sufficient, therefore
is our Lord Jesus worthily constitut judge of the living, and the dead, who
knows the thoughts of all men's hearts, and understands their works, so
that all good Catholics, do attend the judge, whom we acknowledge our only
iustifyer.

No man should be temerous judge of him self.
And therefore I do not usurp, and tak upon me, being a Servant, the authority
of the son: nether do I number me, with these solifidianes (without knowledge
of their oun weakness, and the hid secrets of their hearts, to iustifye
themselves) to justify my self, against whom the Prophet complianes: Men heave
taken from me my judgment. God complains on man, that usurps the office which
is gods. Job nor S. Paul would not iustifye them selves.
and therefore it is evident when the Apostle did say, nether do I judge my self
rightly he does imitate Job cap. 9. Who treuely in this same manner speaks of
him self, howbeit if I should have any thing just, I shall not answer but I
shall pray my judge: and when he shall hear me call, I believe not that he
hears my voice, also if I be simple this same my soul is ignorant of, and I
was affraide of all my works, knowing that thou sparest not the sinner, are
not these sufficient scrupulous testimonies, in so holy men as Job, and S.
Paul? does not all men clearlie see, that this their vain solifidian faith,
The protestants do plain contrary to all good rules.
and presumptuous persuasion, and likewise their sinful security and impious
justification, to be contrary to the holy Scriptures and doctrine of holy
fatheres from the primitive church, to justify them selves, while they are
conversant in the flesh, and this verdict of justification all heretics
usurp to them, which is properly the office of Christ Jesus Judge of the
living, and of the dead, and not man's office.

Only faith anulls the lords prayer.
Morouer this doctrine of only faith, takes away and a bolisheth the Lords
prayer; in which we pray that our sins be forgiven us: for seeing it is
certain, that no man rightly asks in prayer, that he has assuredly in him
self, but by this only faith, a man persuades him self. certain, Calvin mockes
the^ that do say the Lords prayer.
of the forgiunes of sins: therefore it follows according to Caluins saying,
that the faithful man, scorns God, while he prays, forgive us our
trespasses: for what shall he pray for remission, that has already obtained
remission of sins, and is by only faith justified?

Only faith anulles baptism.
Moreover, the doctrine of this only faith, is contrary to the Scripture,
concerning baptism, for no man can be admitted in full years to baptism,
except those who have the Christian faith according to that saying of Philippe
to the Eunuch. Act. 5. if thou believe from thy whole heart, it is lawful to
baptize: but according to the doctrine of this only faith, and by assured
persuasion, If a man only believe he needs not baptism,
a man in perfect years, by believing this faith, he is certain in him self,
that he is the son of God, and that now in apprehensio^ of this faith, God is
merciful to him, and has forgiven him his sins, and therefore consequently, it
is not need to baptize, or to give baptism, that sins may be forgiven, or to
be borne again of the water, and the spirit. So that this doctrine is contrary
to the symboll of our profession, which says, I confess on baptism in the
remission of sins: and in lycksort to that Sermon of S. Peter to the Jews in
the day of Pentecost, Act. 2. let every one be baptized in the remission of
sins* as also to our Lords command, Joan. 3. saying, except a man be borne
of the water, and the spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. but
this doctrine of only faith is false, Who would persuade men, of justification,
and remission of sins, without, mediation.

Only faith is against the doctrine of the Apostle in the receiving of the Lords
supper.
Moreover, this doctrine of only faith, is against the doctrine of the Apostle,
concerning the right use of the Eucharist, for he says who soever shall eat of
this bread, and drinck of this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guyltie of
the body, and blood of our Lord, but let a man prove him self, and so let him
eat, and drink of this cup, for he that drincketh, ad eats unworthily,
eats and drinks to his own judgment, not judging the Lords body.

But this doctrine of only faith, commandes thee to be certain, and to
persuade thy self, and firmly dear with thy self, that thou shall be nether
guyltie, nether shall incur judgment, and shall escape all perrill, If we
only believe, it suffices, although we never examine our conscience.
if that thou only believe, but the Apostle teached the faithful Corrinthians
to prove the^ selves, least they should tak the holy Eucharist unworthily to
their gvyltines, and thereby be condemned. but Luther, Calvin, and all the rest,
teach by only faith, security, and assurednes of the mercies of God, and so
thou take it not unworthily, or art any ways guilty, but shall obtain
grace thereby, so that thou believe. The Apostle teaches Examining of
conscience, Luther affirms that in receiving the Sacrament with guilty
conscience a man receaues grace, if he but only believe.
to go before: but Luther and the rest, teach only faith to suffice; and
believing does assure him self of grace, and that he does obtain the same in
the Communion: and so by dissuading men from the examen and probation of
themselves, before they receive the holy Sacrament, and teaching them only
faith, to look only on the mercyes of God, and not on his judgment, does make
men guilty of judgment, and so throws them into perdition.

Moreover this doctrine of only faith does subvert, and overthrow the preaching
of true repentance, Only faith disanulleth repentance, and conversion to God.
and of our conversion to God; for the Scripture says, Psalm. 84. Convert us
our God of salvation, and turn away thy wrath from us. And Isai. 1. Let the
wicked leave his way, and the iniust man his cogitations. and return unto the
Lord, and he will be merciful unto him. Again, VVash you, and be ye clean, take
away your evil cogitations from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, and learn
to do well, come and reason with me. says the Lord. If your sins were as
scarlett, as snow they shall be made white, Again, Do penance, and be baptized
enery one of you, Penance and conversion are before remission of sins.
in the remission of sins. Act 2 Seeing the Scripture is evident witness,
which declares and shows true penance and conversion to God, to go before
remission of sins: Contrariwise by this doctrine of only faith remission of
sins is obtained, But the Protestants make remission of sins to anticipate
all means.
without any other means going before, only by faith, and then follows
forthwith true repentance, and conversion to God: this Luther affirms in Bulla
Leon art. 11.12. Who belieueth himself to be absolved (says he) is absolved,
whatsoever be spoken of contrition and penance.

Only faith disannulleth the jurisdiction of the Church, concerning the loosing
and binding of sin.
Moreover the doctrine of only faith, is contrary to the power of binding and
looseing, in remitting and retayning of sins, which power our Lord gave to
Peter, and the other Apostles; for our Lord did avouch sins to he remitted to
those to whom they remitted sin, and those to be loosed in heaven, whom
they loosed upon the earth, Matthew. 26. Joan. 20. But this only faith teaches,
that sins are remitted by only faith, yea though no looser nor remitter be
present, or co^descend thereto, yea that having this faith (even when they
shall come to the Pastors of the Church to be absolved) their sins be
remitted to them, and they have obtained and purchased now already, by only
faith, remission of their sins: that it is now ridiculous to stand to the
promises and words of our Lord, which he has said to his disciples, Whose
sins ye remitt, they are remitted to them. seeing their sins are remitted
to themselves, before they come to the Apostles, or their Successors. Yea also
no more power is left to the Apostles (at the least in this part) then to any
Christian man, yea also children, for after the foolish opinions of these
Rabbis, that believing the preaching of only faith, anon receaues forgiveness
of synns. Therefore of this maxim is that wonderful saying of Luther; Luthers
absurd judgment, that women, children and each lay man may remitt sins as well
as the Priests of the Church.
That in the Sacrament of penance, and in the remission of the fault, no more
does the Pope or Bishop, then the lowest Priest, and when there is not a
Priest, each Christian may do the same, yea women and children may do the
same if they be present, as well as Pope, Bishop or Priest, in Bulla Leon.
sent. 13.

Moreover the doctrine of this only faith is contrary to it self, for no man
agrees and consents to any thing, This doctrine is contrary to it self. No
man condescendes and Yeildes to any unknown thing: but only faith is believed
as an unknown thing, which is contrary to al reason. The gospel was not
believed without trial and miracles.
except he judge it true first before he condescend to it, for out of a natural
love of verity, and the hatred of falsehood, morality teaches, that before
we condescend to any thing, we do try it, whether that which is reported to
us be true, and when we have found the same to be in it self true, then next we
give consent. The same argument appears in the Gospel, that many received
and believed the same by reason of the signs, and miracles which they saw
done; and likewise in searching of the old scriptures, found the same things
prophesied, to be fulfilled in the time of the gospel, and to be true
miracles, but this doctrine of only faith, and assured confidence, that a man
belieues, his sins to be remitted to him, is by the same only faith which he
belieues; so it follows of necessity, that he has remission of sins,
before he believed by the same faith, and therefore the remission, A filthy
absurdity the effect to be before the cause.
is behind the remission, which is beliued to be of this only faith, so that
the effect is first, before the cause, which is very absurd. For truly the
Christian faith goes before justification, as the Apostle says; The heart
belieues to richteousnes. Roman. 10. Likewise a man is justified by faith, Gal.
2. An other absurdity, that only faith goes before the word of God.
But it is most absurd, that faith goes before the word of God: and the self
same word of God (faith) to give credit to the word it self: seeing the word of
God is not faith; but faith dependes upon the word of God: it is therefore
necessary that the testimony of God precede, before his testimony may be
believed. But the Christian Catholic Church knows, that before any believe
in Christ, that he is a child of wrath, and the wrath of God to abide on him.
Ephesians. 2. Joan. 3. And also knows that the ungodly man should leave his ways,
and the wicked man his cogitations, Isai. 55. and turn unto God by true
penance, and faith in Christ, in hope and prayer, and by frequent receiving of
the Sacraments, that so at last. God may have mercy on him This Catholic
faith is far from the other only says, which only does believe sins to be
remitted, excluding all mediation, apprehending the effect before the cause.
Only faith does pervert the word of God.
Again this doctrine of only faith peruerteth the word, for this assured
persuasion to believe, does proceed from the understanding of a strange gospel
and not of the word of God So that by the same doctrine of only faith, the word
of God is perverted, wherefore it is to be rejected which begetts so many
absurdities, (as a few we have rehearsed) for faith to no otherthing should
lean to, then to the word of God, The word of God is from God. and only faith
from man.
and by that nothing is to be believed (as the heretics themselves confess)
which word the Apostle declares, whose word it is, saying: When ye received
the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men,
but as it is indeed the word of God. 1 Thessalonians. 2 Again faith is by hearing,
but hearing is by the word of God. Roman. 10. But there is no word in the
Scriptures, If only faith were found in the gospel, the gospel it self should
be naught.
saying to any man, sins to be remitted to him by only faith: for the gospel
is one and the same with all Nations; and the gospel is generally proposed to
all Nations. But if the gospel should have a particular annunciation of only
faith, thereby sins to be remitted to the only belieuers, it should be false
and no Euangelie, because it is not found in the gospel.

Only faith is add^d contrary to the command of God in the Scriptures.
Moreover God commaundes, that thou shall add nothing to his word, least thou be
rebuked and found a liar, Proverb. 30. But they must confess them to believe
this faith, which God has neither spoken by his Prophets nor by his only
begotten son, nor by his Apostles, and to believe the same as the word of
God; Only faith overthrows all Sacraments, and every good wercke.
therefore they add to the word of God, and for that cause are to be reproched
and condemned liars. So that for conclusion, I confess this doctrine gives
consolation and tranquillity of mind, but full of peril; for it does
subvert, and overthrow all the fortresses and strenghes of our salvation; as
the Sacraments, good works, penance, prayer, yea to repeat the Lords prayer
is to doubt in the says, so that a man by this diuillish faith is come to that
madness, that he fears not the divine judgment of God, neither his own works,
but passing over the time with security, in the considence of this only faith
to be saved for Christ's sake, whom Christ acknowledges not.

As concerning justifying faith, it is not only a certain trust, What is
justifying faith.
or firm hope of the mercyes of God, in remitting sins, having for his
object to obtain a difficil good thing, for that cause in the will subjected,
but it is a certain faculty in the understanding, by which faculty we do
agree, and consent, to all those things which are proposed in the Church, as
true revealed by God. So that it is plainly a virtue distinct from trust,
confidence and hope of which these are begotten: for who belieues God to be of
infinite power and most excellent in goodness, easily by this, Of the power and
goodness of God we gather confidence.
conceaues, and obtaines some benefit of trust, confidence and hope, for the
Scripture does manifest this distinction, in separating faith, hope, and
charity, so that they are not one thing, as the Apostle says 1. Cor. 13. v.
13. The Protestants mingle al together as one.
But now remains faith Hope and Charity. Therefore the reformed are
deceived, whilst they confound faith with hope as one virtue, not making
distinction betwixt them.

Secondly, the Scripture teaches hope, and confidence as effects of faith, as
of one great cause, to arise of a certain effect, Hope and confidence are as
effects of faith
and not to be the self faith: but somewhat flowing from him, as the Apostle
affirms. Ephesians. 3. v. 13. In whom we have trust to draw nere in confidence by
his faith. Which to wit begets confidence, which the Apostle also affirms
1. Timoth. 3. v. 13 Who have well ministered do purchase to themselves a good
place, and much confidence in faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Where plainly the
Apostle deduceth from faith confidence, as an effect from his cause, because
God is powerful and faithful in his promises, therefore we arise in hope and
confidence.

Faith has not always confidence joined with it.
Thirdly, faith has not always confidence conjoined to it, as it does plainly
appear in the Leapre who said to our Savior Matthew. 8. v. 2. Lord if thou will
thou can make me clean.

Justifying faith shows no matter and object.
Fourthly the Scripture speaking of faith necessary to salvation, does not show
the matter and his object to be any thing, which is to be believed, or to be
apprehended by understanding, neither properly does it fall in hope, or
confidence of will, for what else does our Savior say. Joan. 14. v. 10. Do ye
not believe that I am in the father, and the father in me? Likewise Matthew. 9.
v. 28. Do you believe that I can do these things to you? Which now sometimes
is present, now also in the future apprehended by only understanding, and not
hoped, Faith sometimes apprehende the present tense, and sometimes the future.
for hope and confidence respect, and look to the future. All the ancient
fathers are of this opinion, who place faith and his action to be in consent,
Faith falls in the consent and operation of the understanding, and not in the
confidence of will.
and operation of the understanding, and not in confidence of will, as says S.
Aug. lib. de praedest. sanct. Ipsum credere (respondet) nihil altud est, quam
cum assentione cogitare. That is: Him to believe (he answers) it is no other
than with assente to think. for this greek word ((...)) does as well signify
consent, as confidence, as Matthew. 9. v. 29. according to your faith, be it
unto you, that is to say according to the thought of your minds, as the
blindmen believed Christ to be able to restore them their sightes: but of the
power to do, is, not confidence, but an inherent quality, persuadinge them to
assent to this power in whom they believed, as there prayer witnesses.

The faith which Christ praises is highly commended of him self for virtue that
is co^ioyned with it.
But that faith which Christ so often has praised, saying: Thy faith has made
thee wholl, as Luc. 7. v. 50. and cap. 8. v. 48. Was not only faith, or alone,
as the reformers this day goes about to establishe, hereupon, laying down the
frivolous, and weak foundation of their only faith, who ar deceived, because
they look not to the virtues that accompaned those persons, as fervent love
toward god, with ernest prayeres, confidence, love toward there neigkboures,
tears, penitential works, humility, shamfastnes, confession of their sins,
perseuera^ce, gratitude in acknowledging of their received health, many of
these may be observed, and marked in the faith of Mary Magdalen, and not only
faith, as they dream of.

I know our savior, to have said, to the archsynagogue, asking health to his
daughter, fear not, only believe. Marc. 5. v. 36. Not withstanding not so,
Only faith never patronizeth and defendes internal justification.
for the only faith of the father, the health of the daughter is given,
although Christ stirred up the father to believe (yet this fact does not
patronize nor defendes not the building of only faith to internal
justification) but Christ speaks to him, as a Physician uses to speak to the
patient (saying) only be of good courage, and thou shall be wholl, whill never
theles he prescribes him, to observe a diet, and other wholesome medicines even
so is the health of the soul, ascrybed to faith, by the rest of other virtues,
because right faith is the fundament, and root of all other virtues, neither
is any work done absolutely without faith acceptable to God.

OBJECTION I.
WE know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren.
1. Johan. cap. 3. v. 14. Therefore by special faith, we are certain of
ryghteousnes, and forgiveness of sins, for this is the translation from the
death of sin, to the life of grace, etc.

ANSWER.
Thou art deceived, for life is not here supposed for justification, but for
life eternal, as though he said, We know us to be instituted heirs of
eternal life, and of that caelestiall kingdom, if we love the brethren. for
this word (because) is taking for (if) conditionally.

OBJECTION II.
THe incertitude of remission of sins, and of the present righteousness, does
torment and tortor the consciences of the faithful, takes away quyetnes, and
induces diverse anxieties, add doubts, so that our archrabbie Luther in the
4. chapt. of Genesis (says) the Papists now Laitlie have used to teach, that we
ought to waver, and doubt of the remission of sins, grace and salvation. For
this cause our confederat frind Chemnitius in his treatise of the certitude of
justifying faith, calls the papist Church, a Shop of doubts. therefore this
special faith is to be retained of the reformed Church, with the certitude of
actual rychteousnes, and by consequence of the remission of our sins, which
makes our conscience free of a thousand launcinge, and pearcing scruples of the
Papists.

ANSWER.
GOd forbid, that we should wrappe snares of desperation or either, butcher and
tortour, the consciences of the faithful. for that we consent not to your only
faith for neither the only heavenly faith, takes away all tortour of
conscience, neither does it free men of these scruples, nevertheless some moral
certitude, is gotten by faith, or by diverse signs, of the state of justifying
grace, and of the remission of sins for just men may aspyre, and rise to this
certitude, that often they fear not, howbeit they might fear, if they consider,
and look to their own infirmity. First in the confiding, and trusting them to
be in grace, so that in them selves be found no contrary opposition. and yet
they may doubt, and fear, least perchance they be deceived, which way of
iudginge of their own richteousnes, should be common to all righteous men. The
second is much more perfecter, neither comone to all, but to these only who
are treuly turned to God, with great zealle, and fervor, or have long served
him, with great devotion, who may reach and attain to that perfection, that
morally they are certain in some manner, that they are in grace, so that
neither are they anxious, ar moved with any doubt, neither do they fear: as
morally a man is certain to be a Christian, and to be verily baptized. howbeit
some manner of way he may doubt, if he consider his own fragilitie, which is
prone to doubt: but does aspyre to the second perfection, to wit, that after
long contrition, and doing of penance, is absolved, and lykwise is baptized,
in the intention of the church, and lives a holy life, and by daily examining,
finds nothing in him self, guilty of sin, as also in contemning the world,
and studyinge to please god, does find this certainety in them selves with
these moral signs (before justifying faith) to delight them selves, in the
exercises of virtue, and to be penitent, for their sins committed, to
abstain from sin, and to overcome the perturbations of the mind, as wrath,
lust, vaine-gloire passiones, to Loath, and dispyse the world, and to feel an
internal motion to good things, tranquillity in mind, and peace in conscience,
a fervor to love God, and an affection to love of the neygetbour, to remitte
trespass, and injury, which how much the more they abou^de in man he is the
perfecter, and is more certain, and fear is less, and confidence does grow,
and increase, the more, in so far that S. Basil. in Reg. Breuior. says:
Whosoever takes heed, and considers his own fragilitie, and pityeth other
menns, and is wholly affected toward God, let him believe him to have
forginenes of sins, and to be in a good confidence (yet not withstanding
with fear) for Salom. Prouerbior. 28. v. 14. terms, the man blessed, who is
ever fearful, for security is the mother of negligence. as writes. S.
Gregorius libro 6. epist. 286. Therefore God would not, that our hope should
only lean, and depend on the promises of God, but to be strengthened, and
fortifyed with the merits of good works, as of contrition for our sins, and
amendment of life, by the which, the certitude of moral righteousness
sufficiently aboundes, and expelles the scruples of all anxietie, and care, and
geaues to the iustman clearness of conscience, and peace of mind. So that the
reformed church (in which this only faith is forged, and maintained) is a
merchant shop, of temeritie, presumption, and perdition.

OBJECTION.
Our Savior says to the sick of the palsy Matthew. 9. v. 2. Son believe they
sins ar forgiven thee: therefore God to the remission of sins, requires
only faith, and the evangelical confidence, and no other thing of us, therefore
only faith is sufficient, and is commended of Christ.

ANSWER.
I Deny thy absurd sequelle, by the obteineinge of remission of sins, he is
commanded of Christ, to stir up confidence, in him self: and because of the
precedent remission, by says, the paralyt here in this place is commanded to
believe, and to conceive confidence of his future health: for it is not said to
him, thy sin shall be remitted to thee, as to come in the future, where upon
they might, build their only faith, but Christ says to him his sins are
forgiuene already, and therefore here, he exhortes him, to tak confidence of his
future health, for thy sins, which was the cause of thy infirmity, now
already are forgiven, and remitted. So that this only faith is neither
sufficient, neither is commended of Christ, for justifying faith, but rather
accursed, and rejected, as invented of man.

QVAESTIO III. Of the article of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins.
HOw believe the Roman - Papists the article of the Creed, I believe the
remission of sins, if we accept not of only faith? Calvin. lib. 3. inst. cap.
13. Brent. in prolog. cont. a Soto.

ANSWER.
ANd I pray thee good reader observe how the reformed believe this article of
the creed (to wit) the remission of sins: Call. doctrine can not agree and
accord with this article. Good works are sin.
seeing that they say, that all our works ar mixed, and defiled, with sin,
and what soever good works shall be done of the most holiest man, by the
uncleanness, and the impuritie of the flesh are polluted, corrupt, and
putrifyed. Man is not fre neither of original, nor actual sin by any
Sacrament. Only faith by imputative justice makes man fre.
Lyckwise (he teaches) that we are not free of original sin, neither are we
absolved, or remitted, from any other sins howsoever confessed, and
satisfied: but only covered by the imputative, righteousness, of Christ; neither
are these sins imputed to the fault, nor to the punishment, as Rabbi-Caluin
teaches. lib. 3 inst. cap. 14.. 9.10 11. and lib. 4. inst. cap. 15.. the which
doctrine does subvert and overthrow the very article of our creed (to wit) the
remission of sins, Call. reiectes the judgment of S. Aug concerning sin in
the regenerat. He teaches that in the saints sin reigns. All the regenerat
ar in aid cleave by imputative justice.
which stoutly he defendes by rejecting, and casting of the opinion, and
judgment of S. Austen de concupiscentia in renatis. We teach (says he) in the
holy Saints ever to be sin until they be freed and unclothed of this
mortal body. lib. 3. inst. cap. 3.. 10. and proceeding more deeply to justify
his doctrine of only faith, moves this doubt: and solues it, him self: But how
is it (says he) that God does purge his Church of all sin, and that he
promises to her, the graces of fredome, and purity, by baptism and does
fulfill it in his elect? It is referred, and fulfilled in communicating his
imputauiue justice, and this God performs, and exhibites in regenerating his
own, that in them, the kingdom of sin may be distroyed and abolished, by
subministratinge to them virtue of the holy Spirit, by which they are superior,
and victors in the fight. lib. 3. instit. cap. 3.. 11. Sin to reign, and not
imputed for a faust. is false doctrine.
And a little after those relics of sin which be in his saints, we
confess them, not to be imputed, as if they were not. of the which doctrine it
follows sin absolutely not to be remitted: for it implicates a
contradiction, sin to reign, and not to be imputed for a fault. for Calvin
affirms, Call. says sin reigns not: but dwelles.
Sin fails to reign in the saints, but not to dwell, as an other
contradiction.

Contrariwise catholics exhort all men firmly to believe, and assured lie
confide that there is remission of sins in the holy Church, and this
remission is to us: and to you: and to Judas the triator: and to every mortal
sinner: and to those that now are, and to those that shall be hereafter: and to
those that are in purgatory: for Christ has promerited, to all abundantly,
who hanging in the cross is made a propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, The Catholics firmly believe remission of sins.
but for the sins of the whole world. But that we Catholics believe all men
to have received, and obtained remission of their sins (de facto and sola
fide credendo) not only we Catholics deny, and gainstand: but also the
Scriptur. for treuly Christ has tasted the death for all, But that all men
have remission of sins de sacto is against the Scriptur and Christ's death. We
believe the remission of sins by the power of the Church.
but all, do not apply to them, the fruit of his most precious death: for in
deed he is made the cause of salvation to all, but yet the Scriptur says, Heb.
5. v. 9. He was made the author of eternal salvation unto all them, that obey
him.

Therefore we believe most firmly the remission of sins, but not to be
remitted in particular by only faith: but that power is given to the Church to
remitt sin, and to retain sin.

Howbeit we admit the heavenly promises of the remission of sins,
justification, and eternal life, Remission of sins is not made to any in
particulat. The promises of God are to all a like and are made with condition.
and such like, which generally is denounced to perpeteyne to every man (to
wit) so far as lies in God, who without acception of persons promisseth, and
gives, to all men abundantly, but with that condition, that he do worthy
penance for his sins, and to keep the commandementes of God, as Ezech. cap.
18. v. 21. If the ungodly man shall do penance for his sins, which he has
wrought, and shall keep my precepts, and do judgment and righteousness, he
shall live the life, and shall not die: and lykwise, Matthew. cap. 10. v. 22. You
shall be hated of all men for my name saks, but who shall persevere unto the end
shall be saved.

No man is certain of perseverance in virtue.
But because a man is uncertain of his own righteousness, and perseverance in
virtue, and lykwise uncertain of his salvation: therefore it is said in the
holy Scripture, Apocalypse. 3. v. 11. Hold fast what thou have, that no man tak
thy crown: for there, has fallen? Saul: Solomon: Iscariotes: Many have fallen
and those they stood, as of the Calvin, some are made Turks.
Paulus Alciatus: Sartor: Blandrata: Socimus: Lysmannus: Luther. Calu. and many
more of the protestants companious abiuringe their faith are fallen to
Turcisme, Mahematisme, and Atheism, as witnesses Beza in the history of
Valentine Gentill, and Caluino-Turcismus lib 1. cap. 2. Whereupon we may gather
that the great maxim of the Caluinistes Theology is fallen, and is conuniced
of falsehood affirming that only faith once gotten, never does fail, or
decays, as stoutly Cudsemius in his Hyperaspisce declares, but when we see
their own turned from their own faith, to infidelity; what judgment is
against them, and what condemnation fall they into? no less treuly than in the
same judgment, and damnation of the heresiarches who by the doctrine of this
only faith minister subjects to Paganism, and Atheism.

OBJECTION I.
Therefore, what: Do thou command, and bids us despair?

ANSWER.
GOd forbid: for as we deny that any can firmly believe and certainlye persuade
him self of the remission of his sins: even so, no lose we affirm
co^stantlie that every Christian man is bound to believe, and with faith, to do
what is in him to expect the effect of faith, What Christians ar bound to hope.
with firm and sure hope in this life of true remission of sins by the
Sacrament of baptism, and penance, and in the world to come to eternal life.
which hope, except we have it firm, and constant, in vain we are called
Christians.

OBJECTION II.
Thou speaks a paradox, and a contrary thing, for firmly to believe, and
assuredly to persuade, thou denies: and yet thou commaundes, and biddes every
one to be of firm and assured hope, that they receive in the present,
remission of sins, and in the futur eternal life.

ANSWER.
I Deny the assumption, for nothing is to be believed of us rightly, and
Catholickly, which may be any way false: for faith is the substance of things
hoped, and an argument of no appearance, because the reason of faith is placed
in the verity, revealed of God: which for that cause may neither deceive, or
be deceived. Yea also we hope these things rightly which otherwise may happen,
for the chiefest reason of hope consists in the possibility of the acquiring
and seeking of these things, which we have hoped according to the commandment,
and promise of God, and for this cause we are exhorted after the exemple of
Abr^ham, that in hope against hope we should labuor, and believe, to make our
caling and election sure 1 Pet. 2. The difference betwixt hope and faith.
For many under pretense of this only faith, being laden with the weight of
there sins, and charged in conscience, unthankful to their Creator, and yet
apeare externally to work the works of the righteous, and walk securely,
perswadinge them selfs to be in grace, and favor of God, and at last to
obtain eternal life: when without hope, they are condemned. Because hope
looks to the promises and commandment of God, which only faith annulles. And
therefore we are more commanded and exhorted to hope, then believe, because hope
has ever actual rychteousnes adjoined with him: and only faith is lyk an
Irishmans in his trowses which is without any conformity, to the habit of any
other nation, and so for conclusion only faith is no faith and is plain,
opposite, anu contrary to the article of our creed, I believe the remission of
sins.

QVESTIO IIII. Of the informall faith of Sinners.
Wherefore do the Papists affirm and teach faith to remain in Sinners
separated from love, contrary to the tenor of the Scriptures and Fathers.
Calvin. lib. 3. inst. cap. 2.. 8.9.10. and in Antid. Con. Trid.

ANSWER.
IT is the universal doctrine of holy Church, that true faith (which the
Apostles defynes to be the substance of things which are hoped for, Faith may
be without love as well as with it.
and the evidence of things, which are not seen) may successively stand with
love and charity, or without it: so that faith may be in the same specie, and
number (notwithstanding with diversity of time) formal, or informall. Faith is
formal and informall. Calu. Scorns all divine and humane sciences.
Howsoever to the contrary Calvin labors, but to no effect, albeyt he goes
about to scorn this distinction of faith, made in the Theological Schools:
but if this scorner of divine, and humane sciences, would approach to the
fountain of holy wryt, and gust with wholesome taste, truly he should find
the same habit of faith, and number to have the place of merit and of demerit,
that the scorner may be at rest. For first Christ Matthew c. 7. verse. 22.
acknowledges faith in Sinners, for in the day of judgment, or in the hour of
death, as in a particular judgment many shall say to him, Faith may be in great
sinners to the working of miracles.
Lord we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name we have cast out devils,
and have wrought many miracles, to whom he shall answer (saying, I never knew
you. For this (nunquam) gives to understand, that even then when they wrought
miracles in faith, and by faith in my name, even then I knew you not, because
you lived a wicked and deformed life with your faith, Sin is opposite to the
merit of faith.
and was so defiled in sin, like to the condition of a most expert Physician,
who is not ignorant of art, and science which he professes and understands,
and yet notwithstanding by fragility of nature, by intemperancy, and bad
living, a similytude.
does violate the science and medecyne, albeit he does not loose and quitte the
science of medecin: even so a Christian man a Prophet, Religious, Faithful,
or else whatsoever moral man instructed in the faith, sinning in the precepts
of faith, Faith profits nothing without works.
does not loose, or is destitute of his faith, nether faithfulness, or ceases to
be a Christian, and yet notwithstanding is excluded from the Kingdom of God
for only want and defect of charity, and good works.

The naughty banquetter had faith with out his garment.
Secondly he who entered to the banquet of the King not having his weddinge
garment Matthew. 25.15. was cast into utter darckenes not because of his faith or
of his baptism (by which he entered and abode in the Church) but because of
only the want of his wedding garment that is to say the want of charity. So
expoundes this place all the Fathers of the Church as S. Greg. in euang hom. 78.

Thirdly to conclud all doubts the Apostle said if I should have all faith so
that I could remove mountains, and want charity, I am nothing, what it is to
have all faith without charity. Calu. Gloss discovered.
to wit, not to be in grace, neither auailles the gloss of Rabbi-Caluin in
this place (saying) that the Apostle speaks not of the Catholyck faith, but of
the faith of miracles, or the virtue of confidence to worck miracles, but this
euation is naught, for when the Apostle says, if he had all faith, absolutely
he concludes all, both intensiue, and extensiue, perfect and imperfect, for in
the end of the same chapter 1. cor. 1; he concludes, that there do remain
faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the chiefest is charity, only so out
of doubt, he speaks of that faith, which before in the same chapter he made
mention of, Faith is compared with charity, and charity to faith.
as he did speak of that same charity before, therefore it follows, that he
has compared the Catholic faith, with Charity.

Fourthly S. Jacob c. 2. v. 14. said, Brethren, what helps it, if a man say,
he has faith, but has no works, can his faith save him? Is any Christian so
absurd of judgment, Faith may be without works although it profit not.
that thinks faith to justify a man without works? to the defense of the
verity the whole Fathers affirm, and have taught, faith cannot justify any man
without works, as: Iren. lib. 4. cap. 25. expounding the same saying of the
Apostle, says, neither knowledge, nor wisdom toward God, neither the
comprehension of divine mysteries, neither faith, neither prophecy help,
without charity; but are void and of no merit before God. And likewise S.
Aug. lib. 15. de Trinit. cap. 18. says without charity faith may be, but not
to profit. What need we yet witnesses? seying reason teaches, that by true
faith, the faithful are distinguished, and discerned from Infidels, Heretycks
albeit defacto they are separated out of the Church yet in name and show they
are within, and yet damned.
and yet notwithstanding if sinners fall from their faith and be separated from
the Church as Ethnikes, and Infidels d^facto, nevertheless in name, and
external show, they are within, as holy Scripture makes mention, as Matthew. 13
in the feyld of corn, was together tares, and wheat; in the net, good fysh
and bad; in an house, foolish and wise virgins Even so such persons, having
faith without works not obscurly, but plainly do pertayn to the Church,
howbeit they are damned, therefore it happeth to faith without charity either
to be formal or informall but the effect and Virtue depends in his will, in
whom charity is, and for this cause, The effect of faith depends in his will
in whom is charity.
the Heretics forceing falsy the contrary are deceived, for whilst they
presuppose and judge with themselves, that true faith, chiefly is placed in
only persuation, by which a man may persuade and certainly assure himself,
because of the imputative righteousness of Christ de facto, that his sins be
remitted to him, and that graces and charity concomitanter are infused into his
soul with his assured persuasion of only faith, The heretics folish
persuasion concerning faith.
and that this persuasion in their judgment is a most true thing, neither think
they ever at any time that this can be separated from grace and charity, which
is false and absurd, as we have before proved, for they lay great weight upon
a weak foundation, and build castelles upon a sandy-mount, for it is not only
faith, that iustifyes a man, nether is it ever annexed and conjoined with
charity and grace, but is separated.

OBIECTIO
FAith consists in the knowledge of Christ, but Christ cannot be known, but by
sanctification of his spirit: Therefore faith can no way be separated from
charity. For the Apostle says, Rom 10 v. 10. With the heart man belieueth unto
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation.

ANSWER.
THE Apostle understands not in these words sanctification of the spirit
including charity, but he says, the heart belieueth to ryghteousnes, in which
words he plainly signifies, that faith is way and mean to get and obtain
righteousness: but this faith does not ever include necessarily the actual stat
of righteousness and charity, and therefore the knowledge of Christ may be in man
without charity, and so it is separated. Other expound this place, of the good
affection of will, requisite in man to believe, and not annexed absolutely to the
action of love, and charity.

OBIECTIO.
FAict without works is dead as the Apostle says, Iac. 2. Therefore as a dead
man is not a true man, so neither is faith in sinneres a true faith without
works and charity, ergo faith and charity cannot be separated.

ANSWER.
THE Apostle to the contrary assimilated and compared faith not to a dead man,
but he assimilated and compared such to a dead body as v. 26. for as the body
(says he) without the spir^t is dead, concerning the vital operatio^s,
whereby it fails not to be a true body) even so without works faith is dead
(concerning the vtility, meryt, and salvation, albeyt it fails not to be true
faith, for the Apostel affirms the Devils to believe, albeyt not to
salvation, how much more a sinner may believe, and have true faith, and yet not
to his salvation? Because it is without works, which are the operations of the
vytall spirit, and so faith is separated from charity, and compared to a dead
man, without the spirit, when he wanted the operation of the vital spirit, and
yet cannot be called otherwise then a body. Ergo and so is faith.

OBJECTION.
THE Fathers in whose doctrine thou Papist so often do boast, teach, faith
without works, not to be true faith: as S. Cyp de simplic. pral. Beda in cap.
2. Iac. etc. Ergo ^rew faith is never without works.

ANSWER.
THE Fathers deny such to be true faith, that is not lively; and perfyt, and to
be such as it ought to be; as laughter is not full joy, yet it is accounted for
joy, and gladness. So S Hier. cap. 5. ad Gal. When charity is far of, and
suchlyke faith is remote and absent, we say it is not perfect charity and true
faith, not that it is far of, and absent, as concerning his essence, but
concerning his perfection operation and life. And hereupon the Fathers teach
the verity; and the Heretics lie, and teach false doctrine.

QVAESTIO V. Of the necessity of miracles.
WHerefore require the Papists miracles of us for confirmation of our reformed
faith, seeing long since it was maruelously confirmed of the Apostels, Martyrs,
Confessores? So that there is no need of new miracles. Calvin. praef. instit.
ad Franc. gal. reg.

ANSWER.
Luther atte^pt^ to raise the dead. He also attemptes to cast out devils If
their doctrine be true from the Apostles how flee they to extraordinary things?
Calvin makes for a miracle of a living man a dead. He would have wrought a
miracle for confirming his doctrine of predestination.
I Ask wherefore Luther, that great Prophet Elias, and a chief Apostle, yea
the Angel of God so called of his successores, for confirmation of his Euangel,
made his recourse to miracles, whilst he assayed, and attempted to raise from
death one William Nesone drowned in the river of Albus as Staph. in respons.
vlt. bears witness.

Also he attempted to work a miracle in the casting out of a Devil out of the
possessed but in vain.

Wherefore, I say, went Luther to use an extraordinary mean, if his doctrine be
the doctrine of the ancient times, and that miracles are not now necessary?

Likewise to the same effect, wherefore attempted Calvin to work a miracle to
raise a dead man, (who by caluines policy dissembled himself dead) for the
confirmation of his doctrine of predestination and the preordination of God,
concerning the fall of man, as Bols. in vita Calu. lib. 13. Again I ask if
Calvin was scrupulous to sow the doctrine of the Catholyk faith, yet wherefore
induces he a new faith, and if he has purged the error of the Paptsts Church,
wherefore runs he to working of a false miracle wonderful to the world.
Lykwyse a certain ringleader of the Anabaptists attempted to work a miracle in
the kingdom of Polonia, who inuyted all his fellow compagnions to be present
at his baptism, promysing to them that they should see the holy Ghost come
down from the heaven to confirm his baptism, An Anabaptist in Polonia
attempted to cause the holy Ghost appear to prove his doctrine from heaven.
to be from heaven, the day is prefixed, the place is appointed, the rumor
spread abroad, all are desirous to see this miracle, and first of all this
Arch-heretick enters into the water: but in place of the Holy Ghost, and of
the spirit of truth, anon the Devil appared with a horrible and fearful
countenance, offering himself to them all, The Anabaptist is beaten of the
devil.
and taking the Heretic by the hair of his head, lifts and caryeth him in
the air, letting him again fall with his own weight in the waters, breaking
his bones, strangled and almost left dead, and this was the event of his
miracle, as witnesses Thomas Bozio de signis eccl. dei lib. 5. cap. 2.

Therefore justly of the reformed minysteres and all Protestants: we Catholycks
demand and ask by what power they have entered into the church of God,
Miracles for confirmation of their doctrine justly demanded: for no true faith
is without miracles.
and with what supernatural signs for the confirmation of their reformation,
for a new faith moust have new miracles, and therefore seeing they have induced
a new faith in all things repugnant to the faith professed and believed this
thousand five hundredth years past, and do contemn the ordinary mission,
lawful succession and ordination of the Church, and have intruded the^selue
extraordinarly (by their moving spirit) therefore rightly, demand we
supernatural miracles for the confirmation of their supernatural vocation.
And seeing from the time of the beginning of the old Church, Miracles are
necessary to prove true faith and lawful vocation.
unto the vprysing of the new, no man denies, and all affirms that miracles
were ever needful. For the Heretics themselves affirms miracles to be so
necessary, as a proof of their lawful vocation. That they who otherwise would
enter into the Church of God, to be preachers and reformers, planters of
Religion and Faith, are to be adjudged, bold temerous, heretics,
presu^ptuous, imitatores, of Chore and Dathon: worthy for their intolerable,
Zuing. condemns those that preach a new faith without miracles.
and devilish arrogance to descend into Hell, for taking more on them then John
the Baptist, Peeter and Paul, yea and Christ himself. This has zuingl. uttered
against the Evangelical extraordinary vocation, as is evident to be read in
his own book. Tom. 2. Eccl. fol. 52.53.54.

Likewise Brentius declares the effect, to what end miracles are done, Brent.
declairs that miracle are to confirm true faith.
In cap 3. Luc. hom. 6. and hom. 76. de Resurrectione Christi: miracles (says
he) have this use especialy, that they are a testimony, and a confirmation of a
doctrine, and religion revealed from heaven.

Unto Brent. agrees, and subscrybeth Luther Tom. 4. in cap. 35. Isa. Musculus
in loc. comm. 41. de nomine dei, page 394.

The Heretics seek miracles of the other Sects, and professores of the new
Gospel.
In so much that the Heretycks themselves impugn and contradict other
Sectaries, and require of them miracles, who profess a new doctrine. For they
affirm and prove, that no doctrine which is from heaven, can want miracles,
for the confirmation of the same doctrine. Therefore this their doctrine is not
from heaven, Heretycks are like the sons of Scena the Jew in working of
miracles.
who are men like unto the sons of Scaena the Jew, as is written of them,
Act. 19. v. 14.15.16. who were more presumptuous, then wise, who thought to
have co^i^red Devils, and for their labors were beaten of the Devils, so the
Protestant willingly would work miracles, but the proof takes none effect not
so much as onlay me-horses. No maruail that they work no miracles, Casu.
blasphemy against miracles after the pharisees manner.
who account so little of miracles, for they so esteem of them as Calvin says,
as of feined fantastical, and Devilish things, and not to be of God, Call
praef. instit. So said the Pharesyes of Christ miracles, Matthew. 12. and the
paganes of thoses miracles which were done amongst the Christians, yea the
Heretyckes show themselves worse, and attributed the working of miracles to the
Devil. The Heretics of old were of this same mind against miracles.
Of this mind were the Arrians, Eunomians, Vigilantius, so that these miracles
done by the Catholics were ascrybed to be wrought by the power of the Devil
and not of God, as witness the holy Fathers, as Aug. lib. de ciuitat. dei cap.
18. Ambros, Sermon. de Geru. and prof. Hier. cont. Vigil. Victor lib. 2. de
vandalica persecut. But the Catholyks have better assurance, to wit, the word
of God, and promise of Ghrist, for the defense of miracles against all
counterpoyses, and manyfolde sleightes of Satan, Moses with lawful vocation
works miracles in Egypt.
or what such hyrelings can object. For first is not Moses sent to Pharao, by
divine vision, and has communicated to him miracles, and the power to work
miracles, that the Jews may believe that the God of their Fathers has
appeared to Moses, John Baptist nativity, and life is full of miracles.
as Scripture witnesses? Exodus 4.5. Likewise, is not John the baptist sent to
denounce the mystery of the Incarnation, hid to the world, who was adorned,
and beautifyed with many heygh miracles, and a man replenyshed with the holy
Ghost? Moreover is not Jesus the son of God sent who has not glorified
himself as heygh Priest, but abode until the time that his Father said: Thou
art an high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. ps. 109. And was
approved of God by the oppenyin of the heavens, Christ proves his own mission
with miracles.
and the desce^ding of the spirit of God in the form of a dove upon him, with
a voice saying: This is my beloved sone in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3. That
after bearing witness to the truth (for which he was sent) says to the
Jews: The works themselves which I do, bear witness of me, that the Father
has sent me, Ioh. 5. And again he says in the 10. cap. If you will not
believe me, yet beliue the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father
is in me, and I in him. And lykevvyse the Apostles, The Apostles and Disciples
are sent to preach, and do confirm it with miracles.
and Disciples are sent into the whole world, to preach the Euangely: but not
except from Christ the chief presede^t of his Church, who gave them power to
preach baptism, and co^secrat bread into his blessed body, with power to
absolve and bind sinners, and to work miracles, receiving gifts freely, and
commanded to give freely as witnesses Mat. 10. saying: He gave them power
over unclean spirits to cast them out: and to cure all deseases. Moreover in
the 7. v. he says to them. As ye go preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is
at hand, heall the sick, cleanse the leprouse: raise up the dead, cast out
devils freely you have received freely give. And in like forte diverse Prophets
were sent extraordinarily, The Prophets mission was approved with myraclest
but not allowed except their missio^ were approved of God with signs and
miracles, for so it agrees well with the disposition of Gods providence as
S. August. disputes, lib. 22. de ciuit. dei cap. 8. For except mission, and the
doctrine be approved with miracles from heaven, and received with common
consent of men, True doctrine must be approved from heaven with miracle and by
the authority of the Church.
and approved by authority for true doctrine, according to the judgment of men,
and of them who have authority to judge in matters of Faith. Otherwise their
mission and doctrine cannot be received, nor believed, who without this
ordinary authority by themselves approve doctrine to be sufficient or
insufficient, and must be moved themselves by some other preacher, and his
authority to believe, and therefore if there want miracles I know not how they
shall approve their doctrine, discuss ambiguities, resolve doubts, never I
say by their own reasoning and understanding of their privy spirit but their
doctrine shall ever be held suspect. No doctrine can be known true without
miracles zuing. affi mes the same.
And for the verity of this assertion Zuing. Tom. 2. eccl. says, how many have
usurped the function to Preach, and teach, or to work miracles, were called of
God, confirmed by election of the pastores of the Church, Thus he. I hope
Zuingl. has said as much as I would say, that ordinary vocation is necessaey,
and that thereby God works often times miracles, for the maitayning of the
same, and therefore both lawful mission and miracles are of God, The heretycks
make themselves Pastors without ordination.
to their shame and ignominy, who sitting in the Chair of pestilence,
contemn and blaspheme all lawful succession and ecclesiastical ordination,
calling themselves, and presuming to govern, without lawful ordination, and
taking the name of Bishop on them, and no man gyuing it to them, as says S.
Cyp. de Simpl. prael. They succeed to none but begin at themselves, Heretics
are profane persons. Calu. flies to extraordinary vocation.
and are profane, and enemies to our Lords peace, and his divine unity.

But Calvin teaches in his book de vera eccl. reform. That God rayseth up
pastores extraordinarily by the inspiration of his own spirit, who should
restore his decaying and ruinous Church: as long since he did in the Synagogue
of the Prophets. And so in our time by the ordinary vocation of man, he has
raised Prophets and Pastors for the building of his Church as Luther Zuingl.
etc. Whose commendations of their own Brethren of the Gospel is wonderful,
and first: The commendation of the extraordinary Pastores Towit luth. and
zuingl.
Bez. to Sanctezij calls Luther, the wonderful instrument of God most
heavenly inspyred, and an admirable servant of God, in whom, who acknowledges
not the spirit of God, knows nothing.

Jewel calls him, the most excellent man of God, sent of him to lyghten the
world. Apoc. part. 4. cap. 4.. 2. Mathesius calls him, the Supreme Father of
the Church, con. 8. de lut. page 88.

Amdorff. says, that there was none like in the world in spirit and faith,
vvisdome and profunde knowledge of the Scriptures. Amdorff. praef. tom. 1.
Luther.

Albertus calls him, a true Paul and Elyas, and a man sufficient to appease and
diuerte the wrath of God from men, to who^ Augustine might think no shame to be
his Scholar: lib. cont. Carollost. lib. 7. Some other call him the Angel of
God, Austen might have been Luther Scholar.
flying throw the myddest of heaven, having the eternal Ghospel in his hand.
Illiricus, in apoc. cap. 14.

Schussinburge says, that Elyas and John Baptist were but figures of Luther,
Elias and John baptist were figures of Luther. Luther vituperation and
disprayse of his own professors.
Theol. call. lib. 2. fol. 124. in the end this extraordinary Prophet is
descrybed of his own, for Schulss. lib. 2. art. 12. de Theol. call. calls him
proud, furious, intolerable, full of error, impudent, a forger, and a
deprauer of Gods word, deceyptfull, a seducer, a false Prophet, lunatyck,
presumptuous, a crucifyer, and a murderer of Christ. Likewise Zuing. calls
him a drunken dreamer, and a head full of lies. Moreover Calvin would be
numbered amongst these Prophets, Calvin would be accounted a Prophet, and
extraordinaryly called.
as is observed in diverse of his sermons, saying, I am a Prophet, I have the
spirit of God, and am sent of God, I cannot err, and if I err, it is God that
deceaues me, and puts me in error for the sins of the people.

His miracles and life, and his Prophetical extraordinary vocation is rehearsed
of Schlussinburge one of their own profession. His miracles and vocation is
commended of the professors of the Gospel.
lib. 2. art. 12. fol. 72. de Theol. Calu. who says that God would not be
mocked by men, has showed his judgment in the world against Calvin, visyting
him in the scourge of his fury, punishing him before the day of his death, for
he strok this sacrame^tal heretyck in such sort, that he dyed desperate,
swearing, and inuocating the devils, to whom he randered his spirit: which
isued out of his privy members, and out of his vlcerous soores, and lay so
stinking, that the people was notable to endure the stinck, and thus miserably
ended his life. Besides this, he was infamous, by sodomy, Calu. dies.
desperate, cursing God, and inuocating the devils, his bad life. The Catholyckes
have registered the miracles of the Saints for a memory all, as S. Luc did the
acts of the Apostles.
cruel, bloody, tyrannous, deceytfull treacherous, a babbler, a contemner, a
sophist, an epicure, and a tosser of the Scriptures, as Quid in his
metamorphosis; thus he. So that this way they have made their extraordinary
vocation, conformable to their extraordinary miracles, but for the Catholyck
part all the holy Fathers have accounted of miracles, and have written the
admirable lives of the Sanctes, and have them in regyster from Christ time,
imitating S. Luc admirable and miraculous relation of the acts of the
Apostles, and David praising God in his Saints as also to follow their
devotion, and holiness of because the Prophet says, Ps. 14. He that glorisyeth
them that fearour Lord, shall dwell in his tabernacle, and rest in his holy
hill. For their miracles done on earth have made them glorious in heaven, for
Calvin confesses ( In heb. 2.4. and 2. cor. v. 12.) That miracles are seals
of doctrine, Calu. is contrary to himself for now he says that miracles are
seals of true doctrine. The Heretyks want miracles. Miracles The overthrow of
Idolatry. Myracls were the cause of the conversion of Scotland.
and do establish faith and Scripture. Whereupon all the Sectaries have great
cause to distrust their faith, as a nouelty unsealed, and vnestablished by the
virtue of God, for they are known altogether to want miracle as also good
life. Far otherwise was the conversion of Scotland from Idolatry to the
Catholycke faith, which was not only by the preaching of the word, but also
was in the working of miracles, as true faith revealed, and approved from
heaven, with admirable holiness of life, and modest conversation, both in
clergy, and lay persons, that many ages after death, and solution of
mortality, we see, and read, the living Lord honored and worshipped in them,
whose bodies whilst they lived, were the temples of the holy Ghost, through
sanctification of his spirit, All the holy Saints were Papists, and were
ordinarily called but God wrought in them extraordinary gifts.
and holiness of life. And that these blessed Saints, and first laborers in
Christ vinyarde in our country, intruded not themselves, but were sent
ordinarily, and with this ordinary mission, God wrought in them extraordinary
gifts, and as the grace of God cooperated, with them unto all holiness of
life, and to live unspotted of the world, true friends to God, in keeping his
commandeme^tes, and good exemples to otheres, but also were indewed with the
gifts of prophecy, and singular learning for the defense of the verity, with
virtue from God to work miracles, what in the curing of deseases, in casting
out of devils, in raising of the dead, that not only these things was acted in
their life, but also after their departure at their sepultures, and by their
relyckes, the power of God, and the virtues of his Saints was made manifest.
How renoumed was Scotland, and what blessing of God abounded in that country,
when these holy Sanctes lived in her, Many hundrith years Scotland was
renoumed for their Saints and virtue flourished in the land.
what grace of God, religion, faith, honesty, and other moral virtues
abou^ded? If S. Columbane, S. Deicola, S. Fintane, S. Brandin, S. Margret: S.
Canitius: S. Mahut: S. Bean. The stars of that nation, and many other (whom I
omit for breuities causes) (whose life, and miracles are known in all the
parts of Schotland, God bearing witness to their miracles in whom God was
honored, and his name magnified) were now in this mortality to be hold the
infidelity that reigns for religion, For virtue that raygned in the Papists
times, what vices rigne with the new Gospel. The Schotish Sanctes converted
diverse other nations and the Ghospellers bid at home at ease to pervert
Catholyckes.
and the publican maneres for honesty, I doubt not but God would approve them
true Saints, for the conversion of that nation, both in doctrine, and
miracles, to the confusion of heresy, by whose intercession now reygning with
God, we live under hope for the second conversion, who not only at home in
Scotland lived holy Saints, but also through fervor of the spirit, and zeal
of the glory of God and of the conversion of Souls, went out, and departed
their native country, accounting all regions their natyue soil for the glory
of God, and conversion of Souls, as not only a few we may rehearse for the
present, whose number at more large is annexed to the end of this book to the
gaeat praise and honor of Scotland, being a region so far remote, from the
Apostles Seats, that not only she is illuminated of them by the glorious
profession of the Catholyck religion, but also has sent beams of her glory,
to shine abroad for the conversion of other regions, for the overthrow of
superstion, with such holiness in behavior and perfection of life, with
devotion and piety, with admirable sanctity, and angelical conversation,
that as yet, when we remember them they are to us amazement of nature, and in
admiration above nature, glorified by God, vvorshiped of men* and to day in
them the power of God is declared, their names, and immortal life is recorded
of all holy writters, they professed the Catholic fa^^^ with us, and lived
therein, and in the same fai^^ wrought miracles, whose remembrance is for
ablessinge to all their posterity, what country, and kingdom has not known,
and had experience of the fruits of the holiness, religion, faith, and miracles
of the Scottish Saints? Is not their acts and monoments registered in all
Catholyck writers, as Molaenus: Haereseus: Surrius: Barronius: and other
ecclesiastical historiographers? Is not their names and nation made plain,
and manifested to be only Scotts? as Furseus: Viron: Kilian: Fiarce: Vinocus:
Liuinus: Columbanus: Vltanus: Foilanus: Hemelinus: Forranus VVironus:
Calestinus: Rumoldus: Guthagan: Etton: Plechelmus: Fredegando: Abell: Egbertus:
Ierom: Ogerus: Vasnusphus: Gislenus: Mornonus: Vulganus: VVinocus: Odda. These
and many blessed Saints in diverse countries are testimonies of the Catholyck
religion, true faith, true lawful mission which flourished in Scotland from
whence they came, and imparted the gifts of God freely for the conversion of
other countries, that all tongues might praise the Lord.

Therefore for conclusion let the judicious Reader observe, and diligentely
examine his own conscience whether they were true Saints of God, An
exhortation to the reader to judge with equity whether the priests and holy men
were trewer Saints by whom God wrought so many miracles or the ministers
whose lives ye are eye witnesses of.
whose vocation and profession is confirmed and approved with holiness of lyse,
and miracles from God: or whether Luther: Calu: Knox etc. whose lives and
works, with their miracles are extant in Scotland. Who would remember their
entrance to be with sedition, and commotion of all estates, with ruin of all
ecclesiastical policy, it is a sufficient argument to know what spirit they
were of: as for their profession and religion it is new, and never known to
Scotland before: their lives are evident to all inhabitants in the country:
their works no ways to the glory of God, vtility of any man, or honor of
the nation. If Sorcery, Wichcraft, and Magic, Heresy, Paganism, and
infidelity, if false-hoode, flattery, and hypocrisy, if blood oppression, and
usury, if Whordome, Sodomy, and Buggery may confirm there Ghospel, it
aboundes, and are most frequent with the profession of this new Gospel. And
such are the miracles of the professors of the new Gospel.

OBJECTION.
TRue miracles confirms the Euangely, and does not overthrow it: but the
Papists miracles does confirm the Idolatry of the mass, and honor of the
Saints etc. Therefore impertinent to the confirmation of the faith.

ANSWER.
I Grant good friend, the miracles of the Papists Church euertes and
overthrows the Euangely of Luther, Calvin, and the rest: but not the
Eua^gelly of Christ; and therefore very pertinent to the confirmation of the
Faith, and true Religion.

QVAESTIO VI. Of the verity of miracles in the Catholyck Church.
WHerefore do ye Papists esteem and make so much account of your miracles,
seeing they are plain illusio^s and inchantmentes of the devils? Calu. in
praef. instit. cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.

ANSWER.
I Say the devil can work no miracle transcending and surpassing any manner of
way the usual, The Devil can work no true miracle above nature.
and accoustumed power of nature, but very well he can make such things appear
marvelous in applying actiues with passiues. Of the which, such we may perceive
him to have power to do, as we may learn in the 13. of the Apoc. and such lyk
S. Aug. reports him to have done, as in his 13. Tract. in John. Tertul. in
Apoiog. cap. 22. Corn. tacit. lib. 4. Hist. Therefore the devil cannot do
true miracles, because true miracles ar done only by the power of God, of
whom it is written, miracles are only of God.
Psalm. 135. v. 4. who only does wondrous works, as only chief governor, and
ruler of nature. Therefore for this cause fitly in an other place of the Psalm.
92. v. 5. they are called saying, The testimonies of God much to be believed,
and therefore if any true miracle be done in whatsoever place, they come, and
are from the only virtue of God: such as are the sudden curing of the lame:
the raising of the dead; giving sight to the blind; etc. which are done by
only heavenly virtue: even so in the Roman-Catholyk-Church, God works by his
divine power, The miracles done in the Catholycke Church are registered for a
perpetual memory.
as all the ecclesiastical hystories makes mention, what is done within this
16. hundrith year, the which Call. derides, calling the Catholyks by this by
name mirabiliers and compares them with the magicians, and charmers in old
times, who was made famous and renouned with their wonders, and Sorcery, to the
upholding, and nourishing of their Idolatry, which lies, truly sound of
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, Cal^. mockes the Catholic miracles and
blasphemes.
that the works of God should be attributed to be done by the power of the
Devil, as the Pharisyes ascribed of Christ miracles. Luc. 11.

Moreover the roma^-Catholyckes produce nothing strange, and contrary, to Gods
divine honor, holy scripture, The miracles of the Catholycks agree wi^h Gods
divine honor; by Scripture and reasons. God does miracles because of the merit
of his saints.
and reason; when they say, such a saint to have done miracles. Which I prove,
because, albeit all these be done by God, yet the merit of the Saint is the
cause, at whose intercession and exaltation, God wills that there shall be
miracles. Therefore, seeing for the merit of his saint, God does these
miracles, and consequently fitly, and justly they are said to be done of that
Saint Neither is this manner of speech strange in the Scripture, seeing, The
master of verity himself does say, Without offense it is rightly said such a
saint has wrought miracle.
Ioh 14. v. 12. who belieues in me, the works which I do, he shall do, (and
besidds these) he shall do greater. Where it is to be observed, that our Savior
says, that his Saints shall do those miracles which he does, and making this
addition (Et maiora horum faciet) all the Heretykes are not abyle to gloss
this text, for it is given us evidently to understand by these words that God
does and works maruailes in his saints. Christ pro ^^^feth that his
faithful beleueres shall do greater miracles then he has done, by authority
and word, and not by only prayer.
Likewise in S. Matthew. 10. v. 8. Their mission says, cure the sick: raise
the dead: cleanse the lepres: cast out Devils: and in vlt. Marc. It is again
repeated, in my name (says he) They shall cast out devils: and speak with
new tongues: and take away serpents etc. It is not said in this place, that by
their prayers they shall do these things, but as the Catholyckroman-church
teaches that by authority, they shall do these things. Therefore let these
mockers and scorners of the miracles of God done by his Saints, go hence, and
be ashamed and return confessing as S. Aug. (says) lib. 22. de ciuit. dei
cap. 8. The martyrs do miracles, or else God by their prayers, cooperating with
them, that faith may have his merit, not that we believe them to be our Gods:
but to have with us, one God.

why miracles are done in one place and not in an other.
Moreover of curiosity it may be demanded, wherefore in some places, certaines
miracles are done, which are not done in other places? I say if thou would
not err, be not curious to inquyre, and search. For the whole reason of the
doing, and not doing is referred, and depends on the omnipotent power, and hid
counsel of God. This question has been demanded by the Heretyckes of eld
times saying: The old Heretyckes moved this question.
Wherefore does he miracles here, and not there? Is not this Saint, as
renouned in holiness, and as high inglory in heaven? Is not his intercession as
acceptable to God as the other Saints are? To whom S. Ang. answers, Epist.
139. ad cler. and pop. hipp. Truly God is every where (says he) and is
contained or-included in no place, who has made all, and it behooves him to
be worshipped of true worshippers in spirit, and truth, who hears in secret,
Also in secret iustif^eth and crounes.

Nevertheless as concerning these things which are visibly known to men, who
can search his counsel, wherefore in this places miracles are done, and in
other places are not done? This doctrine of S. Aug. is easily proved by the
testament. John. 5. When at the moving at the fish-poole-Probatica in
Jerusalem, It is answered why God wrought miracles at the probatica and no
other place
at a certain time, and no other water was moved. And this was done by the
descending of an Angel at a certain time, so that neither before nor after the
ordinary time, that water was of any virtue, for the curing of diseases, and
infirmities either to the blind, lame, or withered etc. But observing the
instante time of the moving of the water, the sick and infirm persons
obtained the benefit of health. Even so to our purpose: As S. Aug. Epist. 137.
ad cler. and pop. hipp. says, taking his warrant out of the Apostles words, 1.
cor. 12. v. 30. All (says he) have not the gift of healing, neither all the
gift of decerning of spirits; So neither all Sasncts in all places, have alyke
power, and virtue is work miracles, but as he will, who deuydes to every one
his proper gift. And therefore let us who are incapable of the secrets of God,
through our humane weakness, confess with the Apostle, and say, Romans 11. v.
33. O the deepnes of the riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, Miracles are not wrought by the power of Satan
neither by iugling or sorcerye, but the works of the Devil were dissolved by
the miracles of his saints.
and his ways past finding out. Morouer the miracles done in the
Roman-catholyck-church cannot be wrought by the power of the Devil, either by
iugling, or witchcraft, or any kind of Sorcery, because that even these works
which was done by the magitians, and sorceres were undone and disolued by the
miracles of his Saints, at the sepultures or at the relics of his Saints,
and likewise the Devils are compelled to confess many things at the places,
and relics of his Saints, which they would not do if their power, and
virtue, were not from God. Of such lycke miracles S. Aug. lib. 22. de ciuitate
dei cap. 8. and epist. 137. ad cler. and pop. hipp. and lib. 8. de ciuit. dei
cap. 26. and libro de curae pro mortuis gerenda. cap. 17. Rehearses at length,
so that it is out of a maligna^t spirit, and a sin against the holy Ghost, to
attribute the miracles wrought by the Saints of God, unto the power of the
Devil.

OBIECTIO.
IN Beelzebub, and in the power of the Devils the Papists cast out Devils, and
work miracles. Ergo their miracles are of the Devil and not of God.

ANSWER.
THE proposition is false, for if (at the touching of the relyckes of Saints,
or in visiting their Sepulturs, Chapells, or to go pilgrimagie to their
relycks, and places, or make prayers, and inuocations to them, or applications
of the Sacraments in honor, and devotion toward them) the miracles wrought
and done in the Catholycke Church, are to be attributed and ascrybed to the
power and virtue of the Devil. Of this proposition should follow two great
absurdities.

First that the Devil with all power and force, should honor Christ and his
Saints, which (is most contrary) by the absurdity, for then, the Devil
should distroy himself, and his kingdom, in promoting the worshipe, and honor
of God, and his Saints; unto whom he will give none, nor acknovvledge any
due, either to God, or his Saints.

Secondly that the name of Christ, and his Saints, should serve for the
working, the works of the Devil, and the divine power and virtue of God,
should serve to the obsequie of the Devil. Which assertion by the absurdity,
is horrible blasphemy against the holy Ghost.

OBIECTIO.
WHen those, and such lyck miracles fall out, they are not to be attributed,
and ascrybed to come of the Saints, or of their merytes, or by their
intercessions, or praeyers, but because it fortuned so.

ANSWER.
IT is an open blasphemy, either to speak, or think to strain the bodies,
and souls of men to the course of the planets, and to the hid influences of
the heavens, so that Leo affirms Epistol. ad Astoricensem. Who follows
these, there is no more place left for him in the Church of God, because (says
he) who once have given themselves unto the constellations, and persuade
themselves after their own opinion, depart, and cut themselves from the body
of Christ. Unto this the counsel of Braccar. cap. 1. If any believe, that the
souls, and bodies of men, are astricted, and governed, of the fatal signs,
with the Priscilianists, let him be accursed.

Moreover miracles, and prodigious things, often fall out, and are wrought, when
the relyckes of the Saints are of the people reverenced, and applied, and
when these Saints are inuocated by their ernest devotion, and to bear witness
of their reverence, and honor to Gods Saints, they receive the holy
Sacraments, even then especially miracles are done rather then any other time,
therefore, seeing at the devotion of the people, and the application of the
relykes of the Saints, miracles are done, they cannot be attributed to come
of fortune, or influe^ces of the planets, but of God, the author of all
goodness, and the governor of this world, for if the fishe-poole Probatica in
Jerusalem, had virtue given to it, to cure diseases at a certain season of the
year by the descending of an Angel, moving the water, which virtue, and
working of miracles in the Probatica of Jerusalem, cannot be attributed to the
influences of the planets, neither to fortune, but to God, and mediatly to the
ministry of the Angel: even so miracles done by the relyques of his Saints,
or at their Sepultures, or Alters, cannot be attributed to fortune, or any
fatal star^e, but to God, and by the mediat mini^tery and intercession of his
Saints, by whose ministry God is honored.

QVAESTIO VII. The Pope is taken of the reformed for Antichrist.
WHerefore do the simple, and ignorant Papists obey the Pope in ma^ters of
relig^on, seeing he is but a man, an^ ^^uely Antichrist? Luther. ass. art. 27.
Smalchald. de pot. pa^ae. Calvin. in 2 These. cap. 2. Illir. de primat papae.

ANSWER.
Upon this proposition, I demand, and ask, wherefore do your mynisteres, of
your Churches, in spiritual things, in whatsoever Kingdom, The Protestants
minysters are subject in matters of faith to laymen.
or Comonwealth they are in, obey men, and that laymen of no ecclesiastical
function, neither of ecclesiastical authority? Is not this evident and known
to all Europe, how the Caluinistes of Ingland, gave their homage and sure
obedience in matters of faith, unto Queen Elizabeth, and instituted her head
of their reformed Synagogue: lykwyse by her ordinances, and statutes (we know
and understand) that these mynisters were compelled, The minysters made Queen
Elysabeth head of the Church, and swore obedience in matters of faith, contrary
to their own conscience. The scripture forbids women in church matters. The
heretics wrytes against the lawful temporal government of women.
and bound to diverse ecclesiastical ceremonies, repugnant to their judgments,
and yet of necessity must rest contented, and also must subject themselves
obedient to her statutes? What absurdity: what baseness: what indignity: and
what madness of mind, to give to a woman the primacy of the Church, whom the
Apostle 1. Timoth. cap. 2. v. n. 12. commaundes to learn with silence with all
subjection, who is neither permitted to teach, neither to rule over a man? How
much more preposterous to rule the charge of the Church? For if Buchanan and
Knox, writ books against the regiment of a woman, in which books they excluded
his majesty's mother, (of happy memory) from the temporal government, and as a
thing most unworthy, that a woman should have any temporal government over
man. How much more indecent to rule over Priests in the Church of God? In the
beginning of this heresy both in Ingland, and Scotland, so long as the two
most Catholyck Maryes Princesses lived, the Heretics opposed, wrote against
their government in temporal things, which was by the law of God, Heretics
do allow the government of women for their purpose.
and nature lavvfull for them. Notvvithstanding when Queen Elizabeth obtained
the crown, then it was lawful for her to rule, not only in temporal
things, but also in ecclesiastical causes, as head of the Church. Therefore it
is far less strange, It is not against the law of God, or reason to obey a
man.
neither contrary to the tenor of reason, neither to holy Scripture, to be
subject to a man, then to a woman, howbeit in laymen, this prehemine^ce was
never given of our Lord, neither was it ever permitted to them to have the
primacy of his Church. For if as the Protestants says, Christ never committed
the iuri^diction of his Church to lay men.
why are the Papists so simple, and ignorant to obey a man, in matters of
religion? May it not be ansvvered with the like humanity, what is his Majesty,
King of great Britany, a man or no? I hope they will not call him a Prophet,
neither Evangelist, The King of Britanie is not a prophet, nor an apostle, nor
an angel, but a man.
neither Patriarch, nor Angel: yea a man, and head of the Church, unto whom
all his good dutiful subjects, are compelled to swear him supreme judge, in all
ecclesiastical causes, as well as in temporal causes. Would to God that his
Majesty's eyes were illuminated, and that God would give his majesty a wise
heart, that deeply he might consider, how his majesty's good nature, vvisdome,
learning, and heavenly gifts, The office of a King is with great vexatio^. His
majesty's good nature is evil abused, by private men for their own particular.
with the counsel of particular men, is abused, laying on his Majesty's
shoulders such a heavy burden, which his Majesty is not able to undergo. For
if the temporal government, and office of a King be excellent, and
notwithstanding, that office is so intricated with inumerable cares, and
disquietnes of body, and mind, by the account making to the living God, with
whom there is no acception of persons, who gives to every man according to
his works, if in a Kingdom be great enormityes and wrongs, which are to be
corrected and amended by the authority of the Prince, yet notwithstanding this
dignity is intricated (for peace and quietness in his country) with vexation of
his body, disquietnes of mind, heaviness of soul, anxiety of spirit, with
solicitude and care night and day, and with fear with mand debate without,
which evidently declare the greatness of the charge: what (I pray thee gentle
Reader) is the charge of the Church of God, and the government of the souls of
men, in comparison of the common estate? Is it less in effect? do not murder,
fire, robbery, witchcraft, sodomy, buggery, theift etc. and these and such like
vex, and molest the wyselt Prince that ever was or shall be, to redress, and
mend in haste? Lykwyse what enormities are in the Church of God? No charge
more chargable then the charge of souls.
what lewdness, and wickedness in the lives of men? what heresy in
religion, what erroneous opinions, what profession of Mahematisme, what
inclination to Paganism, what Atheism in conversation? Is this charge easily
performed? As for the proof of the temporal government, I hope his Majesty
has sufficient experience, vvhill his Majesty reigned King in Scotland, what
day lie complaints of wrongs, what iniquity was done in the land, to no
small grief, and vexation of his Majesty's mind, and body? And as for the
proof since his Majesty has been King of great Brittany, and head of the
Church, and the Oath sworn to his Majesty, to be supreme judge in all
ecclesiastical causes, what Heresies in religion is fallen out in Ingland, and
Scotland, what sects, what opinions betwixt the Protestants and Puritans,
with what disquietnes of mind has his Majesty labored to accord, and agree
religion amongst them? what muny fice^cy, What pains without be efi^ has us
majesty used to comp^se the er^ticks among themselves. A head ought to be
obeyed.
and gifts, had h s Majesty bestowed on the mynisteres, to accord them to h s
Majesty's will. And pitiarrs, and emulat ons remains yet. If his Majesty be
head, why is he not obeyed? if obedience how is ^here controversy, and sects?
should not the members be obedient to the head, and all the members dispose
their actions to the wit, and government of the head, that the head and the
members may do one thing conformably? for where the head has his pure vigent
power, the me^bres should follow his will, and conform their actions to his
judgment. Therefore all the Sectaries, as the Caluinistes, Brunistes,
Puritaues, Protestants, should conform themselves to the unity of the head,
and his judgment. And yet notvvithstanding, all these sects allow and
condiscende, his Majesty to be head of the Church, All the sects in Britane
allow the king for head, and yet they will live in their own opinion, whereby
they would make the King a monster.
and yet they themselves, will be disordered mebers and believe their own
erroneous opinions. (in erecting Altar, against Altar, in making Schism, and
Heresy.) But more lyckly, that they would make, and absurdly believe his
Majesty to be some monster: for whilst they acknowledge his Majesty head of
the Church, what is this confession else, but that they make his Majesty head
of each heresy, and of all dogmaticall doctrine which is maintained, permitted,
or professed in the land, and in his majesty's dominions? It importes no small
charge unto his Majesty's soul, and body, to presume and clame to him,
Presumption a great sin, and is not left unpunished.
the primacy of the Church, and her authority, which appertayn not to laymen
of whatsoever quality they be of: for the history of Achaz, and others punished
for their presumption, is doctrine sufficient to all men, of whatsoever
condition, not to presume in the office of the Church, for Priest, and Kings,
are of sundry powers, and distinct pre-eminence, for Kings have power of the
body: and Priests are over the soul; Kings have the sword, and Priests the
Keys: Diverse are the conditions of Kings, and Priests.
Kings are called nurses: but Priests are called parents: Kings are to hear:
and Priests are to teach: Kings at the voice of the Church, are to be obedient,
and not to command; but Priests are Pastors of the Church, and the chief
members of it, to whom Kings should be obedient, as unto Christ. As they are in
dignity discrepant, so are they in offices, and lyckewyse are discrepant in
charge, the one over the body, and the other over the soul, the one caryeth
the temporal sword, and the other the spiritual; What glory can his Majesty
reap, by this spiritual government in claming it? To be head of the Church
the King can get no honor but rather dishonor.
And what ignominy hereafter may blot his Majesty's fame, and eternallize his
name for an other presuptuous Achaz; which Ipray God auert from his Majesty,
and that God of his divine goodness, would grant him an understanding heart, to
execute the office of a King dutifully, and leave unto Priests, what belongs
to Priests: so shall his Majesty, eternallize his fame, and name, with the rest
of his Majesty's Catholyck progenitores. As concerning that the Protestants say
the Pope is Antichrist, That the Pope is Antichrist it agrees nether with the
law of God, nor moral reason.
their assertion stands neither with the law of God, nor with natural reason.
For Antichrist does properly signify an adversary and an enemy to Christ. As S.
Aug. says with all kind of malice and hatred, and as Luc^ifer was the Captain
and first of all cursed rebels, and for that was named Satan, that is to
say, an adversary, even so is Antichrist named, by thss proper name, as an
euemy to Christ, and as a chief captain of all rebellious and accursed
Christians. For as God of his goodness was not content to send his Prophets, and
Priests, to teach, and guide men to life eternal, but at least sent his own
son, in mans-flesh, thereby to work more effectually our salvation. Likewise
on the otherside Satan shall procure what lies in him, that men shall not
believe in Christ, Satan's policies that men shall not believe in Christ
and at length shall possess a certain accursed man, by whom he may work his
wicked thoughts, and deeds, against Christ. And this wicked man is so much
more dangerous, how much the more privy, Antichrist is a most dangerous man,
and shall be endued with the power of the Devil.
and closer he lies, being covered with mankind, and with the name of a
Christian. And for that end, the Devil shall give his strength and power,
most specially to that cursed man, and he is called by the Devils name, as S.
Paul 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. The adversary, says he, and S. John 1. Ioh. cap. 2.
Shows whose adversary he is, by naming Antichrist, that is to say, that
Antichrist who is set most dispytfully against Christ, Antichrist is an open
enemy to Christ.
who is most certainly fortold to come, and therefore of all Christians, most
carfully is to be eshewed and feared.

There are three kynds of Antichrists but one special above the rest.
Now whereas there are three kinds of Antichrists, and the first is the Devil,
who is only a spirit: next false teachers: thirdly a certain man: who shall be
possessed of the Devil, who shall oppunge Christ manifestly. And albeit every
Heretyck and falls teacher be a certain Antichrist, and an enemy to Christ, as
S. John says, 1 Ioh. 2. there are many Antichrists: Each Heretic is a
certain Antichrist.
(yet as there is one, above all other, so he says as it were pointing him,
you have heard, that Antichrist comes.) You have heard, says he, not only,
that Antichrist comes, but that the same most notable Antichrist comes. Why
Antichrist is permitted to come.
The effects wherefore this singular Antichrist shall be suffered to come, are,
First for trial and revealing of the invincible truth which God has given to
his elect.

Secondly* to show how inexcusable the Jews are, who pretending to believe the
old Prophets, and to look for the Messiah: The Jews are made inexcusable.
yet having repelled Christ Jesus, who most evidently was descry bed of the law,
and Prophets: shall in the e^^de embrace Antichrist for their Messiah, whom the
Prophets have willed them to be ware of, that as S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. says
because they received not the love of truth, that they might be saved, therefore
God has sent on them the working of error, that they may believe lies: to the
end that all men may be judged who have not believed the truth, but have
consented to iniquity.

But the question moved, and the affirmative defended is* that* the Pope of
Rome is this chief, All Horeticks hold opinion that the Pope is Antichrist, but
falsely proved.
and principal Antichrist, who was prophesyed to appear toward the end of
the world. In this ecstasy of mind, and lunatic frenzy, are all Heretyckes
that avouch the same in their sermons, and printe in books, and set abrooad
to the world, to draw all men unto their opinion, their common doctrine about
this effect, is brought out of the revelation, so that the mystical book and
prophecy of God, The clout-the churches asse^bly understands, best the
re^elation, and can apply it to the Pope for Antichrist precs^ly at four aclock.
(in which as S. Hier. says, how many words so many Sacram^utes) (^^herome so
common, and facill to understand, that the howling-sighing-^ypping-pur^^ane
sisters of each city in Scotland, can apply every lord of this book to the Pope
of Rome for Antichrist, as dru^^k brut-beast, without reason and understanding,
not knowing what they speak, with their preacher passing the bounds of all
modesty, and shamsastnes; to speak against anthority.) For if God so generally
commanded and said to the hard hearted Jews speaking of their governors and
rulers, with the whole multitude saying, God commands to speack reverently,
and touch not men of authority. The Apostles are beloved of Christ for their
co^sta^cy, but chiefly Peter who^ loved Christ above the rest, is also of
Christ beloved. S. Peter by Gods providence glorifyeth Christ by his death.
Zac. cap. 2. He that touches you, touches the aple of mine eye: and moreover
speaking more particularly concerning his Prophets, and Priests, says in the
Psalm. 104. Touch not mine anointed. Lyckewyse Luc. 22. He that hears you,
hears me, and he that dispyseth you, dispyseth me. If therefore his Apostles
were nearer him, then any other men, and abode with him in his temptations, and
for that cause, were beloved of him. Yea if amongst the rest Simon Peter loved
him best, as it is said. Ioh. 21. out of doubt also, of him he was beloved
above the rest, who of himself in singular love, is ordained Pastor of his
flock. Moreover if Christ provided by singular providence, that Saint Peter
should glorify him by suffering death at Rome. unto this day S. Peter's Chayr,
and the succession of Priests, with great reverence, has been acknowledged at
Rome. Moreover if the whole Fathers, S. Peter's chayr is holden in great
renere^ce to this day.
from the primityue age, have ever so esteemed of the succession of S. Peter,
that without the unity of that Chayr, they account no salvation, and in it they
have reckened the true Catholycke faith, as witness these following, No
salvation without unity of this chayr.
Iren. lib. 3. cap 3. Cypr. lib. 1 epist. 3. Hippoli^. de Antichrist. Tripart.
hist. lib. 4. cap. 15 Atha. in psalm 106. and psalm. 138 Arnob. in psalm. 106.
and 138. opt. meleu. lib. 2. de Schism. S. Hier. ad dam. Ambros in 1. tim. cap.
3 Augin psalm. cont. don and epist. 162. Now if God has prospered that
succession against the envy, The succession of Peter chayr stands firm against
all envy of Heretycks.
and hatred of all Heretycks, to the comfort of all Catholyckes in all ages to
come, and past, if out of this Catholyck succession, the faith of Christ has
been dilated, and spread abroad in diverse countries, working thereby the
gracious, and miraculous works of Christ, for confirmation of the same. And now
in the end of the world new vpstarts like brute-beasts are not ashamed to
charge the well-beloved see of God, Heretycks lyk brut-beastes know not what
they challenge.
and the successors of his blessed Apostel, not only with error and Heresy,
nor with the begetting, hatching, nourishing, and fostering of Antichrist: but
to be really in effect very Antichrist himself. What raging madness is in these
men's heads: what inte^d they else, then to burden Christ himself, Heretycks are
mad headed to call the Pope Antichrist.
with the bringing forth, and commending Antichrist unto the world? What
blasphemy vomit these men, who cannot only be contented, to chardge the Roman
see, with abuses, errors, and Heresy, neither vouchsafe to esteem the Pope a
friend, or a member of Antichrist, but really the very Antichrist, and chief
captain of all Gods enemies, to sit in S. Peter Chair.

This is the profound doctrine of these diuynes, and this is believed for
verity of their ignorantes, was it not Christ, says S. Amb. offic. lib. 5. who
set Rome in so great honor, Is it not Antichrist that has set Rome in so
great honor to be the sea of Christ and his chief disciple Peter.
as it has always ever had that honorable fame, to be called the seat of the
Apostle of Christ? Neither was it Antichrist, but Jesus Christ who made his
Apostles together to die there, and to have a perpetual succession of
Bishops, in that city, without any infidelity, or proffessed heresy coming
betwixt the lawful successors, to this present day? Neither was it
Antichrist, but Christ who gave the crown of martyr-dome to thirty two Popes
of Rome. Moreover did Christ prepare the way for Antichrist by the chief of his
Apostles The Heretyks accuse Christ to be the setter up of Antichrist.
Could God make no man foreruner of that cursed-man, but the sone of God, and
the redeamer of the world? O blasphemous tongues, o wicked thoughts, unto this
day how many general counselles have been: how many faithful Princes and
Kings: what nations and people unto this time haueth honored Rome, and the
Pastor sitting in it, as honor done to Christ in his Vicare: The Heretics says
all nations have committed spiritual whordome, in honoring S. Peter's see in
Rome.
and now really is called and believed to be Antichrist? Have all good
Christians Kings and People committed fornication with Antichrist? Had Christ
no man else upon whom he might have permitted Antichrist to be builded, then
upon his chief Apostle; upon whom he has builded his Church? Has he promised
that the gates of Hell shall not preuail against this foundation, and contrary
wise Hell gates has so prevailed that Antichrist himselse does sit in the
seat, The Heretics would say that Hell gaites have preuealed against his Church.
and foundation of the Apostle? Did Christ so much labor to prefer S. Peter,
that in the end, Antichrist might have a more honorable seat prepared for him
by the labores of the Apostle, for his abominable inter pryses? are they worthy
to be called Christians, who fear not to say, and teach, such blasphemous
doctrine, and detestable speeches. What ignorance, In vain is christ's promis
to S. Peter.
and unlearned judgment are these men of? what has bewitched, and enchanted
their spirits: How giddy and lunatic are their head, that they should nominat
the successor of the blessed Apostle Peter Antichrist, who is a peculiar
certain man according to the judgment of all writters? as witness, Heretics
have a bewicthed and an enchanted spirit.
Isai. n. dan. 8.9. n. Mat. 24. Ioh. 5. and 2. epist cap. 2.2. These. 2. Apoc.
13. Who is far opposite to the Pope of Rome, for the Popes are not any certain
man, but their succession is the continuance of a certain office, The Popes
are not oncertayn man but a continual succession.
in which many men have succeeded on after an-other: therefore the Popes are
not, neither can be called Antichrist. For as the name of Christ was given in
old times, to many Prophets, Priests, The name of Christ was common to many in
the old law, and yet one Christ* came, so is the name of Antichrist common to
many and yet one must come.
and Kings (who were anointed as a figure of the truth, which was to be
fullfylled) did not hinder and let, but that there should come a certain
singular person, who should be the Savior of man-kynd in that name. In like
manner even so the name of Antichrist, being given to many wicked adversaries
of Christ, and namely to all Heretics, does not hinder, but rather helps to
prove, that some one singular man shall come at length, who shall surpass all
other men in setting himself against Christ, and this Christ verifyeth saying
to the Jews, Ioh. 5. I have come in the name of my Father, and ye receive me
not. if auother come in his own name, him ye will receive. The which words the
Doctors of the Church confess to be spoken prophetically of Antichrist, and
makes the comparison betwixt them, saying, as Christ was a certain man, so
shall Antichrist be a certain man, the difference is, that Christ is from God;
The difference between Christ and Antichrist.
and Antichrist from the Devil, Christ does save, and the other distroyeth;
Christ does unite his people with concord, and peace, and the other does
deuyde, and scatter. Yet in this they agree, that each of them is a singular
man, and as Christ is the man of righteousness, so is Satan the man of sin 1 Thessalonians. 2. Who shall be made known to all men that he shall be wholly addicted to
sin. And therefore seeing that Antichrist shall be a singular man, Antichrist is
not a Devil or spirit, but a real man in whom the Devil shall corporally
inhabit.
and not many men, neither the Popes kingdom: whom S. Hier. in cap. 7. dan.
and n. Let us think him to be, says he, not the Devil or a spirit, but a man
of the propagation of man-kynd, in whom the Devil shall corporally dwell.
Likewise S. Ambros in epist. 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. says, that as the sone of God
took fleesh, so Satan shall appear in man. And S. Aug. de ciuitate dei lib.
20. cap. 19. Confessing many Antichrists, with S. John called one of them, the
very head and the last Antichrist: for the words of the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2.
(Prince) and (last) agree to one only person, and not to a whole succession of
men, in one state of life. To this S. Chry. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. That Antichrist
shall be a certain man, having in him the power of the Devil. In like manner
Theod. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2 That as the Son of God took flesh to procure our
sa^uation: So shall the Devil choose him a man, by whom he may work mischief
and all iniquity, to these subs^rybs S. Greg. in 106. lib 14 cap. 11. That in
the last days, the Devil shall enter in that vessel of perdition which thalbe
called Antichrist. All these famous witnesses declare sufficiently, that it is
not the order, and estate of the Bishops of Rome that are Antichrist,
Antichrist is not the order of Bishops, or an estate, but a man possessed of
the Devil.
but a certain man shall be properly Antichrist, who shall set himself against
Christ, more singularly, then ever any Heretyck as yet has done hitherto. For
he shall withstand Christ so much, that none is able to withstand him more, for
he shall not withstand a piece of the faith, but the whole faith, and shall deny
Christ, to be God, and man, or to be mediator. And as Hier. quaest. 11. ad
Algas. says: He shall exalt himself above all, that is called God, that he
may tread under foot, the Gods of all nations, and all true, He shall abolish
all true Religion. He shall persuade and compel man to Idolatr^ and to worship
himself and his image in all Churches.
and approved Religion. And where as the Apostles, says, 2. These. 2. That God
shall send them not only the worker of error: but the very fountain of error.
For as S. Ambros. in Luc c. 21. says, that he shall dispute out of the
Scriptures that he his Christ, and he shall teach, that he himself is God; also
he shall lead not only men, to Idolatrye, bus also shall persuade and compel
all men to follow and obey him, he shall also commau^d himself to be
worhhipped. and adored, and his image to be placed in the temple of God, not
only in Jerusalem, but in all other Churches also. For Antichrist knowing,
says the Apostle, Antichrist shall usurp the name of Christ because he
knowneth Christ shall come and beat him down He shall call himself God. The
Pope can not be Antichrist, because he belieues the articles of his creed:
which Antichrist shall abolish.
2 Thessalonians. 2. That our Lord shall come, to beat him down, in the mean time,
will usurp his name, unto himself to that end, that his kingdom may seem
true, he will lead with him, such as may perish together with him, that he
may sit in the house of our Lord, in the seat of Christ, and affirm himself
very God. And therefore seeing Antichrist is noted properly to be a singular man,
and as yet not come: whose power, and life, is against Christ, that consequently
the Popes of Rome cannot be this Antichrist; who long since are come, for the
difference which is betwixt them, may decerne, which of them is with, or
against God, for this said Antichrist shall oppose against Christ, and abolish
the faith of Christ. And contrary w^^e the Pope forbide^h no man to believe in
Christ neither denies any part of holy Scripture. Antichrist will do openly
against the faith of Christ, and shall call himself God: but the Pope did never
against the faith of Christ, neither privately nor publicly, nor never did call
himself God. The difference betwixt the Pope and Antichrist, and by what notes
they may be known.
Antichrist will not only be called God of o her men, but will extol himself
above God: that is he will extol himself above the blessed Trinity: But this
extolling no Pope ever did think, of much-lesseprof^sse it, but profess and
confess themselves to be servants of them, who serve God: and therefore the
Pope is not Antichrist. Antichrist thallbe received of the Jews for the
Messiah.
Antichrist shall be received specially of the Jews. S. Hier. ad Algas. Chrysostom
Hom 4 in John. But the Jews have not received the Pope at any time, and if
they received not Christ, far less the Pope, but shall receive Antichrist, as
Christ fortold Ioh. 5. Which place all the Fathers expound of Antichrist, as
Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. Cyril. lib. 3. in John cap. 6. Theod. in 2. These. 2.

Antichrist shall come circumcised, Antichrist shall come circumcised of the
circumcision.
and of the circumcision, that the Jews may have some confidence in believing
him as S. Hier. says sup. He shall do all those things, not by his own power,
but by the permission of God, for the Jews sake. And Theod. vt sup. says,
that the Jews do look for him, and when he comes they will believe in him:
But to this day the Pope is not of the circumcision, neither circumcised,
neither is he expected of the Jews, neither of them is believed: ergo neither
is he Antichrist.

Moreover Daniell cap. 7. After the description of the four Empyres, it is
said, Daniels prophecy of Antichrist.
that the fourth beast (which is the Roman Empire) had ten horns: and I
considered the horns, and behold an other littel horn, sprange out of the
midst of them, and three of the first horns were pulled up, before his face,
and behold the eyes, as it were of a man were in his horn. and a mouth speaking
great things. In which place S. Hier. in Dan cap. 7. Let us say, says he,
Before Antichrist come, ten kings shall divide the Roman Empire, and the
eleventh king shall humble three principal of the ten, as a token of the
coming of Antichrist. Before the coming of Antichrist, the Euangelly must be
preached t^rough the world.
That all the Ecclesiastical writers have lest by tradition, that in the
consummation of the world, when the Empire of the Romans must be distroyed,
there shall be ten Kings, who will deuyde the Roman Empire amongst themselves:
and there shall arise the eleventh being a very little King, who shall overcome
three of these ten Kings, that is to say, the Kings of Egypt, Africa, and
Ethiopia, this witness: Hippol Hom. de Antichrist, and Theod. 2 Thessalonians. 2. But
the Pope has not conquered to him the Kingdoms of Egypt: Africa: and
Ethiopergo he is not Antichrist.

Moreover before the coming of Antichrist, the Euangely is to be preached
through the whole world, as Christ has said, Matt 24. v. 14. This euangely of
the Kingdom, halbe preached in the whole world, for a testimony to all
nations; then shall come the consummation: But this liberty of the Euangely is
not fulfilled as yet, as a certain sign, of the coming of Antichrist, when
he shall appear, and seeing Antichrist is not as yet come, as of this sign may
be gathered. Ergo the Pope is not Antichrist.

Before Antichrist come, Henoch and Elias must come, and when they come they
will withstand him in their preachings.
Moreover the preaching of Henoch and Elias is not yet fulfilled, who by their
preachings, shall oppose themselves against Antichrist, for confirming of the
faithful, in the Catholic, and Apostolical Faith. as witness S. Ioh. Apoc. 11.
I shall give my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy, a thousand two
hundrith and sixty days clothed in sa^hcloth: as witnesses this place, in
their commentaries. Primas. Bed Richard. Aret. in Apoc. Damasc lib. 4. cap. 18.
Greg. lib. 4. cap. 11. D. Aug. in Genesis ad lit. lib. 9 cap. 6. But Elias and
Enoc^ shall not come, but in the time of Antichrist: and as yet Antichrist is
not comed. Ergo the Pope is not Antichrist. Hippol. sermon. de Antich. and Aug.
de ciuit. lib. 20. cap. 19. Chry. in 2. These cap 2.

Moreover Antichrist shall be borne of the trybe of Dan: as witness Iren. lib 5.
aduers. Haeres. Hippol sermon. de Antichrist. Theod. in 2 These 2 Greg. Mo^al. lib
14 in 106. cap. 11. Antichrist shall be borne of the trybe of Dan.
But the Popes are not borne neither derived from such a trybe, ergo not
Antichrist.

Morouer Antichrist comes a little before the end of the world, as the foresaid
Authors make mention: but if the Pope were Antichrist, the world should have
been finished long since, ergo the Pope is not Antichrist.

The time of Antichrist shall be three years and an half, and he shall reign in
Jerusalem, and sit in the temple of God.
Moreover Antichrist shall only prevail in his Kingdom, but three years and
an half, and in this time the Saints shall be delivered into his had, who shall
deal with them after his pleasure, as Dan. cap. 7. and 12. and apoc 17. but
when he has reigned the foresaid time, and has spoiled all things in this
world, and shall sit in the temple of Jerusalem, whose vprysing shall be by the
working of Satan, with all deceit of iniquity, extolling himself above God.
And taking away the daily sacrifice: Dan. 11. and the sign of the Cross in
all places, as says, Hippol. lib. de consummat. saeculi. Antichrist shall
abolish the daily Sacrifice: the sign of the Cross, and follow all
sensuality.
And likewise shall be the cause of the departure, from Christ's faith, lawful
Pastor, and Roman Emperor, whose glory shall be in all sin, and therefore
justly is called the man of sin, and following all sensuallity and lust: as
Dan. 11. But this the Pope does not: ergo he is not Antichrist, neither is his
life blem^shed with such bad qualities. Therefore what understanding have these
men in the word of God, that believe it not concerning Antichrist: neither the
grave authorities of the Fathers: but rashly, and presumptuously do judge the
heigh Priest of God, and vicare of Christ to be that abominable enemy of God:
and Antichrist, to be his son, our Lord, and Savior.

QVAESTIO VIII. Of the Primacy of S. Peter.
WHerefore do the Papists worship the Pope, as Supreme head of the Church,
and Bishop of all other Bishops, Successor (called) to S. Peter, and infallible
Judge, in all causes of faith, which titles and pre-eminence, do all savor of
Antichrist? Luth. art. 25. apud Roffens. Call. lib. 4. cap. 7. Centur. 1. part.
lib. 2. cap. 10. Nilus de primatu.

ANSWER.
GOd did forsee that the people of Israel sometime might fall, and declyne from
religion, either to the right hand, or to the left, therefore he provided in
the Synagogue a Pastor, to whom in matters of doubt they might have recourse,
God provided in the Law a supreme Head for deciding of controversies, and
doubts.
that by his authority, all controversies arysing, might be decyded, and
defined. Moreover the Sc^ipture adds, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 12. If any man will do
presa^^^uo^sly, and not obey the commandment of the Priest, who in that time
ministers to the Lord thy God: by decree of the judge, that man shall die the
death. God is no less careful for his Church, then he was for the Synagogue.
What the high Priest in the law was, the same is S Peter in the Gospel. It is
of greater reason to have an head now, then it was in the law. A head is for
holping of unity in faith and religion. All men believe that the Pope is head
of Christ's Church.
Wherefore seeing, with no less favor the son of God, does assist, and
succor his own Church, with ^he Priest hood, and authority, now in this age,
then he did long since the Synagogue. For which he has instituted and placed
S. Peter Pastor, and has ordained that his successors shall rule in her.
Therefore now it co^mes to pass that greater necessity is at the present time,
to have a Pastor for the government of his Church, then in S. Peter time. For
at this time, there are many more Christians in the world, endued with far
lose holiness, and virtue the^ they were long since. Moreover they are environed
and compassed daily with vpstart heresies, and novelties, and for this cause
greater necessity of a head by whom Gods flock may be preserved, and keept in
one faith, and religion; and that all controversies, and dissension may be
taken away. For confirmation of the verity, all good Christians believe, that
the Bishop of Rome, sitting in S. Peter chair is by lawful ordination, and
the appointment of Christ, the chief Pastor of the whole militant Church, whose
voice every sheep ought to harken to, as to the voice of Christ, and his
Apostle. For no man that has his senses free, and is not led with the spirit
of error. Will make any question of the Supremacy of S. Peter, No man makes
question against him, that has not the spirit of error.
and his successores. Seeing so many evident testimonies confirm the same
thing, as first Christ says to him: John. 1. Thou art Simon the son of
Iona, thou shall be called Cephas: the which by interpretation, is Peter, that
is, a stone, or a rock. Here it is to be observed, that Christ makes a promise,
that Simon shall be called Peter, for as a stone is the foundation of the house,
For Simon Peter had the first place by Christ's appointment.
so shall Peter be the foundation of his m^litant Church. Secondly in choosing
his tw^lue Aposties, M^rc 13. Luc. 6. Simon is nominated first and is furnamed
Peter.

Thirdly when the Godhead of Christ was revealed to him, and when he had
confessed the same: Christ answers expounding his name, saying: and I say unto
thee thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc. For his
name declairs him to be a rock, and a ground stone of Christ's Church.
In which words the promise of Christ is fulfilled, and the reason of the
prom^se is declared, concerning the new name. So that Peter himself is called
here a rock, and that Christ promisseth to build his Church on him, for in
promising to Simon that he should be called Peter, when as yet he had confessed
him, was to that end, that he might confess the more strongly, and firmly as a
rock.

Christ pronu^ces Peter blessed, and a rock to build his church on.
Next he named him Peter before he had confessed him: so that he was thus far
forward, in being the rock before his profession.

And thirdly, when as yet he had not confessed, Christ pronunces him not only a
rock, or a man in stedfastnes, of the property of a rock in his faith, but
also such a rock whereupon he would build his Church, for every Apostle was a
rock in general, but S. Peter was this rock in special, whereof Christ now
speaks.

Fourthly, that the confession of Peter might remain immovable after Christ
ascension. (For always the Church needs a visible head, and rock) Christ
prayed for Peter's faith, The Church has need of a visible head, therefore
Christ prayed for Peter that he might stre^ghen his brethren. What the giving
of the name and promise of Christ erected.
and he was bid to strenghen his brethren; After his conversion of Christ's
denial, last of all to show what kind of strength Peter should give to his
Brethren Christ willed him feed his lambs; as for conclusion of these a
foresaid, the promise of the name of Peter was the first cause of Peter's being
this rock.

The giving of the name, was the performance of the promise.

The confession of Christ's Godhead, was the fruit of the gift, and of the
promise.

The promise to have the Church build on that rock, was the reward of the
confession.

The prayer of Christ for Peter's faith, was the warrant of perpetuity of his
strong confession.

The prayer of Christ is a warrant of p^rpetuity Peter's primacy.
The power to feed Christ sheep was to make Peter such a rock, as should stay
up his Church by teaching and ruling the faithful, whose voice we are bound to
hear, as Chry. in John. hom. 18. Cyril. in Ioh. l. 2. c. 12. Hill. de Trin. l.
6. Tertul. de praesc. aduers. Haeret. Hippol. de consum. mundi. Origin. hom. 5.
in exodus Cyp l. 1. Epist. 3. and l. 4. Epist. 9. Hill. c. 16. in Matthew. S. Amb.
68. S. Bas. in conc. de paenit. S. Hier, in 16. Matthew. Epiph. in anchoratu.
Theod. in cant. cant. Damasc. in Iosaphat and Barlaam. Theoph. in 22. Luc
Euthym. in 26. Mat. Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 21. cont. Epist. Don. Prosp. de
vocat. ge^t. lib. 2 c. 28. S. Greg. epist. l. 6. epist. 37. In fine we have
many reasons why S. Peter above all others was this rock, to wit, the
excellency of his faith, The excellency of Peter's confession, and faith, is the
cause that he is the rock. In Peter is unity and an everlasting Preisthood, the
avoiding of Schism, and an ecclesiastical iorisdict^o^ These are Peter's
prerogatives which declare him head of the Church, and are collected and
conferred of the Scripture set in order as follows. Peter's prerogative of
primacy. The keys of heavens are promised to him. Christ compares Peter with
himself in paying tribut. Christ made choice o^ Peter's but to preach in.
and the excellency of his glory: the unity of the church built on him are a
lone: and the signifying of Christ to be the only everlasting shepherd. And
last for the eschwing of Schism, and for receiving of ecclsiasticall power for
the whole Church. So that the Apostle Peter, passes far the other Apostles in
ecclesiastical dignity, in so much that these his prerogatives may be easly
gathered out of the Scripture it self, as first he is only named first of all
the twelve Matt. 10.

For as much as he had the promise to be called Cephas, that is to say, a rock,
and this promiss was made before the twelve were choosen, and was really named
Peter at the time of his choice. Ioh. 1.

For as much, that although both S. John Baptist had confessed Christ's Godhead
before: and Na^hanieli had said, Thou art the sone of God, thou art the King of
Israel. Mar^. 3. Ioh. 1. Yet only Peter's confession being made after, was most
heighly esteemed and rewarded.

For as much as he is called Peter, and Christ does say to him Matt. 16. Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church.

For as much as the keys of the Kingdom of heaven are namely promised to Peter
alone. Matt. 16.

And for as much, That the tribut of didragma was dew for the first begotten of
every famille. number. 3. loseph. de antiq. lib. 18. cap. 12. Yet Christ paid
both for himself, and for Peter also as being the vnderhead, and first begotten
of his family the Church. Chry. in Matt. Hom. 59.

For as much, as also Christ although an other boat was a hand, yet he taught
the people out of Peter's boat Luc. 5. to show that in Peter's chair his
doctrine should always be firmly professed. Christ prays for Peter's faith.
Peter entered first into the sepulture of Christ. Peter of the Angel is
nominated specially. Peter walks on the sea as aprerogatiue to rule the world.
Peter more then others loved Christ, and is commanded to feed his sheep.
Christ fortelleth Peter that he shall suffer death on the cross for christ's
sake. Peter answered for the rest of the Apostles. Peter gives sentence on
judas to depose him. Peter after receipt of the holy Ghost taught the faith to
the multitude.
Amb. in 5. cap. Luc.

For so much as the Apostles, were sure to be sifted of Satan. Yet the faith
of Peter allone is prayed for, that he being once converted, might strenghthen
his brethren. Luc. 22. Leo sermon 2. de not. Pet. and Paul.

For so much as when the tidings of Christ's resurrection was sent to his
disciples, Peter was first that entered into the sepul^hre: Luc. 24.

For as much, as he was not coprehended with the rest, but was severally named
by himself, whil the Angel said, Teil his disciples and Peter: Marc. 16.

For as much as the other Apostes sailed in the sea in a boat: yet Peter alone
walked in the sea without a boat, as a token that the whole world was (as a
sea) and was to be subject to his turisdiction. John. 22. Bern. de considerat.
lib. 2.

For as much, as some other Apostles standing by, Peter alone is showed to have
loved Christ more then they. Ioh. 21. And he alone is commanded to seed
Christ's sheep, and to rule his lambs. Aug. ibid.

For as much, as it is said to Peter alone, Thou shall strech-forth thy hands,
and for ow thou me: which way in following, was by suffering death on the
Cross, prophesied by Christ. Ioh. 21

For as much, as Peter answered always for the Apostles as being the mouth of
them all John. 6. Matthew. 16.

For as much, as after Christ's ascension: Peter allone gave sentence, upon
Judas, and pronunced him deposed, Act. 1. And an other to be choosen in his
place: Act. 1. Chry, in act. Apost, hom, 3.

For as much, as when the Holy Ghost came down: Peter above all the test first
of a^ taught the faith, and the multitude being converted, say to Peter and to
none other, what shall we do. etc, Act, 2,

Peter exhortes the converted to pe^nance and baptism. Peter wrought the 1.
miracle. Peter first publicly confessed Christ before the counsel, Peter knew
the secrets of Ananias and Saphiras hearts. Peter's shadow wrought miracles.
Peter excommunicated and enjoined penance to Simo^ Magus.
For as much, as Peter made answer for all, that they should repent, and be
baptized. Act. 2.

For so much, as Peter did the first miracle after the coming of the holy
Ghost, and first healed the seete of the lame: because he being the head showed
mistically, that he established the feet of others. Act. 3. Amb. sermon. 68.

For so much, as Peter confessed Christ first, not only before private men, but
also at the seat of judgment: Act. 4.

For as much, as Peter perceived the secrets of the hearts of men, some to do in
simplicity, and some in deceit. He therefore extended his power on Anania and
Saphira: stryking them dead with one word. Act. 5. and Greg. lib. 1. Epist. 24.

For as much, as all the Apostles did miracles, yet Peter was so famous above
the rest, that his shaddowe wrought miracles. Act. 5.

For as much, as Peter excommunicated and enjoined penance to Simon Magus the
first Heretic Act 8.

For as much, as he was the first after Christ's Ascentio^, who rayted a dead
person to life, called Tabitha Act. 9.

Peter by vision is made to know of the conversion of the gentiles.
For as much, as he had first by vision that the gentiles also were called to
believe in Christ. act. 10.

For as much, as God choose that the gentills, should first of all hear the word
of the Ghospel by S. Peter's mouth, and should believe. Act. 15.

For as much, as when Peter was in prison, prayer was made in the Church for him
without intermission. Act. 14. For Peter, prayer is made by the church. Peter
decides the question moved about the Law.


For as much, as when a sedition was among the disciples, in so much that Paul
and Barnabas came to the Apostles at Jerusalem, to seek a solution from them,
and chiefly from Peter, and told the controversy in the counsel. Act. 15.
and Theod in Epist. ad Leenem.

For as much, as Peter did not only first speak but also gave a determinate
sentence, that the gentiles should not be burdened with the law. act. 15.

For as much, as S Paul came to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal 1. And that as S.
Amb-sayes, in com. cap. ad Gal. 1. Because he was first and chiefest of the
Apostles, to whom our Lord had committed the cure of his Church.

For as much, as Peter was either alone, or first, or chiefest in the greatest
affairs of the Church. Chry. in act apost. Hom. 21.

For as much, as he was send to possess with his chayr Rome, Peter by Gods
providence is sent to Rome to possess that see with his chair.
the Mother Church of the Roman Empire. Athan. ad Solit. Vit. Agent Aug de
sanct. sermon 27. Leo sermon. 1. in not. Pet and Paul. Who calls Rome the
Head-city of the world: and to conquer all superstition Heresy, and infidelity.

For as much, as his chayr, and succession has bynacknowledged of all the
ancient Fathers, and has flourished there to this present day, without
interruption of that faith, which S. Peter professed and taught, as expertence
does bear witness. Conc. Calced. act. 3. and Bern. epist 190.

For as Christ excels the Angels, Heb 1 because God never said to any of
them as he said to Christ: even so Christ never said to any of the Apostles, as
he said to S. Peter. Thou shaltbe called Peter: or upon this rock I will build
my Church: or to thee I will give the keys: or pay for me and thee: or I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: feed my sheep and rule my lambs.
Matt 16. Luc. 22. John. 21.

To declare one Pastor and one chair, wherein unity might be kept of all men,
The building of Christ Church varieth not but is never syk it self.
least the other Apostles might echone chaleng a chair to himself. Opt. milet.
lib. 2. de Schism donat So that in Peter himself is this rock, and faith of his
Church. And because the building of Christ's Church varithe not after his
Gospel planted, but is always lyk it self, therefore all Catholyckes
believe, that when S. Peter died, who was the head co^stitute by Christ.
another succeeded in his place by ordination of S. Peter, All christians
believe the Pope to be the head of the church and confessor of the true faith
and consequently the rock of the church.
upon who^ Christ's milita^te Church might be as steadfastly builded as it had been once built on S. Peter. And seeing the Bishop of Rome succeedes S. Peter,
all Christians do constantly affirm, that the Bishop of Rome is the rock, and
head of his Church, who confesses evermore Christ's true faith; Upon which
confession of the sea of Rome, as upon a sure rock, Christ's Church is built.
Whereupon Bern. lib. de consid. ad Eugen. pp. lib. 2. Other Pastores have
flocks assigned to them, every Pastor one flock: to thee all are committed,
one flock to one shepherd: And not only of the sheep, but also of the
Pastores: thou allone art the Pastor, do thou ask how I prove it? by the
word of our Lord. For to whom (I say not only) of the Bishops but also of the
Apostles so absolutely and without distinction, are all the sheep committed: as
it is said. It thou love me Peter, feed my sheep? which sheep? whether the
people of this, or of that city, or country, or certain kingdom? he says my
sheep. Out of which word, it is evident, that Christ did not appoint out some
to a particular Pastor: but assigned all: nothing is accepted: where nothing is
distinguished. Thus he.

Therefore seeing the pastoral office, and authority of S. Peter was ordinary,
it behooves that it must go for ever unto his successors: and for as much as the
Bishop of Rome is that ordinary Pastor, who succeeds in S. Petees chair and
is above the rest, according to Gods word: All ordinary offices go by
succession.
for when the Church was built on S. Peter and he was made chief Pastor of the
same, at what time he was in Palestina, and not in Rome, even then he was
accounted the high Bishop of the circumcision of the faithful Jews: yet
notwithstanding for as much as the same Peter, at the length settled himself at
Rome by Gods appointement, and left a successor there, as the holy Fathers
affirm, as Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Tertul. de praese. And seeing he was the rock
promised by Christ, upon whom he should build his Church, and also the pastor,
who as he has loved Christ more then any other; So he had the authority to
feed Christ flock more then any other Bishop, and seeing that power of S. Peter
was ordinary, it must continue in the Church of God permanent: and also it must
continue in on chief shepherd only, which is the bishop of Rome, who
ordinarily succedees in the said authority of S. Peter: therefore the said
supremacy of the bishop of Rome is avouched, and taught by Gods own word. Et
Cyp. ad iubatan. and de simplicit. prol. says: Christ gave that authority,
that there should be no schism, Authority is in the Church that there should
be no schism and breach in unity.
and that he might make unity manifest, that the original of the same unity
may have his beginning of one. And therefore Iren lib. ^. aduers Haeret. cap.
3. Speaking of the successions of Bishops, in those Churches which the Apostls
had first entitled, called the church of Rome, the greatest Church, and most
ancient and known to all men. All Churches concures with the Church of Rome
as mother Church Heretics have appealed from the affrican counsels to the sea
of Rome.
being planted and settled by two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, and each
Church that is about this, must come agree and concur with her, for her mighty
principality and government. Hereupon. S. Cyp. lib. epist. 3. confesses the
authority of S. Peter to be at Rome, for whereas certain factious persons
Heretycks sailed from Cathage to Rome, intending to complain of him, and the
other Bishops of Africa, said to Pope Cornelius, they dare carry letters from
Schismatic and profane men, to the chayr of Peter, and principal Church,
whence the priestly unity began; neither do they consider them to be Romans,
whose faith is praised by the Apostles own mouth, to whom infidelity can have
no access. This he. For this Seat Emperors, and Kings, honored and
reverenced. Ruff. lib. 10. Eccl. Hist. cap. 2 Likewise Bishops, To the sea of
Rome infidelity can have no access.
and Prelates, have made their appellatio^s, to Rome. as Cyp. cont. epist.
Steph. ppae Hist. tripart. lib 4. cap 15. Arnob. in ps. 106. Opt. mel. cont.
parm. Donat. lib. 2. Hier. Epist. ad Dam. Papa. By her authority, General
Counsels have been indicted, and appointed.

By the authority of the roman see Heretics and Schismatics are accused. No
Heretic Bishop ever found in the sea of Rome.
Schismatics, and Heretics by the same authority or accursed and condemned.

In this succession and authority noe Heretic Bishop ever was found, as
witness, S. Aug. epist. 165. And therefore as S. Aug. says to the Donatists in
ps. cont par. donat. Come ye brethren if ye will be grafted in the vine: it
grieves us when we see youly thus cut of. Number ye the Bishops even from the
very seat of S Peter, and consider who succeeded, who^ in that order: that
himself is the rock which the proud gates of hell do not overcome. What greater
testimony can be said for the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, and successor of
S. Peter, whom all good Christians ought to honor and reverence, as the high
priest of God, and governor of his Church.

OBIECVIO.
THe Protestants affirm that Peter himself, is not called this rock, but
either Christ alone, or the faith which Peter confessed is called this rock. So
that the words of the text are thus meant. Upon this faith, and confession of
thine, which thou have testified of me, upon this rock which I am: or on this
strong faith, which is confessed of me. I will build my Church. And
wheresoever this faith is, there is the rock, upon which Christ builds his
Church.

ANSWER.
ALbeit the faith and confession of Christs-goodhead, be indeed a most strong
rock, whereupon the Church is builded, yet that is not all, which Christ means
at this present. For these words thou art Peter, have a respect unto three
diverse times. First to the time past, because they are spoken to him, who was
promised, to be called Peter. And secondly, to the present time, because they
are spoken to him, who now confessed Christs-goodhead. And thirdly, to the time
to come, because they are spoken to him, to whom Christ says, he will give the
keys of Heaven, and upon whom, he will hereafter build his Church, which thing
he performed, when he said to him, Peter love thou me? etc. Io. 21.

For the proposition is qualified with the person, to whom it is spoken, and
with the diversity of three times.

To conclude, the Protestants deny Peter himself, who make the confession te be
this rock, and deuyde the confession from the promise going immediately before,
which wrought the effect; which ensued after, for so much it is affirmed true,
but in respect of that which is denied, it is a maine falsehood: for Christ's
words do teach that this rock, whereupon Christ's Church is built is S. Peter,
in respect of the promise past, present confession, and the authority of
feeding of Christ's sheep. Io. 21.

OBIECTIO.
PETER alone was not made the shepherd of Christ flock, above all others: but
that in him Christ spoke to all the Apostles. ergo.

ANSWER.
PEter alone is spoken to, and commanded to feed Christ's sheep in the
presence of all the other Apostles, and to none of the^, Christ speaks any
thing thereof, at this time. Ergo Peter alone is preferred.

OBJECTION.
AL Heretics cry out, that all the Apostles were equal, and the rest were the
same thing, which Peter was, which thing (say they) S. Cyp de unit. Ecclaes.
does witness, and lykenwyse the very practice of the Apostles, in so much, that
Paul withstood, and reproved, Peter, who was not one of the twelve. Ergo.

ANSWER.
SAINT Peter was not only an Apostle, (in which office duringe their lives,
all the Apostles were his equalles) but also both chief Apostle, and also
ordinary shepherd, and high Bishop, wherein they all were inferiors to him, as
the members, and body to the head Ergo.

OBJECTION.
THe old Catholic Fathers have written and pronunced, that no mortal man, as
Peter was, but Christ himself the sone God, can be this head. Ergo.

ANSWER.
IT is manifest false, for all the ancient Fatheres agree, and affirm, that
Peter received the building of the Church on him: as Bas aduers. eunom. lib. 2.
Hilar. lib. 6. de Trinit. S. Cyp. ad Iubatan. S. Aug. de past. S. Hier. lib. 1.
de Iouin. and l^b 2. aduers. Iouinian. Leo in assumpt. sermon. 3. Aug. Epist.
165. and in Tract. Io. 124.

OBJECTION.
SAINT Aug. de verbis Domint, says, Christ was ^he rock upon which
foundation, Peter himself ^as also built. Ergo.

ANSWER.
WHo does not know* that one rock might be built on another, the less on the
greater? is not the house of God, built of many stones? Christ is the chief
Rock, and the cornerstone, upon him lies S. Peter, a Rock, in comparison of
Christ, very small; in comparison of us, very great. Upon S Peter the rest of
the Church, which lived under him, was built; who is also a Rock, since every
man in his degree is a lively stone, concurring to the building up of the whole
Church, which are joined together, and fastened by faith and charity, make also
a Rock of themselves; beside that, they are built upon the foundation of the
Prophets, and Apostles: 1 Pet 2 1. Cor. 10 Ephesians 2. Neither does one of these
verities contradict or disprove the other. Ergo etc.

OBJECTION.
WHEN the Apostles who were in Jerusalem, had ^eard that Samarta had received
the word of God: They sent to them Peter, and John, Act 8. But no man is sent,
but by a higher power. Therefore Peter was not head of the Apostles.

ANSWER.
THe holy Ghost, is said to be sent of the Father, and of the Sone, and is not
yet the Holy Ghost of equal honor and dignity with them? Is it therefore
because he is sent, that he is inferior? But we understand that he is
inferior, that is sent by commandment: Otherwise equals and superiors are said
to be sent from the^, at whose request and counsel they go, chiefly, if those
from whom they come, be of great authority, with those to whom they are sent.
And such was the college of the Apostles in Sama^ia. For indeed it was much to
move them, that the Prince of the Apostles, with the beloved disciple of
Christ, by judgment, and decree of all the Apostles, came to their conversion.

OBJECTION.
IT is said, that Peter did suffer an heavy reprehension of the Apostle Paul
Gal. 2. to wit, that to his face he withstood him: but this was not decent in a
subject, or inferior. Therefore the Apostle did not acknowledge Peter Superior,
but a lyk in all things, and equal in degrees of dignity.

ANSWER.
SAINT Paul might do it justly, because they were brethren in the office of
Apostleship, and also for that he had the same holy Ghost with Peter. Yet it is
to be observed, that no doctrine of S. Peter's, was then reproved as false, but
only his behavior in an outward act, as Tertul. lib. de praes. Haeret.
witnesses. For all the fault was in his conversation, and not in doctrine, for
he conuersing with the Gentiles, without respect of the keeping of the law, (for
he believed the law to bind no man,) yet at the coming of certain Jews, he
abstained from the Gentiles, thinking thereby he should do more good to the
Jews, to abstain from some meats, so that Paul reprehended his dissembling,
in that the Gentels also were compelled to play the Jews, as S. Aug. Epist.
19. ad Hier. notes upon this place. Yet no less S. Paul in this fault, is also
culpable, in tollerating the observance of the law, in that he circumcised
Timothy, against the doctrine of the Gospel. Act. 20. Now in that fashion of
reproufe, S. Paul believed that the time was proper, that no man should wink
at the ceremony of the law, and to dissemble longer, for it was unprofitable,
for they believed the time was come, to profess Christ plainly etc.

OBJECTION.
CHrist is the Head of the Church, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. He has
constituted him head over all the Church: but if Peter be head, and
consequently after him. the Pope of Rome, there shall be two heads of one body,
which is absurd. Ergo.

ANSWER.
HOw impertinently does Luther infer this argument against us, to prove the
body of the Church, to be a monster, with two heads? For we do not say that
Peter is a lyk equal head with Christ, but under Christ, that is to say,
head-vicar substitute in the place of Christ, and so a second head after
Christ, that is, an head of all others from Christ: or of his mystical body,
which of all men grows in Christ, and so he is not the head of the full body,
seeing he is not the head of Christ, but Christ is simpliciter and absolute head
of the whole Church, yea of Peter, who is a member of this whole body,
notwithstanding more worthy then others. As a Viceroy is truly head of that
Kingdom, of which he bears charge, neuer-theles the King is superior, and
first head of all his Kingdoms: even so Christ, and Peter who is called a
rock, Matt. 16. and a foundation, 1 Cor. 3. verse. 11. but not first, for Christ
is only the first stone, laid in the foundation of the Church: but Peter is
the second foundation and rock, upon whom the rest of the Church, is founded by
Christ.

OBJECTION.
IF the Pope succeed to Peter. Ergo he is an Apostle, which is false.

ANSWER.
THe sequel is frivolous, for more things are required to the Apostleshipe,
then to succeed to the Apostle, to wit, that immediately he be called of God;
moreover that he be taught of God his doctrine, and sent with authority, to
effectua^ the same: and likewise to be endued with the gift of the holy Ghost,
to write canonical Scriptures. Which things the Pope has not, although in the
mean time he does obtain the Apostolical power, in the whole Church, in
which he has succeeded to S. Peter, from whence it is called the Apostles
seat, because of the jurisdiction and authority, which the Apostls had, and was
given immediately by Christ.

OBIECTIO.
THE Counsel may depose the Pope: therefore the Pope is not supreme head of
the Church, when the Counsel may depose him.

ANSWER.
THe assumption is false absolutely: for a counsel with judicial authority,
cannot depose the Pope, because the first seat, is judged of no man the reason
is, because the Pope has received authority in the whole Church immediately
from Christ, so that the Church can no way take away that authority. Put the
case, that he should be a manifest Heretic, he should not be deposed of men,
but of God, who will not retain such a vicar, who de facto declars himself an
heretic, and cuts himself of, so manifestly from his body, either by evidence
of deed, or by declaration of a general counsel.

QVAESTIO IX. Of the Roman Sea of S. Peter.
WHerefore does the Roman-Papists boast so much of the succession of the Roman
Bishops: seeing S. Peter was never at Rome. Welenus. Illyr. Magdeburg. Sebast.
Franc etc.

ANSWER.
IT is probable, that Peter was not only in Rome, and to have made his
residence in it, but to have been crucified there. Howsoever the impude^cy of
Heretics, does prate against the tradition of all antiquity. It is probable
that Peter was in Rome by his own epistles.
First it is proved out of his own first epistle cap. 5. v. 13. saying; The
Church collected in Babylon salutes you: that is to say, Rome, which he calls
Babylon, because it was full of riches, persecution, superstion, and idolatry,
with all manner of sins reygning in it: as witnesses Eus. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Lykwise Papias the disciple of S John says, that Peter in his first epistle
which he wrote from Rome, has remembered Mark whom he calls his son: Rome
is called Babylong
in which figuratively he has nominated Rome Babylon, when he says, that
Babylon salutes you: Lykwise, Hie^. de Vir. Illust. in Marc. says, that Peter
in his first Epistle under the name of Babylon, figuratively signifies Rome.
Moreover to have houlden and kept the Episcopal Chair at Rome, At Rome he
overcame Simon Magus.
and there to have overcome, and been victor over Simon Magus. This S. Aug.
declares lib. 2. cont. lit. petil. cap. 51. reprehe^ding the Heretics in this
manner saying, What has the Chayr of the Roman-Church done to thee, S. Aug.
defends the seat of Rome.
in which Peter has sitten and in which at this day Anastasius does si^t?
Moreover speaking of Simon Magus, lib. de Haer. ad quoduult. Har. 1. says,
that he Heretic gave the images both of himself, Simon Magus superstuious
dealing in Rome.
and of the whorishe city, to his disciples, to be worshipped, the which at
Rome, he had set up, by public authority; as the images of the heathen Gods,
in the which city, the blessed Apostle Peter overthrow him, by the true virtue
of God omnipote^t, thus he. For all the Hystories, His overthrow at rome by the
power of God.
and Holy writers with general traditions in all ages have testified, that S.
Peter came to Rome, as says Egisip lib. 3. cap. 2. Ire^. lib 3. cap. 3. But
and Eusebius. the professors of ^^^ditious, says, in Ch^on. and Eccl. Hist. lib.
2. cap 15 That in the second year of Claudius the Emperor, Peter the Apostle
when he had first founded the Church at Antioch, he went to Rome, Peter
preached at Rome XXV. years.
where preaching the Euangely twenty-fyue-yeares, he remained Bishop of that
same town. And S. Hier. de scrip. Eccl in Pet. says, that Peter after the
Byshoprick of the Church of Antioch, and the preaching of the dispersed of
them, who had believed of the circumcision, in Pontus Gallatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithinia: In the second year of the Emperor Claudius, he went to
Rome, He came to Rome in the second year of Claudius.
to expunge Simon Magus, and there twenty-fyue-yeares, kept the cathedral
Priesthood unto the last year of Nero. Now that Peter came to Rome (was by
providence of God) that he might save his flock from the raging fury of Simo^
Magus, the captayn of all Heretics, as Eusebius. says, lib 2. cap. 13.14.15. who
was worshipped for a God at Rome, whom by his prayers, The cause why Peter came
to rome, was to save Christ's flock from heresy.
he caused the Devil who carried him in the air, (who would imitat Christ's
ascension) to let him fall (who brake all his bones by that fall) whereupon his
death shortly insued after. But Nero (who took delyke in his Sorcery) being
sore offended with S. Peter, for this cause, sought by all means his
apprehension and distr^ction, as witness Egesipp. lib. 3. cap. 2. At what time
the Christians being very loathe to be deprived of so good a Pastor, with much
entreating and many tears, prayed him to remove a little out of the way, at
whose request (although unwilling) he began to take his journey out of the
city, but when he came to the port, he saw Christ coming toward him, who^ he
worshipped, and said, Lord whether go thou? who answered; I go to Rome to be
crucified again: Peter understanding thereby, Christ appears in the way to
S. Peter and tells him that he was going to rome to be crucified again.
as S. Ambros. epist. 32. lib. 5. That Christ would suffer in him at Rome: who
suffers in every one of his Saints, not by pain of body, but by compassion
of pity, upon this vision Peter returned, and being taken, was put to death on
the cross, with his head downward. So that as Egesipp. lib. 3. cap. 2. says,
Christ himself appointed Rome to be the place where he should rest. Likewise
Orig. Tom. 3 com. in genesis Peter at last whyl he remained at Rome, is made a lyk
to the suffering of our Lord, with his head downward (for so he desired to
suffer.) Also Eus. lib. 2. cap. 5. alleges Dionysius the corinthian, who
lived in the hundrith year after the death of the Apostle, Dionisius the
corinthians report, of S. Peter.
and reports him to have said, when I was in this town of Rome, says he,
both Peter and Paul together, teaching at one time were crowned with
Martyrdom. Likewise, for the verification of the same purpose Tertul. writes:
Haeret. H^pp apud pruden in peristeph. Cyp. de unit. Eccl. Arnob. aduers. gent.
Bar. ann. tom. 1. anno Christi 44. number. 25. By which testimonies we learn that
Christ had a special regard, that Peter and his fellow Apostle Paul might die
at Rome, for diverse causes alleged of the Fathers.

Peter and Paul suffering was for their greater glory. The causes of the two
Apostles suffering a^ Rome.
And first, as S. Aug de sanctis sermon. 27. was for the glory of the Apostles,
that Rome might not lack either of the^ a^ dear brethren.

Secondly for the destruction of superstition, Aug. ibid. That where the head
of superstition was, there might be the head of holiness; and where the Prince
of the gentiles dwelt, there the Princes of the Church might be.

Thirdly for the honor of the west Church, for as S. Aug. ibib. says, VVher
as our Lord has made the cast parts glorious with his own passion. he
^ouchsased in his stead (that it might be no less) to give light to the west
parts by the blood of his Apostles. And albeit out Lords passion suffiseth us
for our salvation, yet their martyr-dome also, has done us good, for an
example.

Fourthly for the spreading abroad of the holy euangely, as says, Leo sermon de
not. Pet. and Paul. That the light of the truth (Which was revealed for the
salvation of all nations) might spread it self more effectually from the very
head throughout the whole body.

Now therefore seeing God has used the city of Rome as a most special mean,
to enlarge and spread his faith through all the world: it came to pase also,
that the same city (as Leo says, ibid. Is made the head of the world, through
the holy-see of S. Peter, that it may rule more lardgely by Gods religion, then
by earthely dominion.

OBJECTION.
PAul writting to the Romans, salutes not Peter, neither the writters, of the
time whem he come to Rome, agree amongst themselses, but disagree, and vary.
Ergo Peter was never at Rome.

ANSWER.
Certain reasons why Peter was not always at Rome.
THe reason of the not finding Peter at Rome, or that by salutation he is not
mentioned in S. Paul's epistle, is his frequent peregrination in diverse
provinces, for the preaching of the faith, by which reason it was a cause
sufficient to writers, to vary of the time of his coming to Rome, yet
notwithstanding it follows not to conclude that he was not in Rome; except
some would conclude by the lyk argument, that Christ has not suffered, because
that all writers do not agree amongst themselves of the time. For S. Ignatius,
S. John's disciple writting to the Trallianes does affirm Christ to have
preached in the thirthy three-yeare of his age: If we believe the variety of
wryrers we may doubt of Christ's sufferings.
Some other co^tendes Christ to be living, and to have preached in the 40. and
46. years of his age. And therefore because this variety is amongst the
writers, does it follow, that Christ has not suffered, or that he was never in
Jerusalem, neither to have been crucified in Golgotha? And consequently if they
doubt of S. Peter's being in Rome: even so also may they justly doubt, Christ
not to have been in Jerusalem, neither suffered in Golgotha. Therefore for
conclusion it is not to be doubted, but that S. Luke. would have made mention
of their saluting one another; and the time of his coming to Rome, and of the
apparition of Christ to S. Peter (as he writ the appearing of Christ to S.
Paul) if he had gone forward in his history of the acts of the Apostles: but
seeing he continued not his narration, until the death of S. Peter, and S.
Paul: we must needs credit these faithful ancient writers, who were nearer
the time of the Apostles, then your negative denial, without any warrant, but
ever denying as men without reason, with clamorous voices, lyk frogs in the
pudle, in the night time, ever crying, and babbling, and nothing proving.

QVESTIO X. Of Ioane the eight Pope, a woman.
Wherefore do the Papists ever affirm* and say, the Pope to receive the
Primacy of the whole Church, from Christ immediately, who of the Church by
lawful way is received in the chayr of S. Peter, Seeing Ioane the eight was a
woman, and incapable of this Byshoprick, long since elected lawful Pope, and
received in the Chayr of Saint Peter.

ANSWER.
WHen we said him to be a lawful successor of S. Peter, and to have received
full power in the whole Church of Christ, who by lawful way is received of the
Church, The Pope of Rome is ever chose^ capable.
and set in the Seat of S. Peter. This sense no otherway we understand, but
that the Church lawfully electes. and receaues him, who is capable of the high
Priesthood: of the which is neither a woman, nor an infidel, nor an Heretic
capable of, nor can be.

Whatsoever be the cause, in which a Pope may be chosen incapable of this
byshoprick: I judge charitably with many godly and learned men, that it came
never to pass as yet, that any was chosen incapable, (God of his own goodness
and providence, turning away the peril of such euentes from his Church) who
neither in this manner of canonical election of his own Vicar is dead,
sleeps, or is careless, who has said, Math. 28. v. 20. Behold all days I am
with you to the consummation of the world. But this assertion is a manifest,
and a falsely, whatsoever they can produce concerning Pope Ioane, to be a
woman, for first there is none of the greek and latin historiographers, and
writers, who make mention of one syllable, or word of this matter, neither
Cedrinus, nor Zonoras, much more ancient then Martyn Pollon, the first author
of this fable, who are wranglers, and contemners of the Bishop of Rome, and
most willingly are glad, to have such an occasion to scoff at the Latin.

Secondly, the same Martyn Pollonus does not affirm this history as certain,
The Author doubts of the history.
but says it was spoken by report, and of vulgar rumor, for Sigibertus, and
Marianus Scotus (who were a live before Martinus Polonus) in their old hand
written books, make no mention of a woman.

Ingland and Moguntia are diverse regio^s.
Thirdly Martinus Polonus reports this woman Pope, to be borne in Moguntia in
Ingland, which is a manifest lie, seeing Moguntia is not in Ingland, but in
Germany situat on the Rhyne.

Fourthly the same Martinus Pollonus does lean to an other falshoode, that
this woman-pope, was brought up in Athens, The history of Martinus Polonus is
full of contradictions and lies.
and studied there her course of moral sciences, seeing by all uniform consent
of all writers, that neither then, nor long before any studies was at Athens,
much less inhabited of any. So that it is a manifest lie, that ever this woman
Pope were. Far less credible, that any woman of honesty, or estate, bygge with
child, and near her time of deliurance, to go throughout the streates, in
public processio^, with so great peril of infamy, and scandal to her self,
from which easily she might have excused her self.

Last of all, I shall ever persuade my self, that God would never have
permitted, such a base sca^dall to rise in his Church.

As concerning the rest of the trifles that is objected by our adversaries, as
the hole in the chayr, for his dimissorialles: the image of a woman: the
declyning of the street, and way, all are sufficiently answered of Bellarm.
tom. 1. cont. Genesis lib. 3. c. 24.

Therefore I counsel all Protestants to moderate their hatred, and malice
against the Pope and see of Rome. A friendly exhortation to use mederatio^ in
detracting the sea of Rome.
Let them call to remembrance the heretical mind and end of Wiritri Archdeane
of Oxford in England who in the year of God 1571. expounding that place of
Scripture Ephesians. 4. v. 11. He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and teachers etc. To serve
the time, Weretries fatal end in glossing the Scriptures against the Pope.
inferres the Pope, you hear, says he, what offices are promised and given to
his Church, but amongst these vocatio^s you hear nothing of a Pope, which when
he had made his application, immediately he was stricken with a great sickness,
and became dombe, and was carried out of the stool, to his bed, and not to his
dinner, as he presupposed to go. Thus Surius in chronicis de vita Veretri etc.
Who dyed miserably, in raging, and wrangling of conscience, to the fear of all
that were about him. Lykwise I cannot omit to rehearse as it was reported to me
by faithful men, and beholderes of the truth, of M. walter Makcanker one of
the Puritan ministers in Edinburg in Scotland an. 1614. expou^ding the 13.
chapter of the revelation, in his sermon speaking of the beast, that had seven
heads, Mackankers fatal and in applying Antichrist to the Pope.
and ten horns, and upon his horns were ten crowns, and upon his head the
name of blasphemy etc. Applying these things to the Pope, with such vehemence
of gaping, and gloaring, calling him Antichrist (as Puritans do) mentioned and
discrybed under the name of the beast in the revelation: immediately the hand of
God was on him, (who although he dissembles long, yet in the myddest of their
iniquity punishes with equity) that his teeth fell into his throat, and he
fell down in the stool, and from thence was carried home to his house half
dead, and the night following senseles ended his life.

And in such like manner, the sweet Saints (so called of the Clouted
Kirches-sisters) of the new Gospel make their final end, for as they live
in hatred and malice against the Pope, so die they in the same malignity, that
we may rightly see, that Luthers benediction has efficacy, and power, for as
the benedictions of Gods Saints was in efficacy toward men, that believed
in God, even so Luthers maledictio^ works powerfully in the followers of his
misbeliefe. Which Vitus Theodoricus a Lutheran makes mention of Tom. 4. Operum.
Luth. Praef. in Ioell. The which is worthy of memory, saying when he came to
the Synod to confirm the confession of Augustana by testimonies of Scriptures,
and Fathers, in the way he was wonderful sick, and by stopping of his vryne
nynes days, almost dead, sit up in his bed, and lifting up his hands to
bless those that were about him, uttered these words for his benediction,
saying The Lord replenish you with his benedictio^, and hatred to the Pope. So
that being almost dead, he left them with hatred to the Pope, as a right
inheritance of his cursed mind; which malediction, as from Cain discends
linially to his successors, so from Luther it passed in his successors, as it
took effect to work in himself.

QVESTIO XI. Of the infallible authority of General Counsels.
Wherefore do the Papists esteem so much of their General Counsels, Seeing
their Bishops in them, may err as men. And moreover unjustly, against all
reason do exclude the power, and voice of Emperors, and Kings, in judging
matters of faith? Luth. in varijs locis. Calu. lib. 4. inst. cap. 7. Brent in
prolog. cont. a sotum. Cent. Madeb. lib 4. cap. 7.

ANSWER.
I Say no counsel either particular, or general, or whatsoever Prelates, or
Byshopes are assembled, have any infallible authority, to defyne themselves,
without the authority and approbation of the Bishop of Rome, No counsel may of
it self define matters of faith, without the head. Diverse counsels have erred.
which we prove manifestly with reason, seeing suchlyke, sometimes without his
authority, have erred: as the counsel of Ariminense, in which counsel were
six hundrith Bishops with Arius, in which it was defined by the^, that (...),
homousion, should not be used, as an improper word, which is to say, that
Christ Jesus, in his Godhead, is not to beheld consubstantiall to his Father.

Lykwise the Counsel of Millan, which confirmed the Heresy of Arius.

Neither this should seem to any a marvel, that two such great Counsels, are
dispysed, and rejected, because they are imperfect, and lame without a head,
neither do such Counsels represent the universal Church, but only the body of
the Church, without a head. Therefore it is not to such like cou^sells, The
promises of God, are to the head, and not to the body, not to no particular
member.
that the infallible promises of Gods divine assistance, in defining matters of
Faith, are promised and effected; but only to the head, who by lawful
ordination has received from Christ immediate power, and authority to defyne
matters of faith, as head of the Church. So that the body cannot defyne any
thing without the head, In the head is the sensitive power to rule the body.
seeing in the head are the se^sitiue powers of the body. Therefore the body is
under the government of the head, and not contrariwyse, the body to rule the
head. Moreover, whatsoever counsel has joined to it, the authority and
approbation of the Bishop of Rome, is of infallible authority, whether it be
general, prouincial, The counsel of Jerusalem is a pattern to all other lawful
counsels.
or national: because the decrees, and definition of the counsel of Jerusalem,
are called the decrees of the Holy Ghost, who cannot err. In which counsel it
is said, it is seen good to the holy Ghost, and to us. Act. 15. v. 28. For this
cause all other counsels lawfully assembled may say the same words,
representing the universal Church, because that counsel was the form and
exemplar of all other counsels, lawfully gathered with the authority of the
head. As also because no less necessary, is the assistance of the holy ghost
in these letter days, then he was in those days: but now more necessary,
because of the greater breaking out of Heresies, Greater reasons are in these
times to gather counsels, then were in the days of the Apostles.
which shall deny our Lord, that has bought us, bringing on themselves swift
damnation, not knowing what they profess, and living lyk brute-beastes, only
seaking their pleasures, and liberty, without contradiction of a superior
power. For which causes general counselles are used to be ordained, that they
may suppress and extinguish such new novelties, and Heretical opinions, which
from the beginning of the Church, by general counselles (with the head, as
chief Pastor and vicar of Christ) have been damned and accursed. So that as well
by Scripture, as reason, it concludes, that whatsoever counsel is gathered
lawfully, and has the authority of the Pope, Counsels approved by the Pope,
are infallible.
is infalible: that in one word I shall make it evident, that ever in the
Church that ancient costume has been, that whatsoever decreetes of a Synod
were concluded, were ever sent to the Bishop of Rome, to be confirmed, Counsels
remit their decree, and examination, with the Heretics books, to the Pope, to
be censured by his judgment.
and approved. So that S. Aug. Epist. 90. bears witness of the counsel of
Chartage, wrytting in these words to Innocent Bishop of Rome: saying unto our
most blessed Father and honorable brother, Holy Innocent Pope: We Aurelius,
Mundinus, Rusticanus, Fidentius, and the rest: who were present in the Counsel
at Carthage, and after co^memoration of those who were present, and of those
things, which were decreed in the counsel against Pelagius: (they add these
words following.) Lord, and holy Brother: we have thought good to intimate to
thy charity, what we have done, that the authority of the Apostolic seat may
be annexed to the statutes of our judgments, and meaning, for the defense of
the salvation of many, and the correction of the peruersitie of some others: as
also the Heretical book of Pelagius, and the answer of the Catholyck Fathers,
we have sent unto thy holiness to be adjudged. The same likewise, This
infallibility is ascrybed to the assistance of the holy Ghost.
S. Aug. does witness in his epist. 92. and 95. for we do not ascrybe this
infallibility to the Byshopes, and Fathers gathered togeathe in the counsel,
for that they are many, or learned men, but to the promise of the assistance of
the holy Ghost, as Matthew. 18. v. 20. and 28. v. 66. Which assistance of the
holy Spirit, we believe you not to have, in your synodes, wherein like manner
men are found, This holy Ghost no Heretycks are assisted with, where also is
found men and noe Angels. The Protestant counsels are left without
determination and worse then they be good. Luther sets at naught all counsels,
and condemns the Canons of Nyce.
and not Angels, neither Prophets, nor Evangelists, but very men, with whom
the spirit of dissension makes matters indeterminate, and without conclusion
amongst you. And moreover, wherefore gives your Brethren such obedience, and
are in subjection unto your pseudo Bishops as to a spiritual and higher power,
and accept of their decrees, seeing they are like our Catholic Bishops in
name, mortal men, whose lives are known to all men. Therefore we have
attributed infallibility of the counsels to the assistance of Gods holy spirit,
and not to man, which if Luther in his book of counsels would, have behoulden
with a pure eye, would not have broken out in that bitterness, to accurse and
blaspheme the counsels, and with which he sets at naught the Canones of that
holy counsel of Nyce, which in all former times has been esteemed so
venerable in the Church of God; tearming all the articles of this counsel to
be but hay, stubble, and straw.

Kemnitius will examine the counsel of Trent after his spirit.
To augment this, did not Kemnitius a Luthera^, a profane temerous fellow,
write the examen of the counsel of Trent, in which was so many learned men,
and all are tried and examined of him. In which doing they not only violate and
transgress the divine law of God, which law commaundes all men to seek the
knowledge of the law of the mouth of the Priests, Heretics tra^sgresse the
law of God, and imperial ordinances of man.
as Mal. 2. but also the humane law of Martian the Emperor, which commaundes
straightly that, that, which is once judged in a Synod and rightly disposed, let
no man call it again in question, seeking thereby occasion of tumult, or of
falsehood: for it is wicked and sacrilegious, after the judgment of so many
Priests, to leave any thing, to his own opinion to be discussed.

Emperors, nor Kings. nor no laymen are admitted in general counsels, to
defyne matters of faith.
Morouer neither are Emperors, nor any laymen, howsoever learned in holy
Scriptures, admitted in a general counsel, to defyne matters of faith, or at
any time have been admitted, as the Bishops be; who assist the Pope not only as
counselors, but also as judges: and for that cause they say: so the holy
Synod has decreed. For what is more contrary to reason, then where is treated
of salvation and damnation, of good and evil, and in defyning of the wholesome
doctrine from error, Bishops are both counselors and judges. It is contrary to
reason, that in matters of salvation, and damnation, lay-me^ should be judges.
to commit the judgment of these things to laymen, which appertain to the
duty of the Pastor, according to Hier. saying cap. 3. I shall give you Pastors
according to my heart, and they shall feed you with science, and doctrine: and
S. Paul says Ephesians. 4. He has given some to be Pastors and Doctores: But the
Emperors, from the beginning of the Church used to follow, and hear the
judgment of the Apostolical seat, and the general counsels, and not to
argue or to give verd^cte, or pronu^ce sentence with the Bishops of the Church;
whereupon S. August. apud possid. in vita eius cap. 18. says, That the Bishops
of the Apostolical seat, (Innocent and Zozimus) accursed the Pelagians, and
cut the^ of, from being members of the Church, and wrote letters to the Affrican
Churches of the Orient and Occident signifying the^ to be accursed, and to be
eschewed of all Catholics. Also the most godly Emperor Honorius, hearing
Pelagius, and his fellowers accursed; decreed them also by his own law damned
and adjudged for Heretics: Emperors and Kings have made concurrence to the
counsels for obedience, and have made laws for obedience to be done for
receiving their decrees.
Likewise S. August. epist. 166. makes mention of the decrees of Constantine
the Great, to have the lyk strength against Heretics. So that these godly
Emperors never meddled themselves to be examiners of the counsel, farreles
judges, but what was decreed in the counsel, we read them to have made laws,
for the execution of the counsel, and Popes verdict and sentence; and ever
have showed themselves as nourses in the Church of God, rendering all
reverence, and submitting themselves to the Churches authorities: as witness
Ruff. lih. 10. Eccl. Hist. cap. 2. and Valentin. Emper. ad Synod. Chalc. and
Martianus. Act. 3. Council. Chalced S. Ambros. epist. 32. S. Aug. hom. de
Paschal. and in ps. cont. part. donat. and epist. 48. and Philo. libro de
Victimis. Athanasius. in Epistol. ad Solit. vitam agente. and Epistol. idem.
and Su^idas in vita Leontij. Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 17.18. and lib. 4. cap. 5.
But contrariwise it is proper to all Heretics, The germans contemned the
counsel of Trent to their great ignominy.
to contemn all general counsels of the Church, as did most filthyly the
Protestants of Germany the last of Febu. 1537. with ignominy to their nation,
for dispysing the counsel, set and appointed by the Pope, whom they will not
acknowledge to have power to judge, nor yet the Byshopes with him, but the
universal Church. But more plainly they may say, it does appertain also to
barbers, tailors, cobblers, bakers, brewers, wolspynners, botchers, cooks,
apotecharies, and every mechanical, and all trashkynde of people, to whom God
never gave authority to judge, neither were admitted to come in the place of
judgment, to hear what was judged in matters of faith: but only to Prelates is
committed the authority of feeding as S. Pet. says 1. Pet. cap. 5. v. 2. Feed
the stock of God which is amongst you, No Emperor may call a general counsel
lawfully, neither does his power extend in all parts, to be obeyed.
and depending upon you, thus he. Moreover neither Emperors of themselves may
command a counsel, the reason is evident: because it is not said to the
Emperor, feed my sheep, but only to Peter, and his successors: neither is the
Emperor or King, head of the Church: neither have they commandment over all
Byshopes, seeing many Bishops remain out of their jurisdiction and
commandment. But a general counsel should be commanded of him, who may
command that they assemble, otherwise the indictio^ and command, shall be of no
value or effect, and seeing the Emperor or King is only a general defender of
the Church: to whom for that cause that jurisdiction to command a counsel,
was never lawful, neither at any time has been instituted of the Emperors by
authority of themselves. And albeit some [de facto] have indicted counsels,
notwithstanding no otherwise, Whatsoever Emperors has done was by consent of
the Pope of Rome.
the^ with the authority, and consent of the Bishop of Rome: neither did the
first Bishops in those times indicte any counsel without the help of the
Emperors, so that ever the authority of the Pope, was joined with the Emperor,
as for example, that great counsel of Nyce, was not only gathered of
Constantyne Emperor, but also of Siluester Pope: as it is said in the sixth
Synod Act. 8. to whom agrees Ruff. lib. 10. Hist. cap. 1. saying, Constantine
to have gathered that great counsel, by judgment of the Pope, and Priests of
the Church, and not of his own authority, and commandment. Moreover this
authority of the Emperor was very necessary for the Bishops to be gathered at
one counsel. First, The authority of the Emperor is necessary for diverse
respects.
that the Prelates of the Church might by their authority be defended from
paganes in the way. Secondly, that they might be transported with public
charges: for then they were poor, and might not bear so great chardges of
themselves. Thirdly because in that time, the old laws of the Emperors did
rule, and were in effect observed, which inhibited all great meetings, and
couentions, without the authority of the Emperor, for fear of sedition, and
coniurations. leg. convent. cod. de epist. cop. presb. which laws have now
ceased.

OBJECTION.
IT is said John. 5. search the Scriptures: therefore the certain way to
compose controversies of religion, is by the searching of the Scriptures, and
not by decition, and sentence of counsel.

ANSWER.
THe Scripture kept the place of a witness, and not of a judge. For Christ has
not said, search the Scriptures because they bear judgment of me, but he says
search the scriptures (by the indicative word) because they bear witness of me.
for it is not the office of a witness to give sentence: but only to give
testimony: but it is the judges part to hear, search and examine the witness,
and so all things hard and pondered, A judge and a witness di^fers greatly.
he gives sentence: therefore seeing an Heretic and Catholic both says,
that they have searched the Scriptures, and these Scriptures bear testimony of
their doctrine, so that in this debate, the searching of the Scripture is not a
sufficient way, seeing these Scriptures are interpreted of every one at his
pleasure: but there is need of a judge, who may give sentence of the true
interpretation and sense of Scriptures; and this judgment and sentence, is due
and proper to the Pope, and his counsel, and not to the searching of
Scriptures. But this is the ambition and pride of all Heresies, who set at
naught the universality of the whole Church: because they will credit them
selves, and their own proper judgment, Heretics will credit themselves and
noe other.
and that all men from the primitive times have erred, and they only have not
erred: let scriptures, fathers, counsels, universality, and practice do all
what is right, they will believe themselves, and remain judges in their own
cause, as though they were gods and not men, and neither subject to sin, nor
error.

OBJECTION.
THe General counsel does represente the whole Church as defyneth Martyn 5.
in the end of the counsel of Co^stance, which counsel represents the
person of the wholl Church, which Church can noe way be gathered together,
but so far as the Prelates assemble in one place, and in the name of all the
faithful. But it follows that the universal Church cannot err. Ergo neither
the General counsel which is the virtue of the whole Church.

ANSWER.
SEcluding the Pope as head, the counsel is only (...): neither does it
represent perfectly the wholl Church, and so it may err, because they are
particular counsels, as the counsel of Carthage, and Areminense: as Caiet.
Tractat. de Auth. and Council. cap. 9.

OBJECTION.
IF the infallibility of the counsel depend on the Pope, in vain it seems
to call a counsel, for truly alswell by the Pope himself without a counsel,
the matter may be defyned, as wish the counsel.

ANSWER.
NOt so, neither are counsels instituted in vain, for how much more
inquisition is made of the grounds of verity, and is decerned by the judgment
of many, the verity is made the clearer, and error is taken away: because
those things in which the Pope defines, with the counsel are of greater
weight, then those which, he defynes of himself, (that the very Heretic may
persuade himself that it is true, and solyde which by so great labor, and
exquisit diligence is found out, and with so many consentes is defyned for
verity.) wherefore the Pope does wysly in censuring of heresy, and other
weighty causes, to conuocate counsel, and to defyne the same with them. In
which definition of counsel, although the Bishops are judges: yet
notwithstanding they are inferior judges, but the Pope is supreme judge. And
as a King in the kingdom may recall the sentence of an inferior judge, when
the greater part is left out, even so the Pope, as head of the Church, may
approve and reject with the assistance of the holy Ghost, and when the greatest
part of the Church condiscendes, and defynes thereupon with him.

OBJECTION.
IN many counsels the Pope of Rome is absent, and only his Legates are present.
Ergo they may err very much.

ANSWER.
I Grant such counsels may err, except those Legates have instruction from the
Pope, and do follow the same, and that the definition of the counsel be
conformable to his instruction, in so doing the counsel agrees with the head
in the same doctrine: and such a counsel is adjudged lawful, when the Pope
before has given them instruction, and has pronunced his judgment, what
shall be done. But if the Pope send no instruction by his legates, albeit his
legates do consent unto the definition of the counsel, it is of no effect,
neither is that definition infallible: because the authority to define and
conclude, is not in the Legates, who are but only messengers betwixt the
counsel, and the Pope. But for conclusion all co^uselles before they conclude
any thing, after long deliberation, and inquisition in every matter, with
their judgments and sentence they use to seek confirmation of the Pope; as we
read of the counsel of Trent, in the bull of Pius 4. by which confirmation
both the counsel is approved lawful, and all things are confirmed, and
ratifyed, and this is the manner of all Catholic Counsels, that for many, no
heresy dare show one to be an universal counsel for them, although they had
for protectors of their heresy, most puissant and potent Emperors and Kings,
as Valence and Constance Arian Emperors, the Vandals and Goths, as also all
sectaries have attempted, but as yet never could assemble a general counsel.

QVESTIO XII. Of the verity of the Roman-Church and of her notes.
WHerefore do the Papists promise to all men, salvation to be only in the
Roman Church. Conf. Aug. art. 6. Calu. lib. 4. inst. cap. 1. 10. Brent. in
conf. Wittemb. cap. de Eccl.

ANSWER.
BEcause it stands with reason, for that the Papists have certain marks of
credible evidence that only that multitude of men, who obey at the present time
the Pope of Rome, The true Church is known by her marks.
are the true Catholic Church: which we prove after this manner. Seeing that
congregation of men is only the Church of Christ, which is, (videlicet) one,
holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church. So that all the ancient counselles
were decerned by those tokens from other sects, and not by the preaching of
the pure word, neither by the pure use of the Sacraments, The Heretics marks
are as obscure as their church which is invisible.
the which the Heretics assign for notes of their Church, alyke obscure with
their Church For what is he of the fifth Eua^gelists profession who proves not
by those marks, that the Church of Christ is with him, and with no other?
Because says he, only in his congregation is the true preaching of the word,
and sincere use of the Sacraments: but marks ought to be evident, otherwise
they are no marks: but the congregation that obeyes the Pope of Rome has
those evident marks, which is, One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolical Church:
therefore this is the true Church, and only in her is expected salvation.

For first the Church of God is One: partly in the head, The Church is one for
diverse respects.
in so far, that all Bishops acknowledge the Pope for head, to whom they agree
and accord in doctrine, and in administration of the Sacraments.

Partly in divine worship, for withal Catholics is offered the same
sacrifice, and the same Sacraments with the same administration of Ceremonies.

And partly amongst the members themselves, to wit, in the doctrine of Faith,
for all believe one thing, and condemn heresy. In this one Church unity is
kept, In one church unity is kept.
and taught as witnesses the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1. I beseech you Brethere^ by
the name of our Lord JESUS Christ, that ye say all one thing, and that there be
no Schisms among you, but be you perfect in one sense, and in the same
knowledge. Again 1. Cor. 14. God is not a god of dissension, but of peace.
Again Rome 15. Now the God of patience and consolation give you to think the
same thing one with another, according to Jesus Christ, that with one mind and
one mouth, you may honor God. Again Romans 12. Be not high minded, and be not
wise in your selves. Again Phil. 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and
mercy, fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, and being
of one unity, and of one judgment. Therefore to descrybe this One, with her
unity, she is called the body of Christ, and his Spouse, the Kingdom of
Heaven, his only dove, and perfect one, his elect and sister, new Jerusalem,
the arck of Noe. as witness these following: Ephesians. 4. and 5.1. Cor. 11. Romans
12. Cant. 6 and 4. Apoc. 21. Genesis 8. Psalm. 79. Cant 2. Esa. 5. Ier. 2 and 12.
Matthew. 20. Marc. 12. Apoc. 14. Luc. 5. Matthew. 13. Therefore as the Church is
One, so has she unity, the reason is, because first she is directed by the
holy Ghost, The causes of unity in the Church, ^s the holy Ghost, the teacher
of the truth, a visible head to f^llow the truth, and the definitio^s of ^he
Church, for conseruing of the truth.
which is the God of love and peace, and always teaches the truth, which is
but One. Secondly the high Pastor and head of the Church, who under Christ
gouernes this Church in a visible manner, is an other cause: because whilst
all obey one, who cannot swerve from the truth because he is the head of the
church, for whom Christ has prayed, Matthew. 16 Luc 22. For faith and truth
must agree in one, because faith and truth are but one. Thirdly the definition
of the Church, as a square rule by which the truth, and relig^on is tried, and
Scriptures are expounded, which rules are the cause of unity, love, and peace,
in the Church of Christ. Noe such like thing can be said of the protestants,
where is this one Church amongst the^? where is unity, which is a virtue
proceeding of the holy Ghost who teaches the truth, for the conservation of
unity? where is the head unto whom all concurres? where are the definitions,
for the keeping of unity? Are these effects among the sectaries? Moreover in
the article of faith, nombers of Sacraments, exposition of the Scripture, the
use, and effects of the Sacraments, such jarres, emulations, and discords are
amongst themselves, that Nicol. gall. superintendent in Rhensburgein thesibus
and hypoth, says: Our contention is not in small matters, neither of trifles,
How variable is the unity of the protestants, and irreconciliable.
but in the highest articles of the Christian religion; to wit, of the law, of
the Ghospel, of justification, and good works, of the Sacraments, and use of
them, of divine worshipe, and ceremonies. Which by no means can be appeased
hidden, or dissembled, for they are plain contradictions, which can not be
accorded: thus he. So that by their own professors they are convinced of
discord, and sects. Likewise Sturnius de rat. contrad. inaeundae. page 24.
Does verisie this discentio^, in so much that the Lutherans in their books
published, do condemn the Churches of Ingland, France, Scotland,
Szuitzerland, as Heretics. Likewise in his Epitome, colloq. Malbrug. an.
1564. page 82. discovering the Zuinglians who clame unity, and fraternall
peace with the Lutherans, saying, that the Zuinglians write, that they account
themselves brethren with us, it is an impudent lie, and vainly forged by
them, that we cannot sufficiently admire their impudency, for we account them
Heretics, and not in the Church of God, farrelesse to repute them our
brethren, whom we find transported with the spirit of falsehood, and to be
contumelious to the son of God. Again Schluss. in Theol. Call. lib. 3. cap.
6. says, that the Caluinistes would account us Lutherans as their brethren,
whom notwithstanding they condemn as Heretics. This discord, Iezler Zuinglio,
Caluinist, lib. de diuturnit. bell^, euch. page 25. and 80. Discoueres more at
length, saying there is no end of chiding, writting, accusing, disputing
conde^ning, and excommunicating one another, betwixt the Lutherans and
Caluinistes. To the same effect says Schluss. lib. 2. art. 15. Theol. call.
That it is most clear, no definition either of general or particular counsel
is expected for unity in religion; because it is impossible to the^ to agree in
matters of religion, except the great day of the Lord haste^, and close up this
variance. Likewise Carlil. in his book how Christ descended into Hell, affirms
their unity is to wrest the Scriptures from their right sense, and to show
themselves to love darkness more then the light. Whereupon Call. in praf. non.
test. gall 1567. I confess says he that Satan has gained more by these new
Gospellers, then was in popery, by keeping the word from the people. Is not
this the unity of these professors of disco^d, Schism, and variable opinions?
as Greg. mayor. in orat. de conf. dogm. The Papists, says he, do object, the
scandalls and discordes which are amongst us I confess they are greater, then
can be deplored with any tears, I confess the weak minds of many, to be so
troubled thereby, that they have begun to doubt where the truth is, or whether
there be any Church of God, or no. Likewise Chytreus in thema deprau. Aug.
conf. The Evangelical Doctors are more barbarous, and lyk cruel beasts
contending among themselves, then barbarous soldiers. Likewise Nil.
Selueccerus, says, that the professors of the Ghospel are loathsome to the
world, their chayrs, pulpites, and seats begun to displease all men, in
which no other doctrine is heard, then venomous debates, contentions, and
varieties of opinions. For as says Vigand lib. de errorib. mayor. It is neither
woll, nor flax, that they contend about, but the very capital points of
Christian doctrine, and until the great day of the Lord, they shall never
better agree. Therefore for conclusion no unity in heresy; but this unity, is
in the Catholic Church, because the multitude of belieuers are of one heart,
In conclusion no unity is in haeresie. As the Catholic Church. is one so is
unity and love in her. One is the Church, and in unity for diverse reasons.
and one mind. Therefore our Roman Catholic Church is that one, and keeps
unity, and that same with the Churches, which are from the primitive times,
which may easily appear by the profession of our faith, and in the
circumstances of all former antiquity, which also remains one, and in keeping
unity in the continual succession of the self visible head, not in number,
but by successiue succession: and moreover it is one, and keeps unity, in so
far as the Roman Church was never corrupted, defaced, hid, or distroyed, but in
all ages was ever extant, and did represent a compagnie of men, who have
professed, and believed the same faith, which our Cath.-Church does this day
believe, and this compagnie was ever taken of all faithful men for the Church.

Which one, and unity the pretended reformed has no place in, who have no
head, and an unknown doctrine, never hard of before, breeding discord,
questions, and endless debates.

The 2. note of the Church is holiness, which is seen both externally and
internaly to be in the members of the Church, for holiness and wickedness, may
easily be distinguished: the works of wickedness are manifest, but in the
acquiring of holiness is greater labor, that the external actions be disposed
and governed with the intention, Holiness in life and conversation is an other
note of the true Church,
to the execution of virtue, for neither fasting, nor alms deeds, nor many
prayers, makes any holy, if they want the intention, and that the virtue be
done with meekness, and in simplicity of mind. Moreover we see also God by
divine revelation, and apparitio^s approve the holiness of his Saints. God
approves the holiness of many by divine revelation.
Likewise by them he works miracles, by his own divine power, as a testimony
of their holiness, and seeing this holiness has been, and is found, with those
manifest tokens in many members of the Catholic Church, it follows that they
are the Church in regard they are the members of the Church, which is Holy,
Where holiness abounds, there is the Church, and such is the roman Church, for
diverse reasons.
and such is the Roman Church, because her doctrine contains nothing contrary
to the rule of right reason, and good manners. Secondly, because she has almost
converted the wholl world, from Idolatry, and has shyned clear in holiness of
religion, and all good manners. Thirdly because she is increased, and filled
with holy men, and in her they have flourished, with wonderful and rare
holiness. Fourthly, because in her has shyned innumerable testimonies of true
miracles. Fifthly, because in her, very many of both sexes, have been indewed
with the gift of prophefie. Sixthly, because God oftentimes has heavily
punished the oppugners of the Roman Church, Holiness can not be attributed to
the Protestants, because they judge profanely of their own.
and has given temporal blessings. (as witness Stanist. Hossius, Bellarm.
Bozius, and alij). to the defenders of the same. But this note of holiness,
cannot be found in the Church of the reformed, for the first builders of this
reformation, and new Ghospel, were men of pride, intemperate, luxurious, like
night thieves following all wickedness, sedition, ambitions, bitter, froward,
cruel, as Calvin himself witnesses, lib. de scand. page 118. and 127. saying,
that the greatest part of them, who have betaken themselves to the Gospel,
what other intent had they, then having shaken of the yoke of superstition,
that they might plu^ge themselves with liberty to all riot and lasciuiousnes.
Again Simdalin reports of the holiness of the Ghospellers cont. 4. sup. cap. 2
Luc. and com. 1. sup. cap. 21. Luc. That the world may know (says he) that
they are no Papists, nor have any trust in their good works, neither to have
freewill, they practice in stead of fasting altogether feasting: and for being
bountiful toward the power, they vnflese them, and flee them: and for prayers
their tongue and lyppes are turned to oaths. Likewise Spangenb. in sua vera
nar. benef. D Mart. Luth. After the revelation of the Gospel, and the casting
of Papistry, men are become so wild, that they acknowledge not God, nor make
any account of him, and make all to be right, and lawful, which every one
likes best. Likewise Castalion apud Rescium page 54. speaking of the holiness
of Geneua, painteth them out with these coulores, they are proud, says he,
puffed up with vain glory, and full of revenge, that without danger any man
may rather offend Princes, then exasperat, or move any of these feyrse
Caluinistes, whose lives are infamous, and vilanous. They are masters of art,
in reproaches, lies, cruelty, and treason; insupportable and arrogant: they
name their Geneua the holy City, and their assembly Jerusalem, but in very
truth, we should call it Babylon, Babylon and Egypt, and the true frontiers of
Egypt, and Babylonicall Inchantresse, Infamous Sodom and the children of
Ghomorra: The great commendation that the Protestants speak of themselves.
Thus he. To tonclude with Aurifab. apud Ministromach. page 7. After the
Gospel was revealed, virtue was slain, justice oppressed, temperance tied,
truth rent with dogs, honisty banished, faith layme, wickedness preuailned,
devotion fled, Heresy, remaining, and Satan reygning. And seeing out of their
own masters we learn the holiness of the reformed-Church, who of honesty can
not be called by any name of a church, except we would say with the prophet, I
have hated the Church of the wicked, psalm. 25. and so name them Saints, and
members of the Synagogue of Satan as in effect they are.

The third note of the true Church must be Catholic, that is to say universal,
through the world, and such is the Roman Church, The catholic Church has
possessed all. nations.
because there is no part of the world known, in which be not Christian Roman
Catholics, For S. Cyp. libro de unit. Eccl. compares our Church to a most ample
tree extending her branches through the world, with abundance of fruit.
Therefore upon this exte^sion she is called Catholic and universal; Moreover
Vine. lyr. cont. proph. heraet. nouit. Descrybing the Catholic Church, least we
should be deceived by the circumuention of Heretics, exhortes us, what to
observe, for a Catholic Church: it is to be observed (says he) the Catholic
Church, that we hold that which every where always, and which, of all is
believed. For this is truly, and properly, Catholic. And S. Aug. sermon. 13. de
tempore. This roman-Church, says he, from the rising of the sun to the going
down of the same, is illuminated all through the world with the splendour of
one Catholic faith. In the Dominions where Heretics are, there are good store
of Catholics, but no great number of Heretics where Catholics rule.
So that our-Church has this true name. Moreover whersoeuer there are
Heretics, there are found good store of Roman Catholics, but in the
contrary not so, where there are catholics here are not found such store of
Heretics, or protestants: as S. Aug. lib. de vnitat. Eccl. cap. 3. says, those
Heresies which are in diverse nations, are not found, where the Catholic Church
is, which is every where, and even where these Heresies are, the catholic
church is also found, thus he. Therefore as Cyril says cathech. 18 The name
Catholic is proper to this Church, the mother of us all. But Cyrill does not
speak of any other Church, then the Roman Church, which of all antiquities was
ever called Catholic, as witness Zozom. l. 7. c 4. that Gratian Emperor would
not permit to disput of the Roman Faith, but made an edict, that every one
should hold the same religion, which the head of the Apostls Peter, had
delivered from the beginning, and that which Damasius Pope of Rome does keep:
and so with Gratian all the Catholic Bishops do call the Church of Rome,
Catholics cannot be called by any other name, the Heretics themselves shall
bear witness.
the Mother Church, and true Catholic Church: as S. Ambros. orat. funeb. de
obit frat. Suppose if any man come to the ports of London, or Edinburg, and be
asked what he is, if he does say, I am a Catholic; forthwith will the
Protestants answer and say, then thou art a papist, also if he demand for a
Catholic house to lodge in it, will they not out of humanity conuoy him to a
papists house, which title and name declares them to be members of the
Catholic Church, for they can no other wise be named, for the word Catholic
is ^he surname of a Christian: and therefore of his mother he is called a
Christian Catholic, The Protestants could never be called Catholics.
which no Heretic can suffer to hear, because they hate the Church for the
name sake. Therefore the reformed Church can no ways be called Catholic,
because neither the Lutherans, Caluinistes, Anabaptists, or whatsoever sect
else, separat from the Roman-Church, at any time has occupied the whole world,
or any one Kingdom of it, The Protestants are ever in suspision of Catholics.
yea and where they profess, and are surest, and in the greatest feruor of
their Heresy, they remain doubting and in suspicion of the Papists, as an
open enemy of their religion. Wherefore their only note, is to flee to
inuisibilitie of the Church, and to lurk in certain corners, and bragg with
the Donatistes, that the Catholic Church has perished, and only lurketh in
corners, and that Church which was visible to the whole world, and was through
the world, is obscured, and become invisible, and yet with the Donatists, they
will clame this Catholic Church, and show her visible in their corners, and in
obscure dens. The Protestants are like the Donatists of old.
For with the Donatistes cries Luth. here is Christ and his Church, In
Saxony: Calu. likewise cries, behold here is Christ and his Church, In Geueua;
Memmo: Pacimont: Rotman: cry, Christ and his Church, is in Morauia: likewise
the Puritans of Scotland, cry like Ravens, here is Christ and his Church: and
each kingdom: Common-welth, Province, and whersoeuer Heretics are all cry
behold Christ, and his Church is here with us. But who can believe them, when
we see no tokens, and marks of his Church, The Protestants make a monster of
Christ, and his Church.
and yet all brag of Christ, and are repugnant to themselves, they make a
monster of Christ and his Church: there is one Christ, and one Church, and yet
all Sectaries will have as many Christ's, and as many Churches as they are
divided in factions, who (...) fail to be called Christian, and farelesse to
be named Catholics. As concerning this note Catholic see more in the first
quest on.

The Church is called Apostolical, because of the Apostls planting* excellency
and prerogative.
The fourth note, is called Apostolical, because it retains the seat of the
Prince of the Apostles, so that, for her singular excellency and prero a^ue,
from the holy Apostle himself, of all the ancient Fathers she is called
Apostolical. As S. Hier. ep^st ad Dom. To thy Holiness, says he, that is, I
join my self to the communion of the chayr of S. Peter. And seeing all the
other Seats of the Apostles, as Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, have perished,
and are possessed of the infideles, only the chayr of Rome by the providence of
God, The Apostolical chayr still remained unmoved albeit Rome has been subject
to diverse mutations.
remains: in which as S. Aug. epist. 162. says, has ever lived the
principality of the Apostolic chayr. And albeit in Rome there has been
diverse mutations* and temporal Lords, sometime Emperors ruling, now the
Go^hes, now co^suls, notwithstanding the Seat of Peter has remained unmoved,
which is done by the providence of God. See more in the 8. question concerning
the Apostolical succession. To what end the Protestants labor. Cant. 4.5.
Apoc. 3 Prou. 23. Ephesians 5 2. ^ar 36. Zac. 7.


For conclusion it is the intention of the Protestants that there should be no
Church at all, but such as is none, profane, obscure, and satanicall. They lay
the fault on Christ, and defend that he has forsaken his own spouse; and to
have discharged the governor of the ruling his own Ark: and to have dispysed
his own flesh. Has he permitted the Synagogue (which was less beloved of
him) to remain only seaue^^ie years in captivity for her sins and his
Church which once was visible, Mat. 20.
and perfect, to be led into error, and from error to have perished these
th^wsand years past has the diligent husband man (who went out diverse times
in the day, to conduce laborers into his vyneyarde) neclected it? or has been
so carrelesse to suffer, and permit brambelles, and thorns of error, and
superstttion to suppress the vyhes, and his vyneyard to be come a wilderness
only fit for the fire? Is the kingdom of God (which in the Scripture is called
his Church) corrupted with error, Matthew. 3.
and is falsehood permitted to reygne in her: seeing the kingdom of God is the
kingdom of verity? Apoc. 21. Psalm. 18. Apoc. 21. Matthew. 18. and 14.
Is likewise the tabernacle of God set in the son, become invisible, and
obseured? Is the city of God, situated on an hill, become confused babell? Has
Hell gates prevailed against his Church? Has the shipp of S Peter been drowned
with the seas of Heresies? Is the sanctuary of refuge become adenne of
dragonnes? Is the mount of thy sanctification become the mount of profanation?
Is the inheritance of God so polluted? Is the strong castle with adamant
walls thus beaten down? O wondrous reformation, who belieues them?

OBJECTION.
THe Lutherans, and Caluinistes, and moreover all the Ghospellers agree in one
uniform defense of the reformed faith, Against the Papists: Ergo.

ANSWER.
I Grant ye agree but like Sampsones foxes, who forthwith running hither, and
thither brunt up the corn of the Philistines, but their heads were divided.
Such are Luth. Calu. and all the rest of the crew of the Evangelists
Protestants, to wit, that their tails that is to say, forces, and evil will,
do assist and help others hands, to burn the harvest of Gods husbandry, but
in religion, and capital points they are extreme discordant, through the
whole articles of our faith even unto death.

OBJECTION.
You are called Papists, which is a name not pertinent to the Ca^holicke
Church: but seeing this name is a particular name, ergo it does also separa^e
you from the Catholic Communion.

ANSWER.
I Confess we are called so, of only Heretics, but not so of any nation
under heaven, no not of the Turks; neither is that name of any particular man
(as Heretics names be) but ^f ^im, who in the place of Christ, governs the
Church of God, and if all the Popes were nombred to th^s present day, all the
Protestants are not able to find one, that is called by this name Pope, or any
of them to have invented any new religion, or to have left any disciple after
the^, who have been named after that name. Therefore when we are called Papists,
I ask of the Heretics, was there ever any, that was called Papa, by his
proper name? or did ever any Heresy co^tin^e a thousand year without a name
given to it? but how should the Church descrybe Heresies to us, but by naming
them from their proper names for their names show who has instituted and
invented that sect?

OBJECTION.
THe Church is believed by faith: but we believe the holy Catholic Church:
Therefore it is not seen, because says is not a thing of appearence, and
seen.

ANSWER.
THe conclusion is false, because that which is seen may also be believed, in
so far as it has some thing, that is not seen; as Christ Jesus was seen wi^h
men's eyes a man and was believed by faith, God, and man, as is said 10.20. to S
Thomas, because thou have seen me Thomas, thou have beliued, that is to say,
thou have seen a man, and thou have believed him to be thy God, and Lord: even
so we see men with our eyes, who appertain to the Church, and those men we
believe to be the holy Apostolik and Catholic Church, and in this Church to be
only remission of sins, grace justification, eternal life, and therefore out
of this multitude of mortal men, neither Salvation, nor the favor of God is
to be expected, of any other society, or Church.

OBJECTION.
CHrist, says, that the Kingdom of God shall not come with observation,
ney^her shall they say behold here or there ^e is, ergo the Church cannot be
demonstrated and seen.

ANSWER.
THe solution is made in the words following: for he says, behold the Kingdom
of God is with you, but Christ denies not but the Kingdom, his Church may be
seen and demonstrated. But he answers the folish question of the pharisie, who
had heard so often the Kingdom of God preached of Christ, who was desirous to
see it, it is a^swered, that Christ is not to reygne in this world after their
mind, as other Kings do with magnificence, and pomp, and to place the throne
of Majesty in a certain place of the Kingdom; but he says he dorh reygne as
he has begun in the hearts of men, which is his Kingdom, whom he does paint
out with his finger, saying Mat. 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the Kingdom of God, to wit, ye are citizens of Gods kingdom the Church,
from which the pharisees are far of.

OBJECTION.
THe Church is believed to be Holy, and none except the holy appertayn to the
Church; but holiness is not seen and known with the eyes, ergo the Church is
invisible, and the members of the Church are unknown.

ANSWER.
THe conclusion is false, for there are Saints and holy men in the Church,
albeit we see them not, yet we believe; for to a living tree there adhere many
dead branches, and in the body of man are many humors, and excrementes without
life, resident in the body: and yet notwithstanding all men believe, and say,
that a man is a living man, ergo.

OBJECTION.
IT is defended of the Fathers, that the Church in this present life, is said
to be beautiful, and to be without spot. cant 4 Ergo sinners and wicked men
are not members of his Church.

ANSWER.
THe Scripture in that place speaks of the Triumphant Church in Heaven,
notwithstanding if with S. Greg. cap. 86 Eccl. dogmat. Thou co^pa^re it to be
the m^litant Church: in that sense, it is called also beautiful, and spotles,
because of the Sacrament of regeneration, which makes her members lively by
inherent righteousness and grace, and are made glorious before God: and are not
obscured, and hid, as the Donatistes thought with the conversation of the
wicked. And albeit as S. Greg. cap. 4. Genesis says, no just or holy man does
want sin: yet notwithstanding he fails not to be holy, and just, if in
affection he retayn holiness, and righteousness, and by penance does wash away
his sins, careful to keep himself from mortal sins, and is contrite for
the venyall, saying with the Psalm. 50. Create in me a new heart o God.

OBJECTION.
THe Church of God is only in the spirit, because it is believed, ergo it is
invisible.

ANSWER.
IF the Church be invisible, how has Christ commanded Matthew. 18. to tell the
Church: and if he hear not the Church let him be etc. but if the Church be
invisible how shall she be told, and how shall they hear her censure? Likewise
if the Church be the body of Christ and Christians, members; Romans 12. 1. Cor.
1. and 12. Ephesians. 15 Coll. 1. If the Chutch be invisible, and only
mathematical, how has the Apostle said, ye are the body of Christ and members
of his members? It is true the Protestant Church is invisible, and
mathematical, but the Catholic Church is a visible Church, as a candell on a
candelstick, and as the son and moon in the firmament: Luc. 11. ps. 19. For
if it had been mathematical and hid, S. Paul should not have had the praises
of all the Churches, 2. Cor. 8. Neither David would not have said Ps. 21. with
thee, my praise is in the Church of the people: and in the chair of the elder
they do praise him. What the modern heresies do say, about the inuisibility
of the Church, the same have the former Heresies done likewise, as S. Augustine
is witness against the Donatists, who would have included the universal Church
in that inuisibility, and in a hid corner in Africa.

QVESTIO XIII. Of the pretended reformation of the Protestants.
WHerefore enuyously name the Papists our reformed Church, deformed. Seeing we
have rejected all papisticall doctrine, and superstitions of Popery out of it.
Bucherus, Melan. Piscator. Sarcer. Calvin. etc.

ANSWER.
THat shall we declare friendly without envy, seeing that under the pretext of
a sound reformation, The Protestants reformation consistes in denying the
article of our Faith.
ye have introduced a most horrible deformation, concerning the doctrine of
faith, and in abolishing all ecclesiastical discipline, in rejecting the
general Counselles, in condemning the ceremonies of the Church, in dispysing
the ancient Fathers, and in giving liberty to the flesh. For what is more
deformed, or abominable in religion, then to counfound, deforme, and deny, the
faith of Christ? For what article of our faith is not deformed, and denied of
the Protestants: as appears by the judgment and doctrine of their own
Rabbis? Against the 1. article of the Creed. what the Protestants beliue, is
from the catholics belief by proper definition.


And seeing the first words of our belief, consist in this form, I Beliue. So
that after S. Paul's definition Heb. 11. Faith is the ground of things which are
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. This faith must be resolute,
and undoubtedly believed of all Christians, which all good Catholics
undoubtedly do believe, both in heart, and mouth, without any waueringe, or
erroneous opinion, and this is the Catholics belief: such was not the belief
of Luther, That he hoped so soon as the curiosity of these times should be
fulfilled, his monuments would decay, and perish. Sermon. conuiualis. fol. 158.
and in praef. Tom. 1. and Tomo 2. fol. 9 and in praef. lib. de abusu missae.
Moreover he says I never dismiss these cogitations out of my head, that I
wish I had never begun this course. In this remorse, and distrust is Zuingl.
epist. ad Alberum, saying, In matters of faith we defyne nothing, but only
deliver our opinion. Likewise how labors Calvin, as reports Bols. invita
Calu. cap. 22. Beza, Oecolampad. Melanch. That they have ever adjoined to their
inconstant faith, to bynd it to the compass of reason. Gods word, ought not so
much to be followed in divinity, as the words of nature: in that we should
look with the left eye at the word of Christ, but with the right, at the
natures of things. Likewise Calvin in Ioh. cap. 6. and cap. 7. declares this
of his brethren, what opinion they be of, for says he, That by means of
their carnal conceit of Christ, they cannot attain to perceive him worthily:
and by corrupt interpretations, they are come to a contempt of the Euangely:
for when the reason of any thing appears not unto them, they suddenly
dispyse it. So that in the beginning they stumble and doubt before they proceed
any further. How repugnant are the Protestants in the believe to say I belife
in God who are found liars.
And when they say, I believe in God, to make a foundation in whom they anchor
their faith, they are found liars, and condemn themselves: for how do they
believe in God, who are Atheistes in profession? for by the true signification
of the word, atempt none, Iac. 1. who in mystaking the effect of the article,
transform him into a devil, for says not Luther, that God does work evil
works in the wicked? Roff. art. 36. and Calvin. lib. 3. inst. cap. 23. 7. and
cap. 21. 7. says, That it was decreed of God, that Adam should sin. And
likewise in the same book, he says, whom God has appointed to damnation, by
his just, The Protestants misbelieue God.
and irreprehensible decree, he shuts up from them, the way of life. Do these
men believe in God, Is not this defended of Zuingl. de prouid. dei Tom. 1. fol.
365. when we commit adultery or murder it is Gods works, as mouer, author, and
inforcer: for the murderer by Gods impulsion does kill, and is often
constrained to offend. Moreover they believe not in God, who account questions
concerning the deity, but triffles, and indifferent things, The Protestants
misbelieue God whill rhey call him Father and deny the Trinity.
Beza de Haeret. a civilly. Magist. puniendis. Moreover as concerning that word
of the belief in calling him Father, truly as they misbelieue God, so do they
misbelieue the Father, while they deny and misbelieue the Trinity, for says
not Calvin. lib. 1. inst. cap. 13.. 5. and lib. ad Valent. Gentil. and Epist.
2. ad Polonos. That he would the name of Trinity were buried, and that these
words in the Litanies rehearsed of Christians, Holy Trinity one God, have mercy
on us, is a Barbarous and improper prayer. Lykwyse Ochim. Dial. lib. 2. dial.
19.20. Calls the name Trinity a sathanicall and devilish name. Whereupon the
family of love has rejected the name Trinity, as a papisticall fiction. Edw.
Roger. cont. fam. Land an. 1578. Art. 24.25.26. Likewise Luther in enchired.
Praecum. ann. 1543 he says, That his soul abhors that prayer Holy Trinity
one God have mercy on us: and likewise that word Homousion, that is to say the
consubstantiality of Christ, betwixt the persons in the holy Trinity. To
animate this detestable hatred the more, the Seruetians called the Trinity a
three headed Cerberus, and hell hound. Beza epist. 81. And moreover to this
effect was not the Embassadge of the Caluinistes, of Poll, and sent to Zurick,
and to Geneua to have this Article abolished out of the belief, and that the
name Trinity should not be mentioned? Whereupon the Caluinian Synod ensued at
Vilnaan. 1589 11. May: where it was ordained by public decree, that all
Ministers in their Sermons, should not make mention of the Trinity. Symler. an.
1560 in vitae Bulling. fol. 33. Brendenbachl. 7. cap. 19.

Likewise they misbelieue the Father, Calvin. lib. 1. inst. cap. 13. 13.23.24
and vlt. do affirm it folishnes to believe or think, that God does
continually beget his Son. Whereas by this continual understanding, he must
ever produce a word, which is the wisdom of the Father, and his Son.

Likewise all they misbelieue the Father, Melan. loc. com. ann. 2539. fol. 8.
and 10. and ann. 1545. fol. 53. and an. 1558. loco defilio.

How the Protestants deny God almighty.
In calling and attributing to him Almighty, amongst the principal protestants,
this Article is denied: Calvin lib. 2 inst. cap. 7. 5. and 24. and lib. 4. cap.
17.. 24. and in psalm. 37. v. 4.

Moreover whereas we Catholics profess him maker of Heaven and earth, the
which right belief does confess, that the Son and holy Ghost created as much
as God the Father, seeing they are not dinstinguished, one from an other, as
they are God, and consequently their doings are, and must be, all one in
external operations: such as in the creation of the world. Against this
article fightes: Calu. cont. Valent. Gent. and lib. 2. inst. cap. 14.. 3.
saying that the name of God peculiarly does belong only to God the Father; and
that Christ considered according to his person, may not be called Creator of
Heaven and earth. Which ungodly assertion being allowed to be true, besides all
other absurdities, it follows, that Christ according to his person, should
not be God; Comment. in cap. 14. Genesis v. 18. and in 6. Ioh. v. 57 he says,
Christ our Lord to be but a second King next to God, and a second cause of
life. Has this Arch-Rabbi had any respect to S. Paul Phil. 2. who justifies
his equality with his Father, to rob him so easily? Moreover the very deity it
self could not retain Calvin from this abominable blasphemy. Likewise Calvin
affirms That the word of the creation was imperfect, for so much that in Heaven
he is not dutifully, and sincerely served without sin, committed even by the
Angels them selves, Calu. in c. 1. col. verse. 20. Which doctrine is contrary
to the Scriptures, that witness that in that Heavenly City is no unclean thing,
or sin. Apoc. 21 Seeing that all power and government belongs to the Father;
all wisdom, knowledge, and doctrine, belongs to the son: all begnity,
liberaltty, plenitude, and sanctification is appropriated and imputed to the
holy Ghost, all good things are ascrybed to the three persons, not excluding
any good from any of them, as being all three equal God, and consequently not
unequally fountaynes of all good things, as well in particular as in general.

Morouer concerning this article, which says, and in Jesus Christ his only
Son our Lord, Against the 2. Article. How the Protestants deny Christ in the
Creed. 16.17.18.19.
many of the Protestant Professors appear to be against this article. For some
affirm that Christ is not the Messiah, others say, that the name of Christ is
a filthy name. Some other that he was a deceauer of the world, and that he was
not God. Some other said that he had but a mean measure of Godhead: Some
likewise said, that he was ignorant, and his discourse absurd, and himself no
more God, then Socrates, and Trismegistus etc. All these blaspemies are extant
in the first and second article of the family of love, as writes Rogerus
against the sect of the family of love, printed at London an. 1579. Likewise
Cartwright discentes nothing from his former false brethren whyll he says in
his 2. replic. page 191. That he could not be persuaded, that the Israelites
was so mad, as to believe him to be the living God, whom with their eyes,
they did behold to be a miserable, and simple man. And therefore all the world
may see of themselves, what distrust they have of Ghrist to be God, Calvin
affirms in cap. 6. and 7. Job when the reason of any thing does not appear
unto us, such is our great Pride, that we esteem it nothing. Likewise they
misbelieue this article, who thereby have made God the Father sometimes not to
understand, which is his begetting, For says Calvin it is foolishnes to think
that God the Father does continually begett his Son: And so the son is
abolished, who is not otherwise actually the Son of the Father, but by
determinating actualy the relation of the Father to himself. Whereupon Luther
disp. de deo. These. 18. Tom. 2. VVittemb. lat. It is no marueil, says he, if
Arius, if a Jew, if Mahomet, and all the would deny Christ to be the Son of
God. And farlesse marueil, if the Protestant be also thus persuaded, to deny
Christ, considering their principal Evangelists teach the same. Against the
3. Article.


Moreover as concerning that Article. Who was conceived of the holy Ghost borne
of the Virgin Marie. How the Protestants deny Christ to be conceived of the
holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary in the creed.
Maldonat. in cap. 1. Mat.

Likewise others misbelieue this Article, who believe Christ to have been only
conceived, but not borne of a Virgin. Caluino-Turc. page 530. 531. and Greg. de
Valent. de Virg. S. Mariae. To which assertion Calvin condiscendes saying: That
the blessed Virgin was in manner weakenned in trauail upon Christ, as other
women in their trauail.

there is not a dyrtie hussy, or drabbe in the I Will of Britane, but will avouch
the same, which the poor people would not so ignorantly do, if they were not
teached of their high diuynes so to say, and believe, against the true grounds
of Scripture, that pronunceth her prerogative to be blessed above all women,
and to conceive and bear a child, and he to be the God of Heaven, and earth,
which no other women ever had, or did.

Moreover they misbelieue this Article, lib. cont. Hesbusium. fol. 284. On this
sam subject is the colloq. mompel. gart. saying. Christ's body was extant even
in the time of Abraham. Whereupon these absurdities follows, that Christ was
true man in essence, and in existence before his conception, and birth, and so
consequently the Angel said not true to the sheephearders, that this day is
borne to you a Savior, and that the Blessed Virgin Marie was not his Mother
etc.

Moreover they make Christ to have two bodies, aucto. diallactici. vide
Bellarm. 5. Euang. page 98. Colon. 1595.

Moreover they misbelieue this Article who affirm that Christ was not
eternally, Symler in praef. lib. de aeterno dei filio. Against the 4. Article.
How the Protestants deny this article that he suffered, and how they euacuate
his passion.


Moreover as concerning that Article. That he suffered under Pontius Pilat was
crucified, dead, and buried: many Protestants deny this Article by euacuating
the Passion of Christ, and that by saying that the blood is putrifyed in the
earth, and for that cause which is putrifyed and corrupt, cannot redeem us but
the Apostle defendes the contrary 1. Pet. 1. who says, We were not redeemed
by any corruptible price.

Morouer they euacuate the passion of Christ, according to all other parts,
who with Molineus in Harm. Euang. makes the merits of Christ's of no effect,
saying: they profit us nothing, they were of no force, but only the death of
Christ, redeemes and promerits for us: and that his preaching is less a
vaylable then other men's, who by preaching, do cancel the multitude of sins.
Likewise his fasting and prayers werelesse worth, then the Ninevites, who
thereby eschewed the wrath of God: and likewise less worth the^ Moses, who
purchased to the Israelits gods favor: more over his volu^tary poverty, his
innocent life, his circumcision, his works of mercy, are of noe value and
benefit. Whereas in any other, all, and every one of these, had been a
sufficient price for Heaven, which cannot be denied to be of infinite price in
Christ, and consequently of sufficiency, all, and every one of them; to
redeem a thousand worlds, unless Christ be denied to be of infinite dignity.
Wherefore all divynes believe, that Christ's death was a demonstration of excess
of love, because he so loved his, that of the end, and consummation of all
love, he left them abundant proofs, and that his merits were sufficient to
redeem a thousand worlds, if Christ would have been contented with that which
was sufficient, omitting what was abundant D. Thom. 3. part. de Christ's mers
is and 1.2. quaest. 114. rota. Whereupon it follows that neither his death was
sufficient satisfaction of sin, and consequently neither Christ's life, nor
death are allowed to be meritorious, and sufficient to redeem us.

Morouer a great absurdity follows, Calu. in cap. 26. Mat. v. 39 says, that
he refused to discharge the office of a mediator, and reputed Christ at the
time of his passion, to have had no sufficiency above other men, and that in
his prayer did not appear a temperate moderation, et Calvin. lib 2. inst. cap.
13. 10* 11.12. says that he was tormented with doutfulnes of his conscience:
and that he was astonished with the horror of Gods malediction, and tormented
with the fear of the botto^les pit of horrible destruction, and he burst out
into a voice and cry of desperation, and being overwhelmed in desperatio^, he
ceased to pray long to God. Which doctrine also confirms Beza in cap. 27.
Matthew. and Marlor. in Psalm. 22.

Morouer they euacuate the passion of Christ who affirm him to have been our
deliverer only, He^lius apud Cle^itium in Victoria part. 2. And likewise also
they who reject the name of merit, and with Calvin affirm lib. 2. inst. c. 17.
1 If any would, says he, oppose Christ to the judgment of God, there would no
place remain to any merit, because there is not in man that dignity* to
deserve any thing of God. And so for conclusion of Caluins assertion the merit
of Christ's death is naught, and that Christ with all his works deserved not
heaven, or at the least to say, that his death, and passion are profitable only
for the predestinat, and that no other have any benefit thereby. Calu. cont.
Heshus. page 39. Beza in colloq. Mompel. 1. page 522. Bucc. sup. Ioh. page 34.
Musc. in loc. Theol. fol. 363.367. Zanch. in miscellam. page 3. 200. 206. Aret.
apud Schlus. lib. 1. art. 6.25.26. and lib. 2. fol. 42. Theol. Calu. Whereby it
follows that Christ is not redeemer of all, or mediator for all offenses, and
offenders, neither intending their salvation.

Against the 6. Article. How the protestants deny Christ to have descended into
Hell.
Moreover as concerning that Article. He descended into Hell, the third day he
rose again from the dead: It is mightily impugned of the Protestants, for
Carlil. in his book that Christ descended into Hell, says, it is a pernicious
Heresy, to say, that Christ descended into Hell, and Beza in Apol. 2. ad
Zantes page 385. These words says he, entered into the creed by
inaduertisement. Or otherwise by glossing these words, that his descending,
was only the suffering of the panges of death on the cross, where not only his
humanity, but also his divinity endured pains, yea and death. Luth. conc. page
276. says that he would not acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, if only his
humanity had suffered. Yea Calvin backs, Luther, in Cataeches. cap. de fide.
This is Christ descention to hell, that he suffered that death which God in his
anger inflicteth on the wicked. And again, lib. 2. inst. cap. 16. 10 and cap.
26.27. Matthew. That he suffered all the pains in his soul, which by God in
reuendgme^t are exacted of the damned* thus he. In which doctrine is contained
beside the death of Christ's body, the death of his soul, Calu. blasphemies
against the holy Ghost.
and of his divinity, and that after he had endured such deaths, to have
suffered all punishments of the damned.

Christ descention to Hell, how it is understood of the Heretics
but Christ's burial in the sepulcher: as Zuing Oecol Buc. Calu. inst. Trem
Marel. Beza do affirm. And because the common name for Hell in Hebrew does
signify sometime a grave, or ditch. And yetnotwithstanding Calvin confesses,
that the said name, more usually and properly does signify Hell, the place and
state of the damned, also many of the Protestant professors oppose Beza,
showing by manifold passages of Scripture, that the Hebrew word Scheol, and the
Greek word (...), and in Latin Infernus, do signify an Infernal proper place
of the damned. And yet nevertheless some are not ashamed, to deny Christ's
descention to heel, thereby to maintayn their former blasphemies, They intend
to deny limbo and purgatory by denying Christ's desce^tion.
of his suffering the pains of the damned, on the Cross; and to euacuate the
delyuerance of the Fathers out of the Limbo, and purgatory. And therefore to
remove these blocks out of way Beza in cap. 2. Act. He tra^slates by his own
confession, and contrary to the opinion of his fellow compagnions, contrary to
the Greek and Latin interpretors and Fathers. Whereupon D. Humfrey lib. 2.
derat. interpret. page 219 220. says, that the foresaid Hebru word, should not
be translated grave, but hell, if the authority of the holy Ghost be observed.
For this has been Bezas inte^tion to translate grave for hell, and Christ
soul, for body, to deny hell, Hell is taken metaphorically of the Protestants.
and all infernal torments, and that mention is made of hell metaphorically.
Albeit forgetting himself, proves by Scripture, and Fathers the contrary
saying, in cap. 16. Luc. That Christ descended into the earth into the
receptacle of those who were there long retained.

Moreover Bullinger in 1. Pet. cap. 4. impugnes this article that Christ
descended no otherwise into hell, then as he daily descended to us, to wit,
only by spirit and virtue, in such sort, as none surmise his body or soul to
have descended. To which agrees Brentius, that there is no other but a
figurative, imaginatiue, and spiritual hell, without other torments, then
metaphorical.

This practice of Heresy S. Ang. lib. 3 de doct Christ. cap. 10. fortould,
saying: when the minds of any are preoccupated by error, all that Scripture
has to the contrary, they affirm it to be spoken, but figuratively. As for
example they begun at the Sacraments to make them but figures, and followed
next to affirm all promises by Christ, Al Christ's suffering and actions shall be
but figuratiues and nothing in effect.
made for good works, to be but hyperbolicall: diverse mysteries of his life
to be ineffectuall, all his passion suffered, to be but figurative, and
histrionicall: and Heaven and hell to be but only tropical, and fantastical:
so has said of the^ Josias Simler. in vita Bulling. fol. 3. and Alan. cop.
dial. 5. cap. 18.

Morouer this article is impugned for the other part of Ghrist resurrection
saying with Calu. in sua harm. in cap. 24. Luc. v. 38. and Beza 1. Cor. cap.
15. v. 23. That Christ wanted some perfection of a glorious resurrection, and
as yet never to have risen, but yet to remain dead. whereupon great exception
has been made against the feast of Easter in remembrance, of Christ's
resurrection, amongst the new professores who desired to abolish it, or observe
it according to the Jews ceremonies. Luth. de conc. Bal. lib. 3. cap. 25. de
scrip.

Morouer this article is impugned by Zuing. tom. 2. resp. ad Luth. librum. de
Sacr. fol. 465. Who denies Christ to have risen by his own power, but
ridiculously mocking Luther says, that the gross praetor, Luther, apparelled
in his red hose, in like manner as Christ went out of his Sepulcher, might also
have issued. For Christ after his death issued out of the Sepulcher of his own
force, and power, without removing the stone, place or monument, as all the
Fathers and Doctors affirm.

As concerning that Article. Against the 7 Article.
He ascended into Heaven sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
Vid admonit. Caluinist. ad libr. concord. and Danen. cont. Osiand. Next by
Calvin. saying. lib. 2. inst. cap. 14. 8. That Christ sitting at the right hand
of God will continue no longer, then till the day of judgment. Likewise Beza
impugnes this article, in cap. 3. Act. v. 21. saying his being at the right
hand of God his Father, does hinder his true being in the Sacrament. And
likewise Calvin. lib. 2. inst. cap. 14.. 3. Denies that he surpasses the
qualities of a natural body, and consequently could never ascend to Heaven,
likewise some other affirm, his being at the right hand, to argue an
inferiority or inequality with God the Father: or that God the Father had a
spiritual kind of body having hands etc. Vid. inter mangerie. page 157. and
Niuerium. in Bello 5. Euang. page 72.

Likewise Calvin denies and says: not to be imagined there is any place in
Heaven, whereunto Christ is ascended, or the humanity of Christ accepted.

Likewise many Protestants hold opinion, Christ ascension is nothing but a
disappearing, without any motion upward, where he was before. ita Ios. Simler.
in vita Bulling. fol. 35.55. Luth. tom. 7. VVittemb. fol. 408.409.

And concerning that Article. Against the 8. article.
From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

Likewise some hold, that only infidelity, Luther sup.

Lykwyse this article is impugned of those who say, that God will judge
iniustly as Luth. tom. 2 fol. 461. de seruo Arb. saying: That like as God in
this life has poured mercy and grace upon the unworthy, even so in his
judgment he shall pour anger and severity upon the undeserving. Which
injustice demonstrates, That God is the author of evil, not only by
provocation: but by impulsion and inforcement. For being the forcer to evil,
how can he punish them justly, who obey him?

Likewise they deny and impugn this article, who affirm that Christ who
should come to judge, is dead according both to his humanity, and Divinity: and
this Musculus doubted not to mantayn publicly, to profess and spread abroad,
that Christ remained dead, and is not risen, neither ascended, or yet shall
come from heaven to judge any quick or dead, Siluest. CZecanonicus de c^rup.
Morib. viriusque part. art. 3.

And as concerning that Article. Against the 9. article.
I beliue in the holy Ghost the holy Catholic Church. Many Protestants
believe not in the holy Ghost, because they affirm it blasphemous, and
idolatrous, to confess Christ to be God, or to have had any point of deity,
before his birth of the Blessed V. M. and thereby denies the holy Ghost
proceeding from the Son, no less then from the Father, Bez. cont. Heshus.
fol. 284. and colloq. mompel. fol. 77.

Likewise who impugneth the holy Trinity, holy Ghost Zanch lib. 3. Elohim.
Simler. in praf. de aterno det filio. Unto which barbarism Calu. epist. ad
Polon. page 946. accords What is it we believe one God, as much as to say, the
Trinity. believe you in God? as much as to say in Trinity: I hat they should
know thee one God, as much to say, the Trinity. This is not only unsavory, but
also profane, and I do dispyse it. This blasphemous derision, other
Protestants dissembled not, but rebuke in highest manner. Vid. Schlus. in
Theol. Calu. lib 2. fol. 2 8 14. 20 26. Whereupon his disciples followed his
example to mock the holy Ghost as Prateol. in Haer lib. 10 cap 10. saying
nothing in holy Scripture of the old or new testaments to be had of his
Divinity. Hereupon a Protestant exclames, Stanch. in ^pistol. contra Calu. number.
45. Beware Christian Reader, says he, and especially you Ministers of the word
of God, beware of the books of Calvin, and especially in the article of the
Trinity.

Likewise another John. Schutz. in lib. 50. cause. causa 48. says, Arianisme,
Mahumatisme. and Caluinisme, are three brethren, and three sisters, and three
breeches of one cloth, and he that will not fall in Arianisme, let him beware of
Caluinisme who as a Jew Iudaizes. 53


Moreover they impugn this article, who make their fantastical imaginations,
the very inspirations of the holy Ghost, and all their wicked inclinations, his
motions. So Zuinglian affirmed him to have this spirit saying: Tom. 2. in Act.
Tiguri fo. 609. I know for certain my doctrine to be no other, then the most
sacred, and true Gospel. By the testimony of this doctrine I will judge all
men and Angels. Likewise, Luth. Tom. 2. and Tom. 5. ad Gall. cap. 1. fol. 290.
says the same: I am assured Christ himself does call me an Evangelist, and
approves me his preacher. Lykwyse Calu. de vera Eccl. reformat. rat. 463. and
de libro arb. cont. phigium lib. 1. page 192. says that the matter it self,
not Martin Luther in the begiuning did speak, but God to have thundered out of
his mouth, and not we to speak now, but God to utter his power: albeit each
one of these are repugnant to other, yet are secure of their own opinions to
proceed from the holy Ghost.

Moreover they impugn this article who derogate from holy Scripture, Zuing.
tom. 2. Elench. cont. Anabap. fol. 10. says that although Paul did arrogate so
much to his epistls, as to think all in them contained to be authentical: which
is to impute to the Apostls immoderate arrogancy, whereupon it concludes
Zuingl. to have the assurance of the holy Ghost and no^ S. Paul. But Ochinus
lib. 2. dial. page 154.155.156.157. proceeds further saying, Sermon de Moyse.
Let not Moses be thrust upon us: we in the new testament will neither regard
nor hear him. Et Jacob Curio in Chronol. ann. 1556. page 151. says, that he
had rather never preach then to propou^d any thing out of Moses, and he that
does allege any thing of his, does deprive Christ of the hearts of men. And
that Moses belongs not to us, that he receaueth him not: for otherwise he
should receive all the Jewish ceremonies that his government is failled, and
himself is dead: that Moses only belongs to the Jews, and not to
Christians. Et Sand. de schism. Aug. lib 2. page 272. reports Buccerus, to
say. If all be true which the Evangelists set down, Christ must be truly and
really in the Sacrament, yet whether we be bound to believe absolutely every
thing set down by them, to be true or no, he would not be judge. To conclude
this is their design what they list to believe, that they will believe and
that they make the inspiration of the holy Ghost to be holy Scripture, and
themselves Evangelists, and true; and what displeases their mynds, be it in
the new, or old Testament they can raze, reject, and affirm it apochriphal,
neither in this are they satisfied, but persuade themselves that the holy Ghost
himself could suggest or teach nothing but what Christ before had delivered by
mouth, and such restraint and limitation to be heedfully noted. This Calvin.
lib. 4. inst cap. 8.. 8 howsoever Christ foretold the contrary of the holy
Spirit.

Morouer what is said of impugning of Scriptures,

Moreover the holy Ghost is misbelieued, and impugned when traditions of the
Church are denied, although they be not all extant in the Scripture, as the
name Trinity, the consubstantialitie of persons, the observation of Sunday for
the Sabbath, the baptising of infantes, the receiving of the communion,
fasting, and the feast of Easter etc. Which traditions the holy Church
acknowledges, to have issued from the holy Ghost, according to Christ his
promise, that he should not only teach, but also suggest all truth.

Moreover the Protestants impugn the holy Ghost, when they impugn miracles,
S. Aug. in quaest. ex vtroque test. quaest. 102. proves that they sin with
the Pharisees, in the sin against the holy Ghost; for there is no miraculous
operations, but they appertain to the working of the holy Ghost.

Moreover the Protestants impugn that article,

Moreover they misbelieue the holy Ghost, who affirm the Church may err,
Matthew. 16. Luc. 22. John. 14. Act. 2. that is to say, the faith thereof should
never fail, and the holy Ghost the teacher of all truth, should perpetually
remayn with it, to keep the spouse of Christ vnspoted, and without all
wrinkle, and this Church is the Church of Rome, as the sectaries themselves
profess, neither deny they, but in this Church is universality, consent, and
antiquity; as Fox acts page 1359. Iewelrepl. cont. Hard. part. 4. diuis. 14.
and 21. page 249. and 268. Call. lib. 4. institut. cap. 2.. 2.3. Also
considering that in no other prosession, is the lyk holiness of life, and unity
in doctrine, which accompany one another, as good and bad fruit of a good and a
bad tree. No heresy that ever has been, can make comparison with the
Catholic Roman Church* either for holiness of life, or integrity of doctrine.
As for their doctrine, we may easily consider, to what holiness of lyfe^t tends,
as their own Rabbis shall testimony give And first, Calvin, iustruct contra
Laber^. cap. 13. Has any man coueted his neighbors wife? let him enjoy her if
he ca^: for he knows assuredly, he does not contrary to the will of God Let
him boldly snatch by force, or fraud his neighbors substance: for he will
take nothing unless God will, and approve it.

Lykwise Zuingl ^om. 1 in actis disp. Tigurinaefol. 628. God has bound himself
to give us Heaven, Tom. 1 inc 8 Mat. They speak of the ghospel as if they were
Angels: but if you regard their works, they are rather devils. J in nari. in
1. Cor. cap. 15 fol 161 162. They live lyk hogs, and as dogs they die.
Lykwyse Calu. descand. page 118 127 128. Zuing tom 1 fol 115. We cannot deny
but the heat of the flesh is ardent with us, whereas the works thereof, has
made us infamous to all Churches.

Morouer the Roman Church has stability* and constancy in her whole doctrine,
and Scriptures. But the contrary is with the Protestants, no constancy, no
stability in their doctrine, as witness Zuingl. Tom. 2. comm. de vera and falsa
relig. cap. de euch. fol. 202. We recant here what we said there, with this
condition, that, that, which we deliver the 42 year of our age, take place of
what was taught in the 40. year. In this same mind is Beza in colloq. mompel.
page 1^0. 268 388* I confess me to have written many things, which I wish had
not been written* I would to God the memory of them all were abolished.

Moreover they impugn this article, and fall in misbeliefe, who appeall to an
invisible Church, removed from all senses, lyk a Platonicall Idea, separated
from all knowledge, neither extant in any country, neither read of in any
history, in which there is no Evangelical Annunciation, no Sacraments
minystred, no persons known: and this is done, because their conscience
informed them, that the true, visible, ancient, and universal Church, (in
which Christ's name, Scriptures, and Sacraments were preserved) stood with us
against them, in auouching the same. It is a desperate opinion proceeding from
profound infidelity.

As concerning that article. The communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins.
Against the 10 Article.
By this article it is evident, that there should be a communion betwixt the
living and the dead, who live and die in one faith, hope, and charity. But this
article is misbel^eued of the Protestants, who deny all corespondence betwixt
the Saints in Heaven, and men in earth. As also they misblieue and impugn
Scriptures (which justify this controversy of the invocation of Saints)
conformable to this article.

Moreover this article disalloweth the discordes amongst the Protestants
themselves. For Sturn di rati^. contradict. ineundae. page 24. says, that the
Lutherans in their published books do condemn the Churches of England,
France, Flanders, Scotland etc. And call their martyrs, Martyrs of the
Devil. And Iester. Zuingl. Caluinist. lib. de diuturm belli eucha. page 25.80.
There is no end of chiding, writing, accusing, disputing, condemning,
exco^municating betwixt the Lutherans and the Caluinistes, and this is the
communion of the Saints in the reformed Church.

Morouer they fall in misbeliefe and impugn this Article, who affirm it
blasphemy to give tytles to Saints in Heaven, which they themselves usurp
and give to sinners on earth, in this mad humor is Calvin, who not enduring
any honor toward Saints, or images, yet could permit his own picture to be
borne about the necks of them in Geneua, and when some thought it insolent
arrogance, and reprehensible, admonished that the people might sin thereby,
because they esteemed it as a remedy against mischances, answered them; grieve
at it till you burst, and after hang your selves. Bols. in vita Calu. cap. 12.

Morouer as concerning the forgiveness of sins, of sins. Partly in saying a
man has no frewill, and consequently cannot sin. Partly by saying that
sins cannot be forgiven in the Church, contrary to Christ's doctrine Job 20 For
if the Protestant will not deny, but there is remission of sins in baptism,
whey not in penance, to the remission of sins? for if the one, be a washing
of the spotted, the other is also a lowsing of the bound, and the one as
necessary as the other.

Against the 2^ article.
Tom. 7. Wit. defend. Verb. Caen. fol. 390. The same Villagaignon epist ad
Geneu. and in praef lib. 1 de euch. affirms, that with his ears he hard it
preached of the Caluinistes, that the hope of life did not belong to the bodies,
but to the souls. Lykwyse Almaricus on of Foxes Martyrs as Caesar. lib dial.
dial. 5 affirms said, that there was no resurrection of the bodies. Calvin is
of this same opinion, in his epist. ad Farell. fol. 194. saying; In that the
resurrection of the flesh seems incredible to thee, it is no thing admirable.

Moreover they misbelieue this Article, Tom. 4* in Eccles. cap. 9^. 5 and 10.
It appears says he, out of this place, that the dead feel nothing. Likewise
Calu in praef. Psi^hrinachiae and in praef. Gallasij says, that he knew
certain good men, to whom this opinion, of the souls sleeping, seemed sound.
It follows that he himself is one of these good me^, who in the ps. 130.
says, that the souls of the wicked are anihillated and not in hell. lib. 3.
just. cap. 25.. 12. and the residue to be but shadows, imaginations,
fantasies, idols, dead; And consequently no immortality.

Whereupon it was concluded in a solemn disputation at Geneua, (when they had
long consulted how to avoid purgatory) to say, Let us affirm the soul to be
extinguished together with the body, Purgatory is abolished by denying the
article of the ^^eed.
and so purgatory will be spedely abolished. For this doctrine is so urgent, that
they are persuaded that it cannot well be denied until the resurrection of the
dead, and the immortality of the soul also be denied. But why is purgatory so
annexed to this article, that the Protestants are driven to his extremity?
because they observed, that God often forgiueth the offenses, and yet reserueth a
chastisment for satisfaction: as in Adam, in Moses, in David: whose offenses
being forgiven, yet Adam remained subject to death, This place serves for the
proof of Purgatory.
and endured all other myseries, Moses never entered into the land of promise;
David's ch ld begotten in sin dyed. So likewise, because God is ever one, and
lyk himself, such as repent late or slakly, might be forgiven at their death,
and yet, for satisfaction, remain in purgatory: therefore it is the rediest
way to deny purgatory, by the denial of the resurrection of the dead and
mortality of the soul. Against the 12 article.


And as for that Article, the life everlasting: So many are in misbeliefe and
impugn this as deny God, Heaven, the resurrection of the dead, the immortality
of the soul, and our redemption by Christ etc. And this is the great abounda^t
light of truth, that has sprung with the reformed; who in the blindness, and
night of darkness, wherein they are wrapped, do vant and glorify, as in the
clearnes of the light, Greg. lib. 1. Mor cap. 26. who will be more curious to
know how deformed the Protestants profession is, concerning the articles of
our creed, let him read Quirinus Cnoglerus de Symbolo Calvin. and Luther. and
he shall find a thousand points of misbeliefe, and filthy absurd errors, and
negations in the twelfue articles of our faith: that rightly they conclude
their proposition to be true, to have indeed in their reformation, rejected all
papisticall doctrine. God, and all true faith, and therefore justly may be
called deformeres, and no reformers.

QVAESTIO. XIIII. Of the stability of the visible Church.
WHerefore affirm the Papists the Church of God ever to be visible, seeing
sometimes, tho has perished, and has remained altogether invisible. Luth
lib. de Abrogand. miss. Calvin. lib. 4. instit. cap. 1. 7. Melanch. in loc.
com. loc. 12. and alij.

ANSWER.
GOod friends I believe you suppose that Christ has two churches, seeing it is
only one, which according to the prophesies, is visible, and spreed abroad
through the whole world; and that her citizins shine (in the midest of a
crooked, and perverse nation,) like stares in the firmament, The Church is
visible.
and does remain glorious in every nation, showing themselves members, in
professing the doctrine. and Sacraments of this visible Church. Therefore one it
is, and not many, publict and not hid, the kingdom of Christ is visible, the
tabernacle of God is placed in the son. Nether shall this seem marue^ll to
any, if all that appertain to the Church would take heed to the last end, unto
which all does tend, and to the same principales and mediates if all I say would
co^curre with one mind, to wit in faith, hope, and charity, for it cannot be,
that there be two Churches; otherwayse there should be two last ends distinct,
and two kynds of principal mediates, to obtain these ends. Therefore it is
to be believed of faith, that the Church of Christ has ever been visible, as
may appear of her notes, and by many places of the holy Scripture, of the
which two shall suffice for breuities sake, first in the ps. 18. It is said,
that he had placed his tabernacle in the foune that is to say, he had placed
the Church in the pure light, that it may be visible to all the world. For as
S. Aug Tract 2. in Epist. Ioh. says, he has placed his Church in the son,
not in the night, but in the day. Again he says, what more am I to say the^
that he is blind that sieth not so great a mountain, and that he shuttes and
closseth his eyes, against the candell set on the candelstick Matthew. 5.
Again S. Aug upon the 18. of Matthew. v. 15 our Savior admonishes: if they
brother sin against thee, go, and reprove him betwixt thee and him: if he
hear th^^, thou have won thy brother, but if he hear th^e not, yet take own
witness with thee, or two that in the mouth of two or thee, ^itnesses, every
word may stand: but if he hear thee not, ^hen tell the Church, and if he hear
not the Church, let him be to thee as an heathen, and publican. I hope if
reason be with man, the reformed will here consider diligently the words of
Christ* bebecause these words specially tell the Church is to recure to the
Church, as judge, the which must be visible, for no judge can be invisible, if
he execute the office of a judge; for how shall I find her, that is invisible,
how shall I declare to the Church, if it be not visible, who has ever
institute recourse, to an invisible judge. Likewise I ask how long has your
reformed Church been invisible, what minysters of the divine word, have you had
with you: what Sacraments: and how are they minystred in all ages past: who of
you has opposed against Vprysing heresies. For so much as the spouse of Christ
has been oppugned in every age? Answer for her inuisibility if you can. As for
the Catholics, and to their purpose many places of the Scriptures serve, as
the parable of the banquet: The Thresking floor: and the fishers net. the
sheepfold etc. All which does prove the Church to be visible, In the name of
the other Senators of the world, compereth S. Aug. in his Epist, 161. ad Hon.
Danat. making mention of the visibility of the Church, and belieues it of
faith, and as it were with his finger pointing the Church of God ever to be
visible. For so much as S Paul in all his Epistles puts the names of these
Cities, Kingdoms, and Nations, as Macedonia, Achaia, Jerusalem, Romans,
Hebrews, Corinth. Colloss. Philip Gallat Ephesians. Likewise S. John in his Apocal.
wryttes to the seven Churches in Asia, etc. Which Churches undoubtedly were
visible, as the other Churches rehearsed, thorefore the Church is not
invisible, and mathematical, unknown to the world, but only to God. Are
Christian men so blind, as yet not to see th^s Church, before your doctrine,
which of necessity must make a visible Church? for if the Church he invisible,
how are you become visible. for Pastores are the representation of a visible
Church, and not of an invisible? who is so blind to ^ollow your imaginary
opinions against the mount of God* the glorious son, and the burning la^p, and
to make the church obscured and darkened through your idle opinions; observe
this for a true note, we are all obliged, under pain of eternal damnation, to
co^ioyne our selves to the true Church of God. and to persevere in her* that is
to say, to obey her head, and to communicate with the rest of the members: Like
as S. Hier. says Epist. ad Dam. Unto thy holiness that is to say, I join, and
concord with the chayr of S. Peter: I know the Church is builded upon a rock,
whosoever is without this house, shall not eat of the Lamb, and he is profane.
And if any man be not within the Ark of Noe. he shall perish, enduring the
deluge. Now truly it is impossible to any to eat of this lamb, out of the
right house, or to be out of the ark of Noe, who desires to be saved, or to
communicate with the true Church if it be invisible. Therefore as the Israelites
in the old testament had the visible sign of circumsition, as a sacrament of a
visible Church: even so in the new testament, the holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles, in visible signs, as a Sacrament of a visible Church for if in the
law of nature, there was ever certain external Symboles visible, for humane
society and observance of deuty: even so in the law of grace Christ has
instituted the Sacraments, for unity, and charity of the members of his Church.
For as S. Aug. lib. 19 cont. Faust. cap. 11. says, in no religion true or
false men can be united, without visible signs, and Sacraments.

Moreover the visible Church from the time it began, it never failed, neither
may fayl: because before the incarnation of Christ, the true faith of God was
ever, and likewise the worship of God was in some men, who made up a Church of
God, and likewise that Church which was after Christ, has never failed, or
might fail, according to that stait, in which it was instituted of himself. It
is evident by testimony of holy Scripture, in which Christ kingdoms is
fortold, to be eternal as psalm. 47 v. 9. Is said as we have hard, so we have
we seen in the city of our God, and God has established it for ever. Which
psalm is spoken altogether of the Church, and her perpetuity. likewise her
visibility, is also mentioned, whyl the prophet says, as we have hard, and
seen, therefore it is not obscurly designed, or invisible. Also Dan. 2. v. 44.
says, That in the days of those Kings, the God of Heaven, shall set up a
Kingdom, which shall never be distroyed: and this Kingdom shall not be given
to another people: but it shall break, and distroy all these Kingdoms, and it
shall stand for ever. Moreover S. Matthew. 16. v. 18. says, That the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against her: for as there is a visible head, there must
be a visible body; and seeing Christ was seen in earth, and did converse with
men, shall not his body, and members thereof, also be visible? if the foundame^t
be visible, it behoweth also the house to be visible, and seeing the Apostles
and prophets are foundament of his Church Ephesians. 2. who can deny the building
not to be visible. Likewise our conjunction with Christ is not only spiritual,
but also is bodily, that we may be bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh,
the Apostle calls it a great Sacraments Ephesians. 5. And seeing by Sacraments we
are united and known together, which are visible things, and therefore
appertain to a visible body. which is his Church also, which has a visible
head, that the Church of God may ever appear visible, whereupon Chrysest. Tom.
5. orat. de non. rontemnend. Eccles. What is more stronger then the Church of
God? the barbarous may pull down the walls, but the infernal devils cannot
overcome it: When she is battered, she is victor: and when she is invaded with
deceit, overcomes, thus he. And S. Bernard. Sermon. 79. neither by the
verbositie of Philosophers, neither cauillations of heretyckes, neither by the
sword of the persecutors might the Church at any time be separat from the love
of God, thus he. Moreover it is said Ephesians. 4. v. 11. He gane some to be
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
^eachers for the ^^summation of the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
and for the edification of the body of Christ, whyll we all mere together (in
the unity of faith and in knowledge of the sone of God) unto a perfyt man, and
unto the measur of the age of the fulness of Christ. In which words the Apostle
rehearsing these offices. Apostles, Pastors, and Doctors to abyd in the Church,
to the end of the world: declares the Church to be visible which no ways ca^ be
understood of an invisible church, by reason that there is no such offices that.

Moreover it implicates a contradition the visible Church sometime to have
failed, and the invisible to remain, for so much as the wonders of the world
are noted; partly by Scripture; as the deludge; Genesis 6 4 Reg 17, Matthew. 25.
the going back of the son: the son and moan, to have lost their light, and
darkness to have over shaddowed the whole face of the earth, at the death of
Christ. Lykwyse Historiographers, and Chronologies make mention of erthquakes;
fire, tempests, pestilence and such like prodigious things which are registered
and are extant in every man's hand. and yet what time the Church, failed, and
became invisible there is no Scripture. no chronology* no witness ever to be
found but only clamorous men's voices, to say it, once it was visible, this they
grant, but how in failed, it is improbable* For if the visible Church has
failed and the invisible remain, and was not seen, there follow to wyld
absurdities, for either she professed her faith; and yielded not to the
persecutions of the Gentills, or Heceticks; and in so doing it follows that
she was visible, as the primitue Church in the time of the Apostles: and
Martyrs in time of persecutors; for in profession, and suffering sho appeared,
and was a spectacle to the world and contrary wise if she professed not her
says but lurked, and retained it inwardly in the heart, and outwardly by
dissimulation accommodated hirself to the time, in following of false worship,
as the Helchesi^nes did, as witness Euse lib. 6. cap. 31. In so doing sho cannot
be accounted the true Church of Christ. For Christ says. Matthew. 10.^.33. Who
shall deny me before men, him shall I deny before my Father in Heaven.
Therefore the Church in vigor and subsistence cannot want a sign of visibility.

Morouer the Church containing alswell the universality of faithful, as of
Bishops absolutely cannot err in matters of faith, which universally either are
to be believed of faith, or propounded unto us; to be done for good manners,
whether expressly they be found in the Scripture, or not? because the Church
is governed of Christ the head, as S. Paul says; Ephesians. 1. u 22. He has given
him to be head of all the Church, which is his body. And therefore, if sho may
err it redounds unto Christ, which according to the verity it self, no manner
of way, may fall, because God is true; and because the Church is the pillar and
foundament of verity: 1. Tim. 3 v. 15. Therefore sho cannot err. likewise
Christ promissed to his Apostles, and to the whole Church, The spirit of
verity, to abyd with her for ever, and to lead her in all verity. S Joan. 14.
and 16. It is not to be understood of simple verity, because the Scripture
speaks generally of all verity, descrybing the holy spirit to teach the
Church, and sho to be a pillar of verity, that in nothing sho should err,
otherwise if the Church may err, in teachings things necessary to salvation,
no man shall know where the verity is, and the holy Ghost shall be found the
liar. For have not all the Fathers in whatsoever question, and controversy of
faith, fled to the church, as unto the ancher of verity? They would never have
taken this refuge, if they thought that the Church might err. To this effect
S. Aug. lib. 1. contra Cresc. c. 33. says: the verity of the Scriptures is
kept of us, seeing we do that thing, which has pleased the universal Church,
the which does commend the authority of the self Scripture, for so much the holy
Scripture may deceive none, but whosoever has feared to be deceived by
obscurity of any question, let him consult with the Church, which without any
ambigu^ty does demonstrate and shaw the holy Scripture. Again Epist. 118. To
dispute against that thing, says he, which the universal Church belieues, it
is most insolent madness Again in psalm. 57. In the bowels of the Church, says
he, verity remaynes, whosoever is separated from this bowels of the Church, of
necessity he must speak false; I say of necessity he must speak false; who
either would not be conceived, or either of the mother is made abortiue being
once conceived. Which Church Sermon* ad Catachum. cap. 20. He calls a true
mother, a godly mother, a chaste spouse, garnished with the dignitye, and riches
of her husband, not in outward show, by lying deceit, but in verity, which
cannot err. And if the prelates of the Church may err, consequently the whole
Church may err, for the people, are bound to follow their pastors, Mat. 23. v.
3. from whence then is the protestants Church, seeing, the Church is invisible,
and has erred? etc.

OBJECTION.
IT is written, say they, the kingdom of God shall not come with observation,
Luc 17 neither shall they say behold here, or behold there, Luc. 17 v. 21
Therefore the Church, which is the kingdom of God, is invisible, and may not be
seen.

ANSWER.
IN the same chapter answer is made, saying: behold the kingdom of God is
within you, or among you: for in the objection Christ repelles the vain
opinion of the Pharisees, who thought the kingdom of God to have his
beginning with observation of worldly pomp, with triumph, and public
coronation (after the manner of worldly princes) making his residence in a
certain place of the kingdom. He answers them, that the Messiah shall not
reign, that manner of way, but in such manner as he has begun, to wit, in
the hearts of men, and in his church, which then consisted in his Apostles and
disciples which in another place he verifieth, saying, Blissed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God. Luc. 6. v. 20. as though he would
say, you ar members of the kingdom of God with peace, without worldly
tumultes, and triumphs, from which the rich Pharisees are far of. Likewise S.
Pet. 1. epi. "cap. 2. v. 5. says, The Church is a spiritual house, to wit,
not according to the invisible substance, as angels or souls, etc. Neither
says he, that the Church consists of gross materials, but of consecrated
and sanctified men to God, united in one body, and mind, as was the multitud of
belieuers in the days of the Apostles.

OBJECTION.
You have not come to the mount, that may not be touched, and to the burninge
fire. Hebr. 12. v. 18. and 22. But you have come to the mount Sion, the city
of the living God. Therefore the Church is not visible, for that the city of
the liueing God is not visible.

ANSWER.
THe Apostle in this place denies not the visibilitye of the Church, but
discrybes the beauty of the triumphant Church, in calling it heavenly
Jerusalem, unto which it is said, the faithful have to approach by faith, and
hope, not that there are two Churches, seeing that it is all one, but builded
with diverse estates; to wit perfect, and imperfyt, unto which perfection the
militant does labor in faith, and hope, whill she come to that beauties end,
which is descrybed in heaven.

OBJECTION.
THose things, which are believed, are not seen: but in the Creed: We believe
the holy Catholic Church, and therefore the Church being believed is invisible.

ANSWER.
MAny things are believed, which notwithstanding are seen, as Christ was seen
with man's eyes, and yet he is believed the Messiah, and God, and this he proves
him self. Johan. 20. v. 29. saying; Because thou have seen me Thomas, thou have
believed, ergo Christ was seen and believed. Likewise in baptism, we see water
and the application there of, with the prolation of words, and yet
notwithstanding, the virtue of the Sacrament, which we see not is effected:
which is, that original sin is taken away, justifying grace is infused, a
character is impressed in the soul, none of these are seen, and yet faith
belieues them, for in all these things, there is some things seen, and other
things believed, even so in the Church, we see with our eyes a company of men,
professing themselfes Christianes, under the government of a head, but that,
that company is the very true Church of Christ, we believe, so that some things
are seen, and some things believed, Is therefore the article of our belief to
be abolished, and to say; I see and suppose the Catholic Church, and deny to
say; I believe the Catholic Church? this article contains many things, more
proper to faith then reason, because we see not the elect, neither do we know
them and yet we firmly believe them to be in this company, as likewise we
believe this company, and Church, to be ruled of the holy ghost, and yet we see
him not, and to be without error, the pillar and ground of verity, and in this
Church only to be remission of sins justification, the infusion of grace,
hope of eternal life, the holy scripture and her true interpretation,
dispensation of the Sacraments and the true preaching of Gods word. and out of
this company and holy Church, no mortal man can attain to the favor of God, or
eternal salvation, all these ar believed, and are not seen nor known, ergo, the
Church is visible.

OBJECTION.
ADam and Eua have sinned, therefore the whole visible Church, which consists
in these two persons, has failled, and erred. Ergo:

ANSWER.
ADam and Eua were not the Church, but her beginning, neither erred they in
teachinge of false doctrine, but as private persons, doing evil, or thinking
evil.

OBJECTION.
IN the time of Isai, and other Prophets of the old Testament, it appeared to
have failled, for Isai says 1. cap. v. 3. That Israel has not known me, and
in the 6. v. he says, that from the soale of the foot to the crown of the
head, there is no whole place. Likewise Hier. 2. v. 29. Ye have left me, says
the Lord. Et Psalm. 13. v. 3. All have declyned and are made altogether
unprofitable, there is not one, who does good, there is not one. Whereupon we
gather both the Church to be invisible, and to have erred.

ANSWER.
ALbeit the whole Church of the Jews in the time of Elias, or at any other
time has failed, which I grant not, notwithstanding, it follow not, that the
Church of Christ has failed, because the Synagoge was not an universal
company of Gods peopl, but a particular, in which were many, who lived holy,
and erred not, as Melchisedech, Job, Cornelius Centurio, the queen of Candies
Enuch; and all these were found both righteous and faithful. Morouer the
Prophet speaks after the manner of Scripture, by reason of the multitude of
the wicked, which speech passes as an universal sign, how beit in truth all
are not such, for the mind of the Prophet, is no manner of way to affirm, that
all men have fallen from God absolutely, but such as deny the divine providence
of God, saying, there is no God, and to be none, who does good; notwithstanding
a little after he declaires some to be good, whom he calls the people of God;
poor, Jacob, and Israel; and consequently the Church neither was invisible,
nor erred at that time.

OBJECTION.
SAint Hier. Dial. cont. Lucif. the whole world (says he) has sorrowed, and
marvelled to be an Arian, ergo the Church has erred.

ANSWER.
HE calls the world a great part, not absolutely the whole world: likewise
these Catholic bishops were assembled at Arimin to Abolishe that name (...), in
which counsel they only materially erred, not knowing the true signification
of the Greek word, neither were these fathers heretics, for forth with knowing
the error, they amended it with penance.

OBJECTION.
ALl the Apostles in time of the passion of Christ lost their faith: therefore
the whole Church some time has erred. The Antecedent is proved. Matthew. 26. v.
31. all you shall be scandalized in me this night. Luc. 24. v. 11. but these
words seemed to them as fained, neither believed they him. Marc. vlt. And he
reproved their incredulites and hardness of heart, because they believed not
these, who had seen him risen. Ergo the Church in the Apostles has erred.

ANSWER.
THe Apostles at that time sinned, because they were slow to believe, and were
worthy of reprehension, yet notwithstanding, they were not infidelles, howbeit
they committed a sin in over much fearing [quia timor cadit in virum iustam]
neither at this time had they received the holy ghost, the doctor of Verity,
to preserve them from humane error and fear, neither by this argument has the
Church erred.

QVAESTIO. XV. The interdicting of Scriptures.
Wherefore does the Papists interdict and forbid the people the reading of the
Scriptures, which is easy of understanding, and clear in themselves. Luth. de
lib. Arb. Calvin. lib. 1. instit. cap. 7.. 2. Beza conf. fid. Punct. 4. art.
27. Brent. prolog. cont. a Soto. Illiric. in Claue Script. etc.

ANSWER.
I Deny the holy Scripture to be easy of understanding, as ye persuade your
selves, for it is a book full of mysteries, and difficulties, the knowledge of
which none can attain, without the great help of Gods grace, and moral
Science; so that the vulgar reading of the same, without understanding, has
given occasion to many, to interpret them after their own sense, and filthily
to err, as the evidences bear witness, from whence ar heresies, Schism, and
dissension? Are they not builded on the Scriptur? because that every man will
understand it after his own opinion, and not according to the judgment of the
Church? And therefore we see by experience, that the Scriptur is not facill of
understanding, for the disciples the^ selves were whole three years under the
instruction of Christ Jesus, the master of verity, who were ever by him, and
often they heard him preach of his sufferings, death, and resurrection,
notwitgstanding they understood not the scriptures, perteining to that, neither
in the, law, Psalms. nor Prophets until Christ opened to them the sense, that
they might understand the Scriptures Luc. 24. v. 45. that is to say, that not
only Christ has expounded the Scriptures to them, as a little before he did to
his disciples going to Emaus, but also he gives to his Apostles and disciples a
certain divine grace, of the sense and meaning, for the better understanding
of the Scriptures. So that it is evident, when the Apostles and disciples were
thus dull to understand the Scriptures, how shall the vulgar people understand
them?

Moreover S. Peeter, 2. Epist. cap. 3. v 15. says, As our beloved brother
Paul, according to the wisdom given to him has writtin to you, and as, in all
his epistles, speaking of them, in which there are some difficil to understand.
which the unlearned, and instable deprave. Therefore it follows, that all the
writings of S Paull, were not to every one plain, but many things difficil to
understand.

Moreover to what end have the learned labored in the knowledge of the
tongues, to seek, and search the understanding of the Scriptur, if it be so
easy of understanding? why did S. Hiero. vex himself above twenty years in
studying the Scriptures, a man instructed in all tongues and endued with most
singular learning, yet we read of him, that often he doubted in expounding the
Prophets, and has been in ecstasy of mind, through the profunde obscurity
of the Scriptures. In the same laborinth was S August. the pillar of divinity,
whilst he explicated the sin against the holy Ghost, lib. 2. de doct. Christ.
cap. 6. in which he himself thinks, not to have labored sufficiently,
because of the difficulties, that arise in the holy Scripture, which were above
his judgment. Therefore S Hier. epist. ad Paulin. says, the law is spiritual
and has need of revelation, that it may be understood, as also, that we may
contemplate the glory of the revealed face of God. The sealed book in the
Apocalypse with seven - sealls is showen: which if thou shall give it to a man of
understanding to read, he will answer thee, I cannot; for it is sealled How
many at this day think themselves to be of understanding, and literature, and
yet hold the sealed book in their hand, neither may they open it, except he
open it, who has the key of David, who opens, and no man shuts, and shuttes,
and no man opens, thus he.

Morouer the Evangelists Matthew and Luke seem to vary in the genealogy of
Christ, in that, Luke says, that Joseph was the son of Heli, and S. Matthew
says, that Jacob begat Joseph, which disagreeme^t, Julian the Apostate
objected to Christians. Likewise S. Christ. 1 Matthew. says, that it is to be
numbered among hid things, how that Elizabeth being of the trybe of Leui, may be
called the Cousin of Mary, who was of the trybe of Judah.

Moreover S Mark speaking of the day of Judgment, says of that day and hour,
no man knows it, neither the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son
himself, but only the Father. In reading this no man sees the doubt. Likewise
S. Hier. received some questions of Algasia and Hedibia about the reading of
the Scriptures, and the first is, why did John in prison, sent to Christ and
demanded, saying, art thou he that shall come, or shall we look for an other?
who before had pointed him saying, behold the la^be of God etc. How comes he
now to ask and dout of him? Hedibia ad Hier. Matthew. 28. John. 20.
4.5.

How agrees this, that Matthew says, that Mary Magdalen fell down at the
feet of Christ, after his resurrection, and held his feet, and S. John says
the contrary, that he forbad her to touch him, John. 20.

Lykwyse S. Mark says, Matthew. 16. John. 20.
that the two Maryes, in the morning, in the first day of the sabaoths they
came to the sepulcher, when the Son was ryse^, and S. John says the
contrary, that they came when it was dark.

Lykwyse in the resurrection, Matthew. 28. John. 20. Marc. 16.
there are a great number of apparent contrarieties, as, the time of the
resurrection: of the appearance of the Angels in the Sepulcher, their number,
and place.

Moreover that Christ breathing on his Apostles said, receive ye the holy
Ghost. Now if he gave, them the holy Ghost before his Ascension, what needs
he to send them the holy Ghost, after his ascension, seeing they had received
the holy Ghost already? Hidib. quaest. 9

Likewise S. Paul says, Romans 3. We think a man to be justified by faith
without the works of the law. And contrariwyse S. James cap. 2. says, what
avails it though a man say, he has faith, if he have no works, can his
faith save him, for without works faith is dead?

Moreover it is said Romans 5. That faith was reckned to Abraham for
righteousness. And contrariwyse S. Iac. 2. says that Abraham our Father was
justified by works.

Likewise S. Paul Romans 10. declaring the reiection of the Jews, and vocation
of the Gentiles, alleges the Prophet Isai, saying, I am found of them that
sought me not, and manifested to them that asked not for me: but unto Israel,
all the day long I have streached forth my hands, unto a people that belieueth
me not: but speaks against me. And after this he says: has God cast away
his people? God forbid: if the Casting away of the^, be the reconciliation of
the world. Have they so offended and stumbled that they should fall? he
answers: saying: God forbid. And yet after this, he arguments the contrary,
saying, because of unbelief they are broken and cast away. I pray you is this
place by reading the plain text, easily understood? How opposite is the
Apostle to the readers judgment?

Lykwyse about predestination Romans 9. where he says that it lies not in the
will of man, neither in the running of man, but in the mercy of God. Again the
Apostle is contrary to himself. Romans 7. saying, will is present with me.

Moreover in the first Epistle Timoth. cap. 2. it is said, that God will have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth: If God so
wills, who can gainstand his will? why then do so many perish amongst
Christians, and others remain in infidility?

Likewise the Apostle Romans 9. wished to be accursed for his brethren the
Jews, and yet he says, that nothing could separate him from the love of
Christ Roman. 8. what may be gathered of these words, but that he loved the
Jews better then Christ? Algasia ad Hier. q 9.

Likewise S Paul cor. 15. says, when al things are subdued under him, then
shall the son also himself be subject unto him, that put all things under
him, that God may be all in all, this place fits well Calvin, with the Arians,
to make Christ inferior to his Father.

Lykwyse the Apostle says Coll. 1. that he does fulfill, that lacked of
Christ's sufferings, in his body. This place seems to make the passion of
Christ insufficient, if we understand it according to the letter.

Likewise to the Hebrews 6. saying it is impossible that those who once are
illuminated and have Gusted the Heavenly gift, and are made participant of the
holy spirit, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the joys of the
world to come, if they fall away, The Scripture is of difficill understanding.
should be renewed again by penance.

Which in cap. 10. For sinning willingly after the receipt of the knowledge of
verity, there is not left now for sin any sacrifyce, but a terrible
expectation of indgement and burning fire. If these places were not favorably
interpreted by the literal sense, no man can be saved; that if a man sin
after he is Christened, and has received the gifts of God, that after, he
cannot be reconciled with penance; and by this all hope of mercy for remission
of sins, is taken away, which argument was the cause of Nouatus heresy.

Moreover S. Hier. ad Algas quest. 7. says, what was the Apostles meaning,
What wonderful heresies has risen of the Scripture.
that scharcely will any man die, for the righteous man: peradventure for a good
man, durst a man die? The words seems to be plain and easy of understanding,
and yet notwithstanding for lack of knowledge, two great Heresies arose of this
sentence. For Marcion by this defended, that there were two Gods: one just:
creator of Heaven and earth, and author of the Law and Prophets. The other a
good God, the God of the Gospel and Apostles, whose son is Christ For the
just God few or none have dyed, for the good God innumerable martyrs, have
dyed, thus Marcion.

Likewise Arius was in the contrary opinion, that Christ was the just God, by
this argument ps. 71. Give the King thy Judgments, o God, and thy righteousness
to the Kings Son. And the other good God, he calls the Father, and God of
Heaven, by reason by the Evangelist Luc. 18. why call you me good, seeing there
is none good, but God the Father. All these being well considered, is the
Scripture easy of understanding? Think with your selves, and judge equally, and
if so be, why have your chief Rabbines written, so many prolix commentaries on
the Scripture, and chiefly on the words of Christ's institution, which are so
plain, and clear in themselves, and yet there has risen above two hundrith
diverse opinions, to interpret them. For the words of a testament ought to be
plain, without obscurity, ambiguity, doubt, or equivocation, as the nature and
condition of a testament requyres. Therefore judicious Reader, observe
diligently, what facility is in the whole Scripture, when in one word, there is
above two hundrith explications: they go about to give you the light, of Gods
word, whyll they infer darkness, and shut up the verity from you, they will
have you understand the hid misteryes of God, by reading, and yet they will be
interpreters of the meaning of it, and not deliver it according to the spirit
of God, and his Church, but according to the revelation of there privy spirit,
as Call. l. ^ inst. c. 7. 2. who says, the obscurity, and hard places of the
Scripture, in their sense, and understanding, is no more difficill to judge
them, then to judge the colors of things blake, and white, swet and bitter
which of the spirit, and sense, are judged. So that the reading of the
Scripture in a vulgar tongue, gives occasion to subvert the faith of Christ,
and gives place to every Heresy, and to make it a storehouse of each
dogmaticall opinion, as Luth. postilla. dom. post. pent. There is no heresy
howsoever evil, or gross it be, which will not defend it self, by the
Scriptures. Lykwyse Tert. lib. de praesc. the Scripture says he, is the book
of Heretics: not of it self, but occasionally.

OBJECTION.
THE Scripture is the food of the soul, therefore the faithful are not to be
deprived of it, by interdiction not to read the Scriptures.

ANSWER.
IT is true, the Scriptures are the food of the soul, but this food is to be
eaten, by the mouth of the Pastors and teachers of the Church as Mal. 2. v. 7.
the lyps of the Priests keep wisdom, and they shall ask the law at his
mouth, and not of the reading of the Scriptures, which rashness S. Hier. epist.
103. reprehendes, that every one will challenge Scripture: this the chatting old
wife, this the doting aged, this the babbling sophister, this every one presumes
to teach before he learn. And likewise Tert. de Prasc. says, all are swelled
up, and all do profess knowledge: yea even very heretical women, how male
pert and bold they are to teach, and dispute in Scriptures? therefore to avoid
these absurdities, it is not lawful to read the Scriptures.

OBJECTION.
CHrist gave thanks to his Father that he had hid these things, from the wise,
and prudent, and had revealed them to babes Matthew. 11. which does manifest the
greater ostentation of Gods divine righteousness, mercy, and light of the
Gospel: therefore the Scripture is no less commended to the unlearned of
spiritual understanding, then to the judgment of the prudent and wise: but
the Papists do interdict the people this knowledge in reading the word of God,
in remitting them to the Doctores of their universities.

ANSWER.
I Admit the antecedent, and deny the subseque^t; for by little ones is not
understood, the unlearned people, but the humble, and meke, that is, not puffed
up with vain science, such were the Apostles, and Disciples, fishers, who
altogether were not unlearned, in that whole three years, they were conversant
with Christ, the Master of verity, who by his divine doctrine, illuminated
their mynds and understanding, to have knowledge of the Scriptures. But such
little ones, were not old-doting-foles, prating-old-wyfes, Barbers, Smythes
etc. who having always false passadges, search not the understanding of them,
but prate, babble, and read them in their shopps, esteeming more of their own
judgment, then all the Doctors, and universities in the world.

OBJECTION.
THE Scripture is the book of the faithful. Therefore it is to be read, and
is plain to every man's mind and understanding.

ANSWER.
I Grant it is: but not to be expounded of all, because S. Ambrose calls it
the Priests book, neither was it without a cause, that the books of the old
Testament were most surely kept, in the Temple, by the Priests as relates S.
Aug. lib. 16. de cruit. cap. 13. And therefore the Priests books, are not
books for the vulgar people.

OBJECTION.
THEY shall be all taught of God Ioa. 6. v. 45. Therefore there is no need of any
other Doctor, for the people, then the Scripture.

ANSWER.
I Deny the consequent, for it is not there signified, that all people shall
understand all Scriptures (without any external Doctors) of God, by his
inspiration as they dream, but he says, all shall be taught of God, in the last
times, which doctrine is fulfilled by Christ, and after him, of the holy Ghost,
in pouring in his Pastores of the Church true faith So that this doctrine of
Christ, and true faith, is publicly denounced by the Catholic Church,
whereby every one may be taught in the knowledge of God, and not by naked
reading of the Scripture. For the assumption makes against themselves. To what
end are ministers, and preichers admitted amongst the Protestants, if all men
by reading the Bible, may be sufficiently taught in the knowledge of God? of
God by inward inspiration, and of his own reading, as well as by their
preaching.

OBJECTION.
THe Scripture is the Key of knowledge, but this Key ought to be known to all,
Ergo. and the Scripture.

ANSWER.
Origin lib. 4. de princ. cap. 2. says, that the inter pretatio^ of the
church is the key of knowledge, drawn from the self same Scriptures, but the
Scripture it self is not the Key of knowledge, because the Scripture cannot
warrant it self, withour the authority of the Church, and this authority and
spiritual interpretation of the Church, is the spiritual Key of knowledge,
and not the reading of Scripture.

OBJECTION.
THe reading of the Scripture brings consolation of the spirit to the people:
therefore it is good and necessary to be read, of the vulgar for consolations
cause.

ANSWER.
IT is true, (but not to the purpose) for there are many other things, which
give consolation to the spirit, as the expositions of the Scripture, Sermons,
Meditation, and receiving of the Sacraments, and not the naked reading of the
Bible. Otherwise if it be of necessity, how shall the poor, miscrable, and
idiots, who can not read, have any consolation, for the word of God consists
not only in external sound, but in the true sense, and understanding?

OBJECTION.
CHrist commanded the Jews to search the Scriptures John. 5. verse. 39. And the
same likewise is commanded to Christians; to try the doctrine of faith,
according to the rule of scripture, and that they may judge of his
interpretation.

ANSWER.
THe word search, both in Latin and Greek, may be in the indicative, and
imperative mood; if it be in the indicative, as D. Stapelto^ says, the sense
is, you diligently inquyre the Scriptures, and yet will not believe, that there
you do find of me, and these were the books of the old Testament, for there
were none other then writie^. If it be in the imperative, Christ has not here
spoken to the vulgar sort, but to the Scrybes, Psiests, Levites, and
Pharisees, with whom was the Key of knowledge, who had their daily conversation
in the Scriptures the which for probability Herod affirms, whill he assembled
the Scrybs, Matt. 2. to inquyre of them, where Christ should be borne.

OBJECTION.
THe Beronenses do search the Scriptures, after the preaching of S. Paul, and
are commended, that they bestowed themselves daily, in searching the
Scriptures, concerning those things which were affirmed by Paul and Silas.
Therefore it is necessary to read the Scriptures.

ANSWER.
THe Beronenses search the Scriptures after the preaching of the Apostles, not
as doubting of the word, but diligently attending, least with new doctrines
contrary to ye scriptur they might also be deceived; for as yet the Beronenses
had not made profession of Christ name, neither were they bound to credit the
Apostles, except their doctrine had been proved with miracles, or else by
testimony of Scripture. But far other ways the reformed use to do, who will
mix their private interpretation with the Scripture, repugnant to the
Scripture, and Church, in raising new opinions, and renewing old damned
Heresies.

OBJECTION.
LVther de ser. Arbit. Teaches, and constantly affirms, that the Scriptures in
themselves are easy of understanding, and need no interpretor, yea all men are
taught of God, and his spirit, and need not to be taught of any other.
Therefore as they are facill in understanding, so should they be common to all
men, without interdiction.

ANSWER.
WHere difficulties are, it is not plain, neither facill to all men: but the
Scripture is full of difficulties, for it is the storehouse of Gods Secrets
Ergo. Moreover the disciples, hearing Christ disputing about the mystery of
his body, And because they were his disciples, should have better digested
Christ's words, the^ the people, who notwithstanding grossly said* how can he
give his flesh to be eaten? this is a hard saying, so that neither the Jews
nor his disciples, who should exceed others, did attain to the understanding
of Christ's words as notes Chrysostom. in c. 6. John. What the^ is this word hard,
and a saying not easy of understanding, which was full of dread, that their
imbecillitie could not bear it etc. For if the Scriptures were easy, it was no
great benefit that Christ did to his Apostles, in opening their wits, that
they might understand the Scriptures: neither was it any great matter, that he
hid to his two Disciples, going to Emaus, unto whom, beginning at Moses, and
the Prophets, he interpreted in all Scriptures, which were written of him, for
this action of Christ, argues difficulties, otherwise why did he labor to
much, to make them understand them?

The Enuch of the Queen of Candy, reading the Scriptures, confesses that he
understood them not: and yet a man of good experience. To this effect Phil^p is
moved of the holy Ghost, to join him to his chariot, who hard him read I say
ye prophet, and asking him, if he understood what he read: he answered: how can
I, except I had a guy de? Wherefore when Philip was with him in his chariot,
and the Scripture was read the Enuch asked him, saying I pray thee, of whom
speaks the Prophet, of himself, or some other man? Then Philip opened his
mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. For the
work of the holy Ghost in placing Philip to him, had been in vain, if there
had not been difficulty in the Scripture, and if this man could not understand
without a guide, for all his experience, no more can other men do.

Moreover when Christ spoke of his passion, and resurrection, his Apostles
understood him not, saying, after a little while, and ye shall not see me, and
again after a while and you shall see me, for Igoe to the Father. Joan. 16. If
the lively voice of Christ was obscure, and dark to the Apostles, so the same
is now being written in dead letters; for the lively voice of Christ, is of
greater force, then the letter.

Likewise S. Paul numbering the Gifts of the holy Ghost 1. Cor. 12. to one,
says he, is given the utterance of wisdom: and to another the gift of
knowledge: to another the gift of faith; to another the gift of healling: to
another the gift of miracles: to another the gift of prophecy: to another the
gift of judgment to discern spirits: to another the gift of tongues: to
another the interpretation of tongues, and all these things works one, and he
self same spirit, distributing to every man, severally as he will* Therefore
seeing every one has not the gift of utterance, of knowledge; of Prophesying
etc. and consequently also no more understanding of the Scriptures. And as
these gifts are not common to all men, even so the understanding of the
Scriptures is not easy to al men. S. Paul proves this well by the order and
disposition of a natural body, from which he deduces an argument, to prove an
order in the mystical body, the Church: 1. Cor. 12. You are, says he, the
body of Christ, and members of his body: and therefore God has ordained in the
Church, first Apostles: next Prophets: thirdly Teachers: fourthly the^ that do
miracles: fifthly the gifts of healling etc. For if the Scripture be easy of
understanding, then these gifts are superfluous: for where every one
understands, there needs no Apostle, Prophet, Teacher etc. And if every man
understand, then every one has all these gifts; contrary to the Apostles
meaning; who says, all be not Prophets, and Teachers etc.

Moreover S. Hier. in praef sup. Ezech. says, that the Jews might not read
the books of Genesis before they ere thirthy years of age, but the Protestants
(as new-hatched chike^s pipes) out of their mothers belly, pratle of the
Scriptures, as experience teaches in Scotland, it will not serve the Puritan
ministers, to have long grace, but also the chapter must be read with his
Gloss, after the spirit. and Iok: Genny: and Mady: etc. must gather, and
repeat long notes, old, and young must do the same, otherwise they have not
the spirit, and are weak in the faith, and so play the hobly-horse in the
Scriptures.

QVAESTIO. XVI. Of the adulterating of the Bible.
WHerefore do the Papists condemn our reformed Bybles. John Wigand lib de
bonis, and malis, Germ. Brent. Kemn. Cent. Magdeburg.

ANSWER.
THe reason is just, on the Catholic part, for each on of the sectaries
condemn on another Bible, therefore justly they may be condemned of the
Catholics. Each Heretic condemns one another Bible for evil translation.
For Luther co^demnes the Zwinglians, and contrariwyse the Zuinglians, the
Lutherans, likewise Beza Castalion, and likewise Castalion, Beza etc. Lykwyse
did not King Henry the 8 condemn his 1. traslatio^, and made a new tra^slatio^
and published it by authority of Parlame^t, as witnesses Calu. Turc. lib. 4.
cap. 7. Wherefore not unjustly are they condemned of us Catholics: from whom
your Grandfather Lvther had received the true coppies, who has corrupted
them, in mutilating, and adulterating the whole text from his original. It is
the Protestants reformation to deny many books in the Scriptur.
For what reformation is it to take away from the Canon of Scriptures, To bias:
Judith, the book of wisdom, Ecclesiastes, and the Machabies, which books
were received for Canon Scripture of the famous and ancient Counsels as
Carthage, Florence, and Trent. Of which sacred books Innocent the 1 makes
mention of the^ for Canon Scripture in epist ad exuperant. Likewise Gelatius in
his counsel of seue^ty Bishops. Lykwise the Fathers who cite these books for
divine scripture, as at lenght are rehearsed a Sixth Senens. lib 8. S.
Bibliothecae. If this be your reformation let the world be judge, to blot out S
James epistle, calling it a straw-epistle, which contrariwise is received of
the Caluinists. Lykwyse to call in doubt the second epistle of S. Peter, with
the first epistle. and the second of S. John, Jude, and the Apocalypse. which
places were ever in authority with the Greeks and Latins. Likewise in adding
to the Scripture they think no sin, for when S. Paul Romans 3. v. 22. says,
that the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, is unto all, and
upon all that believe, the reformed traslatio^, add, this word (only) as it
were that by only faith the Christian righteousness falls to us,: to exclude all
good works. Likewise is it an honest translation of the Zuinglians in Turingne
to change the words of Christ. Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. cor. 11. where
it is said (This is my Body: and this is my Blood,) to change it and say, this
signifies my body and blood* For which causes of trumpery, the Heretics
cannot suffer the Roman Catholic Bybles, and therefore justly may the
Catholics say to the^ justly with S. Aug. l. 4. de Symb. c. 10. All
co^gregations, and heresies, is a concubine, and an ^^hoore, who cannot blushe.
and be ashamed, as experience teaches Did not Luther translate the new
testament in the German tongue, but so wicked, and pernicious, corrupt, and
erroneous, that it ministered sedition, mutination, and rebellion of the people
against the higher powers. By this simple women, took on them, the reading of
the Scripture, and their notes, with such fervor of the spirit, with contempt
of all learned men, to preach and exhort publickely, contrary to the inhibition
of S. Paul, who ought to keep silence, and hold their peace, where men are. In
the same manner did not the sighing-puritane-sisters of Edin brough, and other
cities in Scotland after this Ghospelling conversation, at four a clock when
they were rypest of understanding, take upon the^, to read the Scriptures? I
hope it falls to them, by ignorance, and blindness of mind, so long as they read
that bible babble, as was prophesyed of Peters-wyfe, who will never mend, but
ever grow worse, and worse. For are not their Rabbis in that same conformity
with the old Heretics, about the Scripture, who were condemned of the ancient
Fathers, for depraueing the Scriptures, and denying of sundry books, as the
Aebionits, who denied S. Paul epistles, as witness S. Iren. l. 1 cap 26. and S.
Epiph. haeres 3? Likewise was not the Manicheans damned, for denying the
Gospel of S M^tthew, as witness S. Aug. lib. 33. contra. Faust. cap. 3 and 7.?
Likewise the Alogians, were condemned for the denying of S John's Evangelist,
and his Apocalypse, S. Aug Haer. 30 Likewise the Marcionists, and Arians for
denying the Epistle to the Hebrews, to be S. Paul's, as witness Tertul. de
praesc. Iten. lib. 1. cap. 29. Epiph. Haer. 41. S. Hier. in praef. in epist. ad
Tit. Or the same opinion is the modern Rabbis, with the old Heretics,
concerning the Scripture, to repudiat, and reject the books of Moses, here
upon is Luthers doctrine Sermon. de Moyse, saying, let not Moses be thrust on
us, we in the new testament, will neither regard, nor hear him. Again idem,
Luther calls the old testament, no word of God, belonging to Christians for
Moses appertains, nothing to us. Again in his book de december praec and lib.
2. cont. Rusticos. Thou seditious preacher affirms, says he, that the old
Testament is to be observed: preacher, I say, not to me, but to the Jews,
preach thy Moses: not a title or Jot of Moses belongs to us: yea not the
law concerns us, but the Gospel, yea not the ten commandments belongs to
us. Likewise Luther Sermon. de Phar. and Publ and in proaem. noui testam Not
unfitly, did I admonish the reader, in my prologue of the new testament, that
they should abolish this opinion to be four Ghospells, for I have said that the
Gospel of Saint John, was most acceptable and true. Likewise he says, in
Assert. in prologo: the bible buble-bable together with the Scripture, is
nothing but fables. Likewise Ochinus denies the whole new testament. Jacob.
Carrion. in Chron. an 1556. page 151 printed at Basil. And lykwyse Ochin. lib.
2. dial. page 154. 155. 156. says, that we ought to believe no more, the^ the
S^^. of the old testament: to him subscrybeth Call taxing the Evangelists, and
Apostles, lib 4. inst. cap. 8. 4. saying, if they be Apostles, let the^ not
babble what they lift. Likewise Calu. in John. cap. 19. v. 23.24. says, that
the Evangelists wrest allegations, and depart from the right meaning of them:
in cap. 2. Matthew. v. 18. and in 3. Matthew. v. 13 and in 5. cap. Matthew. v. 17.
Calvin accuses them to speak a bruptly, many sentences in their wrytings, and
to term things improperly, and to use many improper words. Whereupon Calvin
said, that he could never be persuaded, that the sixth chapter of S. John's
Evangelist was ever his. To this effect is not these books called Apochrypha,
in summa, the translation of the Bible in the vulgar tongue, is the cause of a
thousand errors, for says not Broughton in his advertisement to the counsel
of the corruptions of the Bible an. 1604. That the whole original text of the
new Testament, was perverted in above 8. hundrith and 8. places: and that it
was nothing inferior to the Turkish Alcaron. Likewise in Hampton conference
page 45 etc. The Inglish Bybles are evil translated altogether. And them of
Geneua the worst of all, they contain partial untruths, and are full of
seditious notes, to much intending to mutiny, and rebellion, allowing
dissobedience to Kings, and full of taxing of Kings.

OBJECTION.
LOng since of some Fathers, some books of the Scripture were put in doubt, as
Judith, Tobie, Wisdom, and the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second of S. Peter,
Jude, Apocalypse etc. Therefore with us also it is lawful to doubt of them.

ANSWER.
THe sequel is nothing for albeit Thomas did once doubt of the resurrection of
Christ: it follows not, that he should ever doubt, and albeit there was no
book of Scripture, which was not walled with the Apostolical authority and
tradition: yet-notwithstanding in the beginning of the Church were suspected,
and doubted, while by little and little by inspiration of the holy spirit, things
were made more clear, so that these books which before have been doubted of,
have now of the universal Church abtayned divine authority, and so
consequentely they are no more to be doubted.

OBJECTION.
THe Counsel of Laodice omits, and leans out those books of the old
Testament, because they were not in the Canon of the Hebrews ergo what the
counsel has not acknowledged, neither we acknowledge for cannon Scripture.

ANSWER.
IDeny the consequence, for the Fathers in that Counsel, have not rejected
these books, as not holy, neither canonical, but they have not numerated them,
amongst those books which are read in the Church, because of the converted
Jews, who almost lived Iudaizing, of whom Phrygia was full, from the time of
the Apostles, and therefore the holy Bishops in that counsel, would not attempt
to read those books in the Church, which they had not in the Canon of the
Hebrwes. Secondly if no book be Canonical, but these which are in the Canon of
the Hebrews, the new Tastament shall be ieiected, for it is not in their Canon.

OBIECAION.
GRegorius lib. 19. Mor. cap. 17. as concerning these books of the Machabees,
we do not speak uncivilly, if by beside the canonical books, which are made
for the edification of the Church, we shall produce any testimonies, Ergo these
books are not canonical.

ANSWER.
HE denies not these books to be holy, which are rehearsed in the Canon of the
Church; seeing it could not be hid, and unknown to the holy man of God, that
200. years before, blessed Innocent Pope, and the counsel of Carthage, had
spoken of the Machabees as canonical Scripture. But he speaks of the Canon
of the Hebrwes, in which these books were not nombred, neither were they in
like authority with the Jews, whih after the universal Church did authorize
by the holy Ghost, for authentical Scripture: upon which authority, S. Austen
feared not to confirm, the prayer for the dead, as holy Canonical Scripture
with the Church.

OBJECTION.
LOng since, of many it was doubted of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second
of S Peter. the last of Daniel etc. Therefore for this doubt, they are not to
be adjudged Heretics, who now either reject them, or put them in doubt.

ANSWER.
THe consequent is denied, because the like raeson should follow in the like
doubt, whether they are to be baptized again, whom Heretics have baptized;
which S. Cyprian with some others, have thought meet to be don. And whether the
Moysaicall law is to be observed of Christians; yea also who believed of the
Gen tils, whereupon, the counsel of Jerusalem was moved about these Heresies.
Lykwyse whether the grace of the Euagely did appertayn to the Ge^tils, or to
the Jews only, as is disputed in the Act. Apost. cap. 11 For albeit the Church
retain all times, the same one faith, yet notwithstanding by progress of
time, and occasions, as the church increases in her number, so things
pertinent to faith, may be amplifyed, and made more ample, then it was in the
beginning. For the Church at no time ever received, for an opinion of Faith,
that which before she had once rejected. Now those books once censured, and
approved by the Church, it is not lawful, more to doubt of them, and are in as
great authority and veneration, as the others books of Scriptures be, for
example. For as a piece of gold in the beginning is suspected to be false, and
conterfeyt yet if afterward it be tried by the touchstone of the Goldsmyth,
and found sufficient, and approved of the Magistrate, is received of the whole
people, and goes current, as other quoyne, and is no less worth, then any
other peace of gould which was never suspect, even so these books of Scripture
etc.

QVAESTIO. XVII. Of Traditions.
WHerefore are the Papists so simple, as to believe some things, which are not
expressly contained in the Scriptures: Which they call traditions? Calu. lib 4.
inst cap. 8. 8. Brent. in prolog. Kemnit. in exam. Conc. Trident.

ANSWER.
IT may be demanded in like manner, wherefore Calvin lib 4. inst. cap. 3.. 19.
Allows and commendes traditions, for in the ordination of the ministers of
the Church, he commandes as a precept, the imposition of hands, yet
notwithstanding seeing there is no commandment extant in the Scripture, he
himself protestes it to be necessary, as his own words record. Albeit says
he, there is no commandment extant for the imposition of hands, yet we do
see it to be in perpetual use from the Apostles, and therefore that same
diligent observation of theirs, ought to be to us as a commandment. So that
Calvin, who before denied traditions, does allow of them as necessary in the
ordination of the ministry; whom for entrance we see led with the spirit of
co^tradictio^. For I say, that not only these things which plainly are
contained in the Scripture, are to be observed, but also many traditions, and
observations which have flowed, and comed from Christ, and his Apostles, which
are to be retained necessary, as it were in a manner the written word it self.
Because it is found in the Scriptures, Christ, and his Apostles to have
delivered many things, which are not written. For in the 16 of S. John. Christ
says I have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. In which
words he signifies, that many things are necessary and needful, to be known
to the Apostles: which things out of doubt, he made known when he appeared to
them the forty days, speaking of the Kingdom of God, his Church, and of the
government of the Kingdom of grace, and what the Apostles have heard, out of
doubt they have delivered to the Church, for her cause, these were communicated
of our Lord to them, which, although they be not expressed in the Scriptures,
yet by tradition are delivered. Of which S. Paul speaking to the These. epist.
2. cap. 2 v. 14. stand, and hold fast, says he, the traditions which you have
received, whether by word, or by our Epistle, that is to say, the doctrine
delivered to you, whether by the preaching viua voce, or by an epistle written
to you. Which place these venerable fathers expoundes of traditions as S.
Basil. lib. de S. S. Chry. Oecom. Theoph. and S. Aug. epist. 174. to that now,
says he, which I have rehearsed it fall so, that Homousion: is not found in the
written word, and yet as an article of faith the word is defended.

Likewise the Father is called unbegotten, which is not read in the Scriptures.
The Symbol of the Apostles is by tradition, and not by the written word.

Likewise the observance of Sondy, for the Saboath, the baptizing of infantes,
^he receiving of the Sacrament fasting; And S Luke acknowledges that he has
received by tradition, what he has written in his Euangely. For if you reject
traditions, why not also the whole written Scripture? by what reason is there
only four Evangelists, and no more? And wherefore are they received that never
saw Christ, and these Evangelists rejected, who did see, hear, and were
conversant with him, as Nicodem, S. Thomas, Thaddeus, S. Peter, Bartholomewe,
and others, who have wrytren Euangelyes, and yet their written Euangelyes are
rejected, and these other four are received, who never did see Christ; And
with us, you believe the^, which are not expressed by any written word, but
only believed to be true Evangelists, by tradition. What can be more said for
verification of the truth, then the words of the Apostle? 2. These. cap. 2. v.
14. Which words, all tend for the commendation of our belief. Of which S
Basil. l. de S. S. cap. 29. I account it Apostolical, to continue, and believe
firmly the unwritten word. To whom all the Fathers are conformable. For when
the old Heretics, as Gnostes, Marcion, Cerdone, Arius, Eunomius, Aerius,
Nestorius, etc. opposed themselves against traditions, disdayning, and denying
them, were with the whole consent of the ancient Fathers condemned as
Heretics, as witness Iraen. lib. 3. Tert. de praescript. S. Basil. lib. de S.
S. cap. 27. Epiph. Haer. 53. S. Aug. lib. 5. cont. Maxim. Now brother Asill,
what can be denied against traditions, what argument have you for your defense,
for you accept no Scripture as canonical, ergo you must prove Scripture by
tradition; and the other Scripture which you reject, is named apochrypha, and
in so doing you must allow tradition, and so on every side tradition conuinceth
you, and yet ye will be oppugners, and denyers of tradition? I demand this: if
you were to convince any man of Heresy, for denying the Canon of Scripture,
what argument would you use to convince him? As for example: Luther in the
Preface of the new testament, decreed to reject the epistle of S. James, for
Apochripha, to convince him of this error, it cannot be done by the Scripture,
neither of himself, because he is judge in his own cause, neither is he to be
believed by the revelation of his private spirit, for all do make for
confirmation of his opinion, theref^re to convince him rightly they must have
recourse to the tradition of the Church, as says S. Aug. Sermon. 191. de temp.
We receive the new, and old testament, in the number of books, the which by
authority of the Catholic Church, is delivered to us. Moreover, this other
argument is to be observed, for the Church, from the beginning of the world,
till Moses, two thousand years, was without Scripture, only ruled by
traditions, and rites of the sacrifice. In the new testame^nt Christ has
written nothing, neither commanded to write, but well he says Marc. 16. verse.
15. Preach you the Euangely to all creatures, in which mission, no precept is
given of writing, for salvation depends upon the word of God, and not upon
books, neither the written Scripture, nor revelation or prophecy etc. For that
cause Iraen. lib. 3. cap. 4. writes, that some nations in his time, had the
faith of Christ, and yet no Scripture. Where is it found in the Scripture to
reject traditions? But this is the cause why you withstand all traditions, for
these being banished, easily you may pervert, and gloss the Scriptures, and
apply them to your own minds, which traditions of the holy Church, stand out
against you, for the clearing of the verity, and will not suffer the Scriptures
to be corrupted, with your fancies; which corrupt interpretations, permitted,
and suffered, we shall see you follow traditions, and consequently your own
inventions, to be for holy Scripture, for the first part is probable, for
Calvin himself approves the traditions of the Jews, commenting in the 104
Psalm. sec;. 18. Many things remained amongst "them by successiue tradition,
which were godly, and necessary for them, of the which, no mention is made in
the Scriptures. Out of which place it follows, that Calvin willingly would
Iudaize, and as concerning the following of their own senses, in rejecting the
traditions of the holy Ghost, to erect their own traditions, contrary to the
written word, I would most willingly be satiefyed by what reason either
spiritual or moral, why you Puritans uphold, and set up traditions; as the
pillar of repentance denigrate, and made black, and sinners to stand there, to
the spectacle of the whole Church, with the showing of their heads, at the
cross, bound with iron chains, in time of Market, your sackcloth at the
Church door, and carting of poor women through the city, of whom have you
learned to punish fornicators by this ignominious punishment. Others by the
purse, and to pardon some, who are fatt, and to execute rigor upon the poor?
From whence have you received that tradition in your prayers, to hold your
noses in others tails, and to ly groaning on the ground, after the manner of
the Jews? From whence is that tradition, to fast on sondayes, and feast on
frydayes, and to work on Christmas day, and other Saints days, and to
observe monday [suter sonday] for holy day? These and a thousand more are the
Puritanes traditions, of their own invention, without any Scripture or
vvritte^ word, and yet not vvithstanding they will abolishe, and condemn all
traditions, and yet will set up, and authorize traditions, of their own
authority, contrary to the law of God, and all Scripture, and tradition of any
age before passed.

OBJECTION.
THe Lord, says Deuteronomy. 12. verse. 32. What I command thee, do thou that unto the
Lord only, neither shall thou add any thing, neither diminish. Therefore
traditions are superfluous, and in vain.

ANSWER.
IF this argument were available, neither the Prophets, nor the Apostles ought
to have written any thing after Moses, for what the Prophets have written,
are not contained in Moses, neither what the Evangelists and Apostles have
written, are contayeed in the old testament; but generally and implicit. In
like sort traditions are contained in the Scripture implicit, when Christ
said Luc. 10 v. 16. Who hears you, hears me. Therefore the sense of these
words, which says, (that thou shall add nothing nor diminish) is, that thou
shall add nothing repugnant unto those things which are commanded in the
Scripture. In this same sense says S. Paul Gal. 1. v. 8. Whether we, or an
Angel from Heaven euangelise to you, otherwise then that, which we have
euangelized, let him be accursed. For that praeposition (praeter) is as much to
say as contrary, for otherways should he be contrary to himself, who added
many things, as his epistles witness. And likewise S. John after he had written
the Apocalypse, and Euangely, who threateneth the same curse, should fall in the
same sentence^, in adding to his Epistles, in which are many precepts, and
traditions which are not contained in the Apocalypse and Euangely etc.

OBJECTION.
THE Scripture is a Rule to believe, therefore it ought to contain all things,
which are to be believed.

ANSWER.
THe Scripture is a Rule to believe, but not adequat and a right Rule, because
the right Rule, is the word of God, whether written, or delivered by Tradition.

OBJECTION.
THese things are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Son of God:
and that believing you may have life in his name. But all things written, serve
to believe in Christ, therefore all belief is written.

ANSWER.
Saint Paul says, that, Abel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Isac, Jacob, Heb. 11. had
undoubtedly true faith, yet they had no Scripture written. Again the primitive
Church, at least ten years after Christ, had no Scripture written; who will
say but that they had true faith? Again these are not contained in the written
word, to wit, the consubstantiality of the Trinity, the procession of the holy
Ghost, the virginity of the most blessed Virgin Mary, the baptising of
children, and the not rebaptising of them, who are baptized of Heretics, the
breaking of the Sabbath, and keeping of Sunday, the observing of Easter, the
receiving of the Sacraments fasting, the eating of blood, and strangled meares
prohibeted in the Law, and Eua^gely Act. 15 But I would know of the
Protesta^tes, what Scripture they have for women to singe Psalms, and to
gloss on the Scriptures, in the Church, at home, and in the tauernes? What
Scripture have you for your pillary, cross, steeple, repentance seat, carting,
and showing of poor women, for the sin of fornication, for these things you
have no Scripture, but must build upon traditions, either true or false?

QVAESTIO. XVIII. Of the certitude of Hope.
WHerefore do the Papists deny that our Hope is with certitude, seeing it is
written, that Hope makes us not ashamed, but brings with it certitude, and
confidence, Luth art. 10 11. Calvin. lib. 3. instit. cap 2.. 16.

ANSWER.
WHat certitude and assured hope, can the Protestants have in our Savior, if
they defend, and abide in the principal poincts of their Reformation? Whose
doctrine is concerning Christ himself, to wit, when he descended into the
Hell, that he was shaken with horrible torments, and grief of conscience, in
thinking on Gods wrath toward him, that he dispared of his eternal salvation,
as do the damned, and that God his Father had conspyred the destruction of the
son, which evidently may be read in Calu. lib. 2. inst. cap. 16. 11.12.

Likewise he says, that Christ refused to discharge the office of a mediator,
and in his sufferings had no more sufficiency then other men, and in his
prayer, did not appear a temperate moderation, and that he was tortored, with
doubtfulnes in his conscience, and astonished with the horror of Gods
malediction, and tormented with the fear of Hell, and eternal damnation, and
that he ceased to pray long to God, but burst out in a voice of desperation. In
this tenor is Brent. 2. part. Hom. sup. Luc. Hom. 54. and 65. Therefore what
assured Hope, have these men in Christ, who is worse reputed by them, then the
most miserable sinner that ever was borne, and adjudged equally miserable, with
the damned Devils in Hell? Again what confidence, and assured hope can they
have of God, whom they avouch, to be the author of sin, as witness Zu ing.
lib. de diu. prouid.? when we commit adultery, murder, and theft, it is Gods
work, as the mouer, author, and inforcer.

Likewise, Calvin says, that the thief does kill by Gods impulsion, and is often
constrained to offend. Et lib. 1. instit. cap. 18. Sins are committed, not
only by Gods permission, but by his will. Et ibidem cap. 16.17.18. he says,
all sins by whomsoever they are done, they are Gods gifts, and just works,
for iniquity is not fulfilled by will, and intention of man, but by the holy
Ghost; and that often times the will of God, is contrary to his commandments,
which he approves lib. de praedest. and provident The will of God, says he,
is the principal cause of the peruersity of men. And in his inst. lib. 2. cap.
4 that God suggesteth dishonest desires, with effectual decree, operation, and
will. This he proves more largely in his inst. lib. 3. cap. 23. That the
impious, and reprobate, do more fulfill the works of God, in their
iniquities, then their own works, hereupon he affirms that it was absolutely
ordained, and decreed, that Adam should sin, and consequently, he has
created the most part of the world, to be damned; by the absolute decree of his
will. Hereunto if credence should be given; what assured hope, and what
confidence can a sinner have, when it lies not in him, either to merit or
demerite, but absolutely does, whatsoever he does, by Gods instigation and
provocation?

Contrary to this, the Papists place their Christian Hope firm, and sure,
because on his part in whom we hope, it is most certain, that is to say, it
is most certain on Gods part, that there shall want nothing, for obtaining of
that, which we hope for. For this cause, hope is called assured and certain,
because it leanes to a most sure fondament, to wit, the Heavenly promises, and
help of God, by which assuredly, we are conducted to salvation, if secondly for
our part, we shall use diligence, to work with the same to our power, as is
said in the counsel of Trente sess. 6. cap. 13. where speaking of the gift of
perseuera^ce, it says, let no man promise to himself security, by absolute
certitude, and assurance, but in Gods help all are to be reposed, and with
firm hope vvorking our salvation. Where it is supposed, that it is in our
power in apart, that we fail not, or that we work not with his graces as
we should do. And as it is in the gift of perseverance, even so it is in the
hope of our salvation. For if truly and properly it were not in our power to
cooperat, and work with the divine power of God, we should have no more place
to hope in God, then if we wanted him, and that there were not a God. And
therefore our hope is sure, and confident in God, because he is omnipotent, and
faithful in his promises, as the ps. 144. v. 15 says, The Lord is faithful
in all his words, and holy in all his works, to wit what lies on Gods part,
for this cause consequently it follows, that our Lord vpholdes those that be
weak, and lifts up those that are fallen. Again ps. 145. it is said;
Blessed is he, that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God, which made the Heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that there
in is, who keeps faithfulness for ever.

Likewise Eccl, 2. v. 11. No man has hoped in the Lord, and is ashamed. For
God helps ever, so that the certitude of our hope, consists in this, that
it is assured on Gods part, for our salvation, because his grace is ready, if
we cooperate, and work therewith, and so rightly is understood, that saying of
the Apostle, that hope is not ashamed; and this hope which the Catholics
believe, is far discrepant, to the temerous presumption of the protestants,
who are so certainly persuaded, and assured, that they confide in themselves,
more then in God, and whatsoever thing they persuade, and assure themselves of,
God must be bound to follow their opinion. So that God shall not be God, but
each Protestant in his own imagination is God, and such is the Protestants
assured, and certain hope, which indeed is ashamed, and not the hope which the
Apostle commends, which they want altogether.

QVAESTIO. XIX. Of public and private prayers.
WHerefore do not the Papists in their sacrifice of the mass, and in
administratio of the Sacraments, and in all actions, both public and private,
use the vulgar tongue, which may be understood of the people, but the Latin
tongue, which our reformers call counterfeyt, and dissembled worship of God.
Luth. de form. Missandi. and Call. in catach.

ANSWER.
IN the time of Christ, there were three principal tongues, to wit, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, to this, the title of Christ cross bears witness Matt. 27.
Joan. 19. In which tongues, God every where was praised, Three principal
tongues sanctified of Christ in the Cross.
and in these languages chiefly divine service was done. To what end is this
question, seeing in the reformed books, and prayers, are observed diverse
words in a strange language that the people cannot understand, as* Amen,
Alleluia, Osanna, Eli-Eli-lamasachthani, Sabbath, which are Hebrew words.
Likewise in the Baptism of infa^tes, you pronu^ce agreek word which surpasses
the vulgar peoples understanding, if it were not for the long co^tinua^ce and
practice of it. Therefore it is expedient, yt divine public service be don in
the latin tongue, and not in the vulgar tongue of each country. First because
the universal Church approves this manner of prayer, The reasons wherefore
the latin tongue is used.
against whose practice to dispute, is most insolent madness, as witness S.
Augusten epist. 118. ad Ianuar. So that what is instituted of the whole Church,
for the public vtility of faith, it is no^t to be changed.

Secondly, because of the judgment of the people, who are naturally inclyned
to Heresy, and novelties, whilst in reading of the Scripture, and not
understanding it, they take occasion to hold opinions, against the doctrine of
faith, and the precepts of manners, least they should deryde, and sinistrously
interpret these things, which are religiously instituted; and albeit, many
things be put in ye vulgar tongue, as the psalms, and other parts of the
Scripture, notwithstanding the people cannot attain to the sense and meaning
of them, for even these who are expert in the Latin tongue, find difficulty
to understand the Scriptures, It is not needful that the people understand
what is song or said in the church.
except first they consult with commentaries, and holy Fathers of the Church.
Neither is it needful, that the vulgar people understand what is song, or is
celebrated in the Church, more then the people understood, what the heygh
Priest did in Sancta Sanctorum, Hebrew 9. Luke 2. For the Ecclesiastical
songs, are not instituted to instruct the people, in their understanding with
words, but it is instituted to awake and sturr up their minds, to the worship
of God, by swet Harmony, Reverence, Majesty, and solemn actions. What if
perchance it come to pass that either we travail in a strange country, or
that a stranger come where Religion is, if Gods service be not in a vulgar
language, as Latin is, how shall he understand, whether they serve God, or
mock him? how shall he that is ignorant say a men to thy benediction as the
Apostle says? Therefore public and private prayers in a strange tongue,
albeit they be not understood, of him that prays, yet are acceptable to God,
and have virtue to impetrate, and obtain blessings, because God and his
saints understand all tongues, which is probable, Prayers in the latin tongue
are acceptable to God.
for that common people, with the children cried Matthew. 21. v. 9. Osanna filio
David, which words neither the peoole, nor the children understood, and yet
Christ commendes and prayseth the children, neither reprehendeth he the cry of
the people. Whereupon Greg. hom. 20. in Joshua. speaking of a strange tongue,
says, If thou hear sometime to be read in thy ears, that thou understand
not, yet in the mean time, know thou, that thou have received vtility thereby,
in that the only hearing, is to thee, as it were a certain charm, to expel
the deadly poison, and damage evil spirits, who ly snares, and go about
beseygning Christian souls. Which grounds Calvin contradicts, who says in
his Catechism, to pray in an unknown tongue, it is to mock God, and perverse
hypocrisy. Contrary to this, who is of sound judgment, A similitude
conuinting Calvin.
will easily esteem him no hypocryte, and mocker, who offers a supplication,
in an unknown tongue, to the King, who is expert in the tongue, through daily
use, and yet unknown to the delyuerer. It is to be thought, that all nations
had a common tongue as Genesis 19. in which God was served, but confusion of
tongues being made, three special tongues, are separat, and institute for the
divine service of God, whereupon this custom follows, that in the
occidentall Churches the use of the latin tongue was ever with them, which was
a natural tongue to them, and althought it was not altogether common, to all
nations, for diverse nations, and tongues, were included in the occidentall
Church, and yet for divine service, this tongue is most frequently used. So
the Greek church, uses the Greek and chaldaick, and yet the Greek and
chaldaick is another tongue, different from the common tongue, which the people
uses in their meettings, but the others were used only amongst the learned,
and with the Priests, in divine service. For it was never a custom through the
universal world, that the use of the vulgar country tongue, should be admitted
in divine service, but that which is most common, universally to all nations,
Vt omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. And as concerning the reading and praying in
a vulgar national tongue, it is no perfection, to do so, for then the use of
the better tongue fails, as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, which were sanctified on
the cross of Christ. And as Latin is common to all, it is used much more,
specially it is common to the service of God, and seeing God requires the best
of every thing, to be offered to him, as sovereign Lord, and most loving
Father, who doubts but a learned, holy, and common tongue, is more
honorable, then a barbarous, profane, and private tongue is? And moreover, in
respect, of the whole body of the Church, with whom specially we co^municat, in
our service, and in prayers, that we may say all one thing, the vulgar tongues
are counted strange, and unknown, which strange tongues S. Paul does little
regard I. Cor. 14. and prefers the common tongues, which were delivered to
the first Christians, sanctified of Christ, and delivered by the Apostles, in
the East, and West parts of the world; not regarding the multitude of vulgar
tongues, which were used in particular provinces. For usually the Greek tongue,
was specially in the East, and the Latin in the West Church. For Christ being
on the Cross (from whom is the pattern of all prayers, and oblatio^s, who
knew right well, that the common people of the Jews could not understand him
(because the true Hebrew tongue was either lost, or much decayed in the common
speech, and every day, more and more failed, after the captivity of Babylon*)
did recyte the beginnig of the Psalm. 21. in Hebreu, my God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And did not either then, or any other time interpret it, in
a vulgar tongue. Therefore out of doubt, after his example, we may do the like
in these tongues, in our service, and prayers, which Priests, and clerks
understand, albeit the common people do not understand the same, for this good
aryseth to the whole Church, by the use of the latin tongue, to wit, learning
and devotion, whereas the Protestants having once had the Latin service, and
changing it into their particular vulgar tongue, have lost both learning and
devotion, for Amen, Alleluia, builded many Churches, Hospitalles, Bridges etc.
and augmented the devotion of the people: contrary wise, So be it has pulled
down the Churches etc. and banished devotion. So that falling from the Latin,
to the vulgar, they have fallen from the better to the Worse, and from unity
into heresy, and so to deuyding the coat of Christ into many parts, which
thing the barbarous, and profane soldiers, were affrayed to do. John 19.

OBJECTION.
Saint Paul I. Cor. 14. says, let no man speak a strange tongue in the
Church, which is not understood, for says he, who shall supply the place of
the Idiot, and how shall he say Amen upon thy benediction, because he knows
not what thou say, but if we read our service, and prayer in latin, the
vulgar people, understand it not, and so there is no more fruit of the hearing
of it, then if a man should speak to the wall.

ANSWER.
THE Apostles saying, contaynes a threefold prayer, to wit, the prayer of the
mouth, of the spirit, and mind, to which, these three concur, the tongue, the
will, and understanding, therefore if any pray with his mouth, in an unknown
tongue, he prays with mouth and will, if he do it for Gods cause, but his mind
is without fruit, to wit, that he understands not, because what he prays, he
understands not, in the mean time, his prayer is not without fruit, for it is
meritorious to him that prays, and acceptable to God, albeit it be destitute
of that fruit, which men conceive by understanding. And therefore S. Paul
strives to declare the gift of Prophecy, which is the gift of the exposition
of holy Scriptures, and of the words of prayer, to be more excellent, then the
gift of the tongue. For seeing daily the number of the faithful increased both
amongst Ethnicks, and Jews, to the faith of Christ, it was not requisite to the
faithful, to speak before them, with many tongues, but then it was their part
to speak with interpretation of the Scriptures, without which they understood
not the Scriptures. But now, when men are taught in the faith of Christ, and
with continual preaching of the word, what service, or prayers are in the
Church, that men are ignorant of? Therefore to what end should divine service
be done in a vulgar tongue, seeing it is not unknown to the vulgar, what is
done in the Mass, or songs of the Church; whilst they conform their gestures
to the words of the Priest, now to stand, now to bow their kne, now to left
up their hands, and eyes, now to knok on their briests etc? But to the
argument which the heretic propounds against the Mass, and Church mattens,
we answer that S. Paul speaks of a Prophet, Preacher, or Doctor, to
interpret the Scriptures, as Hierome, and Austen witness in this place.

Secondly that albeit the laymen understand not the words, yet
notwithstanding they understand all the mysteries, by preaching. Therefore the
hearing of mass, and matines, and even song is not unprofitable etc. howbeit
they understand not the words, for these reasons. Because in the divine
service of the Church, usually is read the holy Scripture, by which the holy
Ghost speaks to us, and powers some grace, in our hearts, and tongues, to
express our affection and love toward God.

Thirdely the Priest, in the mass, or collect, is common minister of the whole
Church, and therefore all hearers of Gods service, should repose in the faith of
the Catholic Church, for she more pleases God, and is more acceptable to him,
as a most beloved spouse to her husband, then the faith of any private men.

Fourthly the end of mass, and divine service, is common to all, whether he
understand, or no, for the end of the mass, and the Churches intention, is
known to all, to wit, that the sacrifice is offered for the living and the
dead, in remembrance of the death and passion of Christ, to the honor of God,
and edification of his Church, and to the honor of the Blessed Virgin Marie,
and all his Saints, and therefore it suffices that we have divine service in
Latin, seeing it is one of the three chief tongues, which Christ sanctified on
the Cross, and that we appertain to the latin Church etc.

QVAESTIO. XX. Of the Aue Maria.
HOw does the simple Papists think that they pray, when they rehearse the
Angelical salutation, saying, Aue Maria: Aue Maria. Calvin. in Harm. Euang.
etc.

ANSWER.
THe Catholic Papists commit no foolishnes, while they repeat the Angelical
salutation, as a true prayer. The reason is, because prayer consists in two
parts: the on is in giving of thanks, and the other in prayer, therefore it is
not affected folly, or superstition. The mayor is evident, because there are
many Psalms of David, that are only actions of thanks, and yet are nombered
amongst Ecclesiastical prayers, also they are no^bred by their own judgment
in the Psalmists, and in this manner were Paul, and Sylas at midnyght praising
and praying our Lord. Act. 16. v. 25. For the petitions, and desires are
included in the prayer it self. Moreover the minor is evident, first because,
while we repeat that prayer we commemorat the benefit of our redemption, by the
incarnation of the son of God by way of thanks giving, therefore it is to be
thought, and adjudged for a prayer.

Secondly it is a prayer implicit, by way of insinuation, as was the prayer of
the leprous-man to Christ, saying: Lord if thou will, thou can make me
clean: Matthew. 8 v 2. To whom Christ answered condiscending to his inward
desire and private prayer, saying: I will, be thou clean. Even so in like
manner, whyl we repeat this salutation, we pray-the Mother of God, to have a
care of us implicitly.

Thirdely, the holy Church has put to this a formal and express prayer, in
the end of the Salutation, saying holy Mother of God pray for us, now, and in
the hour of our death. Therefore it is a true prayer, howsoever the ennemies
of God, and of his blessed Mother, whisper and murmr against her.

OBJECTION.
IF the Angelical Salutation be allowed of the Catholics for a prayer. Ergo
when the Angel saluted the Virgin he prayed to her.

ANSWER.
THe sequel is absurd, for altough he saluted her, it follows not, that he
prayed to her, as when the action of a thing is of a diverse intention, and
end: it acquires a diverse name, and action, according to philosophical
axioms saying Actus accepit specie^ ab obiecto. that is to say, the deed
takes his form of the object: As for example; when any man shall give an alms
for the succor of his nyghbour, this intention, and end of his work, is
observed of the form of the object, in that he is his nyghbour, and poor: and
in the other, when any man shall give an alms to deceive his nyghbour, the
first is meritorious, but in the second he demerites. Even so the intention,
and end of the Angels salutation, it was congratulatory, in that she was chosen
to be the Mother of Christ. And therefore he is not co^uinced in this to have
prayed to her, but by the same axiom to have saluted her.

OBJECTION.
THe Papists usurp an others office, which is wrong, while they salut the
Blessed Virgin Mary, they usurp the office of the Angel, therefore they sin
in making this salutation which is not proper for them to do, but the Angel.

ANSWER.
I Deny the usurping of an others office, this is invented of Caluins own
head. But Athan. in Eua^gel. de dei para, says, that all the Spirits of the
celestial Hierarchies, do incessantly sing in Heaven this glorious and
unspeakable hymn, and for this cause it follows, that not only this
salutation was enjoined to the Angel Gabriel, but to all the Angels in
Heaven, although one was messenger sent from God, to utter this salutation. For
if any, to praise God, should sing this hymn, Gloria in excelsis Deo etc. He
does not usurp the office of another, but so he does, that he may imitat the
Angels in praising God, and so therefore such-lyke is this.

OBJECTION.
THe Virgin Mother of God is absent, how can thou then call upon her, without
some blot of magical enchantment and superstition?

ANSWER.
WE do not salute, nor invoke the Blessed Virgin Mary absent, but we salut
and inuocat her, whose spirit with us is present. For if the souls of the
blessed, and the Angels know our doings, otherwise they could not execute
their ministry, and office concerning us: It follows, that the Saints know
our actions either by word, or particular revelation of God, who are present
with us in spirit, of whom S. Auste^ says, that being secure of their own
salvation, are solieitous and careful of ours Heb. 1. How much beyond the
Saints and Angels is the B. Virg. Mary, so much is she more able to know our
thoughts, hear our prayers, and to be present in spirit with us, in all our
actions, which tend to the glory of God, and our faluation. Whose presence is
without all magical enchantment and superstition.

QVAESTIO. XXI. Of the Beads.
Wherefore do the simple Papists repeat so often in their Rosaries one thing
idely, ever saying, Haill Maryfull of grace, Aue Maria etc. Calvin. lib. 3.
instit. cap. 20.. 29.

ANSWER.
Wherefore did David King, and Prophet, in one Psalm. 135. repeat tuenty-fyue
times one thing, saying: praise the Lord for his mercy indureth for ever. And
psalm. 117. praise the Lord because he is good, and his mercy is for ever, which
he repeates in an other psalm five times, in this often repetition was the
Prophet foolish, and deryded God? nay, but he did well in so praying, and in
replycating, is commended, and praised of all men. Even so we Catholics in so
doing, and praying, cannot be accused of superstition, or idelnes, although in
the prayer of the Rosarie we repeat often the Angelical salvation.

Moreover our Savior Jesus Christ, Matthew. 26. before his passion, three times
in the garden repeated one prayer, saying: Father if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me, and this the Evangelist witnesses that he prayed thrice,
repeating the very same words. Therefore after the example of Christ, and his
other Saints, who often duplicated the same words, in their prayers, and
Supplicatio^s we follow them, in reiterating the same words of the Angelical
salutation, in thankful remembrance of the incarnation of the son of God;
and in praise of his blessed Mother, then to follow you who once will not
repeat the Lords prayer, in a whole day, who indeed approve your selves
destitute of all fervor of devotion; like unto the cold Salamander, in the
flamming burning fire. For by the often repetition of one prayer, it moves the
reasonable creature, forces the spirit, and inflames the mind, in the desire
of celestial things, by this frequent, and importunate manner of praying,
gates are set open to knockers, and seekers do find, and in the end, the
benignity and mercy of God, is imparted and given. Therefore let them be
ashamed, with their* pseudo-prophet Calvin, with his rediculous scoffs of
impiety, saying that the repetion of prayers, which the Catholics use, are but
babbling, for so much, as much talk is forbidden of Christ, and all prating
garrulity is a mocking of God; who endeed by such prating, without any form of
reason, does mock God, and his Church. In that he mockes God it is evident, for
the rosarie was not but by his ordinance, who with many miracles, has declared
the use of these prayers to be good and acceptable to him, as may be read in
the life of S. Dominick. But also throw envy and hatred he mockes the Church,
who by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, has allowed, and approved such
prayer lawful, and godly. And therefore all the reformed with Calvin, as
enuyers of the honor of God, and his blessed Saints, are condemned for their
maliciousnes and mockery.

OBJECTION.
IN prayer speak not much, says Christ. Matthew. 6. and therefore to what end
is that babbling, and repeating Aue Maria, Aue Maria etc?

ANSWER.
IT may be said, thou argumentest be like with the Devil, in cyting the
scriptures, for thou hold thy peace of that which follows, as the Devil
did to Christ, saying it is written, as thou producest the same also written;
but if thou should cite right, it is said, not to pray with many words and
babbling, after the manner of the Ethnicks. In which words, he taxes their
superstitious obserua^ce, who thought not their prayers to behard of ye Gods,
except they were don with superstition, and clamorous voices: So that the more
they spoke whether the affection was to prayer, or no, they believed the sooner
to be hard. For the Greek word signifies no less, then a pouring out of futil
and idle words. But our Savior did not reprehend the continuance of prayer,
but the manner of the Ethnicks, and their intention, but in continuance of
prayer God considers the inte^tion, and fervor of the supplicant, who knows
what we have need of, so that it is not necessary that we should teach him with
many words, but with affection, and perseverance in prayer, for it is written,
Pray ever, Romans 12. and Christ has said Matthew. 6. when ye shall pray, say
Pater noster etc. Therefore the continuance of prayer, is no babbling, nor much
speaking, but godly, honest, and profitable to the supplicant.

QVAESTIO. XXII. Of the praying in Churches.
WHEREFORE do the Papists teach and auonch, that it is decreed to pray in their
hallowed. Churches hu^ge with tapistry, painting, and such lykorname^ts, rather
the^ in any other place, seeing God is every where, call. inst. lib. 4. etc

ANSWER.
THe Christian Churches, are not only institut for the preaching of the word,
and ministration of the Sacraments, but chiefly for the oblatio^ of the
unbloody sacrifice, and prayers, so that in them, in regard of, their
institution God is much more worshipped, then in any other other place. Which I
prove, because none of the ancient Fathers, speaking of the Christian Churches,
uses any other word, then Templu^, a Temple, so that a temple, is for an
alter, an Altar is for a sacrifice, and therefore they were first instituted
for a sacrifice. For what else is a Temple, then a place for an Alter, and what
signifies an Alter but the place for a sacrifice? Hereupon S. Paul makes
mention of an Alter, 1. Cor. 10. saying: You cannot be partakers of the table
of our Lord and of the table of Devils, where the Apostle opposes the
Eucharisticall table, against the table of Diuelles: the which table was an
Altar really. It follows by the like reason, that the Christian table must be
an Altar, for it is said before, speaking of immolations, because the Gentiles
used to immolate, which immolation, was not done to the true God, whereupon
contrary wise the Apostle signifies, that true sacrifices, and Altars, are
offered and erected to God, for he forbiddes Christians not to drink of their
drink offerings, or to eat of their meat, immolate in the Temples, and Altares
of their Idols, seeing that their worship can no ways stand with the Christian
worship, where the cup and Altar of Christ is, which is the sacrifice of his
own Blessed body, immolat in the Temple on the Altar, and received of all
Christians, the which Altar he will not have, to be a compagnion of Devils,
that is to say, that he will have it, to have no part with the sacrifice of
Idolaters, who offer their facrifices to Idols, of the which true sacrifice,
those holy, and venerable Fathers have left us in remembrance these words, the
sacrifice, temples, and Priesthood of the new testament; as Aug. lib. 8. de
ciuitate dei cap. vlt. Ambros. lib. 2. offic. cap. 21.

Secondly, Churches are instituted for prayer, more then preachings, for Christ
himself says, Luc. 19. my house is the house of prayer, and not an house of
preaching. For this cause it is said of the Apostles, who preferred prayer
before doctrine, Act. 6. We will be instant to prayer, and secondly to the
ministry of the word. Likewise, Peter and John did ascend unto the Temple, at
the nynth hour to pray. Act. 3.

Thirdly more easily God hears the prayers of the godly, in the Church, then
in any other place, because the Church includes the uniform prayers of many,
as also the presence of Christ Jesus our mediator, both in his power, and in
special effect in the blessed Sacrifice of the Altar. In the Church also the
devil is less powerful, to vex and tempt the members of Christ's body. And
likewise it agrees with reason that it is better to pray in the Church the^
elsewhere, because to pray in the Church does proceed of obedience, and
commandment of God, and his Church, which circumstances rehearsed, do not
quadrat, and agree to be done in private houses, or in any other places, for in
S. Chrysostomes time some there were, that excused themselves that they could
pray at home, and hereupon used Sesdome the Church, whom he reprehendes, Hom.
3. O could excuse, says he, which I hear of many, while they say, we may pray
at home, but we can hear sermons, and doctrine but in the Church. O man thou
deceauest thy self, and walks in a great error, for albeit license be given
thee to pray in thy house, notwthstanding, it cannot be so well done, that thou
prayest in thy house, as in the Church, where so many Fathers and holy men are,
for the ernest cry of a whole society, is made to the immortal God, who
hears the cry of the humble, and co^trit in heart etc. and a little after, he
says; there, in the Church men have a greater occasion to pray, then in any
other place, because the oblation of grace is present, in his object: which is
the sacrifice of the mass. Morouer our catholic Churchs are erected,
consecrated, adorned, and beautifyed without superstition, only to the honor
of God, and his Saints. That Churchs are consecrated and erected to the honor
of God, it is out of controversy, but also they are erected in honor of his
Saints, as shall be proved, for if the Temple of Solomon, was erected not only
for the Sacrifice, and prayer, but also for conservation of the Arck of God, to
wit, that it should be a house in which (as David vowed 1. paral. 28.) The Arck
of the covenant of the Lord should repose, even so the Temples are for the
co^seruatio^ of the relics of Gods Saints, who sometime will they lived were
the tabernacles of God, and mediates by whom God has spoken, and wrought
miracles, and if the Arck of God was honored in the Temple, and ye Temple
builded for the Arck of God, why also may not Christians reverence honor and
pray where the relickes of the blessed Saints are, and and for their honor
and worship erect Churches, and Altars without offense or calu^ny of heretics,
as David had vowed, and Solomon performed to build a Temple for the Ark of God?
The which erection and consecration is without all magic, and superstition,
for the fact of Jacob approves it in the Law of nature, Genesis 28. where
erecting a stone in title, to the use of a sacrifice, and pouring oil on it,
for sanctification, and in calling the place Bethel, that is to say, the house
of God, which ceremonies pleased God, and were without all magic, and
superstion; even so our consecration of Churches, and Altars, is without all
enchantments, or superstition; either explicit or implicit. Morouer we decore
and adorn the Churches for the greater magnificence of Gods house, which
magnificence extendes to the honor of God: for Moses by the commandment of
God, appareilled, and adorned the tabernacle with gold, silver, pearls, silk,
and other precious tapestrie for the greater honor of God, and for the moving,
of devotion, for in these things the faithful are helped, and the Sacraments
are honored with majesty, and reverence, for when we see these things before
our eyes, forth with the heart is lifted up to think on heavenly things, and to
contemplate the diuyn Majesty, how great and powerful God is, that is
worshipped with such magnificence. And contrariwyse the Churches are contemned,
and despised, which want these ornaments, consecration and appareilling, as
may be seen in the Protestant Churches, which are no Churches, but merchant
banks, citizines walking places, a gallery for common people, a spy-house for
taillours, a law house, a common hall for examining a malefactors, a place of
verdict, a place where equity and falsehood is judged, a consistory for the
Caluinian sessioners, and Church warde^s: a place for the imprisoning of
whores, and fornicators, that verily Christ fortold in effect that it was
nothings else, but Spelunca latronum, and non Domus orationis.

OBJECTION.
GOd is every where, neither dwells the most highst in houses mad with
hands, or in temples as S. Stephan. Act. 7. said, and therefore no more is he
to be prayed to in the Churches the^ without, and without as well as in the
Church.

ANSWER.
I Confess God is every where by essence, presence, and power, neither
dwells he in temples, as included in them, or indigent of them, as S. Stephen
understands, yet he dwells in them, another way, as says Hier. cap. 7. I
shall dwell with you in this place. because the Temple is a house dedicated to
God, and his worship, who hears prayers in that house more willingly, then in
any other place whatsoever, so yt it follows that as it is a place dedicated
to God, and acceptable, therefore howsoever magnificently we can decore it, for
that cause our prayers are more easily hard of God and our petition granted.

QVAESTIO. XXIII. Of Predestination and Reprobation.
WHEREFORE do not Papists accept, and condescend to our doctrine of
Predestination, and Reprobation. Seeing by them the divine mercy, and justice,
of God does chiefly shine claer, and is made manifest, Calvin. lib. 3. cap. 21.
and 23. Piscat. cont. Scaff. etc.

ANSWER.
WE Catholics accurse your wicked doctrine, who affirm that God, not only
from eternity has defined, and preordayned all things in particular, both
good, and evil, before the forseen determination of freewill: but also that
our first parents have fallen by the eternal ordination of God. And that, that
most clement Lord, whose nature is goodness, having no respect to our good, or
evil, has decreed from eternity, to creat some to life, some to death, only
that in them he may declare his justice, and in other his mercy, so that to one
of those ends, every one is created, and this they call predestination, and
therefore lest I should seem to forge, or counterfeyt any thing contrary to
verity, it is requisite to produce the words of their own Rabbis, to this
purpose Call. lib. 3. inst. cap. 23. 7. No man can be justified, says he,
whylst God has forseen what progress he is to have, that made him, and
therefore God has forseen, because by his own decree, he has disposed what
he had forseene etc. For it does appertayn to his wisdom to forsee all things
which are to come, and likewise it appertains to his power to rule and
moderate all things with his hand. Moreover ibidem, he says. It was decreed of
God that Adam should sin: morouer that it should seem absurd to any, that
which I say, not only God to have forseen the fall of our first parents, and
the ruin of the whole posterity, in them, but also to have disposed it so, by
his decree, and will; and so we call predestination, the eternal decree of
God, which he has declared with himself, what should be done of every man.
For all are not created to alyke condition, but some are preordinate to life,
and others to eternal death, and therefore whether of those ends, he happens
on, we say, that to that end he is predestinat Calu. lib. 3. inst. cap. 21.. 5.
To justify Calvin, Caluins and Piscatores blasphemy.
burst out Piscator a Caluinist in his Treatise against Scaffma^ printed in,
Lai in. Holl. 1610. page 26. God so created our first parents, says he, that
indeed they should sin, for so much as there was no other way, that he might
obtain his own first end, which is in the declaring, and showing his mercy in
the salvation of some: and in the manifestation of his righteousness with just
condemnation of others, thus he. But as concerning this predestination to
death. Calvin says, sup. whom God gives over to damnation these truly by his
equity, and righteousness, and in his incomprehensible judgment, we affirm
them, from the entrance to life to be secuded, and stoped. And likewise eue^ as
God with vocation and justification, does seal his own elect, that they cannot
fall: even so the reprobat, by excluding them from knowledge, and notice of his
vocation, or from the sanctification of his spirit, in his decree, and
predestination the which he declares and manifest by justice, lib. 3 cap. 21. 7.

Morouer he teaches in another place that God draueth the reprobate by force,
and constrains them of necessity to the doing of wickedness, and yet
notwithstanding by no means can they be excused either from sin, or from the
punisheme^t of divine justice, for he says, that the reprobate would be
thought excusable, in sinning, because they cannot eshew the necessity of
sin, seeing this manner of necessity is laid on them, by the ordination of
God. Predestination constreines and forces a man to sin after Caluins
opinion.
But for this we deny them to be excused, for as much as the ordination of God,
by which they complain them to be ordained, or destinat to damnation, stands
with his equity, to us the cause is unknown, but that equity is most certain,
and upright with him, lib. 3. inst. cap. 23. 9. The which doctrine is most
impious, wicked, cruel and blasphemous, and is repugnant, and withstands the
holy Scriptures, right reason, and their own euangelical consistory of
Tuguring, and Basil, who has rejected this doctrine of Calvin, concerning
predestination anno Dn^i. 1552. as witness Bols. cap. 13. Therefore what
appertains to the evil of our fault, and the forward actions of a sinner,
they are not predefinite, and preordinate from eternity, which the whole
Scripture withstandes, as Psalm 5. where it is said, That God loves no
iniquity, neither wills wickedness. And as for punishment and eternal
damnation to be decreed of God before the forseen malice, and wickedness of
the creature, or without respect of futur sins; that God should have
predestinat, and to have created them to eternal condemnation. Let Christian
ears abhor to hear such doctrine, to which the Scriptures oppose, which
testify that God does not pull out the sword of punishment, Punishment and
revenge is a strange work to God.
and revenge, except he be compelled, and forced, by provoking him by long
continuance in sin. For this cause the prophet Isai cap. 28. v. 21. says,
That Vengeange, and the Scourge are called an unusual, and a strange work, and
cap. 1. v. 24. as it were he complains saying by an interiection, ah, ah, I
will case me of my enemies, and I will revenge me on my foes which
interiection, Heu, many interpret it so, that it is against his will, and that
he expresses it with sorrow, that force urges him contrary to his will to
vengance, and punishment, who wills all men to be saved, that his mercy, and
not his justice, might be declared, God is forced to punish man against his
will.
for it is more proper to him to have mercy, and to spare, then to punish, but
revenge is a strange work to him and contrary to his nature to be a punisher.
Is not this fully expressed in Genesis 6. How he was forced, when it is said, that
he was inwardly touched with dolor of heart, and said, I will destroy man, whom
I have created. Likewise Ezech. 18. v. 23. Is my will the death of the wicked
says the Lord God. Likewise Sap. 1. God made not death, neither rejoice in the
perdition of the living.) But by the equity of his justice, when Sinners
conuertes not, he shall rejoice exceedingly in the reprobation of sinners, for
the ostentation of his justice, for his work of predestination is good, and is
without any preuision, or forsight of men's demerites or original sin, who
from eternity has not decreed to determinate, constrain, force, move, or
impell the wills of any to wickedness, and sin.

Moreover if the Angels, and men, from eternity, are predestined to
reprobation, to the only oste^tation of Gods divine justice, they have fallen
into a more miserable condition then all the brute beasts of the world,
Angels, and men, are created to a more miserable condition then beasts are.
the which God has not created to misery, farelesse to eternal condemnation.
Whereupon it follows, that God shall first be a revenger, before man be a
sinner, the which S. Austen every where reclames, that it does repugne the
infinite goodness of God, and in so doing God should be more cruel, then the
wyld bear, and lions; for there is no beast so souadge, who do intend to
procread their birth and whelps to a extreme misery, other is none, that do
not nourish, and promote what in them lies, to perfection. And to the contrary
God shall be more unnatural then the brut beasts, after the doctrine of Caluins
theology. I cannot see by what reason men can promise, and assure there souls
whether to presume of their salvation, or to dispayer in this doctrine of
predestination. How shall it be in our liberty and will to persevere in good
things, and hope to be saved, if predestination without frewill, good works,
and perseverance make a consummation? what? has Christ said in vain, Matthew.
19. If thou will enter into life kept the commandments? Again he that
perseuereth to the end shall be saved, But this Protestant predestination
annihillate the words of Christ, for it freeth us of the commandments, and of
the virtue of perseverance; and says all good works are unprofitable.

Moreover there follows another absurdity, that if God of his own will,
without forseen sin, What absurdiues follow the Protestants doctrine of
predestination.
does reprobate men, there shall be fewer reprobat, then elected, which is false,
as Matthew. 7. and 22. by the consequent of the Scripture is probable; for God is
more propense* and ready to have mercy, then to condemn: therefore if
predestination consist in his own will, it is to be supposed, to be fare fewer
reprobat to death, then to have been predestinat to life. wherein consists
election, and reprobation, and of his distinction.
For it is an idle argument that you Gather of predestination, to make the
vindictiue justice of God to shine, seeing by reason, it is rather obscured: who
will God first to be a revenger, before man, or Angel be, and to forsee and
predestinat them sinners, before they be creatures, for by all reason, it ought
to be first produced, what is to be punished, before the punishment be decreed,
and secondly the decree of the punishment, is to be measured, according to the
fact. So that the difference in election, and reprobation, consists in this
distinction, to wit, that immediate election in perfect years subsist in his
prescience with preuision of following merits, presupposing cooperating grace,
and mediat knowledge. And in children by preuised application of the
Sacraments, against sin original. Reprobation is by apositiue act of his
divine will, by which God has decreed to condemn some to eternal
punishements. The cause is given meritorious of the part of the reprobate, to
wit, perseverance in mortal sin, or in original. For where there is a
reason given, wherefore the Kingdom of God is prepared for the elect, before
the beginning of the world; is there good works, and merits, for it is said,
Matthew. 25. that Christ in the day of judgment shall say, Forseen merits and
demerits are causes of election and reprobation.
come ye blessed of my Father (by predestination from eternity, and by grace in
the present) possess you the Kingdom, prepared for you, from the beginning of
the world, that is to say, from eternity. Adiecting the reason, wherefore not
only it is given to them to possess, but also was prepared from the beginning,
because says he, I was hungre, thristie, naked. etc. and you succored me,
contrariwise to the reprobat. Go from me accursed into hell fire, which is
prepared for the Devil, and his Angels, for I was hungre, thursty, naked, etc.
and you secoured me not, so that the predestinat, is elected to glory, for
their forseen merits, and the reprobate are ordained to Hell fire for their
forseen demerits. Whereupon is the common maxim that the vulgares, and idiots
hold, and is mantayned of all sectaries, that a man predestinat to eternal
life, howbeit he does evil, cannot be a member of the Diueil, The vulgars
opinion of predestination and reprobatio^.
and contrariwyse the reprobat whatsoever good he does, or how well he live,
cannot be a member of God. By this doctrine righteous, and good men, are turned
away from doing good works, and makes away for sin and all vices, for hereby
a man, shall neither merit, nor demerite; seeing this Paradox teaches an
infalibility that the predestinat, ca^ do no evil, and the reprobat can do
good. Which is false, for it is not said to reprobat Cain, disparing of the
divine mercy of G^d, for which he was damned, and to prevent him of
reprobation, he says, Genes. 4. v. 6. Wherefore art thou angry, and why is
thy countenance cast down, if thou do well, thou shall be rewarded. In
which words it is evident, that God promisseth to a reprobate man, the reward
of good things, if he will work them But the Protestants chief design is to
extinguish all power, and will to work any good thing, The Protestants will is
to extinguish all power to merit or demerit.
through predestination, so that the predestinat cannot sin, nor the
reprobate cannot merit, withstanding the holy Scripture, which says, that
Peter was predestinat to eternal glory, and yet committed a most heinous
sin, by swearing and denying our Lord, Matthew. 26. whom before he confessed
the son of God, and King of Israel, Matthew. 16 Likewise is not S. Paul
predestinat, yet he himself confesses that he had been a blasphemer, a
persecuter, and a wicked liver, which is the works of reprobatio^, except you
would say, yt a blasphemer is worthy of an eternal reward, then was he a
blasphemer of necessity, or then was he a member of the devil, for all
wickedness must be of the Devil, for as S. Gregor. Hom. in domin 1 Quadrag. The
head of all the wicked is the Devil, and the members of this head, are all the
wicked, Thus he. Who would think S. Paul to be predestinate, and S. Peter
whose deeds are opposed, or how did their concur with predestination ensuing,
seeing as they say, the predestinate cannot sin? How then have they, and
others sinned, like fools, assuring your selves of predestination, and
eternal life, who cannot faill, no more then Christ himself, with Calvin, you
are not ware, of presumption lib. 4. inst. cap. 17.. 2. Whilst you trust in
your own suppositions, concerning predestination, and reprobation, for many
have perished, who have thought to have been predestinat, and many has been
saved, whose life appeared to others reprobate.

OBJECTION.
THe Scripture says Romans 9. v. 11. when as yet they were not borne, nor had
done either good, or evil (that according to election, the purpose of God
should remayn sure) not of works but by him that calls it is said, that the
elder shall serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have
hated Esau: in which the Apostle concludes, that Jacob is not for his forseen
works, beloved of God, with the love of predestination: even so neither Esau
for his forseen sins to be had in hatred, and reprobation of God: and
therefore the one is loved, and the other is hated for the only ostentation of
his mercy, and justice, without respect of their merits, and demerites.

ANSWER.
BY Jacob, and Esau, are understood two people, to wit, the Idumeans, and
Israelites, and therefore by the name of Jacob, he declares the Synagogue with
her head, and by the name of Esaw, the people descended of Esaw with their
head, it follows that this love toward Jacob, was in the good will of God to
give to the Synagogue those preuiledges, by help of which many was saved, and
predestinate. And the hatred of God in this place toward Esaw, and his
posterity, is naught else, then less love, whom God would not prevent with such
singular preuiledges: but permitted them with their head, to fall in sin, and
to be obdurate in sin, and therefore this word hatred is taken for the less
love, as is frequent in Scripture, Luc. 14. v. 26. If any man come to me, and
hate not his Father etc. So that Jacob was elected to a far more help of
grace, and greater preuiledges then Esau, for of Jacob, and his posterity
Christ was borne, and not of Esau, also Jacob received a temporal inheritance,
in a figure of an eternal inheritance, and benediction, and Esau only left to
common helps of grace, and hereupon Jacob is beloved, because of the singular
graces given to him, which was denied to Esau, and seeing the election to be
inequall because of the will of the caller, and not the merits of the one, or
demerites of the other, it is said, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, and to
give a token of his love, he says, that the elder shall serve the younger,
which according to the letter, we read in no Scripture, that Esau ever served
Jacob, neither does he absolutely speak in this place of predestination, and
reprobation, and yet notwithstanding so he speaks of those grounds in which
proper reason teaches in what consistes election, and reprobation.

OBJECTION.
IT is said by the Apostle ibid. v. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy: Therefore it is not the
Willer nor the Runer, but of God yt shows mercy etc. Therefore as mercy is of
God, even so is reprobation in the will of God, unto the ostentation of his
justice.

ANSWER.
THe Sequel is false, for neither to have mercy is to predestinate, or not to
have mercy, is to reprobate: but to have mercy, is to confer, and give
means, by which men is delivered, and made fre from the miseryes, which sin
induces with it, and this mercy is in the will of God, which he gives to one,
and not to another, neither can any complayn: because God gives sufficient
grace to all men, if that man cooperate therewith. In the same manner is
understood the discourse of the potter, and the clay, as concerning precious,
and contemptible vesselle, for so the Apostle argues, if it please the Potter
to make a vessel to honor, and in another to dishonor, which in the
conjecture of man is a great work: may not it please God to do that which is
less. For if an Potter of an Clay may make two vessels after his will, to
honor, or ignominy, may not God make of two sinners, (who is basser then clay,
through their own fault) two vessels, either to honor, or ignominy, after the
multitudes of his mercy, or the equity of his justice, in giving to the one
convenient help, and grace, by which God foreseeth him to be mollifyed, by
penance, and to be formed a vessel to honor, by good works And unto the
other he gives means sufficient, albeit not in such abundance, or powerful,
yet sufficient to save their souls, if they work sufficiently with these
means. But when these means are not followed, and applied, which are
sufficient, that it is said, that God leaves him in his own will, and this way
he is said to be endured and hardened of God. But whereas the Apostle says, what
if God would, to show his wrath, and to make his power known, this sense is
more difficile, for he speaks not simpliciter as delightful in the
punishment of man, but for the reason of justice, and to make his power
known, who long has sustained with patience the vessels of vrath, that is to
say, expecting their penance; and ready to help the^ with his graces, who
withstanding him, have obdured themselves, that he may show the riches of his
glory in the vessels of mercy, and so by a consecutiue reason, in showing the
power of his wrath on the one, in the righteousness of his justice, is the
ministering of mercy to the other, to come to glory. What herein can any man
complain, seeing he has sufficient help of God, if he will work with that
help? No man can perish, for it is Gods will that all men should be saved, and
none should perish, 1. Tim. 1. who delytes not in the death of a sinner. Ezech.
18. Where it is to be noted, the saying of the Apostle, and the end why the
reprobat are permitted to sin. and the suffering of them, was not only, that
God should show his wrath in them, and vindicatiue justice, but also that he
might show the riches of his glory in the vesseles of mercy, for the death of
Christ should not have been, neither the death of his martyrs, if God had not
permitted sins etc.

OBJECTION.
Saint Paul seems to speak of predestination, so that there is no cause in
us of rebrobation, because all is referred to the only good pleasure of God.
For which cause the Apostle cries out: O the deaphes of the riches, of the
wisdom, and of the knowledge of God, how incomprehensible are his judgments,
and his ways unsearchable, Thus he.

ANSWER.
THe Apostle exclames not admiring the secret causes of predestination, and
reprobation, but the immense wisdom of God, his counsel, and dispensation of
his grace, and faith? Who has permitted both the Gentiles, and the Jews to
fall in infidelity, that he may have mercy on both, as at length in this place
is discussed: but as touching the words of the Apostle saying, when the
children as yet were not borne, nor had done good oreuill. By which example it
is evident, that neither nations, nor particular persons be elected eternally,
or called te^porally, or preferred to Gods favor, by their merits, because
when God made these two persons, he loved Jacob, and refused Esaw, respecting
them both evil, and the one as guilty as the other, for original sin, which
was alyke in them both. And therefore justly where he might have reprobated
both, he saved of mercy one, which one being as evil, and as void of good, as
the other, must hold of Gods eternal purpose, mercy, and election, that he was
preferred before his brother, which was elder then himself, and no worse then
himself; neither has his brother Esau in the other part cause to complayn, for
that God, neither suffered anything to be don toward him, that his sin did
not deserve: for although God elect eternally, and give his first grace without
all merits, yet he does not reprobate, nor hate any, but for sin or the for
sight thereof. Therefore in these two equal persons God calls the one unto
mercy, and leaves the other in his sin: Is God for this cause iniust, and an
accepter of persons? The Apostle answers, that God were not just nor
indifferent indeed, so to use the matter, where grace and salvation were dew.
As for example, if two men both believed well, and lived well, if God should
give Heaven to the one, and should condemn the other, then were he iniust,
partial, and forgetful of his promise. But respecting two, who both be worthy
of damnation, (as all are, before they be called to mercy) then the matter
stands of mere mercy, and of the Giuers will, and liberality, in which place
partiality has no place. As for example two malefactors are condemned for one
crime, the Prince pardons the one, and leteth justice proceed on the other:
even so God, seeing mankind in a general condemnation, because of sin, he
saves some, and not other some.

Secondly the malefactor that is pardoned, cannot attribute his remission to
his own deserving, but to the Princes mercy: even so, all that be pardoned of
damnation, are delivered by grace through the good will of God, and merits of
Christ.

Thirdly, the malefactor that is executed, cannot chalendge the Prince, that he
was not pardoned also, but must acknowledge, that he has his deserving: even
so, such as be left in the state of damnation, cannot complain, because they
have their deserving for sins.

Fourthly the standers by, must not say, that he was executed, because the
Prince would not pardon him, for that is not the cause, but his offense: even
so, we may not say, that such be damned, because God did not pardon them, but
because they were offenderes, and therefore deserved punishment for there
offenses.

Fyftly, if they ask further, why the Prince pardoned not both, or executed
not both, the reason is, that as mercy is a goodly virtue, so justice is
necessary and commendable, even so that some should be damned and not all
pardoned, and other some pardoned, rather then all condemned, which agrees to
Gods justice, and mercy, which virtues, in Gods providence toward us, are
recommended.

Moreover if it be demanded, why Joan rather then James was executed, and why
was James rather then John pardoned, seeing they both are equal criminal; the
reason is, because it hangs mearly, and wholly upon the Princes will and
pleasure: even so that Saul should be rather pardoned, then Cayphas being both
equally evil, it depe^ds upon Gods holy will, by which many unworthy persons
obtain pardon; but for verity no just, or innocent person is ever damned.

QVAESTIO. XXIII. Of Free Will.
WHy do the Papists affirm men to have in their action, freewill; seeing it is
extinguithed by sin. Luth. de seruo: arb. Call. l. 2. inst. c. 2. 8. Melact.
in loc. com.

ANSWER.
WHerefore is frewill denied, and necessity altogether induced, Freewill is
denied, and necessity is induced.
and to renouat the most pernicious errors of the old damned opinions of Simo^
Magus. Bardesance: Priscillianists: Manicheis: Aboilards: Wicliff. Albanense:
and the errors of such like Haeresiarches repugnant to the Scriptur, contrary
to manifest experience, right reason, and the goodness of God? For the Scripture
teaches that after the sin of our first parents, there remained freewill,
either to choice, or refuse, good, or evil, neither is he forced by
concupiscence after the manner of brut Beasts, neither is he compelled of God,
or is, as stock, and block, moved to good, or evil; but freewill works
freely, in all things requisite to man, so that he may both choice good, and
also he may resist diuyn grace it self, A man may withstand the grace of God.
because the grace of God infers no violence against the will of man,
neither is he forced against his will neither is he necssitate, but God
calling, he obeyes, or disobeyes, and after his own will, and free option
either accepts or refuses, the grace of God? So that will, when he
deliberates, he may in that instant, will, and not will, so that whether in
volution, and deliberatio^; it is proper in his will. The verity is without
controversy in men of sound judgment as holy Scripture witness, Man has
freewill.
as Genesis 4 v. 7. Where God spaken to Cain, says, If thou does well, shall thou
not receive waidges, but if thou does evil forthwith in the door is sin,
Herupo^ has not a man power, to rule his own passions and may he not eshew
sin, proceeding from that passion; Therefore let all Heretics with Luther
be ashamed, who makes the freewill of man seruill, and to be forced, and
necessitated; which God himself witness, to have made free, and made man Lord
endued with reason, and not servant? or yet his will to be seruill, and
abandoned, but to be Lord of himself.

Likewise our Savior speaking to Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. says, How often, would I
have gathered thy children, but thou would not. In those words it is
evident that God is willing, and man will not: therefore be the will of God, the
freewill of man is not forced and necessitated, but remitted in his own
disposition and option. Likewise Eccl. 31. v. 10. It is written of the
righteous man in his commendation, saying, Who might trangresse, and is not
transgressed, might do evil and not done it: to this the disciple accords
with his master, 1. cor. 7. v. 37. saying in the commendation of Virginity, who
has disposed firm in his h^rt not having necessity, having power over his
own will, and has so decreed in his heart to kept his virginity, does well, in
which words S. Paul plainly attributes power in the will of man, but taken
away the freewill of man, is a consequent to deny the article of our belief,
The denial of frewill is to deny on of the articles of the creed.
to wit, from Heaven shall be come to judge the Queick and the Dead. To what
end shall a Judgment be, when there is no merit, nor demerit to be judged,
neither shall there be praise, nor disprayse, neither reward, nor pun^shment?
For to these effects is a Judgment, and consequently it includes liberty of
Freewill, as teaches S. Augustine.

Moreover to what end are all the exhortations to penance, and conversion to
God, and to what effect are the commandments given: to what end are
inhibitio^s: threatenings: promises: to fle from sin: and consequently from
the wrath of God: if the liberty of frewil be extinguished, there shall be no
difference betwixt the actions of man, and Brut-beastes, and man shall be after
the same inclination and appear with them alyke: then freewil, must be
subjected to the appetite, and concupiscence is of necessity: what can be
spoken, mare wildly against the excellency of humane dignity, is not also this
an open axiom plainly contrary to reason, putting no difference betwitxt man,
and beast, for indenying this, it takes away all consolation, it freeweth man
of solicitude, it secludeth fear, that he may do what he list, he is exempted
of reason, and discretion, what he does, of necessity he must do it, whether it
be good or evil. That thereby this end may follow, security and idelnes:
referr^ng all to the grace of God, and only faith, sluggish to every good
works, extinguishers of virtue, perverting the grace of God, introducing
inevitable necessity, and excusing sin, in making God the author of sin,
and chargen the bening goodness of God of all wickedness.

OBJECTION.
GOD says I have endured the heart of Pharao, Exodus 10. v. 1. Likewise Joseph
brethren who sold him, says, Genesis 50. v. 19. can we resist the will of God.
But the divine will of God has predeterminat Pharao to afflict the people, and
the brethren of Joseph to sell him. Therefore there is no liberty of frewill.

ANSWER.
THe consequent is false, for God has not forced Pharao to the detention, and
affliction of his people, but in just judgment, for great sins going before,
he has deprived him of his grace, for that cause he is left to himself, and
turning him from God, leanning to the creature, has endured him self, for so
it is written, Exodus 8. v. 15.19. Pharao has obdured his heart: and again it
is said, that the heart of Pharao is obdured, so that Pharao wa^ted not frewill,
but he wanted the grace of God to work with his frewill, because of his
forgoing sins.

As concerning Joseph, and his brethren it is to be understood of the
determinat will of God, for the exalting of Joseph, and is not attributed for a
sin to his brethren, which glory and exaltation God had decreed long
before, to him, as may be gathered of his visitions, and dreams, and therefore
for this cause it is said in the v. 20. ye thought of me evil, but God has
turned it in good, that he might exalt me: so that their frewill by this was no
ways necessitate, and forced, but concurred with the will of God, for the
glory and exaltation of Joseph.

OBIEC^ION.
IT is neither the Willer nor the Runner, but it is of the mercy of God. Romans
9. v. 6. Therefore there is no frewill, but God does all in us after his will,
and mercy.

ANSWER.
I Deny the Sequel, for the mind of the Apostle is, that the beginning of good
works, is not of humane will, neither from the indeuoire of man, but first of
the preueaning grace of God, which excludes not the free cooperation following
afterward of freewill, to this purpose, says the Apostle, 1. cor. 3. v. 9. We
are Gods helpers, and S. John Epist. 3. v. 9 exhortes us; to be helpers to the
truth, ergo Frewill remain in man to work and cooperat with the grace of God.

OBJECTION.
NO man comes to me except my Father who has sent me draw him, John 6. v.
41. but he that is drawn has not frewill: ergo man has not frewill, because
drawing designs violence.

ANSWER.
TO draw, is understood for internal vocation, by which God sturreth our will
to work good things, but this vocation oftentimes man resistes, as is said
Prou. 1. v. 24. I have called and you have refused, for that cause it follows
such vocation not to be violent, so that after God has called us, frewill is
left in us, to inclyne to the vocation, or to that which may chiefly please us,
either good, or evil, and therefore he is said to be drawn, when he is
called, for if the Poet say, trabit sua quemquae volu^ptaes, and as S. Aug.
says, ostendas puero nucem and trahas cum, so that neither in love neither in
showing a child a nut make any violence, but motions to frewill, and therefore
God in calling, and pouring in his grace in man; so draws that the follower
may will, and therefore frewill is in man without any violent drawing, but in
merciful vocation, to accept and repel, as every man's pleasure is.

OBJECTION.
AL our works, thou has wrought them in us, says the Prophet Isai 26 v. 12.
and the Apostle likewise, Phill. 2 v. 13 says, that it is God which works in
you, both the will and the deed even of his good pleasure. Therefore the
frewill of man altogether is passive, neither can do any thing, but as it is
moved.

ANSWER.
GOD so works good things in us, yet notwithstanding, a place is left in our
frewill, to work together with God: to this purpose and effect S Paul argue
for us, saying, that he has more labored then the rest, yet notwithstanding,
he says, not I, (to wit, only of my strenght) but the grace of God with me. 1.
cor. v. 10. for grace, and freewill, are coherent, as the first cause with the
second, as expounds S. Aug. de gra. and lib. arb. cap. 5. Greg. lib. 16. cap.
11. Bern. Tract. de gra. and lib. arb as for example who is to draw his
nyghbour out of the pit, draws him that is willing to be saved on together
with him, even so God works with the freewill of man, first by a general
concurse: secondly be a special help, illuminating the understanding to the
knowledge of God, and pushinge the will, in lyking virtue, and honesty: thirdly
by habitual grace, which works grace to the soul, and gives to the body
corporal health, all thire-wayes God works in us, so that God works not
allone, neither impedits nature, neither predeterminat any act by freewill but
helps by influence of grace, (as wine, helps the weak, and sick persons,
and as a stock which a sick man leanes to, is a help to walk with
facillity,) so that he no ways is forced, or is necessitated, for grace takes
not away nature, but helps, and perfytes it.

OBJECTION.
THe Scripture faith, that we are in the hands of God, as clay in the hands of
the Potter, as is said Isai 64. v. 8. We are clay, and thou art our fashioner,
but the clay is passive, and to suffer only: ergo even so are we in frewill
with God.

ANSWER.
THe Apostle says, sup. object. 2. We are Gods fellow helpers, a fellow
helper must be active, ergo not passive, but in so far as we called clay, is
in respect that clay is, as it is of it self filthy and of no worth, without
the labor of the cunning potter, to make it in a good and an excellent
veshell. Even so no man may merit of his own power, or may attayn to be
adopted a child of God, seeing all are borne children of wrath, and seeing all
are the work of God by giving of preuening grace, and justification, which is
not without freewill, and so to conclude we are said to be Clay, and he our
former, respective.

OBJECTION.
FRewill in good things cannot fall in evil, even so to arise to good, or
evil, it can be without an excitant and moving help, therefore will is not
free.

ANSWER.
Who easily has fallne in a pit, cannot easily go out of the same: even so
grace been taken from a man, he cannot work good works, so much is the
imbecility of nature in the working of good, without grace, whereupon it
concludes, that the grace of God, co^curreth with free will, and freewill with
the grace of God, so that it is never alone.

QVAESTIO. XXV. Of Prescience, Predestination, and Free Will.
Wherefore does the Papists affirm that the will of man is free, seeing in the
prescience of God, in so much as it is infallible, and necessary, takes away
this liberty, for the divine will of God from eternity has predefynit, and
predestinat all things in particular before the forseen determination of second
causes sometime in time to come. Wicl. art. 27. Calu. lib. de aetern. de prou.
and lib. 1. inst. cap. 18.. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 23.. 2.4. 7.8.9.

ANSWER.
I Say the infallible, and eternal prescience of God, takes not away, neither
preiudges the liberty of humane freewill, or either is tied to the chanches of
time, because the prescience works nothing in the future actions of humane
will: therefore it brings not to man any necessity. The Sequel is plain,
seeing necessity is an intrinsecall condition of the thing which forces or
necessitates: The antecedent also is probable, because prescience presupposes
things to be future, and to depend on there objects, the which S. Augustine
induces with a similitude, lib. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 3.4. saying, For as thou
with thy memory, forces not to be done which has passed: even so God by his
prescie^ce, forces nothing to be done, which are to come, to pass, thus he.
Because memory makes not, but presupposes things to be passed: as for
example, my sight by which I see John to Run, is not the cause of his course:
even so the prescience of God of future things, makes them not to be future*
but presuposes things to be futurs; so that these things, should not be from
eternity of God, the foreknower of all the actions of our will except such things
sometime were in time to come, neither it is because God has for known yt to
com; therefore it is come: but the contrary, because God forseeth it to come of
their own causes: therefore God knows things to come. Which grounds are
sufficient, to agree the prescience of God, with frewill, and fortune, and this
has been the common opinion of the Fathers, so that now no less is the
liberty of freewill, or the fortunne of things, then if there should be no
prescience about future effects absolutely. But it is to be observed, this
distinction between prescience, and freewill, first I say by a familiar
similitude, in sensu composito, it is necessary the Runner to move, as it is
impossible the ru^ner not to move, for it implicates a contradiction, to agree
these two, any to run, and not to move; even so in sensu composito: is it
necessary that John who is forseen of God to sin, sin, for it is impossible
to remain in the prescience of God, that John shall sin, and not sin,
because these two cannot subsiste, and consist in God, that he is to forseee a
man to sin, and not sin together. But in the contrary it follows, that,
in sensu diuiso, that he who is Running may absolutely not move, because he may
not Rune: even John who is forseen of God to sin, may absolutely not sin,
because if he may not sin, he was not to sin: neither has he stand
praeexistant in Gods prescience, that he is to sin. How ungodly is the mind
of Calvin, and Beza, who say sin, and all evil not only to be forseen of
God, but also in particular before all forseen determination of created
frewill, to have been decreed, willed, and predestinat of God? as reports
Calu. lib. 1. inst. cap. 23. 7. saying, it was decreed of God that Adam should
sin, and a litie after, he says, it is a horrible decree, truly I must
confess, notwithstanding no man can justify this, but that God has forseen
what event man was to have, before he made him: and therefore what he has
forseen by his decree, so has he ordained. To justify this villainous
assertion he induces S. Austen to favor his erroneous opinion, saying, I
doubt not with S. Austen simplicitly to confess, that the will of God is the
necessity of things, and that necessity is also necessary to be futur what he
has willed. Moreover, in the 9. he says, that the reprobat would be thought
excusable in sinning, because they cannot eshewe the necessity, seeing it is the
ordination of God, and cast on them by way of necessity, but we deny them to
be rightly excused? for so much as the ordination of God, of which they
compain them to be destinat to punishment, and damnation, it stands with
his equity. In which Calvin concludes God to be the author of sin, and of the
damnation of man, for of this paradox follows, that God not only wills
sin, but efficaciterly does procure sin, instigateth, and forces them to
sin: and therefore it follows that God has not from eternity definit, and
in particular to have ordained any thing, before forseen determination of the
second causes, neither the election of the predestinat to glory, to be without
preuision of second causes, use of freewill, and the grace of God.

OBJECTION.
FRom a necessary cause, must proceed a necessary effect, but the prescience
and knowledge of God, is the cause of all things, and first, of Freewill, as a
necessary effect, because that God can not want it. Therefore all things for
known of God, are of necessary effects, and comes to pass necessarily.

ANSWER.
OF a necessary cause, necessarly working, necessarly and not freely, the
effect follows: such is not the knowledge and prescience of God. for
prescience is not the cause of future things, but supposes them to be futures.
but of natural causes, as science and learning are necessary to a necessary
effect, yet notwithstanding not so necessary, but are of Gods divine will
independently, and of free election of humane, will, if we speak of the
effects, which depend of created freewill.

OBJECTION.
Saint Peter speaking of the death of Christ, act. 2. v. 23. says, that Jesus
of Nazareth was delivered by definit counsel, and for knowledge of God, whom
they killed, and Crucified by the hands of the wicked, and in cap. 4. v. 27.
They truly co^ueynned in that City against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou
anointed, Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentills and people of Israel to
do which thy hand and counsel has decreed to be done: Therefore the
crucifying of Christ (and consequently the sin of the crucifyers) was
absolutely defyned from eternity, and that truly before all for sight, and
preuision,

ANSWER.
IN the crucifying of Christ, first there is the action of Jews in crucifying
Christ, which because it was evil, could not be preordinat of God in
particular, but only permitted.

Secondly, the passion which is good of Christ's part, and in the presupposed
mediat knowledge of God, by which he knew of the hypothese what should be
future, absolutely was willed and predefined of God, as also of absolut will of
Christ, and loved, for the redemption of mankind.

OBJECTION.
PRedestination from eternity is made, and decreed without us, of us: neither
may we obtayn the end, but by mediat efficacies, which are included in
predestination from eternity concerning us, without us: therefore of necessity
and with preiudging humane freewill, is the infallible event.

ANSWER.
THe Sequel is false, for who has forseen and has preordinat glory to the
predestinat, also truly before has forseen and preordinat mediates, by which
such ends are acquyred and obtained with frewill, for this disposition in it
self, includes a congruall cause of predestination, by which God so co^uenie^tly
moves the will of man, eue^ as it is apt and disposed to follow the mouer, who
by his preuening grace knows how to dispose, that the called, contemn and
refuse not the caller, but to consent and accord, which all consist in the
freewill of man.

QVAESTIO. XXVI. Of the Keeping of the Commandments.
WHerefore says the Papists, that the Commandments of God are possible to be
keept, seeing the imbecility of the flesh withstandes. Luth. lib de libert.
Christian. Calu. lib. 2. inst. cap. 5. 6.7.

ANSWER.
THe keeping, and observance of the Commandments are possible, with the help
of Gods grace, which grace is ever ready, if we will accept of it; The
Comma^dements are possible with Gods help.
for God propones to us an easy yock, which is both easy, and swet, fare
alienat to impossibility: which the Protestants maxim holds impossible, that
a man may as easily touch the Heavens, with his finger, as to kept the
commandments, belying the holy Ghost, With Heretics are impossible.
and withstanding the Scripture, which bear evidence of the facility of the
Commandments of God, for first speaken, in Deuteronomy. 30. v. 11. The Commandment
which this day, I command thee, it is not above thee, nor placed fare from
thee, not in Heaven, that thou should say, who shall go up to Heaven, and
bring it to us, and cause us hear it, that we may do it; neither is it beyond
the sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea, and bring it to
us, and make us hear it, that we may do it,; (whereby excuses may be pretended)
but he says; No excuse cannot be pretended in not keeping the Commandments.
my words are near thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it
In which, expressly he says, that the commandments are in our possibility to
kept the^, with the necessary help of Gods grace. For if they were impossible,
and importable, they should be above us, that we might perceive their
impossibilities, and justly pretend excuse. Neither would God command
impossibilities to us, knowing our weakness, but he says: that his
commandments are in thy heart, and in thyn mouth to do them: therefore what are
within us, are possible for us, and seeing the commandments are in our heart and
mouth, in this they are annexed to our possibility. For Christ says, my yock
is easy, and my burden is light, Matthew. 11. v. 30. but what is easy, and light,
must be portable, and possible; and even so are his commandments. This
approves S. John. 1. Epist. cap. 3. saying, his commandments are not heavy;
and what is more heavy then an impossibility, no man is commended in observing
that ruell which is impossible, but many are highly commended in the keeping of
the commandments; as Zacharias, and Elizabeth, who were both just before God,
and walking in all his commandments, and iustifications without fault, Luc. 1.
And David is called a man, according to the heart of God, and walking in all his
wills, Act. 13. v. 23. Herein they are attributed just, and righteous, in
keeping, and walking in the commandments of God, which if it had been
impossible, they should never had this commendation, of the holy Ghost, in his
written word. For in all the Scriptures, we shall find nothing commanded, that
is not in our possibility: Commandments are given to be kept, and not
contrary Many has loved God sincerly and their nyghbour.
so whatsoever precept is commanded to be done of man ought to be obeyed, for
to what end is a commandment given, if it be not observed; for no man is bound
to that which is impossible. ergo etc.

Moreover it is certain, that the Apostles, and others many, with syncer love,
and affection, has loved God, and their neighbor; for the Apostle boosts in
that, saying: Romans 8. What shall separat us from the love of Christ; who
doubts, but love is the end, and fulfilling of the commandments, which the
Apostle assured himself to have.

Likewise making mention of the faithful Romans, cap. 15. v. 14. to be full of
perfection, of whom, he says, but I am certain brethren, and I my self am
presuaded of you, that ye are full of love; and to the Coll. 1. v. 4. h.
says, likewise, hearing of your faith in Christ Jesus, Love is the end of the
Co^ma^deme^ts
and love, which you have in all the Saints etc. but this love is not without
the keeping of the Commandments, because no man can come, to the end which is
perfection, but be mediates, and seeing the end of the Law is love: Therefore to
attain to this end, it follows, that they have kept the Commandemendts; to
this says S. John, Epist. 1. cap. 5. v. 3. This is the love of God, that we
kept his Comma^dements; and likewise Christ says, John. 14. v. 23. If any man
love, me, let him kept my words: and S. Paul Romans 13. says, He that loves,
fulfilles the Law, etc.

Moreover the Ruell of reason is a sufficient witness, which is graued in the
hearts of all men, that none is obliged to an impossibility, for as S. Aug.
says, no man sins in that in which he cannot eshew; so that God should
proceed very iniustly against man, if he should oblige him, reason is a rule in
the keeping of the Commandments.
to an impossibility, how unreasonable should God be to co^mande us to do:
that no earthly Prince will bid his subjects do: for if God command us,
what we are not possible to do, he is unreasonable, and a tyrant, and if he
has made us impotent, and commands us to do it, the fault is his, and not
ours, if we transgress his Commandments, and therefore fore with S. Hierom.
let him be accursed; who says, God to command any thing impossible to man.

OBJECTION.
THe precept of love as, in Deuteronomy. cap. 6. v. 5. is said, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, withal thy heart, etc. cannot be fulfilled, neither observed in
this life; because it is of necessity, that who lives, does love some other
thing, by God. Therefore all the commandments are not possible to be kept.

ANSWER.
THe Commandments absolutely may be kept in this life, of a man instructed, and
furnished with Gods grace, for that precept of the love of God, intendes not,
that we should love no other thing: or that all the powers of our soul, should
be so sommerly, and intensiuely impendit to his love; but rather he commandes
to love him apprehensiuely, that we prefer no creature to God, and his love:
and to love nothing repugnant to his precepts; and in so doing in very truth,
he loves God, with all his heart, who in loving God, keipt the rest of his
Commandments; according to Christ saying, Ioh. 14. if any man love me, he will
kept my words.

OBJECTION.
IT is said in Exodus 20 v. 17. Thou shall not Covet: but this commandment,
cannot be fulfilled in this life, seeing the flesh is infected with such
concupiscence, and coueteousnes: therefore the Commandments are not possible.

ANSWER.
TO the minor, I say, a man with the help of Gods grace, may fulfill that
Co^mandeme^dt; because by that precept, The first motions are not sin.
the first motions of concupiscence, or motious preuening reason, is not
inhibited; but the interior consent of will. For David, and S. Paul, in
conditions are like unto other men, subject to concupiscences, and motions of
the flesh, notwithstanding are said, to have kept the Commandments of God,
for it is said of King David, that he walked after God, with his wholl heart, 3.
Reg. 11. v. 34. And likewise it is said to S. Paul, that Gods power, is mad
perfect through weakness, 2. cor. 12. v. 9. and next with this power, he
atteanes to strenght, saying: What is able to separat us from the love of
Christ etc. Romans 8. And by the grace of God, I am, that I am, and his grace was
not vain in me: therefore they have kept this Commandments. But if the
motions of coueteousnes, and concupiscence, had been forbidden, by this
precept, they should have been sinners; but in the contrary they are no
sinners, except delectatio^, and consent had been co^ioyned therewith: but whereas
the Apostle says, Romans 7. v. 17. That he does not the good that he would do,
because of the sin that duelleth in him. Whereupon, Heretics has builded,
to call the first motions sin, which indeed are not the true names of sin,
but rather an inclination, or a defect in nature left for a punishment of
original sin, after baptism, in which signification no man is called a
sinner absolutely, for as S. Aug. com. ad Gal. [aliud est peccatum habere, and
aliud peccare.] (one thing is to have finne, and another it is to sin.) for
the one is an evil obiectiue, which when delectation, and consent is
committed, and willed, does fall a sin: and therefore S. Paul speaks no
ways of a sin to duel in man, as a sin, which is by transgression of the
Law; and consequently with concupiscence, and couteousnes as first motiones,
the Commandments may be kept.

QVAESTIO. XXVII. Of Real Justice.
Wherefore does the Papists deny a man to be justified, be imputative justice,
and apprehended righteousness in the faith of Christ, imputed to us freely of
God, seeing this, is much more to the confort of the consciences of man, then
inherent righteousness. Luth. sermon. de natiu. Beatae Virginis Mariae. Calvin.
lib. 3. institut. cap. 11.. 11.12.13.

ANSWER.
I say in the justification of the wicked, from the estate of sin, to the
estate of grace, and adoption, to be the sons of God, by Jesus Christ, is
done by some gift really inherent in the soul; True justification is an
inherent virtue in the soul. The Scripture make a positive signification.
by which a man for mally is just, by habitual grace, and charity: as it is
proved by the Scripture: foresomuch as men are said to be washen: purged:
renewed: and made whyt; which words, all signify a positive splendore, and
comlynesse: neither can there words be understood without a real quality
following, as Isai 1. v. 18. says, If your sins were as crymsome, they
shall be made whyt as snow, and if they were read as scarlet, they shall be made
whyt as wolne. Likewise Ezech. 56. v. 25. says, I shall pouer clean water on
you, and ye shall be made clean of all your filthynes: and I shall give you a
new heart, and a new spirit, and I shall place it, in the midst of you; But this
weshing, and clenging of the heart, cannot be otherwise understood, but that
thereby a reale mutation in the will, and heart of man, to be righteous.

Likewise it is said, That we are translated from death tolyf. Sanctified in
the verity, and that we are called the sons of God 1. Epist. John. 3. v. 1.
are we so by extrinsecall favor? no, but by internal unction; by which for
mally we are the sons of God; for the verification of this, the Apostle Paul
Romans 5. says, That the love of God is poured in our hearts by the holy Ghost,
which is given us. In which words is understood the habitual love of God
toward us and in us; and by which again we love God is infused in us: so that
by pouring, or infusing, is signified, that the whole soul of man is
penetrated, and furnished with Heavenly graces. Things natural, and
supernatural work their own effects.
The reason of this foresaid, of S. Thom. 1.2. summae Quaest. 110. art. is
deduced, for if God to natural operations, and works, has given, and granted
natural powers by which those functions may be connaturally accommodated to
man: even so to supernatural functions, God has given such powers, and
falculties, by which these may be as connaturally accommodated to the soul of
man. Neither are we according to the Euangely, justified by the essential
righteousness of God imputed to us, after the opinion of Osia^der; For those
places of Scripture teaches righteousness and grace, by which we are made just,
to be some thing flowing, and coming from the grace, and right ousnes of
Christ, as witness S. John. 1. v. 16. saying, Of his fullness we all have
received, grace for grace. And likewise Romans 1. v. 5. says, by whom we
receive grace. And Ephesians. 4. v. 7. To eueryon of us is given grace, according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. And so that essential imputative justice,
shall make way to fall into Pelagianisme; Imputative justice accordes with the
Pelagians.
who denied Christ grace necessary to justification, and righteousness: and
hereupon the Protestants concludes that we are justified and sanctified by the
self same justice, wherewith Christ himself is just, which is inherent in him,
and imputed to us, and apprehended by us, with the reacheing hand of faith, and
so made our own; for in this manner of doing they make every man as good, and
as holy, as Christ himself, in which absurdity follow this conclusion, if we
have no inherent justice, but are just by Christ's justice imputed to us; it
follows, that so sun as we apprehend Christ justice by faith as our own,
we are in a full perfection at the first, for in all graces Christ was perfect;
and yt as the first Adam was perfect so is the second in a moment, now if we be
likewise just by his grace imputed to us, then are we as perfect as he is, and
so are all just alyke; By imputative justice no difference betwixt Christ and
us.
and consequently shall all receive the like glory with him, neither shall
there be any difference betwixt Christ, and us, in the Heavens: which argument
was affirmed by the Beguards, and Iouinian old damned Heretics, which the
modern Sectaries now a days defendes: for hence it follows, that we are all
as just as Christ, for seeing we are made just by his justice, then his, and
ours are all one, herupon has commed the boldness of some villainous minded
folck, to compare themselves with Christ and the Virgin Mary, that every on is
als holy, as our Blessed Lady; ye or Christ himself. What Luciferan pride is in
this dectrine, to make themselves fellow-compagnions with Christ, ye with God
himself.

OBJECTION.
ALbeit sin be within us, notwithstanding, it makes not the belieuer
unrighteous, because the righteousness of Christ is imputed, and therefore sin
is not imputed.

ANSWER.
IF sin remain, and is not imputed, as Calum says, lib. 4, inst. cap. 15..
10. To what end is the article of our creed, faying, I believe the remission of
sins; what fruit reap we of the blood and passion of Christ, seeing by
imputative justice Christ passion is made in such inefficacy, that it cannot
bloot out any sin; against whom the Scripture reclames the contrary, saying:
John. 1. v. 29. Behold him, who takes away the sins of the world. And
likewise Romans 6. v. 18. Being delivered from sin, you are made the seruands
of righteousness. And 1. John. 1. v. 7. says, That the Blood of Jesus Christ
his son does purge us of all sin. Secondly it implicates a contradiction,
sin to be, and not imputed for a fault; for upon this maxim follows, that
God will not have, or judge sin for a fault; and so not to have a fault,
neither to hate it as a fault, which is opposed to the Scripture, who says,
That the ungodly, and his ungodliness, are both alykhated of God. Sap. 14. v. 9
Lykwyse it implicates, that God does not censure, and judge a man of sin, in
that he is neither culpaple, nor sinner; for to be culpable, and affaulter, is
the formal effect of sin, therefore this imputative justice implicates
contradition against God, and Christ his sone.

OBJECTION.
CHrist is said to be made unto us righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, 1. cor. 1. v. 30. Therefore it is imputed to us these graces of
Christ.

ANSWER.
CHrist is our righteousness not formally, but efficiently, because, to wit, he
is the meritorious cause. In the same manner of way, is understood that place
of the Apostle to the Romans cap. 8. v. 32. saying, Who has given his son,
how not also with him, has he given all things to us, So that of their
sentences may be observed, that the Righteousness, Wisdom, and Sanctification
of Christ's, are so ours not by imputative justice* but in the contrary, Christ
is made to us these virtues, and else whatsoever is necessary to salvation, that
by the merit, and benefit of Christ death, and passion, these may be given, and
possessed by us, and to remain inherent in us; and therefore the righteousness
of God is the self internal righteousness, poured freely in us for the merits
of Christ.

OBJECTION.
THe Apostle says, that the faith of Abraham is imputed for righteousness: and
therefore our righteousness is nothing other, then imputative righteousness
apprehended by faith.

ANSWER.
THe Apostle speaks of Abraham's faith, by which he believed God, who promised
him seed in his old age: but not of that faith, by which he apprehended the
righteousness of Christ, which faith was hid in Abraham: and in believing God
it is said, that this faith was reputed for righteousness, for by that he was
made more just; so that Abraham with extrinsecall and intrinsecall righteousness
is just. for his extrinsecall faith is reputed to righteousness, as wadges is
reputed according to the debt, as the Apostle says, ibid. 2. saying, but the
wadges is not imputed according to the debt except it be true debt, and true
wadges: even so, is faith not reputed to righteousness, except it be true
righteousness, truly justifying a man: and not according to the extrinsecal
existimation, for this cause David in psalm. 31. v. 2. says, Blessed is the
man, to whom our Lord has not imputed sin, that is to say, whom God no
more judges a sinner; and so has forgiven him, that he acknowledge no more
sin in him: and has so taken it away, that there remain nothing of that
turpitude in him, but a resplendent purity in his place.

OBJECTION.
Our righteousness is so little that men cannot suffer the judgment of God;
therefore it is necessare, that the righteousness of Christ be imputed to us; by
which the imperfection of our righteousness may be taken away, which seems to
be done in the Sacraments, where Christ merits are applied to us that in some
manner of way, they are ours; for by these merits we are made just; albeit the
real gifts be absent.

ANSWER.
THe righteousness which should, and ought suffer the judgment of God, is the
righteousness of works, and not habitual righteousness; of which is the
question, for albeit our righteousness by words be imperfect of themselves: yet
notwithstanding are not so imperfect, but that we may do many good works,
throw the merits of Christ, not imputed to us, but freely given.

QVAESTIO. XXVIII. Of good Works.
WHerefore to the conservation and sauety of righteousues, by faith, lean the
Papists to good works, seeing of their own Thomas de Aquino, it is written,
that only faith suffices. Luth. Ser. Sic Deus dilexit mnndu^. and lib de
captiu. Babylon. cap. de Baptis. Calvin. lib. 3. inst. cap. 11.. 19. and cap.
17.. 10.11. and 18.

ANSWER.
NOw rightly have we discovered, and detected your special faith, by which you
affirm and assure you selves sins to be remitted for Christ sake, and that
his promises assuredly are applicated unto you, and so by you apprehended unto
justification, Justification be only faith is an inue^tion of the devil.
which altogether is a true invention of the Devil; and excogitat for the
nourishing the liberty of the flesh. Which is probable, because the Scripture
neither demandes, neither teaches us, of such a faith, by which we may believe
us to be justified by only faith, but well the Scripture teaches us to have
faith, to believe the divinity of Christ, as Matt. 9, v. 28. Where Christ asked
of the two blind men, saying, believe ye that I can do this to you. In which
words, he demaundes the consent of their understanding, which assent or
consent, and S. Aug. lib. de praed. Sanct. says, he would have them believe,
virtue to be existant in the power of Christ: by which he would have them believe
there health, and restauring of their sight, and not that foolish special
justifying faith; which you dream, of your own invention. Neither this confent
as S. Aug. says, fuffices not to the conservation of righteousness, neither to
salvation; but besides these are requisite good works; and the observance of
the Commandments of God; Good works is very requisite to faith.
by which the just man grows in righteousness, and charity, according to that
saying, of S. James cap. 2. v. 21. That Abraham our Father, was justified of
works; that is to say, by works he is made more righteous. What else mean other
places of Scripture, in dema^ding good fruict, and greater abondance of
righteousness, above the Pharisaicall righteousness; to this effect the yongman
asken what work was to be done, and needful for him to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; our Savior answers not saying believe; and thou shall be
just, as the Protestants presupposition is; but he says to him, If thou wilt
enter into the life, kept the commandments? Matthew. 19. v. 17. which
commandments was the Decalogue as Christ expones unto him. Works are the
fruict of faith.
To what end is this special faith, when the true faith suffices not to do
absolutely right well: but charity joined with faith, does make men just, and
the sons of God, because the Apostle says, 1. cor. 13. v. 1. Without charity
all to be insufficient to salvation what a man can do; and so consequently
faith of it self suffices not without works, which proceed of charity. Luther
moekes good works.
Therefore let Luther be ashamed, in making this wicked skoffagainst good
works in his sermon, saying, I say to thee, because the way is strait, and
narrow, it behoweth thee to bethin, and small, if thou will come be that way:
but it follows, who are charged with works, as we see ye pilgrims of S.
James, to be laden with there clam-shelles, can no way enter into Heaven. To
conclude the counsel of Luther is different from the counsel of Christ, who
commendes the fruits of righteousness, proceeding from faith? and the other
discomendes all good works, to establish his naked only faith.

OBJECTION.
Justification often in the Scripture is attributed to only faith as Luc. 7. v.
50. Thy faith has made the whole, and likewise Rome 5. v 50. We are justified
of faith, Therefore in vain are works.

ANSWER.
AS the Scripture has attributed justification to faith, even so likewise, to
hope: to fear: to penance: and to Alms. As Romans 8. v. 24. By hope we are
saved: and Tob. 4. v. 11. Alms delyuere from sin, and death: also Eccl. 1.
v. 27. The fear of the Lord expels sin, ergo it follows these to
justify as well as only faith; and if there be rightly understood, joined with
faith, Works joined with faith justify a man
make justification: for they are the fruicts of faith; and so it is not only
faith that makes a man just; for that word is not found in the Scripture
(only) but because faith is the foundament, and root from whence other virtues
grows; Therefore righteousness and salvation is attributed to him, although
mention is not made so ample of the virtues, as of the foundation; for what
pulchritude, and beauty is in a tree, all dependes of the root, even so what
virtue, and righteousness grows with man, all is commended to proceed of
faith, as of the root, and foundation of others.

OBJECTION.
THe Scripture speaking of the Euangely, and explicating what it is, as it were
by a Emthesis, says the Euangely which is to say, Gods word saves us, as 1.
cor. 15. v, 2. The Euangely, says he, by which ye are saved: and likewise,
Jacob: 1. v. 18. Willingly has he begotten us, by the word of verity:
Therefore by faith, and not by works we are justified, and for this cause, we
Protestants give our selves, to preaching of the word, and to the reading of
the Bybel; that by the word of faith, we may be feed, and saved.

ANSWER.
MIserable Protestants how art thou deceived, in hearing preachings, and in
profitable reading of the Bible, when thou understands it not: For if thou
would understand thy own proposition, thou shall well know, that the word of
God saves not formally, but by way of Gods proponed grace, and our obedience;
and not be only faith, as S. James cap. 2. v. 24. says in express words;
See, says he, how a man is justified of works, and not of faith only.

OBJECTION.
But how says S. Paul, Romans 3. verse. 20. Gall. 2. verse. 16. That no man by the
works of the Law, can be justified.

ANSWER.
WEll agrees S Paul, and S. James, by diverse reasons, for S. Paul says, that
the works of the Law, without relation to Christ, auailleth not to
righteousness, which S. Paul so hyghly disputes; and again the works of the
Law, with relation to Christ, conjoined with faith, to auaille much; so that S.
James, and S. Paul denies not good works, done by faith: but teaches expressly
the vtility of them, as Gal. 5. v. 6. saying, in Christ Jesus neither is
circumcision any thing, neither the preputie^ but faith, which by charity is
wrought, and seeing it is evident, that the requyres, and demaundes good works,
which comes of faith, and charity; that only faith may be secluded.

OBJECTION.
IF Abraham is justified of works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with
God. Romans 4. v. 2. Therefore we cannot rejoice, and boost of our works.

ANSWER.
I Say that neither Abraham, nor any other man, could glory, and rejoice of
their works in the mind, and sense of S. Paul, that is to say, in the merits
of their works done without faith, as the Jews did rejoice of, to wit, of
righteousness done without grace; by the knowledge of the Law: which observation
was very imperfect in them, for that they kept the Law but in a part, to wit,
concerning certain external things.

OBJECTION.
CHrist hanging on the Cross, has said, it is finished, John. 19. v. 20.
Therefore there remain no works; for all are done by Christ, and no more is
required: no fasting, penance, and satisfaction etc.

ANSWER.
THe true sense of these words are, that Christ has finished the work of our
redemption on the Cross For if otherwise the Protestant understand this, they
ought not to baptyse, nor be baptized, frequent the Lords Supper, Preach,
singpsalmes, pray, nor fast, etc.

OBJECTION.
ONly Faith suffices, as says Thomas de Aquino; ergo.

ANSWER.
SO it is in the mind of the Doctor, to the understanding, and conception of
the mystery of the Eucharist: and not to the conservation of righteousness; and
to the obtaining of blessedness; which only faith failles to that end. The
Doctor never dreamed that it should suffice without good works, and far
less that faith can save any man without works.

QVAESTIO. XXIX. Of the incertitude of Righteousness.
Wherefore denies the Papists, that a man of his own propre righteousness is
uncertain, seeing the spirit himself, gives testimony to our spirit, that we
are the sons of God, as it is written, Romans 8. v. 16. and Luth. art. 10.11.
Kem. in exam sess. 6. and Calu. in Antid. sess. 6. and lib. 3. just. cap. 2..
16 17.39 40.

ANSWER.
IF you affirm with your Rabbines, that all the faithful assuredly, and
infallibly ought to believe with themselves; sins no ways to be imputed, Who
are assured of the remission of sins should not say the Lords prayer.
because of the righteousness of Christ; to what effect rehearse you the Lords
prayer? and why ask you remission of sins? saying, forgive us our sins,
etc. Why is not this prayer rejected, as well as the Purita^s in Scotland has
rejected the belief. For if you hold this opinion infallible, and true, of the
certitude of righteousness, the Lords prayer is no ways profitable, or
necessary, as is mentioned already in the second quaestion, in discovering only
faith etc. Therefore no man howsoever just, and holy, cannot attribute unto his
own righteousness (without peculiar revelation of God) that infallibiliter
confidence in his own righteousness which is proped, No man is certain of
grace farelesse of remission of sins.
and grounded upon common revelation made in holy Scripture, that thereby any
shall know himself to be in the grace of God, it is uncertain. which
proposition if it were true, Job would have been more bold, nor any Protestant;
who as it were doubting said, howbeit I were simple yetnotwithstanding my soul
is ignorant of, that, cap. 9 v. 21. where distinctly by the name of
simplicitly, he names his own righteousness absolutely to be unknown; as thought
he would say, albeit I am just; notwithstanding, I cannot confidt to it
assuredly. Moreover this assertion is opposed to reason, for whosoever is
certain of the remission of sins, and estate of grace, it falloweth of
necessity to have the same certitude of their conversion to God, with true
penance and others motives of faith, as charity: patience: and perseverance
etc. requisite to justification, and inteire receiving of the sacraments: but
none is, that can promise to themselves such certitude, for no man is assured
of his disposition to be supernatural, or in the receiving of the Sacraments
to have a perfect intention. Therefore no man, without special revelation of
God; is certain to be in the state of grace. And consequently the Rabbis of
the reformed Synagogue, are like unto the serpent in paradise, who, while he
promised to our first parents knowledge, spoiled him of knowledge and brought
him in gross ignorance, even so while they would teach, the confidence of
rightousnes to justification, send us away empty of righteousness, but wrapped
in gross ignorance, with presumption, as at lenght is discussed in the third
quaestion. vt sup.

OBJECTION.
It is said by the Apostle Romans 4. v. 16. That it is by faith, according to
grace, that the promise, may be firm. which is to say, that we are justified
by only faith, and that we may be certain to be confirmed in grace, ergo etc.

ANSWER.
THe Apostle mean an other thing, for he teaches men to be justified by
lively faith in Christ without the observation of the old Law; and by that
faith, we are made certain, and the promises of grace is fulfilled, and this
assumptio^ is proved in Abraham who believed him to be a Father of many
nations: so that this promise of grace is made to Abraham and his fellowers of
faith, whether in the time of the Law, or after, without the works of the Law.

OBJECTION.
Likewise the Apostle says, Romans 8 v. 38.39. I am certain that neither death,
nor life, neither Angels etc. Neither any creature may separate us from the
love of God. Therefore in this life we have certitude of grace, through the
certitude of Gods love, which argument Calvin vehemently urges lib. 3. inst.
cap 2.. 40. That this certitude is not only for S. Paul, but also it is a
certitude apperteyning to all the faithful, and a perseverance of the grace of
God,

ANSWER.
THis word I am certain, or as Calvin wills I am persuaded, speaks not of
the certitude of only faith, neither infallibly of the faith it self, but only
of moral confidence, trust, and hope, as is probable of the frequent common
phrase as Romans cap. 15 v. 14. where the Apostle speaks confidently of the
Romans saying, and I my self also am persuaded of you. What is else this
persuation; but to confidt well. Likewise 2. Tom. c. 1. v. 5. The Apostle
repeates the same, saying, When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that
is in thee, which duelt first in thy gra^d-mother Lois, and in thy mother
Ewnice, I am certain it dwells in thee also. Here is no mention made of the
certainty of faith, but only a good confidence and trust of them to have piety
to salvation, not to boost of faith, but to hope to have it.

OBJECTION.
IT is said by the Apostle Romans 8. v. 16. That the spirit himself beires witness
to our spirit, that we are the sons of God. And likewise S. John 1. Epist.
cap. 5. v. 10. says, who believe in the son of God, has the testimony of
God himself. But the testimony of the holy spirit brings certitude, therefore
all are certain in themselves, to be the sons of God.

ANSWER.
THe Scripture is falsely allege, because the meaning of the Apostle to the
Romans, is yt ye H. Ghost with diverse miracles, and distributions of gifts,
did work wonderful things in time of the primitive Church, for the
confirmation of the faith, and to bear witness of the same faith, unto all
those who worshipped and embraced the faith of Christ and keep it, in life, to
be the sons of God.

In this manner also is understood that saying of the Apostle to the Gal. 4. v.
6. Because ye are sons, God has send forth the spirit of his son in your
hearts which cries, abba, Father, and this witnessing of the spirit, is to the
wholl Church, and to no private person as the Apostle says, Gal. 3. v. 26.
saying for ye are all the sons of God by faith, which is in Christ Jesus. And
likewise, these places verify the same testimony of the spirit, to be promised,
and given to his Chrurch, as expoundes all the ancient Fathers, 1. cor. 2. v.
12. 1. John. 3. v. 14 and 4. v. 13 and 5. v. 19.
and not particularly is to be attributed to only one. For albeit in the
righteous man, this affirmative might be attributed: notwithstanding not so
really, but by a certain moral certitude of his own righteousness, and good
life, with hatred to sin, and love of God yet notwithstanding not without
fear and trembling, if they consider their own infirmity, and weakness. And as
concerning, that saying of S. John 1. cap. v. 10. who belieues in the son of
God has the testimony of God in himself. It is true, to wit, by faith,
believing the verity, which God witnesses, so that this place does not speak
of the testimony of righteousness, but bea^e witness, and gives testimony of
the divinity of the son of God, which the Father exhibites of his Son, and
is believed of man.

OBJECTION.
THe Apostle says, 1. cor. 13 v. 8. That charity never failles: but we have
this charity in baptism, which we are certain never to lease, Therefore we
are certain of grace, and consequently of righteousness.

ANSWER.
Saint Paul denies not, but that charity may faill in this life, but in the
other world to come it shall not faill. For if faith, and hope may fail, why
not also charity, Ergo we are not certain of our righteousness.

OBJECTION.
THe Apostle says, 2. cor. 1. v. 12. This is our glory the testimony of our
consciences, but a testimony is none, except it be certain.

ANSWER.
THe testimony of conscience in which the Apostle glories, and reioyses, or, by
whose example we may glory the like, to wit, is, not to be guilty in our selves
of sin, and to live confidently us to stand in grace. Which testimony of
conscience consistes not in righteousness of works, but in sanctification and
holiness of life, for all rejoicing anexed with fear, is not assured, and
certain. For it it said ps. 2 serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him
with trembling.

OBJECTION.
MAny are certain in themselves to have walked righteously, and to have
eshewed all mortal sins; which cannot be without justifying grace: therefore
must certainly, and assuredly any man may know himself to be in grace, and
consequently certain of his salvation.

ANSWER.
THe Minor is false, for it is said, ps. 18. v. 13. who does know his sins.
And S. Peter 2. Epist. cap. 1. v. 10 Exhorts by the flying of sin, to make
our calling and election sure by good works. That we be not in vain called,
for whosoever perseueres not, in vain is his vocation; and consequently a man
is neither certain of justifying grace, neither of salvation.

OBJECTION.
TO Deny this certitude of grace, makes men to doubt, and despair, Ergo.

ANSWER.
ALbeit his certitude of Grace and only faith be excluded and denied, there is
no occasion of anxiety and doubt, because there is many things that brings
consolation, to go fordward in righteousness in the fear of God, as love,
charity, contrition, the Eucharist, tribulations, as witness the Apostle saying,
2. cor. 7. v, 4 Above measure I rejoice in all our tribulations etc.

QVAESTIO. XXX. Of the Pureness of good Works.
WHerefore extolleth the Papists, so much the works, of Righteousness, seeing
all good works, whatsomeuer, whosoever done of any man, are sin, and blotted
with impurity of the corrupted flesh, and are made imperfect with a perpetual
affection of imperfections, So that as our Arch-Rabbies teaches, that the very
elect, are Guilty of sin before God, and of the fear of the judgment of
death. Luth art 31. 32. Calvin. lib. 3. inst cap. 11. 11. and cap. 14. 9.10.11.
and lib. 4 cap. 15. 11.

ANSWER.
What execrable assertion is affirmed, be there Ghospellers, who being empte
of all good works, and holiness, following the flesh; must savor of the
impurity of the flesh, and consequently wyld sinners, and as brutish creatures
to follow their own imaginations, concerning righteousness, and good works.
Many good works are without sin and glorifyeth God.
Which we defend and confesses, that good men (de facto) may perform, and
exhibit (by the help of Gods grace) many good works meritorious; and verily to
be without any spot of sin, as undoubted faith teaches; and holy Scriptures
bear witness. For to what end does Christ exhort men to good works, if they
be sin in themselves, saying, Matthew. 5 v 16. Let your light thine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father, which is in
Heaven. But wicked and sinful works, are not good, neither is God glorified
of them, but in the contrary what is good, and glorifyeth God, are not si^ne,
neither polluted of the flesh; which is verifyed secondly of the doctrine of
the Apolste, who exhorting them to follow good works, showing what offect
follow them* saying, 2. Pet. cap. 1. v. 10. In doing of these things you shall
not sin, which ^^hey had been sin, the Apostle Peter, so foolishly world
not have bidden us to make our calling, and election sure, by good works; if
they had not profited us, and glorified God.

Moreover the Apostle 1. cor. 7. v. 38. speaking of Virginity, sayt: Who gives
his virgin to Matrimony does well; and who does not, do better, if this
positive gift Mariadge, be not sin? How much more excellent a work is
Virginity to be a work without a sin.

Likewise the Apostle commending the dignity of a Bishop, says, 1. Tim. 3. v.
1. If any man desire to be a Bishop, he desires a good worke^.

And last of all it is said to the great praise of Job, that in all his
afflictions, he had not sinned in his lips, cap. 1. v. 22. Therefore it is
evident that many good works (by the help of Gods grace) may be accomplished
and done, without any spot of sin; or any quality appertayning to sin, both
to the glory of God, and profyt of the doer. If good works were sin God
should be a prayser of sin.
And therefore to say that our good works are defayled, and spoted with sin,
it should follow that God should praise evil works: which is opposed to the
nature of his own goodness. Moreover reason accords with the Scripture,
because there is no quality in man that necessitates, and forces him that he
should defayle, and contaminat his own works with sin: neither is he moved
of God, nor of his own nature to that evil, seeing that God is no tempter of
evil; neither does nature desire of it self, or works force or any
violence, neither the Devil, because he cannot compel violently the freewill
of man, neither bow it, or fraime it to his disposition, and desire; For if a
man can do no good wo^^^ without the blot, and evil effect of sin, it
should follow, that the grace of God, and the whole merits of Christ, should be
unprofitable and without effect to abolish sin. And again in the day of
judgment, there shall be neither merit, nor demerite rewarded; and in the
present time, it is all a like, to spoill, and robe, as to give alms; and
consequently mortal sin, and habitual grace shall dwell and exist
together: and moreover in vain are all the exhortations* and monitions,
perused in the Scriptures, to move men to penance, mortification, and
satisfaction of l^fe* if a man can do no good thing, but sin. And that all
his actions, are sin; then wherefore it is said to sinners, John. 1. v. 12.
That he has given them power, to be the sons of God who believe in his name,
if by sin they rema^^e ever the children of the Devil, and of darkness, as
Calvin affirms, saying; that the very elect are Guilts of sin, before the
tribunal seat of God, and subject to he sentence of death; whose bla^^ he my
and arogant mind is damned of all Christian men who can judge any thing equally
in this subject and matter.

OBJECTION.
THe Prophet Isai 64. v. 6. says: We all are made, as unclean, and our whole
righteousness, is as a menstruouse cloth: that is to say, our whole works,
which seem just unto us. are unclean with sin. Therefore all our works are
defaylled with uncleanness, and the (...) of sin.

ANSWER.
THe Prophet speaks according to the meaning of S Hiero. in the person of the
Jews: and yet notwithstanding not of all men, (amongst whom, were many good
men, whom the Scripture commendes, for their righteous works:) but of the
wicked, whose legal works, Sacrifices, Sabbothes, and New moons were
adjudged before the Lord pollured, and unclean: to wit, when they were done of
them, in the estate of sin; not that these effects was sin of themselves,
but because they profited nothing, by reason of the actors who remained in the
estate of sin. Moreover neither does the Prophet speak, so extending his
words absolutely against all times and all men, but only to that time, in which
he speak these words, when iniquity abounded in Israel, for which iniquity,
God was to permit, that they should be lead into captivity, as may be
evidently gathered of all words following v. 10. saying. The city of thy
holiness is desert Sion is made vast, and Jerusalem is disolat etc.

OBJECTION.
ECcl. 7 v. 21. says, There is not a just man in the Earth who does good, and
sins not. Ergo all our works are sin.

ANSWER.
IN the Hebrew text it is read, that the just man shall not sin at all times.
But the true sense is, that no man is so firm, and constant to do good, that
he can never sin, and it is not needful, neither of necessity, that he shall
sin in all his works, and labors, ergo there is just men in Earth, that does
good, and sins not.

OBJECTION.
IT is said in Genesis 6. v. 5. That God did see, that the whole cogitations of
the heart of man, was bent to evil, at all time: But of evil cogitations, and
of a will inclyned to evil; no good works can proceed: ergo where there is no
good thought, there is farrelesse good works.

ANSWER.
THe true sense of these words after the interpretation of the ancient
Father, is, that many cogitations of the heart of man were inclyned to evil for
such sayings are common in the Scriptures, as for exemple all are said to be
absent, when almost all are present even so in the same place v. 12. It is said
that al flesh to have corrupted his way: and notwithstanding Noe, and Enoch,
are praised for righteous men. Likewise S. Paul complaynes Phil 2. v. 2^* That
all sought that, which was for their own profyt; and not which appertayned to
Jesus Christ. And yet in the contrary S. Paul himself, and the other Apostles,
sought not their own profyt, but Christ Jesus. Ergo, all men, neither the
thought of all men, are not inclyned to evil, but also to good, and
consequently to good works.

OBJECTION.
IT is said an the Psalmist. 142. v. 2. That all living souls shall not be
justified in thy sight. And Matthew 7 v. 8. says, That an evil tree, cannot
bring forth good fruict: but where there is no justification, and good
fruictes; there can be no good works. Ergo etc.

ANSWER.
THe true meaning of the Psalmist is, saying, that if God would do with
sinners in righteousness and eq^^^; there is none* who absolutely and altogether
can be pronunced just, without some venial sins; by reason of which, he is
not altogether just; to this effect is understood that place of S. John i.
Epist. Ioh. cap. 1. v. 8. If we say, we have no sin* we deceive our solues,
and the verity is not in us: ^etnot with standing desists not or failles to be
just; for it is said that the righteous masinnes seatientymes in the day, Prou.
24. v. 16. which sins, are not judged mortal, to Rob him of righteousness,
but venial inclyning and not effecting, and so the holy man concludes, that no
man can be justified, in the presence of God, innocent, and pure, of all sin,
which venial sin do not impedit righteousness, because as often we say the
Lords prayers, as is presupposed of all learned men, venial sins are
forgiven. And as concerning that place of S. Matthew. That an evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruict. S. Augustine expoondes it of the intention, to wit,
that so long as an evil intention is retained in the mind, a man cannot bring
forth good works, for unto an evil intention, evil follows. Whereupon it
follows that freewill is in our own power vnderpropted with divine help to
turn it to Good and so to bring forth good fruictes.

OBJECTION.
AMongst other precepts God has two, first that we love God, with our whole
heart. Deuteronomy. 6* v. 5. Secondly he says, That we shall not covet. Exodus 20. v.
17. But who fulfills not these two precepts, inteirly sins: ergo what
righteousness can we work but it it sin, seeing we cannot kept these two
commandments.

ANSWER.
IN the contrary S. John Epist. 1. cap. 2. v. 5. says, who kepes his word, in
him is the love of God parfect indeed; as for the precept, thou shall not
Covet, the consent of will is forbidden, and not first motion, and for that
cause we consent not ever, neither sin ever; and consequently we may fulfill
these two precepts in keeping his commandments, when we consent not in will to
Covet; and so we work righteousness without sin: in keepting his
Commandments, as at more lenght is discovered in the twenthy-fyue question.

QVAESTIO. XXXI. Of the merits of good Works.
WHerefore do the Papists so arrogantly teach, that a man properly may merit
the augment, and increase of grace, in this life, and the reward of eternal
life; seeing this derogates the Majesty of God. For that cause, the name of
merit is as a thing full of arrogance which our reformed Church has abhorred
and detested. Calu. lib. 3. inst. cap. 15. 12 and alij.

ANSWER.
IT is no marvel that good works, and the name of merit, be in hatred, and
detested of you, who allowed none, but all to be sin. Which affirmitiue make
men to fle from the virtue of all good works, as chastity humility etc. And
other Christian Godly works, as from deadly poison; and to enter in the brood
way, which leads to perdition. Matthew. 7. v. 13. But the true verity is, that
a man standing in habitual grace, may truly properly, of worth, and right,
merit eternal life, without any prejudice of gods divine Majesty. Which
doctrine of faith, is valled with strong reasons of holy Scriptures, which no
man will deny, that is not prevented with a malicious mind, and carnal
passion: and who has the smalest taest in the divine Scriptures shall easily
defyne this argument; so that Eccl 16 v. 15. says. all mercy makes a place to
every one, according to the merit of his work. How evident is merit
expressed to be a consequent of mercy, what in this word is to be hated, and
abhorred of the Protestants, if they love the Scripture, for if they deteste
the one they must detested the other, and so the Scripture is as abominable to
them, as the word merit, and good works are* next to Ecclesiasticus, S. Paul
auouches the same, saying, Heb. 13. v. 16. do good and to distribute forget
not, for with sacrifice God is promerited. And likewise of these places in
which it is said, that God gives to every man a reward, and wadges according
to the measure, condition, and dignity of the work, which is nothing other,
then according to the good merit of the work, or the evil, as it is said,
Psalm. 6. v. 13. That God gives to every one according to his works And
likewise S. Matthew. 16. v. 27. says, That when the son of man shall come in
the glory of his Father, with his Angels, then shall he give to every one
according to his works. And likewise S. Paul 1. cor. 3. v. 8. says, That
every one shall receive his proper wadges, according to his labor. What is
else merit but wadges, and a reward, and a condign recompensation of every
man's labors, and works, But now if there be no mention of merit, which word
the Protestants abhors, how are wadges, and rewards distributed, and given:
and likewise punishements. For does not God punish man for evil, according to
the evil; and remunerates man with eternal life, for good works according as
they are good works, and therefore seeing evil works, of worth, (ex condigno)
merits this punishment which is eternal, shall not good works, and
welldoing merit eternal life as a reward, and a remuneration of good things;
for if we observe peculiarly the name of wadges, and reward, alleged of the
Apostle, it gives us to understand, that wadges has no place, but where is
merit: for they are correlatiues, one, with the other, for there is due no
wadges, where there is no merit, neither follows merit, but where there is
works.

OBJECTION.
Calvin. lib. 3. inst. cap. 15.. 2. says, that the Kingdom of God improperly
is called wadges, seeing it is the inheritance of the children, ergo.

ANSWER.
Wherefore is it rather improperly said waidges, then inheritance, seeing the
same be waidges, and inheritance, and the same with diverse titles may be debt
to us, as appears evidently in Christ, to whom the accide^tall glory of his
body was true waidges, as says the Apostle Phil. 2. v. 8.9. He has humbled
himself, and is made obedient to the death, even to the death of the Cross:
for which, God has exalted him, and has given him a name, which is above all
name, etc. For yt he promerited the same through his humility, and passion, for
if he had not promerited this accidental glory to his body as waidges; the
Apostle had not said this word [propter quod] which waidges was also in
heritance due to him, by reason of his hypostaticall union: even so life
eternal is inheritance, to the just, and innocent, for so much as they are
adopted sons of God, by habitual grace, which only title is dew to baptized
infantes. And likewise life eternal is waidges to the children of adoption,
for so much as they merit it with good works done in the state of Grace. And
therefore it is not called improperly waidges more then inheritance, seeing both
the inheritance, and waidge depend on the merit of good works.

OBJECTION.
THe Lutherans argue, that life eternal is called waidges, not that it is
given, or due for good works; but because it is anexed to the promises of God,
and therefore it is due to us by promise, and not of no merit.

ANSWER.
I Say a man instructed, and confirmed with habitual grace of God, may
exhibet, and do a work condign, and worthy of eternal life, because he is
moved with the spirit of God, whose supernatural motion intendes to life
eternal, and therefore for that cause, these good works are so high, and
excellent as is the self life eternal. And therefore with divine promise
joined; life eternal shall be debtfull to that work, and for that cause, that
work shall merit truly, and properly, life eternal, as a merit: and so our
merits draw their own condition, which are done, and wrought, by the grace of
God.

OBJECTION.
THe Apostle says, Romans 6. v. 23. That the grace of God is life eternal: but
that which is of grace is not debtfull to us, by way of wadges, of
righteousness: And for this cause it is said, Psalm. 102 v. 4 That God has
crowned us with mercy and compassion, ergo of grace, and not of works, is
life eternal.

ANSWER.
WHo is so ignorant, that knows not, that life eternal is called grace;
because the co^d^gne merits of life eternal, are of the grace of God, as
says, S. Aug. Epist. 105. For if S. Paul calls death the stipe^d of sin
eue^ so the stipe^d of righteousness may be called life eternal; or the stipend
of death, and stipend of life is merit and demerit, as correlatiues are, for
in this the Apostle has changed a kind of speech, that he might exclud
ambition, and pride, out of the heart of man, and especially such as would that
life eternal, should be due, and properly given for their own righteousness,
without the grace of God* as witness S. Aug. in Epist. 105. And therefore the
Apostle calls life eternal the grace of God, because it is given, for the
revvard of works done in the state of grace, and seeing our works without
grace, as unto the life eternal, it is attributed to grace, as unto the
principal cause, that our works merits life eternal. And consequently is the
exposition of the Psalm, that he has crowned us in mercy and compassion, not
that life eternal is our true waidges, of due righteousness to our works, but
because the same works are done, in the mercy of God, albeit others expoundes
this place so, that God with his mercy, and benefits, compasses the just man
about as with a crown.

OBJECTION.
WHen we have done all, which is commanded, say, we are unprofitable serua^ds,
what we ought to have done ^e have done it. Therefore to unprofitable seruands
wadges is not due of righteousness.

ANSWER.
Our own works of themselves in a part to us, are unprofitable, and of no
value without God* because they draw all their dignity and worth of his grace:
notwithstanding good works laid, and joined with divine grace, are very
profitable according to that saying, 2. Tim. 2. v. 21. If any man therefore
shall cleange himself of these he shall be an veshell sanctified in honor,
and profitable to the Lord, and prepared to every good work. Therefore when he
says profitable, the Apostle means, that both, he is for the honor of God,
and for perfection: disposing him self to all good works. And therefore for
that cause, it is said, behold good seruands, and faithful etc. Matthew. 25. v.
21. For a good and faithful seruand is profitable, when their works are done
by the grace of God.

OBJECTION.
THe Apostle says, that the sufferings of this time, are not worthy to the
futur glory, which shall be revealed unto us, Romans 8 v. 18. but o^r works has not
that dignity with that reward of glory. And therefore as Bern. sermon. de
annunciat. says, neither are the merits of man such, that for them, life
eternal is due of right neither God does injury if he give not the same unto
us.

ANSWER.
I Confess that our good works is not worthy so much glory, be Physical
equallity, for the reward is much more excellent, nor the works are* if we
consider them, according to their substance trauails, and continuance: Yet
notwihstanding they bring with them eternal glory as the Apostle says, 2.
cor. 4. v. 17. For our light afflictions, which is but for a moment, causes
unto us, a far more excellent weight of glory. Which works as thy proceed
from grace, and the spirit of Christ, is worthy of eternal life, with
proportioned excellency of glory as such is betwixt, the midst, and the end,
the fight, and the victory, the race and the vining, for the works of the
righteous (which truly we call worthy of eternal life) are midst, and are most
fitly ordained to that end, and of that same right ruell measured, to wit in
Gods divine and supernatural grace, to which end, such rewards answers,
according to the right ruell of his providence. Moreover Bern saying, That our
merits according to themselue is not such, that by them, God by right, is
debtor of life eternal, but to have life eternal through works is of his
good grace, and divine promise: and therefore God has obliged himself to
recompense these good works done in grace, if we consider together his
ordination to work good works, and the promise of recompensation for good
works, concludes that he is obliged himself, to this recompensatio^, to give
life eternal for ye working of good works, and consequently, man merits life
eternal, and his works are such that does merit, and also receaues great
injury, if God effectuat not his own promise in remuneration of his good
works.

OBJECTION.
IF we may merit any thing, it redoundes to the injury of Christ's merits, as
thought it were not sufficient, except they be helped of ours which is false.
And therefore we reformed are scrupulous, to grant any merit, and
satisfactions to the Papists, lest we should seem to do injury to Christ.

ANSWER.
THe assumptio^ is false, because our merits absolutely has power and virtue
from the infinite merits of Christ, and does proceed, and come from him, which
makes our merit acceptable, ye also our merits, are the works of Christ,
which he himself works in us, by his spirit, and according to the measure of
his gifts given us, as teach S. Aug. Epist. 105. And for that cause, all
their praise, and worth, redoundeth to the greater glory of Christ; for that we
affirm the merits of Christ to be of so great efficacy, that not only they
purchesse remission of sins, and eternal life: but they have merited virtue
for us to promerit, and this promeriting makes a place, and redoundes to the
praise of Gods divine power, who not only has created all things, and works
in all things, but also in all thing created has given power of vvorking; how
much more, by the rest of his creatures, has he given power, and frewill to
man to merit eternal life, which is the end of his creation. And therefore God
requyres our merits, for he would not apply to us the merits of Christ, yt by
them we might obtain beatitude immediate of themselves (for in so doing they
shoul make us slothful, idle, and the merits of Christ less famous, and out
of reputation.) but so they are applied to us, that we may obtain immediate
virtue to merit, which except we use the merits of Christ they should
profit us nothing to eternal life. As for your scruppels in the conclusion of
this subject they shall be discovered.

QVAESTIO. XXXII. Of Good works done in respect of an eternal reward.
WHerefore do the Papists teach, that a man may do, and exhibet, some good
works in respect of eternal reward, seeing this form of doing is mercenary,
and ^^le. Calu lib. 3. inst. cap. 18.. 2.

ANSWER.
TO work good works in respect of an eternal revvard it is both leesome,
honest, and acceptable unto God, as is proved of the Psalm 118. v. 112 saying, I
have inclyned my heart to do thy iustifications for ever for a revvard.
Therefore it is evident that David in respect of a revvard, had inclyned his
heart to do iustifications, and to keep the Law of God. For the first
principal cause of it self, wherefore the mind of man is applied, and
inclyned to follovv the commandenients of God, is God, and his will, because
God so wills, and commandes, and this obedience, and observance is due to his
own Majesty: but notwithstanding the second, and less principal cause why
they followed, and kept the co^ma^dements, is the hope of a reward, or
remuneration. And albeit that Heretics would make this subterfuge to turn
(ly) for a reward unto the end, and to say for ever, but this helps them not,
because immediately, (ly) goes before, while the Prophet says, in aeternum,
for so in S. Hierome translation it is said, inclinaui, cor meum ad faciendas
iustificationes tuas in aeternum, propter reeributionem.

Moreover John Baptist, and our Blessed Savior, with his Apostles by his
command, for hope of eternal life, with this proposition began their
preachings saying, Do penance, for the Kingdom of Heaven has approced,
Matthew. 3. verse. 2.

Likewise the Enuches are praised of Christ: Matthew 19 verse. 12. Who has gelded
themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven. In which words, most plainly Christ
commendes penance, and purity of life, in respect of a more easy obteyning of
beatitude; for the end truly unto which God has created us, is eternal life:
to which end as a mediat he has commanded, destinat, and willed good works to
be done, but who, (except he be more blockish nor a block, and more stuped nor
a stock,) will deny mediates, which rightly Rulleth, and directes his own end;
and that chiefly when a man is greatumly loved of God, he will give diligence
in doing the same which he commandes, for whom he undergoes his labors, and
pains, cannot be frustrat of eternal life, for a merit, and therefore to
work meritorious works, for their merit, is not mercenary not basse, but
honorable, good, and acceptable to God our Father, whose sons we are if we
inclyne our heart to do his laws, for a reward, and this is the good pleasure
of God, that concommina^ter we should work good works, with his grace unto
life eternal, whose will is to remunerat and gine that beatitude, for a merit
of good works.

QVAEST 10. XXXIII. Of Confidence conceived of merits.
WHerefore do the Papists conceive such confidence of eteruall life by their
merits, seeing it savors of presumption, and in prejudice of the excellency of
our redemer. Calu. lib. 3. inst. cap. 12.. 3.4.

ANSWER.
I Say it is not anough to confide, and trust simpliciterly, but also with
assured faith, we are bound to believe good works to merit life eternal, for
we cannot obtain life eternal, except we have labored to promerit the same
with good works, as is evidently discussed already, notwithstanding, no man can
firmly determine, and assuredely persuade him self, in his merits, to obtain
and have life eternal, defacto. The reason is, because we are not certain of
our own righteousness, and that any man is just absolutely, and to have
meritorious works, and howbeit he might in some part repose confidently to
have, notwithstanding it follows, that no man assuredly can assure himself of
perseverance, and therefore seeing no manner of way, any man can be certain in
this life, (without a special revelation of God, or else, if we would
precipitat our selves in the damnable golfe of the Caluinists only faith) We
believe under hope, sub gratia, giving diligence to make our calling and
election sure by good works, as the Apostle teaches, 2. Peter. 2. and so we
may conceive of our good works, some trust, and confidence, of eternal glory:
notwithstanding so, that chiefly the same confidence, and trust, be placed
dependently in the only mercies of God, and merits of Christ, and secou^dely
in works. And therefore to the purpose, the first part is proved, Tob. 4. v.
12. Great confidence is with alms before the most high-God to all them that
does the same.

Likewise 1. Tim. 3. v. 13. says, who have ministered weell purches to
themselves a good place, and much confidence in faith. And seeing good works,
are the cause of our salvation, already proved, we may the more rightly trust,
and confide them to obtain our salvation: as for example when the Physic is
very good, the patient may the more co^fide of his health: and therefore in
such manner I may confide, that merits are the cause, of which salvation may
come, and so consequently we may have that confidence, and trust of good
works, as an effect depending on the cause. Secou^dly the posterior part is
prouen of the for said introductio^, because the chief cause of our salvation,
is the merits of Christ, and Gods divine mercy, therefore by the merits of
Christ, virtue is given us to merit, and to be perseuerand: So that our merits
are the works of Christ, which he works in us by the spirit of his grace,
which no man is ignorant of, for so much as in all our petitions, and prayers we
remite them to be granted for his divine mercy saike, and the merit of
Christ. And therefore the holy Church, and every member concludes their prayer,
saying, by our Lord JESUS Christ, etc. And therefore here is neither done, nor
inferred, either presumption or prejudice to the excellency of our redeemer,
for whose fauou^ and grace, all help requisite is given us to merit, and so it
is acknowledged of us, to be from him, as the principal cause, and so we do
not trust, and confide in our own merits, but seconda^ly and dependenterly;
for all that we have received or works, we affirm it to be, by the merits
of Christ, and divine grace, and whatsoever we work, or merit, it is through
the grace of God, and merit of Christ, and not of our selves absolutely, as our
adversary imagine. Neither do we presumptuously any thing, neither with
injury to Christ.

As concerning their Scrupels, for conclusion they are full of scrupelles, to
withstand the verity revealed out of the word of God, and make no Scrupell
where Scruples should be observed, it is no Scrupell with there divines, to
affirm God the author of sin, with predeterminat predestination without
forseen causes the fall of man, and the reprobates damnation; of Christ
disparing on the Cross: of man's freewill, of the whole twelf articles of our
Belief, of the impossibility to keep the Commandments, in defending that all
our actions are mortal sins, in making all sins equal, and in teaching
that Christ has fred us from all Laws, in taking away all fear of
conscience, by only faith: in teaching necessity to be forced in the freewill
of man: in taking away vice, and virtue in man's actions; merit and demerite;
sin and grace: with others infinite numbers of assertions swallowed up of
them, without any scrupell, like another Leuiathan plunged in the weest Sees
with a deuoring mouth, So pass they without Scrupelles walking after their
own fantasies, and not according to the word of God; neither the reason of
moral knowledge.

The end of the first Part.
THE TABLE OF THIS BOOK.
TO whom properly the Catholic name appertain. Quaest. I. page 2. Of the
damnable, and special Faith of the Heretics. Quaest. II. page 23. Of the
Article of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins. Quaest. III. page 44.
Of the informall Faith of Sinners. Quaest. IIII. page 49. Of the necessity of
Miracles. Quaest. V. page 45. Of the verity of Miracles in the Catholic
Church. Quaest. VI. page 61. The Pope is taken of the reformed for Antichrist.
Quaest. VII. page 73. Of the Primacy of S. Peter. Quaest. VIII. page 89. Of the
Roman Sea of S. Peter. Quaest. IX. page 107. Of Iohne the eight Pope, a Woman.
Quaest. X. page 112. Of the infallible authority of General Counsels. Quaest.
XI. page 116. Of the verity of the Roman-Church, and of her notes. Quaest. XII.
page 127. Of the pretended reformation of the Protestants. Quaest. XIII. page
145. Of the stability of the visible Church. Quaest. XIIII. page 169. Of the
interdicting of Scripture. Quaest. XV. page 183. Of the adulterating the Bible.
Quaest. XVI. page 199. Of Traditions. Quaest. XVII. page 206. Of the certitude
of Hope. Quaest XVIII. page 214. Of publicts, and private Prayers. Quaest. XIX.
page 218. Of the Aue Maria. Quaest. XX. page 225. Of the Beads. Quaest. XXI.
page 228. Of Praying in the Churches. Quaest. XXII. page 231. Of
Predestination, and Reprobation. Quaest. XXIII. page 236. Of Free Will. Qust.
XXIIII. page 251. Of Prescience, Predestination, and Free Will. Quaest. XXV.
page 259. Of the keeping of the Commandementes. Quaest. XXVI. page 264. Of
Real Justice. Quaest. XXVII. page 269. Of good Works. Quaest. XXVIII. page
276. Of the incertitude of Righteousness. Qust. XXIX. page 281. Of the Pureness
of Good Works. Qust. XXX. page 289. Of the Merit of good Works. Qust.
XXXI. page 296. Of good Works done in respect of an eternal reward. Qust.
XXXII. page 304. Of Confidence conceived of Merits. Qust. XXXIII. page 306.
FINIS.

