A TREATISE TENDING TO MITIGATION toward Catholicke-Subiectes in England.

VVHERIN IS DECLARED, That it is not impossible for Subjects of different
Religion, (especially Catholics and Protestants) to live together in
dutiful obedience and subjection, under the government of his Majesty of Great
Britany.

AGAINST The seditious wrytings of THOMAS MORTON Minister, and some others to
the contrary.

Whose two false and slanderous grounds, pretended to be drawn from
Catholic doctrine and practice, concerning REBELLION and EQVIVOCATION, are
overthrown, and cast upon himself.

Dedicated to the learned Schoole-Deuines, Cyuill and Canon Lawyers of the
two Universities of England.

By P. R.

Prou. 26. Verse. 20. Susurrone subtracto, iurgia conquiescunt.

The makebate being removed, brawles do cease.

Permissu Superiorum. 1607.

THE SVMME OF ALL THAT IS HANDLED IN THIS TREATISE.
1. IN the Preface and first six Chapters, is discussed all that belongs to
the first imputation about Disobedience or Rebellion, either out of the
Catholic or Protestant doctrine, use, practice, or consequence thereof: with
what is objected, or answered on both parts.

2. IN the other 7. Chapters, is treated the Question of Equivocation, how it
began, what origin, causes, use, or necessity it has, or may have; what
circumstances for lawfulnes, what restraintes, or limits: and finally, what
practice among all sorts of men in certain cases, even with those that most
impugn the same.

3. Upon all which is inferred the principal conclusion; that these two
pretended obstacles do not let, but that Catholic and Protestant English
Subjects may live together in union of dutiful obedience under his Majesty,
to his, and their both safety and comfortes, if seditious make-bates be removed.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the learned Schole-Deuines and Lawiers of both faculties in the
Universities of England.
IT was no part of my purpose (learned Contrymen) when I took this Treatise
first in hand, either to wade so far therein, as now I have been compelled; or
yet to prefix any other Epistle Dedicatory before the same, then the large
common Preface it self that does ensue, which may partly appear by the
argument thereof, as namely also and principally, by that which we have set
down in the third Chapter of this Treatise: for that taking in hand, but to
point, as it were, at the exorbitant number of some monstrous, and malicious
lies, and slanders cast abroad this last year in a certain small
contemptible, but wicked and hateful libell, under the title of A discovery of
Romish doctrine in the case of Conspiracy and Rebellion by T. M. I thought it
sufficient to that purpose to show not only the cankred untruths of those most
false and virulent calumniations; but the many ino^ueniences The Authors first
intention.
also, and public hurtes, which do, and must needs ensue to any Common
wealth, that suffers such venomous tongues to sow hatred, dissension,
diffidence, and the seeds of perpetual emnity and alienation among the
Subjects thereof.

2. Which point having to my judgment sufficiently performed, I saw a far
greater book published from the same Author stuffed with Merchandise of like
mark, but yet embracing more matter, to wit, n t only the former argument, or
inuectiue of heinous Rebellion; but (to use the writers words) of heathenish,
hellish, and execrable Equivocation, chargin Catholic people so deeply and
desperately in them both, as that in these two respects, they are not only in
his censure insociable, and intractable, but also insufferable in any
Protestant common wealth: whereupon I was enforced as well to reassume again
that which before I had done and laid aside, upon certain causes which
afterward are uttered; as also to dilate my self much further, for defense of
equity and truth, and for the repressing somewhat this violent railing (...) and
4. Reg. 18.
for rendering some evident reasons of Catholics innocence Esaias. 36.
and integrity in them both. Wherein what I have performed for their just and
lawful defense, I leave it to the Judgment of you my learned Contrymen,
after you shall have read over this our Answer, presuming that your learning
and understanding is acco^panyed also with such ingenuity of good nature, and
maturity of Judgment, as you will not be carried away with the wynd, and sound
of words only as others of lesser capacity; nor yet be much moved with the
false outcryes of perfidious Make-bates, who enraged with the imaginations of
hate and auersion, do like (...) hounds runne-counter upon every false sent
they apprehend, or frame unto themselves; but rather will stand firm, and
weigh the substance, and proofs of matters with their due circumstances. (...)
of hearers.
Which if you perform, you shall find all these odious and clamorous
accusations, and exaggerations of this fyerie Minister to be nothing else, but
euaporations of a hoate distempered brain with abundance of hatred and want
of Christian charit.

3. And to say a word or two of the reasons that moved me to present this work
to you the learned of our English Universities in the foresaid sciences of
School- Deuinity and Law, both Canon and Civil, whereof the first is, that
the question of Equivocation Reasons of the dedication.
others, who apprehending only the name together with their own conceits
thereof without true knowledge of the grounds, reasons and circumstances whereby
it is made lawful, do not so eagerly, as ignorantly, cry out against it,
condemning and detesting that which they understand not, as largly is declared
in the 7. Chapter of the ensuing Treatise, which is the first concerning that
argument. But such as are more conversant and better studied in the said
sciences, and know the true principles whereon the question stands, are not so
rash nor headlong, but go more reseruedly therein, distinguishing between
(...) and unlawful, Amphybologie or Equivocation, as signing to (...) one
their times, cases, causes, reseruations and limitations, according to the
observation of Aristotle: Prudentis est distinguere; It appertains to a wise
and discreet man to distinguish; whereas the ignorant and unlearned does
commonly confound all without distinction.

4. My second reason was, for that foreign Universities, and not without
direction (as he says) from his Superiors, wherein all use of Equivocation or
Amphybology in any case whatsoever is condemned as unlawful, impious
execrable, hellish, heathenish, the black-art, and other such terms, without
respect or regard, that in all other Universities in Catholic Cou^treyes
throughout the world, in all Courts and Tribunalls, and in all learned Authors
and professors of the foresaid three faculties, for many ages, some use thereof
has been taught and allowed: diverse learned (I say) have wondered thereat and
laughed also, especially being advertised that this doctrine of Equivocation is
ascribed, as a new thing to the Jesuits, whereas many ages before their name was
heard of in the world this doctrine was known, taught, and held. Wherefore these
strangers are wont to demand, whether there be any learned men indeed in these
three facultyes now in our Universities, and whether any be studied in
SchooleDeuinity and the Laws, either Civil or Canon; for if there be, it
seems impossible to them that such a book should be suffered to come forth so
full of ignorance as this is. For (say they) if they had read or looked over
but these heads in the said sciences, to wit, of the nature of truth and lyinge
of the lawfullnes of dissimulation in certain cases both in words and works,
as namely, in stratagemes of war, of the lawfulnes of covering some truth upon
just occasion in the Canon law out of S. Augustine, of (...) malus and Dolus
(...) or Sundry heads vvherin Equivocation is touched both in Law and
Deuinity.
vtilis in the same law out of S. Hierome, and other Fathers; of the cases
wherein a man may swear, or not swear lawfully, or not be bound to keep his
oath; of the question whether God can deceive, or any man else by his spirit,
of the limitations of an accuser and defendant; of the obligation of a witness
to utter, deny or dissemble the truth; of the office of a Judge, Advocate, or
Solicitour in accusation or defense of any body; of the cases wherein secresy is
necessarily to be observed by all lawful means, both in and out of
confession, and diverse other such like heads of doctrine, as occur daily in
all the foresaid three faculties, and in the common use of man's life; these
learned men affirm, that it is impossible for our Vniuersity-Doctors to have
read and weighed them, but they must confess the lawfulnes of Equivocation in
diverse cases, and that it may be without lying (which is lawful in no case,
nor for any cause whatsoever.) Whereof they infer that either their sciences
are not studied in our Universities, or that the students profit little in them,
or that the worst learned of all are suffered to write books: which thing for
that it appertains to the disgrace of your so famous Schools; I thought it
one sufficient cause amongst the rest, to dedicate this Answer unto you.

5. My third reason was to move you by this occasion, Thomas Morton: for if you
find him to have dealt sincerly in alleging his Authors, I am content he have
the victory, though he have behaved himself otherwise never so weakly. For
trial of which point, I remit my self to that, which I have handled afterward
more plentifully and perticularly in the 2. 6. and 12. Chapters of purpose.

6. But yet for that since the writing of the ensuing Preface, I have read and
perused two Epistles of his last book entitled, A full satisfaction, the one
to the Kings Majesty, the other to the seduced brethren, as scornfully he
calls the Catholics, which Epistles have as much gaul in them as the man's
dispitefull stomach could utter, I shall pray you to have patience with me, if
I run over briefly certain notes out of the said Epistles, whereby you may
partly take notice of the man's talent in writing, but especially in raylinge,
until you come unto a more full view thereof in the sequel of this our Answer
that does ensue.

7. Thus then he begins with his Majesty within some half dosen lines after
the entrance of his Epistle. T M his app^ale to his Majesty Epist, ^. initio.
Innocence, (says he) which though naked was never ashamed, has charged me to
manifest my self unto your Highness, and together with my Aduersarye to appeal
unto your incomparable wisdom, which I do in so constant assurance of an
upright conscience as that I shall willingly remit that just advantage, which
the difference of comparison both between a legitimate or conformable subject,
and a person suspiciously degenerate, as also between a Minister of simple
truth, and a professed Equiuocator does offer unto me. Here you see him vaunt
of sundry points; as first of his naked innocence, which we have afterward to
his greater shame, so clothed with the foul rags of his lying and most
deceiptfull dealing, as she may no more be called a naked, but rather a clouted
innocence, if innocence at all, and not rather malicious nocencie, intending to
wound and injury the just, and such as are faultles and innocent in deed.

8 Secondly he appealeth to his Maiestyes incomparable wisdom, as you see, in
the constant assurance of an upright conscience; but we have showed throughout
this whole work, that nothing is further of from this fellow, then any
conscience at all: for that we have taken him in so many wilful falsifications
and corruptions (wherein he could not but know that he did lie and falsify;) as
besides all other examples laid forth in sundry several parts of this
Answer, I have been forced to make a special Chapter thereof, which is the sixth
of this ensuring work, where as also in the 4. Paragraph of the 2. Chapter and
else where, the Reader shall find such store of testimonies against the
vprightnes of this man's conscience, as I dare assure my self, he will leese,
with indifferent men, the constant assurance of honesty, howsoever in his own
opinion he may hold the same assurance for other matters.

9. Thirdly he says to his Majesty he does willingly remit that just advantage
which the difference of a legitimate and conformable subject, and a person
suspiciously degenerate does offer unto him: wherein what he would say I do
rather guess by discourse, then understand by the sense of his words. For I
imagine that the Minister would The conformity of T. M.
say, that he is ready and pressed to conform himself to any thing, that the
State or Prince shall appoint him, as well in Religion, as in other matters
whatsoever, and that therein consists his vprightnes of conscience, to wit, to
be conformable. And for that his adversary showing himself (perhaps) more
scrupulous and timorous in certain points concerning his soul or conscience,
and not so conformable: therefore he calls him suspiciously degenerate, and no
legitimate, and conformable subject, which whither it tends, and toward
what gate of Atheism, or Herodianisme, every man that has Judgment and
conscience in deed will easily discern.

10. But of all the rest, the fourth point is the most ridiculous, wherein he
intituleth himself, A minister of simple truth, and his adversary A professed
Equiuocator, whereas I have showed in the 7. and 12. Chapters of this Answer,
first, that such as grant the lawfulnes of Equivocation in some limited cases,
are far more severe and rigorous against al kind of lying in the least things
that may be (as appears by their known, and confessed doctrine by us set
down,) then are their adversaries in the greatest; yea highest kind or degree
of that sin, I mean of lying: and in the second, besides the multiplicy of
conuictions, whereby I have made demonstration of this man's falsity every where,
I have showed in the foresaid 12. Chapter, that he ( this Minister to wit of
simple truth) as also his fellows A Minister of simple truth.
which profess themselves such enemies of lawful Equivocation that may be
used without lying, do Equivocate every where in the worst and most sinful
sort of flat lying that may be imagined, without any reservation or veil, or
substance of truth at all. For proof whereof I (...) me to the said 12.
Chapter, and shall return to follow this fellow somewhat further in the said
Epistle to his Majesty.

11. For not many lines after the former passage, by occasion of certain
words of him that first answered him about a march of apes; he takes upon him
to set forth a certain march of Soldiers coming against his Majesty and other
Protestant Princes from the 7. hills of Babylon, to wit Rome, saying thus: May
it Epistle to the King.
please your sacred Majesty, to see how exactly they imitate Soldiers in their
march? Parsons, teaching persecution against all Kings and States Protestant,
does propound for his imitation the example of David A sayned march against his
Majesty.
in his conflict against Goliath: Allen, the example of Eliah in calling, if it
were possible, for fire from heaven to consume the Messengers of Kings:
Reynolds the example of Iabel to knock Generaels on the head: Bellarmine the
example of Iehoida, and other Priests for murdering of opposite Queens:
Sanders, the example of Mattathias, who fought against King Antiochus: Simancha
the example of Heathenish Scythians, who murdered their natural King Scyles:
Boucher the example of Sampson, to kill, if they can, a thousand of his
supposed Philisthians with the iaw bone of an Ass.

12. So he. And does not the man deserve to have a iawe-bone of an Ass for his
dinner, that has so labored to lay together these impertinent examples,
without head or foot, ground or proof, purpose or coherence, truth or
similitude with the matter in hand? For where does he find these marchinges
against his Majesty? why had not he cyted some place or testimony whereby might
appear this to be true that he obiecteth here to these me^ against his
Highness? Nay if his Majesty will remember marchinges against him indeed, not
imaginations in the air as these are, he will consider what manner of men they
have been, either Protestants or Catholics that have marched and machinated
against him and his, for more then 40. years together, while he was in
Scotland; what royal blood was shed of his nearest and dearest in kynred; what
violence used and practiced upon his own person, and parents; who were the
Authors, incensers, fyre-brands, and bellows of these A (...) march against
his Majesty.
enraged flames; Priests or Ministers; those that came from the hills of Rome,
or such as had their spirit from the valley of Geneua: and then if we would
frame a squadron of all those turbulent and lawless Protestant people, that
vexed and afflicted his Majesty in Scotland, and marched against him, and his
noble Mother, and grand Mother with banners displayed: and that we should place
before these again, a Vanguard of preaching-Scottish-Ministers, Va^guard
as Knox, and all his (...), exhorting, in cyting and sounding out the trumpets
of these rebellions; and a Rereward again of English-Ministers (...)
standing behind them, and clapping their hands to their encourageme^t,
writing books and sending them all aid both in words and works that possibly
they could procure; whilst in the mean space both Catholic priests and
people in England, Rome, and else where, prayed heartily for the good success of
his Majesty's said parents, and for his in theirs: this (I say) was a true and
real march in deed, and that other imaginary, which our Minister to make us
odious has here devised.

13. And to speak one word more of this matter, for that it is of much
importance, and the truth thereof notorious to the world: When upon the year of
Christ 1586. fourteen principal and zealous young CathoIicke Gentlemen
suffering for his Majesty's title.
gentlemen were most pitifully put to death in London, and diverse others
condemned, and their goods confiscated for an imputation, that they would (...)
delivered his Maiestyes mother (...) of prison, and favored her succession to
the Crown; did not (...) raging Ministers then, no less fyerie (...) MORTON
now, rave out of every pulpit, not so much against them, as against the cause
and obiectes of their calamity, which was the love they bare both to mother and
son in that behalf? Against (...) also they never ceased to cry until they
had gotten the life of the one to be taken away, and the Statute of Association
to be made for endangering the other.

14. And when before that again, upon the year 1581. fourteen learned
priests and Jesuits, were arraigned and condemned upon pretense that their
coming into England was for some designement against the State; was not the
greatest, and most odious part of their arraignment (and most amplyfied by the
Attorney Popham at that time) for that they were devout to the Queen of
Scotland, and her title, and prayed for (...) accused for their devotion to the
title of Scotland.
her in their Masses, Letanies, and other prayers? Yea when some of them came
to dye at Tyborne, and prayed at their death for the Queen of England, did not
some principal men demand them publikly from among the people, what Queen
they meant, Elizabeth, or Mary? And was not this an ordinary Equivocation,
which Ministers cried out that Catholics then used, and especially priests?
And how then does this fond, and malicious Minister bring in such Marchinges of
Catholic Soldiers against his Majesty, who ever (...) for him? How does he
talk of such kylling of supposed Philisthines by the iaw-bone of an ass? The
ass in deed we have found, but the iaw-bone as yet we see not.

15. But let us hear him go forward in vaunting to his Majesty of his goodly
works. After the reply is finished (says he) there is presented to your
Princely, and most religious judgment, A confutation of the reasons of two of
their more then unreasonable positio^s; as namely of heinous Rebellions, and
execrable Equivocations: both which are refelled (I hope) sufficiently by the
testimonies of their own most principal Doctors; A course which I profess in
all disputes; knowing that by no better wisdom may this new Babylon be
confounded, then wherewith God wrought the destruction of the old, even Genesis 11.
7. and 9.
The division of their tongues. So he.

16. And you must know, that this division of our tongues is nothing else but
that he alleges some times different opinions out of some of our
SchooleDoctors (which our men do for him, he having nothing heerin of his own
industry) in matters that be disputable, and not determined by the (...). And
is not this a great point, for so great a Rabbyn to brag of, as of a course
which he (...) in all his disputes? How does foolish vanity discover it self
in all these men's words and actions? And yet let the Reader note attentively
that notwithstanding this brag, he has no one Catholic Author in all this
controversy about Equivocation, that absolutely denies the thing, or The vanity
(...) T. M in deuidinge our tongues.
holds it for unlawful in all points as he does, albeit some do differ in
opinion concerning the cases, causes, times, means, manners, limitations, and
circumstances of the same, as after is largely by us declared. So as here he
has no division of our tongues, but which himself makes, to wit, where
somtymes to seem to find a difference where none is, he belyeth our Authors
flatly, and forces them to speak one against an other, as in many places we
do demonstrate and leave him with the shame.

17. Wherefore to say as he does that our execrable Equivocations are
sufficiently refelled by him with the testimonies of our most principal
Doctors is as true, as that he is a Minister of simple truth, and naked
innocence, and of constant assurance of an upright conscience: all which are
ridiculous A fond vaunt of T. M. refated.
antiphrases in deed, for he has no one Doctor of ours, either most or least
principal with him in his opinion, or that calls Equivocations, used with
due circumstances or limitations, execrable, or unlawful, or not necassary in
some cases; nor has he any one sentence, or testimony of theirs to the
contrary, as after is made evident. And consequently this course of Tho. Morton
in all his disputes, is a lying course, a vaunting course, a ridiculous course.
And as for his disputes, I do show him after to be so sylly a disputer, as that
he knows not how to make a true syllogism, and therefore am forced to send
him back again to Cambridge to reform his Logic, or to learn more: about
which point I remit the Reader to that which is handled in the 11. Chapter and
else where of this Treatise.

18. Next after this he lays before his Majesty a certain observation about
Popes names, as full fraught with malice, and deceiptfulnes, as the former with
vanity; and he lays the observation upon Polydor Virgil, though cyting no
place for it. Polydore observes (says he) that the Popes a long time in their
election had their Epist. ad Regem.
names changed by Antiphrasis, videl. the Elected, if (...) were by natural
disposition fearful, was named Leo, if cruel, Clement, if uncivil, Vrbanus,
if wicked, Pius; if covetous, Bonifacius; if in all (...) intolerable,
Innocentius: And with this he thinks to have laid down an observation of
importance. But why had he not adjoined also, that if he were careless of his
flock, then Gregory must be his name, which imports a vigilant pastor?

19. But now let the judicious Reader observe the malice, and falsehood of this
observation, and thereby judge, whether the Author thereof be a Minister of
simple A false and malicious observation of T. M. against Popes refuted.
truth or no. Polydore says only that sometimes Popes, as other Princes in
like manner, have had names, that have been different, or rather contrary to
their nature and manners, which is an ordinary case if we examine the
signification of men and women's names; but that Popes names were changed of
purpose by Antiphrasis, or contrary speech to cover their defectes, as here is
set down, this is a malicious lie of the Minister, and has neither
simplicyty, nor truth in it, for that all these names here mentioned of Leo,
Clemens, Vrbanus, Pius, Bonifacius, Innocentius, and Gregory, were chosen by
the Popes that took them for the great reverence, and estimation they had of
certain excellent men of that name that went before them; as also for the good
abodement of their future government, and to be styrred up the more by the
memory of those names to the virtues signified by them; but especially for the
honor and imitation of the first Popes that bare those names. As for example of
S. Leo the first, who how excellent a man he was, both for learning and
sanctity, appears by the acknowledgment of the Protestants themselves. M.
Jewel making this Apostrophe unto him in his challenge, O Leo, O (...), O Paul,
O Christ!

20. The like may be said of S. Clement the first and next Pope after S. Peter;
and the same of S. Vrbanus Pope and Martyr, in the second age after the
Apostles: and the like of Pius the first Pope and Martyr, in the first age
after the said Apostles; and no less of S. Bonifacius the first that lived in
the beginning of the fourth age, and a little before him again in the same age
S. Innocentius the first, so highly commended by S. Augustine for a great
Saint: and after him again S. Gregory the Great, and first Pope of that name
most admirable both to those of his time and all posterity for many excellent
virtues, who though living some ages after all the former; yet have there been
13. Popes after him, that for reverence of his virtues have taken his name, and
ten of S. Leo, 7. of S. Clement, 6. of S. Vrbanus, 4. of S. Pius, 7. of S.
Bonifacius, and 8. of S. Innocentius, whereof none had that name by (...), but
all by choice after they were elected Popes, for the causes now touched. Which
being so, it is evident what a wicked lost conscience this Minister has, to
avouch unto a King, and by him to all others, so manifest, and malicious a
calumniation.

21. But he goes further yet in folly to magnify his own learning and to
compare the same with no less then Aristotle. (...) have so framed this
dispute (says he) that it may seem, I hope, to be like Aristotle's books of
natural Philosophy, so published, as not published, etc. And his reason is.
For that as he says, he always puts down the clause of meant all
reservation in Latin: which yet is not true, as the Reader will see by pervsing
this book, he having to my remembrance set down the same in Latin but once
only throughout all his book, and that in four words in his second page, the
said reservation being mentioned in English, more perhaps then forty times, nor
were it of any importance if it were always put down in Latin. For that any
man lightly whether he understand Latin, or no, if he see or hear the
precedence both of question and answer, will easily guess what the
reservation is, if he suspect any to be at all, as if a man do hear or read
the premises of a syllogism in English, he will easily guess at the
conclusion, though it be in Latin; yea if he be of any mean capacity, he will
gather the inference himself by natural discourse. Wherefore this of
Aristotle's books was brought in only by the vain Minister to compare them with
his books, or, as he calls them, his disputes, so published (forsooth) as
not published, for that he imagines that the common capacity of men cannot
reach unto the depth thereof, he wadeth so profoundly in his own folly. But you
will see afterward that How T. M. his books are so published as not
published.
he is understood, and so decyphered, as he may be understood, and pitted also
by others. And I know no sense wherein he may say, that his works are so
published, as not published, but that they are not worthy indeed the publishing
and much less the readinge, wherein they do differ much from those of
Aristotle.

22. It follows in his said Epistle to his Majesty: Epistle to the King
against Equivocation.
For that this doctrine of Equivocation (says he) acknowledged by your
admirable wisdom to be in religion most (...) and detestable, in politic
State most pernicious and intolerable, and in every actor most banefull to the
soul of man; it may please your Excellent Majesty to provide in this behalse
for your faithful and religious Subjects, that they never be so intoxicated
with this Antichristian spirit, as either to deceive, or be deceived thereby,
etc. Would God it might please his Highness in his admirable wisdom to pervse
over but two, or three Chapters of this Treatise about Equivocation, and the
reasons of the lawfulnes and necessity thereof in some cases, together with the
gross, monstrous, sacrilegious, and detestable license of lying, taken up, and
vied by the impugners of lawful Equivocation, and especially Ministers, that
most talk, and make profession of simple truth; I do not doubt, but his
Excellent Majesty out of his Christian piety would provide in this behalf, for
his faithful and religious Subjects that they should not be so much deceived
by (...), as they are, nor intoxicated with their Antichristian lying spirit,
to their eternal perdition. And this is so much as I have thought good to reply
in this place concerning his Epistle to his Majesty.

23. As for the other which scornfully he directs T. M. his idle Epistle to
the deceived brethren.
to the deceived brethren, it is so short, fond and idle a thing, that it
deserves no answer at all, the principal point, whereupon he stands therein,
being this, that Catholic people are seduced by their priests, who 1. Tim. 2.
will be Doctors (says he out of S. Paul to Timothy) and yet understand not
what they say, nor vvherof they affirm. But whether this description of fond
presumptuous Doctors touched by S. Paul do agree rather to ProtestantMinisters,
or to Catholic priests, will appear in great part by reading over this
book, especially the 5. 8. and 10. Chapters, if by Thomas Mortons errors and
ignorances, a scantling may be taken of the rest. But now let us (...) how he
does go about to prove that our priests are such bad Doctors, as S. Paul
speaks of.

24. His chief proof consists in a certain comparing of them with those
Jewish priests of the old law in Christ's time, who taught the soldiers that
watched at the Sepulcher of our Savior, to say, that whilst they were
sleeping, his disciples came and stole him away; Common sense (says he) might
have replied, how could you tell, what was done, when you were all a sleep?
But minds enthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring priesthood (which
confirmed that (...)) could not possibly but err with their priests; such
(alas) is the case of all them, etc. Do you see how substantially he has
proved this matter? Let us examine the particulers: (...) the story, then the
inference.

25. About the story, S. Matthew recounteth in the 28. chapter of his Gospel,
how Christ our Savior being raised miraculously from death to lyse, with a
great and dreadful earthquake, and descent of an Angels, so as the soldiers
that kept the sepulcher were astonished, and almost dead for fear, some of
them ran and told the chief priests thereof, who making a consultation with
the Elders, devised this shift to give them store of money and to bid them say,
that in the night when they were a sleep his disciples came and stole him
away, and so they did. And S. Matthew adds, that this false brute ran
current among the Jews, even until that time, wherein he wrote his Gospel.
This is the narration, what has now Thom. Morton to say to this against us,
for thereunto is all his dryfte. First he says as you have heard that this
devise was improbable, and against common sense it self. Common sense (says
he) might have replied (to the soldiers) what could you tell what was done
when you were The diffi culty of (...). M. how men may know what is done
(...) they are a sleep resolved.
all a sleep? Se here the sharpenes of Tho. Mortons wit, above that of the
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees. But what if one of the soldiers had replied
to him thus: We saw it not, when we were a sleep, but afterward when we were
awakened, we perceived that he was stolen away. What reioynder would our
minister make? As for example if Tho. Morton were walking with a
co^munion-booke under his arm through a field, and wearyed should ly down to
sleep with his book by his side, and at his awaking should see his book
gone, were it against common sense for him to say, that his book was stolen
from him while he was a sleep? Or is not this an assertion fit for one of
those Doctors whereof S. Paul talks, that understand not what they say, or
whereof they affirm. But this will better yet appear by the second point which
is his inference. Wherefore we must a little also examine that.

26. But (...) (says he) (...) in the opinion of a neuer-erring priesthood
(which confirmed that answer) could not possibly but err with their priests,
such (alas, is the case of all them, etc. The malicious man would deface
Christian priesthood by the Jewish priesthood, and our Priests by theirs: but
consider how far he runs from the mark in both: Minds enthralled (says
he) in the opinion of a neuer-erring priesthood, which confirmed this answer:
Did the Priesthood of Jury confirm this Answer? Who says so? We read that
the Priests with the Elders did devise this answer, and they knew they did
evil, and lie therein, and so did the soldiers also that published the same.
But this was a matter of fact, not a determination of faith. Neither among the
Jews nor Christians was there ever opinion that Priests, or Priesthood could
not err in matters of fact, life, or their manners. How then is this to the
purpose? Or does not this also prove him to be one of those forenamed Doctors,
that understand not what they say, or whereof they affirm? How much more
modesty and piety had it been in Thom. Morton to have followed the example of
Christ and his Apostles, who though persecuted by those Priests; yet both
thought and spoke reverently of the Priesthood.

27. S. John the Evangelist setting down the speech of wicked Cayphas the
High Priest about the death of John. 11.
Christ, to wit, that it was necessary sor one to dye for the people; adds
presently: that Cayphas spoke not this of himself, but prophesyed as being
High Priest of that year. S. Paul Priesthood of the old Testament derided by
T. M. greatly honored by Christ and his Apostles.
in like manner being apprehended, and brought into a Counsel of the Jews,
and unjustly stricken on the face by the commandment of wicked Ananias the
High Priest, whom thereupon in his (...) called Paynted-wall, as soon as ever
he was (...) that he was the High Priest, he excused himself, that he knew it
not. I did not know brethren (says he) that he was Act. 23.
Chiefe-Priest for it is written, (...) not speak (...) of the Prince of thy
(...) And when the said Apostle does afterward handle in his Epistle to the
Hebrews this Jewish Priesthood, as a figure of that of Christ our Savior, and
of the new (...) he speaks very honorably thereof, saying: That (...)
Chief-Priest taken out from men, is appointed for men in those things that
belong to Heb. 7.
to God, to offer gifts, and sacrifices for (...), etc. But Christ himself
most honorably of all other gave to his disciples, and to the people this
advertisement: Upon the Chair of Moses have sitten Scribes and Pharisees; all
things therefore whatsoever they shall say unto you, observe, and do them, but
do not according to their works.

28. And if unto the ancient Aaronicall Priesthood of the old Testament, so
much honor, so much credit, so much obedience was to be performed (which yet
was not so sanctified by the divine person of Christ himself, nor yet so
adorned with the promise of his infallible assistance, as ours of the new
Testament is, according to the Order of Melchisedech) what impiety is this in
Thomas Morton to go about to discredit the one by the other? yea to ascribe the
lying of the Jewish souldyers and their talking against common sense (as he
will have it) unto their enthralled opinion of a neuer-erring Priesthood? Is
not this sensles? Had these souldyers an opinion perhaps that their Priests
could not sin? Or did they hold this for (...) point of doctrine, determined
unto them out of Moses chair? Or if te y did not, how is this their fact
attributed by Thomas Morton unto that (...)?

29. But he goes (...), and (...) all our errors (...) to the same (...)
(...): for (...) whereof 1. These. 2.
(...), that God in (...) to (...) lies and (...), and (...) examples the
delivery of False calumniations.
(...) soul out (...) the (...): The donation of Constantine; the (...) of our
Lady; the (...) of a (...) by S. (...); the (...) of Christians amongst the
Indians etc. But here now Thomas (...), if he would show (...) a man of (...)
and judgment indeed, and to deal really and not by calumniatio, should prove
three things. First that all these positions are held by us as he sets them
down: Secondly that they are all false indeed as we hold them: and thirdly,
that therefore we err in them, for that we believe our Priesthood cannot err;
so as the causality of these errors must fall upon the enthralled opinion of
our neuer-erring Priesthood.

30. Of which three points he proves never a one, nor goes about to prove
it: and we deny them all in the sense that he obiecteth them: For as for
Traians soul, no learned Catholic man does hold it, either for true or
likly: and it is at large refuted by Baronius a Catholic writer. Constantines
donation is a Baron. tom. 2. anno 100. sub finem and in tom. 8. anno. 604. fuse.
matter of story disputed to and fro by learned men of our religion. The
assumption of our B. Lady has more grounds for it, then either Morton or a
thousand Mortous will be able to impugn, for that he can not deny, but that
for many ages together it has been received through out all Christendom for
an ancient tradition, and from the time of the most learned S. John Damascene,
(that lived in the East Church, almost mine hundred years gone, and expressly
records the said The defense of the bodily assumptio^ of the B. virgin.
tradition to be held for ancient in his time) T. M. must needs grant the
same; and then how many thousands of more learned, godly, vigilant, and
prudent Christian men then Morton is, have believed the same in so many worlds
throughout all Christendom, as See S. Bernard in his 5. Sermons of the
Assumption of our B. Lady and alibi.
namely S. Bernard and others, every man may easily see, as also consider this
one reason amongst the rest; that if the sacred body of that Blessed Virgin,
Mother of God, had been left any where upon earth, as other Saints bodies were,
there would have remained at least some memory, some testimony thereof, or some
devotion to the place.

31. And for so much as by Gods holy providence so great concourse has been
made ever unto the bodies of S. Peter, S. Paul, and other of the Apostles,
Martyrs and Saints of God, in different places, though never so remote, it is
more then probable, that some would have been made likewise unto this sacred
body of our Blessed Lady: but the malice of these people is such to the holy
memory of this blessed virgin upon earth, and their precipitation to (...) so
hasty and inconsiderate, as whatsoever they see not with their eyes, they deny
as absolutely false. For what certainty Miracles wrought by God for the
conversion of the Indians scoffed at by T. M.
can T. M. have (think you) against the bodily (...) of our Blessed Lady, his
assertion being a bare negative? What certainty against the miracles wrought by
God in the Indies? Is the hand of God shortened? Is not Christ as powerful
now, as he was in the Primitive Church, when he extended his hand to miracles,
Act. 4.
as his Disciples with exultation (...)? Are not these Indians new Christians
as the other in Jury were? Did not Christ even then when he gave power to work
miracles, expressly say, that he would be with Marc. vlt.
them (not for this or that age) but unto the end of the world? How then does
this arrogant-sylly-gras-hopper insult here in favor of Infidels, and disgrace
of Christians, calling them, lying miracles amongst the Indians? Has he
perchance ever been there? Has he adventured his life to gain those souls
unto Christ, that dyed for them, as others have done? Has he suffered hunger
and thirst, could and heates, persecution and affliction with loss of his
blood for gayning of those poor Indian (...), as others have suffered, and
(...) daily? Noe. He has done nothing of this, but contrary wise stood a far
of in England, has attended to good cheer and ease, procured benefices and
favor of the State, and now upon the sudden is become an advocate for the
Indian Pagans, to scorn at the Christian miracles wrought by Gods power among
them, though testified by never so great and grave Authority unto us. And is
not this a pious man think you.

32. As for S. Francis louse, I never heard of that scorn before, and I
marvel in what part of our Theological The contumely of T. M. about S.
Francis louse.
assertions he (...) place (...), or how he will deduce the (...) of this louse
from our enthraled opinion of our neuer-erring Priesthood. For so he must, if
he talk to the purpose. And when he will or can do this, every man sees. In
the mean space, I leave it to that glorious Saint now in heaven, where no lise
be, to answer the contumely, if he think good, either upon earth or else
where. Sure I am that I have read of strange euentes in some upon less pride
and in solency used toward the Seruautes of God then this. The examples most
known are of Herod's lise, that devoured him; and if we believe Doctor Bolsacke
the Physician of Geneua, John Calvin dyed of the like disease. God defend all
good men, and T. M. also from like chastisement, and cure (...) rage of his
co^tumelious and blasphemous tongue, whilst he has time of (...). 33. And now
for that this Epistle grows over long, and we shall have large occasions
afterward to (...) open this man's defects in these behalfes, we shall go no
further in examining of matters here, but pass to the treatise it self
designed to procure (if it be possible) some Mitigation of affliction and
persecution toward Catholic Subjects, drawn into public hatred,
exulceration and exceration by such devilish Sycophancy and odious
Calumniations, as this fellow and his like have cast forth against them,
without al ground, but of malice and hatred, as by his accusations and our
answers, I doubt not, you will manifestly perceive. I beseech Christ Jesus our
Savior to turn all to his greater glory, and then happy are our sufferings:
and so to his holy providence and protection I commit the whole.

Your loving Countreyman, that wishes your best good. P. R.

A TABLE Of the particular Contents, Chapters, and Paragraphes of the ensuing
TREATISE.
THE Preface to all true hearted Englishmen, that love the Th. Morton his
injurious libell. Page 1. That the maine Proposition insinuated and urged by T.
M. is untrue, indiscreet, and pernicious; and falls rather upon
Protestant-subiects then Catholics. Chap. I. page 31 Ten Reasons or rather
Calumniations brought by T. M. That Catholic people are intolerable in a
Protestant Government, in respect of (...), conspiracies and rebellion, (...),
and returned upon himself and his, Chap. II. p. 52. How this Treatise was
laid aside by (...) of the Author T. M. (...) to his Maiefly; with the Authors
judgment of them both. Chap. III. page 89. What the (...) Thomas Morton does
in this Reply Chap. IIII. page 103. The first Question about Heretics and
heresy,. 1. page 105. The second Question about seditious doctrine, para. 2. p.
112. The third Question concerning practice of (...).. 3 p. 122. A brief
Censure is given of a new Treatise set forth by T. M. A Confutation of the
Popes (...) as supreme head of rebellion, etc. annexed to his former
justification of Protestant-Princes for matters of (...). Chap. V. page 139.
The second Part of this Chapter containing three particular T. M. against the
Popes supremacy to wit: Out of the new and old Testament, and from Reason it
self. page 159. A brief view of certain notorious; false and fraudulent
dealings T. M. in this his short several Treatise against the Popes Supremacy:
As also sundry examples of the like proceeding in the former part of
hisdeceytfull Reply. Chap. VI. page 189. The second part of this Chapter
representing some of the falsifications M. Mortons reply; which came to our
hands after our Answer made before in our second Chapter against his ten
Reasons. page 218. The third Part of this Chapter containing a Controversy,
Whether Calvin favored Arianisme, or no; with diverse (...) of. T. Morton
about the same. page 244. Of the second General Point of Calumniation set
forth against T. Morton concerning Equivocation, which is reduced to certain
particular Considerations for better discussion thereof, Chap. VII. page 273.
The substance of the Cause is entered into; and it is discussed, What (...),
what (...), what falsity, and lying is: and some other points (...) this
effect, Chap. VIII. page 307. The second Part of this Chapter, Whether a mixed
Proposition page 321. The third Part of this Chapter, Whether the former mixed
Proposition, partly uttered, and partly reserved, be (...) or not?. 2. page
335. The truth before set (...) is further debated and proved by Chap. IX. page
348. The first Point about Schoole-Deuines, Doctors and Lawyers, page 349. The
second Point touching Scriptures and Fathers; for (...) page 358. The third
Point concerning other Scriptures alleged, and pretended T. Morton;. 3. page
369, The fourth and last Point of this Chapter, about Scriptures page 396. Of
certain particular cases, and occasions, wherein it may be Chap. X. page 406.
The first case about the Secret of Confession. 1. page 407. The second case
about Secrets of the Co^mo^welth. 2. p. (...). The third case about any Party
accused or (...) in Question, page 414. The arguments and grounds of this
Common (...),. 4. The fourth case about VVitnesses,. 5. 425. The (...) case
about (...) in swearing,. 6. page 427. Diverse other cases in particular,. 7.
page 430. The arguments and Reasons of T. Mortons (...) examined Chap. XI.
page 439. His first argument (...) definition of aly,. 1. page 442. His second
Argument from the (...) of Equivocation, page 444. His third Argument from the
description of lying,. 3. p. 447. His fourth Argument is taken ^ specie, or
from a particular page 449. His fifth Argument, Truth God, lying the Devil, 5.
page 453. His six Argument entitled, from examples of dissimulation page 457.
His example of Pagan writers out of Cicero.. 7. page 462. His (...) Argument
taken from a sign, an Interpreter, a page 466. Of his second Conclusion and
proofs thereof, para. 9. p. 468. Of (...) of Equivocation, the one (...) and
lawful; the T. (...) and his follows (...) the first, do use (...) the
second, which is false and lying (...). Chap. XII. page 483. The (...) of (...)
in some Protestant (...) Bishops, page 490. Six arguments of M. Jewel
Superintendent of (...) page 493. Six examples of M. (...) particular
Equivocation,. 3. The use of Equiuocating in English Protestantes-Ministers,
page 517. The use of Equivocation in Laymen and Knights,. 5. p. 529. The
Conclusion of the whole (...), with a brief exhortation Equivocation, (...) in
(...) cases, but where some (...) occasion induces (...). A Table of the
particular matters (...) in the (...).

TO ALL TRVE-HARTED ENGLISHMEN, That love the honor, safety, and best good of
their Nation, Prince, and Country.
THE PREFACE.
OF THE PRESENT DIVISION AND DISAGREEMENT About matters of Religion in England,
and of many importune exasperations used by diverse sorts of men, to increase
the same: and namely by this Minister T. M. his injurious Libell.
I DO not see (dear Countrymen) why I may not justly (our times and
circumstances thereof considered) begin these my first lines of Preface with
those words of Complaint and Admiration of the Poet Lucan, whereby in few
verses he comprehended and laid forth the rufull state of the rented
Common-welth and Roman Empire by civil wars, saying:

Bella per Anglicanos.
Aemathios plusquam ciuilia campos
Iusque datum sceleri Flemus.
canimus: populumque pote^tem,
In sua victrici conuersum viscera dextra.
2. For if here we change but Thessalian fields into English land, and the
Poets singing, into our weeping and wailing, all the rest agrees most aptly,
if our division be not more rufull and lamentable then that of the Romans. For
first our wars may truly be said to be plus quam ciuilia, more then Plus quam
ciuilia.
civil, in that they are not only internal, but domestical also, in such
sort, as no one Province, no one town, no one village, no one house or family
is lightly to be found, where some part or other of this war and dissension
The pitiful (...) of England.
upon difference of Religion takes not some hold: The Father somewhere
accusing or suspecting his children: the children flying or fearing their
Father: the Mother entering into (...) with her daughter: the daughter not
trusting or confiding in her Mother. the brother impugning his brother, and
wife complaining of (...) husband: the friend breaking with his friend: and the
nearest of kyn with those whom law of nature, and bandof blood did most
straightly combine and knit together.

3. Neither is this war ended only in words, or in bare debate of minds,
judgments, wills and affections, but it breaks forth also into works, and
hostile actions, to the sight and admiration of all the world, no adversary
Camps or armies standing more watchful and distrustful one of an other, or
using more stratagems of discovery, spiery, prevention or impugnation, the one
against the other, then we among our selves; whereof our continual searches,
privy intelligences, bloody and desperate conspiracies, apprehensions,
imprisonments, tortures, arraignementes, condemnations and executions are most
loath some and lamentable witnesses.

4 And as for Ius datum sceleri, never could Iusque datum sceleri.
it be spoken so properly in the Romans misery as in ours, when in deed (though
in some different sense) that which was ius before, is now scelus, to uvitt,
that which was law, right, and equity under Catholic Religion, is now
offensive and punishable by the laws of Protestants, that which was then
piety, is now iniquity, that which by them was used for devotion, is now
scorned for superstition, that which they reverenced for highest Religion, is
now held in contempt and greatest derision; such as then should have been hated
and punished for heretics, are now esteemed for Christian and best reformed
Catholics, and they which in those days were called Catholics, as well by
their enemies as themselves, and sat in judgment upon the rest, are now
brought into judgment under them whose judges at that time they were, in the
self same cause, right and law being changed with the time, and equity with
men's affections, articles of old faith become crimes of new treason, and
finally all so inuerted and turned vpside down, and the differences so pursued
with such hostile emnity of exulcerated minds, as the Poets conclusion
falls upon us evidently in Populumque potentem in sua, etc.
the eye of all Christendom, that we being a potent people, and dreadful
otherwise to all our neighbors, have turned our victorious hands into our own
bowels, by this disunion in Religion, and thereby have just cause to fear the
event and inference threatened by our Savior (except his holy hand protect us)
that; Every Kingdom divided in it self shall Mat. 12.
come to desolation.

5. And that which most increases the feeling of this misery is, that no man
endeauoreth to mollify matters, but all to exasperate; no man applies
lenitiues, but all corrosiues; no man powers in wine or oil into the wound,
but all salt and vinegar; no man byndeth Exasperations.
up or fomenteth, but every one seeks to crush, bruze, and break more; all
cry and clap their hands to exulceration, saying with the children of Edom, in
the day of Hierusalems affliction: Exinanite, exinanite, vsque ad Psalm. 136.
fundamentum in ea. Pull her downc, pull her down even unto the foundation.

6. And to this effect have we heard and seen many speeches and sermons made,
sundry Books and pamphlets cast abroad or set forth in print, some before the
late cruel and hateful Malicious extension.
conspiracy (which might perhaps be some incitation to the designeme^t or
hastening thereof, and some presently thereupon, not only to exaggerate that fact
(whose atrocity by it self is such, as scarsely it leaves any place to
exaggeration) but also to extend and draw out the hatred and participation
thereof to others of the same Religion most innocent therein, yea unto the whole
multitude, so far as in them lies, a matter of exorbitant injustice and
intemperate malice.

7. Of the former sort of books and pamphlets Of books and pamphletes.
we have seen one set forth the year past by Thomas Hamond, entitled: The
late Commotion of certain Papists in Hereford Shire, about the burial of one
Alice VVellington Recusant, after the Popish manner, in the town of
Alens-moore, two miles from Hereford etc. Which thing though it were but the
fact of a few poor country people Catholickly affected (as most are known to
be in those parts) to bury the said Commotion of wales.
Alice, and that in a sort they were forced thereunto, least the dead corpse
should rot above ground (the Minister of the place most obstinatly refusing to
bury the same) and that some other false companion in like manner is thought to
have been set a work to induce them into that trap, as since has been
understood: yet was the matter so exaggerated every where, both by books,
preachings, and public speeches of Magistrates, as if it had been a most
heinous attempt in deed: and not only these, but by this occasion all
Catholics generally were most odiously traduced, especially in this one point
(that touched them nearest) to wit, that they would seem to conceive any least
hope of his Majesty's clemency and mercy toward them by way of toleration or
conniuency for their Religion, or mitigation of their continual pressures for
the same.

8. To which end were brought into this book and published in print not only
the Bishop of London his sermon at Paul's Cross upon the fifth of August then
past, wherein he auowed his Majesty's protestation against Catholics In the
Epistle of T. H. 22. Iunij 1605.
to the contrary, but the speech also and charge of the L. Chancellor in the
Star Chamber unto the Lords, Judges, and communalty there present ready to
depart into their countries, was delivered as from the Kings own mouth, all
tending to the same end of afflicting, and disgracing the said people, and
depriving them of all hope of any tolerance, yea Auant false and lying Varlets
(says one) your words are vain, and your hopes are more vain.
scoffing most bitterly and contemptuously at their folly, for conceauing any
such vain hopes, and inioyning the most severe order for descrying, searching,
apprehending, imprisoning, and punishing them, which ever lightly was heard of,
as though they had (...) the only or most grievous male factors within the
Realm, and this only for their Religion.

9. Soon after upon the back of this, came forth S. Edward Cook his
Maiestyes Attorneyes Sir Edward Cooks book against Catholics.
Book, entitled by him: his Fifth Part of Reports: which though in the
entrance, and forefront it promised more calm and mild proceeding (and so it
performs in phrase and style of writing) yet was the drift and ending thereof
no less stinging, then the Scorpions tail it self, against all sorts of
Catholics and their Religion. And to say somewhat of it in this place, his
argument or subject was new and strange, taking upon him to prove out of the
old and ancient common laws of His argument.
England, that the spiritual jurisdiction given by Act of Parliament to the
late Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her reign, and exercised
afterward by her in Ecclesiastical matters, was dew unto her, not only by
virtue of that Statute, but by vigor also of the said ancient common laws,
and so acknowledged and practiced by the old rank of our foregoing Kings and
Princes: a conclusion no less strange and paradoxicall in wise and learned
men's ears, then that was of him who diverse ages after the wars of Troy
ended, and the true success thereof published by all writers throughout the
world, took upon him to teach the contrary, to wit, that not the Grecians, but
the Troianes had the victory in that war, and so to reuerse and contradicte
whatsoever had been written, taught, or received before.

10. Let the histories of our Christian English Kings even from the first
converted Ethelbert, unto King Henry the eight be examined whether this be so
or not, and whether a thousand monuments of theirs (in almost a thousand
years) do not testify them all to have been of contrary judgment, practice,
sense, and belief (in the controversy proposed) to that which M. Attorney by a
few pieces of laws distractedly alleged, would have men to think. Or if he
delight (as I take him to be learned) to have this argument more discussed (for
it is both ample and important) let him M. Attorneyes paradox of English Kings.
but procure license for his Antagonist, to write and print his book, and I
doubt not but that he will quickly be answered by some of his own profession,
among whom I do imagine that many fingers must needs itch and tickle to be
doing in so aduantagious a cause: or if not, yet do I dare assure him, that
some Divine of our side shall join issue with him in that point, for the Now
I hear it is answered.
confutation of his whole drifte, and narration in those his Reports, but
principally in the overthrowing of his injurious conclusion, whereby he would
infer, that whosoever did not believe and acknowledge the said late Queens
Ecclesiastical feminine authority, power, and jurisdiction in spiritual
matters, was and is a traitor by the judgment of the ancient common laws of
England, received, held, and practiced even under Catholic Kings and
Princes of former times.

11. Unto which untrue and improbable paradox, he adds another no less
stinging, nor better founded then the former, which is that for the foremost
eleven years of Queen Elizabeth's reign, until she was excommunicated by
Pius Quintus: No sort of people of what persvvasion soever in Religion, False
and odious (...) of M. Attorney.
refused to go to the Protestants Church (which is evidently false, both in
many Puritanes and more Catholics that refused openly in that time) and then:
That upon that occasion Catholics first began to refuse (which in like manner
is false, both for that they refused before, and this occasion was altogether
impertinent to their refusal) and thirdly most injuriously of all, he would
further seem to infer, that such as refuse now, may in like manner be
presumed to do it upon the same undutiful mind toward his Majesty. All
which points do tend to the exasperation and exulceration which every one
sees, and coming from a man of his place, room, and neerenes in office about
his Majesty, could not but make deep impression, and give perhaps a great push
to the lamentable precipitation of those unfortunate Gentlemen that soon after
ensued.

12. Which being happened, came forth presently this other odious pamphlet of T.
M. his devised discovery (whereunto now I am forced in particular to answer) it
being in it self no less slanderous and injurious, then the fact of the
conspirators was wicked and grievous to all Catholics. The book bears this
title: An The book of T. M. about Romish doctrine
exact discovery of Romish doctrine in case of Conspiracy and Rebellion: But he
that shall weigh it well, shall find it a more exact discovery of English
Ministerial malice, in case of sycophancy and calumniation; the Author
endeavoring to ascribe that to public and general doctrine, which proceeded
from private and particular passion, as also to draw the temerity of a few, to
the hatred and condemnation of the whole. Of which iniquity we shall have
occasion to speak more afterward in due place.

13. Soon after this pamphlet appeared many more, tending all for the most
part to the same end of exulceration, or driving rather to plain desperation,
every one adding affliction to affliction, and heaping hatred and envy upon
them that detested and bewailed the transgression happened, no less, but much
more then these insolent insultors themselves. Of this kind I might name
sundry that my self have seen (though being out of England I may presume to
have seen the least part of such as have been published and set forth (...)
this fact fell out) as namely one entitled: A Discourse of the late intended
Treason; wherein the discourser begins with this foundation: That all
English, both at home and abroad, were so A discourse without name of Author
or truth of argument.
fully in possession of contented peace at the time when this treason was
plotted, as, to use his own words, no (...) grudge, no inward whispering of
disco^tentment did any way appear. Which assertion if you consider it well,
and compare it with our domestical differences in Religion, and variety of
punishments laid upon diverse sorts of men at that time (even before this fact
fell out) for the same, will seem a very great hyperbolicall exaggeration, and
ouerlashing: for that the penalties of Recusancy and other like molestations
were as rife then as at any other time before, and complaints of Catholics
in diverse countries no less pitiful.

14. Another like Treatise followed this, entitled: A true report of the
imprisonment, arraignment, and execution of the Another Treatise.
late Traitors, imprinted by Geffery Chorlton: Which so raileth upon
Catholics, and Catholic Religion from the very beginning to the end thereof,
as if none of them had been free from the fact attempted, or that their common
doctrine had publicly allowed the same; whereunto this seditious libell of the
minister T. M. which now I am to confute endeauoreth to bear false witness. I
will pretermit two other most virulent and spiteful Treatises entitled:
Pagano-Papismus, and The picture of a Papist; in which the Religion Two other
furious books.
wherein all our ancestors both lived and died from the beginning of their
Christianity unto our days, and so many worthy nations, great Princes, and
famous learned men do profess round about us at this day, and do hope to be
saved thereby, is made worse then Paganism, vea the horrible sink of all
damnable heresies, which notwithstanding were condemned by the same Religion
and Church in former ages, and consequently this censure sauoureth more of fury
then of reason.

15. But to leave of the recital of any more books or pamphlets to this
effect, there has appeared further a matter of far greater importance, which
is a Catalogue of new laws suggested in this Parliament against the said
Catholics, wherein besides the former heap of penal statutes made to this
affliction in precedent times, diverse new are proposed for an addition and
aggrauation of their Calamities, far more rigorous (if they Now they are passed.
pass) then the former; which being considered by foreign people do make the
state of English Catholics under Protestant government to seem unto them
much more miserable and intolerable, then that of the Jews under any sort of
Christian Princes, or that of the Grecians, or other Christians under the
Turk, or Persian; or that of bondsubiectes under the Polonians, Svvecians,
Moscouians, and other such Nations: so as all this tends as you see (and as
before we have noted) to more desperate disunion of minds and exasperation of
hearts.

16. Only I must confess, that in two men's writings I find more moderation,
then in any of the rest; who yet being more interessed in the late grievous
designed delict, then any of the other that write thereof, had most cause to be
provoked against the delinquents The first is his Majesty's speech both in his
Proclamation, and Court of Parliament. In the former he professes to
distinguish betvveene all others, calling themselves Catholics, and the
Authors of detestable treason, and The Princely moderation of his Majesty in
his speech.
that by good experience he was so well persuaded of the loyalty of diverse of
that (...), as that he assured himself that they did as much abhor that
odious (...), as himself. And in the second, his Majesty speaking in
Parliament, distinguished between different sorts of Catholics, allowing to
the one sort both the opinion of loyalty and possibility of salvation,
detesting in that point (to use his Highness words) the cruelty of the
Puritanes, and thinking it worthy of fire, that will admit no salvation to
any Papist: Which is an argument of his Princely moderate meaning, not to
condemn the whole for a part: though in our sense the distinction used by his
Majesty in that place of some Catholics that hold some points of our
Religion, and of others that hold all, cannot stand. For that we account them
not for Catholics at all (nor may we) that hold not all, but a part, for
that Catholicum is secundum What is Catholicum according to S. Augustine.
totum, and not secundum partem, as well S. Augustine notes, and consequently
he that belieueth a part only or any one jot less then the whole, cannot be
in our sense, nor in that of S. Augustine, a true Catholic.

17. And surely though his Majesty in this place, out of the preiudicate
persuasions of others, and (...) suggested informations, seem to be persuaded
that no Catholics of this condition that believe and embrace the whole, can
ever prove either good Christians, or faithful subjects: yet is our hope and
constant prayer to almighty God, that he will in time so illustrate that
excellent understanding of his Highness, as the same will see and discern
between these absolute and perfect Catholics that yield themselves wholly in
obsequium Which is the best sort of Catholics
and obedientiam fidei, in all that the vniuer sall Church prescribes unto
them to be believed, and others that choose, take, and leave what they like or
list upon their own judgment: which choice or election (called otherwise
heresy) if we believe the Holy Scriptures and sense of all antiquity in this
behalf, is the most dangerous and pernicious disease (in respect of both those
effects here mentioned by his Majesty) that is upon earth. And when his
Highness shall further with deliberation and maturity have pondered, how many
ages his noble Ancestors, Catholic Kings and Queens of both Realms have
reigned in peace, honor and safty over subjects of the first sort, and how
infinite troubles, turmoiles, violences, dangers, hurtes, and losses his
Majesty's own person, and all his nearest in blood and kindred, have suffered
in a few years of those other new chusers (to omit their doctrine) I doubt not
but that out of his great prudence and equanimity, he will mollify and mitigate
the hard opinion conceived of the former, notwithstanding this late odious
accident fallen out by the temerity of a few, as the world knows.

18. The second example of some moderation before mentioned, (or at least wise
meant) was my L. of Salisburies answer My Lord of Salisbury his book.
to Certain scandalous papers, as he called them; which though being written
in the time and occasion they were, the answerer wants not his stinges that
pearce even to the quick: yet supposing the pretended injury offered by that
fond menacing letter, and the condition of men in his place and dignity, not
accustomed to bear or dissemble prouocations of that kind, all may be called
moderate that is not extreme: though for the letter it self (if any such were)
I presume so much of his Lordships wisdom and prudence, as he could hardly
deem or suspect any Catholic to be so mad, as to write such a frantic
commination, but rather that it came from the forge of some such other, as
together with the blow to be given thereby to all Catholics, had furthermore
a desire to draw forth from his L. the answer, thereby to see and try his
style, and to that end gave him so urging an occasion, as by his friends is
thought that in the conueniency of reason and honor, he could not well omit
to accept thereof as he did, and performed the enterprise in such manner, as
might be expected at his L. hands; to wit, as himself writes of his Majesty's
speech in the Parliament, Every line declaring the vvorkeman.

19. Only I may not let pass to note by the way, that in two points of (...),
touched by him of the Popes authority, concerning Princes and the lawfulnes of
Equivocation in certain cases, as they are matters not apperteining Against my
Lord of Salisburies Divine.
properly to his faculty, and profession: so must I think that his Divine did
somewhat mistake, or misinforme him therein. For of the first, thus he writes:
that he has been a long time sorry, that some clear explication of the Papal
authority has not been made by some public and definitive sentence
orthodoxall etc. He adds further this reason of his desire: That not only
those Princes which acknovvledge this Superiority might be secured from fears
and iealosies of continual treasons and bloody Assassinates against their
persons, but those Kings also which do not approve the same, and yet would
feign reserve a charitable opinion of their subjects, might know how far
to repose themselves in their fidelity in civil obedience, howsoever they see
them divided from them in point of conscience etc.

20. To the former clause touching his L. desire to have the matter defined and
declared, his Divine might easily have informed him, that among Catholic
people the matter is clear, and sufficiently defined, and declared in all
points wherein there may be any doubt concerning this affair. As for The first
question about authority over Princes.
example in three things question may be made: first whether any authority
were left by Christ in his Church and Christian commonwealth to restrain or
repress, censure or judge any exorbitant and pernicious excess of Great men,
States or Princes, or that he had left them remediles wholly by any ordinary
authority? In which case as in other commonwealths that are not Christian,
all Philosophers, lawmakers, Senators, Counselors, Historiographers, and
other sorts of soundest wisdom, prudence, and experience, either Jew or
Gentile, have from the beginning of the world concurred in this; that God and
nature has left some sufficient authority in every common wealth, for the
lawful, and orderly redressing of those euilles, even in the highest persons.
Nor did ever Philosopher of name, or lawmakers hitherto deny this assertion, as
founded in the very law of nature, nations, and reason it self.

21. So when Christ our Savior came to found his commonwealth of Christians
in far more perfection then other states had been established before,
subiecting temporal things to spiritual, according to the degree of their
natures, ends, and eminencies, and appointing a supreme universal Governor
in the one, with a general charge to look to all his sheep, without
exception of great or small, people or potentates: upon these suppositions (I
say) all Catholic learned men do ground, and (...) ever grounded, that in
Christian commonwealths, not only the foresaid ordinary authority is left,
which every other state and Kingdom had by God and nature to preserve and
protect themselves in the cases before laid down; but further also for more
sure, and orderly proceeding therein, that the supreme care, judgment, direction
and censure of this matter was left principally by Christ our Savior unto the
said supreme Governor, and Pastor of his Church and commonwealth. And in
this there is no difference in opinion or belief between any sort of
Catholics whatsoever (so they be Catholics) though in particular cases,
diversity of persons, time, place, cause, and other circumstances, may move
some diversity of opinions. And thus much of the first question.

22. The second may be about the manner The second question.
how this authority, or in what sort it was given by Christ to his said
supreme Pastor, whether directly or indirectly, immediately or by a certain
consequence. As for example, whether Christ, as he gave the general charge of
his sheep to S. Peter and his Successors directly and immediately in
spiritual matters, by that commission three times repeated in S. John. Pasce
oues meas; which words include, according to Catholic exposition, not only
authority to feed, but to govern also, direct, restrain, cure, repress, and
correct, when need is, as we see it does appertain to a temporal sheepheardes
office: so whether with this commission in spiritual affairs, our Savior
gave also immediately and directly, the charge and oversight of temporalities in
like manner, or rather indirectly and by a certain consequence: that is to
say, that when the government of spiritual affairs, to wit, of souls to
their eternal bliss and salvation is so let, or impugned by any temporal
governors, as the said spiritual commission cannot be executed without
redress or remedy; in such cases, and not otherwise, the said supreme pastor
to have authority to proceed also against the said temporal Governors, for
defense and preservation of his spiritual charge. Of which question the
Canonistes do commonly defend the first part, but Catholic Deuines for the
most part the second: but both parts fully agree, that there is such an
Authority left by Christ in his Church, for remedy of urgent cases, for that
otherwise he should not have sufficiently provided for the necessity thereof. So
as this difference of the manner makes no difference at all in the thing it
self.

23. The third question may be about the The third question.
causes, for which this authority may be used, as also the form of proceeding
to be observed therein; wherabout there are so many particularities to be
considered, as are ouerlong for this place: only it is sufficient for
Catholic men to know, that this may not be done without just cause, grave and
urgent motives, and due form also of proceeding, by admonition, prevention,
intercession, and other like preambles, prescribed by Ecclesiastical Canons to
be observed, whereby my Lordships doubts of fears, and ielosies of continual
treasons, and bloody assassinates may justly be removed. For that this
authority does not only not allow any such wicked, or unlawful attemptes of
private men, but does also expressly and publicly condemn the same and the
doctrine thereof, as may appear not only by the condemnation of VVicklifs
wicked article, in the Council of Constance, wherein he affirmed: That Sess. 15.
it was lavvfull for every private man to kill any Prince whom he held to be
a Tyrant, but also by like condemnation of Calvin, Beza, Ottoman, Bucchanan,
Knox, Goodman, and others of that sect, who hold and practice in effect the
same doctrine of Wickliffe, concerning Princes, if not worse, as shall more
largely and particularly be declared afterward in the first and fourth Chapters
of this Treatise. And this I desire may satisfy his Lordship for the present,
until we come to the foresaid places where better occasion in this kind will
be offered.

24. As for the second point touched by his Lordship about the doctrine of
Equivocation, About the doctrine of Equivocation.
ambiguity of speech, amphibology, or mental reservation, in certain cases
lawful (which doctrine his Lordship terms strange, and gross, and that it
teareth in sunder all the bands of humane conversation) for that I am to
handle this matter more largely and particularly in the ensuing Chapters of
this book, especially from the fourth forward (the whole bulk of our
adversaries calumniations consisting in these two points of Rebellion and
Equivocation) I will here make answer to his Lordship, as to a man of science
and experience, that I marvel greatly, how he can think that doctrine to be
strange, which is so ordinary and usually to be seen in all the books of
Catholic Deuines for the space of these three or four hundred years, by
confession of his own writers: how also he can term it gross, that the
greatest wits of Christendom, for so long at least, have held for learned,
and founded not only upon evident grounds of reason, nature, equity, and
justice in diverse cases (and for such allowed throughout all tribunales of
Christendom, both Ecclesiastical and Civil) but warranted also by authority
of many express examples of Holy Scriptures and Fathers, and in some cases so
necessary for avoiding the sin of lying, perjury, discovering of secrettes,
iniuring our neighbors, and other such inconveniences, as if I should here
set down the said particular cases, both concerning secrecy or safty of him
that is forced to equivocate (as afterward I shall do in convenient place) I
presume his The law fulness, necessity, and circumstances of Equiuocatio^.
Lordship as so great a common-vvealthesman would allow thereof with due
circumstances, as just and necessary, and recall that part of his censure
wherein he says: That it teareth in sunder all the bands of humane
conversation, especially if he remember, that we do except from the license of
Equivocation, the common conversation of men in contractes, bargains, and
other like affairs, whereby any damage or prejudice may grow to another man,
and much more in matters appertaining to the clear and manifest profession of
our faith. And thus much for this place, the refidue afterward.

25. And now having spoken all this by way The argument of the ensuing book
against T. M.
of Preface, we shall return to the particular Treatise of T. M. (for more of
his name we cannot yet find out) entitled, An exact discovery of (...)
doctrine in case of conspiracy etc. which we have taken in hand to answer in
this place, and to show that as his meaning is malicious, and means foolish:
so is his proposition pernicious, and arguments vain, to prove the same,
wherein I remit me to that, which afterward you shall see set down.

THAT THE MAIN PROPOSITION INSINVATED AND URGED BY T. M. That Catholics are
not tolerable in a Protestant Commonwealth in respect of Rebellion and
Conspiracies, Is untrue, indiscreet and pernicious, and falls rather upon the
Protestant-Subiect, then the Catholic.
CHAP. I.
THe whole drift of the Author throughout this malignant inuectiue to be
nothing else, but to persuade, that Protestants and Catholics cannot live
together in The (...) drift and seditious scope of T. M.
one commonwealth, nor under one Prince or Governor, if he be a Protestant,
is clear and manifest by all his whole discourse, proofs and arguments,
which afterward we shall more particularly in due place discuss: yea to the
end he may make this divorce and separation between the Kings Majesty of
Great Britany, and his Catholic subjects (for thither he bends all his
battery) the more irreconciliable and remediless he places the ground of this
incompossibility, not in the will, which may be changed, but in the judgment,
and belief of Catholics; to wit, in their public and received doctrine,
which doctrine well he knows not to lie in the hands of particular men, nor
of particular Provinces, to change or alter at their pleasure (as Protestants
may, and do, here taking a part, and there leaving as they list,) but they
must stand firmly, and universally to the whole, this being truly Catholicum
as ancient Fathers define it. And hence it is, that T. M. infers thus: It is
taken out (says he) of the express dogmaticall principles of their Priests
and Doctors, and collected from their own public positions etc. which how
true or false it is, shall appear after. Now let us examine some other
circumstances of this proposition.

2. First then, I say and auerre, that this his maine and fundamental axiom,
of the incompossibility of Catholic and Protestant people together, under
the Government of his Majesty of Great Britany, is not only false and
erroneous in it self (as afterward The maine proposition of T. M. censured.
shall be declared) but pernicious also to the commonwealth, prejudicial to his
Majesty's both comfort and safety, hurtefull to the state, seditious against
peace, scandalous to the hearers, offensive to foreign nations that live under
Princes of different Religion, both Catholic and Protestant, and hateful
finally to the ears of all moderate, peaceable, and prudent people: and is on
the other side no ways profitable, needful, expedient, or convenient thus in
public to be proposed. For I would first demand this famous mak-bate, what
gain or vtility may be expected, either to Prince or people by putting in
print this so odious an assertion of extreme diffidence, and distrust between
his Majesty, and so many thousand of his subjects, that admitted him with all
joy and comfort at his first entrance to the Crown? Is it (perhaps) to prevent
some danger that may be doubted from such kind of people, and to make his
Majesty more careful and vigilant for his safty? If that be so, a private
advise had been more important to himself, or his Counsel: for that the
publishing and proclayming thereof procures not only diffide^ce, but also
restles solicitude on both sides, the one to prevent the other.

3. Secondly I would ask, what he will do, or have to be done with so great a
multitude of people, as in all his Majesty's Kingdoms do love and favor the
Religion, which this masked Minister impugneth, and would put them in despair
of any sufferance or tolerable condition under his Majesty's government? Will
he have them all made away from the face of the Earth? This were hard, except
Noe his flood should: come again, or some other equivalent inundation,: either
of water, fire, or sword. And for the later, though some think he could wish
it, yet who knows not, but that the bowels of England are so combyned and
linked together at this day in this point, as hardly can the sword pass the
one, but it must: wound also deeply the other. What then? Will he have them to
live in perpetual torment, hatred, suspicions, iealosyes, auersions,
detestations, and deadly hostilities, the one with the other? This is a state
more fit for hell, then for any peaceable and Christian common wealth, nor of
it self is it durable, if we believe either reason, or experience of former
times. For we know what Cicero, what other wisemen among the Cicero lib. offic.
very Heathens have observed, what they have written, what they have counseled
to be done, or to be prevented in like occasions: to wit, that multitudes are
not to be put in despair, no nor particular men into extreme exasperation
without hope of remedy: Inconveniences of exasperation and despair.
for that despair is the mother of precipitation, and extreme exasperation is
the next door to fury. No counsel, no reason, no regard of Religion, nor
other respect human or divine holds place, when men grow desperate, and all
stringes of hope are cut of. We see by experience, that the least and weakest
worms of the earth, which cannot abide the look of a man, yet when they are
extremely pressed, and put in despair of escape, they turn and leap in man's
face it self, which otherwise they so (...) fear and dread.

4. Wherefore seeing this dangerous stickler would put this extreme despair into
so many thousands of his Majesty's subjects, you (...) imagine what good
service he means to do him thereby, and what pay he deserves for his labor.
Surely if a great rich man, whose wealth lay in his flock of sheep, had never
so fair and fawning a dog, following never so diligently his trencher, and
playing never so many flattering tricks before him; yet if together with:
this, he had that other currish quality also, as to woory his masters sheep,
disseuer his fold, disperse his flock, and drive them into flight and
precipitation; it is Sheepebiters not to be tolerated in a Common wealth.
like that his Master out of his wisdom (though otherwise he were delighted
with his officious fawning) would rather hang such a dog, then adventure to
suffer so great and important losses by him. And no: Iesse is to be expected of
the great equity and prudence of our great Monarch, when he shall well consider
of the cause and consequence thereof.

5. And thus much of the malice and pernicious sequel of this assertion: let
us see somewhat now also of the folly and falsity thereof. To which effect I
would first enquire, if it be so that subjects of different Religions are not
comportable together, under a Prince that is of one of those Religions for so
must the question be proposed if we will handle it in general) then how do
the Jews and Christians live together under many Christian Princes in Germany
and Italy? under the state of Venice? yea under the Pope himself? how do
Christians and Turks live together under the Turkish Emperor of
Constantinople, as also under the Persian without persecution for their
Religion? how did Catholics and Arrians live so many years together under
Arrian Kings and Emperors in old times, both in Spain and else (...)? how do
Catholics and Protestants live together at this day His universal
proposition improued by diverse particulers.
under the most Christian King of France? under the great King of Polonia? and
under the German Emperor in diverse parts of his dominions (all Catholic
Princes) and in the free-cityes of the Empire? And in particular is to be
considered that the Hussites have lived now some hundreds of years in Bohemia
under the Catholic Princes and Emperors Lords of that Country, with such
freedom of conversation with Catholic subjects, and union of obedience to
the said Princes, as at this day in the great City of Praga, where the
Emperor commonly resideth, and where Catholics (...) wholly govern, there is
not so much as one (...) Church known to be in the hands of any Catholic
Pastor of that city but all are Hussites that have the ordinary charges of
souls; and Catholics, for service, sermons and Sacraments do repair only
to monasteries, according: to ancient agreementes and conuentions between
them, though in number the said Catholics be many times more then the other,
and have all the government and Commaundry in their hands, as has been said.
These are demonstratiue proofs ad hominem, and cannot be denied, and
consequently do convince that this makebate Ministers proposition is false in
general: That subjects of different religion, may not live together in (...)
peace, if their governors will permit them. Now if he can allege any
several weighty causes why this general assertion holds not, or may not
hold in the particular case of English Catholics and Protestants under our
present King, we shall discuss them also, and see how much they weigh.

6. He pretends ten several reasons in his pamphlet, 10. Reasons.
for causes of this incompossibility, and thereof does his whole inuectiue
consist. Eight of them appertain to doctrine and practice of rebellion in us,
as he avouches; and the other two unto doubtful speech or Equivocation. Of
which later point, having touched somewhat in the precedent Preface and being
to have occasion to do the same again more largely afterward we shall now
consider principally of the former, concerning doctrine and practice of quiet
or unquiet, peaceable or dangerous humors and behauiours of subjects both
Catholic and Protestant.

7. And as for Catholics, the Minister in all his About doctrine and practice
of Rebellion.
eight reasons brings out nothing of nouelty against us, but only such
points of doctrine, as himself does consesse, and expressly prove that they
were held and recevued in our public schools, above four hundred years
gone: as namely in his first reason, For that we hold Protestants for heretics
so far forth as they decline and differ obstinately from the received
doctrine and sense of the Roman Catholic Church, and consequently that being
Heretics they are not true Christians, nor can have true faith in any one
article of Christian belief, and that the punishment determined by the ancient
Canon laws, which are many and grievous, both spiritual and temporal, do, or
may thereby light upon them. And in 2. 3. 4.
his second, third and fourth reasons, that we teach, That the Bishop of Rome,
as spiritual head of the universal Church, has power above temporal
Princes, and may procure to let the Election and succession of such as are
opposite, or enemies to Catholic Religion, and that in some cases he may
dissolve oaths of obedience, and the like.

8. And further yet in his fifth, sixth, seventh, and 5. 6. 7. 8.
eight reasons, that in certain occasions, and upon certain necessities, for
preventing of greater evils, imminent to any Country, Kingdom, or common
wealth, especially if they be spiritual and appertain to the salvation of
souls, the same high Pastor may restrain, resist, or punish the enormous
excesses of temporal Princes (if any such fall out) by Censures,
excommunication, deprivation or deposition, though this not but upon true,
just, and urgent causes, when other means cannot prevail, for avoiding those
everlasting evils.

9. All which doctrines (for this is the sum of all An impor tant
consideration,
he says or alleges) do co^teine, as you see, no new matter of malice
against Protestant Princes, invented by us, for that the Minister himself, as
now we have said, confesses, that for these three or four later hundred
years, these positions have been generally received by all the universal
Church and face of Christendom; so as being established so many hundred years
before Protestants were borne or named in the world, they could not be made or
invented against them in particular; but only are drawn unto them at this time
by the malicious application of this Minister, to make the divorce before
mentioned between our Prince and us to seem remediless. For if the doctrine
approved and received so many ages before this difference of Religion was heard
of, shall be laid unto us now for matter of undutifulness (with which doctrine
notwithstanding our Ancestors lived most peaceably and duetifully for many
hundred years, as good subjects under his Majesty's (...) both in England and
Scotland) what fault can this be in us now, or what (...) is it in the Minister
to object it against us; yea to make a criminal accusation thereof in this his
calumnious libell against all Catholics of our Country whatsoever?

10. If we consider their doctrines and positions, together with their
practice and exercise concerning this point of quiet obedience and subjection,
even from these later times of Luther, Zuinglius and (...) beginninges of
innovation, we shall find an Caluinian doctrine about obe (...) to Princes.
other manner of nouelty to contemplate, and another sort of dangers for
Princes to tremble at. For if in steed of Rebellious doctrine of the (...)
Church (which is the title of this adversaries pamphlet) we should set down
the positions and practice of the Geneuian Church and Caluinian sect, planted
and directed thereby, we should easily see what were the difference, as the
whole world both may and does. For that concerning their positions and doctrine
that touch this point, they are extant in their own books, not wrong or
drawn by strained inferences, as our Ministers Calumniations are against
Catholics in this place, but plainly, clearly, and Categorically set down
by their own pen, testified and put in Archb. of Cant. in the first Book of
dangerous positions. cap. 4. and 5. and (...) in the Survey of pretended
discipline.
print by their own writers, and especially by one in England that is now in
highest dignity under his Majesty, and another in place of some dignity also by
his office, who out of their own books cited particulerly by them, relate
these and other like positions: That Princes may be restrained by force;
pursued, judged, and punished by the people; excommunicated, deprived, deposed,
and cast into hell by the Ministers; arraigned, condemned and put to death by
the inferior Magistrates, whenever in their opinion he becomes a (...), or
opposite to the gospel; which in effect falls out to be so often as these
headstrong new brethren shall mislike of his or her government, and think
them worthy to be removed.

11. And if to the testimony of our English Protestant writers in this point
any be desirous to have ad joined the suffrages in like manner of externe
authors of the same Religion, concerning the same article, about the lawfulnes
of violent usage toward Princes, in cases by them prescribed; let them read
Foreign vvriters of Protestants pernicious doctrine against Princes.
Bezae himself in his Apology to the Bishop Claudius de Saints in defense
and praise of Pultrot that murdered traitorously the famous great Duke of Guise
his Majesty's great uncle, and supreme General of all the French forces; as
also the discourse of the French famous Minister Suriau otherwise calling
himself Rosier in his Book of Reasons why it was lawful for any of his (...)
brethren to kill (as he says) Charles the ninth King of France and his mother,
if they would not obey the Caluinian Gospel, as both Launay, Launay in
Replique Christienne. lib. 1. c. 9. 6 n. 1566. and Belfor. lib. 6. cap. (...).
fol. 1565.
Belsorest and other French writers in their Histories do relate. To which
effect also was written that notorious and seditious book entitled (...)
matin and others by the brethren of the gospel; yea above others, that most
dangerous firebrand by Orsinus Hoto man and the rest of Geneua, allowed also by
(...), intitu led Vindiciaecontra Tyrannos: The revenge upon Tyrants
containing a most shameless public approbation of all desperate, of all
villainous attemptes whatsoever made, or to be made by their brethren, against
lawful Princes, under the name of Tyrants, whenever it might seem to be
done in favor of their gospel.

12. So as now after all this manifest assertiue doctrine of theirs, known and
confessed in the world, and practiced by them in so many places, for so many
years, in so notorious manner, as no man can deny it, for this Minister to
come peeping forth with certain poor illations and strained inferences
against Catholics, for that in certain cases they acknowledge power to remain
in the head of the Church by way of Canonical laws and public judgment, to
restrain exorbitant outrageous excesses of Princes, when they shall fall out,
is a ridiculous kind of biting at the heel, while the other do strike at the
head: and so will it also appear, if we observe the eue^tes themselves, for
that here in this place our Minister (for example) (...) only four factes or
processes of Popes, to wit, two of Gregory's the seventh and ninth, and other
two of Pius and Sixtus the fifth, who in so many ages have given sentence of
deprivation against Princes: whereas if we consider but this one A 'markeable
point.
age only, which has passed since Luther began (and not yet one whole age) we
shall find many more Princes deposed, slain, molested, or violated by
Protestant people, then by all Popes put together since the beginning of
Pope-dome have been troubled or Censured, which is a markeable point, and not
lightly to be passed over by prudent Princes: for that the reason hereof is,
that the one side proceeds by law, public judgment, and mature
deliberation, the other by popular mutiny, rash and temerarious precipitation.
And this of doctrine in this place until we come to the fourth Chapter, where
much more is to be added to this effect.

13. But if we should come now from doctrine to Practice of the Protestant
doctrine for tumultes against Princes.
action and examples of the exercise thereof in this behalf, there were no end
of the narration, and there is no man or woman lightly of any years or
understanding in public affairs, whose mind and memory is not full of them.
For who remembers not what passed in Germany presently almost upon the
beginning of Luthers doctrine (at the least not above 7. or 8. years after) to
wit, from the year (...). testified as well by Sleidan and other Protestant
Authors, as by those that were Catholic, how the new brethren incited by this
new doctrine again (...) their Princes, both temporal and spiritual, took
arms and entered into tumult and rebellion with such violence and headlong
pertinacy, throughout all that country, as in one The Rebellions upon Luthers
doctrine.
Province only, there were above two hundred Monasteries and Castles taken,
razed, and spoiled, and above an hundred and thirty thousand people slain, and
this was for that beginning: which fire once enkindled, and the humor of
sedition once settled in the heads o that Heretical faction, never ceased
afterward, but continued more or less still against (...) Emperor Charles the
(...), under diverse devises and pretenses of the (...) association, and the
like, until The Smalcaldian associatio^.
more then twenty years after, to wit, until the year 1546. wherein he was
forced to take in hand that great and dangerous war (Luther himself (...)
yet alive) against the Duke of Saxony, Marquis of (...) and other Protestant
Princes, whom he subdued therein, but not without great effusion of Christian
blood.

14. And the like I might relate of many other particular States and
principalities of Germany, as namely that of the Princes and Archbishops
Electors of Collen, Treuers and Mentz with all the State Palatine of Rhene, the
Bishoppricke and Dukedom of Liege, and other parts adioining, where together
with this new Gospel (especially now divided into different sects of
Lutheranisme, Zuinglianisme, Caluinisme, Multitudes of insurrectio^s against
true Princes by the new Ghospel.
Anabaptisme new Arrianisme and the like) entered presently new sedition,
Rebellion, and wars, and from thence dispersed it self long and wide, both
North and South, East and West. In the North, to Saxony, Denmark, Norway,
Sweueland, Polonia, (...), North.
and other adioining countries; and on the south to South.
Zwitzerland first, Sauoy, Grisons, and other parts next adhering, where
diverse battles were fought, Zuinglius himself being present as the chief
stirrer in those of the Cantons of Zwitzerland his country, and (...) therein,
and Calvin Beza, Farellus, and other such Ministers being the principal
inciters in the Rebellions of Geneua, and neighbor countries, against the Duke
of Sauoy, and other Lords and Princes thereof, as is apparent by their own,
and other men's books of the same part and faction.

15. Toward the East, the same fire of sedition passed with the same new
Protestant Gospel, to Bemeland In the East.
Austria, Hungary, Siletia, Moldauia and other bordering Provinces, where more
or less it has continued till our time, wherein we see by lamentable
experience, that they have joined even with the Turk himself against their
Sovereign Lord and Emperor, and against the Christian name and cause, in
despite of Catholic Religion, as Boscaine, the famous Caluinian Rebel, and
others of that Religion, or irreligion rather in these parts, for some years
now have done; and finally have forced the said Emperor for avoiding the
fatal ruin of Christendom, to grant him the Princedome of Transiluania
during his life, which God for his so great wickedness has soon cut of.

16. But to the West parts of the world, to wit, France, and all parts and
parcels of that (...) Kingdom, In the West.
the same fire was transported with greatest fury of all, as do testify their
four general most bloody France.
wars, lasting for many years together, whereof if I should recount but the
least particulers set down by their own histories, it would rue any Christian
heart to hear or read the same.

17. From hence if we draw near homeward to Flanders, England and Scotland,
the effects of this new Gospel and Ghospellers are yet more present unto our
eyes. For who can recount the thousands of people, that upon this occasion
have lost their lives both temporal and eternal as may be feared, in these
long, and bloody wars of the low countries, begun first, Flanders.
and continued ever since, upon the entrance of Protestant Religion in those
States? Who can number the Cities beseiged, taken, rifled and ransacked? The
towns and villages burnt and overthrown? The countries spoiled? The people
slain and murdered about this difference? And if we look into England, and
the state but of one sole Catholic Princes governing, England.
there, but for four or five years over Protestant subjects misliking her
government for Religion, you shall find more conspiracies, treasons, and
Rebellions practiced against her in proportion of so: few years, by the said
sort of people (if we consider what Northumberland, Suffolk, Wiat, Courtney,
Stafford, Fetherstone, William Thomas, and others in different conspiracies
practiced against her) then in more then 40. years was done against her
Protestant sister by her Catholic subjects, though never so much afflicted,
injured and persecuted by her.

18. But of all other countries, Scotland may be an Scotland.
example and president of Protestant spirits, what See the Histories of
Scotland (...) by Bucchana^, and Knox and by Holinshed, and my Lord of (...).
his book of dangerous Positions, cap. 2. 3. 4. etc.
they are under a Catholic Prince or Princess, though otherwise never so
virtuous, or never so mild. For who can deny the exceeding great prudence,
moderation, benignity, liberality, and other virtues of the Noble Queen Mary
Regent of Scotland, Grandmother to our Sovereign that now reigns, when those
furious and seditious Ministers Knox, Goodman, Mollocke, Douglasse, Meffan, and
others began to raise up her subjects against her, from the year 1557. (which
was the fourth of Queen Mary's reign of England) and continued the same in
most spiteful and barbarous manner, with intolerable insolency, both of words
and acts, for 3. or 4. years together, assisted principally by the helps,
aid and encouragement of Queen Elizabeth (that had succeeded in the Crown of
England) until through grief, sorrow, and affliction, (...) afflictions and
death of Q Mary Regent of Scotland.
the excellent Princess gave up the Ghost, upon the year 1560. having been
(...) deposed, and the lie given her publicly, and most (...) by them. And
finally seeing herself so extreemely (...) and environed with these rebel
forces, and with a puissant army sent from England in their succor, consumed
and pyned away with (...) of mind as has been said: And no Christian could but
have compassion of her case. The particulers are written by Knox and Buchanan
themselves, in their histories of Scotland, who were two chief firebrandes in
that combustion, and by Holinshed an English Protestant Author in his
description of Scotland, allowing well, and liking the same, according to the
sense of English Protestants who concurred with them both in good will and
cooperation.

19. And thus much of the Queen Regent: but now of her excellent daughter, the
Queen regnant, Mother of our Sovereign, had they any greater respect unto her
notwithstanding all her benignity and benefits toward them at her new
return out of France, when she pardoned all that was past, and (...)
proceeding against his Majesty's Mother.
accepted of new oaths and promises of faithful obedience at their (...)? did
all this I say any thing avail her or procure her safty or quietness, in
governing these new Ghospellers? No truly, so long as she remained Catholic,
that is, to her death, and after her death, they pursued her with the greatest
hatred, and most barbarous cruelty, that ever perhaps was read of against
Prince or Princess before, or after her. I shall briefly here set down some
(...) particularities of many, as I find them (...) both in English and
Scottish Histories themselves, and that by Protestant writers, as has been said.

20. This Noble Queen after long deliberation in France, what course to take
in those troublesome times, when the spirit of the new Caluinian Gospel had
raised tumultes, conspiracies, wars, and Rebellions A brief sum of matters
fallen out in Scotland.
throughout the most part of all States, Kingdoms, and Provinces round about
her, determined finally to credit the fair promises of her said Protestant
subjects in Scotland, and to go thither, which she did, and arrived at Lith
the 20. of August, upon the year 1561. But before she departed from France,
there (...).
being sent to her from the Catholic party Doctor John Lesley Bishop of Rosse
to counsel her not to trust her bastard-brother James Steward Prior of S
Andrews, that had been the chief Author of all the former broi Holinsh.
les in Scotland, and was now sent unto her from the (...) supra.
Protestant party to flatter and deceive her with false oaths and (...), she
promised that she would not: but he arriving the next day after the Bishop unto
her at (...) in France, made so great promises, oaths, and protestations unto
her, as by little and little gate credit with her; and so returned into
Scotland by England (where he had his full instructions you must think) to
dispose the minds of all sorts, to receive, and obey the said Queen after
his and their fashion and agreement; for which good office Prior (...) made
Earl of Murrey.
she gave him soon (...) her return the Earldom of Murrey, and committed
the chief Government of the Realm unto him. But what effects ensued, we
shall now in few words declare.

21. When upon the year 1563. which was two 1563.
years after her return to Scotland, she resolved by consent of her Parliament
to marry her knisman the Lord Darley, newly made (...) of Rosse and Duke of
Albany, this Earl of Murrey made a leagne of his confederates against the
same, pretending that it would be in (...) of their Religion, and brake into
open wars against them both, says Holinshed, and when they were pressed by
the Kings and Queens forces, they had always their refuge into England, and
their counsel and direction both thence, and from their Ministers that never
parted from them, how to prosecute their matters against their Princes: whereof
the first point was, to abuse the young Kings credulity, and to set him against
the Queen: and hence ensued that strange and horrible act of entering her privy
chamber, when she was at supper upon the fourth of march 1566. in the company
of the (...) of Murton, 1566.
the Lords Ruthen and Lindsey, all Protestants, and armed, who saluted her
first with this greeting, she being great with child: That they would no longer
suffer her to have the governing of the Realm, nor to abuse them, as hitherto
she had done: And then pulled violently from her, her Secretary David, which
stood there present serving her at table, and for his refuge took hold of her
gown, which they cut of, and slew him with The barbarous murder of the
Secretary David.
many stabbes, to such fright of the afflicted Queen, as it was no less then
a miracle, that she had not perished therewith or miscarried of her child (which
was his Majesty that now governs England) having six months gone with the
same. This was done at a Parliament when all the Protestant confederates met
together, and took (as you must think) the ghostly counsel of their good
Ministers for so holy an enterprise. And upon the 20. of June next, was the
Prince borne, which thing not pleasing some, that there should remain any
issue of that family, which they desired to extinguish, the said King his
Majesty's The murder of the King.
Father was most cruelly murdered in Edenbrough on the tenth of February next
ensuing.

22. Nor did the matter cease here, but rather now ascended to the greatest
height of malicious Treason (...) ever perhaps has been used against any
crowned Prince in the world, for that these Lords of the Congregation, as they
called themselves, that is to say, Religious Rebels, congregated against their
sworn Prince, gathering forces together, laid violent hands The barbarous
dealing against his (...) Mother.
on her Majesty's person first at Carbar-hill by Edenbrough when confidently
she presumed, as to her subjects, to go unto them, and treat of peace, and
then casting her into prison, deprived her of her Crown, set up against her
the name of her dearest jewel the young Prince, not yet a year old, made
Regent her greatest enemy the Earl of Murrey her bastard traitorous brother,
held Parlamentes, made laws, debarred her the sight of her son for ever: and
finally waging open war against her, and overthrowing her forces in the
field, she being present, forced her into England, and there following her
also, procured unto her the greatest disgraces, dishonored her with the
foulest reports, defamed her with the most spiteful sermons, books and
printed libelles; and finally oppressed her with the most notorious open
injuries, that ever were cast upon a person of her Majesty's quality and
dignity. And all this without any scruple, or remorse of conscience at all: nay
all was auerred to be done according to the very rule of the Gospel and for
the Gospel, and this by all the Ministers both of Scotland and England.

23. And thus much of the second Queen Mary of Scotland brought to her ruin
by the Evangelical obedience of these new Ghospellers: but as for the young
Prince her Noble son, whom she loved most dearly above all earthly
creatures, and never was permitted so much as to embrace, or see him more
afterward, what passed in this time by the same sort of me^, both during his
minority and afterward, what co^tentions, (...) wars, (...), what murders,
what conspir cies, Rebellions and violences were used, What the King (...)
has suffered at Protestats hands in (...) of disobe dience and Rebellion.
were ouerlong to recount in this place: the Histories are full, and the (...)
made, and set forth in print by the foresaid (...) Author of (...), in his
sixth Chapter and (...) book against the (...) does touch many (...) points of
diverse notorious (...), and violences offered by them and their (...), (...)
the Kings person, state, and dignity, as their taking his authority upon them,
his surpriz and restraint at Rutheuen upon the year 1582. the brethrens
allowing and authorizing (...).
the same afterward expressly against the Kings declaration to the contrary.

24. The (...) also against his person at Striueling upon the year 1584. and
many railing speeches, (...).
sermons and books against him and his government made in England to disgrace
him, and namely the seditious preaching of Dauison and other Scottish Ministers
against (...) in London, in the Church of the Old-Iury and this being in the
month of May, it followed in November after that these Ministers with their
accomplices returning into Scotland with aid from England (though this
circumstance the Author con ealeth as not making for his purpose) they gat ten
thousand Rebels together, and (...) their tents before the town of
Striueling, whither the King was retired to fortify himself in the Castle,
making proclamations Intolerable insolences of Ministers against the King.
in their own names, and there drove at length his Majesty to yeald his person
into their hands, with the lives of his dearest friends, and was deprived
also by them of his old guard, and a (...) put upon him. All which acts were
not only defended afterward by the chief Ministers of that Realm, but the
King himself was called in like manner Jeroboam by them, and threatened to be
rooted out, as Ieroboams race was, if he continued in the course he held: and
many other like (...) by them committed, which for breuityes sake I forbear to
recount in this place.

25. Now then to return again to our former ponderation set down in the
beginning of this Chapter, let every sage and prudent Prince consider and weigh
A weighty consideration (...) Princes.
with himself, which of these two ways which of these two people, which of
these two grounds of doctrine, which of these two methodes of practice, which
of these two manners of spirit in Protestant and Catholic subjects do best
content him, and which of them he may think more sure or dangerous unto him.
For if we look over the ancient records of our countries for a thousand
years before, while English men were Catholic, we shall not find so much
violent and barbarous dealing with their (...), as I have here recounted in
less then thirty, within the compass of one only Kingdom under the
Protestants.

26. And if we compare the objections made here against us by T. M. in this
his calumnious pamphlet (as in the seque^t Chapter more particulerly you shall
see discussed) with these, and the like actions of their people; they are very
trifles and streyninges in respect of these other. As for example Doleman is
accused to write, that: The commonwealth has authority to choose to
themselves a King (when they have none) and to limit him Streyned (...) against
Catholics.
laws whereby they would be governed. And that of Doctor Stapleton: That the
people (or multitude) was not made for the Princes sake, but the Prince for the
people: That Religion is is to be had in consideration, in choice or admittance
(...) a King, where choice and admittance is permitted: That the Pope being
head of the Catholic Church may in some cases, and for some causes dispense
in oaths: That he may censure Princes upon just causes, though not in
temporal matters but indirectly only, and upon such necessity as no other
remedy can be found for (...) of the spiritual good of his subjects: That
evil (...) declyning into Tyranny may be repressed, but not by private men, or
popular mutiny.

27. All these points (I say) and diverse others, which this fellow does so
greatly exaggerate and odiously amplify against us, are so ouerrunne by them
both in The comparison betvveene the disobedience of Catholics and Protestants.
doctrine and practice, if we compare them, as they scarce admit any comparison
at all, especially if we cast our eyes upon their present practice, which
represents the lively fruit of their doctrine: as namely, the most dangerous
Rebellions of Caluinian and Trinitarian Sectaries, even now standing on foot
in Hungary Austria, and Transiluania against the Emperor: and of like men in
Polonia against that mild and most just King: and of Lutherans in Suetia, of
Puritanes, Brownists, Protestants, and the like in the Low Countries, so many
years now continued against their true and natural Prince as before has been
declared; which makes another manner of impression and force of consequence,
if it be well pondered, then does the particular temerarious fact of half a
score of young Centlemen put in despair by apprehension of public
persecution, without demerit of the persecuted, or hope of remedy for the same,
though this also be inexcusable; but the difference of evils, is worthy of
consideration, especially with the more grave and prudent sort of people, that
are not carried away with passion, or otherwise misled by sinister information.

28. And thus having said sufficiently in general about the first and chief
ground of our Ministers calumniation, concerning Rebellion and Conspiracies,
whereby he would make impossible the (...), and mutual union of Catholic
subjects with Protestants, we shall pass on to his second pillar of
impugnation, named by him The doctrine of Equivocation: but yet first we think
it expedient to examine in a several Chapter the particular reasons which he
has framed for some show of proof to this his seditious assertion.

TEN REASONS OR RATHER CALVMNIATIONS BROVGHT BY T. M. For maintenance of his
former Proposition: That Catholic people are intolerable in a Protestant
government in respect of disloyalty, conspiracies and Rebellion, Confuted and
returned upon himself and his.
CHAP. II.
ALbeit that which we have laid forth before in the precedent Chapter, for the
overthrow of the slanderous and injurious imputations of our adversary, about
Rebellion and conspiracies, be sufficient (I doubt not) for satisfaction of any
indifferent and dispassionate mind, that is not ouerborne with prejudice; yet
have I thought it expedient to pass somewhat further also, and to enter the
list with him for improuing his particular reasons, on which he would seen to
found his calumniations, wherein as nothing is so absurd or false (according to
the Orators opinion) but that by speech and smooth discourse it may be made in
some ears probable, at leastwise in the conceit of him that speaks and
indeauoreth to deceive another: so this Minister T. M. (for of that trade he is
held now to be) having designed to himself an argument whereby to make
Catholics odious, and gathered together for that end diverse shows or
shadows for the furniture of his forsaid found assertion, that Catholics are
not tolerable in a Protestant State, he intituleth them: Pregnant observations
directly proving Remish schools to be Seminaries of Rebellion in all
Protestants government: Whereas indeed they are not so much pregnant
observations, as malignant collections and enforced inferences upon false
grounds. Neither do they at all either directly or indirectly prove that which
he pretends, as by examination shall presently appear, if it may please the
Reader to hold an equal and indifferent ear in the mean space to the
discussing of the controversy.

2. And first of all to make up a competent number in form of a decalogue, he
streineth himself much to bring out ten different reasons, and in deed every
man A decalogue of T. M. his reasons hardly streined
may see that it is a streine, for that all might have been uttered in two or
three at the most, if not in fewer; for that all do concern in effect the
Catholic doctrine, about the Popes authority either in Princes or private men's
affairs. And herehence is deduced his of their succession by the same laws.
The fourth, the oath and obedience of their subjects. ex officio, that is to
say, as he is a Romish Priest. By which enumeration you may see in deed, that
the poor man was more barren then pregnant, and after his streine had partum
difficilem, a hard childbirth, as may appear by that which he has brought
forth, to wit a mouse for a mountain, and thereupon we may justly say:
parturiunt montes etc. We shall give a short view over all his reasons.

The first Reason.. 1.
THey who by their slanderous doctrine (says he) do make all Protestants by
their common censure Heretics, so odious, as unworthy of any civil or
natural society, must necessarily be judged seditious and intolerable amongst
the Protestants: But the Romish Seminaries and Jesuits do so, ergo. This is
his reason and manner of reasoning, and in this sort go all the rest, each
thing with his ergo, that you may know that the learned man has studied
Logic, or rather sophistry to set down all in form of syllogism. And to
prove his propositions or premises in How T. M. proves his assertions.
this first argument he uses two means, first to cite the hard speeches of
certain Catholic writers against the Caluinian faith, as though it were none
at all, but rather infidelity: (wherein we shall see after what great store of
Protestant writers they have also with them in that point) the other medium is
a certain odious enumeration of the penalties inflicted by Church-lawes, and
Canons of old time upon heresy and Heretics in general; all which T. M. will
needs apply to himself and to English Protestants at this day, to break
thereby all civil association with us that are Catholics: but both the one
and the other are proofs of no validity. Let us begin with the first.

4. He cites the words of Andreas Iurgiuicius Canon of Cracouia in Polonia,
affirming that Protestants do hold no one article of the Apostles Creed to
wit rightly Iurginicius.
and entierly. Of M. Wright in his articles, teaching Protestants to have no
faith, no Religion, no Christ. Of M. Wright.
M. Reynoldes, entituling his book Caluino-Turcismus. Of D. Gifford in the
preface to the said book, auouching M Reinoldes.
the pretented now Ghospel of Calvin, in many things, D. Gifford
to be worse and more wicked then the Turks Alcaron. And finally of Antonius
Posseuinus who wrote a book De Atheismis (...).
Protestantium: Of the Atheismes, or points of doctrine leading to Atheism,
which are taught by diverse Protestants, especially by Calvin, and his followers.

5. Out of all which speeches T. M. infers the general meaning of us
Catholics to be: That all humane society with Protestants must be utterly
dissolved, which is utterly false and a mere mistaking. For these speeches
prove only that there ca be no society (...) Catholics and Protestants in
their doctrine and belief, but not in life, manners and conversation, which is
the point in question: so as T. M. infers here quid pro quo. And if he will
hear one of his own brethren hold this position also; That there can be no
union, society, or conformity between their and our doctrine pretended by
some, No sociability in doctrine but in conversation there may be.
let him read William Perkins epistle to S. William Bows in the preface of
his reformed or rather deformed Catholic, where he reprehendeth the new
brethren of France, and some also in England, for giving hope of Perkins
Catholic
this union. So as in this point we agree, that no agreement can be in
Religion, but in conversation there may, as we have showed by many examples in
the precedent Chapter of people of different Religion that live together at
this day in union of obedience, and quiet subjection under the (...), Turk,
and Christian Emperor, as also under the great Kings of France, Polonia and
other Princes. Fondly then does T. M. infer the incompossibility of
cohabitation and conversation out of the insociability of their doctrine and
Religion.

6. Now as for the hard and harsh speeches of the Authors alleged, though
unto many they may seem somewhat sharp exaggerations; yet unto him The hard
speeches against Caluinistes ansvvered.
that shall consider well the matter in hand, and the accustomed phrases of
ancient Fathers in like occasions, it will appear far otherwise. For first
(...) his meaning is nothing else, as appears by his book, but that in all
and every article of the Creed, Caluinistes have innouated and altered somewhat
in the true sense thereof, and added particular errors of their own, as you
shall hear afterward proved, and declared more largely out of the (...) and
assertions of diverse great Lutheran Protestants, that hold Caluinists to have
perverted all the articles of the said Creed. Of which point our learned
countriman M. William Reinoldes, that had bvn diverse years a Protestant and
Preacher of that doctrine, after long study to prove the same by many
demonstrations, resolved to write a whole book, That Caluinistes believe no
one article of the Apostles Creed; but afterward turned the same into that
other work entitled Caluino-Turcismus, CaluinoTurcismus of M. Reinoldes.
which is held by strangers to be one of the most learned, that has been
written of this kind of controversy in our age, and M. Sutcliffe has made
himself ridiculous by attempting to answer the same.

7. Those words also of M. Wright (if he used them) that Heretics have no
faith, no Religion, no Christ, but are Master VVrights speeches.
mere infideles, do contain an ancient position of Catholic doctrine,
delivered in schools and Fathers writings against old Heretics, many hundred
years before the name of Protestants was heard of in the world; so that this
cannot be of malice properly against them. The famous doctor S. Thomas above
three hundred years gone, has this Question in his Treatise of faith: Whether
he that (...) obstinatly in one point, D. Thomas 2. 2. quaest. 5. art. 3.
or article of his belief, does leese his whole faith in all the rest, and
holds yea; alleging for the same invincible reasons. And the same Doctor in
like manner proposes another question, to wit, which of three sins belonging
to infidelity is most grievous, Iudaisme, Paganism Ibidem quaest. 10. art. 6.
or Heresy? and resolves the question thus: That albeit in some respects the
former two may be thought more grievous in that they deny more points of faith;
yet absolutely in regard of the malice and How heinous a sin heresy is.
obstinacy of an Heretic, that knew once the Catholic truth, and now
wilfully impugneth the same, against the judgment of the universal visible
Church, his sin and damnation is much more grievous; and hereupon the ancient
See Tertull. li. de pudicitia. Cypr. li. 4. ep. 2. Athan. ser. 2 contr. Arrian.
Aug. li. de gratia. Hier. con. lucifer. etc.
Fathers do every where aggrauate the heynousnes of this sin above all other
sins, and in particular, do deny them to be Christians, but rather to be
Infideles, and worse then Infideles, as now by S. Thomas has been said: which
is most conform to the writings of the Apostles themselves and Apostolic
men, who detested this sin in the highest degree, as might largely be showed
out of their works, even to the horror of the Reader, if this place did bear
it. That severe speech of S. Paul may be sufficient for all the rest, exhorting
his disciple Titus to avoid an heretical man after one or two Tit. 3.
reprehensions, knowing that such a one is subverted, and sins as damned by
his own judgment. Which is never found written of other sorts of Infideles.

8. No man then ought to be offended with these earnest and sharp speeches,
where heresy or the presumption thereof is in question, for that nothing is more
dreadful to Catholic people then the very name and apprehension of heresy;
howsoever in our unfortunate days, it be made a matter of dispute only, or
table-talke by many now in England, and he that will see store of proofs and
reasons laid together by the foresaid learned man M. Reynoldes to prove that
M. Reinoldes collection about modern heresies.
the heresies of these our times, of such as call themselves Protestants, but
especially the followers of Calvin, are far more perilous and detestable
then Paganism, Iudaisme or Turcisme, let him read not only his foresaid four
books De Caluino-Turcismo, but two special large Chapters or Treatises of
this very matter in his book De iusta Reipublicae potestate etc. to wit the 4.
and 5. and he will rest satisfied.

9. Nor do Catholic writers only make these Protestations against Calvin and
his doctrine, but many of the most learnedest other Protestants of these days,
as has been touched. One most famous preacher and Protestant writer or rather
Superintendent in Polonia called Francis Stancarus in an epistle to the King
Franciscus Stancarus Minister epad Regem Poloniae.
himself says of him, and to him: Quis Diaboluste, o Calvin, seduxit, vt
contra filium Dei cum Arrio obloquaris? etc. Cauete, o vos Ministri omnes, a
libris Caluini, praesertim in articulis de Trinitate, incarnatione, mediatore,
Sacramento Baptismi, and praedestinatione: continent enim doctrinam impiam and
blasphemias Arrianas: What devil has seduced thee, o Calvin, that thou
should speak injuriously against the son of God with Arrius the
Heretic? etc. Beware, all ye Ministers, of Caluins books, especially in the
articles of the Bl. Trinity, Incarnation, of the mediator, of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and of predestination: for they contain impious doctrine, and
blasphemies of Arrius.

10. Another brother and Protestant-Preacher no less zealous then he in
Germany named Conradus Schlusselburge says of him and his (...) that himself
has declared and proved in three large books: Hos de nullo fere Conradus
Schlusselburgius in l. de Theologia Caluinistaru^ impress. Francof. 1592.
Christianae doctrinae articulo recte sentire: That they scarcely believe
aright any one article of Christian belief, which is the self same that the
forenamed Catholic writer Iurgiuicius objected before, which T. M. took so
impatiently as you have heard. And the same brother in one of his said books
affirms: Quod Caluinistae ipsum filium Dei mendacij arguunt, Deum sua
omnipotentia spoliant, sunt abiurati hosts and profligatissimi falsatores
Testamenti filij Dei: That Caluinists do charge the Son l. 2. art. 13.
of God with a ly, do spoil God of his omnipotency, and are foresworne
enemies, and most wicked falsifiers of the Testament of the Son of God.

11. And another famous Doctor of the same new Gospel and spirit, says that
this sect of Caluinists and their doctrine, Sentina quaedam est etc. is a
certain sink (...) Schulz. lib. de 50. (...) lit. A. 6.
into which all other heresies do flow: it is the last rage of the devil,
which he in his fury does exercise against Christ and his Church etc. And then
further: Qui parts eorum sequitur etc. he that follows their sect, is a
manifest and sworn lit. Q. (...).
enemy of God, and has denied his faith which he promised to Christ in his
baptism: So he. And consider now whether this be not as great detestation of
Caluins doctrine, by principal learned Protestants, as T. M. has picked out of
Catholics wrested words before recited?

12. But you must not think that here is an end for there would be no end, if
I should prosecute all that might be said in this case: Tilmannus Heshusius a
Superintendent of the Protestants in the same country Tilmanus Heshusius
calls Caluins doctrine: Blasphemam and Sacrilegam sectam; a blaspemous and
Sacrilegious sect: and writes a special book of this title: A defense of the
Holy Testament of Christ against the blasphemous confession of Caluinists.
AEgidius Hunnius. fol. 181.
And AEgidius Hunnius writing a book De Caluino Iudaizante, of Calvin playing
the Jew, after a long confutation says thus: D^^^^um satis superque iudico
etc. we have detected I suppose sufficiently, and more then sufficiently that
Angel of darkness John Calvin, who coming forth of the pit of hell, has
partly by his detestable wickedness in wresting Scriptures, partly by his
impious pen against the Holy Majesty of Christ, partly Apo. 12.
by his horrible and monstrous paradoxes about predestination, drawn both
himself into hell, and a great number of stars, as the Apocalips speaks.

13. I pretermit many others, as that of Philippus Nicolaus a
Protestant-Minister of Tubinga, who in the Many books of the learneder
Protestants against Caluinistes.
year 1586. set forth a book in 4. with this title: A Discovery (and this I
write for our discouerer) of the fundaments of the Caluinian Sect, and how they
agree with old Arrians and Nestorians: Whereby also is demonstrated that no
Christian man can take part with them, but that he must defend Arrianisme and
Nestorianisme: So he. But the next year after there came another book forth
printed in the same University with this Ioannes Modestus. 1587.
title: A demonstration out of the Holy Scriptures, that Caluinists and
Sacramentaries are not Christians, but rather baptized Jews and Mahometanes:
and a little after that again Ioannes Matthias.
came forth the book of Ioannes Matthias the great Preacher in VVittenberge:
De cauendo Caluinistarum fermento, how to avoid the leaven of the Caluinists;
and then Albertus Grauerus
another of Albertus Grauerus of like function upon the year 1598. entitled:
Bellu^ Ioannis Caluini and Jesus Christi: The war between John Calvin and
Jesus Christ; and all this written, set forth, and printed by chief Protestant
brethren: which if the inference of T. M. be true against Catholics, that in
respect of the difference of their doctrine, and for that they hold Caluinists
to have no true faith, they may not live together under one Prince: then must
it follow also that neither these Lutherans and Caluinian Protestants can live
together: and the very same ensues between English Protestants and
Puritanes, upon the difference of their doctrine and belief, which has no
less opposition in deed and detestation the one of the other in bitterness of
speech, then have the Lutherane Protestants against them both; as may easily be
demonstrated out of their own books, if we would stand upon it. And this
shall be sufficient for the refutation of his first medium, brought forth to
prove that Catholics and Protestants cannot live together in one common
wealth, for that the one side accompteth the other for Heretics.

14. But the second medium is yet more childish, Refutatio^ of his second
medium.
which is, that for so much as we not only do hold Protestants to be
excommunicate Heretics, but subject also to all the punishments and penalties
set down in the Popes Ecclesiastical Canons, Decrees, and Constitutions for
the same, which are many and grievous, (as that Heretics must leese their
goods, cannot gather up tithes, nor recover debtes, nor institute heirs, and
other such like, and more sharp penalties prescribed in old time by the Canon
law against ancient Heretics) hereof he infers that we detract all humane
society from Protestants, and consequently we are not tolerable in a Protestant
commonwealth.

15. But we answer first, that touching the former part to wit the imputation
of heresy and excommunication to the Protestant party of England, that
follows the Sacramentary doctrine of Calvin and Zuinglius, you have heard now
immediately before, how that imputation is laid upon them, not only by
Catholics, but also by the most renowned Protestant writers that have been
since that name and profession began. And if we would allege much more out of
the very Father of Protestancy it self Martin Luther, Luther. contr. art.
Louanien. These. 27.
we might have store, especially where he pronou^ceth this judicial sentence
of them all: Haereticos serio censemus and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei Zuinglianos
and Sacramentarios omnes, qui negant Christi corpus and sanguinem ore carnali
sumi in venerabili Sacramento. We do unfeignedly hold for Heretics, and for
aliens from the Church of God all Zuinglians and other Sacramentaries that do
deny Christ's body and blood to be received by our bodily mouth in the
venerable Sacrament.

16. Behold here both Heresy and excommunication or separation from the Church
of God auerred against both Zuinglians and Caluinists, by him that was their
chiefest parent and Patriarch: and in other places of his works, the same
Luther has many more particulers to this purpose, as namely that men must fly
the books and doctrine of Zuinglius and his followers, Non secus ac tartarei
Daemonis venenum, no otherwise Luther, de Caena Dotomo 2. Ger. f. 182 and 190.
then the poison of the devil of hell. And yet further that: They are not to
be held in the number of Christians, for that they teach no one article of
Christian doctrine without corruption, and are seven times worse then Papists
etc. Whereby is evident that this charge of Heresy and excommunication
proceeds not against Caluinists from us only, but much more eagerly from
their own brethren, and consequently it is with very little discretion brought
in by the Minister T. M. against us as a singular fault of ours, whereof we are
to treat more afterward in some occasions that will be offered.

17. But now as for the penalties contained in the Canon law, against
excommunicate Heretics, as deprivation of dignities, loss of goods, infamy,
imprisonment, Concerning the penalties incurred by Heresy according to the
Canons.
debarment from Sacraments, and from conversation, with the like; the answer
is soon made, that those external punishments are not incurred ordinarily,
but after personal denunciation and condemnation by name. For albeit the
inward punishments that follow Heresy which are sin and deprivation of
grace, excommunication and separation from Gods true Church, and other
spiritual losses thereon depending, be incurred by the obstinate holding or
defending of any condemned Heresy whatsoever, if the defender know the same to
be condemned by the Church, as both Holy Canons do expressly denounce, and
Bulla Caenae Domini every year (...) on Maundy-Thursday does confirm: yet
commonly are they not held for subject to the other external punishments (and
in particular to be avoided and their company fled) until by a lawful Judge
he or they be denounced, convicted, and condemned by name, which we ascribe not
to the Protestants of England, and therefore this charge was maliciously
devised by this Minister against us, to make us odious.

18. Nay we go yet further for pacifying and milding matters between us, that
we do not easily condemn or hold all and every sort of Protestants,
Puritanes, or the like sorts different at this day in our country from the
Catholics, for absolute Heretics, but excusing them rather wherein we may by
any charitable interpretation, do willingly lay hands where probably The
moderation of S. Augustine willingly admitted.
we may on that wise, learned, and discreet moderation of the famous doctor S.
Augustine, affirming to his friend Honoratus infected with the Manichean
Heresy, that there is a great difference between an Heretic, and one that
belieueth Heretics, and is deceived by them; you shall hear his own words
to that purpose: Si mihi (Honorate) vnum atque idem videretur Aug. lib. de
vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum Manichaeum.
esse Haereticus and Haereticis credens homo, tam lingua, quam stylo in haec
causa conquiescendum esse arbitrarer: nunc vero cum inter duo plurimum in^ersit
etc.

19. If it had seemed to me (friend Honoratus) that an Heretic and a man
believing Heretics had been al one thing, I should have thought it better to
hold my peace in this cause between us, rather then to speak or write any
thing therein: but now seeing there is such great difference between these two,
I thought Who is an Heretic.
it not good to be silent with you, for so much as an Heretic in my opinion
is he, that for some temporal respect or commodity, but especially for vain
glory and singularity, does invent, or follow false and new opinions: but he
which belieueth such people is a man only deluded by a false imagination of
truth and piety. So S. Augustine. And hereby opens to us a door to think
charitably of many Protestants, whom though we hold for deceived; yet not
properly in S. Augustines meaning for Heretics.

20. And this doctrine teaches the same Doctor in other places against the
Donatistes, saying, that if a man should believe the heresy of Photinus (for
example) lib. 4. de bap. contra Donatistasc. 16.
who denied the distinction of three persons in God, and the divinity of
Christ, and should think it were the true Catholic faith: Istum nondum (...)
dico (says S. Augustine) nisi manifestata sibi doctrina Catholicae fidei
resistere maluerit, and illud quod tenebat elegerit. I do not Every one that
belieueth heresy is not properly an Heretic.
think this man as yet to be an Heretic, except when the doctrine of the
Catholic faith (to wit that which is held generally by all or the most
Churches over Christendom) being made clear and manifest unto him, he shall
resolve to resist the same, and shall make choice of that which before he
Choice or election make Heresy.
held: so as now this choice or election with obstinate resolution to hold and
defend the same against the public authority of the Church, makes that to be
properly heresy, which before was but error; which error though it might be in
it self damnable; yet nothing so much as when it passes into the nature of
heresy; both which points are seen by that which the said Holy Father has in
another place, to wit in his book De haeresibus ad Quod-vult-Deum, where
having recounted eighty and eight Heresies, that had passed before his time
unto the Pelagians, that were the last, he concludes thus: There may be yet
other Heresies besides these that I have in this our work recounted, or there
may rise up other herafter, whereof whosoever shall hold any one, he shall not
be a Christian Catholic. He does not say he shall be an Heretic properly,
but no Christian Catholic, which though it be sufficient to damnation, if
ignorance excuse him not; yet nothing so great as if he were an heretic, for
that as before we have showed out of S. Thomas, the damnation of Jews and
Gentiles is much more tolerable then that of Heretics.

21. And all these limitations and charitable moderations we do willingly use
to calm and mitigate matters, and to temper that intemperate breaking humor
of this makebate Minister T. M. and his companions that would put all in
combustion and desperate conuulsion. And so much of this first reason, the rest
we shall pass over with greater breuity.

To his second and third Reasons.. 2.
HIs second reason why his Majesty's Catholic and Protestant subjects may not
live together in England is, For that all Popish Priests (faith he) do
attribute a double prerogative over Kings, that is to say, a Democraticall and
Monarchical Sovereign civil power, the first to the people, the second to
the Pope: And for proof of the first, concerning the people, he alleges
four several authorities of Catholic writers, but so corruptly and
perfidiously, as if nothing else did show his talent of cogging and treacherous
dealing, this were sufficient to discover the same, though afterward greater
store will occur: we shall run over briefly all these four.

23. First he says that Doleman in his Conference about succession has these
words: The Commonwealth Dol. par. 1 page 13. cyted in Discovery page 9.
has authority to choose a King, and to limit him laws at their pleasure:
Which if it were truly alleged as it lies in the Author, yet here is no
mention of the people, or of Democraticall state, but only of the
Commonwealth, which includes both nobility and people, and all other states.
Secondly Dolemans words are not of choosing a King, but of choosing a form of
government be it Democraticall, Aristocraticall or Monarchical. Let us hear
the Author himself speak: In like manner (says he) it is evident, that as the
Commonwealth has this authority to choose and change her government (as has
been proved:) so has it also to limit the same with what laws and conditions
she pleases, whereof ensues great diversity of authority and power, which each
one of the former governments has Dolema^s text abused in words and sense.
in it self. So he. Where we see that Doleman speaks of the power which a
Commonwealth has, that is deuoid of any certain government, to choose unto
themselves that form that best likes them, with the limitations they think
most expedient: and so we see in England, France, Polonia, Germany, Venice,
Genua, and in the Empire it self different forms and manners of government,
with different laws and limitations, according to the choice and liking of each
nation. This place then of Doleman is corrupted by T. M. both in words and
sense, for he neither speaks nor means as the false Minister avouches him,
of giving Democraticall power to the people over Princes established.

24. There follows the second place taken out of D. Bouchier p. 36. cyted in
Disc. pa. 8.
the French Jesuit, as he calls him: De iusta abdicatione etc. though it be
well known that D. Bouchier Author of that book yet living in Flanders, and
Canon of Tourney was never Jesuit in his life; but all must be ascribed to
Jesuits, that may seem odious: This French Jesuit (says he) shows a reason
of Dolemans speech, saying: For Majesty is rather seated in the Kingdom, then
in the King. But I would ask the poor man, why he does allege this place?
or of what weight it is, or His cauillation against D. Bouchier.
may be for his purpose? for so much as D. Bouchier in these words denies not
Majesty to be in the King, but to be more in the Kingdom; for that the
Kingdom gives Majesty unto the King when it chooses him, and not the King
properly unto the Kingdom. And is not this a great objection? or does this
prove that we ascribe Democraticall soueraignity over Kings unto the people?
One of his own Ghospell-brethren speaks more roundly and roughly to the
matter when he writes: Populo ius est vt imperium cui velit deferat: Buchan.
l. de iure regni. p. 13
The people has right to bestow the crown upon whom they list: if we had
said so, what advantage would T. M. have sought thereat?

25. His third place is out of D. Stapleton, in his book called Dydimus, where
he says: That the people are Stapleton in Dydimo pa. 261 cyted in Disc. pa. 8.
not ordained for the Prince, but the Prince for the people. His words in
Latin are: Non populi in Principum gratiam facti, sed Principes in populi
commodum creati sunt. Multitudes of people are not made (by God) for Princes
sakes, but Princes are created for the commodity Peevish vvra^gling against D.
Stapleto^.
or good of the people: and what is there in this sentence justly to be
reprehended? Is not this evident by divine and humane law, and by the very
light of nature it self, that Princes were first ordained by God, for the good
of multitudes, and not multitudes for the vtility of Princes? Will T. M. deny
this? or is not this far more modest and temperate then that of his own
brethren before mentioned, whose words are: Populus Rege est praestantior and
melior; the people are better Buchanan li. de iure regnip. 61
and more excellent then the King? what wilful wrangling is this in a
turbulent Minister?

26. His fourth and last place is out of M. William Reinoldes in his book De
iusta Reip. auctoritate etc. whom Reginaldus de iusta Reip. auctoritate etc.
c. 1. cited in Disc. pa. 8.
he abuses egregiously, both in ascribing to him that which is not his, and in
delivering the same corruptedly, and by a little you may learn much, ex vngue
leonem. His words he cites thus: Rex humana creaturae est, quia ab hominibus
constituta: and Englisheth in this manner: A King is but a creature of man's
creation. where you see first that in the translation he adds but, and man's
creation of himself, for that the Latin has no such but, nor creation, but
constitution. Secondly these words are not the words of M. Reinoldes, but
only cited by him out of S. Peter; and thirdly they are alleged here 1. Pet.
2.
by T. M. to a quite contrary sense from the whole discourse and meaning of the
Author, which was to exalte and magnify the authority of Princes, as descending
from God, and not to debase the same, as he is calumniated. For proof hereof
whosoever will look upon the book and place it self before mentioned, shall
find that M. Reinolds purpose therein is to prove, that albeit earthly
principality, power and authority M. Reinol des discourse.
be called by the Apostle humana creatura: yet that it is originally from God,
and by his commandment to be obeyed. His words are these: Hinc enim est etc.
hence is it, that albeit the Apostle do call all earthly principality a
human creature, for that it is placed in certain men (from the beginning) by
suffrages of the people; yet election of Princes does flow from the law of
nature, which God created; and from the use of reason which God powered into
man, and which is a little beam of divine light drawn from that infinite
brightness of almighty God; therefore does the Apostle S. Paul pronounce that
There is no power but from God, and that he which resists this power,
resists God himself. So M. Reinoldes.

27. And now let the indifferent Reader judge whether M. Reinolds abu sed by T.
M.
M. Reinoldes has been calumniated in this allegation or no, and whether this
Minister is led by any rule of conscience, and whether these be such pregnant
arguments and proofs against us as he promised at the first entrance of his
book. And for the matter in hand, he promised to prove, as you have heard,
that we ascribed popular and Democraticall power to the people over Kings,
which how well he has performed by these places alleged you have seen.

28. Finally to stand no longer upon this, whether we or they, Catholics or
Protestants do attribute more to popular license, against Princes (when they
give not contentment) may abundantly be seen in that we have set down
before, and will ensue afterward, both of their doctrine and practices in like
occasions. And so much of this first charge: now will we pass to the second.

29. The second is, that we ascribe (...) The second charge ansv vered about
the Popes authority.
power and souer aignty over Kings unto the Pope: wherein first what he says of
civil souer aignty is a mere fiction and calumniation of his own, if it be
out of the Popes own temporal Dominions. For we ascribe no such unto him over
other Princes or their subjects, but that authority or sovereignty only which
Catholic doctrine ascribes to the Bishop of Rome as Successor to S. Peter
Prince of the Apostles, and spiritual head of the universal visible Church of
Christ, which is only spiritual, and for spiritual ends, to wit, for the
direction and salvation of souls. And if at any time he be forced to pass
further then this, and by a certain consequence to deal in some temporal
affairs also; it must be only indirectly in defense or conservation of the
said spiritual, that is to say, when the said spiritual power apperteining to
souls cannot other wise be defended or conserved, as more largely has been
treated before.

30. This then is the sum and substance of Catholic doctrine, about this
point of the Popes authority, which from the beginning of Christianity has been
acknowledged in Gods Church, and in no place more then in England, where it
has been both held and practiced from the very first Christened King of our The
answer to S. Edward Cook.
nation Ethelbert unto K. Henry the 8. for the space of almost a thousand
years, without interruption, as largely and abundantly has been showed and
laid forth to the view of all men in a late book written in answer to S.
Edward Cooks fifth part of Reports; and this with great honor and prosperity
of the Princes thereof, and union of their people under their government, and
without such odious or turbulent inferences, as now are made thereupon by
unquiet spirittes, that would set at war even men's imaginations in the air,
thereby to maintain disunion, discord, and diffidence between Princes, and
namely between our present noble Sovereign and his Catholic subjects.

31. And first of all let us hear this turbulent T. M. how upon the envy of
this authority he frames and foundeth all his ensuing reasons. We demand
(says he) how far these pretended powers (of people and Pope) T. M. puts
his fictions for our positions.
may extend, and heervpon we argue. To which I answer, that in imagination
they may extend so far as any fantastical brain shall list to draw them;
but in the true meaning of Catholic real doctrine, they can extend no
further then has been declared. And as for the popular power of people over
Princes, we have now refuted the calumniation, and showed that it is a mere
fiction of his own, and no position of ours; and that his Protestant doctrine
does ascribe much more license to popular tumult, then the Catholic without
comparison: and for that of the Pope, I have declared how it is to be
understood to be of his own nature in spiritual affairs only, without
prejudice of civil Princely government at all, and so the practice of the
world and experience of so many Princes, great States and Monarchs living
quietly and securely under the same authority, both in former times and ours
most evidently does prove and confirm.

32. But yet let us see and consider how falsely and calumniously this
Makebate does hereupon argue in his third reason, inferring for his assumption
or minor proposition thus: But all Popish Priests upon this pretended
Supremacy and prerogative of Pope and people, do utterly abolish the title of
succession in all Protestant Princes: Ergo. Wherein to show him a notable liar,
it shall be sufficient to name all the Protestant Princes, that have had title
of succession in our country (for thereof he speaks principally) Calumniation
(...) co^uinced.
since the name of Protestant has been heard of in the world, being three in
number, to wit K. Edward the sixth, Q. Elizabeth, and K. James that now
reigns, all which were admitted peaceably to their Crowns, as well by
Priests as Catholic people, who notwithstanding in some of their admissions
wanted not means to have wrought disturbances as the world knows: so as if
one instance only does truly overthrow any general proposition; how much more
does this triple instance not able to be denied, overthrow and cast to the
ground this universal false assertion of T. M. which auerreth: That all Popish
Priests (...) utterly abolish the Succession of all Protestant Princes. Will he
not be ashamed to see himself co^uinced ofso great and shameless ouerlashing?

33. And on the other side, one only Catholic Princess being to succeed in
this time, to wit Q. Mary, we know what resistance the Protestants made both by
books, sermons, Treatises and open arms; and Catholic Princes successio^s
resisted by Protestants.
how many Rebellions, conspiracies, robberies, privy slaughters, and other
impediments were designed and practiced afterward, during the few years she
reigned: we know also what was executed against the government and lives of the
two noble Catholic Queens her nearest neighbors, and one of them most
straightly conjoined in blood that reigned at that time in Scotland, to omit
others before mentioned, that were debarred from their lawful succession, or
excluded from their rightful possession for their Religion in Sweueland,
Flanders, and other places as cannot be denied.

34. Wherefore it is more then extraordinary impudency in T. M. to charge us
with that which is either peculier or more eminent in themselves, and false in
us: and what or how far this fellow may be trusted in these his assertions,
may be gathered by the last sentence Calumn^ia tio^ against Doleman.
of all his discourse in this matter, where he has these words: F. Persons
(in his Doleman) does pronounce sentence, that whosoever shall consent to the
succession of a Protestant Prince is a most grievous and damnable (...). And is
it so in deed Sir (...)? and will you stand to it, and leese your credit if
this be falsely or calumniously alleged? then if you please let us hear the
Authors own words.

35. And now (says he) to apply all this to our purpose Doleman part 1. page
216.
for England, and for the matter we have in hand, I affirm and hold, that for
any man to give his help, consent, or assistance toward the making of a
King, whom he judges or belieueth to be faulty in Religion, and consequently
would advance no Religion, or the wrong, if he were in authority, is a most
grievous and damnable sin to him that does it, of what side soever the truth
be, or how good or bad soever the party be, that is preferred. So he. And his
reason is, for that he should sin against his own conscience in furthering
such Aching. And is there here any word peculiar of a Protestant Prince, or of
his succession? T. M. (...) bad dealing.
nay does not the text speak plainly of making a King where none is? does it
not speak also indifferently of all sorts of Religion, of what side soever
the truth be? How then can this malicious cauilling Minister expect to be
trusted hereafter, or how may any man think that he speaks or writes out of
conscience, seeing him to use such gross shifts and falshoodes in so manifest
and important a matter? It is no marueyle that he set not his name at large to
his book, as not desirous to have the dew praise of such desert.

To the rest of his reasons.. 3.
But let us pass a little further in these his devises, for much I may not,
both in regard of the breuity which I have designedvnto my self, and for the
loathsomnes I take of such uncharitable railings, as in steed of reasons he
casts forth, with no greater authority, then of his own assertion, or rather
calumniation.

37. As for example in his fourth reason he subsumeth in his minor proposition
thus: But all Popish Priests (...) dissolve the oath of obedience to all
Protestant Governors. And in the fifth: But all Popish Priests defend violent
deposing of Kings and Emperors. And in the sixth: But all Popish Priests are
guylty of intending, designing, or practicing murder A rabblement of false
illations.
of Princes. And in the seventh: But all Popish Priests do justify the acts
of treason and (...) parricides. And yet further in the eight: But all Popish
Priests profess Rebellion, as soon as they can presume of their strength In
the ninth likewise: But all Popish Priests are guylty of (...), for denying or
violating with men of diverse Religion. And lastly in histenth: But all Romish
Priests ex officio, that is to say, as they are Priests, must and do
profess such seditious (...), as thereby they are desperate traitors. (...).

38. And is it possible for any tongue (though borrowed from hell it self, and
embrewed with never so virulent or serpentine prison) to utter more precipitate
malice then this? His propositions you see are general in all these
assertions, to wit, that al Catholic Priests are guilty in all these
accusations, and the nature as you know of a general proposition is such, as
if any one instance may be given to the contrary, it overthrows the whole.
And is it probable (think Injurious dealing of T. M.
you) that no one Priest may be found in England or elsewhere, deuoide of all
these heynons accusations, or of any one of them? Surely I am of opinion, that
there will hardly be found any man so passionate on his owneside, which in this
case will not condemn him of passion, precipitation, and conscienceles
calumniation. And we on the other side may well urge to the contrary that no
one Priest has truly hitherto been convinced to have treated or conspired, or
given consent to the Princes death in all the long reign of the Queen past,
no not Ballard himself who only can be named to have been condemned for this
pretense, though in deed his crime was, as of all the 14. Gentlemen that died
with him, rather to have delivered Queen Mary out of prison, then to deprive
Q. Elizabeth of her life: and so they protested at their deaths.

39. But leaving this let us come to examine some of the points themselves,
that are objected: they are all (if you consider them well) but little buddes
and branches deduced from one, and the self same root of the Popes authority,
and consequently but minced-meates made out in different services, by the
cunning cookery of T. M. to feed the fantasies of such as hunger after
variety of calumniations against the Catholic doctrine. For what The (...)
authority strained to many branches of (...).
great difference is there (for example sake) between that which is treated in
the fourth reason of sreeing subjects from their obedience to Princes, and the
other of the fifth about Deposing Princes, or that of the sixth and seventh of
designing their deaths, and of justifying treasons against the same: And so in
the ninth of oaths euacuated, which was handled before under other terms in
the fourth reason, whereby appears, that this man's purpose was (as before I
have noted) to strain matters to the uttermost, and to set out as many shows
of inconveniences, dangers and damages to ensue by our doctrine of Papal
authority, as either his wit could devise, or his malice utter.

40. And yet the seely fellow did not consider one instance unanswerable, that
might be given to all these his inventions, which is the experience of so many
ages, both in England, and other Kingdoms round about us, wherein the Kings and
Princes have reigned prosperously (and do at this day) notwithstanding this
doctrine, and use of the Popes power; and this not only Catholic Princes, but
diverse Protestant Potentates in like manner, for any thing that Popes have
done, or attempted against them. For what has any Many (...) Princes never
molested by the Pope.
Pope done against the Protestant Kings of Denmark in this our age? what
against those of Sweueland either Father or Son, though the later does offer
open injury to a Catholic King the true inheritor? what against the Dukes of
Saxony, the Count Palatines and Protestant Princes of the Empire,
notwithstanding the said Electors whole authority in that action was given them
by the Sea Apostolic, and consequently does depend thereof? what against
diverse other particular Princes both of the Empire and otherwise, who have in
this our age departed from the obedience of that Sea? how many has it
molested, censured, deposed, or troubled for the same?

41. And that which is most of all to our purpose at this time, what manner of
proceeding has the same Kind offices of the sea Apostolic toward his
Majesty of great Britanny.
Sea Apostolic used toward the Kingdom of Scotland, and his Majesty (that
now rules also the scepter of England) for the space of 36. years, wherein he
reigned from an infant, after the iniust deposition of his mother by her
Protestant subjects? did the Sea of Rome or any Bishop thereof ever go about to
hurt or prejudice him? Or is it not well known that diverse Popes did endeavor
to do good and friendly actions for the preservation of his safty, when it was
many times put in ieopardy by the Protestant party? And among See Thynnes
addition to Holinshed page 446. and the book of dangerous positions p. 26
other I can well remember that about the year 1585. when his Majesty was
besieged by them in his town and castle of Striueling, and driven to yield
unto them both his own royal person, and amongst other articles this, as the
Protestant History it self does recount it, was one; That his Majesty's old
guarde was to be removed and another placed by them: the Pope then Pope Gregor.
13.
living, hearing thereof by his Majesty's Ambassador in France the Archbishop of
Glasco, and others, he was so moved with compassion, as he offered an honorable
contribution toward the preservation of his Majesty's person in that case, and
especially for maintenance of a trusty guard about the same: the like good will
in other less occasions have other Popes showed in like manner. So as all is
not fire and sword, excommunication, and anathematization, prodition,
deposition, conspiracy, murder, absoluing of subjects, relaxation of oaths,
and other such hostile actions, as our seditious adversary here lays
together to make the Popes office and authority more odious.

42. Only two public examples to my remembrance can be alleged of any
Protestant Princes excommunicated, censured, or molested by the Sea Apostolic
since Luther began his breach (which are now almost an hundred years)
notwithstanding there have Two Protestant Princes only censured by the Sea
Apostolic in our age.
been so many of them, and so exorbitant things committed by them against
Catholic Religion, and the said Sea Apostolic as is notorious to all men.
And these two upon special causes and inducements, to wit, Q. Elizabeth of
England, and King Henry then of Navarre, and now also of France (for of King
Henry of Enggland I make no mention, for that his cause was not Q. Elizabeth.
Religion at that time:) the first of the two, in regard of the public
violent change of Religion, which she made in her Realm, with the deposition,
deprivation, imprisonment or exile of all Catholic Bishops, Prelates, Clergy,
and others that would not yield their consent thereunto, and this (as is
alleged) contrary to her public promise and oath at her Coronation.

43. The second for fear least he coming to the Crown of France in that
disposition wherein then he K. of Navarre.
was presumed to be, should attempt the like change in that great Kingdom: And
to both these acts were the Popes of those times drawn and incited either
secretly or openly by some of the chief Nobility of both Realms, whom most it
concerned. And albeit the former has not had that success which was hoped,
The happy success in the K. of France.
and perhaps suggested; yet the final event of the second has been more
prosperous, then at that time could be expected, no King lightly in
Christendom having made more real demonstratio^s of love, union, and
reverence to the Sea of Rome then his most Christian Majesty, nor received
greater enterchange of graces, and favors from the same Sea, and this in
matters of most importance for the settling and establishment of his Imperial
Crown and royal race.

44. Wherefore all this bitter barking of this Minister T. M. about
excommunicating, depriving, deposing, and murdering Princes, as also about
absoluing of subjects from their oaths and the like, cease (as you see) by
a little good correspondence between the said Princes and their general
Pastor. And when matters pass at the worst, and are in most exasperation
between them: yet is it not the tenth part of peril Protestant people more pe
rilous the^ Popes.
which Protestant doctrine and practice draws them into, upon any general
disgust against their governments. For if in lue of these two Protestant
Princes censured by the Sea Apostolic, we should recount all the Catholic
Princes that have been vexed, molested, injured, or deprived of their States, or
violated in their persons, or brought to confusion in our Northern parts of
the world in this time, to wit, in Sauoy, France, Switzerland, Germany,
Bemeland, Austria, Poland, Sweueland, Denmark, Flanders, England and Scotland,
and some other places whereof we have treated more largely in the precedent
Chapter; there would be no comparison at all.

Of false dealing and sleights of T. M.. 4.
ANd yet further you must understand that this malicious calumniator proposing
unto himself for his end to make us hateful, does not only increase, multiply,
and exaggerate matters against us by all art of sycophancy, as making some
things to seem odious, that of themselves are true and laudable; and
exaggerating others to a far higher degree, then wherein they were spoken, or
are to be understood, inferring also general propositions upon some shows of
particular proofs: but besides all this, he passes also further, and
obiecteth often times against us the very Examples of bad dealing in T.M.
same things that his own Authors do hold (whereof before we have laid down
some examples, and shall do more hereafter) yea shameth not manifestly to
falsify and ly also; as when he avouches with great resolution, that the late
K. Henry of France Disc. p. 31.
was censured by Pope Xixtus. v. for this only crime, for that himself being a
Papist, yet favored the Protestants, and especially the Prince of Navarre:
Whereas it is known that besides this, he had murdered most miserably two
principal peers and Princes of his Crown, the Duke, and Cardinal of Guise,
nearest in blood to his Majesty of England, and thereby broken his solemn oath
made but a little before in presence of many, when he received the Bl.
Sacrament to the contrary. And how then was his only crime to have favored the
Protestants, as this Minister auerreth?

46. And again in the same place or precedent page he has these words: Pope
Adrian being guilty of like seditious Naucl. p. (...) gener. 39.
practice against the Emperor Henry the second, was choked with a fly. And in
his quotation cites Nauclerus for it, Generatione 139. which should be 39. for
that Nauclerus has nothing near so many Generations in that Our English Pope
Adrian egregiously abused by T.M.
Part, and in steed of Henry the second, he should have said Frederick the
first of that name, for that Henry the second was before the time of our
Conquest, and almost two hundred years before Adrian the fourth our English
Pope, of whom we now speak who lived in the time of King Stephen and King
Henry the second of England, and was a Holy man, and accounted the Apostle of
Noruegia for converting the same to our Christian faith, before he was Pope,
and all Authors do write honorably of him, and so does Nauclerus affirm: and
therefore though he make mention of such a fable related by Vrspergensis that
was a Schismatical writer in those days (who also does not absolutely avouch
it, but with this temperament vt fertur, as the report goes) yet does the
said Nauclerus reject the same as false, and confuteth it by the testimonies of
al other writers, especially of Italy, that lived with him, and thereby knew
best both his life and death. And yet all this notwithstanding will this false
ladde T. M. needs set down this History as true, affirming it for such, and
never so much as giving his Reader to understand, that any other denied the
same, or that the only Author himself of this fiction doubted thereof. And is
not this perfidious dealing? or can any man excuse him from falsehood and malice
in this open treachery?

47. Another like trick he plaieth some few pages before this again, citing
out of Doctor Bouchiers book, De iusta abdicatione these words: (...)
occidere honestum Disc. p. 23.
est, quod cuiuis impune facere permittitur, quod ex communi consensu dico: And
then he Englisheth the same thus: Any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant, which I
defend A notable corruption about Doctor (...).
(says he) by common consent. But he that shall read the place in the Author
himself, shall find, that he holds the very contrary, to wit, that a private
man may not kill a Tyrant, that is not first judged and declared to be a
public enemy by the commonwealth; and he proves the same at large, first
out of Scriptures, and by the decree of the General Council of Constance, his
words be these: Neque vero eo iure quod ad Regnum habet, nisi per publicum
iudicium, spoliari potest etc. Neither can a Tyrant be deprived of that right,
which he has to a Kingdom, but only by public judgment; yea further also so
long as that right of Kingdom remains, his person must be held for sacred,
whereof ensues, that no right remains to any private man against his life:
and albeit any private man should bring forth never so many private injuries
done by the said Tyra^t against him; as that he had whipped him with iron rods,
oppressed him, afflicted him, yet in this case must he have patience, according
to the admonition of S. Peter: That we must be obedient not only unto good and
1. Pet. 2.
modest Lords, but also unto those that be disorderly, and that this is grace,
when a man for Gods cause does sustain and bear with patience injuries
unjustly done unto him etc.

48. And in this sense (says he) is the decree of the Consil. Constan. Sess.
15.
Council of Constance to be understood, when they say: Errorem in fide esse
etc. It is error in faith to hold (as John VVickcliffe did) that every Tyrant
may be slain meritoriously Catholic moderation toward censuring of Princes.
by any Vassal or subject of his, by free or secret treasons etc. Thus writes
that author, holding as you see, that no Tyrant whatsoever, though he be never
so great a Tyrant, may be touched by any private man, for any private injuries,
though never so great, nor yet for public, though never so manifest, except
he be first publicly condemned by the commonwealth; which is another manner
of moderation, and security for Princes, then the Protestant doctrine before
rehearsed: and namely that of Knox, uttered in the name of Knox (...) hist. p.
372.
the whole Protestant Congregation both of Scotland and Geneua: If Princes be
Tyrants against God and his truth, his subjects are freed from their oaths
of obedience. So he. And who shall be Judge of this? The people, for that the
people (says he) are bound by oath to God to revenge the injury Knox appel.
fol. 33.
done against his Majesty. Let Princes think well of this, and let the Reader
consider the malicious falsehood of this Minister T. M. who in alleging that
little sentence before mentioned, about killing of a Tyrant, stroke out the
words of most importance: quem hostem Reipublicae iudicauerit; whom the
commonwealth has judged for a public enemy; and adding that other clause,
which I say by common consent, which is not there to be found: And with such
people we are forced to deal, that have no conscience at all in cosenage, and
yet they cry out of Equivocation against us, where it is lawful to be used;
making no scruple at all themselves to ly, which in our doctrine is always
unlawful for any cause whatsoever.

49. But will you hear a case or two more out of the Canon law, how dexterous
Sir Thomas is in corrupting Disc pa. 4.
that which he loves not, nor seems well to understand? you may read in the
fourth page of this his pamphlet an ancient decree (for so he calls Another
cosenage about a text of Gratian.
it) alleged by him out of Gratian in the gloss, determining that though a
man have sworn to pay money to one that is excommunicated, yet is he not bound
to pay the same, and he alleges the Latin text thus: Si iuraui me soluturum
alicui pecuniam qui excommunicatur, Apud Gra. causa 15. q. 6. cap. 4. gloss.
non teneor ei soluere: If I have sworn to pay money to any man that is
excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it, adding this reason: Quia (...)
possumus, debemus vexare malos vt cessent a malo; We ought to vex evil men by
what means foeuer we may, to the end they may cease from doing evil. In the
allegation of which little text, a man would hardly believe how many false
tricks there be, to make Catholic doctrine to seem odious and absurd. For
first these words not being found in any text of law or decision of any Pope
or Council, but only in the gloss or commentary, they make not any ancient or
modern decree, as the Minister falsely avouches, but rather show the opinion
of him, who writes the commentary, if his words were as here they are
alleged.

50. But the truth is, that the words of the gloss contain only a certain
objection upon a clause of a Canon, concerning promise to be observed to one
that is excommunicated after the promise was made; A doubt proposed and solued.
and the objection or doubt is made in these words by the Author of the
gloss or Commentary: Sed quid dices, si iuraui etc. But what will you say, if
I have sworn to pay money to any person, or have promised the same under some
forfeiture, and in the mean space, he to whom I made the promise is
excommunicated, am I bound to pay the same or not? This is the question, and
then he argues on both sides: and first for the negative, videtur quod non, it
seems I am not, for that the Canon law says Causa. 23. q. 6. That we ought
to afflicct wicked men by all means possible, to the end they cease from
their wickedness. So he, alleging diverse other arguments for the same opinion;
but yet afterward coming to give his own resolution, he says thus: Verius
credo, quod licet ille non habeat ius petendi, tamen debet ei solui. I do
believe the truer opinion to be, that albeit he that is so excommunicated do
leese his right to demand his money, yet is the other bound to pay him. And
for this he cites diverse laws and reasons therein mentioned, as namely,
Extrau. de Iu. debitoris, and extr. de sent. excommunicationis, Si vere, and
11. q. 3. Cum excommunicato.

51. So as here our Minister not of ignorance but See of this History of the
Disputation before the King of France annexed to the confut. of the first 6.
months of Foxes Calendar.
of falsehood takes the objection for the resolution, as Plessy Mornay did in
his book against the mass, where he would prove that Scotus, Durand and other
schoole-deuines did doubt of the real presence and transubstantiation, for
that having proposed the question, they began to argue for the negative part,
saying, videtur quod non, though afterward they resolved the contrary, and
solued the argument. And the very like does our Minister here, calling this
objection of videtur quod non, not only a resolution but an ancient Decree.
Secondly there is wilful deceit in leaving out the first words of the
Author, Sed quid dices, si iuraui? But what will you say, if I have sworn?
which do plainly show that it is but an objection. Thirdly that he alleges
the reason of the objection Quia qualitercumque possumus etc. for the reason of
the resolution, which is false: for that the resolution is made against that
reason. Fourthly the true resolution of the Commentor is utterly concealed, and
a contrary determination by him impugned set down, and this not as a private
opinion, but as an ancient decree of the law and Canon it self. Consider I pray
you how many frauds and falshoodes there be in one little quotation, and what
a volume I should be enforced to make, if I would examine exactly such a
multitude of citations as he quoteth against us, but yet one or two more shall
I produce in the same kind and matter.

52. In the sixth page of his discovery he has this grievous accusation out of
the Canon law against us: Haeretici Another fraudule^t case out of the Canon
law.
filij vel consanguinei non dicuntur, sed (...) legem sit manus tua super eos,
vt fundas sanguinem ipsorum, and then he quoteth thus: Apud Great. gloss. in
Decret. li. 5. ex Decret. Gregor. 9. cause. 23. q. 8. cap. Legi. Which
distracted kind of quotation, seperating the first and last words, that should
have gone together, seem to import that he scarce read the books themselves,
but cited the same out of some other man's notes; but that fault were easily
pardoned if he used no greater fraud in the thing it self. For first he
Englisheth the words thus: Heretics may not be termed either children or
kindred, but according to the old law thy hand must be against them to spil
their blood: And then in the margent he sets down this special printed
note: The professed bloody massacre against the Protestants, without
distinction of sex or kindred. And what can be more odiously urged the^ this?
Now then let us see how many false tricks and shifts, fit for a
Protestant-Minister, doely lurking in this short citation.

53. First of all is to be considered, that this gloss or Commentary of the
Canon law, which here is both untruly cited and maliciously applied, is upon a
Canon beginning Si quis, which Canon is taken out of Decret. (...). (...). de
Haer. tit. 7. c. (...).
the third Council of Carthage, wherein the famous Doctor and Holy Father S.
Augustine was present, as a chief Bishop, that had voice in that Council, and
the decree of the Canon is; that if any Bishop should institute Heretics or
pagans for his heirs, whether they were consanguinei or extranei, kinsmen or
externes, ei Anathema dicatur, atque eius nomen inter Dei sacerdotes nullo modo
recitetur: Let him be accursed, and let not his name be remembered any way among
the Priests of God.

54. This is the severity of that Canon, for ground whereof another precedent
Canon sets down out of the same S. Augustine: Quod Haereticus persevere ans
aeternaliter Theseuere sentence of S. Augustine against Heretics. August. l.
de (...) Cath.
damnatur etc. That an Heretic perseuering in his Heresy is damned eternally,
neither can he recieue any profit by baptism, alms, martyrdom, nor any other
good works. So has the title of the Canon, but the words of S. Augustine are
these: Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites etc. Hold for most certain and
no ways doubt, but that every Heretic or Schismaticke shall be partaker of
hell fire everlastingly, together with the devil and his angels, except
before the end of his life he be restored and incorporated again into the
Catholic Church; neither shall baptism or alms never so abundantly
bestowed, no nor death it self suffered for the name of Christ, profit him any
thing to salvation. So S. Augustine.

55. Upon this ground then that Heretics out of the Church, and so censured
as here you have heard, though they be never so near of kin, may not be made
heirs, especially by Churchmen; the gloss yielding a reason thereof, has
these words: Quia isti Haeretici iam non dicuntur filij vel consanguinei, vnde
dicitur in lege: si frater tuus, and amicus tuus, and vxor tua aeprauare
voluerit veritatem, sit manus tua super illos: For that these Heretics are
not now called children or kinsfolk, therefore, as such, they cannot be made
Inheritours by Ecclesiastical men; whereupon it is said in the law (of
Deuteronomie) if thy brother and friend or wife will go about Deuteronomy. 13.
to deprave the truth, let thy hand be upon them. And presently he cites to
the same effect, the authority of S Hierome, out of another Canon, in another
place of the law, as presently we shall see.

56. So as first here we may behold that T. M. has not put down this his
quoted gloss as it is found in the true gloss it self, but left out both the
beginning: (...) isti Haeretici etc. which imported somewhat to the
understanding of his meaning; as also he left out the reason alleged by the
gloss out of Gods own words in Deuteronomy, to wit, the wilful corrupting
of his truth. And thirdly he added these words: Vt fundas sanguinem ipsorum,
which here (as you see) the Hier. contr. vigilant. eit. a (...) cause. 23. q.
(...). c. legi.
gloss has not, but they are cited out of S. Hierome in another Canon and
volume of the law, where (...) Holy Father, excusing to his friend Riparius a
Priest, his earnest zeal and desire to have Vigilantius the Heretic (against
whom he had written) punished by his Bishop, alleges diverse examples of
severity in like cases out of the Scripture, as of Phinees, Elias, Simon
Cananeus, S. Peter, S. Paul, and lastly cites also the foresaid words of Gods
ordinance in Deuteronomy: If thy brother, thy wife, thy friend etc. shall go
about to pervert thee from Gods true worship etc. hear him not, nor conceal
him, but bring him forth to judgment, and let thy hand be upon him first, and
then after the hand of all the people etc. which is to be understood according
to the form of law appointed afterward in the 17. Chapter: That he be orderly
brought forth to judgment, and then when sentence is (...) against him, he
which heard or saw him commit the sin, and is a witness against him, must cast
the first stone at him, and the rest must follow. And this also does the
ordinary Commentary or gloss of Lyranus and others upon those textes of
Scripture declare.

57. And now let the judicious Reader consider how many corruptions this crasty
Minister has used to bring forth to his purpose, this one little distracted
text, for proof of professed bloody massacres intended by us against
Protestants. For first he corrupts the words of the gloss apparently, and
that in diverse points, leaving out that which the gloss says, and adding
that which the gloss has not: then he corrupts the meaning both of gloss
and Canon, deprauing A Catalogue of cor (...).
that to a wicked sense of bloody massacring without distinction of sex or
kindred; which the Canon and Council of Carthage with S. Augustine meant only
of civil punishment against Heretics, to wit that they could not be made
heirs to Ecclesiastical men. Thirdly he peruerteth in like manner S. Hieromes
intent, which was that albeit he wished that Heretics should be punished also
bodily, yet by order and form of law, and not that any one should kill
another, and much less by bloody massacres, as this fellow sets it down in
his marginall note. And lastly he presumes to pervert the very words of God
himself in the law, by translating fundas sanguinem ipsorum, spill their blood,
instead of shed their blood, as though God were a bloud-spiller, or commanded
the same to be done unjustly by others: but all is strained by the Minister to
make us odious, whereas himself indeed is thereby made ridiculous. And for that I
have been somewhat longer in this example then I had purposed, as also for that
by this one (if it were but one) you may guess of all the rest of his
proceeding, I will here cease, referring the rest of this kind, to other more
fit places and occasions afterward.

58. And yet truly I cannot well pretermit, for ending this Chapter, one little
note more of rare singularity in this man above others, which I scarce ever
have observed in any one of his fellows, and this is, that the very first
words of Scripture alleged by him in the first page of his book, for the
poesy of his pamphlet are falsely alleged, corrupted and mangled, though they
contain but one only verse of Isay the Prophet; and then may you imagine, what
liberty he will take to himself afterward throughout his whole discourse. His
sentence or poesy is this: Isay. 29. verse. 9. The very first text of Scripture
alleged by him most corruptly.
But stay your selves and wonder, they are blind and make you blind, which he
would have to be understood of us Catholics: but let any man read the place
of Isay it self, and he shall find no such matter either in words or sense,
but only the word wonder, to wit obstupescite and admiramini, fluctuate and
vacillate, inebriamini, and non a vino, mouemini, and non ab ebrietate: And
according to this are the Greek and Hebrew textes also. So as what should move
T. M. to set down so corruptly the very first sentence of his book, and cite
the Chapter and verse wherein his fraud may be descried I know not, except he
observed not the last clause of the Prophets precept, mouemini, and non ab
ebrietate. And so much for this.

HOW THIS TREATISE WAS LAID ASIDE By sickness of the Author, and some other
causes. And why it was taken in hand again upon the sight of a Catholic
Answer, and a new Reply of T. M. dedicated to his Majesty: with the Authors
judgment of them both.
CHAP. III.
Having written hitherto and passed thus far-forth in examination of the
Ministers opprobrious libel of Discovery, I was partly forced by grievous
sickness that continued for some months, and partly also induced (for that I
understood that another Catholic man had answered the said libell) to lay
that which I had written a side, as also for that the occasion of time, wherein
this Treatise was begun, soon after the detection of the often forenamed
powdertreason, seemed in great part to be past, and having once laid it out of
my hands, had no great will afterward to go forward theriwth, as an argument
of loathsome contention, against most odious imputations and calumniations: but
yet after diverse months again, seeing the said Catholic answer to appear
(which before I had not viewed) together with a large Reply to the same by the
Minister that first made and devised the libell; and that the said Minister had
now resolved upon instance of the said Answerer to manifest his name, to wit of
Thomas Morton, T. M. his new Reply.
which before went ciphered with the letters only of T. M. that might as well
have signified Thomas Malmesbury or Montague or Monte-banke, or any such like
sur-name: and further that he presumed to dedicate the same unto the Kings
Majesty, by a special glosing Epistle, full of fond Ministerial malice
against Catholics, intituling his said Reply: A full satisfaction concerning
a double Romish iniquity, heinous Rebellion, and more then heathenish (...).
And further that he had increased his said work with two or three new
Treatises, partly for justifying of Protestants in the case of Rebellion, and
partly for confuting of a Treatise written in defense of Equivocation, I was
moved as well of my self, as by others exhortation, to resume the thing into my
hands again, and to adioine by the view of the whole that which was wanting
to the full confutation of this Ministers iniquity, in laying such heinous
Rebellion and heathenish Equivocation unto Catholics charge, who of all men
living are most free from just reprehension in them both: and the Caluinian
sect and sectaries convinced to be most guilty in the one, and consciencelesse
in the other, as the judicious Reader (I doubt not) shall see evidently proved
and confirmed in that which is to ensue.

2. It moved me also not a little to go forward somewhat with this confutation
(though in as breiffe manner as might be) to see that this devise (though T. M.
lends and borrovveth of S. Edward Cook.
never so fond and false) of charging Catholic doctrine with Rebellion and
Equivocation, was applauded not a little by some men of mark in our State; as
namely by his Majesty's late Attorney General, as well in his writing, as
pleadinges against Catholics, borrowing from this Ministers first Treatise
diverse large parcelles, and passages of his calumnious imputations, about the
forenamed two heads of Rebellion and Equivocation, and lending him again in
lue thereof for his second Reply sundry observations and collections of his
own, concerning diverse Kings of England, that seemed to him not so much to
favor or acknowledge the Bishop of Rome his authority over the English Church,
which yet now upon further search, is found to be contrary, and so set down
and demonstrated at large by a late Answer published to the said Attorney his
book of Reports, as I think in have will not be answered. Whereupon,
for so much as this new devised accusation, of Rebellious doctrine and
Equivocation, is taken up by so many hands of those that be enemies to
Catholic Religion; I thought it convenient to clear somewhat more this
(...); and as I had, before I laid aside this work, treated sufficiently, as
it seemed to me, of the former point, concerning Rebellious doctrine, upon the
sight only of T. M. his first pamphlet (as in the precedent two Chapters you
have seen) yet now upon the appearance of this Minister Thomas Morton in his
proper name and person, and of his new Reply that promises full satisfaction
in all; it seemed necessary that I should go forward to finish my first
intent, and to examine the second point or head of his accusation in like
manner, apperteining to the doctrine of Equivocation, made no less odious now
by continual clamours of sycophancy, then the other of Rebellion it self.

3. One other circumstance also stirred me greatly to proceed in this short
work, which was, that together with these books sent out of England,
advertisement was given, that this Minister Thomas Morton was Chaplain to my
Lord of Canterbury, who being head of the spiritual Court of Arches, which is,
or ought to be the supreme for matters of conscience in England, T. M. my Lord
of Canterburies Chaplain
I was in hope to have some remedy against this his Lordships Chaplain, if I
should demonstrate, that he deals against all conscience, observing no law,
either of truth or modesty toward Catholic men in this his Reply, nor any
regard either to his own or Masters honor, he behauing himself so
fraudulently against his own knowledge and conscience, as in this writing he
does. And if I prove not this afterward, by multiplicity of manifest and
manifold examples, as in part you have seen that I have done before, let me be
thought to have done him injury (which willingly I would not do unto the worst
man living) in which place I hold not him, though by his pen I must needs
judge him to be bad enough.

4. Now then to the point it self of his Reply, which he calls, as has been
said, A full satisfaction; it seems to me as full as pipes and hoggesheades
are wont to be here in these countries at the time of vintage, when they are
full only of wind and air and nothing else; and so you shall see afterward,
that this his Reply is The Ministers manner of dealing.
full of words without substance, of flourish without truth, of fraud without
real dealing: for that lightly he scarsely alleges any text of his
Adversaries writing, without some fort of sophistication both of words and
sense, or other like knackes. And further so distracteth and dismembreth his
adversaries thread of speech, citing one branch of it in one part of his Reply,
another in another, one sentence first that should have been last, and another
last that should have been first, thereby to confound the Readers memory; one
period half divided, the other quartered, the third left out, the fourth
disguised: so as it is evident that he sought rather to fly, to cover, shadow,
and hide himself, then really and substantially to come to the combat, as
examples ensuing shall make all manifest.

5. But here perhaps some will say, that this seems a marvel unto them,
for that this man pretends to deal more distinctly and exactly then others,
for that he sets down severally, plainly, and clearly, first the words of
his former pamphlet of Discovery, Fond florishes of T. M.
then the text of his adversary (the moderate answerer) and thirdly the full
satisfaction of his faithful Reply. And furthermore he draws every thing to
divisions and subdiuisions, distinctions and contrapositions, which make a
jolly flourish in the Readers eye, being set down in logical rank. As for
example, in his first reason, for setting Catholics and Protestants at
debate, he says he will prove it thus.

By a threefold evidence from a Popish.
1. Definition of an Heretic. 2. Explication of a person excommunicate. 3.
Application of Romish Censures to them both.
And then the last member again is proved:

By Popish.
1. Councelles. 2. Bulls. 3. Doctors.
6. And is not this plain and clear says one? Yes, to entertain Children by
sound of words, or pleasing pictures. But when we come to the substance, and
find that neither he alleges his Adversaries speech sincerely, nor answeareth
truly to the sense, but either dissembleth the same, or runs a side, or
confirms his said adversaries argument, by his feeble answers, what imports
this ostentation of bare and idle sillables?

7. But you will say that he seems to have seen and read much of our modern
Catholic Authors, and to allege them more abundantly in his text and margent
then commonly other writers of his coat and calling have hitherto done, for
every where almost he quoteth Vasquez, Suarez, Tolet, Bellarmine, Cunerus,
Azor, (...) T.
Alsonsus de Castro, Sayer, Gregorius de Valentia, Bannes, M. (...) our
Catholic Authors.
and others, which I grant, that he has seen and taken a view of them and
others, if they be notes of his own gathering, but he has considered of them,
as Satan had considered of Job, and his actions, when God said unto him:
Numquid considerasti seruum Job (...).
meum Job? and he signified, yea, but it was to belly and calumniate him; and so
has this fellow considered of our Catholic authors, not only to slander
them what he may, but manifestly to falsify and corrupt them in many places
both in words, meaning and whole drift of their discourses, as in part you
have seen already, and shall more largely and particulerly upon just occasions
afterward.

8. Nor has this whole Reply of his, though big in bulk, any substantial
point almost handled therein, either about the one or the other two parts of
his subject proposed, to wit, Rebellion, and equivocation; whereby he would
dissolve all friendly combination, and association between Catholic and
Protestant people; for as concerning the first, he has no more in effect, but
that which before has been touched in his ten devised and distended Reasons:
That we hold Protestants for Heretics excommunicate, and subject to all the
penalties of Ecclesiastical Canons made by the Church against ancient
Heretics: That we ascribe power to the Bishop of Rome in certain cases, to
censure, to excommunicate, to deprive Princes, whereof is inferred, that such
and such dangers may ensue, which finally is nothing else, but may, so as the
question being De futuris contingentibus, of (...) lib. Prior.
things contingent to come (whereof the Philosopher says there is no science)
all remains in uncertainty, but only the suspicion and hatred which he would
raise against us: but what the Protestants doctrine has done and does at this
day against lawful Princes in their Realms, the armies in the low countries,
Hungary, Poland, Suetia and other places, do testify not only to our ears, as
things absent, but as present also to our eyes, and then must I infer, that
where we have so many examples of so manifest experience and present action,
where we see and behold and feel with our senses what passes, and what has
passed, and what is like to ensue daily by the notorious unquiet spirits of new
Ghospellers, under any Prince whatsoever that contenteth not their humors.
What shall we stand wrangling with this Minister, or any his like, about
possibilities or coniecturall probabilities? What may fall out in time against
his Majesty, for example, (...) Protestant Princes troubled by Popes in our
days.
of Great Britany, who has been a King, a Protestant King, almost forty years,
and never received hurt or disquietnes from any Pope, though diverse have been in
that Sea within the compass of this time, and many other Kings and Princes
both in Denmark, Sueueland and Germany for more years without molestation
received or offered from the said Sea, which I dare avouch no Catholic Prince,
King or Emperor can say that he has passed half so many years in quiet
government over Protestant people, unto whom their doctrine gives as great
power over Princes in that case, as we ascribe to Popes and far greater;
wherein I remit me, to that which has been said and demonstrated in the
precedent two Chapters.

9. And now to end about this first point of our Ministers Reply, that whereas
in his former libell of ten reasons, entitled, A discovery of popish doctrine
etc. He set down in his first reason, for proof of our insociability with
protestants, that we hold them for excommunicate Heretics, and subject to all
the penalties belonging to such men, whereof one among the rest is, that we must
fly them, and avoid their conversation; the answerer of the pamphlet, for
better milding and pacifying the distempered humor of this enraged Minister,
told him that English Protestants were How Protestants were denied by the
Ansvverer to be subject to the penalties of Heresy.
not simply held in that account with us, to wit for excommunicate Heretics,
in such degree as they were either to be avoided, or subject to the penalties
appointed by holy Canons for ancient Heretics; understanding (as himself does
sufficiently insinuate) this to be in regard that they are not, nor any among
them to his knowledge, expressly, and by name denounced and condemned for
convict in that behalf, which circumstance of particular condemnation and
denuntiation, by most lawiers and Deuines opinions is necessary, before the
said punishments, especially external, can be inflicted, albeit the
internal, to wit, the loss of grace, separation from the Church,
excommunication, and the like be incurred ipso facto, by the holding and
professing of any condemned Heresy whatsoever, as before in the precedent
Chapter more largely we have declared.

10. But for the external punishments, as debarring from conversation and
communication with them, loss of goods, honors, and dignities, deprivation
of offices, inhability to inherit, note of infamy, incapacity of Christian
burial, and the like, there being two opinions between Catholic writers,
the one more large and mild, that none of these punishments are to be actually
incurred, but after particular denuntiation and sentence given by a Judge
against the party, the other more severe, that in some cases, the notoriousnes
of the thing may be so great, as in some part they may thereby be incurred
without sentence; the Of (...) the more moderate follovved by the Ansvverer.
just and moderate answerer (for so he intituleth his book, and in this point
shows it by effects) made choice rather of the more temperate, and mild
opinion; which in like manner is the more universal among both Canonistes and
Catholic Deuines, he thinking it sufficient to cite only to that purpose, as
in his answer Moderate Answer cap. 1.
he did, the Council of Lateran, Cunerus, Nauar and others, but he might have
cited many more: for in truth. (...).
it is the more common opinion by much, as may be seen by the words of these
learned men ensuing: Antoninus p. 3. tit. 25. cap. 3. Angelus verbo
Excomunicat. 8. n. 3. Sotus. 4. did. 22. q. 1. art. 1. Victor in summa de
Sacram. tract. de excom. Armilla verbo Excomunicat. nu. 50. Rosel.
excommunicat. 6. nu. 44. Siluest. verb. Excommunicat. 5. q. 3. Caetan. in
summa. Ledes. 4. did. q. 23. art. 1. and diverse others.

11. But now this Minister finding that some Catholic Author did hold the
other opinion in like manner, that in certain cases some of the forenamed
punishments might be incurred before particular denunciation by an
Ecclesiastical Judge, triumphs greatly, as though he had taken the said
answerer at great advantage, and found plausible matter to entertain
cauillation against him, and thereupon spends diverse Chapters of his Reply in
citing some of those Authors to his purpose, without telling his Reader, that
it is a matter in dispute or question among Catholic writers; but as though
all were clear and resolved Reply c. 4. 5. 6. etc.
on his side, he cites not only Panormitan, Bannes, and others, but the
Jesuit also Gregory de Valentia, in these words: If the guilt of Heresy be
so notorious (says he) as that by no evasion it can be concealed, the party
does incur the penalty, thus far, that his subjects may deny such a Lord all
fealty, yea before the sentence of judgment. In alleging of which authority,
though but short, as you see, he uses the same fraud which commonly you shall
find in all the rest, or most part of his allegations, to wit, that somewhat is
mangled, added, or left out of purpose to make the thing sound against us, as
here the Latin text has, Haeresis sieve Apostasiae a fide, of Heresy or
Apostasy from the faith, and then paena praedicta incurritur ex part, the
foresaid punishment is in part incurred: and lastly, Non tamen ita, vt
teneantur (subditi) Domino Greg. de val. to. 3. disp. 1. q. 12. de Apostas.
(...). 2. para. 4.
Haeretico aut Apostatae obsequium negare; but yet that subjects are not bound
to deny obedience to their Lord that is an Heretic or Apostata; all with
moderations our Minister cutteth of, and leaves out, to the effect that you
may imagine. But for that of these tricks we shall have afterward occasion to
treat more particulerly, I will intermit the same now, and return to speak a
word or two more, of the foresaid moderate Answer made to the Ministers
slanderous discovery, soon after the publication thereof in England; though
not come to my hands in many months after.

12. And whereas the Answerer both in regard of the exasperation of times then
running, and to perform the title of his book, which is, A just and moderate
Answer, indeauoreth every where prudently to fly the occasion of more offense
and exulceration, and to work the moderation that he might, without injury of
the truth (for this seems to have been his purpose) especially in affirming,
that no Protestants are held by us T. M. will needs prove Protestants to be
held for Heretics.
for excommunicate Heretics (meaning thereby, denounced by name, as before
has been decsared:) this other stickler and stirrer of coals will needs take
upon him to prove at large, that Protestants are esteemed to be truly
Heretics, excommunicate, and subject to all the Censures of the Church, which
any ancient Heretic was in times past: and to this effect he brings in the
definition of an Heretic, set down by Catholic writers, the explication of
persons excommunicate, and the application of Ecclesiastical Censures against
them both, which he proves by three means, to wit, of General Councelles,
Popes Decrees, and Doctors judgments; by all which he proves Protestants to
be esteemed Heretics, and held for guilty of all the pains and penalties
thereof, both internal and external, spiritual and temporal, in the sight,
sense and opinion of all the universal Catholic Church, for many ages
together; And is not he worthy of a good fee think you for pleading for
Protestants in this manner?

13. But whatsoever he may deserve in this (which I leave to other men's
judgments) I must needs say, that in two or three other points, he has
deserved little of the Protestant cause, and so I think will his T. M a bad
Proctor for Protestants.
Lord and Master say, when he shall make true reflection upon the case; for
first he has brought in a needless comparison between the stirring humors
of Protestant and Catholic people, in matter of obedience to their Princes,
which must needs fall out to the great disgrace of the Protestant party, as by
the before alleged examples and other proofs may appear and be seen by the
eye.

14. Secondly he takes upon him yet more fondly in the second part of this his
Reply, to make a public justification of all Protestants for rebelling
against their Princes, in any country whatsoever, but more particulerly and
especially in England, and therein does so justify Cranmer, Ridley, Sir Tho.
Wyatt, and others that conspired against Q. Mary in England, Knox, Buchanan,
Goodman, and like Ministers in Scotland, turning vpside down that State
against their Sovereigns, the Rebellions raised in Suetia, Polonia, Germany,
Switzerland, France, and other countries, as his justification is a more plain
condemnation of them, and their spirits and doctrine in that behalf, then if
he had said nothing at all, as partly shall afterward appear, by some
instances that we shall allege thereof.

15. Thirdly he does with as little discretion bring in that accusation before
mentioned of hard words used by some of our Authors against his party that
follows Caluins doctrine: as namely; That they believe no one article truly
of the Christian Creed; That they are Heretics, and therein far worse and in
more damnable state the^ Turks, Jews or Infidelles; That their doctrine
leads by consequence to Turcisme and Infidelity etc. for by this occasion
both the Author of the moderate Answer has alleged many clear authorities
of principal Protestants themselves, that are of the same opinion, and we
have added many The imputation (...) Heresy unto Protestants (...) brought in
by T. M
more thereunto, in the precede^t Chapter of this book, whereby is made
manifest, that the profession of Caluins doctrine is no less held for Heresy,
Apostasy, and infidelity by all other sorts of Protestants of our days, then
by Catholic men themselves; and much more may be added for justification of
that point which needed not to have been brought in, but upon this occasion, to
show that English Protestants are held for Heretics, not only by the
Catholic Church whose judgment most imports, but by the cheiffe pillars also
of the Protestants profession in other countries. And when I do name Heresy
and Heretics, the prudent Reader will remember that I do name the most
heinous and damnable thing that any Christian cogitation can comprehend, no
matter of jest or dispute, but of terror and tears.

16. Fourthly I can as little commend the Ministers wit for drawing into the
field again a new disputation, and special Treatise of his, adioined in the
end of this his Reply, about Equivocation or doubtful speeches, sometimes
lawful to be used for good and pious ends, and for avoiding sin and other
hurtes both spiritual and temporal, wherein though the lawfulnes and necessity
thereof both by law of nature, divine and humane, have been made evident, upon
diverse occasions in England these later years, since this T. M. an example of
Equivocation.
calumniation was raised against virtuous and learned me^ about the same; yet
one proof we shall add more here in this place, which before I have not
seen set down at any length, which is that not only Protestants themselves
do both use and abuse the same, as the Answerer declares; but that this very
Author our Minister that inueigheth so sharply and ignorantly against the
manner of speech, which he calls Equivocation, is forced in almost infinite
places of his Reply, either to grant that he does Equivocate, or else that he
lies flatly. And for this also I remit my self to the proofs that after shall
ensue.

17. And so to conclude this Chapter, concerning my judgment about the Answer
and Reply to the foresaid Discovery of Rebellion and Equivocation, I must
needs say, that the Answerer has endeauored to effectuate so much as he
promised in the title of his book, which was, of a just and moderate Answer,
and in performance thereof, has not only borne on matters temperately, as
before has been showed, but spared also his Adversary in many points, and
namely in passing over his allegations without note or check, having not
perhaps either time or commodity of books to examine the same, or persuading
himself, that in so small a pamphlet, and palpable matter, a The Authors
Ce^sure both of the Ansvverer and Replyer.
Minister would not adventure to use so many falsifications; but he was
deceived, not knowing so well this generation of men, who finding their cause
deuoid of truth, are forced to hold up the credit thereof by sleightes of
falsehood. In the rest, the Answerer quitteth himself learnedly, and shows
much reading in particular, as by the multiplicity of Authors by him alleged
does well appear. But the Replier is so far of from performing his promise, of
a full satufaction concerning double Romish Iniquity, as he has scarce
satisfied fully or meanly any one argument or authority alleged by his
adversary, who though I may presume he will best declare himself by his
Reioinder to this Reply, if he think him worthy of so much labor (as in truth
I do not, especially at this time, when so grievous punishments are procured
in England by him and his like for such as do presume to answer their books:)
yet mean I also briefly in this Treatise, by some examples to make it
manifest, leaving the rest to himself to be treated, and refuted by him more
largely and abundantly, when he shall think it best convenient; my purpose
being only to lay forth in general the injuries which this Minister does offer
unto all Catholic people, by slaundering them in the foresaid two odious
accusations of Rebellion and Equivocation, whereof having treated sufficiently
about the first in the two foregoing Chapters (and shall do more in two other
that ensue) we mean by Gods help to pass thence to the other general head
of Equivocation, and to handle the same with no less euidency of truth, equity
and piety of Catholic doctrine therein, then has been declared in the other
before concerning our innocence, wherein I remit me willingly to the indifferent
Readers judgment and censure.

WHAT THE MINISTER THOMAS MORTON DOES IN THIS REPLY and full satisfaction
answer CONCERNING The former point of charge against Protestants, for
Rebellion, Conspiracies, and Disobedience; the effect whereof is drawn to three
principal Questions.
CHAP. IIII.
ANd now after judgment given of this Ministers Reply in general, it shall be
needful that we descend somewhat to particulars for proof thereof. And whereas
he, by so many The Ministers Sleightes.
sleightes and turninges of divisions and subdiuisions, numbers and members of
things to be handled, or rather hudled, as also by transmutation from due
places, alteration of order, clipping and culling of words and sentences,
endeauoreth so to entangle the sight and understanding of his Reader
(especially the more unlearned) as he may not easily find where he walks,
nor when he answers to purpose and when not, when he leaves out and when he
puts in all, when he deals plainly and when fraudulently, and by
consequence after much reading, can scarce be able to make any firm conclusion
at all about the matter in controversy: Our course shall be quyte contrary,
endeavoring to bring all to breuity, perspicuity, and certainty, so much as in
us lies, for so we think it necessary for the Readers true satisfaction,
after the small satisfaction he can receive by the full satisfaction promised
by this Minister.

2. Wherefore to reduce all that before has been said by him, or his Answerer,
or my self, concerning the charge of sedition and Rebellion, unto some
perspicuous order and method, three points seem unto me most important to be
considered in this matter, as co^prehending the sum and substance of all that
has been said, answered, or replied upon. The first concerning Heresy; the
second, seditious doctrine tending to Rebellion, and the third, the practice
and exercise thereof: wherein as in all other points of argument, and discourse,
when the objection and solution is once heard, and well considered, no great
difficulty remains for a discreet man to make the conclusion, and to settle
his mind therein.

The first Question about Heretics and Heresy.. 1.
FIrst then there has been a great contention and is between us, as in the
second Chapter of this Treatise you have heard, about the name, nature, and
application of Heresy and Heretics; this Minister makes it a principal
ground in the very beginning of his first discovery, why Catholics and
English Protestants may not live together in one Commonwealth, without
continual fears of treason to be practiced from the said Catholics, for that
they held Protestants to be Heretics: and hereupon does he bring in that
long list and rablement of losses and penalties, both temporal and spiritual
adjudged by ancient Councelles, and Canons Ecclesiastical, to be incident, and
due to all sorts of Heretics, rising up against the Church from the
beginning: whereunto his moderate Answerer gives that moderate satisfaction,
which in the precedent Chapter we have signified, to wit, that concerning the
execution of those penalties (especially the external) it is not due against
any until lawful and judicial denuntiation have passed; and that for so much
as apperteined to the imputation of Heresy unto them that are of Caluins
Religion professed in England, not only Catholics, but diverse sorts also of
the most renowned Protestants did stand therein most resolutly holding them to
be true and properly Heretics. And for this he cited many instances,
authorities and examples; and we have added more in the said second Chapter
that goes before.

4. Now then it is to be considered maturely without passion or heat of
contention, whether this be so or not, and how T. M. does answer these
instances of his first adversary (for mine hitherto he has not seen:) for if
this be true, that indeed they are held for Heretics by learned and grave men
of their own profession, who are no less opposite to us then they; then
falls first the ground of his bitter exclamation against us for reputing them
so, and secondly follows it also, that as great probabilities of treasons and
conspiracies may be suspected from those of the other sects, that hold them
for such, (if that opinion be the cause of treasons) as Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Puritans, and Mark these consequences
the like. And lastly ensues a weighty consideration, that if by all sides
they be held for Heretics, how deeply the grave or rather grievous assertion
of S. Augustine before alleged is to be held in memory, and pondered with
terror. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites, Aug. de fide Cathol. citat.
apud Great. tit. 7. de Haereticis c. 2
omnem Haereticum vel Schismaticum cum Diabolo and Angelis (...) aeterni ignis
incendio participandum: Hold for most certain and no way make any doubt, but
that every Heticke or Schismaticke, of what sort soever, shall be partaker of
the flames of eternal fire, together with the devil and his Angels; which
is a dreadful sentence, especially if we remember both his and all other Holy
Fathers uniform definition of an Heretic, to consist principally in this,
that he hold with obstinacy any one article contrary to the belief of the
universal visible and known Church, for that out of these two mayor and minor
propositions, the conclusion is easily made who is an Heretic, and First
charge of Heresy laid upon Protestantesby men of their own pro fession.
thereby also in the danger denounced by S. Augustine.

5. The first proof then which the Answerer alleges against the discovery of
T. M. in this behalf, is the authority, censure and judgment of the Deane and
College of the famous Lutheran University in Germany, named Tubinga, set down
by the said deane and Common Reader of that University named Philippus Nicolaus
in a large book with this title: Fundamentorum Moderate Answer. page 14.
Caluinianae sectae cum veteribus Arrianis and Nestorianis communium detectio:
A discovery of the fundamentes of the Caluinian sect, which are common to them
with the ancient Arrians and Nestorians: and he proves through In praefat. and
cap. 1. 2 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc.
many Chapters together, that Caluinists are no less Heretics then the
other, and they agree with him at least in seauenteene or eighteen principal
articles, alleging also (...) authority to the same effect.

6. This is the charge. What does the Minister now Reply upon large and mature
deliberation in this his full satisfaction? You shall hear it in his own
words: Reply page 17.
That which they did (says he) in the spirit of opposition and contention is
not much to be regarded: His slight (...) not satisfying the doubt.
and this is all he says to the purpose, for that presently he runs a side
to prove by other means, that Calvin did not hold with the Arrians and
Nestorians; but this is to take a new contention in hand with the University of
Tubinga, whether they censured well or no, and not to answer us, whether
Caluinists be truly Heretics by the judgment of that Protestant University,
which in effect he grants, when he says: That it is not much to be regarded
what they did in the spirit of opposition and contention; so as they censure
him, and he censured them: whereby is clear that in their judgment, both he and
his are condemned, which is the point in question.

7. And by this and many other like authorities alleged by me to this purpose
in the precedent second Chapter, is evident, that in the judgment and
conscience of all Lutheran Protestants whatsoever, not only in the spirit of
opposition and contention, as this man says, but in their calmest spirit (if
ever they be in calm) all Caluinistes are held by them for damnable
Heretics, yea, deploratissimi Haeretici, most desperate Stanc l. de Trinit.
and medi. Lut. li. contr. Sacra. and epist. ad Marchio. Pruss.
Heretics says Franciscus Stancarus a chief Superintendent in Polonia:
Alieni ab Ecclesia Dei, and satanae membra, says Luther himself: cut of from
the Church of God and thereby made true members of Satan; which censure being
laid upon them by men of their own profession is a very considerable point to
be marked by him that fears the eternal fire before mentioned by S.
Augustine. For as if so many learned Physicians should tell us that we were in
a dangerous consumption, or so many skillful Lawyers should admonish us that we
were by law in a case of extreme temporal danger of death, we would look
about us: so much more ought we in this case.

8. I pass over the testimony of Conradus before mentioned, who affirms
Caluinistes to believe and teach rightly no one article of the Creed: that also
of Heshusius, that says, their association is a most blasphemous and
sacrilegious sect: that of Hunnius, it is most damnable and the right way to
hell: that of Schutzius, calling it the sink of all wicked Heresies: that of
Modestus, that makes Caluinists as badd as Jews and Mahometanes: that of
Matthias, Grauerus, and others, that affirm all Protestants that follow
Caluins doctrine prosessed enemies of Jesus Christ: al which being Ministers,
and zealous professors of Luthers new Gospel, cannot be imagined by
Protestants to have been so much abandoned by the Holy Ghost, as to give this
deliberate Censure of their brethren in profession, if it were false, or else
must we think, that they had never the true spirit of God in them, whereof
which soever our Minister grants, he is in the brakes: And thus much of
Lutherane Protestants.

9. Next to this where the danger without comparison Ansvverer page 15 The
second charge of Heresy from Puritanes.
is far greater, the Answerer obiecteth to our Minister, the opinion of the
Puritanes, to wit, the more zealous part of the Caluinian profession it self,
who affirm in the name of all their brethren (whom they Admonit. 2. to the
Par. pa. 25. and suppl. verse. 36.
say to be thousands) that the ordinary Protestants of England are not only in
error and Heresy, but are plain Infidelles; and that it is infidelity to go
to their Churches; and that it was a damnable sin in the Parliament, yea more
heinous then that of Sodom and Gomorrha to confirm such an erroneous Religion.
And the same and other like censures of theirs are related in my Lord of
Canterbury his book of Dangerous positions: and the occasion and foundation of
this censure and judgment is set down of late very clearly in the preface to
the answer to Sir Edward Cooks Reports, where is showed why (supposing the
grou^des of both Religions and differences, especially in the origin of
Ecclesiastical power which gives essence to the true Church) they cannot be
but as heathens, publicans and Infidelles the one to the other.

9. Now then how do you think that T. M. shifteth of this charge? No
otherwise then the former, by granting the matter; but inueigheth against the
men: How T. M. does shift of the Censure of the Puritanes.
This writer and you (says he) may join fellowship: you dedicate your book
to the King, he to the Parliament; he pretends the consent of a thousand; you
of a thousand thousands; he for all his consent is not many, and you (for
ought you will pretend) but one etc. So he. But what is all this to the
purpose? He grants the point in question, that English Protestants are held
for Heretics, in the science and conscience of Puritanes: so as, both by
enemies and friends, they are thought to be in an evil case. And truly this
is much plainer dealing in confessing a truth (that they be in deed at such
debate among themselves in the very substance and essence of their Religion)
The notable shifting of Deane Sutcliffe.
then that of Deane Sutcliffe, who having taken upon him these years past to
return A full and round answer (for so he intituleth his book) to the
VVarnword of N. D. (even as now T. M. does his A full satisfaction) when he
came to the purpose, he was so far from being full and round, as to four whole
Chapters which the other had made of this matter, to show the dissentio^ of
Protestants among themselves, and the condemnation of Caluinistes by all other
Protestant sects of our time, he answered not twice four lines to all the
said discourses, testimonies, examples, and demonstrations, but dissembling al,
as though no such thing had been written by his adversary, at last in the
Sutcliffe in his full answer, part. 1. C. 1. page 14.
end of a Chapter, brake forth into the denial of any such different names or
sects at all, saying: Neither do we acknowledge the names of Lutheranes,
Caluinistes, Zuinglians or Puritanes, but only do call our selves Christians
etc. We say further, that the Churches of Germany, France and England agree,
albeit private men hold private opinions.

10. Thus Deane Sutcliffe: and by this audacity you may know the Deane, for
that no man else I think could without blushing have denied the notice of so
notorious names and differences, or so boldly have affirmed that all the
Protestant Churches of Geneua, France and England did agree, notwithstanding
that private men held private opinions; so as belike Churches may agree without
men, to wit, in their walls and windows: but these are escapes fit for M.
Sutcliffe, and so to him I leave them.

11. But yet the moderate Answerer goes one step A third charge of Heresy
against Protestants by one of their own.
nearer unto T. M. and tells him that a great learned man of his own side, a
rare linguist, a long traveler, trained much in Geneua and other Cities of
Germany, highly commended by M. Willet in his printed works, and admired by
others; to wit, M. Hugh Broughton having considered well of our ordinary
Protestants Moderate
Religion, condemned the same of infinite errors and Answer. page 14.
Heresies, in a certain advertisement published in M. Hugh Broughto^.
print, upon the year of Christ 1604. giving grievous curses of Anathema
Maranatha to the same, and to diverse Bishops in particular, as namely to M.
Whitgift, late Archbishop of Canterbury, and to M. Bilson yet Bishop of
Winchester, affirming further that their Bible, after their translation, and
by their corrupt notes thereunto, is made worse and more dangerous then the
Turks Alcaron, and causes many millions to run to eternal flames: that he
has found the text of the old Testament only, perverted in eight hundred and
eight and forty several places, and other like points; whereunto I find T. M.
to answer nothing in effect touching the matter it self in question, either by
denial of the thing, or otherwise, but only ascribing it to passion and lack
of judgment in him, which the other perhaps will return to him again. But
let us hear our Ministers words to his adversary.

12. What modesty (says he) can this be in you to object unto us a man whom
you know to be sequestered from us, rather by Reply c. 7.
impotency of passion, then by any difference of Religion: And is not this a
very substantial answer? Is not this a full satisfaction, according to the
title of his book? and was not the censure of the Puritanes cast of a little
before in regard of like passion? And all the Lutheran Protestants of Tubinga
before that again upon pretense T. M. cannot defend his Religion from Heresy
against his own people.
of like passion, as writing in the spirit of contradiction and contention?
What trial, what witness can have place if this kind of answering may be
admitted? But it is sufficient to me that by confession of our Minister
himself their Religion is held for error, Heresy, and infidelity, not only by
Catholics or Papists, as they call them, but also by Protestants
themselves, both Lutheranes and Puritanes, and some learned also of their own
proper sect, which is a pitiful confession if we consider of it well, and no
less dishonorable and prejudicial unto them, to have the name of Heretic
ascribed and laid upon them, as well by friends as enemies, as it is honorable
and comfortable unto us to be called Catholics, according to S. Augustines
observation, Aug. l. de vera Relig. cap. 7.
not only by freindes but also by our enemies. And thus much of the first
Question.

The second Question about seditious Doctrine.. 2.
13. ALl our contention hitherto in this point having been, whether truly and
really the doctrine of Catholics or Protestants be more peaceable, or
seditious in it self, or more dangerous or secure to Princes, concerning the
obedience or Rebellion of their subjects, whatsoever has been objected by the
accusation or calumniation of our Minister, in his former discovery against
Catholics, has not been any direct The equity of our doctrine tried by the
effects
doctrine, teaching or insinuating, much less inciting subjects to
disobedience or Rebellion, as before has been declared, but only by a certain
consequence or infere^ce, that for so much as in certain urgent and exorbitant
cases, we ascribe to the Christian Commonwealth and supreme Pastor thereof,
authority to restrain and punish supreme Magistrates in such cases; that
therefore our doctrine is seditious, and tending, indirectly at least and a
long, to Rebellion; though the visible experience of so many great Kingdoms
round about us, living for so many years, and sometimes ages also, in quiet
security, notwithstanding this doctrine, does convince this to be a
calumniation.

14. But our Adversaries do not only teach this, The contrary effects of
Protestant doctrine.
That every Christian Commonwealth upon mature deliberation and with general
consent has such anthority, but further also, that particular men and Common
people have the same, and are not only taught, but urged in like manner, and
exhorted to use it, when soever they suppose their Prince to offer them injury
or hard measure, especially in matters of Religion; whereof the moderate
Answerer obiecteth many examples and proofs against T. M. taken out of their
own books, words and wrytinges, as also by the testimonies of other
principal Protestant-writers, whereunto though T. M. would make a show to
answer somewhat now in this his Reply, and thereupon has framed a second
several part of his book for justification of Protestants in that behalf:
yet is it so far of from A full satisfaction (the title of his whole work) as
in The vanity of this Reply.
effect he confesses all that his Adversary opposes, no less then you have
heard in the former question, though somewhat he will seem sometimes to
wrangle, and to wype of the hatred of their assertion by Commentes of his own
devise.

15. And indeed what other answer can be framed to most plain assertions out
of their own words and writings, as of Calvin, Beza, Hottoman, and so many
other French Caluinistes, as I have mentioned in the first Chapter of this
Treatise? Goodman also, Gilby, VVhittingham, Knox, Buchanan, and others nearer
home unto us? All the forenamed Collections in like manner of him that is now
Archbishop of Canterbury, of Doctor Sutcliffe and others, in the books
entitled, Dangerous positions, Survey of the pretended Disciplinary Doctrine,
and the like, wherein their positions are most clearly set down, concerning
this matter. And albeit this Minister T. M. in his Reply, does use all the art
possible to dissemble the same, by telling a piece of his Adversaries
allegations in one place, and another piece in another, altering all order both
of Chapters matter and method, set down by the Answerer, so as never hare when
she would sit, did use more turninges and windinges for covering her self
(which the Reader may observe even by the places themselves quoted by him out
of his adversaries book:) yet are his answerers such, where he does answer
(for to sundry chief points he says nothing at all) as do easily show that
in substance he confesses all and cannot deny what is objected. And where he
seeks to deny any thing, there he intangleth himself more then if flatly he
confessed the same. Some few examples I shall allege whereby conjecture may be
made of the rest.

16. The Answerer alleges, first the words of Mother. Ansvverer cap 4.
Goodman, in his book against Queen Mary, wherein he writes expressly, that
it is lawful by Gods law and man's to kill both Kings and Queens, when just
The doctrine of Goodman and other English Protestants of Geneua
cause is offered, and herself in particular, for that she was an enemy to God,
and that all Magistrates and Princes transgressing Gods laws, might by the
people be punished, condemned, deprived and put to death, as well as private
transgressors; and much other such doctrine to this effect, cited out of the
said Goodman. Goodman pa. 94. 119. 203. etc.
All which the Bishop of Canterbury his second book of Dangerous positions
has much more largely, both of this Goodman and many other English
Protestants, Cap. 1.
chief Doctors of their Primitive Church, residing at that time in Geneua.
And what does T. M. reply now to this? You shall hear it in his own words.
If I should justify this Goodman says he (though your Full satisfaction, part
2. pa. 103.
examples might excuse him) yet my heart shall condemn my self: But what do
you profess to prove, all Protestants teach positions Rebellious? Prove it.
Here is one Goodman, who in his public book does maintain him: I have no
other means to avoid these straites which you object, by the example of one,
to conclude all Protestants in England Rebellious; then by the example of all
the rest to answer, there is but one. So he.

17. And this is his full satisfaction and faithful Reply, as he calls his
book; but how poor satisfaction this gives, and how many points there be
here of no faith or credit at all, is quickly seen by him that will examine
them. For first how do the (...) alleged against this Goodman by the Moderate
Answerer excuse him, as here is said, seeing the words he alleges against
him out of his own book are intolerable, and my Lord of Canterbury alleges
far worse? As for example, that it is most lawful to kill wicked Kings when
they fall to Tyranny, but namely Queens, and thereupon that Queen Mary ought
to have been put to death as a Tyrant, Monster, and cruel beast; alleging for
confirmation thereof diverse examples out of Holy Scripture, as that the
Subjects did lawfully kill the Dang. posit. l. 2. c. 1.
Queens Highness Athalia, and that the worthy Captain Iehu killed the Queens
Majesty Iesabell, and that Elias, though no Magistrate, killed the Queens
Highness Chaplains, the Priests of Baal; and that these examples are left for
our instruction etc. And now, tell me, how may these examples excuse M.
Goodman, as our Minister Morton avouches?

18. Secondly it is both false and fond to affirm that the moderate Answerer
took upon him to prove either that all Protestants in these our days, do
teach such Rebellious positions, or that all Protestants in England are
Rebellious, as here is affirmed; for that this were to deal as injuriously
with them, as they and he do with us, by imputing this last Rebellious fact of
a few in England, to the whole sort of Catholics and to their doctrine. It
was sufficient for the Answerers purpose to show that both Goodman and many
others, principal pillars of the English new Gospel in those days, did
hold, believe, and practice those positions out of the true spirit of the said
Gospel. And hereupon thirdly it follows, that it is a notorious impudency
to avouch with such resolution, A shameless assertion of T. M. denying a
manifest truth.
as this man does, that there is but this one of that opinion, and that one
dram of dross (as he says) proves not the whole mass to be no gold. For who
knows not first, that VVhittingam, afterward Deane of Durham, approved and
made a preface to Goodmans book, commending highly the said doctrine? Gilby
also another of that primitive Geneuian Church, who is thought by some to have
been the Author of the famous seditious book, entitled, Of Obedience (he
should have said Of Rebellion says my Lord of Canterbury) which book
approves and commends the same doctrine most highly, as the said Lord
testifies at large, by setting down their positions, and then adds as
follows about the consent of others.

19. Goodman (says he) for his conclusion is most earnest with all English
subjects, that they would The B. of Cant. his testimony of the primitive
English Geneuia^s. dan. posit. page 218. 219. 220. 221.
put his doctrine in practice, assuring them that in so doing, if they be cast
into prison with Joseph, to wild beasts with Daniel, into the sea with (...),
into the dungeon with Jeremy, into the fiery furnace with Sydrach, Mysaach, and
Abdenago: yet they shall be comforted. Whereas if they will not, in seeking to
save their lives, they shall loose them; they shall be cast out of the favor
of God; their consciences shall be wounded with hell-like torments; they shall
despair and seek to hang themselves with Judas; to murder themselves with
Franciscus Spira; drown themselves with Judge Hales; or else fall mad with
Justice Morgan etc. At Geneua etc.

20. This doctrine, says VVhittingham, was approved In his preface to Goodma^s
book.
by the best learned in these parts, meaning Calvin and the rest of the
Geneuians. The English men of name there at that time besides Goodman and
VVhittingham, were (as I take it) Antony Gilby, Miles Couerdale, David
Whitehead, and sundry others, who liking the said doctrine also exceedingly,
were very earnest to have the same printed for the benefit, as they said, of
their Brethren in England. VVhittingham made a preface to Goodmans book,
wherein he greatly commends this doctrine, and writes thus in the name as it
seems of all his fellows there: We desire that you (meaning all in England
and elsewhere) that love to know the truth and follow it, should be persuaded in
this truth (to wit of deposing Princes that follow not their Gospel.) And yet
further: Here thou do hear the eternal speaking of his Minister etc.
quickly give ear and obey etc. And again: If thou wish for Christian liberty
come and see how it may easily be had etc. From Geneua etc. So he.

21. Whereby may be seen that there was more then one dram of dross in that
golden mass, if every one of these first Geneuian Ghospellers weighed a dram;
and by this may be seen also, what credit may be given to these Ministers
asseuerations, that so guilefully do affirm or deny what makes for their
purposes, without scruple of lying, even then when they speak against
Equivocation. For it was impossible, but that T. M. knew this to be so, when he
avouched the contrary, that Goodman was alone in this case; and how then could
he write and print it, except either by secret Equivocation, or manifest lying?

22. Nor is it much to the purpose, to say, that English An euasio^ taken away.
Protestants do not now profess those positions of Goodman and the rest of
those ancient days for that the times and state of things be changed and
bettered with them; for they are not under Princes that press them to matters
against their wills. But yet we must imagine, that those who had Primitias
Spiritus, the very first fruits and greatest fervor of that new
Ghospelling-spirit, did speak and write more properly out of the force and
instinct of that spirit, according to the nature and essence thereof, then these
later, who accommodate themselves to the condition of states and times; and
that these now would fall to that also, if they were in their case.

23. For proof whereof the moderate answerer cites diverse like Rebellious
assertions, set down by Their sedicious do ctrine against Q. Elizabeth.
such as esteem themselves the purer sort of Protestants, against Queen
Elizabeth also, though a Protestant Princess, when she pressed them in
matters concerning their Religion; in which positions they affirm: That she
was worse and less tolerable then her sister Dan. posit page 18. 133 (...).
suppl. to the governor of Wales p. 16. 36. 37. 38.
Queen Mary, and not to be obeyed in her procedinges against them; yea openly
they moved diverse Magistrates to take arms against her, and namely in the
marches of Wales, as appears yet by their supplications to the Governor of
that country. He obiecteth in like manner the public positions, and printed
doctrine Mod. ans. cap. 4.
of Buchanan, Knox, and other chief Ministers and preachers of Scotland, about
the very same times, who publicly Positions of Scottish Mininisters.
and resolutely give authority to the people, to pull down, punish, and
deprive Princes, as well of their Crowns, as also of their lives when they
think them worthy; yea, do allow public rewards to be proposed Knox in Hist.
p. 372 item to Engl. and Scotland f 78 Buechanan de Iure Reg. p. 13. 25. 40.
58. 61.
to such as kill evil Princes, no less then to them that destroy noisome
beasts, as ravenous wolves, bears, and the like. He adds moreover out of
the very notes of our modern Protestants upon the Bible, even by the judgment
and interpretation of his Majesty himself, in the late conference with the
Puritanes, that deposing and killing of Princes is allowed, out of their
exposition of Scriptures, for lawful in such cases, as they go against
Religion; which censure Cap. 2.. Contrariwise.
to be conform to the judgment and writings both of Luther, Zuinglius and
Calvin, he shows by quoting their words and works in sundry places, which
for breuity I pretermit.

24. And what does T.M. answer to all this think you? You shall hear part by
part according as before How fully T. M. answers matters and gives
satisfaction.
the objections have been set down. To the first about Puritans, I find no
answer at al, so as in this, I see not how his satisfaction may be called
full, for so much as it is quite nothing: To Knox and Bucchanan their
assertions, he answers thus: You might have added, that there was in Scotland
an act of Parliament to call in that Reply (...). 107.
Cronicle of Buchanan, censuring all such contemptes and innouations, and then
cites in the margent anno 1584. To the objection about Knox and Buchanans
doctrine.
which was almost thirty years after the said doctrine had been taught,
preached, and practiced in that Kingdom, by those first Ghospellers. And is
not this A full satisfaction trow you? What if the Cronicle of Buchanan were
called in, that recounted with approbation and insolent triumph the attemptes
made upon their lawful Princes, by incitation of this doctrine? Does this take
away the doctrine it self? Or does it prove that those first Ghospellers held
it not? What became of the other books of Knox, and namely his Cronicle (for
he wrote also a Cronicle of the same matters, and of his own acts therein, as
Caesar did his Commentaries) were they abolished hereby? Or do not the same
things remain in Holinshed, Hooker, Harison, Thyn, and other writers as well
English as Scottish? Or does all this prove that this was not their doctrine?
See then how full or rather fond this satisfaction is.

25. As for the judgment and testimony of his Majesty, about the notes of
English Ministers upon the Reply pa. 103.
Bible, allowing it for lawful in certain cases to depose To theobiection of
his Majesty's judgment about the English Ministers notes (...) the Bible.
and kill Princes, he answers thus: It will be requisite without prejudice to
the most learned and Religious judgment of his Majesty to satisfy for two
places related from that conference etc. And then he passes on to discourse at
large of the meaning of those places, and under the color of the foresaid
honorable preface, he takes license to dissent from his Majesty, signifying in
effect that either the conference was not well related, or his Majesty mistook
their meaning in those notes; and yet is the matter clear by his own
confession, that their said notes upon the second book of Cronicles, and 15.
Chapter verse. 16. do not only allow the depofing of the Queen Maacha by her
son King Asa, for Idolatry, but further do reprehe^d him also sharply for
that he had not put her to death by fire, saying thus in their note: That
whether she were Mother or Grandmother, yet herin the King showed that he
lacked zeal; for she ought to have been burnt by the covenant, as verse. 13.
appears, and by the law of God Deuteronomy 13. but he gave place to foolish
pity, and would also seem after a sort to satisfy the law. So they in their
note.

26. But who will look upon the two textes of Scripture by them here cited,
shall find no mention of burning, but only of putting to death, and in Deuteronomy.
of stoning only. But how does he now defend this note of our English Ministers,
allowing the deposition and putting to death of Princes? You shall hear his
shift (for he is much troubled with his Majesty's Mark his poor shift.
observation:) What shall we say then? (says he) is the Sovereignty of Kings
disabled? God forbid; but it is rather established thereby, for the King is made
the deposer, yea even of whosoever. Do you see his poor flattering shift? If
the Queen Maacha might be deposed according to their note, and that ex Augusto
Imperio, from her Imperial 2. Par. 15.
government, as the text of Scripture has, yea and that she ought according to
the law of God to have been put to death, as now has been said, for her
Idolatry, then is it a poor shift to say that Kings cannot be deposed, for
that they must be the deposers, seeing that in Deuteronomy. where the Commission is
given, there is no mention of Kings at all, but Gods speech and commission
there is unto the people: Sitibi voluerit persuadere frater (...) etc. If thy
brother, or wife, or friend will persuade thee to leave God let thy hand be
upon him, and after thee the hand of all the people; which Not only Kings by
Gods law appointed deposers as the Minister T. M. says.
notwithstanding is to be understood as before in the second Chapter we have
noted, both out of the 13. and 17. Chapters of Deuteronomy. and the gloss thereupon,
according to the order there set down, to wit, after the cause examined and
sentenced by lawful Judges. And at this time when this law was ordained, there
were no Kings in Israel, nor in many years after, and consequently this
commission could not be given to Kings only.

27. So then for so much as English Protestant-Ministers that made these notes,
do authorize by this place of Deuteronomy. the deposing and killing of that Imperial
Queen; his Majesty's censure was judicious, and true, that thereby they allowed
that lawful Princes might be in certaines cases deposed and put to death. And
the first shift of T. M. in this place is ridiculous, whereby he would seem to
make secure al Kings from danger of deposition, for that themselves by Gods
word (which yet he proves not) must be the deposers, and then he presumes
they will not depose themselves; but for Queens he leaves them to shift as
they may: Which doctrine I suppose he would not have set forth in print in the
late Queens days. But their assertions are according to times and places: and
so this shall be sufficient for the second Question.

The third Question concerning practice of Rebellion.. 3.
28. ANd now having been longer in the former two Questions, then in the
beginning was purposed, I shall endeavor to be shorter, if it may be, in this
last, though the multitude of examples, partly set down by us before in the
first Chapter of this Treatise, and partly to be read in Histories and observed
by experience of Protestants continual tumultuation against Catholic
Princes, would require a larger discussion, then both the other two Questions
put together: albeit on the other side again the matters are so clear as
they need no discussion at all, but only narration. For what can our Minister
answer in reason or truth, to all that multitude of instances of Protestants
Rebellions, in the foresaid first Chapter set down, and for the most part
objected before (as now I perceive) by his adversary, the moderate Answerer? We
shall briefly run over some few examples.

29. To the instances in England of continual conspiracies Reply page 101.
and insurrections against Queen Mary, he sets down first this bold and
shameless provocation. After the proclamation of her title (says he) show us
what Protestant ever resisted? what Minister of the Gospel in To the
Rebellio^s against Q. Mary what he answers.
all that fiery trial did kindle the least spark of sedition among her people?
In which words is to be observed, first that he says, after the Proclamation
of her title, to excuse thereby the Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, the
Marquis of Northampton, and others that took arms against her, before she
was proclaimed in Londen, though in Norfolk she had proclaimed her self
presently upon the death of her brother King Edward: as also to excuse Cranmer,
Ridley, Sands, Latimer, Rogers, Jewel, and other Ministers that had preached
most bitterly against her title. But what, is the residue true, that here so
boldly he avouches, that never any Protestant resisted, nor Minister kindled
the least spark of sedition among her people after her title proclaimed? Is
this true I say? Is this justifiable (for he calls this Treatise a
justification of Protestants?) Is this any way to be maintained by any show or
shift whatsoever? What then will he say to the new conspiracy and iterated
Rebellion Stow, Holinshead, and others in their Cronicles
of the Duke of Suffolk, and of his brother the Lord John Gray, not only after
the said Queens title proclaimed, but after she was in possession, and had
pardoned them both of their former Rebellion? What will he say to the Rebellion
of Sir Peter Carew, Sir Gawyn Carew, Sir Thomas Denny, and other Protestant
Gentlemen, that took arms in Devonshire within six days (says Stow) after
the arraigneme^t of the Duke of Northumberland? What will he say to the
conspiracy of Sir James a Croftes and others in Wales, discovered (says the
same Many clear examples to convince T. M.
Author) about the five and twentieth day of January next ensuing? What will he
say to the Rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyatt and his confederates in Kent ensuing
about the same time? Were they not Protestants that were authors thereof? Or
was not Queen Mary's title yet proclaimed? Will our Minister face out this?
What will he say to the co^spiracies ensuing after this again, from Sir Edward
Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Stow. an. 1554. May 18.
Sir Nicolas Throckmorton, and others? what to the conspiracy of William
Thomas, who having determined and plotted the murder of the said Queen, and
convicted thereof, professed (says Stow) at his death at Tyburne, that he died
for his country?

30. I pass over other conspiracies and Rebellions, as that of Vdall
Throckmorton, John Daniel, Stanton, Cleber, the three Lincolnes, and after them
Thomas Stafford, and others, that coming out of France with instructions of
the brethren of Geneua, surprised Scarborough Castle, (...) other insurrections.
made proclamations against the Queen, that she was justly deposed, and other
such like attemptes by that sort of people, who all professed themselves to be
Protestants, and to have entered into those affairs principally for their
Religion: And with what face or forhead then does T. M. say in this place? Show
us what Protestant ever resisted? etc.

31. But much more impudent is the second part of his assertion about
Ministers, saying: That no Minister of the Gospel did ever kindle the least
spark of sedition against Queen Mary: Whereas his adversary obiecteth many by
name, as Cranmer, Ridley, Rogers, and Jewel before mentioned, (...) and
conspiracies by Ministers.
who as is evident by Fox his story in his Acts and Monumentes, both dealt,
preached and stirred people against her, all that lay in their power. And as
for Cranmer, it is evident he was condemned for the same treason in Parliament:
Ridley preached openly at Paul's Cross against her title: Rogers at Clocester:
and Jewel was appointed to preach in Oxford, had he not been prevented by the
sudden and unexpected proclayming of the said Queen there by Sir John
Williams and others.

32. The instances also that we have alleged of Goodman, VVhittingham, Gilby,
Couerdale, VVitehead, and sundry others testified by my Lord of Canterbury, to
have taught and practiced sedition against the said Queen in those days, do
they not convince this Minister Thomas Morton of rare and singular impudency?
will any man ever believe him hereafter what he says or affirms, denies or
shifteth of, seeing him to avouch so manifest untruths, as these are, with so
shameless asseueration?

33. But yet to convince him somewhat more, I think good to set down some of
the particular words and phrases of two or three of the principal forenamed
pillars of the Protestant primitive Church in More examples of Ministers
treasons against (...). Mary.
our Island (omitted for breuities sake by the moderate Answerer) to the end you
may see their spirit, and judge of this man's forehead in standing so resolutely
in the denial taken in hand. For first John Knox, in a book written and
printed at Geneua 1558. which was the last of her reign; wherein after he had
said, That is is not birth only or propinquity of blood that (...) a King
lawful to reign above the people professing Jesus Christ etc. He goes
forward, saying thus: I fear not to affirm Knok in his (...). to the Nobility
fol. 63. and 77.
that it had been the duty of the Nobility, Judges, Rulers and people of
England, not only to have resisted and withstood Mary that Iezabel, whom they
called their Queen; but also to have punished her to death, with all the sort
of her Idolatrous Priests, together with all such as should have assisted her
etc. Do you see here his Evangelical spirit? Do you see the essence of his
doctrine? Do you hear this new Prophet declare himself clearly? But let us
give audience to another of like vocation and spirit.

34. The second is his dear brother Christophor Goodman, who in a book of his
printed also at Geneua the Goodman in his book, how Superiors ought to be
obeyed. c. (...). fol. 54.
same year 1558. the title whereof was, How Superiors ought to be obeyed,
writes thus: I know you of England will say that the Crown is not entailed to
heire-males, but appertains as well to the daughters, and therefore by the
laws of the Realm ye could do no otherwise then admit her, but if this be
true, yet miserable is the answer of such as had so long time professed the
Gospel, and the lively word of God. For Princes to be deposed by the lively
word of God.
if it had been done by Pagans and heathens, which knew not God by his word, it
might better have been borne with all, but among them that bear the name of
Gods people, with whom his laws should have chief authority, this answer is
not tolerable. If she had been no bastard but the Kings daughter, as lawfully
begotten, as was her sister, that Godly Lady and meek lamb; yet at the death
of our lawful Prince King Edward, that should not have been your first
counsel or question, who should be your Queen, but first and principally who
had been most meet among your Brethren to have had the government over you. For
a woman to reign Gods law forbids, whose reign was never accounted
lawful by the word of God etc. So he. And behold here now whether these men's
word of God did not serve them to all turns, even to bar lawful
succession, to depose the possessor, and whatsoever themselves listed.

35. The third Doctor of this learning was M. VVhittingham, Deane afterward
(for his good merittes) of Durham, who made a preface to the foresaid book of
Goodman, allowing and commending the same highly, as a thing consulted,
examined and approved by Calvin, and the rest of the most learned Ghospellers
of Geneua, M. VVhittingham in his preface to Goodma^s book.
for thus he writes: M. Christophor Goodman conferred his articles and chief
propositions of his book with the best learned in these parts, who approving
the same, he consented to enlarge the said work, and so to print it as a token
of his duty and good affection toward the Church of God: and then if it were
thought good in the judgment of the Godly to translate the same into other
languages, that the profit thereof might be more universal. So VVhittingham;
with whom concurred in judgment VVhithead, Couerdale, Gilby in Admon. page 69.
Gilby, and others then living in Geneua, which Gilby wrote also of the like
argument a special admonition to the Realms of England and Scotland, to call
them to repentance by all likelihood, for that they had admitted, tolerated,
and not put to death Q. Mary of England, and not yet deposed, as after they
did, Q. Mary of Scotland both Mother and daughter; and the book was printed
the same year by the same Crispin in Geneua: wherein besides that which he
utters against this Queen Mary as a Catholic Princess, or rather no
Princess in his opinion, he has these words also of King Henry her Father,
even after his fall from Catholic Religion: The boar was busy wrooting and
Gilbyes immodest speech against K. Henry and the supremacy.
digging in the earth with all his pigges that followed him, but they sought
only for the pleasant fruits that they winded with their long snowtes, and for
their own bellies sake etc. This monstrous boar for all this, must needs be
called head of the Church under pain of treason, displacing Christ our only
head, who alone ought to have this title. So Gilby. And for that all this was
spoken, written, and printed diverse years after Q. Mary was proclaimed, and
installed Queen, and all tending evidently to sedition as you see; (besides
the flat denial both of King, and Queens supremacy) it conuinceth plainly
that which our Minister T. M. before denied. And so with this conviction in the
sight of all his Brethren we leave him. But yet let us hear what he says to
some other particulers before by us objected.

36. To that then of Sir Thomas Wyatt, the Duke of (...), and others he
answers diversely. First the History relates (says he) the pretense of Wyatt
thus: A proclamation against the Queens marriage desiring all Englishmen to
join for defense of the Realm etc. then that in Queen Mary's oration against
Wyatt, there is not to be fond (says he,) any scruple concerning the cause of
Religion: thirdly that no Minister of the Gospel was brought in question as a
Commotioner in that cause: Lastly, if intent might answer for Protestants
accused in that name; then is it plain, that it was not Religion: If for Wyatt
and his fellows; it is plain it was not against the Queen or State, but for
both. So he. In all which different clauses of his answer, consider if any one
be in it self true, for as for the first and second, though Wyatt pretends in
his proclamation the said marriage with Spain to be the chief cause; yet not
alone, but that the Queen and Counsel (says Fox) would Fox in an. 1554. page
1289.
also by this marriage as he affirmed bring upon the Realm miserable
servitude, and establishe Popish Religion.

37. And the same Fox relates Queen Mary's words in her oration thus: That
the matter of the marriage is but a Spanish cloak (says she) to cover their
protensed purpose against our Religion. So as in these two points the Minister
lies openly, but more in the last, that VVyats The (...) of Sir Tho. Wyatt.
attempt was not against Queen Mary or the state, but for both, for that
Queen Mary in the same oration, as both Fox and Holinshead do jointly relate,
affirmed VVyats answer to have been to Sir Edward Hastinges, and Sir Thomas
Corn-wallis sent from her unto them, which he also at his arraignment
confessed, that he and his would have the governance of her person, the keeping
of the Tower, and the placing of her Counselors. And as for the other point,
whether any Ministers were called in question as Commotioners in that attempt,
imports little, for so much as no man can doubt but that the Commotion being
so general and for Religion, as Fox affirms, all Ministers hearts and
tongues were therein in secret, and their hands in like manner so far forth
(...). l. 2 de Schis. p. 332.
as they durst; which being well known to Queen Mary and her Counsel, caused
them to proceed against the principal soon after in matter of Religion,
preferring therein the injury done to God before the injuries offered to her
self: though Doctor Sanders do affirm that diverse chief of the new Clergy,
and among them Doctor Cranmer, were convinced to have conspired in that
Rebellion. And by this we see how well the Minister has justified his
Protestants in this point: It is even as good as their justification by only
faith, which makes them less justifiable then before. Let us pass to some
other examples and se what he says to the Rebellion of Protestants in other
countries.

38. To that which has been proposed of Scotland, both by the moderate Answerer
and by my self also in my first Chapter of this Treatise, of so great and
intolerable insolences used in Scotland by ProtestantMinisters Reply (...).
107.
and their Disciples against Grandmother, Mother, Father and son, all
lawful Princes violated by them, he yields no other answer or satisfaction,
but that which before has been recited, that in a Parliament upon the year
1584. the Chronicle of Buchanan was called in by the said Parliament (the Kings
highness then being about eighteen years old.) But what is this to the
purpose? Did this alter their doctrine or manner of Rebellious proceeding No
substantial answering to any thing.
thereupon, which they had used both against his Majesty in the time of his
minority and against his Mother and Grandmother before him, and against him
after this Statute published? No truly, but they were more earnest in their
sedition afterward then before, for that the very next year after, they caused
that notorious surprise to be made upon his Royal person at Striueling before
mentioned in the first Chapter of this Treatise.

39. James Gibson also one of the chief Ministers being Dang. posit. l. 1. c. 6.
called before his Majesty and privy Counsel upon the one and twentieth of
December 1585. used intolerable speech unto his highness, calling him
Persecutour, and comparing him to Jeroboam, threating his rooting out and the
like, which his Majesty can best remember: So as such doctrine, and such
practice being held by them and their new Ghospelling Brethren of Scotland in
those days, it is a simple satisfaction for our Minister to come forth now
with a reuocation of Buchanans Chronicle, as though that did remedy the matter,
or as though that reuocation had been made by them (I mean the Ministers
repentant for their former doctrine) and not rather by the Civil Magistrate,
impugned and resisted by the other. And this for the present of Scotland.

40. To the examples of France alleged by the Answerer of infinite rebellions
made by the Protestants, To the examples of France.
for many years together against sundry Crowned Princes of that Realm, of
which attempts many were so barbarous, as without horror they cannot be
uttered: And one French writer affirms that within the compass of one year,
which was 1562. two and Vide Lodouicum Richome in expost. apolog. ca. 94.
forty thousand Priests, Religious, and Ecclesiastical persons were most
desperately murdered, above twenty thousand Churches cast on the ground, and
within the compass of ten years by the witness of a Protestant writer
Colignius, two millions of men were slain, two thousand Monasteries
overthrown, nine hundred hospitalles destroyed, and above two hundred Cities
and Castelles ruined under one only K. Henry the third. To all this (I say) he
answers that according to the Historical Collections, which he has seen of
French affairs, the fault of all this, is to be laid upon the house of Guise,
who being strangers, sought to suppress the natural Princes of the blood Royal
in France, A vain shift.
as also to oppress the Ghospellers: But suppose this were true, which I hold
to be most false and slau^derous yet could not this particular passion of the
house of Guise make lawful the Protestants Rebellion against their natural
and lawful Kings, no more then if now in England the Catholics or Puritanes
should rebel against his Majesty, for that some noble man or men of the
Counsel were known to be their enemies.

41. To the examples of Calvin and Beza in Geneua, To the examples of Geneua
both for doctrine and practice, he answers first for doctrine, granting
Caluins sentence to be: That when a King usurps Gods throne he loses hu
Royalty. And again: If the King exalt himself to Gods throne and commands
Reply pa. 116.
any thing contra Deum against God, then to pull him down. Moreover he
grants that Calvin uses this phrase; That when a King does so behave
himself, we must spit in his face, which is spoken, says our Minister,
comparatively, and not Rebelliously: He expounds also those words of Calvin;
Abdicant se potestate, that such Kings are bereaved of Ibid. page 119.
authority; meaning only (says he) in that case of contradiction against God.
But let the Minister tell us, who shall be Judge of this, who shall determine
the case? To whom shall it belong to give sentence, when a King does
contradict God, when he usurps Gods throne, when he commands any thing
against God, and consequently, when his face must be spitten on, when he must
be pulled down, and when he must be deprived of all regal authority? Did
Thomas Morton ever find in any Catholic writer such words, or sense in
prejudice of Princes? And yet the fond Minister, as though he had played
worthily his Masterprize vaunteth in these words: Thus is Calvin justified
concerning his doctrine, and in him also Beza: because Beza (say you) his
Successor in place succeeded him also both in opinion and practice. True Sir:
they are both justified in your manner of justification, and they are fit
justified Saints for your Calendar.

42. And having said thus, he passes yet further, adding a second provocation
about practice in these words: We have heard of their opinion (to wit of
Calvin Reply pa. 19.
and Beza) have you any thing to except against their practice: And this
demand he made, when he knew and had seen his Adversaries many and most
grievous accusations Mod. Answer. c. 9.
against them in that kind, not only for moving that people of Geneua to open
Rebellion against their Lord and Prince the Bishop; but also the people of
France, against their King and Sovereign, citing good authorities for the
same, saying: Calvin and Bezae armed the subjects against their Prince of
Geneua, and (as Calvin himself, Doctor Sutcliffe, and the Bishop of Canterbury
be witnesses) deposed their Sovereign from his temporal right, and ever after
continued in that state of Rebellion; They celebrated also a Council, wherein
was concluded that King Francis the second, then King of France, his wife the
Queen, his Children, Queen Mother etc. should be destroyed: And his
quotations for these things are: Beza l. de iure Magistrate; Sutcliffe answ. to
suppl. and Survey, Calvin in epist. Pet. Far. orat. cont. Sectar. defens. Reg.
and Relig. etc. All which being seen by our Minister, he demands Great
hypocrisy in the demand of T. M.
notwithstanding as you have heard with this hypocrisy, have you any thing to
except against their practice? As though there were nothing at all, not only
not to be accused or reprehended in them, but not so much as to be excepted
against: And is not this notable dissimulation in a matter so clear and
evident? Who can believe this Minister at his word herafter? But let us now see
how he will answer the matter it self objected, and then will you admire his
impudency much more.

43. For better understanding whereof you must know, that besides all that which
is alleged for proof of this accusation out of Calvin and Farellus their own
Lords, and my Lord of Canterbury his book of Dangerous positions, Doctor
Sutcliffe does of purpose, and at large prove the same in two whole Chapters,
to wit the second and third of his Survey against the pretended discipline;
showing out of diverse authors, and namely Franciscus Boninardus, that wrote the
History of Geneua Bishop of Geneua was Lord (...) also of the City.
(as he says) by Caluins direction, Symlerus and Bodinus; that for above five
hundred years gone the Bishop of Geneua was not only spiritual, but temporal
Lord also of that City, and the same confirmed unto him by the Emperor
Frederick the first, upon the year of Christ 1124. and, as Calvin himself
confesses in his writings to Cardinal Sadoletus, had Ius gladij and alias
ciuilis Calvin to Sadolet. p. 171.
iurisdictionis parts, the power of life and death and other parts of civil
jurisdiction; and that this Prince and Bishop was cast out by the people upon
the preachinges and practices of Farellus, Calvin, and other Protestant
Ministers: Quo eiecto (says Bodinus,) Geneuates Bodinus l. de Repub. page 353.
Monarchiam in popularem statum commutarunt: who being cast out, the Geneuians
did change their Monarchy into a popular State.

44. And finally after many proofs Doctor Sutcliffe Sutcliffe in Suric. page
14.
sets down his opinion in these words: I doubt not but that I may presume,
without any man's just offense, to speak my opinion as touching the deuinity
which was pretended by the said Ministers of Geneua against their Bishop; for
indeed I do dislike it. If such dealinges were simply to be urged by the word
of God, they might reach further then would be convenient. I never thought it
agreeable to deuinity, for Ministers to cast of their Rulers at their own
pleasures; one of them writes thus: That the light of the Gospel had
restored to the City that principality which the Bishop had before; But all
the learned deuines in Germany at their D Sutclifs testimony of Protestants
doctrine for deposing of Princes
conferences with the Emperor, were of a contrary opinion etc. I am not the
man that will either justify mine own discretion, or impugn any thing which
may be brought for the civil proceeding of that State, or any other, so as they
carry no false grounds of deuinity with them, which may prove dangerous to our
own, such as have been since published for the authorizing of subjects in many
cases to depose their Princes. So he.

45. And now by this large discourse, you see fully his mind, first that the
Bishop of Geneua was Lord, and Prince of that City for diverse ages, confirmed
also by the Emperor: secondly that he was unjustly deprived by the people,
upon the preaching and false grounds of deuinity of Farellus, Calvin, Beza,
and other Protestant preachers: thirdly we see the reason why he thinks thus;
least their doctrine might reach further then would be convenient, and be
dangerous in England: So as he also (as you see) does accommodate his doctrine
and grounds of deuinity, to the commodity of his cause.

46. But now let us see how this Minister Sutcliffe, and our Minister Morton
have agreed together, upon a far different manner of answering this matter
at this time, and you will perceive thereby what people they are who change
their answers as time and wether walks. For after that Morton had read all
this in Sutcliffe, and yet made the matter so strange, as by his former demand
you have heard, when he said: and have you any thing to except against their
practice? Now here he answers after another fashion thus: The book (says
he) of Doctor Sutcliffe, I could not find, and I Full satisfaction page 119.
needed not seek it, for I have conferred with the Master, who answered me,
that the book De iure Magistratus he never thought to be Beza his work, and
concerning the State of Geneua, and Bishop thereof, he was never their Prince,
but the State of the town was a free State of it self: and now to make a
question whether I should believe him, or you, is to doubt whether he that has
been at Geneua, or he that never saw it can better report the state thereof, the
conclusion will be that you may rather prove those Bishops to have been
injuriously ambitious, then the City Rebellious. So he.

47. This is his faithful reply and full satisfaction, according to the title
of his book. And now consider good Reader what honest men these two Ministers
are, that so contradict the one the other, and that A (...) conference be
tvveene Sutcliffe and Morto^.
upon conference together for thy deceit and cosenage: for even now you heard
Doctor Sutcliffe to affirm that the Bishop of Geneua had been temporal Prince
for many hundred years, and that upon the preaching of Farellus, Calvin and
others, they changed their Monarchy into a popular State, and that himself
misliked the same, according to the grounds of deuinity; and how then does he
say here to his fellow Minister Morton, that the Bishop of Geneua was never
there Prince, and that the state of the town was a free State of it self? Can
these things stand together? Morton says moreover he could not find
Sutcliffes The absurd false dealing of two Ministers together.
book, which truly is a thing very strange, there being so many thousands
printed of them in England; but more strange it is, that Deane Sutcliffe should
so soon forget his own book, and what he wrote therein, and so egregiously
cousin his Brother-Minister in their private conference, as to make him believe,
and utter now in print quid pro quo, and chalk for cheese as he does. But it
cannot seem probable that Morton believed it himself, but rather would make
the simple Reader believe the same, and so dazell his eyes for his deceit: and
this is their manner of dealing in most matters, where fraud may be used.

48. It were over long to look into all other examples objected by the
moderate answerer, how they are replied unto by T. M. As for example the known
reuoltes and Rebellions of Flanders, and of those States Sundry other
Rebellions of Protestants.
against their lawful Princes, and so many outrages committed therein for
almost now forty years, if not more; the bloody tumultes in Germany and
Switzerland upon Luther and Zuinglius their doctrine, wherein Zuinglius himself
the head stirrer was slain; the like in Denmark for expelling Catholic
Religion, and bringing in of Lutheranisme; the manifest Rebellion, intrusion,
and oppression of Duke Charles in Sweueland against his Nephew the King of
Polonia, lawful Inheritour of those States, enduring unto these days; as also
the open wars of Boscaine, and his fellows in Hungary against the Emperor,
in favor of Protestant Religion, and of the Turk himself, whose Confederates
they confess themselves to be.

49. Into these and other examples as I said, time will not permit us to enter
with any length, nor will it be to any purpose; for that we shall find them as
sleightely answered or shifted of, as the rest before. For unto the first and
last, of Flanders and Hungary, the Minister answers in effect nothing at all;
and I marvel Seely answers or rather shiftings of.
not, if he answered this with silence, seeing he answered all the tumultes of
Scotland for so many years continued, by saying only as you have heard: That
Buchanans Chronicle was recalled by an act of Parliament.

50. To the other of Germany and Luthers seditious proceedinges both in words,
writings and deeds, wherein it is objected among many other things that he
censured both K. Henry of England, and many other Princes with intolerable,
insolent, and vile speeches, affirming them unworthy of all government; that
Protestants hands must be imbrued with blood, and that thereupon ensued most
bloody wars throughout Germany and almost all Christendom besides, Munsters
Rebellions also in the same countries, who preached, that Rebellion against
Catholic Princes for Religion was to be called The war of God, and that he
had (...) commandment from God to that effect; whereupon ensued the slaughter
of a hundred and thirty thousand men in three months etc. To the first of
Luther, he answers very sagely in these words: Luthers literal censure of
words will be partly confessed, but Reply pa. 124.
the other of swords, which drew blood can never be proved. You see upon what
points of desperate denial he stands, and you may remember how clearly the
matter has been proved before, and what is extant in most writers of our time
about the same.

51. The other of Munster he rejects, as not being of his Religion, and yet
no man can deny, but that he was of Luthers school, and spronge out of the
first seed and spirit of that new Gospel; but hard it is to discern who be
brethren, and who be not, when it stands for their commodity to acknowledge
or deny one the other. Here you see he denies Munster, and acknowledges
Luther to be of their Gospel and fraternity; and yet no man does reject them
more contemptuosly, or condemns them more seriously for Heretics then Luther
himself, as before out of his own words you have heard. To the stirs in
Switzerland raised by Zuinglius, who was slain also in the field, he says in
like manner nothing; and little more to Denmark, but that now all is quiet
there, and Lutherane Religion in full possession, but he tells us not by what
styrres and tumultes the same was brought in.

52. To that of Sueueland, and the open Rebellion of those Kingdoms, he
finds only this shift to put of the matter. It was (says he) the demand of
the whole state, for defense of their country privileges, liberties, and
fruition of Religion; can any Papist call this Rebellion? No truly Sir in your
sense, who do call the state whatsoever multitude of people does rebel
against their Princes, for the liberty of your Ghospel, for so you called the
party Protestant of Scotland (if you remember) the Lords of the Congregation,
and the state of the Realm: and the other party that stood with the Queen,
was called a faction, and so likewise in France and Flanders, Germany and
Sueueland, those that took exceptions first, and then arms against their
Princes, are called the State, or States, united Provinces, those of the
Religion, and by other like titles of honor: and the other part or rather body
it self, has the name of Enemies, Persecutors, Tyrants, Papists, and other
odious appellations. But I would make this demand, how came (...) particular
men to be States, and to be called the Commonwealth? were they not first
subjects? And did they not first withdraw themselves from the obedience of
their lawful Princes, by sleightes, dissimulations, pretense of greiuances,
liberty of Gospel, and the like devises, until at last they fell to open
arms? May not any number of rebels make themselves a state in this sense? But
I will urge you no further, for that I well see you cannot answer, and to
drive you beyond the wall is to small purpose, I have compassion of you.

A BRIEF CENSVRE IS GIVEN OF A NEW TREATISE set forth by T.M. INTITVLED, A
Confutation of the Popes Supremacy, as supreme head of Rebellion etc. Annexed
to his former justification of Protestant-Princes, for matters of Rebellion.
CHAP. V.
THis Minister Thomas Morton not content, after the pretended confirmation of
his first discovery and reasons thereof, to have added a second Treatise,
containing (as he says) A Justification of Protestants against imputations of
disobedience and Rebellion against temporal Princes, either in doctrine or
practice (both which you have heard now how substa^tially he has performed) he
thought good also to ad a third Treatise (though nothing needful to the
argument in hand) which he intituleth, A confutation of the principles of
Romish doctrine in two points, first, concerning The title of T. M. his (...)
Treatise.
the Pope supreme head of Rebellion, and secondly, the impious conceit of
Equivocation. And forasmuch as of the second point, which is Equivocation, we
are to treat more largly in the ensuing Chapters, and that the first seemed to
me impertinent to be treated again severally in this place, the substance
thereof having been touched sufficiently, forasmuch as belongs to this affair,
in the former Chapters, especially the second; I had purposed once to pass it
over without any answer at all, as indeed not deserving any, it being only The
cause of this several Chapter.
a certain disorderly hudling together of pieces and parcelles of other men's
collections about that matter, better handled by themselves: But yet
considering afterward the special manner of this man's treating the same
matters, both in regard of fraud and simplicity, though contrary the one to
the other; I judged it not amiss to give the Reader some taste thereof in this
one Chapter, whereby he may be able to frame a judgment of the rest, and of the
exorbitant vein of this man's writing.

2. First then he begins the very first lines of his Confut. page 1.
first Chapter with these words: This pretended predominance ( says he) of
the Pope in temporal causes, whether directly or indirectly considered ( in
which division of governing the Romish school is at this day extremely
divided) if it be from To his first cauillation.
God, it will sure plead Scriptum est etc. By which sole entrance you may take
a scantling of the ma^s discretion; for it cannot be denied I think (except we
deny the Gospel) but that Scriptum est was pleaded also by Math. 4.
the devil, and not only by God, as in like manner it has been by all
Heretics, the devils chief Chaplains, since that time; and consequently it was
no good exordium to build all upon this foundation.

3. Secondly it is not true, that the Romish schole is so extremely divided in
this division of governing directly To his second cauillation.
or indirectly, as the Minister would make it: for the question is not at all
of governing, but how the right to govern in temporal causes, was delivered
by Christ to S. Peter and his Successors, whether directly, together with the
spiritual government over souls, or else indirectly and by a certain
consequence, when the said spiritual government is let and impugned, as
before has been declared. In which difference of opinions there is no such
extremity of division among Catholics, as this man would have men think: for
that all do agree in the substance of the thing it self, that the Pope has
this authority from God Iure diuino, in certain cases, whether directly or
indirectly that little imports to this our controversy with the Protestants,
who deny both the one and the other. And so much for that.

4. The next sentence or objection after the former preface (which is the very
first of his discourse) is framed by him, but yet in our name, under the title
of the Roman pretense in these words: The high Priests in Page 2.
the old Testament (says he) were supreme in civil causes, ergo they ought
to be so also in the new: for which he cites, one Carerius, a Lawier, that
wrote of late in Padua De Carerius li. 2. Romans Pontif. ca. 18. and Sander. in
visib. monarch.
potestate Romani Pontificis, defending the former opinion of Canonistes for
direct dominion, and cites his words in Latin thus: Dico Pontificem in veteri
Testamento fuisse Rege maiorem: And Englisheth the same as before you have
heard, that the high Priest was supreme, in civil causes; which words, of
civil causes, he puts in of his own, and if you mark them, do mar the
whole market: for that Carerius has them not either in words or sense, but
teaches the plain contrary in all his discourse, to wit, that he means in
matters appertaining to Religion and Preisthood, and not of temporal
principality, which this Author grants to have been greater in the old
Testament in dealing with Ecclesiastical men and matters, then in the new; and
to that effect is he cited presently after by the Minister himself, contrary to
that which here he feigneth him to say. But let us hear the words of
Carerius. Tertio dico (says he) etiam in Testamento veteri fuisse Pontificem
Rege maiorem: quod quidem probatur etc. Thirdly I say that the high Priest was
greater also in the old Testament then the King, which is proved first out of
the 27. Chapter of Numbers, where it is appointed by God, that Iosue and all
the people should be directed by the word of the high Priest Eleazar, saying,
when any thing is to be done, let Eleazar the high Priest consult with God, and
at his word as well Iosue, as all the children The dignity of Priesthood proved
to be more then Regal.
of Israel, and whole multitude shall go forth and come in etc. And secondly
the same is proved out of the fourth of Leuiticus, where four kind of
Sacrifices being ordained, according to the dignity of the persons, the first
two are of a calfe for the high Priest and commonwealth, the third and fourth
of a he and shee-goat for the Prince and private persons: Whereby Carerius
infers a most certain dignity and pre-eminence of the Priests state, above
the temporal Prince, though he say not in civil causes, as this Minister does
belly him.

5. And whereas Carerius had said in two former Answers, first that in the old
Testament, Ecclesiastical and secular jurisdiction were not so distinct, but
that both might be in some cases in the King, and secondly that in the new law,
the spiritual power was more eminent then in the old; he comes thirdly to
say False dealing against (...).
that in the old law the High Priest in some respects was greater also then
the King, which cannot be understood of civil power, except the Author will be
contrary to himself. And therefore that clause was very falsely and perfidiously
thrust in by the Minister, and this with so much the less shame, for that in
the end of the same Chapter he cites the same Author to the (...). p. 2.
Carer. l. 2. c. 1.
plain contrary sense, saying: In veteri lege Regnum erat substantiuum and
sacerdotium adiectiuum etc. That in the old law the Kingdom was the
substantive, that stood of it self, and Preisthood was the adjective, that
leaned thereon, but contrary-wise in the new law, Preisthood and spiritual
jurisdiction is the substantive or principal in government, and temporal
principality is the adjective depending thereof, for direction, and assistance,
the one both by nature and Gods law being subordinate to the other, to wit the
temporal to the spiritual. And thus much concerning this guile by flat
falsehood. Now to a trick or two of other sorts of shifting by him used for
deluding the Reader.

6. It follows in the same place, as a second Romish pretense: That the old
Testament was a figure of the new in Christ, and therefore that in the new, the
spiritual power (as the Popedom, says he) must be the chief or substantive
etc. Which short sentence he patcheth out of two different Authors, Salmeron
and Carerius, part of one, and Salmeron Disp. 12. in (...) Paul. Carer. l. 2.
(...). (...)
part of another, and then frames this grave answer thereunto: In this
objection (says he) there is more childhood then manhood, babish grammar, then
sound deuinity. So he. And will you hear his manhood in sound deuinity? It
follows imediatly. The old Testament indeed (says he) in his earthly
elements was a figure of this spiritual and heavenly; but of the truly
heavenly, the day of that eternal sabbath, and the Celestial Jerusalem, the
Mother-Citty of the Hebr. 4.
Saints of God. Behold his manhood in sound deuinity. How the old Testament
was a figure of the new.
Let it be so, that the old Testament was in many things a figure of the
heavenly sabbath and Celestial Jerusalem, but what (Sir) will you conclude of
this by your sound deuinity? Was it not a figure also of many things upon
earth, which should be fulfilled in the new Testament? Were not their
Ceremonies and Sacrifices a figure of our Sacraments and Sacrifice? their
Manna of our Eucharist? their circumcisions and washinges, figures of our
Baptism? does not S. Paul in the ninth and tenth of his first Epistle to 1.
Cor. 9.
the Corinthians set down many examples to this effect? As that of Deuteronomy:
No^ (...) os boui trituranti, thou Deuteronomy. 25.
shall not bind up the month of the ox that labors, unto our preachers of
the new Testament? as also the passing of the Red Sea by the Israelites? their
being baptized in the cloud? their food of the Manna? their drinking out of
the rock, which (...) Christ? and diverse other things, whereof he says: (...)
autem in figura facta sunt nostri; these things were done 1. Cor. 10.
in figure of our present State. And again: Haec autem omnia in figura
contingebant illis; all these things did happen to the Jews in figure, but
were to be fulfilled truly and really according to the spiritual meaning in
the new Testament? Is not all this so? were not these things to be fulfilled
as well upon earth as in heaven? how the^ does our Minister put that aduersitiue
clause: but of the truly heavenly; as though the old Testament in her earthly
Elements had (...) nothing to be fulfilled but only in heaven. Is this sound
deuinity? Is this manhood? Nay is it not rather babish childhood, that seems
not to know the very first Elements of true deuinity?

7. I let pass the shameless corruption which he uses in translating the
very words cited by him out of Salmeron, for proof of his objection, made in
our behalf, and I call it shameless for that every child which understands
Latin, may see the Ministers shift therein. The Authors words are these as this
man here recounteth them: Et hoc Regnum terrenum (...) (...). p. 3.
tamen suit spiritualis regiminis in Ecclesia Christiana: and yet this earthly
Kingdom (of the Jews) was a shadow of the spiritual government, that was to
be in the Christian Church: meaning thereby that the most excellent spiritual
power and government over souls, which Christ was to institute in his Church,
at his coming in flesh, to wit, the power of absoluing from sins upon earth,
the assistance given by the Sacraments, and the like, were shaddowed in a
certain manner by the earthly Kingdom among the Jews: And how does T. M. now
translate these words, and frame our objection out of them: The old Testament
(says he) was a figure of the new in Christ, therefore in the new the Popedom
is the substa^tiue etc. Here are two short propositions you see, the
antecedent and consequent, and both framed with falsehood; for that the
antecedent set down out of Salmeron, is not that which he affirms in his
Latin words, as already we have showed, though otherwise in it self the
proposition be true; nor (will I think) T. M. can deny, but that the old
Testament was a figure of the new in Christ. There follows then the
consequent which is no less corruptly (...) of T. M.
inferred in our name, then was the antecedent affirmed, for that we do not
infer, nor yet the Author Carerius in the said second proposition or
consequence by him (...), that for so much as the old Testament is a figure of
the new, therefore in the new the Popes spiritual authority is the substantive
etc. for that this were a weak inference, as every man sees; nay Carerius
makes no inference at all in the place by him alleged, but only uses that
similitude, which before you have heard of the substantive and adjective: so as
this inference is only a fiction of the Minister to make himself and other men
merry, and to give occasion to play upon his Adversary, with the reproach of
childhood and babish grammar, as now he has done. But indeed the true
consequence that may be made upon the Catholic Authors words, which hitherto
he has alleged, is only this; that forasmuch as the Kingdom and government
among the Jews even in Ecclesiastical things was but earthly, and a figure
or shadow in respect of that which was to be over souls in the Christian
Church, it follows that this in respect of spirituality, was to be much more
eminent then the other, as the thing figured, then the figure or shadow it
self. And what inconvenience has this doctrine that it should be called
childhood and babish grammar.

8. But now shall you hear a new strange devise of his, never heard of (I
think) in the world before, and such a manhood in sound deuinity, that shows
him scarce to be arrived to childhood in true Theology; for that to exalt
temporal principality of a Kingdom and depresse Priesthood, he seeks to
abase the High Priesthood of Christ himself; for so he vaunteth that he will
return the foresaid argument upon the Romish. Christ (says he) being King and
Priest, was shaddowed Conf. par. 3. page 3.
by the types of the old Testament; but in Christ his Kingdom had the
pre-eminence of Priesthood, because he is a Priest only for us, but he is King
over us. Secondly as Priest he is suppliant to the Father; as King he is
predominant over all powers and principalities equally with the Father, Ergo,
this order inherent in Christ ought to hold as convenient among Christians. An
argument demonstratiue. So he.

9. Whereby you may see, first how good a Logitian he is, who avouches this for
an argument demonstratiue, which is indeed a very Elench and Sophisme, A
Sophistical fallacy in steed of a demonstratiue argument.
and manifest fallacy, for that he changes his subject from sense to sense,
making one proposition of his argument in the one, and the other in another
sense. For when he talks of Christ's Priesthood comparing it with his being a
King, he meant (and so he ought to do) as he was man, and inferior to his
Father; and when he speaks of the other, of his being a King, he
understands it, as he was God and equal to his Father; and so taking the one
in one meaning, and the other in the other, his principal meaning is to
deceive his Reader with a sophistical argument instead of a demonstratiue; and
yet does the good man so confide in his logical science, as in one place he
triumphs over his Adversary, that did but once name Logic in these words:
Dare you (says he) appeal to Logic? this is the art of all arts, and the
high tribunal Reply par. 3. page 54.
of reason and truth it self; which no man in any matter, whether it be case of
humanity or deuinity, can justly refuse: which is so ridiculous a simplicity,
as no man can read without laughter. For what high tribunal (I pray you) has
logic in deuinity? Or who gave her this tribunal? was there no deuinity
before Logic was invented by the Philosophers? Logic is not a science,
according to Aristotle, but only modus sciendi, a manner or mean how to come
to science, and it ministers not matter, but form of argument, as armor to
the Logitian, whereby to impugn falsehood and ignorance in every science, even
as the Cutlers shop does yield weapons to soldiers that go to war, and yet
cannot the Cutlers shop be justly called the high tribunal of all matters
belonging to Chieualry and feats of warfare, and consequently this was a vain
flourish and ostentation.

10. But now to return to the principal point, we have seen that this
argument is so far from being demonstratiue, as it is no argument at all, in
regard of the Equivocation and fallacy therein contained. Let us then consider
the same in respect of the matter and substance it self. First I say that it
conteyneth a manifest, fond and impious paradox, that Christ's Kingdom (as he
was both King and Priest) had the pre-eminence Whether Christ's Priesthood or
Kingly power were grea ter upon earth.
of his Priesthood; and I call it a paradox, for that I think no Christian man
of learning ever held it before, and much less any sound divine. Secondly I
call it fond, in respect of his ridiculous reasons alleged for the same, which
presently we shall examine: And thirdly I call it impious, for that it is both
against the Scriptures, and prejudicial to Christ's highest dignity of
Priesthood upon earth: Whereby also follows that this Ministers inference or
conclusion ( Ergo this order inherent in Christ ought to be held as convenient
among Christians) must be censured by the same censures, for that it concludes
a general pre-eminence and excellency of Kingly State, before Priesthood,
which is the quite opposite assertion to that which all ancient Fathers, and
namely S. Chrysostom out of all their common sense, does maintain in his
books De Sacerdotio, affirming, that the office and dignity of a Priest, does
so far exceed that of a King, as gold does silver, heaven earth, and the soul
the body: Regno Sacerdotium (says he) tanto est excellentius, quantum carnis
and Spiritus interuallum (...). l. 3. de Sacerdotio subinitio.
esse potest; Priesthood is so much more excellent then Kingly authority, as
there can be difference imagined between flesh and spirit. And in another
place the same Father: Sacerdotium est principatus ipso Chrysostom. ho. 5. de verb.
Isaiae.
etiam Regno venerabilior and mayor: Priesthood is a Princedome more venerable
and great then is Kingly authority. And then again: Ne mihi narras purpuram
etc. do not tell me of purple or diadem, of scepter or golden apparel of
Kings, for these are but shadows, and more vain then May-flowers: Si vis
videre discrimen Ibid.
quantum absit Rex a Sacerdote, expende modum potestatis vtrique traditae etc.
If you will see indeed the true difference between them, and how much the King
is inferior to a (...), consider the measure of power given to them both, and
you shall see the Priests tribunal much higher then that of the King. So he.
Whereunto agrees that of S. Gregory Nazienzen spoken to Naz. orat. ad ciues
timore (...).
the Emperor himself: The law of Christ (says he) has made you subject to my
power, and to my tribunal, for we (Bishops) have an Empire also, and that
more excellent and perfect then yours, except you will say the spirit is
inferior to the flesh, and heavenly things to earthly.

11. So he. And much more to this effect, which you may read cited out of
diverse Fathers, in a book set forth this last year, in answer to Sir Edward
Cooks Reports by a Catholic divine, who handles this point more largely
and particularly in the second and fourth Chapters of the said answer. And
this is sufficient to show the inference or conclusion of T. M. to be false,
touching the power and dignity of Priesthood, and of Kingly principallity among
men. Now let us return to the consideration thereof in Christ himself, which is
the principal question, though in effect it be decided by that which now we
have showed, for that the dignity and pre-eminence above Kingly dignity, of
Priesthood in man, which the foresaid Fathers do so resolutly affirm,
infers also the pre-eminence of Priesthood in Christ, for so much as from
that descends this other; but yet I think it not amiss to handle the same
somewhat more distinctly, the Ministers paradox therein being so profane and
irreligious as has been said.

12. First then as Christ is acknowledged both by them and us to have been both
Priest and King, according as he was prefigured in Melchisedech, who had both
these dignities in himself, so the one and the other excellency of Priestly and
Kingly pre-eminence, were in him according as he was man, and under his Father,
which for so much as appertained to his Priesthood is granted here by T. M.
and the matter is evident in itself; for that Christ as God could not offer
Sacrifice, nor make intercession to his Father for us (which are the chief
offices of Priesthood) for that this belongs to an inferior, according to
that saying of S. Ambrose: Sacerdos idem and hostia Sacerdotium, tamen humanae
(...). l. 3. de fid. c. 5.
conditionis officium est: Christ was both Priest and Sacrifice, yet was his
Priesthood the office of humane condition. S. Augustine also talking of both
dignities Aug. l. 1. de consensu (...). cap. 3.
says: Secundum hominem Christus, and Rex and Sacerdos effectus est: Christ
was made both King and Priest according as he was man. And the same is plain
by Scripture, in which every where is acknowledged that Christ's Kingdom was
given him by his Father: Ego autem constitutus Rex ab eo super Sion montem
Sanctum eius, says Psalm. 2.
Christ in the Psalms: I am appointed King by him upon his holy hill of Sion,
ergo he was King by gift and appointement of his Father. And in the same Psalm
God the Father says unto him: Postula a me and dabo tibi Ibid. and Hebr. 1.
gentes haereditatem tuam and possessionem tuam terminos terrae: Ask of me,
and I will give unto thee the Gentiles for thy inheritance, and the confines of
all the earth for thy possession: so as in this Kingdom, God the Father
required an acknowledgment. And yet further the Prophet speaking to the said
Father of this Kingdom of Christ in flesh said: Constituisti eum super (...)
Psalm. 8.
manunm tuarum, and omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius: thou have appointed him
for Lord and King over the works of thy hands, that is to say, over all thy
creatures, and thou have subjected all things under his feet: which point S.
Paul does prosecute most excellently in the first two Chapters of his Epistle
to the Hebrews; and there can be no doubt in this matter, for Christ himself
speaks most plainly: Data est mihi omnis (...). 28.
(...) in caelo and in terra: All power is given unto me both in heaven and
earth, so as he acknowledges it to be given, which cannot stand with his
divinity, in that he is God, and equal with his Father: in which regard all
was his own without gift, according to those words of S. Paul to the
Philippians: Non rapinam Phil. (...).
arbitratus est esse se aequalem Deo; He did not think it Usurpation to be
equal to God his Father according to his divinity. Wherefore it must needs
appear great ignorance in our Minister, to assign him this his temporal
Kingdom as he was God and equal to his Father.

13. But now to the principal proposition Whether Christ his Kingdom had the
pre-eminence of his Priesthood, or his Priesthood of his Kingdom; though in
part the matter be made clear by that which is already spoken; yet shall we
add two or three words more. And first the matter is manifest by the
narration it self in Scripture, when the figure of his Priesthood and Kingdom
is declared in Genesis, in the person of Melchisedech: for thus Genesis 14.
says the text: Melchisedech King of Salem bringing forth bread and wine (for
he was the Priest of God most high) gave his benediction to Abraham, and took
tithes of him for all that he had. In which example is greatly to be noted the
reflection it self and emphasis which the Scripture makes upon his Priestoood:
Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi: For he was the Priest of the most high God,
as who should say, that otherwise he could never have offered up in sacrifice
that bread and wine (the highest action of all other upon earth) as King,
except he had been Priest: nor yet have blessed Abraham, and much less have
taken tithes of him: Which point S. Paul does ponder very deeply and seriously
in his Epistle to the Hebrews, repeating often Hebr. 7.
times for the greater glory of Christ and his powerful Priesthood this
example of Melchisedech: Assimilatus (...) Dei (says he) manet sacerdos in
perpetuum; intuemini autem quantus sit hic, cui and decimas dedit de praecipuis
Abraham Patriarcha: This Melchisedech bearing a likeness of the Son of God,
remained a Priest perpetually: Neque initium dierum neque finem vitae habens:
having neither beginning of his days, nor end of his life: consider then how
great a man this was, to whom the Patriarch gave tithes of all the principal
things he had.

14. This is S. Paul's contemplation of the matter, who in his said Epistle to
the Hebrews, laying this foundation of the figure of Melchisedech for the
Priesthood and Kingdom of Christ (though more specially as you see for his
Priesthood) does presently after the consideration of those words, Filius meus
es tu, ego hodie genui (...); thou art my Son, I have this day begotten thee
(whereby he proves Christ to have been not the adopted but natural Son of God)
after this, I say, he does insist, for demonstration of his highest (...) and
dignity, upon those words of God the Father for his Priesthood: Tu es facerdos
in aeternum secundum (...). 109.
ordinem Melchisedech: Thou art a Priest forever according to the order of
Melchisedech; out of which words of highest dignity and commission, S. Paul
does make many inferences, as that in the second Chapter: Nusquam Hebr. 2.
Angelos apprehendit, sed (...) Abrahae etc. vt misericors fieret and fidelis
Pontifex ad Deum. God took not Angels but the seed of Abraham to frame
Christ, to the (...) he might be both a merciful and faithful High Priest for
us with God, for propitiation of our sins. And again in the third Chapter:
Behold you Holy brethren who are partakers of this our heavenly vocation,
Consider Hebr. 3.
our Apostle and High Priest of this our confession Jesus. And in the fourth
Chapter having spoken much of the Sabbath day, that he is to give us in the
next life, he adioineth this exhortation: Habentes ergo Pontificem magnum Hebr.
4.
The dignity of Priesthood in Christ above his Kingly authority.
etc. we having therefore a great high Priest that has pierced the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession, for we have not a
Priest that cannot take compassion of our infirmities etc. And again in the
fifth Chapter having said first: (...) Pontifex etc. Every High Priest chosen
out of men, is appointed for men in those things that appertain unto God,
that he offer gifts and Sacrifices for sin etc. after this (I say) S. Paul
does immediately infer this conclusion about the supreme honor and dignity of
Christ his Priesthood: Nec quisquam sumit sibi honorem etc. Neither may any man
take the honor of Priesthood unto him, but he that is called by God, as Aaron
was, and so Christ (though he were the true Son of God) did not advance
himself to this honor of being high Priest, but that he who said unto him
filius meus es tu, thou art my Son, said unto him also tu es sacerdos in
aeternum, thou art a Priest for ever, appellatus a Deo Pontifex, being called
by God to be high Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech, of whom
there remains to us a great speech to utter, and such a one as needs
exposition, whereof you as yet for your weakness are not capable. So S. Paul.

15. And then in the other two sequent Chapters to wit the seventh and eight,
he does prosecute the same argument of the high dignity of Christ's Priesthood
Hebr. 7.
much more largely. Among the Jews (says he) there were many Priests made,
for that they were let by death to remain, but this our high Priest
remains for ever: his Priesthood is eternal, whereof it ensues that he can
for ever save us, interposing himself with God for us by himself, and ever
living to make intercession for us, for such a high Priest was it convenient
that we should have, holy, innocent, unspotted, separated from sinners, and
more excellent then the heavens themselves. And again in the next Chapter:
Such a high Priest we have, as sits on the right hand of the seat of majesty
in heaven, and there he is Minister of the Saints and true Tabernacle.

16. All this and much more has S. Paul in that Epistle of the eminency of
Christ's Priesthood, thereby to set forth the most admirable excellency of his
power and glory thereby given him from his Father for our salvation; but of the
glory of his temporal Kingdom The ancient Fathers infere^ce about Priesthood.
in this life, he says little or nothing. And had not then the foresaid
Fathers and holy Bishops S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nazienzen, S. Ambrose and
others, great cause by contemplation of this supereminent worthiness of Christ's
Priesthood, to infer the great prehemine^ce in general of the Christian
Priesthood, before Kingly dignity of earthly principality? But let us yet
consider one reason more.

17. The office of high Priesthood, as partly has appeared by that we have
said, and is evident by the discourse of S. Paul, appointing him for a means
or mediator Two prin cipall parts of Priesthood.
between God and man, consists principally in two things or parts: first
in respect of that which he is to perform toward God, as to his Superior:
secondly in the functions that he is to use toward the people, as inferiors
and subjects. The first consists in offering sacrifice, oblations, prayers
and intercession for the sins of the people, as already touching Christ our
Savior out of the Apostle we have declared. The second consists in the
spiritual power, dignity, authority and functions thereof, which our said high
Priest Christ Jesus, as head and high Priest of his Church, purchased with the
sacrifice of his own blood, has, and may exercise upon the said Church for
ever, for unto him as our high Priest it appertains not only to make
intercession for his said Church, but to govern the same also, and to direct
it by convenient means unto the end of their salvation, which he has
designed, and for this to make laws, prescribe orders, appoint Sacraments,
ordain Christ a spiritual King by his Priesthood but not a temporal.
spiritual tribunals of judgment, give sentence of separation of the good from
the bad, forgive and retain sins, which spiritual government of souls
belonging to the office of high Priesthood, is a different thing from the
civil government of temporal principality, and yet is a Kingdom also in it
self, but a spiritual Kingdom over souls and not over bodies. And this had
Christ our Savior together with his high Priesthood, according to the
prediction and vision of Daniel: Aspiciebam and ecce quasi filius hominis etc.
I did Dan. 7.
look and behold there appeared as it were the Son of man, and God gave unto
him power and honor, and a Kingdom, his power is an eternal power, and his
Kingdom shall never be corrupted. And so in the second Psalm, after he had
said, I am made King by him upon his holy Hill of Sion, he adds presently to
show that it was a spiritual Kingdom: Praedicans praeceptum eius, my office
is to preach his commandment, and many other authorities may be alleged to
prove that Christ in that he was high Priest had supreme spiritual Kingly
authority in like manner for governing of souls.

18. But now for the temporal Kingdom of Christ in this life, to wit, whether
besides this spiritual and Of Christ's temporal Kingdom.
Royal government of our souls, he had Kingly Dominion also upon our bodies
and goods, and upon all the Kingdoms of the earth, so as he might justly have
excercised all actions of that temporal jurisdiction, as casting into prison,
appointing new officers, Kings and Monarchs; yea whether their power, and
authority, and interest to their States did cease when he came, as the right of
Priestly authority did: in this (I say) and other points depending hereof,
there are two disputable opinions between Catholic Deuines; Almain. l. de
potest. Eccl. c. 8.
the one holding the affirmative, that Christ was Lord and King temporal, as
here is set down, which Turrecr. l. 2. sum. c. 116. Nau. in c. Nou. de iudic.
D. Tho. l. 1. de reg. Prin. c. 11. D. Anton. 3. par. ti. 3. cap. 2.
diverse learned men both of old and our time do de fend; the other affirming
that albeit Christ together with his high Kingly dignity of spiritual power,
was Lord also consequently over our bodies, and shall reign over the same most
gloriously for all eternity in the life to come; yet that he renounced the use
of all that Dominion in this life, and that in this sense, he fled when they
would have made him King, and refused Luc. 12.
to divide the inheritance between the two Brethren when he was demanded; and
finally said to Pilate, My Kingdom is not of this world, confessing himself to
be a (...). 18.
true temporal King also, according to Pilates meaning; but yet that the use
and exercise thereof was not for this world, but only for the next, whereof also
the good thief understood when he said on the Cross: Be mindful of me when
thou shall come into thy Kingdom. Luc. 25.
And finally they allege for proof of this the words of Zachary the Prophet:
Ecce Rex (...) venit tibi iustus and Zach. 9.
Saluator and ipse pauper: Behold ( Sion) thy King comes unto thee as a just
and saving King, but he is poor; as though he had said, he is thy true King,
but has renounced the use and privilege of the same, and chosen poverty in
this world. And with this second opinion which is the more Ita tenet Abulensis.
q. 30. in Math. 21.
general, do concur also the Protestants of our age, that Christ took
upon him no temporal Kingly power in this life, least if VValdens. l. 2. de
doctrina. ca. 76. and 77.
they held the contrary, it should be inferred thereof, that he left the same
authority both of temporal and spiritual unto S. Peter his Successor; which
yet the Victoria velect. 1. de potest.
Catholics that hold this opinion, explicate otherwise, saying: that albeit
Christ had no direct Dominion Eccl. q. 5. Sotus l. 4. de iustitia q. 4. art. 1.
in this life upon temporal things, yet indirectly for preservation of his
spiritual Dominion he had, and might have used the same, and in that sense he
left Armacan. l. 4. contr.
it to his said Successor.

19. Of all which is inferred first the pre-eminence (...). c. 12 Burgensis in
Scrutinio (...) P. 1. did. 7.
of high Priesthood in Christ before his temporal Kingly principality, for
that as we have said, the actions and functions of Christ's Priesthood, have
not only more high and eminent dignity, both in that they treat with men for
governing their souls, then Christ's temporal Kingdom for governing of
bodies; but moreover that the dignity of Priesthood in Christ, contains in it
self a much more high spiritual Kingly power, then is the temporal.

20. Secondly is inferred, that the reasons here alleged by T. M. for his
paradox, in preferring Christ's Infere^ces upon the premises about the
pre-eminence of Priesthood above temporal Kingly authority.
being a King, before his Priesthood, are vain and foolish. The first whereof
is this. Christ's Kingdom (says he) had the pre-eminence of Priesthood,
because he is Priest only for us, but he is King over us. But I would ask him,
Is not Christ Priest over us as well as for us? has he not a spiritual and
Priestly jurisdiction over our souls? does not he bind and loose our sins?
does not he prescribe us Sacraments? appoint us laws of living, and the like?
or do not these actions appertain unto him as high Priest over his Church?
And again I would ask him, about the second member, as Christ in flesh was
King, was he not made King as well for us, that is for our good, as over us?
does not this man know that the difference between a good and bad government,
a true King and a Tyrant, consists in this, that the one reigns for his
own good, the other for the good of his subjects? What impiety were it to
affirm this defect to be in Christ's Kingly government, and consequently what
folly is it to bring in such reasons? But let us see what he says further.

21. Christ (says he) as Priest is suppliant to his Father, and Page (...).
as King he is predominant over all powers and principalities, equally with his
Father: But now we have showed before that there be two parts or functions of
Priesthood, the one toward God, to be suppliant by sacrifice and
intercession, the other to be predominant over men by spiritual government
upon their souls, The folly of T. M. his discourse.
and that both these do agree to Christ, in respect of his high Priesthood,
and as he is man, and much more the other of his temporal Kingdom: so as to
make him equal to his Father in this, as T. M. does, is an impious absurdity;
for that under his Fathers universal Kingdom Christ himself is also contained
as a subject, according to those words of graduation in S. Paul: Omnia vestra
sunt etc. vos autem Christi, Christus autem 1. Cor. 3.
Dei. All things are yours, life, death, the world, things past, things to
come, and you are of Christ and Christ of God; that is to say, all things for
Christ are subject to you, so you are and ought to be subject to Christ, and
Christ to God his Father. Now then see how wisely this man frames his foresaid
maine Conclusion, that as in Christ, his Kingdom had the pre-eminence of his
Priesthood (which is false as we have showed) so must it hold also among men
that Kingly power be preferred before Priestly, temporal before spiritual. Of
which opinion S. Chrysostom does think that no man, but mad or furious, can
be. Equidem (says he) neminem existere talem dixerim, nisi si Chrysostom. l. 3. de
(...).
quis furiarum aestu percitus sit: I cannot think any man to be of this
opinion (to prefer temporal authority before spiritual) except a man should
become mad with the rage of furies. And so to S. Chrysostom I leave our
Minister to be charmed from these kind of Heretical furies.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, CONTAINING Three particular kinds of
proofs, alleged by T. M. against the Popes Supremacy, to wit: Of the new,
and old Testament, and from reason it self.
ALl this that hitherto has been treated by our Adversary, has been by way, as
it were, of preamble or preface, for abasing Priesthood, as you have seen,
even in Christ himself, thereby to subject the same in Christians to temporal
authority; but about this point, I wish the Reader to look over the forenamed
two Chapters of the late Answer to Sir Edward Cook (I mean the second and
fourth) and I suppose he will remain satisfied in the preheminency of the one
above the other. Now notwithstanding for the second part of this Chapter we
shall bring into a short view the principal points handled by T. M. in this
his confutation of the Popes Supremacy. And albeit you may easily make a
conjecture of what substance it is like to be, by that which already you have
seen discussed; yet shall we descend to some principal particulars, for that
he reduces in effect all his proofs to three chief heads: the first
concerning the state of the Sinagogue under the Jews, the second of the
Christian Church under the new Testament, the third by reason common to them
both.

From the State of the old Testament.. 1.
23. FOr the first he sets down as arguments of ours, for licencing Popes
to kill Princes, a large list of Kings and Princes deposed, murdered, or
molested A list of Kings and Princes deposed or slain, impertinently brought
in by T.M.
under the old Testament, as though we did found our doctrine thereon; for which
cause he gives the title of Romish pretense to the said list, alleging therein
fourteen several examples; as Saul deposed by the Prophet Samuel: Roboam by
the Prophet Achia; the Queen Athalia by the chief Priest Iehoida; King
Antiochus resisted and driven out of his Dominion over Jury by the Priest
Mathathias and the Machabees his children: the Priests of Baal, and other
Ministers of the King slain by the Prophets Elias and Elizeus: the great
Captain Holofernes by Judith: King Eglon by Ahod: Sisera by Iabel: Queen
Iezabel by Iehu at the appointment of the Prophet Elizeus, with seauenty
children of King Achab: the death of King Achab who was slain also miserably
himself by Gods appointment, and the Prophets prediction: King Amon slain by
his own servants 4. Reg. 19.
for his wickedness; to whom we may ad the death of King Agag by the
commandment of Samuel 1. Reg. 15.
4. Reg. 12.
the Prophet; the slaughter of King Ioas by his own servants: And lastly King
Ozias for exercising the Priests office and function, was by the high Priest
deprived of his Kingdom.

24. And when he had set down all this rank of these unfortunate Princes
their deaths and depositions, as though we had delighted therein or proposed
all that here is said to be imitated, he says: Here we hear nothing but
fighting, dispossessing, and killing of Kings, and Conf. P. 4. 5.
those chiefly by Priests and Prophets of God in the old Testament propounded
to the Prelates of the new, to teach them to erect their Miters above Crowns.
Do you see the malice of the man? If himself has gathered together this
Catalogue of Princes that came to ill ends, and were slain or deposed, is it
marvel though he hear nothing but that himself likes to lay forth?

25. The difference and comparison of Miters and Crowns is fond and
ridiculous, and brought in only How myters are above Crowns.
to make the matter it self odious; for the true comparison is only between
spiritual and temporal authority, the one apperteyning to souls, the other to
bodies, the one called heavenly, the other earthly, the one proper to Priests,
the other to civil Princes as before you have heard declared out of ancient
Fathers, who notwithstanding were never reprehended nor called into envy for
erecting Miters above Crowns in that sense, as this profane Calumniator does
here urge: and exaggerate.

26. And as for this whole matter of the examples out of the old Testament, our
principal question being only as before we have declared: Whether God has
left any lawful means for restrayning evil Princes, in certain cases The
true State of the Question.
of extreme danger, and whether Priests also and Prelates in Christian
Religion, but especially the highest Priest, may deal therein: These examples
are fraudulently heaped and hudled together by T. M. as though all were
equally stood upon by Catholic writers, and this to the end that he may give
himself matter to answer afterward, as he does by distinguishing that all do
not prove the self same thing, nor were equally lawful, nor done by equal
authority or approbation, nor appertain equally to the matter we have in hand,
which Catholic writers also do say, and have taught him to say, though he
dissemble it, whereof we may read both Cunerus, Carerius, Salmeron, Barkleius,
Reginaldus and Boucherus, here by him cited out of whom he has taken the most
part of that he writes in this affair.

27. Whereas then we must confess with the Philosopher and with reason it self,
that Quidlibet ex quolibet non est consequens, every thing follows not of
whatsoever, it seems that two points only of any moment, concerning the
controversy in hand, may truly Two prin cipall points to be considered in
these examples of Kings punished.
and sincerly be deduced out of this number of examples now alleged: the first
that as temporal authority of Princes is from God, and he will have it
respected and obeyed as from himself; so one way or other he fails not to
punish them grievously, and to bring them oftentimes to great affliction and
desolation, when they govern not well, and this either by ordinary or
extraordinary means, as himself likes best. To which end is that severe
admonition in the second Psalm: Et nu^c Reges intelligite, and erudimini qui
iudicatis terram: seruite Domino in timore, and exultate ei cum tremore.
Apprehendite disciplinam, nequando irascatur Dominus, and pereatis etc. And now
you Kings understand, and you that govern the earth be instructed: serve
almighty God in fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling. Admit discipline,
lest he fall into wrath against you, and you perish etc. And this is the best
and most pious meditation which a Christian man can draw or lay before Princes,
out of those disasterous euentes as fell to diverse by Gods own apointment or
permission under the old Testament, and not the comparison of Myters and
Crowns which this Minister ridiculously brings in.

28. Secondly may be noted, that in the execution of Gods justice and
designement in this behalf, he used The true controversy.
also oftentimes the help and concurrence of both Priests and Prophets, and
other holy men, who notwithstanding may be presumed out of their said holy
disposition to have abhorred such effusion of blood, war, and other calamities,
which by fulfilling Gods ordinance made unto them, either by secret
inspiration or open commandment, were to ensue and follow, and consequently
that all Priests were not debarred from dealing in such affairs, when God
required their cooperation therein.

29. All the question then is how, and when, and where, and by whom, and for
what causes, and in what cases, and with what circumstances, this restraint of
Princes may be used, wherein I have showed abundantly before, that the
moderation prescribed by Catholics is far greater, without comparison, then
is that of the Protestants, whether we respect either their doctrine or
practice, of which both kinds we Supr. c. 1. 4
have before produced sufficient examples: and in this place the Authors most
alleged by T. M. about this controversy, against violence toward Princes,
are Catholic, as namely Cunerus, a learned Bishop of the low Countries, in
his book, De Officio Principis Christiani; Cuner. ep. Leouard.
and Barkleius a Reader of Law in Loraine, in six books written by him, De
Regno and Regali potestate aduersus Monarchomacos, Of Kingdom and Kingly power
against impugners of Princes, the first writing against the Rebellions and
violent attemptes of the subjects of Holland and Zeland, and other Provinces
thereunto annexed, and by that occasion treating in general, how unlawful a
thing it is for subjects to take that course, upon any coffeehouse
whatsoever, handles the matter very learnedly though briefly.

30. But the other Doctor Barkley, taking upon him to treat the same matter
much more largely, directs his pen principally against the books of certain
Protestants of our time, as Hottoman, Brute, Buchanan, and others before
mentioned, for so he says in his preface: D. Barkley Prefac. ad Henr. 4.
Non contentus Satanas it is, qui parens ille malorum and mendaciorum Lutherus
etc. Satan being not contented with those Gall. Reg.
wicked doctrines which Luther the Father of all wickedness and lies, and other
slanderous Railers, that came out of his kytchin, had with infamous mouths and
intolerable audacity vomited out against Princes, he sent forth also into the
world, to fly before men's Catholics principal vvriters for the safty of
Princes.
eyes other most seditious books, Hottomani FrancoGalliam, Bruti vindicias
Tyrannorum, Bucchanani Dialogum de iure Regni; the book of Hottoman (dwelling
in Geneua) entitled, Free-France, or the Freedom of France (to wit, of the
Protestants against their Kings and Princes,) that other also of Brutus (a
man of the same place and crew) entitled, The revenge that subjects ought to
take of their Princes if they become Tyrants; the third of Buchanan,
(schoole-maister in times past to our Kings Majesty) entitled, A Dialogue of
the right of Kingly power, subiecting the same to the people, yea and to every
private person thereof, when it shall seem unto him necessary for the
commonwealth, or expedient for Gods glory, as before you have heard. Against
all which this Doctor Barkley, a Catholic man writes his six books; so as
in this point for Princes security we are far more forward then Protestants.

31. And albeit this said Doctor does include in like manner Doctor Boucher a
French Catholic D. Boucher.
writer, reprehending diverse things uttered by the said Boucher in his book
De iusta abdicatione, against the late King Henry the third of France; yet in
the principal point; whether private men, either for private or public
causes, may use violence against their lawful Prince, not lawfully denounced
for a public enemy by the whole state and commonwealth; in this point (I
say) the said Boucher is absolutely against the same, and so protests and
proves it by diverse arguments, See Boucher l. 3. c. 16.
showing himself therein to be quite contrary, and to abhor not only the
doctrine of VVickcliffe and Husse condemned in the Council of Constance about
that Sess. 15.
matter, but also of the forsaid Protestant writers Hottoman, Brute, Bucchanan,
Knox, Goodman, Gilby, VVhittingham and the like: among whom also I may include
John Fox, who in his history of John Husse, allows that proposition of his;
Prelates and Princes leese their authority VVarnvvord Encounter 2. ca. 3. n.
(...) 4.
when they fall into mortal sin; as the Author of the VVarn-word proves
more largely out of Fox himself.

32. And thus much for the first point, about examples drawn from the times of
the old Testament, out of which, little ca^ be urged to the proof or disproofe
of this question, besides the two general points by The comparison of
Priesthood and Kingly authority in the old law.
us noted before. For to bring into disputation, whether Priesthood or Kingly
principality had the upper hand in that law, is to small purpose, the matter
being clear, that as the Kings (and so likewise their Captains, Judges, and
Governors before they had Kings) had the pre-eminence in all temporal
affairs, so in spiritual: and such as concerned God imediatly, the were
referred principally to Priests, and the temporal Magistrate commanded to
hear them, to take the law of them, and consequently also the interpretation
thereof, to repair unto them in consultation of doubts, and to stand to their
judgment and definition; that Priests and Prophets should consult immediately
with God, and the Prince follow their word and direction.

33. And albeit God did sometimes use for external guiding and direction of
Priests and Priestly affairs, the authority of good Kings in those days,
especially when they were Prophets also, as David and Solomon, in the
correcting and removing of some Priests; yet this was extraordinary, and
proves not, that simply and absolutely Kingly dignity and authority was above
Priesthood in that law, albeit also it be most true, which the Authors by this
man here alleged Salmeron, Cunerus, Carerius and the rest do note, that the
Priesthood of the old Testament was nothing comparable to that of the new, this
descending directly from the person and office of Christ himself, and endued
with far higher and more powerful spiritual authority for guiding of
souls, then had the Priests of the old law, which was but a figure of the
new; and therefore to argue from that to this, is a plain fallacy, and abusing
of the Reader.

34. Wherefore leaving this of the comparison between Kings and Priests, of
the old and new Testament, I will end this first point, with the very same
conclusion (concerning the safty of Princes from violence of their subjects)
which our Adversary himself alleges out of our Catholic Author Cunerus
Conf. p. 13
in these words: We are taught (says he) from the example of the people of
God, as your Cunerus teaches, with great patience to endure the tyranny of
mortal Kings, yea when we have power to resist, (...). de of. Princ. c. 7.
and because they be next under God in earth, in all their injuries, to commend
their revenge unto God; nay he teaches Kings another excellent rule of
policy, fitting for the preservation of all States, which is; that he who
succeeds a King violently murdered of any, though of Godly zeal; yet ought
he to reueng his Predecessors death by the death of the malefactors. So T.M.
And now follows that of the Gospel Ex ore tuo te indico serve (...). (...).
(...): for first I would ask him, is not this Catholic doctrine? Is it not
ours? does he not here call the Author thereof Cunerus, ours? how then does he
affirm every where, that our doctrine teaches killing of Princes? Let him
show us any of his Authors, that ever of this argument has written so
moderatly.

35. And yet further I must ask him whether he will stand to the judgment of
this our Cunerus, when he comes to the point indeed, How incorrigible Princes
in some cases may lawfully be restrained, as also deprived by the
Commonwealth, and consent of the supreme Pastor? will he stand to this (I
say) or rather fleet back again to the doctrine of the Scottish, Geneuian,
French, and Flemish Ministers, when the King should mislike him, and especially
for his Religion? whereof I make little doubt, what ever he says here, finding
himself and his at good ease. And finally I would ask him seriously, whether
he would have his Majesty of England to practice that excellent rule of policy
which he so highly comendeth out of our (...) (who notwithstanding says not a
word thereof by way of rule or observation, but only affirms that Amasias did
4. Reg. 14.
justly put to death those servants of King Ioas, that 2. Par. 24.
upon zeal had slain him in his bed:) I would ask him (I say) whether indeed
he would wish his Majesty of England to put the same rule, and so highly
commended policy in use, against such as violently A (...) made (...) T.M.
murdered, abetted or procured the same, against not only his Predecessors,
but parents and immediate Progenitors, Father, Mother, and Grandmother? And
then we know how many Ministers, and their friends would enter into that
dance; but these men frame their tongues according to times and fit occasions.
And with this he ends his proofs out of the old Testament.

Out of the new Testament.. 2.
36. ANd then coming to the second part, he begins his discourse with this
title: The former Page 14.
question disputed according to the state of the new Testament, and presently
in our manner he gives the onset with this proposition: The Pope has all
absolute and direct power and dominion temporal over all Kings and Kingdoms
of the world etc. And for proof thereof cites Carerius and Bozius in the
margent, and begins to lay forth their proofs; and then against these two
that hold the opinion of Canonistes (whereof before we have treated, to wit,
that Christ was the immediate Lord of all temporalties, and consequently also
is his substitute) he opposes Franciscus de Victoria, Bellarmine, Sanders, and
others that hold the other opinion, to wit that the Pope has not directly, but
indirectly only such authority to deal with Princes in temporal affairs: and
so not informing his Reader that these are different opinions of the manner how
the Pope has this authority, but yet that both do agree in the thing it self
that he has it; he plays pleasantly upon the matter, and would make men
think that he takes us at great advantage, as contrary or rather
contradictory among our selves: which indeed is no more co^tradiction, then if
two Lawiers agreeing that such a noble man, had such an office or authority
over such An example expressing the state of the question.
a Lordship, by succession from the Crown, should differ only in this, whether
the said office were given by the Prince, severally and expressly by
particular gift and writings, or were given by a certain consequence included
in the gift of the said Lordship: The difference were nothing in the thing or
certainty of authority, but in the manner of having it, and so is it here; and
yet out of this difference of these two opinions, does our Minister furnish
himself with good probability of argmentes on the one side, as though they were
his own, who otherwise would appear very poor and pitiful therein. And this
trick he played before with the moderate Answerer, when he served himself of
the two different opinions of some Deuines and Canonistes about the question:
Whether Heretics before personal denuntiation, and sentence given, be
subject to See before cap. 2.
external penalties appointed by the Canons: And generally he runs to this
shift, more then any other commonly of his fellow-writers which I have seen in
these our days, to wit, that whersoeuer he finds any difference of opinions
in disputable matters between our Catholic writers (which S. Augustine Aug.
l. 1. contr. (...). cap. 2.
says may stand with integrity of faith) there he sets down any one of
these opinions for ours, and argues against it with the arguments of the
other, or brings in the others authority and words against the same, which
makes some show or muster of matter on his side, whereas in deed and substance
he has nothing at all.

37. It were over long to examine in this place all the objections which he
puts down on our behalf, under the second head of our proofs, concerning
the time of the new Testament, calling them Romish pretenses, and the fond
resolutions he gives unto (...). page 15.
them; as first that we do found the Popes temporal sword upon the keys
given by Christ to S. Peter and that it is a strange art to make a sword of a
pair of keys, which seems to him a fine jest, and then comes That keys
may (...) authority both spiritual and temporal.
he out with this vanut: Neither can any show me one Doctor, but of reasonable
antiquity (peto vel ex millibus vnum) who by keys understand civil power: But
Sir what needs antiquity of Doctors in this behalf? will not your own
modern Protestant Doctors grant, that when the keys of any City, Town, or
Fort are given to a Prince, civil power over that Fort is meant thereby? who
will deny this?

38. And secondly whereas he alleges Franciscus a Victoria to say that the
keys given to S Peter imported spiritual authority of remitting and reteyning
sins, ergo no way temporal, is a fond illation: for that albeit Victoria
says that those keys did principally importe spiritual authority; yet they
include also supreme temporal indirectly, when the defense of the spiritual
does require it. Whereupon he frames this conclusion in the same place: Our
eight proposition is (says he) that the Pope (by authority of the foresaid
keys) has most ample temporal power over all Princes and Kings, and the
Emperor himself, in order to a spiritual end, which he proves there by many
arguments. And this of the first jest about swords to be made of keys.

39. The second jest also is as wise and witty as this former, that when we
found the same temporal sword or authority of S. Peter, and his successors
upon the words of Christ: Feed my sheep, he does infer that Princes also must
be fed, and dietted corporally at the Popes discretion, and other such toys,
he not understanding, as it seems, or rather dissembling the force of
Catholic arguments drawn from those and other like Scriptures, both by
later Doctors, and ancient Fathers, which this fellow turns into scofs and
contempt, or wicked railing, for that presently he falls into these rages: O
arrogant Glossers! O impudent Conf. p. 17
Glosers, and peruerters of the sacred Oracles of God! And why is all this heat
of exclamations? Forsooth for that in some Popes Bulls (though corruptly and
fraudulently alleged) some mention is made of the great authority that was
given to Elias, Elizeus, Jeremy, and other Prophets, and especially to Christ
himself, upon earth to plant, destroy, pull up, or punish where need should be;
and that this authority by allusion unto the same words of Scripture, is
applied to Christ's Successor upon earth, and affirmed to be left in the
Christian Church, to be used when need shall require: and is this so great an
impiety think you?

40. But he goes on and says: That next to this he will examine the antiquity
of pretended Papal power from the Apostles time downward, and then produces
this assertion of ours: The Priests ( says the Romish pretense) of the new
Testament in the Priesthood of Christ have more authority then that of the old
law over Kings to depose them, whereunto he adioyneth presently his own spruse
Ministerial answer in these words: This is not probable except you can show
some footinges either of Christ or his blessed Apostles, or their Holy
Successors in the purer periods of times. And is not this answered as from a
man of his coat? Mark the phrase Of footings in purer periods, I will for
footinges in this matter refer him to the large demonstrations which out of
Scriptures, Doctors, Fathers, Councelles, and Ecclesiastical Histories, the
Authors by him here often alleged Carerius, Bozius, Bellarmine, Sanders,
Salmeron, and others do abundantly and substancially allege; and when he
shall have overthrown or supplanted those footinges of theirs, which they
(...) fix throughout all periods of times from the beginning The poor footings
of Protestants in periods of antiquity.
of Christian Religion unto our days, and general practice thereof, then may
the poor man get to have some little footing for himself and his cause, which
hitherto he has none at all, as to any man whosoever, with any indifferency of
judgment, shall read over and examine his book, will evidently appear; yea
though he compare but only that which himself alleges here both in the text
and margent, which seldom agree in true sense if you mark it well. But if you
would examine the Latin authorities cited in the said margent, with the
originalles of the Authors themselves, you shall scarce ever find them
sincerly to agree, but that one fraud or other is used in their allegation, by
chopping, changing, infarcing, leaving out, and other such sleightes and
deceiptes, which though the breuity of this Treatise permit me not to examine,
and lay forth at large in this place; yet some we have touched before, and some
others shall we have occasion to note afterward, and the Reader himself may
upon this warning make some little trial.

41. And as for the succession of times, which this Author T. M. pretends to
bring down from the Apostles days, (not to ours) but for a thousand years
only after Christ, wherein he says; that no Pope can be showed ever to have had
any temporal jurisdiction over any Emperor, King, or temporal Prince; though
Catholics do hold the later six hundred years also, to be of no less force
for president of examples in the Church of God then the former thousand, yet
are the instances so many and evident, which may be alleged against his former
prescription of the said thousand years, as do manifestly convince him of
folly in that assertion, wherein I refer me to the collections and
demonstrations thereof by the foresaid Authors Carerius, Bozius, Carer (...). 2.
depotestate Pont c. 19. and 20.
Bellarmine, Sanders, and others in the places here quoted in the margent, but
especially to the three that are not Jesuits, and to the first for all, to wit
Carerius, that Bell. (...). de Romans Pon. Sand. l. 7. de Monar. Bozius l. 5 de
temporali Eccl. Mon. etc.
in diverse things wrote against the Jesuits, who in his second book
alleges 10. or 12. examples out of antiquity for proving his purpose. I
remit me also to the many learned writings, set forth of late about the cause
of the Venetians, by Penia, Baronius, Bouius, Eugenius, Nardus and others,
showing the most evident right, which the Pope had, and has to command them,
as high Pastor of the Church, to recall certain civil laws made by them in
prejudice of the said Church, and Ecclesiastical State; which Commandment we
The cause of the Venetians.
doubt not but God will move that most excellent Commonwealth finally to Now
they have obeyed.
obey, they being known to be so good and sound Catholics, as they are,
though for some time in regard of some temporal respects they have deferred
to do the same.

42. Many more points might be examined in this desce^t of his throughout
periodes of times; but it would be ouerlong, and my intention is to give a taste
only or short view: for to examine the places cited out of Fathers of diverse
ages, for proof of his pretense, were time wholly lost. For that in effect they
say nothing else, but that we grant, which is that temporal Princes are to be
respected and obeyed by Ecclesiastical men also, but in temporal affairs.
And as for his examples of some English Kings that seemed not to respect much
the Popes authority in some occasions, which he has borrowed out of Sir Edward
Cooks Reports, he may see the answer to that book, and so I think remain
satisfied. Wherefore this shall suffice for the second head of arguments
throughout the new Testament, though after also in the examination of some
falsifications we shall have occasion to say more.

Arguments from Reason.. 3.
43. Wherefore to pass no further in the second point of arguments under the
new Testament, we shall say a word or two only of the third, to wit of proofs
affirmed to be deduced by us from force of reason, for so he intituleth them;
to wit, Popish Arguments from reason. And to the end you may see his talent
therein, we shall examine only the third reason in this place which he declares
in these words: Except, says the Romish pretense, there were a way of
deposing Page 14.
Apostata Princes, God had not provided sufficiently for his Church; Extrauag.
communium de maiorit. and obed.. Vnam Sanctam.
and for this he cites the Constitution Extrauagant of Pope Bonifacius, and
says; This objection is in your Extrauagantes, and so it may be called,
because it rangeth extra, that is without the bonds of Gods ordinance etc.
But as in all his other citations generally, he is never lightly true and
sincere in all points, no not thrice (I think verily) throughout all this
lying book of his; so neither here: and it would require a great volume alone
to examine only some part of his leaves about this point of his shifts and
corruptions; they are so many, and thick and craftily hudled up together. As
for example here, first this sentence is not in the Popes Extrauagant at all,
The Extrauagant of Bonifacius ^. falsely alleged.
but only in a certain addition to the ordinary gloss or Commentary of John
Picard, which addition was made by Petrus Bertrandus a late writer. Secondly
this Commentary says nothing of deposing Apostata Princes, but only affirming
the foresaid opinion of Canonistes to be true; that Christ was Lord absolutely
in this life over all, not only in spiritual authority, but in temporal also;
he infers thereby Christ should not have sufficiently provided for the
government of his Church, and Kingdom upon earth, Nisi vnicum post se talem
Vicarium reliquisset Addit. ad comen.
qui haec omnia posset, except he had left some such one substitute or Vicar
after him, as should be able to Extrauag. de mayor. in c. 1. ad finem.
perform all these things, to wit, as belong both to spiritual and temporal
power, according as necessity shall require: which later clause you see, that
T. M. cut of, as he added the other about Apostata Princes And thus much for
his variety of corruptions in this little sentence, now to the thing it self.

44. The reason if we consider it without passion, is strong and weighty, and
founded upon the providence, wisdom, and goodness of almighty God, who having
provided diligently, and admirably for the preservation of all other things,
and Communities by The great force of the former (...).
him created or ordained, should leave the Christian Commonwealth unfurnished
of all remedy for the greatest evil of all others, that possibly can fall out,
which is the corruption of the head, that may destroy the whole body whereof he
is head, if it be not redressed. As if (for examples sake) the Prince would
extirpate Christian Religion, bring in Mahometisme, or other such abomination,
overthrow all good laws, plant and establish vice, dissolution, Atheism, or
commit some other such exorbitant wickedness, as were not tolerable, whereunto
notwithstanding man's frailty, without the help of Gods grace, is, or may be
subject: In this case (says the objection) some remedy must have been left by
Christ, or else his divine wisdom and providence had not provided sufficiently
for the preservation of his Kingdom, as by light of nature he left remedy to
the body of every Commonwealth Pla. Dial. 1. de repu. Aristot. 2. Polit.
under the Gentiles before his coming, which is evident both by Plato,
Aristotle, Cicero, and others that wrote of Commonwealths in those days, and
did Cicer. 3. de leg. Bart. lib. de Tyrannide.
always presume, that the said Commonwealths had sufficient authority by law
of nature to restrain exorbitant Princes, when they were perilous to the
public: and the same have held al other learned men that ever wrote of that
argument afterward.

45. But as for our Catholic learned men, both Deuines and Lawiers, though
they affirm (as out of T. M. his frequent allegations of them in this his
Treatise is evident) that all obedience both external and internal, in
conscience and works, is by Gods ordinance due unto them; yet that in such
public perilles of the Church and Commonwealth as before are mentioned, when
they fall out, Christ our Savior has not left his Church wholly remediless,
but rather, The Catholic opinion and moderation about restraining evil
Princes.
that besides the natural right which each Kingdom has to defend themselves,
in certain cases, he left also supreme power in his high Priest and immediate
substitute, to direct and moderate that power, and to add also of his own,
when extraordinary need requires, though with great deliberation,
consultation, weighty motives, lawful means, and other like circumstances.

46. This, I say, is Catholic doctrine, but what Protestants doctrine is,
were hard to set down: for that they speak therein as time and occasion
serves them, having no rule or Canon at all whereto they are bound. For what
was both their doctrine and practice, (...) vncerteinties.
when, and where they were discontented with their Princes, both in England,
Scotland, Flanders, Geneua and France, is evident by that which before we have
alleged in the first and fourth Chapters of this book: now this man tells
us another tale for the time present, but what he would say or do, if he were
in the discontented occasion of those his fellow-Authors, that wrote so
sharply and violently, no man can tell: but let us see now at length, how
substantially he does satisfy this objection, for he gives three or four
several solutions thereunto; you shall hear what ones they are.

47. The first is from Gods ordinance (says he) for by the word of God, as
your Cunerus Deuinely reasons, (...). page 35.
which is not partial, nor by the self pleasing The first answer.
fancy of sensual affection, must this question be determined; though therefore
it may seem to us a decree of nature, for every one to defend himself and the
things he does enjoy; yet the Law of God does forbid to do this by taking
arms against the higher powers etc. So T. M. out of our Cunerus. And it is
well that he allows this Catholic writer to reason deuinely, so far forth
as he may seem to make for him, though in truth in the conclusion of his
discourse, B Cunerus drift (...) T. M. (...) alleges him.
he is wholly against him. For as first his whole speech in this seventh
Chapter by him cited, is expressly against the Hollanders, that under diverse
pretenses, both of Religion, and Scriptures for the same liberty of their
country, and the like, took arms against their true natural King; which he
reproves, and condemns very piously, and learnedly throughout this whole
Chapter, and in the next ensuing, whose title is, Quid in Tyrannide subdit is
agendum sit, What subjects ought to do in case of tyranny, he shows two
sorts of Tyranny and Tyrants, the one that inuadeth unjustly another man's
dominions against the will and Two (...) of tyranny and tyrants.
authority of his King and Prince, the other that leaving the office of a King
and good Prince in protecting his people, and Religion and justice among them,
turns himself wholly to their affliction and oppression: and that in the
former case, the people are taught by many examples of Scriptures, to resist by
arms where they can; but in the second much more moderation is to be used, all
means of humble suite, entreaty, intercession, prayer to God, amendment of
life and Cuner. l. de officio Principis cap. 8.
pacification to be used; Quod si haec non iuuent (says he) and Superiorem in
tempor alibus, vti Reges, Princeps non agnoscit, tunc supremus Ecclesiae Pastor
interpellandus occurrit, qui bonis and aequis subditorum querelis audit is,
plura Deo cooperante ratione and auctoritate praestare poterit quam vnquam
(...) armis impetrabit; but if these means do not help, says Cunerus, and
that the Prince do acknowledge no Superior in temporal causes, as Kings do
not, then is the Supreme Pastor of the Church to be called upon, who having
heard the just and good complaints of the Subjects, God assisting him, shall
be able to effectuate more by reason and authority with their Prince, then ever
the people themselves should have obtained by force of arms. Thus he.

48. And now, will T. M. allow this also for deuinely spoken? If he do, then
we differ not in opinion: If he do not, why does he so often, and continually
cull out, and cut of sentences of Authors, that write directly against him, as
this Bishop Cunerus, the Lawier Carerius, the Divine Bozius, the Jesuits
Bellarmine, Salmeron, Azor, and others? And yet I must admonish the Reader
here again, that if he compare the text it self of Cunerus with that which
here T. M. sets down in Latin, and then the Latin with that he Englisheth,
he shall find such mangling upon mangling, by cutting of, leaving out, and
altering whole sentences, as he will see that this man can scarce deal truly
in any thing. And thus much for his first answer out of Cunerus, making much
more against him, then for him, as you have seen.

49. And I leave to discuss the Authority of S. Augustine which out of Cunerus
he also alleges (for otherwise then out of our Authors books he has little
or Great fraud and corruption in mangling Authors.
nothing in any matter) it being no less mangled by this man, then is the text
of Cunerus it self, as every one will find that shall read Cunerus; not so
much as one note of [etc.] being left any where lightly, to signify that
somewhat is cut of, but all running together, as if it were continual speech
in the Author; whereas in deed they be but pieces and scraps joined together,
and those also commonly with much corruption: whereof I dare avouch that the
Author shall find above a hundred examples in this fraudulent Reply, which is
wholly patched up out of the distracted sentences of our own Authors by this
art.

50. But now to his second answer to the former The second answer.
objection, that Gods providence must needs have lef't some remedy for the
danger that may occur by evil government of Princes etc. The second is
(says he) the consideration of examples of the primitive Church, when for the
space of three hundred years it was in grievous persecution, there was found
no power on earth to restrain that earthly power, was therefore God wanting to
his Church? God forbid. Nay rather he was not wanting, for it is written:
Virtue is perfected in infirmity. Romans 11.
And again: As gold is purged in the fire; so by affliction 1. Cor. 12.
etc. Because when the outward man suffers, the inward 2. Cor. 12. Dan. 3.
man is renewed, and when I am weak, then am I strong. So he. And do you see
how patient and meek this man is become now, when there is nothing to suffer?
did his Protestant-Authors before mentioned write or teach this doctrine when
they were pressed by their Catholic Princes to be quiet? Or if this should be
Great hypocrisy.
preached now at this day in Holland, Zeland, Frizeland, Hungary, Polonia,
Zweueland and Transiluania, where actually Protestants are in arms against
their natural and lawful Princes, would it be received as current and
Evangelical? Would the examples of primitive martyrs, when there was scarce
any temporal commonwealth extant among Christians, be sufficient to prescribe
a form of patience and sufferance to these men? Why do they not then put it
in practice? And why cease they not, according to this man's doctrine from so
notorious tumultuations against their lawful Princes? Why is not this doctrine
of the Scripture of perfecting their virtue by bearing and suffering admitted
by them? I confess it ought to be so with all particular men in their
afflictions, oppressions, and tribulations, and so teach our Doctors, as before
you have heard; though when the hurt and danger concerns a common wealth
established in Christian Religion, there be other considerations to be had, as
before has been set down.

51. But Protestants observe neither the one, nor the other, but both in
particular and common, break forth when they are streyned or disconte^ted,
into the uttermost violence they can: and their Doctores are ready presently to
defend them; yea and to go to the field with them if need be against their
Princes, as experience has taught us both in Zwitzerland, Scotland, France,
and other places. Wherefore this pretended preaching of patience and sufferance
of T. M. in this place both in his outward and inward man, is to small purpose.

52. Wherefore his third answer is to the former objection The third answer.
Confut. p. 35. and 36.
The view (as he says) of our Popish principles, whereby we teach, that the
Pope may not be judged by any person upon earth, whether secular, or
Ecclesiastical, nor by a General Council, though he should do something
contrary to the universal State of the Church, neglect the Canons, spare
offenderes, oppress innocents and the like: For which he cites both
Bellarmine, Carerius and Azor: and then adds, that Bellar. 2. de Romans
the Pope cannot be deposed for any of these, no not Pont. c. 26 Carer. l. 1.
de potest.
though (says he to use the words of your Pope himself, one placed in the
calendes of your martyrs) he should carry many people with himself to hell;
yet no mortal Pont. c. (...). Azor Inst. l. 5. c. 14.
creature may presume to say, why do you so. Thus he.

53. Whereunto I answer first, that all which Bellarmine, Carerius, Azorius,
and other Catholic writers do affirm of the Popes preheminency of authority
immediately under Christ, so as he has no Superior Judge between Christ and
him, that may sit in judgment over him, or give sentence upon him for matters
of ill life, tends only to show, that as he receives Fraudulent dealing in
T. M by concealeme^t.
his supreme charge immediately from Christ, so by him must he be judged, and
not by man, though the same Authors in the same places (which this man of
purpose omitteth and concealeth) do expressly affirm, that for the Crimes of
Apostasy or heresy he may and must be deposed, or rather is ipso facto deprived
of his office and dignity, and so may be declared by the Church in that case,
to wit, as well by Princes and Potentates both Ecclesiastical and temporal, as
by all Christian people, who in that case are bound to The (...) may and must
be deposed for heresy.
concur to his expulsion and deprivation. And albeit in the other of lesser
vices or infirmities of life, he have no human Superior to judge him: yet is
that of Christ himself so much the more severe, and dreadful, and his holy
providence has been ever and will be such, as these personal defectes in his
supreme Pastor, shall not so much preiudicate his office, but that always he
shall teach his flock that which may help them to their salvation, howsoever
he live himself. Math. 23.
And of this he having forewarned us with express premonition, the performance
lies upon his charge whose power is omnipotent, and fidelity such, as in his
promises cannot possibly fail. And this to the first point.

54. Now to the second wherein he says, that one of our Popes, placed also in
the Calends of our Martyrs, does affirm that though a Pope should carry many
people with himself to hell, no mortal man may presume to say, why do you
so? I do greatly marvel with what conscience, or if not conscience, with
what forehead at least these men can write and print, and reiterate so often in
their books, things that they know, or may know to be merely false and forged!
Is not this a sign of obstinate wilfulnes, and that neither God, nor truth is
sought for by them, but only to maintain a part or faction, with what slight
or falsehood soever? I find this very objection set forth in print not many
years gone by (...) Francis Hastings in his VVatch-word and Defense thereof,
and the same avouched stoutly after him for a time by Matthew Sutcliffe the
Minister, Advocate and Proctor of that defense; but afterward I find the same
so consuted at large by the VVarn-word, and so many lies, falshoodes, and
evident frauds discovered therein, as Shameless facing of untruths.
the said M. Sutcliffe in his Reply entitled A full and round answer, thought
good roundly to let this pass, without any answer at all, which I can find in
his said book, though I have used some diligence in search thereof; which I do
add, for that he changes the whole order of answearing from the method of his
Adversary, to the end not to be found, and so answers nothing in order or
place, as it is set down by him whom he pretends to answer, but rather
taking a new, vast and wild discourse to himself, snatcheth here a word, and
there a word, to carpe at, not as they A note of M. Sutolifs manner of
answering.
ly in his adversaries book, but as it pleases him to admit them, now from
the end of the book, then from the beginning, then from the middle: and with
this substantial method, he takes upon him to answer all books that come
in his way; for so he has answered of late the book also of Three Conuersions
of England, and may do easily all that is written by Catholics, if carping
only and scolding be answering.

55. Wherefore to this instance here resumed by T. M. though I must remit him,
or rather the Reader for larger satisfaction to the said Catholic Treatise,
entitled VVarnword, Encounter 2. c. 13. number. 18. 19. 20. etc.
The VVarn-word; yet here briefly I am to tell him first, that he erreth
grossly in the affirming in this place, the Author of this Canon cited by him
Si Papa, to have been a Pope, for that the said Canon was gathered by Gratian
out of the sayings of S. Boniface martyr, as in the title of the said Canon is
expressed, which Boniface was never Pope, but a virtuous learned English man,
that lived above 850. years gone, The error about S. (...) the English martyr.
and was the first Archbishop of Mentz or Moguntia in Germany; of which people
and country he is called by all ancient writers The Apostle, for that he first
publicly converted that nation, erected that Primate sea, and suffered
glorious martyrdom by the Gentiles for the faith of Christ. Wherefore the scoff
of T. M. calling him our Pope placed in the Calendes of our martyrs, besides
the ignorance, tastes also of much profane malice and impiety.

56. Secondly I say that these words of his are corruptly set down, as ever
commonly elsewhere, and that both in Latin and English. In Latin, for that he
leaves out the beginning of the Canon, which shows the (...) thereof, whose
title is: Damnatur Apostolicus qui suae and fraternae salutis est negligens:
The Pope is damned which is negligent in the affair of his own salvation and
of his brethren; and then begins the Canon Si Papa suae and fraternae
salutis negligens etc. Showing that albeit the Pope have no Superior Judge in
this world, which may by authority check him unless he fall into heresy; yet
shall his damnation be greater then of other sinners, for that by reason of his
high dignity, he draws more after him to perdition, then any other. Whereby we
may perceive that this Canon was not written to flatter the Pope, as
Protestants would have it seem, but to warn him rather of his peril,
together with his high authority.

57. After this the better to cover this pious meaning of S. Boniface T. M.
alleging two lines of the same in Latin, he cutteth of presently a third
line, that immediately ensues, to wit: Cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum
vapulatur us, that the Pope is to suffer eternal punishments, and to be
scourged with many stripes, together with the devil himself, if by his
evil, or A heap of (...).
negligent life, he be the cause of others perdition; which threat this man
having cut of, he ioineth presently again with the antecedent words, these as
following immediately in the Canon; Huius culpas redarguere praesumet nemo
mortalium; this man's faults (to wit the Pope) no mortal man shall or may
presume to reprehend, and there ends. In which short phrase are many frauds:
for first he leaves out istic here in this life, and then for praesumit in
the present tense, that no man does presume to check him in respect of the
greatness of his dignity, this man says praesumet, in the future tense, that is
no man shall presume, or as him self translateth it may presume to controlle
him, which is a malicious falsehood. And lastly he leaves out all that
immediately follows containing a reason of all that is said: Quia cunctos ipse
iudicaturus, a nemine est iudicandus, nisi deprehendatur a fide deuius etc. For
that whereas he is Judge of all other men, he cannot himself be Judged by any,
except he be found to swerve from the true faith. Here then is nothing but
fraudulent citing, and abusing of Authors.

58. But now thirdly remains the greatest corruption and abuse of all in his
English translation, which is that which most imports his simple Reader that
looks not into the Latin, and this is, that he translateth the former
sentence of the Canon thus as before you have heard: Though he should carry
many people with him to hell; yet no mortal creature may presume to say why
do you so? But in the Latin neither here, nor in the Canon it self is there
any such interrogation at all, Great impudency.
as why do you so? And therefore I may ask T. M. why do you ly so? Or why do
you delude your Reader so? Or why do you corrupt your Author so? Or why do you
translate in English for the abusing of your Reader, that which neither your
self do set down in your Latin text, nor the Canon it self by you cited
has it at all? Is not this wilful, and malicious fraud? Wherein when you
shall answer me directly and sincerly, it shall be a great discharge of your
credit with those, who in the mean space will justly hold you for a deceauer.

59. His fourth answer to the former argument of Gods providence, is the
difference (he says) of Kings His fourth answer.
and Popes in this point, for that the Papal power (says he) which will be
thought spiritual if it be evil, may be the Confut. p. 3. and 36.
bane of souls; the power of Princes is but corporal, therefore fear them not
because they can go no further then the body. Thus he. And did ever man hear
so wise a reason? And cannot evil Kings and Princes be the cause of
corrupting souls also if they should live wickedly, and permit or induce
others to do the same? And what if they should be of an evil Religion as you
will say Q. Mary, and K. Henry were, and all Kings upward for many hundred
years together, who by Statutes and Impertinent reasons.
laws forced men to follow the Religion of that time, did all this touch
nothing the soul? who would say it but T.M? But he goes forward in his
application, for that bodily Tyranny (says he) works in the Godly patience,
but the spiritual Tyranny does captiuate the inward soul. This now is as good
as the former, and is a difference without diversity, so far as concerns
our affair, that a man may with patience, if he will, resist both the one and
the other. And even now we have seen that when any Pope shall decline from the
common received faith of Christendom, he cannot captiuate other men, but is
deposed himself. Wherefore this man's conclusion is very simple, saying:
Therefore here is need, according to Gods providence, of power to depose so
Math. 5.
desperate a spiritual evil, whereof it is written, if the salt want his
saltenesse, it is good for nothing, but to be cast upon the donghill. Mark
then that concerning the spiritual, that God Romans 13.
has ordained eiiciatur for as, let it be cast out; but concerning the
temporal, resist not the power.

60. Lo here, and do not these men find Scriptures for all purposes? This
fellow has found a text, that all spiritual power, when it misliketh them,
must be cast to the donghill, and no temporal must be resisted; and yet he
that shall read the first place by him alleged out of S. Matthew shall find
that the lack of saltenesse is expressly meant of the want of good life and
edification, especially in Priests and Preachers; and yet is it no precept, as
this man would have it, to cast them al to the donghill: but that salt leesing
his taste, is fit for nothing but to that use. S. Paul in like manner to the
Romans does not more forbid resisting of temporal authority, then of
spiritual: but commands to obey both the one and the other; which this man
applies only to temporal, which he would have exalted, obeyed, and respected,
and the other contemned, and cast to the donghill. Oh that he had been worthy to
have been the scholar of S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nazianzen, or S. Ambrose
before cited, who so highly preferred spiritual authority before temporal,
how would they have rated him, if he would not have been better instructed, or
more piously affected? No doubt eiecissent for as, they would have cast him
forth to the donghill in deed, and there have left him, and so do we in this
matter, not meaning to follow him any further, except he reasoned more
groundedly, or dealt more sincerly.

61. Yet in one word to answer his comparison, we say, that both temporal,
and spiritual Magistrates may do hurt both to body and soul: for as the
temporal may prejudice also the soul, as now has been said; so may the
spiritual afflict in like manner the body, as Much less dangerous to have one
Pope without all Superior, then many Princes.
when the Pope or Bishops do burn Heretics: so as in this respect, this
distinction of T. M. is to no purpose; yet do we also say, that when
spiritual authority is abused, it is more pernicious, and prejudicial then
the other: Quia corruption optimi est pessima: The best things become worst,
when they are perverted: and spiritual diseases, especially belonging to
faith, be more pernicious then corporal: for which cause God had so much care
to provide for the prevention thereof in his Christian Church, for the
conservation of true faith, by the authority, union, visibility, and succession
of the said Church, and diligence of Doctores, Teachers, Synodes, Councels, and
other means therein used, and by his assistance of infallibility to the head
thereof: which head though in respect of his eminent authority, he have no
Superiors to Judge or chastise him, except in case of heresy, as has been
said; yet has he many and effectual means whereby to be admonished, informed,
stirred up, and moved: so as he being but one in the world, and furnished with
these helps, brings far less danger, and inconvenience, then if all
temporal Princes (who are many) had the like privilege and immunity. And this
every reasonable man out of reason it self will easily see and consider.

62. As also this other point of no small or mean importance, to wit, that
English Protestants pretending temporal Princes to be supreme, and without
Judge or Superior in matters of Religion, as well as civil and secular, they
incur a far greater inconvenience thereby, then they would seem to lay upon
us. For that if any temporal Prince as Supreme in both causes, would take
upon him the approbation, or admission of any sect or heresy whatsoever, they
have no remedy at all according to the principles of their doctrine; whereas we
say, the Pope in this case may and must be deposed by force of his subjects,
and all Christian Princes joined together against him: so as in place of one
general Pope, which in this case is under authority, they make so many
particular Popes, as are particular Kings and temporal Princes throughout all
Christendom, that are absolute, and consequently without all remedy for
offenses temporal or spiritual in manners or faith.

63. And now let us imagine what variety of sects and schisms would have been
at this day in Christianity, if for a thousand and six hundred years, which
Christian Religion has endured, this doctrine of liberty and immunity of
temporal Princes to believe, hold, and defend what they list, had been received
and practiced for good and current unto this time. From which singular
inconvenience, danger, and desperate desolation, the doctrine and belief of
the only Bishop of Rome his Supreme authority, and exercise thereof, has
chiefly delivered us, as to all men is evident. And this only reason were
sufficient in all reason to refute this man's idle confutation of that Supremacy
here pretended; which confutation standing upon so feeble and ridiculous
grounds, as now in part you have seen, and supported principally by certain
new shifts, and iugglinges scarcely used by any before, by casting out
shadows of our Catholic Authors sayings and sentences, as making for him;
though I mean to pass no further in impugning his said grondes, which are of
so small weight as you have seen: yet do I not think it amiss to add
another several Chapter for better discovering of the said iugglinges used by
him in this short Treatise, not containing much above twenty (...) in all. For
by this little you may gather what a volume might be framed of his false
dealings, if we would dwell any longer therein.

A BRIEF VIEW OF CERTAIN NOTORIOVS, FALSE AND FRAVDVLENT DEALINGS, USED BY
T.M. In this his short several Treatise against the Popes Supremacy: As also
sundry examples of the like proceeding in the former Part of his deceiptfull
Reply.
CHAP. VI.
IT is the saying both of Philosophers and Deuines, Bonum nisi been fiat, bonum
non esse, A good thing except it be well and rightly done, is not good: As for
example if a man would relieve the necessity of poor and distressed people
with alms gotten by stealth or robbery; albeit giving of alms of it self be a
good thing; yet for that it is not here lawfully performed, in this case it is
not good nor lawful: So M. Thomas The fraud of T. M.
Morton taking upon him to confute the Popes Supremacy over Kings and Princes,
thought no doubt to do a good work therein, at leastwise bonum vtile, a
profitable good thing for himself, in regard of some favor or benevolence
which he might hope to gain with some Prince thereby to his preferment; but not
performing the same by lawful means of truth, but of sleightes (not
withstanding to his Majesty he terms himself the Minister of simple truth)
though it should prove vtile, yet not honestum; that is, for his gain, but not
for his credit or conscience, and consequently deserves rather disgrace then
estimation, even with those whom most he desired to gratify in that affair.

2. For demonstration whereof, though I suppose to have said sufficient before,
both in the second, fourth, and fifth Chapters by occasion of matters that
occurred in discussion between us; yet now having determined with my self, to
pass on no further in the particular refutatio^ of this his Treatise, as a
thing not worth the time to be lost therein, and handled far better by diverse of
his own side before him, namely by M. Jewel, M. Horn, D. John Reinoldes, M.
Bilson and some others The vanity of T. M. his vaunt of truth.
in their books of this subject; I thought good notwithstanding for some kind
of recompense of this my breuity in answering so simple and idle a Treatise, to
ad some few examples more in this place of other corruptions and falsifications
practiced by him in this his confutation: not of all, for that alone would
require a great book, but of some competent number, whereby the Reader may
guess at the rest; and his Majesty take some proof of the extraordinary
vanity of that vaunt, wherewith he presented himself to his Highness, in the very
first entrance of his Epistle dedicatory, in so constant assurance of an
upright conscience (to use his own words) as that he would willingly remit
that just advantage against his adversary, which the difference between a
Minister of simple truth, and a professed Equiuocator did offer unto him. Now
then let us enter to the examination it self.

3. Wherein only the Reader is to be advertised, that whereas this man by a new
devise of his own, does pretend to put down the sayings of our Catholic A
(...) devise of T. M. (...) braggeth.
writers for his purpose, and that both in Latin and English, the one in the
text, and the other in the margent, pretending thereby to make them speak
contrary one to the other, A course (says he to the Kings Majesty) which I
profess in all disputes; he deals so perfidiously therein to bring them to
debate, as commonly the simple fellow commits three several sorts of
frauds and falsehood in most of his allegations. First in corrupting the
meaning of the Authors, alleging them quite against their own whole drift,
and intended discourse, and conclusion thereof. Secondly in setting down
fraudulently the Latin text, by peecing and patching their sentences together
that stand far a sunder in the Authors themselves, and by dismembring others
that were coherent before, as often now we have complained. Thirdly in
translating the same by like fraud into English, using manifest violence to
the words and sense it self, to get thereby some show of advantage, or at
least- wise to say somewhat. All which sorts and kinds of shifts you shall
see expressed in the examples that are to ensue.

4. In the second page of his pretended confutation; The first example.
he has these words; In the old Testament the Jesuits are forced to allow,
that the King was supreme over Page 2.
the Priests in spiritual affairs and ordering Priests. For proof whereof
he cites in the margent Salmeron a Jesuit, a very learned man, that has left
written in our days many volumes upon the Ghospells, Epistles of S. Paul, and
other parts of Scriptures, and was one of the first ten, that joined
themselves with the famous holy man Ignatius de Loyola, for the beginning of
that Religious order; in which citation diverse notable corruptions are to be
seen. First, for Salmer. disp. 12. in Epistolas Pauli in gen.. sed contra.
that Salmeron proves the quite contrary in the place by this man quoted, to
wit, that never Kings were head of the Church or above Priests by their
ordinary Kingly authority in Ecclesiastical matters, in the new or old
Testament, and having proved the same largly, he comes at length to set down
objections to the contrary, and to solue and answer them, saying: Sed contra
hanc solidam veritatem etc. But now against this sound truth by me hitherto
confirmed, I know that many things may be objected, which we are diligently to
confute. First then may be objected that Kings in the old Testament did
sometimes prescribe unto Priests what they were to do in sacred things, as
also did put some negligent Priests from the execution of their office. To
which is answered: Vbi id euenisset, mirum esse non debere; If it had so fallen
out, it had been no marvel: for that the Synagogue of the Jews, albeit it
contained some just men, yet was it called rather an earthly, then a heavenly
Kingdom, August. l. 19. contr. (...). e. 31. in princ.
insomuch as S. Augustine does doubt, whether in the old Testament, the
Kingdom of heaven was ever so much as named, and much less promised for
reward; and therefore those things that were then done among them, foreshewed
only or prefigured divine things that were to succeed under the new Testament,
the other being not divine but humane and earthly. So Salmeron.

5. Here then are sundry important corruptions, and 2. Corruption about the
meaning.
frauds uttered by T.M. the one that the Jesuits, and namely Salmeron, are
enforced to allow the temporal King to have been Supreme over the high Priest
in spiritual matters, under the old law; whereas he does expressly affirm and
prove the contrary, both out Disp. 12. page 324. and 325.
of the Scripture it self, by the sacrifice appointed more worthy for the
Priest, then the Prince, and many other testimonies, as that he must take the
law and interpretation Leuit. 4.
thereof at the Priests hands, that he must ingredi and egredi ad verbum
Sacerdotis, go in and out, and (...). 17.
proceed in his affairs by the word and direction of Number. 27.
the Priest, and the like; as also by the testimony of Philo and Joseph, two
learned Jews, and other reasons Philo l. de victimis par. 2. circa medium
Joseph. 3. Antiquit. cap. (...) c.
handled at large in this very disputation, and in the self same place from
whence this objection is taken. And this is the first falsification concerning
the Authors meaning and principal drift.

6. The second corruption is in the words, as they ly in the Latin copy, and
as they are by me before mentioned: Vbi id euenisset mirum esse non debere, If
any such thing had fallen out, as was objected, to wit that Kings 2.
Corruption about the words.
sometimes had prescribed to the Priests what they should do in
Ecclesiastical things, deposed some etc. it had been no marvel, for so much as
their Ecclesiastical Kingdom or Synagogue was an earthly and imperfect thing,
but yet this proves not that it was so, but only it is spoken upon a
supposition: which suppositio^ this Minister that he might the more cunningly
shift of and avoid, left cut of purpose the most essential words thereof Vbi
id euenisset if that had happened etc. as also for the same cause to make
things more obscure, after those words of Salmeron that stand in his text:
Synagoga Iudeorum dicebatur terrenum potius quam caeleste regnum; The Synagogue
or Ecclesiastical government of the Jews, was called rather an earthly then a
heavenly Kingdom (whereas contrary-wise the Ecclesiastical power in the
Christian Church is every where called Celestial) after those words (I say)
this man cutteth of again many lines that followed, together with S.
Augustines judgment before touched, which served to make the Authors meaning
more plain, and yet left no sign of ( etc.) whereby his Reader might
understand that somewhat was omitted, but (...) again presently, as though it
had imediatly followed, (...) cum populus Dei constet corpore Sundry (...).
and animo, carnalis pars in veteri populo primas tenebat: Whereas Gods people
does consist of body and mind, the carnal or bodily part did chiefly prevail
among the Jews, and heerwith ends, as though nothing more had ensued of that
matter, thrustnig out these words that immediately followed, and made the thing
clear which are, Et ad spiritualia significanda constituebaiur, and that kind
of earthly power was appointed to signify the spiritual that was to be in the
new Testament: whereby is evidently seen that Salmeron understood not by
carnalis pars and regnum terrenum, the temporal Kingdom of Jury, as this
Minister does insinuate to make the matter odious; but the Ecclesiastical
government of the Synagogue under the old law, in respect of the
Ecclesiastical power in the new, whereof the other was but an earthly figure or
signification.

7. But now the third corruption, and most egregious of all, is in his English
translation out of the Latin words of Salmeron: for thus he translateth them
in our 3. Corruption about the translation.
name: In the Synagogue of the Jews ( says Salmeron) was a State rather
earthly then heavenly; so that in that people (which was as in the body of a
man, consisting of body and soul) the carnal Confut. page 2.
part was more eminent, meaning the temporal to have been supreme. In which
translation are many several shifts and frauds. For whereas Salmeron says
Synagoga Iudeorum dicebatur potius terrenum quam caeleste regnum, the Synagogue
or Ecclesiastical power among the Jews was called rather an earthly, then a
heavenly Kingdom; he translateth it, the Synagogue of the Jews was a State
rather earthly, then heavenly; and this to the end he might apply the word of
earth to the temporal Prince, and heavenly to the Judicial Priests, which is
quite from Salmerons meaning. Secondly those other words of Salmeron being Cum
populus Dei constet ex corpore and Malicious interpretations to make us odious.
animo, whereas the people of God do consist of body and mind, meaning thereby
as well Christians as Jews, and that the Jews are as the bodily or carnal
part of the man, and the Christians the spiritual, and consequently their
Ecclesiastical authority earthly, and ours heavenly; this fellow to deceive
his Reader, puts out first the word Dei, the people of God and then
translateth it, in that people (to wit the Jews) the carnal part was the more
eminent, meaning (says he) the te^porall; which is false, for he speaks
expressly of the Ecclesiastical power among the Jews, which he calls
carnal and terrene, in respect of the spiritual Ecclesiastical among the
Christians, and not the temporal or Kingly power under the old Testament, as
this man to make us odious to temporal Princes, as debasing their authority,
would have it thought. And Salmerons co^traposition or antithesis is not
between the temporal and Ecclesiastical government among the Jews; but
between their Ecclesiastical government and ours, that of the Synagogue, and
this of the Christian Church, whereof the one he says to be terrene and
earthly, the other spiritual and heavenly, the one infirm, the other
powerful over souls etc. So as all these sorts and kinds of corruptions
being seen in this one little authority, you may imagine what will be found in
the whole book, if a man had so much patience and time to leese, as to
discuss the same exactly through.

8. A little after this again, he brings in an example The second example
page 7.
of the King of Israel Ozias, who for presuming to exercise the Priests office
in offering of incense, being first reprehended, and resistest for the same by
Azarias the high Priest, and fourscore other Priests with 4. Reg. 15.
2. Par. 26.
him in the Temple, was for his presumption presently and publicly in all
their sightes punished by God, and stricken with a leprosy, and thereupon removed
by the authority of the said high Priest, first from the A contention about the
expulsion of K. Ozias.
Temple, and common conversation of men, and then also from the government or
administration of his Kingdom, the same being committed to his son Ioathan
all the days of his Fathers life: about which example, M. Morton first of all
brings in Doctor Barkley dissenting from Doctor Boucher in this matter, about
the deposition of this King, the one holding that he was deposed, the other
not, but only that as a sick man was debarred of the administration. Doctor
Bouchers words are these cited by D. Barkley: Sic Oziam Azarias Barkleius l.
5. c. 11.
de Templo primum, mox etiant de Regno eiecit. So Azarias the high Priest did
cast out King Ozias, first from the Temple, and then from his Kingdom. Which
the other will not have to be understood that the title and interest of his
Kingdom was taken from him, but only the administration, which in effect is no
great difference of opinions; for that Bellarmine also talking of this matter
says: Cum regni administratione priuatus fuerit, whereas he was deprived of the
administration of the Kingdom, which after in other words he expressing,
says, Regnandi authoritate, he was deprived of the authority Bell. l. 5.
de summo Ponti. c. 8.
of actual reigning, or exercising that authority: whereunto the words of the
Scripture seen plainly to agree, which are these: Festinato expulerunt etc.
Azarias and the rest of the Priests did hastily drive him out of the Temple,
and he himself being terrified with that which he felt to be the punishment of
God, made have to go forth. Wherefore 2. Par. 26.
this King Ozias remaining a leper unto the day of his death, did dwell in a
separate house, and he was full of leprosy, for the which he was cast forth of
the house of our Lord: so as his son Ioathan did govern the house of the
King, and judge the people of the land.

9. Out of which words of Scripture as also out of the Book of Leuiticus,
where the law says, That whosoever Leuit. 13.
shall be spotted with leprosy, and is separated at the apointment of the Priest,
shall dwell alone without the tents, Bellarmine does gather that this
separation of King Ozias was not voluntary but by prescript order of the said
high Priest Azarias, and that consequently he was deprived also by the same
sentence and authority, of his government and administration of the Kingdom;
against which T. M. brings in a great tempestuous storm of words, and war
of the foresaid Doctor Barkley Scottishman, against Cardinal Bellarmine, as
though he had refuted him with some contumely and contempt; whereas Doctor
Barkley neither names nor means Bellarmine, but only Boucher upon his words
before recited, against whom he being, according to his custom, somewhat
vehement in speech (the difference in substance being little or nothing as you
have seen) T. M. endeauoreth by his sleightes to increase or aggrauate the
same. For whereas Doctor Barkley presuming Boucher to understand by those his
words De regno eiecit, that Azarias had taken from K. Ozias the name and right
of Kingdom, says unto him; Magna sane imprudentia vel impudentia est, ea
scriptis mandare, quae manifestis scripturae testimoniis redarguuntur: It is
truly a great imprudence or impude^cy, to commit those things to writing which
are controlled by manifest Dealings of a makebate.
testimonies of Scripture; There our Minister blotteth out in his Latin text
the word imprudentia, and will have only to stand impudentia to set them
further out then they be, which me thinks was some impudency also in him; and
again when the said Barkley writes immediately after the former words; Malo
te negligentiae quam nequitiae reum facere, I had rarher accuse you of
negligence then of malice; these words also not without some malice T. M.
strikes out, and pitifully mangleth the whole discourse, putting in and
putting out at his pleasure, and yet all set down in his book as the
continual speech of the Author.

10. Here then you see how many wilful corruptions there be, first to bring
in Doctor Barkley rating of Cardinal Bellarmine with magna sane impudentia est
etc. Whereas he talks not against Bellarmine at all, nor indeed is Bellarmines
manner of speech contrary to that Enumeration of falsities.
which Barkley will have to be the meaning of the History; for that Barkley
does not so much stand upon the thing in controversy for Priests authority,
but upon the manner of proof by the examples alleged by D. Boucher of
Jeroboam, Ozias, Athalia, and some other Princes, in whose punishment God used
Priests for Ibid. c. 11.
means and instruments. Non ignoro (says he) Ius esse Ecclesiae in Reges and
Principes Christianos, nec quale ius sit ignoro, sed id tam alienis argument is
ostendi prorsus ignoro; imo non ostendi plane scio: I am not ignorant, says
Doctor Barkley, that the Church has right over Christian Kings and Princes,
nor am I ignorant what manner of right it is; yet do I not see how the same
may be proved by such impertinent arguments; nay I know rather that it cannot
be so proved. Which words going but very few lines before those that T. M.
alleges, he could not but see, and yet left them out, and then begins
against us his English text thus: Your own Doctor calls this your assertion
most false, and contrary to the direct History of the Bible, to wit, that Ozias
was deposed of his Kingdom by Azarias the high Priest.

11. But now you have seen that howsoever it may be called, either deposition,
deprivation, restraint, sequestration or inhibition; certain it is, that he
was separated from the administration of the government by (...) the high
Priest, and whether his son during his life were truly King or only regent or
Governor under his Father, or whether he were bound to consult with his said
Father in his greatest affairs, and take his approbation and commission, that
point, which is most important, Doctor Barkley proves not, but only that Ozias
notwithstanding his separation was called King during his life, which let
not, but Ozias how he was separated by the high Priest.
that his son might be truly King also, during his Fathers days: for
otherwise D. Barkley might as well say, that his Majesty now of England (for
example) was not King of Scotland, whiles his Mother the Queen lived in her
exile, which yet I think he will not say; and therefore to use the words
impudentia, nequitia, and falsissimum in a matter so doubtful, might perhaps
have been omitted; but much more ought to have been the multiplicity of falsities
used by T. M. in relating the same, and namely in bringing in Cardinal
Bellarmine with such ardent desire to have him contradicted and disgraced, as
he not only applies to him that which was spoken against another, but reciting
also two lines of his speech, besides other manglinges, shufleth in falsely two
or three words, that overthrow the whole controversy, to wit separatus extra
Regnum, that King Ozias was separated by Azarias the Priest forth of the
Kingdom: whereas Bellarmine has not these words extra Regnum at al, but only
that he was separated from the City extra vrbem in domo solitaria forth of the
City in a solitary house, which thing the Scripture it self before related
does testify; whereby you see what botching there is to bring matters to his
purpose; and yet will he needs style him self The Minister of simple truth.

12. It follows in the 16. page thus: Your devise (says he) of exemption of
Priests (from the jurisdiction of temporal The third example page 16.
Princes in certain cases) is to crude to be disgested by any reasonable
Divine, for (as your Victoria says) Priests, besides that they are Ministers
of the Church, they are likewise members of the Commonwealth, and a King is
as well a King of the Clergy, as of the laity, therefore the Clergy is subject
unto the civil authority in temporal things, for such matter is not ruled by
any power spiritual: A plain demonstration. So he. And I say the same, that
indeed it is a plain demonstration of his egregious falsehood, and abusing his
Reader. First in making him believe, that the learned man Franciscus de
Victoria does favor him or his in this matter of the exemption of Priests,
whereas in this very place here cited by T. M. his first proposition (...). de
Victoria relect. 1.
of all in this matter is this: Ecclesiastici iure sunt exempti etc. I do
affirm that Ecclesiastical men are by Law exempted, and freed from civil
power, so as they may not be conuented de potest. Ecclesiae Sect. 4.
before a secular Judge, either in criminal or civil causes, and the contrary
doctrine to this is condemned for Heretical, among the articles of John
Wickliffe in the Council of Constance. So he. And now see whether Victoria
make for him or no, or whether he disgested well this crude doctrine of
Priests exemption, as this Ministers phrase is.

13. Secondly if we consider, either the English translation here set down
out of the words of Victoria, Variety of corruptions
or his Latin text, for ostentation sake put in the margent, we shall find so
many and monstrous foul corruptions, intercisions, geldinges and mutilations,
as is a shame to behold; and I beseech the learned Reader to have patience to
confer but this one place only with the Author, and he will rest instructed
in the ma^s spirit for the rest: but he must find them as I have cited them
here in the margent, and not as T. M. Victoria his propositions about
exe^ption of Clergy men, and T. M his corruptions therein.
erroneously quoteth them, if not of purpose to escape the examine. For that
Victoria having set down his precedent general proposition, for the exemption
of Clergy men, that they were exempted Iure by Law, he passes on to examine in
his second proposition Quo iure, by what Law, divine or humane they are
exempted; and in his third, he holds that Aliqua exemptio Clericorum est de
iure Diuino: That some kind of exemptions of Clergy men from civil power, is
by divine Law, and not humane only, and fourthly he comes to this which here
is set down by T. M. but not as he sets it down. Our fourth proposition
(says Victoria) is, that the persons of Clergy men are not absolutely, and in
all things exempted from civil power either by divine or humane law; which
is evident by that Clergy men are bound to obey the temporal laws of the
City, or Commonwealth wherein they live, in those things that do appertain
to the temporal government, and administration thereof, and do not let or
hinder Ecclesiastical government.

14. These are the words of Victoria as they ly together in him, and then
after some arguments interposed, for his said conclusion, he adds also this
proof: That for so much as Clergy me^ besides this, that they are Ministers of
the Church, are Citizens also of the Commonwealth, they are bound to obey the
temporal laws of that Commonwealth or Prince in temporal affairs; and then
ensues the last reason (here set down in English by T. M.) in these words:
Moreover (says Victoria) for that a King is King not only of laymen, but of
Clergymen also, therefore aliquo modo subiiciuntur ei, in some sort they are
subject unto him: Which words aliquo modo in some sort, the Minister leaves
out; and then it follows immediately in Victoria: And for that Clergymen are
not governed in temporal matters by Ecclesiastical power, therefore they have
their temporal Prince, unto whom they are bound to yield obedience in
temporal affairs.

15. And this is all that Victoria has in this matter, and in these very
words. And let any man consider the patching, which T. M. uses both in
English and Latin in this place, to make some show for his fained demonstration
out of Victoria, and he will see how poor and miserable a man he is, and how
miserable a cause he defends. And in particular, let the very last
proposition be noted which he cites, and Englisheth as out of Victoria, to
wit, the Clergy is subject unto the civil authority in temporal things, for
such matter is not ruled by any power spiritual, whereby he would have his
Reader to imagine, that no spiritual power may have authority to govern
temporal matters; whereas the words of Changing of nominative cases.
Victoria are: Clerici quantum ad temporalia non administrantur potestate
Ecclesiastica, that Clergy men, for so much as appertains to temporal
affairs, are not governed by Ecclesiastical power, but by the temporal which
there bears rule: So as this fellow by a subtle slight changing the
nominative case from Clerici non administrantur to temporalia non
administrantur, frames his plain demonstration out of plain cosenage and
forgery. And is this naked innocence?

16. From the page 18. unto 27. he handles together many sentences and
authorities of ancient Fathers, The 4. example page 18. 19. 20.
alleged by Catholic Authors Cunerus, Tolosanus, and especially Barkleius,
to show that the Apostles and their successors, and those Fathers amongst the
rest, did not take arms against their Princes either Infidels or Christians,
but did rather suffer injuries, then seek by force to revenge the same; which
being our conclusion in like manner, and held and defended by Frauds used out
of the ancient Fathers and Cath. vvriters.
our Catholic writers as you see, and that for the most part, by name against
Protestant writers and practisers, both in Scotland, France, Flanders, and
other places, you may perceive how corruptly this is brought in against us, as
though our common belief and exercise were the contrary, and this may be
called falsification and sophistication of our meaning.

17. But yet if we would examine the particular authorities that be alleged
about this matter, though nothing making against us as has been said, and
consider how many false shifts are used by T. M. therein; you would say he were
a Doctor in deed in that science, for that a several Treatise will scarce
contain them. I will touch only two for examples sake. He cites Doctor
Barkley, bringing in the authority of S. Ambrose, that he resisted not by force
his Arrian Emperor, page 24.
when he would take a Church from him for the Arrians, but he sets not down
what answer of his Doctor Barkley does allege in the very self same Barkleus
l. 3. cap. 5.
place, which is: Allegatur Imperatori licere omnia etc. It is alleged that it
is lawful for the Emperor to do all things, for that all things are his (
and consequently that he may assign a Church to the Arrians:) Whereto I answer
says S. Ambrose; trouble not your self O Emperor, nor think that you have
Imperial right over those things that are divine; do not exalt your self,
but if you will reign long, be subject to God, for it is written Ambros. l. 5.
Ep. 33.
that those things that belong to God must be given to God, and to Caesar only
those things that belong to Caesar; Palaces appertain to the Emperor, A
clear authority of S. Ambrose imbezeled by T. M.
but Churches to the Priest, the right of defending public walls is
committed to you, but not of sacred things. Thus Doctor Barkley out of S.
Ambrose in the very place cited by T. M. which he thought good wholly to
pretermit, and cut of, as not making for his purpose; and so had he done more
wisely, if he had left out also the other authority of Pope Leo, which he
recites in the eight place of authorities, out of ancient Fathers in these
words.

18. The eighth Father (says he) is Pope Leo, writing The fifth example.
to a true Catholic Emperor, saying: You may not be ignorant that your
Princely power is given unto you, not Page 26.
only in worldly regiment, but also spiritual, for the preservation of the
Church: as if he said not only in cases temporal but also in spiritual, so
far as it belongs to the outward preservation, not to the personal
administration of them, and this is the substance of our English oath: And
surther neither do our Kings of England challenge, nor subjects condescend
unto. In which words you see two things are contained, first what authority
S. Leo the Pope above eleven hundred years gone ascribed unto Leo the Emperor
in matters spiritual and Ecclesiastical. The second, by this man's assertion,
that neither our Kings of England chaleng, nor do the subjects condescend
unto any more in the oath of the Supremacy that is proposed unto them; which if
it be so, I see no cause why all English Catholics may not take the same in
like manner, so far forth as S. Leo allows spiritual authority to the
Emperor of his time. Wherefore it behooves that the Reader stand attent to the
deciding of this question, for if this be true which here he says, our
controversy about the Supremacy is at an end.

19. First then about the former point, let us consider how many ways T. M.
has corrupted the foresaid Many falsehoods.
authority of S. Leo, partly by fraudulent allegation in Latin, and partly by
false translation into English. For that in Latin it goes thus, as himself
puts it down in the margent: Debes incunctanter aduertere, Regiam
potestatem non solum ad mundi regimen, sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium esse
collatam. You ought (o Emperor) resolutly to consider, that your Kingly power
is not only given unto you for government of the world, or worldly affairs,
but especially for defense of the Church: and then do ensue immediately these
other words also in S. Leo, suppressed fraudulently by the Minister, for that
they explicate the meaning of the Author: Vt ausus nefarios comprimendo, and
quae been sunt statuta Leo ep. 75. ad Leone^ Augustu^.
defendas, and veram pacem his quae sunt turbata restituas: To the end that you
may by repressing audacious attemptes both defend those things that are well
ordained and decreed, ( as namely in the late general Council of Calcedon)
and restore peace where matters are troubled, as in the City and Sea of
Alexandria, where the Patriarch Proterius being slain and murdered by the
conspiracy of the Dioscorian Heretics, lately condemned in the said Council,
all things are in most violent garboiles, which require your imperial power
to remedy, compose, and compresse the same.

20. This is the true meaning of S. Leo his speech to the good and Religious
Emperor of the same name, as appears throughout the whole Epistle here
cited Ibid. c. 5.
and diverse others. Nonne perspicuum est (says he) quibus pietas vestra
succurrere, and quibus obuiare, ne Alexandrina Ecclesia etc. Is it not evident
whom your Imperial piety ought to assist and succor, and whom you ought to
resist and repress, to the end the Church of Alexandria, that hitherto has
been the house of prayer, become not a den of thieves? Surely it is most
manifest that by this late barbarous and most furious cruelty (in murdering
that Patriarch) all the light of heavenly Sacraments is there extinguished;
Intercepta est The Christian sacrifice ceased in Alexandria.
Sacrificij oblatio, defecit chrismatis sanctificatio etc. The oblation of
sacrifice is intermitted, the hallowing of Chrisme is ceased, and all divine
mysteries of our Religion have withdrawn themselves from those parricidiall
hands of those Heretics, that have murdered their own Father and Patriarch
Proterius, burned his body, and cast the ashes into the air.

21. This then was the cause and occasion wherein the holy Pope Leo did implore
the help and secular arm of Leo the Emperor, for chastising those turbulent
Heretics, to which effect he says that his Kingly power was not only given him
for the government of the world, but also for the defense of the Church, which
our Minister does absurdly translate not only in Notable corruption of S. Leo
his meaning.
worldly regiment, but also spiritual for the preservation of the Church,
turning ad into in, and praesidium into preservation; and then makes the
commentary which before we have set down: As if he had said (quoth he) not
only in causes temporal, but also in spiritual, so far as it belongs to
outward preservation, not to the personal administration of them.

22. And here now he shows himself entangled, not only about the assertion
of Imperial power in About Ecclesiastical supremacy in temporal Princes.
spiritual matters, by that S. Leo says it is given ad praesidium Ecclesiae,
to the defense of the Church, which proves nothing at all for him, but against
him rather as you see, and much more in the explication thereof, to wit, what is
meant by this authority, and how far it strecheth it self: wherein truly I
never found Protestant yet that could clearly set down the same, so as he
could make it a distinct doctrine from ours, and give it that limits which his
fellows would agree unto, or themselves make probable.

23. About which matter M. Morton here as you see (who seems no small man
amongst them, and his book must be presumed to have come forth with the
approbation and allowance of his Lord and Master the Archbishop at least)
says as you have heard, that it is no more, but such as S. Leo allowed in the
Emperor ad Ecclesiae praesidium to the defense of the Church, and Church
matters and men, and for punishing Heretics that troubled the same. And
further more T. Page 26.
M. expounds the matter saying: That this Imperial and Kingly authority in
spiritual causes reaches no further, but as it belongs to outward
preservation, not to the personal administration of them. And do not we
grant also the same? Or do not we teach that temporal Princes power ought
principally, as S. Leo says, to extend it self to the defense ad preservation
of the Church? In this then we agree and have no difference.

24. There follows in T. M. his assertion here: But not in the personal
administration of them (to wit of spiritual causes, and this now is a shift
dissembling the T. M. his co^ceipt of the oath of (...) in England.
difficulty, and true State of the question) which is in whom consists the
supreme power, to treat, judge, and determine in spiritual causes; which
this man flying, as not able to resolve, tells us only, that he cannot
personally administer the same; which yet I would ask him why? For as a Bishop
may personally perform all the actions, that he has given authority to
inferior Priests to do in their functions, and a temporal Prince may
execute in his own person, if he list, any inferior authority that he has
given to others in temporal affairs; so, if he have supreme authority
spiritual also, why may he not in like manner execute the same by himself, if
he please? But of this is sufficiently written of late in the foresaid book of
Answer to Sir Edward Cook, where also is showed, Answer to Sir Edward Cook
c. 2. and 3.
that a far greater authority spiritual was given to King Henry the eight by
Parliament, then this that T. M. allows his Majesty now for outward
preservation of the Church, to wit To be head thereof, in as ample manner, as
ever the Pope was, or could be held before him, over Statut. (...) 26 Hen. 8.
cap. 1. ann. (...) 1535.
England: and to King Edward, though then but of ten years old was granted
also by Parliament, That he had originally in himself by his Crown and Scepter
all Episcopal authority; so as the Bishops and Archbishops had no other power,
or spiritual authority then was derived from him: and to Queen Statut. 1.
(...) c. 6. (...) 1547.
Elizabeth by like grant of Parliament, was also given as great authority
spiritual and Ecclesiastical over the Church and Clergy of England, as ever
any person had, or could exercise before, which was and is another thing then
this Stat. 1.
outward preservation which T. M. now assigns, Eliza. (...). 1559.
having pared the same in minced words to his purpose, to make it seem little
or nothing, but dares not stand to it, if he be called to the trial.

25. Wherefore this matter being of so great importance and consequence as you
see, I do here take hold of this his public assertion, and require that it
may be made good, to wit, that this is the substance and meaning only of the
English oath, and that neither our Kings of England do challenge more, nor
subjects required to condescend to more then to grant to their authority for
outward preservation, or ad Ecclesiae praesidium, as S. Leo his words Hold
taken on the offer of T. M. about the oath of Supremacy.
and meaning are, and I dare assure him, that al Catholics in England will
presently take the oath, and so for this point there will be an atonement. Me
thinks that such public doctrine should not be so publicly printed, and set
forth, without public allowance and intention to perform and make it good.
If this be really meant, we may easily be accorded; if not then will the Reader
see, what credit may be given to any thing they publish; notwithstanding this
book comes forth with this special commendation of Published by authority
etc.

26. And for conclusion of all, it may be noted that there has been not only
lack of truth and fidelity in S. Leo (...) ep. 34. 46. 62. 81. 87. Sermon. 1. de
nata.
citing Pope Leo for Ecclesiastical Supremacy in Emperors above Popes, but
want of modesty and discretion also; for so much as no one ancient Father does
more often and earnestly inculcate the contrary, for Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli.
the pre-eminence of the Sea of Rome, then does S. Leo; in so much that John
Calvin, not being able otherwise to answer him, says, that he was tooto
desirous of glory and (...). l. 4. instit. c. 7.. 11.
dominion, and so shifteth him of that way; and therefore he was no fit instance
for T. M. to bring here in proof of spiritual supremacy in temporal Princes.

27. But yet in the very next page after, he uses a far greater immodesty, or
rather perfidy in my opinion in calumniation of Cardinal Bellarmine, whom he
abuses The sixth example of Cardinal Bellarmine.
notably both in allegation, exposition, translation, application, and vain
insultation; for thus he cites in his text out of him. Ancient general
Councelles (says the Romish pretense) were not gathered without the cost of
good and Christian Emperors, and were made by their consentes, for in those
days the Popes did make supplication to the Emperor, that by his authority he
would gather Synods, but after those times all causes were changed, because the
Pope who is head in spiritual matters cannot be subject in temporal. Bellarm.
lib. 1. de Council. cap. 13.. Habemus ergo.

28. And having alleged this resolution of Bellarmine, the Minister insulteth
over him in these words: Who would think this man could be a Papist, much
less a Jesuit, how much less a Cardinal, who thus disableth the title of the
Pope, granting to us in these words: after these times (that is after six
hundred years) the truth of purer antiquities challenging Popes to be subject
unto Christian Emperors? And yet who but a Papist would (as it were in despite
of antiquity) defend the degenerate state, saying, after those times Popes
might not be subject A childish insultatio^ of T. M. over Cardinal Bellarmine.
in temporal matters? As if he should have said: Then gracious favor of
ancient Christian Emperors, then sound judgment of ancient reverend Fathers,
then devout subjection of ancient holy Popes; in sum then ancient purity and
pure antiquity adieu. But we may not so bastardly reject the depositum and
doctrine of humble subjection, which we have received from our Fathers of the
first six hundred years; and not so only, but which (as your Barkley
witnesses) the universal Christian world embraced, with common consent for a
full thousand years. So he.

29. And do you see how this Minister triumphs? Who would think that men of
conscience or credit could make such ostentation upon mere lies devised by
themselves, as now we shall show all this brag to be? And as for D. Barkley
alleged in the last lines, Barkleius l. 6. aduers. Monarch. c. 26
let any man read him in the book and Chapter cited, and he will wonder at the
impudency of this vaunter; for he speaks no one word of gathering Counsels,
or comparison of spiritual authority between the Pope and Emperor,
concerning their gathering of Councelles or Synodes; but of a quite different
subject, of taking arms by subjects against their lawful temporal Princes.
And what will our Minister then answer to this manifest calumniation so
apparently convinced out of Doctor Barkley? But let us pass to the view of
that which touches Cardinal Bellarmine, against whom all this tempest is
raised.

30. First then we shall set down his words in Latin according as T. M.
cites him in his margent. Tunc Concilia generalia fiebant (says he) non sine
Imperatorum sumptibus, and eo tempore Pontifex subiiciebat se Imperatoribus
Bellar. l. 1. de Conciliis ca. 13.. habemus ergo.
in temporalibus, and ideo non poterant inuito Imperatore aliquid agere:
id^irco Pontifex supplicabat Imperatori vt iuberet conuocari Synodum. At post
illa tempora, omnes causae mutatae sunt, quia Pontifex qui est caput in
spiritualibus, non est subiectus in temporalibus. Then in those days general
Councelles were made not without the charges of Emperors, and in that time the
Pope did subject himself unto Emperors in temporal affairs, and therefore
they could do nothing against the Emperors will, for which cause the Pope did
make supplication to the Emperor, that he would command Synodes to be
gathered; but after those times all causes were changed, for that the Pope who
is head in spiritual matters, is not subject in temporal affairs. So he.

31. And here let us consider the variety of sleightes and shifts of this our
Minister, not only in citing Bellarmins words falsely, and against his meaning
and drift in Latin, whereof we shall speak presently; but in perverting this
Latin that he has so corruptly set Diverse sorts of corruption.
down in his former English translation. For first having said according to
the Latin, that general Councelles in those days were not gathered without
the cost of Emperors, he adds presently of his own, and were made by their
consentes, which is not in the Latin: and then he cutteth of the other words
immediately ensuing, which contain the cause; to wit for that the Popes
subiecting themselves in those days touching temporalities unto the Emperors
(as having no temporal States or dominion yet of their own) could do nothing
without them, and therefore did make supplication to the said Emperors that
they would command Synodes to be gathered: which T. M. translateth that they
would gather Synodes, as though Bellarmine did affirm, that it lay in the
Emperors, by right, to do it: but after those times omnes causae mutatae
sunt, all causes were changed, but he should have said, are changed, as
Bellarmins true words are, omnes istae causae, al these causes are changed, to
wit four sorts of causes, which he sets down, why general Counsels
could not be well gathered in those days without the Emperors help and
authority, which words are guilefully cut of by this deceauer, as in like
manner the last words put down here by himself, Pontifex non est subiectus
in temporalibus, are falsely translated, cannot be subject in temporal, and
again afterward, Popes might not be subject in temporal matters, which is to
make Bellarmine contrary to himself, who says a little before that the Popes
did subject themselves for many years, whereby is proved, that they could do
it; but Bellarmins meaning is that in right by the pre-eminence of their
spiritual dignity, they were exempted, and not bound thereunto.

32. And thus much now for the corruptions used in the words here set down
both in Latin and English. But if we would go to Bellarmine himself and see
his whole discourse, and how brokenly and persidiously these lines are cut out
of him, and here patched together as one entier context contrary to his drift
and meaning, we shall marvel more at the insolency of Thomas Morton,
triumphing over his own The su^me of Cardinal Bellarmines discourse (...) by
T. M.
lie, as before has been said; for that Bellarmine having proved at larg, and
by many sorts of arguments and demonstrations, throughout diverse Chapters
together, that the right of gathering general Councelles belongs only to
the Bishop of Rome, and having answered all objections that could be made
against the same in the behalf of Emperors, or other temporal Princes,
gra^ting only that for certain causes in those first ages, the same could not
be done (in respect of temporal difficulties) without the help and assistance
of the said Emperors, that were Lords of the world; he comes to make this
conclusion which here is cited by T. M. but in far other words and meaning
then here he is cited. You shall hear how he sets it down, and thereupon
consider of the truth of this Minister. Habemus ergo (says he) prima illa
Concilia etc. We Bellar. l. de Council. cap 13.
have then by all this disputation seen, how those first Christian Councelles
were commanded by Emperors. Habemus ergo.
to be gathered, but by the sentence and consent of Popes, and why the Pope
alone in those days did not call Councelles, as afterward has been accustomed;
the reason was, not for that Councelles gathered without the Emperors consent
are not lawful, as our Adversaries would have it, for against that is the
express authority of S. Athanasius saying: Quando Athan. in ep. ad solitar.
vitam agentes.
vnquam iudicium Ecclesiae ab Imperatore authoritatem habuit? When was it ever
seen that the judgment of the Church did take authority from the Emperor? but
for many other most just causes was the Emperors consent required therein etc.
So Bellarmine.

33. And here now you see, that Bellarmins drift is wholly against M. Mortons
assertion: for that he denies Four causes why Emperors consents were
necessary for gathering of Counsels in old time.
that ever the Emperors had any spiritual authority for calling of Counsels;
but only that they could not well in those days be made without them, and that
for four several causes; whereof the first was, for that the old Imperial
laws made by Gentiles were yet in use, whereby all great meetinges of people
were forbidden, for fear of sedition, except by the Emperors being temporal
Lords of the whole world, the Sea ff. de Coll. ill. and l. convent. de Episc.
and Presbyteris.
their leave: the third for that general Councelles being made in those days,
by the public charges and contributions of Cities, and especially of
Christian Emperors themselves, as appears by Eusebius, Theodoretus, and
other writers, it was necessary to have their Eusebius. l. 3. de vita Constant.
Theodor. l. 1. Histor. cap. 16.
that was.

34. The fourth and last cause was (says Bellarmine) for that in those days,
albeit the Bishop of Rome where head in spiritual matters over the Emperors
themselves; yet in temporal affairs he did subject himself unto them, as
having no temporal State of his At post illa tempora istae omnes causae mutatae
sunt; but since those days all these four causes are changed and ipse in suis
Prouinciis est Princeps Supremus temporalis, sicut sunt Reges and Principes
alij; and the Pope himself now in his temporal Provinces is supreme temporal
Lord also, as other Kings and Princes are, which was brought to pass by Gods
providence (says Bellarmine) to the end that he might with more freedom,
liberty, and reputation exercise his office of general Pastorship.

35. And this is all that Bellarmine has of this matter. And now may we
consider the vanity of this Mortons triumph over him before, and how falsely he
deals with him, alleging him against his own drift and meaning, leaving out
also (...) four causes by me recited, and then cutting of (...) the particle
istae, these causes are now changed, which includes reference to these four,
aid furthermore speaking indefinitely, as though all causes and matters were
now changed, seeks thereby to deceive his Reader, and to extort from
Bellarmine, that confession of (...) on his side which he never meant, and much
less uttered in his writings. What dealing, what conscience, what truth is
this?

36. In the very next page after he talking of the great and famous contention
that passed between Pope Gregory the seventh called Hildebrand, and Henry the
The 7. example out of Otho Frisingensis.
fourth Emperor of that name, about the year 1070. he cites the
Historiographer Otto Frisingensis, with this ordinary title of our Otto for
that he writes, that he found not any Emperor actually excommunicated or
deprived of his Kingdom by any Pope before that time, except (says he) that
may be esteemed for an excommunication which was done to Philippe the Emperor
by the Bishop of Rome, almost 1400. years gone, when for a short time, he was
Inter paenitentes collocatus, placed by the said Pope among those that did
penance, as that also of the Emperor Theodosius, who was sequestered from
entering into the Church by S. Ambrose, for that he had commanded a certain
cruel slaughter to be committed in the City of (...): both which exceptions
this Minister of simple truth leaves out of purpose, which is no simplicity as
you see, but yet no great matter with him in respect of the other that ensues,
which is, that he alleges this Frisin. l. 6. hist. c. 32.
Frisingensis quite contrary to his own meaning, as though he had (...) Pope
Gregory the seventh for it, whereas he condemns that cause of the Emperor,
Otho Frisingensis abused.
and commends highly the Pope for his constancy in punishing the notorious
intolerable faults of the said Henry. (...) (says he) semper in Ecclesiastico
rigore constantissimus fuit: Hildebrand was ever the most constant in (...) the
rigor of Ecclesiastical (...). l. 6. c. 36.
discipline. And (...) in this very Chapter here alleged by T. M. Inter onnes
Sacerdotes and Romanos (...) (...) zeli and authoritatis fuit: he was among all
the Priests and Pops that had been of the Roman Sea of most principal zeal
and authority. How different is this judgment of Frisingensis from the censure
of T. M. who now after five hundred years past, compares the cause of Pope
Gregory, to that of Pirates, thieves, and murderers, and so cites our (...)
Frisingensis as though he had favored him in this impious assertion. Can any
thing be more fraudently alleged? Is this the assurance (...) his upright
conscience, whereof he braggeth to his Majesty?

37. But the next fraud or impudency or rather impudent impiety is that which
ensues within four The 8. example of Lamb. Scafnaburgensis.
lines after in these words: Pope Gregory the seventh (says your
Chronographer) was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italy, for that he had
defamed the Apostolic Sea by Symony, and (...) itall crimes, and then cites
for proof her of Lambertus Schafnaburg. anno (...). As if this our
Chronographer had related this as a thing of truth, or that it were approved by
him, and not rather as a slanderous objection cast out by his Adversaries that
followed the part of Henry the Emperor. Let any man read the place, and year
here cited, and if he be a modest man, he will blush at such shameless dealing.
For that no Author of that time does more earnestly defend the cause and
virtuous life of Pope Hildebrand, then this man, whose words are: Sed apud
omnes sanum aliquid sapientes luce clarius constabat falsa esse quae
diceba^tur: Nam and Papa tam (...). (...). in histor. Germaniae an. 1077. sub
finem.
eximie tamque (...) vitam instituebat etc. But with all men of sound wisdom
it was more clear then the sun, that the things which were spoken against
Pope Hildebrand were false, for that the Pope did lead such an excellent and
Apostolic life, as the sublimity of his conversation did admit no least spot
of wicked rumor against him, he living in that great City and open concourse
of men, it could not have been hidden, if he had committed any unlawful thing
in his life: and moreover the signs and miracles, which by his prayers were
often times done, and his most fervent zeal for God in defense of
Ecclesiastical laws, did sufficiently defend him against the poisoned tongues
of his detractours. And again: Hildebrandi constantia, and inuictus aduersus
auaritiam animus omnia excludebat argumenta humanae fallaciae: the constancy of
Pope Hildebrand, and his invincible mind against the corruption of avarice,
did exclude all arguments of humane fallacy and deceit. So Lambertus.

38. And now let the Reader consider with what conscience and fidelity T. M.
has cited him for condemnation of Pope Hildebrand. He relates indeed, what
certain Noble men, Captains and others, that The submission of the Emperor
Henry the fourth to Pope Hildebrand at (...).
came with the Emperor to the Castle of Canusium, and would not have had him
made peace with the Pope in that place, said in their rage afterward, for
that against their Counsel he had submitted himself unto the said Pope, and
when a certain Bishop named Eppo, was sent to their Camp by the Pope, and
Emperor to inform them of the agreement and submission made: Fremere omnes
(says this Story) and saeuire verbis, and manibus caeperunt, Apostolicae
legationi irrisoriis (...) vbi (...).
exclamationibus obstrepere, conuitia and maledicta turpissima quaecunque furor
suggessisset irrogare. All of them began to fret and wax fierce, both in words
and casting their hands, and with scornful outcries to contradict this
Apostolical legation sent unto them, and to cast upon the Pope all the most
foul reproaches and maledictions that fury could suggest unto them. Thus says
Lambertus: and then sets down the particular slanderous reproaches here
cited by T. M. which he approves not, but condemns as you have heard, and
highly commends not only the virtue but sanctity also of the Pope. And will
ever any man credit T. M. any more in any thing that he alleges, when this
conscienceles falsification is once discovered in him? yea though it were but
once throughout his whole book, it were sufficient to prove that he deals
not out of any faith or conscience at all.

39. If an enemy would discredit both Christ and Christian Religion, and say
your own Evangelists do recount foul things against him (as here this
Minister says our Historiographer does of Pope Gregory) A comparison
expressing the fraud of T.M.
and namely that he was accused by the Scribes and Pharisees for casting out
devils in the power of Beelzebub; for deceiving the people; for denying tribute
of the paid to Caesar; for moving sedition, and other like crimes, which our
Evangelists do recount indeed, but do condemn them also as false and
calumnious; were not this as good and faithful a manner of reasoning, as this
other of Thomas Morton out of Lambertus and Frisingensis against Pope
Hildebrand, who is by them both most highly commended as you have heard, and
his Adversaries condemned? Truly, if any man can show me out of all the
Catholic writers that be extant, English or other, that ever any one of them
used this shameful fraud in writing, where no excuse can free them from
malicious and witting falsehood, then will I grant that it is not proper to the
Protestant spirit alone. Hitherto I must confess that I never found it in any,
and if I should, though it were but once, I should hold it for a sufficient
argument not to believe him ever after. And this shall suffice for a taste only
of M. Mortons manner of proceeding. For that to prosecute al particulers would
require a whole volume, and by these few you may guess at the man's vain and
spirit in writing.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, REPRESENTING Some of the falsifications
which are uttered in the former Part of M. Mortons Reply, Which came to our
hands after our Answer made before in our second Chapter against his ten
Reasons.
ANd now albeit these false and fraudulent dealings laid open in the precedent
Part of this Chapter, be sufficient or rather superaboundant to descry this
Minister and his naked innocence, who in his Epistle to his Majesty, as before
has been touched calls himself A Minister of simple truth and upright
conscience; yet for more perfect complement of the same, I have thought good to
adioine also a second Part to this Chapter, and therein to draw to light some
number of his notorious untruths, corruptions, sleightes, falsifications and
calumniations uttered in the former Part of his Reply to the moderate Reader,
which Part not coming to my hands until I had made the answer which before
I have set down in the second Chapter of this Treatise against his Discovery,
I could not conveniently discuss the same particularly therein: but now by that
which here you shall see produced, you may easily guess how worthy a piece of
work it is, and what credit the man deserves that made it. And albeit the
breuity purposed by me in this place, permits not the examine of al, or of
the greater part; yet verbum sapienti sat est, the discreet Reader by a few
examples which demonstrate that the writer wants remorse of conscience in his
asseuerations, will easily see how far he is to be credited in all his
writings. Wherefore to the examine it self.

41. In the third page of his said Reply, he beginning to talk of the nature
of heresy, has these words: The first example of corruptions.
We may not be ignorant, first that seeing the nature of heresy is such, that
it is a vice proper to the mind, it may denominate the subject whatsoever an
Heretic, without obstinacy, which is only a perverse (...) of the will, and
therefore a man may be an Heretic though he be not obstinate: And for proof
of Vasq. disp. 126. c. 3.
this false doctrine, he cites in his margent Vasquez Iesuita, whose words
are: Malitia huius (...) intellectu, non in voluntate consummatur, the malice
of this sin of In 1 tomo.
heresy, is perfected or made consummate in the understanding, and not in the
will, which our Minister About the nature of heresy and pertinacy.
understanding not, and yet desirous, as in his preface to the Kings Majesty
he insinuates, to divide our tongues, and to make our writers seem contrary
the one to the other, has fondly slaundered the learned man Vasquez in this
place, by making him seem to be patron of this his absurd doctrine, that
heresy may bewithout obstinacy; whereas Vasquez in the very same disputation
here by him cited, expressly does impugn this doctrine and establishes the
contrary, defining heresy thus: Haeresis nihil aliud est quam error in rebus
(...) cum pertinacia, Heresy is Ibid. c. 1.
nothing else, but an error in matters of faith with obstinacy.

42. Which another learned man of the same school, by somewhat a more ample
definition declares thus: Heresy (says he) is an error contrary to the
Catholic faith, Valentia in 2. 2. qu. (...). punct. 1 (...). 4. summa par 2.
c. 1. and Doctores omnes 4 d. 13. and D. Tho. 2, 2 art. 2. Vide etia^ Clar. 24.
q. 3. Can. dixit Apostolus, and Can. Qui in Ecclesia.
whereunto a man that has professed the said faith in his baptism, does adhere
with an obstinate mind: Which definition he proves ex communi mente Doctorum
by the common consent of school Doctors. And finally not to stand upon a thing
so clear among us S. Thomas for decision heerof has these words: De ratione
Haeresis sunt duo, electio priuatae disciplinae, and pertinacia: Two things
are of the essence and intrinsecall nature of heresy, without which Heresy
cannot be, the one the choice or election of a particular doctrine, discipline,
or opinion, contrary to the doctrine of the universal Church; the other
pertinacy or obstinacy in defending the same, though the party know that it be
against the doctrine of the Church, without which knowledge and obstinacy there
can be no Heresy.

43. This is our Catholic doctrine about the nature of Heresy, to wit, that
it cannot be without obstinacy, which is so common and triuiall, as it is now
come into an ordinary proverb, to say: Well I may be in Obstinacy necessary
to heresy.
error, but Heretic I will never be, for that I will hold nothing
obstinatly. And as for the words of Vasquez: that the malice of Heresy is
consummated in the understanding, and not in the will; if our Minister had read
the other words immediately going before, he might perhaps have understood
Vasquez meaning, for they are these: Vt aliquis sit vere reus Haeresis etc. To
make a man be truly guilty of Heresy, it is not necessary that he be Vasquez
his discourse about pertinacy.
carried directly in his affection or will against the authority of the Church,
that is to say, it is not needful that he have an express will and purpose to
disobey or contradict the Church, but it is enough that he do contradict the
same re ipsa, indeed, knowing that opinion which he defends to be against the
authority of the said universal Church, albeit he be not induced to this
belief with a direct will to impugn the Church, but either by desire of glory,
or other inducement: so as indeed the malice of this sin is consummated in
the understanding and not in the will.

44. This is the discourse and doctrine of Vasquez in this place about the
nature and essence of Heresy, wherein he does not exclude either the
understanding, or will, but includes them both expressly: for that as there
must be knowledge, which appertains to the mind or understanding, so must
there be choice with obstinacy, which belongs to the will and affection; but
his scholastical consideration is, in which of these two powers of our soul
this sin of Heresy receaueth her consummation. For better explication thereof,
let us use this example: If a man should hold or believe an erroneous
proposition contrary to the doctrine of the Catholic Church, as for example,
that there were but one nature in Christ, not knowing it to be against the
Catholic Church, it were How (...) is co^summated in the understanding and
not in the will.
false in it self, and an error in his understanding, but not Heresy, except
also by act of his will he should choose to hold it with resolution and
obstinacy, even after that he knows the same to be against the doctrine of
the said Church, for then this knowledge (says Vasquez) that it is against the
Church, makes it perfect and consummate Heresy, albeit the matter pass not to
a further act of will, to wit. that he chooses expressly to contradict the
authority of the Church therein, which should be a greater sin, but yet is not
necessary, for that the perfect nature of Heresy is consummated, by knowing
that it is against the Church; and for that this notice or knowledge belongs
to the understanding, therefore Vasquez holds, that the last perfection or
consummation of this sin, is in the understanding, and not in the will, not
meaning to exclude thereby obstinacy of the will (as ignorantly T.M. does, when
he says we may not be ignorant:) but to show in what power of the mind, the
last perfection and consummation of this heinous sin consists, to wit, that
a man may be a perfect and consummate Heretic, by holding obstinatly any
opinion against the doctrine of the Church, after we once know it to be
against the said Churches doctrine, though we have not that further malice also
of express will, and purpose, to contradict thereby the said Church, but only
we hold the same, for that the opinion pleases us, or is profitable, or
honorable to us, or thereby to contradict another, or some such like inducement,
according Aug. l. de vtil. credend. ad Honor.
to those words of S. Augustine to Honoratus: Haereticus est qui alicuius
temporalis commodi, and maxim gloriae principatusque sui gratia, falsas ac
nouas opiniones, vel gignit vel sequitur: An Heretic is he, who in respect of
some temporal commodity, but especially for his own glory and pre-eminence,
does beget or follow false and new opinions.

45. The same S. Augustine also against the Donatistes Aug. l. 4. contr. Donat.
c. 16.
proposes this example: Constituamus (says he) aliquem sentire de Christo
quod Photinus etc. Let us imagine one to think of Christ, as Photinus the
Heretic did, persuading himself, that it is the Catholic faith etc. istum
nondu^ Haereticum dico (says he) nisi manifestata sibi doctrina Catholicae
fidei resistere maluerit and illud quod tenebat elegerit. I do not yet say
that this man is an (...), S. Augustines explication of the whole matter.
until after that the doctrine of the Catholic faith being opened unto him,
he shall choose notwithstanding to resist, and to hold by choice, that which
before he held by error. In which words S. Augustine does evidently declare,
how necessary both knowledge and will are unto Heresy, and consequently how
absurd and ridiculous the assertion of M. Morton is, that Heresy being a vice
proper to the understanding, may denominate the subject whatsoever an
Heretic, without obstinacy of will. For (...) we grant with all Deuines, that
Heresy is in the understanding as in her subject (and so is faith also that is
her opposite) and further that her last perfection and consummation is from the
foresaid knowledge in the understanding, as Vasquez does explane it: yet does
not Vasquez or any Divine else exclude the necessity of pertinacity also, and
election in the will, and consequently both his words and meaning have been
evidently falsified, and calumniated by T. M. and so much of this first charge,
whereby you may see what books might be made against him, if we would follow
his steps in all his fraudulent traces. But yet let us see somewhat more in
this very leaf and page.

46. For within few lines after he begins his 2. Example about true Religion.
third Chapter with these words: That is only true Religion (say your Romish
Doctors) which is taught in the Romish Church, and therefore whosoever
mainteineth any doctrine condemned in that Church, must be accounted an
obstinate Heretic. And in the Cuner de offic. Princip. cap. 13.
margent he cites Cunerus, alleging his Latin words thus: Haec est
Religionis sola ratio, vt omnes intelligant, sic simpliciter esse credendum
atque loquendum, quemadmodum Romana Ecclesia credendum esse docet ac praedicat:
Which words if they were truly alleged out of the Author, yet were they not
truly translated: for if by only true Religion (a corrupt translation of
Religionis solaratio) be applied to particular positions and articles of
Religion; then S. August. in Psa. 54. in verba Psalm. In multis (...) mecum,
and Epist. 48.
we grant that such true Religion may be also among Heretics, and not only
taught in the Roman Church, for that, as S. Augustine well notes, Heretics
also hold many articles of true Catholic Religion: but here the corruption
and falsification goes yet further, and it is worthy the noting, for that
Cunerus having (...) largely against the insurrections and Rebellions of those
of Holland and Zeland for cause of Religion, and other pretenses against their
lawful King, takes upon him in his thirteenth Chapter, to lay down some
means how in his opinion those dissentions may be compounded, giving this
title to the said Chapter: Quae sit vera componendi dissidij (...), what is the
true way of composing this dissension, and then after some discourse sets
down this conclusion: Haec igitur in Religione concordiae sola est ratio, vt
omnes pio ac simplici animo, pure and integre sic sapiant, viuant, loquantur,
ac praedicent, (...). (...) egregiously perverted.
quemadmodum sancta Catholica Romana Ecclesia, quae Dei prouidentia magistra
veritatis Orbi praeposita est, docet, loquitur, and praedicat: This therefore in
Religion is the only way of concord, that all men with a pious and simple
mind, do wholly and purely conceive, live, speak, and preach as the holy
Catholic Roman Church, which God by his providence has given for a teacher
of truth unto the whole world, does teach, speak, and preach.

47. And now consider you this dealing, that whereas B. Cunerus says haec est
in Religione cocordiae sola ratio, this is the only way of concord in Religion,
this man alleges it in his margent, haec est Religionis sola ratio, this is
the only way of Religion, as though concord and Religion were al one; and then
by another trick of crafty translation in his English text that is only true
Religion, as though true Religion and the way or means to come to true
Religion were not different; and then for all the rest how it is mangled, and
how many words and sentences are put in by this Minister, which are none of
Cunerus, and how many of his altered, and put out, is easy for the Reader to
see by comparing the (...) o Latin textes before alleged and thereby to
consider how facile a matter it is for this fellow to divide In his Epistle to
the King.
our tongues: A course (says he) which I profess in all disputes, when he
deuideth and separateth the words from their Authors, and the sense from the
words, and the whole drift from them both: a very fine course, and fit for a
man of his profession. But let us proceed.

48. In the very next page, he going about to make 3. example
us odious by our severe censuring of Heretics, puts page 4.
down first these words of Alphonsus de Castro: He that understanding any
opinion to be expressly condemned by the De iusta pun. Haer. l. 1. c. 10.
Church, shall hold the same, is to be accounted an obstinate Heretic:
Whereupon M. Morton plays his pageant thus: What obstinate? It may be, some
do but doubtingly defend it, what will you judge of these? whereunto he
answers out of Azor: If he doubt thereof willingly he is certainly an
Heretic: But by our Ministers leave Azor adds more; Quoties quis voluntary
and pertinaciter de fide dubitat eo ipso est Azor corrupted.
haereticus, as often as a man does doubt willingly and obstinatly of his faith
he is thereby an Heretic, for that faith is a sure and certain assert of
mind unto those things that are to be believed; and he that willingly and
obstinatly doubts of the truth thereof, cannot have this firm and perfect
assent, and consequently has no faith during the time of this wilful and
obstinate doubting. And that you may understand of what importance this word
pertinaciter is, that this man cunningly so cutteth out of Azor his words, you
must know that he in the very same Chapter holds, that if a man doubt without
pertinacity, being ready to submit his judgment when he shall be instructed in
the truth, incurreth not Heresy at all. So as here the most substantial word
is left out, and craftily conveyed away by our deuider of tongues, whereby the
Author is made to say the quite opposite to that he says and protests.

49. It follows presently in the same text of T. M. 4. example
continuing his pleasant vain of playing with us: But it may be (says he)
that he which doubts is ignorant; will no ignorance excuse him? whereunto he
frames of himself this answer citing Tolet in the margent, affected ignorance
does argue him an obstinate Heretic: Which if you mark, does not answer the
demand, for he demands whether no ignorance at all does excuse him, and he
answers that affected ignorance does not excuse him, but does rather argue
him an Heretic. Now those that be learned do know, that there be diverse
sorts of ignorance, Tolet abused.
and of diverse degrees, whereof affected is the most culpable, so as this is
very impertine^t, for that albeit affected ignorance do not excuse him; yet
some other less faulty may do it. And this for the sense, but if we look
upon the words themselves of Tolet, cited by this man in the margent we shall
discover much more impertinency or impudency rather: for they are these:
Ignorantia crassa non excusat alique^ a pertinacia, gross Lib. 1. Just. Sacer.
c. 19
ignorance does not excuse a man from pertinacy. Now gross ignorance and
affected ignorance are two different things, which may be understood by this
example, that one may be ignorant of Catholic Religion by gross ignorance,
in that attending to worldly affairs, he does not care to inform himself, but
he is ignorant by affected ignorance, that does purposely fly to be informed;
so as here still our ignorant Minister either ex ignorantia crassa or
affectata, tells us quid pro quo, in translating affected ignorance, for
gross ignorance, and then again in Englishing non excusat aliquem a
pertinacia, does argue him an obstinate Heretic, for that it is one thing to
argue, and an other not to excuse. And whereas before T. M. held that pertinacy
apperteined not at all to the nature of Heresy, here contrary-wise he
translateth pertinacia, an obstinate Heretic, making it to signify both
substantive, and adjective, substance and quality. But yet further then this
you must note that in citing this sentence out of Tolet he cunningly
dissembleth the Authors assertion set down clearly not six lines before these
words: pertinacia necessaria est ad constituendum hominem Haereticum:
Pertinacy is necessary to make a man an Heretic, being the quite contrary
proposition to that of this man before set down in the first example of his
corruptions in this former Part of his Reply.

50. But the greatest corruption in this page (and it is notable indeed) is of
the words sense and meaning of our learned Countreyman Sayer, of whom T. M.
writes thus: In brief our Countreyman upon this case of conscience says; an
obstinate Heretic is as well he that is presumed so to be, as he that is
manifest, and again in (...). example
the same page: seeing therefore that (as your great Casuist has said) every
one presumed to be an Heretic, is taken for an obstinate, who can be free
from your censures? etc. And then cites in the margent these words of Sayer:
Contumax Sayer. in casib. cons. l. 1. c. 9.. 30.
Haereticus est tam praesumptus quam manifestus: An obstinate Heretic is
as well he that is presumed to be so, as he that is manifest or known for such,
which may seem to be a great injustice in our doctrine. But if I do not show
this devise to be one of the most manifest A notable falsificatio of Sayer.
and faithles deceiptes and corruptions that ever any honest man put in paper
against his adversary, then let me be censured for to sharp a Reprehe^der.

51. For first Sayer has no such matter at all concerning obstinacy in Heresy,
his whole purpose being only to declare who may be excommunicated by a Judge
for contumacy in not appearing (which is a different thing from obstinacy or
pertinacy) and this whether he be either Heretic or Catholic; nay he
speaks either only or principally of Catholics, who do show contumacy in
any Court or tribunal, in not appearing or answering, according as they are
cited and summoned by a lawful Judge, and so he defines contumacy in these
words: Contumacia (says The definition of co^tumacy.
he) nihil aliud est quam inobedientia quaedam, qua ius dicenti non paretur:
Contumacy is nothing else but a certain disobedience, whereby he is not obeyed
that sits in judgment. So as here is no mention or meaning of obstinacy in
Heresy: and further he puts down two sorts of contumacy thus: Contumax
duobus modis esse potest, nimirum, manifestus and praesumptus; man may be
contumacious in two sorts or manners, either manifest or by presumption, and
he gives diverse examples of both, as namely, if a man cited do refuse openly
to appear, or obey his Judge, this man's contumacy or disobedience is public,
and manifest: but if he do not refuse, but by idle dilations or shifts
puts of or deludeth the Court, he is presumed to be contumacious, and so may
excommunication (if it be a spiritual Court) proceed against him, as if his
contumacy were manifest.

52. Now then what has all this to do with Contumax Haereticus tam
praesumptus quam manifestus? Has Sayer any such word or sentence? No truly, or
shall we think Thomas Morton to be so simple both in grammar, law, and
Deuinity, as that he does not know what difference The difference betvveene
co^tumacy and pertinacy.
there is between contumax and (...) whereof the one is a fault in obedience
toward our Superiors, as now has been showed; the other in tenacity of
opinion as before we have declared. Or if Thomas Morton will not confess this
ignorance, but that he know the difference of the words, and of their
significations, sense, and applications here used by the Authors, then must he
confess wilful deceit in using one for the other, and much more in twice
translating the words contumax Haereticus in this one page, for an obstinate
Heretic, and much more yet in foisting in the word Haereticus, which Sayer
has not; and most of all in making his Reader believe that contumax,
praesumptus and manifestus does signify in Sayer one that upon presumption only
is judged to be as obstinate an Heretic, as if he were manifest, whereof Sayer
neither spoke nor meant; but in a quite different sense (not appertaining to
Heresy at all) says, that a man may Manyfalse shifts.
be condemned as contumacious by presumption, if he appear not, or uses
sleightes, diuerticles, or delays, as well as if openly he refused to appear.
Now then consider what a Minister of truth this is, and of what naked
innocence, thus perfidiously to delude his Reader, and yet to come forth after
all with this dissembled Hypocrisy: Now let me be beholding unto you (says he)
for an Page 4.
answer. And so I think he is, but if not sharp enough for so shameful an
abuse, it may be amended and augmented herafter upon like occasions, which
every where are offered throughout his whole book; and there were no end if I
would answer him to all.

53. And this now is only in one sole leaf, and no less may be said about
another, that within some pages 6. example
after ensues, if we would stand thereon, to wit, where he takes upon him to
defend John Calvin from the imputation of Arrianisme, objected by the moderate
Answerer, not only out of our Catholic writers, but from chief Protestant
Authors themselves: about which point, for that I shall be enforced to make a
particular Treatise in the third Part of this Chapter, I will here let the
most Part of that matter pass and examine only a piece thereof, to wit, how
Calvin does deny the Son of God to be Deum (...) Deo, lumen de lumine, God of
God, and light of light, as the first general Council of Niece did decree
against the Arrians, Page 20.
whereof T. M. writes thus: Your Jesuit Bellarmine reckons up Calvin and Beza
to be of this opinion, and Whether Calvin denied Christ to be God of God.
I think he says truly etc. But now this doctrine being examined with the
eye, not ouercast with the web of prejudice, does in the judgment of your
said famous Bellarmine seem Catholicall, because they deny not the Son to be
from the Father but they deny the essence of the Godhead to have any
generation, this likewise is not the Part of common modesty, to blindfold your
self, and strike you know not whom.

54. And who would not think here upon this asseueration of T. M. but that
Cardinal Bellarmine were contrary to himself in accusing Calvin, and yet
justifying his doctrine: you shall see then how many sleightes here are used
for deceiving the Reader. First Bellarmine Bellar. l. 2 de Christo cap. 19.
begins his Treatise of this matter thus in the place cited by T. M. Est
noua quaedam Haeresis etc. There is a new kind of Heresy sprung up in our
days, which I know not whether it consist in the thing it self, or in words
only: Genebrard does of purpose confute the same in his books of the blessed
Trinity, calling it the Heresy of Autotheans, that is to say, of such as do
hold Christ to be God of himself, and not of his Father, and both he and Bishop
Lindan and Petrus Canisius do ascribe the same unto Calvin, of which error
does manifestly follow, that either the Son is not distinguished personally
from the Father, which is the Heresy of Sabellius, or that he is distinguished
in nature, which goes near to the heresy of the Manichies. So Bellarmine. Who
as you see holds the proposition to be Heretical, that Christ is God of
himself, being understood simply as the ancient Church understood it, and
namely the Council of Niece, when they set down the contrary doctrine as true
and necessary to salvation, to believe that Christ is God of God, and light of
light.

55. But now Calvin and Beza, (as also M. Willet, and Doctor Fulke their
scholars) in a particular sense (says our Minister) do deny Christ to be God
of God, to wit, that the essence of his Godhead has no generation, though as
he is Son, and the second person in Trinity, he is by generation from his
Father; which doctrine he says our Bellarmine does hold for Catholicall, whose
words he alleges in the margent thus: Bellarmins wor des fraudulently
alleged.
Dum rem ipsam excutio, non facile audeo pronunciare illos in errore fuisse,
while I do examine well the thing it self, I dare not presume to pronounce
them to have been in error, to wit Calvin and Beza; whereas Bellarmins words
are, dum rem ipsam excutio, and Caluini sententias diligenter considero, non
facile audeo pronunciare illum in hoc errore fuisse, while I examine the matter
it self, and diligently consider Caluins opinions, I do not easily presume to
pronounce him to have been in this error, to wit in the particular error or
heresy of Autotheans, set down and confuted by Genebrard, and in his sense
condemned expressly by the ancient Catholic Church, for denying Christ to
be, and to have his essence from the Father; but yet though in some sense it
seems to Bellarmine, that Calvin may be excused in this private and
particular meaning of his, yet not absolutely, as T. M. would make his Reader to
think, by striking out cu^ningly the particle hoc (this error) and leaving
the word error in common, as though Bellarmine had excused him from all kind
of error, which is most false, for that presently after he both impugneth of
purpose and confuteth by many arguments his manner of speech, as Heretical in
this behalf.

56. Restat (says he) vt modum loquendi Caluini qui dicit (...) a se habere
essentiam simpliciter esse repudiandum, and contrario Caluins manner of speech
(...) by Bellarmine.
modo loquendum esse demonstremus etc. It remains that we do demonstrate
Caluins manner of speech, that says the Son to have his essence of himself,
is simply to be rejected, and that we must speak in a quite contrary manner,
to wit, that the Son has not only his person, but essence also from the
Father, and so is God of God and light of light, as the Council of Niece
declared; and this he proves by four ways: first, Quia pugnat cum verbo Dei,
for that Caluins manner of speech is opposite to the word of God etc. Pugnat
secundo cum Conciliis, and secondly it is repugnant to the manner of speech of
ancient Counsels, as the Nicene and others: Pugnat tertio cum doctrina Patrum,
thirdly it is contrary to the doctrine of the old Fathers: fourthly it agrees
with the speech of the old Arrians, and other such proofs, which Bellarmine
does prosecute at large, confirming each one of these members by diverse
examples and instances, and that Calvin spoke Heretically in favor of the
Arrians in this behalf.

57. So as the cosenage here of striking out ( hoc) out of Bellarmins words,
making him to say non audeo pronunciare illos in errore fuisse, instead of
illum in hoc (...) fuisse, though it be small in sound of words: yet in
substance is it much: for that thereby T. M. would make his Reader believe, that
Bellarmine cleereth Calvin and Beza from all sorts of error in this point,
and for that purpose turns illum into illos, and hoc errore, into errore that
is to say him into them and this error into any error at all: whereas
Bellarmine though in one sense he excuse him; yet absolutely does he condemn
him, as you have heard; and no man can deny but that his Latin words were
here fraudulently and perfidiously alleged and mangled by T. M. for that he
could not do it but wittingly, and of purpose; and yet forsooth this man will
not Equivocate, as he says, for a world, though lie he will manifestly for
much less as you see. And so much of this until we come to examine the matter
more largely afterward in the third Part of this Chapter.

58. And here I will pass over many things that 7. example
might be noted out of the sequent pages mamely 30. 31. 34. where he does so
pervert, and abuse both the Page 30. 31. 34.
words, discourse, and sense of diverse Authors alleged by him, as is not
credible to him, that does not compare them with the books themselves, from
whence they are taken. As for example Royardus the Franciscane Friar is brought
in with commendation of an honest Friar, for that he says, that a King when
(...). Sermon. 1. in Domin. 1. Aduent.
he is made by the people, can not be deposed by them again at their pleasure,
which is the same doctrine that all other Catholics do hold, so long as he
contains himself within the nature of a King, for that Royard. Sermon. 2. in
Domin. 23 post Pentecost.
otherwise (which is the question in co^trouersy) Royard himself says parendum
(...) non esse, that he is not to be obeyed, but this is not to be judged by
the people, and their mutiny, as Protestant Doctors teach.

59. And to like effect he cites a discourse, though most brokenly alleged
out of Bishop Cunerus, writing against the Rebels of Flanders, and testifying
that it lies not in the peoples hand to reject their Prince at their pleasure,
as those Protestant subjects did; and Royardus and Cune nerus abused.
then M. Morton, as though he had achieued some great victory, triumphs
exceedingly, saying: That for so much as Friars in our Counsels have no voice,
but only Bishops, he has brought forth a Bishop against us, whom for that the
moderate Answerer had named a little before, this man scornfully tells him
Caesarem appellasti, ad Caesarem (...). 25.
ibis, you have appealed to Cunerus, and now he shall be your Judge against you.
And is not this great folly and insolency? for that Cunerus in all that his
book says nothing against us, but altogether for us, to repress the
Rebellion in Flanders, as has been signified. And secondly notwithstanding all
this exact obedience, which both he and we prescribe, and require at subjects
hands toward their lawful Princes, he has a special Chapter which is the
third after this alleged Cap. (...).
here by T. M. wherein he does expressly, and largly prove that in some cases
when Princes fall into intolerable disorders, there is authority left in the
commonwealth, and Church of Christ to restrain, and remove them. What
falsehood is this then to allege Authors thus directly against their own
sense, meaning, and whole drift? does this become a Minister of simple truth?
Is this for a man that so much abhors Equivocation?

60. I let pass as trifles in this very place (but yet such as show a guilty
mind and meaning,) that he (...). example
citing the book of Alexander Carerius, a Doctor of the Canon law in Padua,
which he wrote of late de Potestate Romani (...), puts in of his own contra
huius temporis Haereticos against the Heretics of this time, which are not in
the title of that book; and then whereas the said Author naming or citing many
other writers to be of his opinion, does say nuperrime vero Celsus Mancinus in
tract. de Iuribus Principatuum etc. and last of all Celsus Mancinus does hold
the same in a certain Treatise of the rightes of principalities; this man to
frame unto himself some matter of insultation, turns Page 14.
vero into vere, and then plays ridiculously upon his own fiction in these
words: Carerius cites another called Celsus, by interpretation high or lofty,
and therefore insignes him with vere Celsus, as truly so named, and so truly he
may be if we judge him by the loftines of his style, and conclusion. So he. And
do you see this folly? Or will you think it rather folly then falsehood, that
could not discern between vero and vere? Or not be able to judge by the
contexture of Carerius his speech it self, that it could not by apt
construction be vere if he had lighted upon Carerius corrupted
a corrupt copy, as he could not; for that there is but one, and that has
very plainly vero, and consequently all this Commentary of Thomas (...) is out
of his own invention. And where now is the assurance of his upright conscience
protested to his Majesty in his Epistle dedicatory? where is his simplicity in
Christ Jesus? where his naked innocence? Can this be ignorance? can this be
done but of purpose, and consequently by a guilty conscience? what may the
hearer believe of all he says, when every where he is found entangled with
such foolish treachery? But let us proceed.

61. There follows within two leaves after a heap not only of falshoodes,
but also of impudencies. 9. example
For whereas his Adversary the moderate Answerer had said, that not only Kings,
but Popes also for Heresy, by the Canon laws were to be deposed, he Answers
Page 38.
thus: The Authors of the doctrine of deposing Kings in case of Heresy, do
profess concerning Popes, that they cannot possibly be Heretics, as Popes;
and Bellar l. 4 de Romans Pont. c. 2. Carer. l. 1. cap (...).
consequently cannot be deposed; Not says Bellarmine, by any power
Ecclesiastical or te^porall, no not by all Bishops assembled in a Council:
Not, says Carerius though he should do any thing prejudicial to the
universal Azor. (...). 5. cap. 14.
State of the Church: Not says Azorius, though he should neglect the Canons
Ecclesiastical, or pervert the Laws of Kings: Not says Gratians gloss,
though Gratian. Canon Si Papa. did. 40.
he should carry infinite multitudes of souls with him to hell: and these
forenamed Authors do avouch for the confirmation of this doctrine, the
universal consent of Romish Deuines and Canonistes, for the space of an
hundred years. So he. And in these words are as many notorious and shameless
lies, as there are assertions, and Authors named by him for the same.

62. For first the four writers which he mentions there in the text, to wit,
Bellarmine, Carerius Azorius and Gratian, do expressly, clearly, and
resolutly hold the contrary to that he affirms out of them, for that they
teach and prove by many arguments, that Popes that Popes may fall into Heresy
and be de posed for the same.
both may fall into Heresies, and for the same be deposed by the Church, or
rather are ipso facto deposed, and may be so declared by the Church, and their
words here guilfully alleged by T. M. as sounding to the contrary, are
manifestly spoken, and meant of manners only, and not of faith, that is to say,
if they should be of naughty life, yet have they no Superiors to depose them
for that (being immediately under Christ) but for Heresy they may be deposed,
which in steed of all the rest, you may read largly handled in Bellarmine, in
his second book de Pontific. cap. 30. where among other proofs he cites this
very Canon of Gratian here mentioned by T. M. saying: Haereticum Papam posse
iudicari, express habetur Canon. Si Papadist. 40. It is expressly determined
in the Canon Si Papa, that a Pope falling into Heresy may be judged, and
deposed by the Church; and more, that in the eight general Council, and
seventh Session, Pope Honorius was deposed for Heresy. So Bellarmine. And the
same doctrine hold the other two cited by our Minister: so as here be four
notorious lies together, that by no shift or tergiuersation can be avoided,
for that T. M. could not but manifestly see, that he alleged these four
Authors quite contrary to their express words, drift and meaning, what then
will you say of this fellow, and his manner of writing? shall he be credited
herafter?

63. But yet not contented with this he cites other four or five Authors
besides in the margent, to wit Gregor. de Val. analys. l. 8. c. 3 Salm. com. in
Gal. 2. disp 24.
Gregorius de Valentia, Salmeron, Canus, Stapleton and Costerus, all which in
the very places by him cited, are expressly against him. And is not this
strange dealing? Let Canus that goes in the midst, speak for all, who
having proved first at large the opposite Canus l. 6 Loc. Theo c. 8.
proposition to T. M. to wit, that Popes may fall into Heresy, and be deposed
for the same, concludes thus Stap. doct. Princ. l. 6. initio.
his discourse; Non est igitur negandum (says he) quin Summus Pontifex
Haereticus esse possit: It cannot therefore be denied, Coster. de Pontif. in
Enchirid cap. 3.
but that the Pope may be an Heretic, adding presently: VVherof one or two
examples may be given, but none at all, that ever Pope though he fell into
Heresy, did decree the same for the whole Church; by which last words of Canus
is discovered the ridiculous fallacy of T. M. alleging here out of our
foresaid writers, that Popes cannot possibly be Heretics, as Popes, and
consequently cannot be Though Popes may fall into Heresy yet shall they not be
per mitted to decree it.
deposed: Whereof they say the flat contrary, as you have heard, that Popes may
be Heretics as Popes, and consequently may be deposed; but yet that God, as
Popes, will never permit them to decree any Heretical doctrine to be held by
the Church.

64. Consider then I pray you what a fellow this Minister is in abusing thus so
many Authors so manifestly; but especially do you note the impudency of his
conclusion: And these forenamed Authors (says he) do Page 38.
avouch for confirmation of this doctrine, the universal consent of Romish
Deuines and Canonistes for the space of an hundred years. So he. But I would
ask him of what doctrine? that Popes cannot be Heretics, or be deposed for
the same? you have heard them now protest the contrary, and you may read it in
the places here cited, out of all the nine several writers before mentioned,
who by their express contrary doctrine do prove Thomas Morton to have made
nine several lies against them in this his assertion, and now the tenth and
most Ten lies made at one time.
notorious of all, is this his conclusion; That they do avouch for
confirmation of that which he obiecteth the universal consent of Romish
Deuines and Canonistes for the space of an hundred years; which besides the
manifest falsity thereof, seen in their own words, and works here by me
cited, it contains also great folly, and simplicity to say, that they avouch
the consent of Romish Deuines and Canonistes for an hundred years; for that
their proofs are much elder, and Bellarmine among the rest, for deposition of
Pops does cite the eight general Council vnvnder Pope Adrian the second, for
above six hundred years gone, and the Canon Si Papa, out of our Countreyman S.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz and Martyr, above seven hundred years gone, and
collected by Gratian, and confirmed by Popes, as Part of the Canon law above
four hundred years gone: So as to say that now they avouch Authors of an
hundred years old against that which for so many hundred years before was
held and established, is mere folly or rather foolish malice.

65. And albeit I have not yet passed over the first half of the first Part of
this first Treatise of his, and in (...). Example.
this also have pretermitted willingly many other examples that might have been
alleged, yet finding my self weary, to prosecute any further so large a
labyrinth of these intricate iuggling tricks, used by this Minister in his
whole corpse of citations, with do consist principally thereof; I mean to draw
to an end adding only one example more in this place, about a matter more
nearly concerning our argument, which is of reconciliation of Protestants with
Catholics in points of Religion, which T. M. willing to accuse Page 55.
Jesuits, as the only hinderers thereof writes thus: Only by the insolency
(says he) of Jesuits all such hope of reco^ciliation is debarred, as is
plain by Bellarmine; for whereas Bellar. l. de Laicis cap. 19.
that most grave and learned Cassander honored of two Emperors for his
singular learning and piety, did teach that Emperors should endeavor a
reconciliatio^ betwixt Cassand. l. de (...) pij viri.
Papists and Protestants, because (says he) Protestants hold the articles of
the Creed, and are true members of the Church, although they dissent from us in
some particular opinions; the grand Jesuit does answer, that this judgment of
Cassander is false, for that Catholics cannot be reconciled with Heretics,
Heretically meaning Protestants. So he.

66. But here I would ask him why he had not uttered also that which
immediately follows in Bellarmine, that John Calvin had written a book
against this error of Cassander, and that among Catholic writers Johannes a
Louanio had done the same, and showed that it was an old Heresy of Appelles, as
Eusebius testifies, and of other Heretics afterward under Zeno the
Emperors, named Pacifiers, as Euagrius testifies, Eusebius. 5. Hist. c. 13.
Euagr. l. 3. Hist. c. 14. and 30.
who held that Catholics and Heretics might be composed together: why (I
say) did T. M. conceal this? As also the many, great, and strong arguments,
that Bellarmine alleges to prove his assertion? And why would he lay all the
fault of not agreeing, upon the insolency of Jesuits, seeing Johannes a
Louanio was no Jesuit, nor Calvin neither.

67. But to leave this, and to come to the thing it self, and to take some more
particular view of the false behavior of Thomas (...) in citing this
authority: It is strange that in so small a matter, he would show so great want
of truth, or true meaning as here he does. For first, to pretermit that he
goes about to deceive his Reader, by the opinion of gravity and learning in
George Cassander of Bruges, who was but a Grammarian in his days; and that he
was a Catholic, who is censured for an Heretic primae classis in the Index
of prohibited books, and not only for Heresies of this time, but also, quod
dicit spiritum sanctum minus aduocandum, and adorandum esse; for that he says
that the holy Cassander what manner of man he was.
Ghost is less to be called upon or adored etc. as the Index expurgatorius
testifies; besides all this (I say) he corrupts manifestly in the sentence
before alleged, the words, and plain meaning of his Author, to wit, Index
expurg. in (...). Cassand.
Bellarmine, from whom he cites Cassanders judgment: for thus they lie in
him: Tertius error (says he) est Georgij De officio pij vi ri. fol. 314.
Cassandri in libro De officio pij viri, vbi docet debere Principes inuenire
rationem pacis inter Catholicos, Lutheranos etc. Sed interim dum non inueniunt,
debere (...) vnicuique suam fidem, modo omnes recipiant Scripturam and Symbolum
Bellar. l. de laicis cap. 19.
Apostolicum: Sic enim omnes sunt vera Ecclesiae membra, licet in
particularibus dogmatibus dissentiant.

68. The third error is of George Cassander in the book Of the office of a
pious man where he teaches that Princes ought to seek out some means of
peace, betwixt Catholics, Lutheranes, Caluinistes, and other sects of our
time, but in the mean space, whiles they find no such means, they ought to
permit every one to follow his own particular faith, so as all do receive the
Scripture, and common Creed of the Apostles, for so al are true members of the
Church, albeit they disagree among themselves in particular doctrines. These
are Bellarmins words. Now let us see how they are mangled by M. Morton, both
in Latin and English, as by him that has the notablest talent therein,
notwithstanding his solemn protestations to the contrary, that ever I read in
my life.

69. He puts down first the Latin words in his margent thus: Debent
Principes inuenire rationem pacis inter Catholicos, Lutheranos, (...); qui
omnes dum Symbolum tenent Apostolicum, vera sunt membra Ecclesiae, licet a
nobis in particularibus dissentiant. Princes ought to seek a means of peace
between Catholics, Lutheranes, Caluinistes; all which, for so much as they
hold the Apostolic Creed, are true members of the Church, albeit they dissent
from us in some particular opinions. And here now you see first to be omitted
cunningly and wilfully by this crafty Minister the words of much moment, that
whiles Princes do not find a fit mean of peace, they ought to permit all to
live according to their particular faith, which sentence of his grave and
learned Cassander, not seeming to himself allowable in our English State, or to
his own Brethren the English Caluinistes, that now having gotten the
Cassanders judgment not allowed by English Protestants.
government, will suffer no other Religion but their own, thought best to
suppress and cut them quite out: Secondly in steed of the condicionall speech
used by Cassander, modo omnes recipiant Scripturam etc. So all (...) receive
the Scripture and Apostolical Creed, he puts it down with a causatiue
clause, Qui omnes dum Symbolum tenent etc. All which sects because they do
hold the Articles of the Creed, are true members of the Church, leaving out the
word Scripture, as you see and perverting the other wholly in sense. For who
will not hold it absurd, that Catholics, Lutherans, Caluinistes, and other
sects of our time, though in words they do admit both Scripture and
Apostolical Creed, yet differing in sense, and so many doctrines as they do,
are all to be held notwithstanding for true members of one, and the self same
Church? Can any thing be more ridiculous then this?

70. Thirdly he does most notably cogge in thrusting in the words a nobis,
from us, which are not in the original, meaning thereby to make Cassander to
seem a Catholic, and to speak in the behalf of Catholics, which is plain
cosenage: and to this end also he leaves out dogmatibus; and finally you see
that he shapeth every thing to his own purpose, and by making Cassander, as a
Catholic, seem to wish and endeavor this union, and Bellarmine to reject
it; he would confirm his former calumniation, that only by the insolency of
Jesuits all such hope is debarred.

71. And thus much for the corruption of the Latin text: but his English has
other corruptions also, according The (...) tes of his English (...).
to his ordinary custom. For first he translateth Debent Principes, that
Emperors should endeavor a reconciliation, to confirm thereby his former
vanity, Cassander was so great a man with Emperors, as he talks not but to
Emperors: Secondly he translateth Catholicos, Lutheranos, Caluinistas etc.
which words and (...) comprehend all other sects of our time, as Anabaptists,
Arrians, Trinitarians, Hussites, Picardians and the like, he translateth them
(I say,) Papists and Protestants, as though all those sects of our time were
to be comprehended under the name of Protestants of the English faith, or as
though Cassander if he were a Catholic, as here he is pretended, would call
us (...) Thirdly whereas in his own Latin here set Qui omnes dum Symbolum
(...) etc. All which, to wit Catholics, Lutherans, Caluinistes, and other
Sectaries, whiles they hold the Apostolical Creed, are true members of the
Church, he does English it thus, because Protestants hold the Articles of the
Creed, and are true members of the Church, excluding Catholics from believing
the said Articles, or being true members, which in his own Latin (and that of
Bellarmines) also are included: and fourthly is the corruption although they
dissent from us in some particular opinions; which in Bellarmine is, although
they dissent among themselves in particular doctrines: and finally the words
by him cited of Bellarmins judgment, falsa est haec sententia Cassandri; non
(...) enim Catholici reconciliari cum Haereticis, Bellarmines opinion falsified.
are not so in Bellarmine, but these, potest facile refelli (...) (Cassandri)
sententia: primum enim non possunt Catholici, Lutherani, and Caluinistae eo
modo conciliari etc. This sentence (of Cassander) may easily be refelled; first
for that Catholics, Lutherans, and Caluinistes (for example) can not so be
reconciled as Cassander appoints, to wit, by admitting only the words of the
Creed, for that we differ in the sense, and sometimes in the articles
themselves, as in that descendit ad inferos, he descended into hell; and in
like manner, we agree not about the sense of those other articles, I believe
the Catholic Church and Communion of Saints, remission of sins etc. So
Bellarmine. All which this fellow omitteth.

72. And so you see there is no truth or sincerity with him in any thing:
neither can these escapes be ascribed The conclusion.
any way to oversight, error, mistaking, or forgetfulness, but must needs be
attributed to wilful fraud, and malicious meaning, purposly to deceive, as
the things themselves do evidently declare, for which cause, I shall leave him
to be censured by his own Brethren, but especially by his Lord and Master,
for so notable discrediting their cause by so manifest false manner of
proceeding; and yet for that there is one example more, that remains within
the compass of these few Pages by us examined, that draws a longer sequel
after it, then is fit to weary the Reader withal, without some breathing, we
shall reserve the same to a third Part of this Chapter which now ensues.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS CHAPTER, CONTAINING A CONTROVERSY: Whether Calvin did
favor Arrianisme, or no? With diverse sleightes of Tho. Morton about the same.
ANd now albeit these examples before rehearsed, do sufficiently declare the
man's humor against whom we deal, who professing extraordinary sincerity in
all points, performs the same scarcely in any ( I profess, says he, that
simplicity in Christ, as never either in word, or writing to Equivocate:) yet
for an vpshot of this Chapter, I have thought good, to lay forth one example
more, to prove worse matter then Equivocation against him, as in the former
Parts of this Chapter we have already done, to wit, plain falsehood, and
faithles dealing. But here now is a particular controversy fallen out, by
occasion of certain sleightes, used by him in defense of John Calvin, against
the imputation of Arrianisme laid upon him, not only by our doctors, but much
more by sundry learned Protesta^t-writers of Germany, alleged in part by the
moderate Answerer in this place, and shifted of slightly by T. M. And albeit
we have treated somewhat of this matter before, in the second Chapter of this
book, yet the thing coming again in question now by reason of certain
corruptions used by T. M. therabout, I have thought it expedient to handle the
same more largely as a point of no small importance, which by the sequel you
will see.

74. First then T. M. taking upon him to answer the objection of his
Adversary, That Calvin was accused Page 17.
of Arrianisme, by the writings of diverse most learned Protestants of the
Lutheran and other sects in Germany, and having given this feeble answer
only, which before we have touched in our said second Chapter, and is here
repeated again, That it is not much to be regarded, what those
Protestant-writers in the spirit of opposition and contention did say of
Calvin: especially (says he) seeing as it may seem by their objections, their
judgment has been depraved by your maliguant Doctors.

75. After (I say) this general, but simple evasion (for if this kind of
answering may be admitted, that things are spoken or written out of the spirit
of Contradiction, what may not be answered?) he takes upon him for some show
of probability in this shift to set down the justification following. First
(says he) Tolet. com. in Joan. 14 and Mald. (...) locum.
concerning Arrianisme, Calvin as your Jesuits affirm, does plainly teach the
same, saying; That the Father is by a kind of excellency God, whereas both the
speech and sense is most orthodoxall, and agreing with the tenure of holy writ,
as your learned Jesuits confess: for the words of our Savior are plain
Joan. 14. My Father is greater then I, in the true sense, Is (say your
Jesuits, and truly) the Father greater, not in substance and being, but by
reason of birth and begetting; For their authority they produce an inquest of
Fathers to free Calvin in this point, who was so far from Arrianisme, that
your own Bellarmine does acknowledge that Calvin did impugn the doctrine of
the Arrians.

76. This is his defense, wherein you shall see how many subtilties, and shifts
there be used to defend Calvin from this impiety, who yet, as will appear, is
not defensible in this respect. For first where he says, That our Jesuits do
affirm John Calvin to teach Arrianisme, in that he holds that the Father is
by a kind of excellency God, citing for the same among others in the margent
both Bellarmine, and Gregorius de Valentia, his first corruption therein is,
that he cites not the words of their accusations, as they ly in the Authors,
Bell. praef. (...). de Christo. Sed iam. and l. de notis Eccles. c. 9. and de
Chri sto media. c. 3. and 8.
which in Bellarmine are these: Non veretur Valentino concedere, nomen Dei
KATH' HYPEROCHEN, id est, per excellentiam quandam, soli Patri attribui; Calvin
seared not to grant to Valentinus Gentilis (the Arrian Heretic) that the name
of God was attributed only to the Father by a certain excellency. And the same
obiecteth Greg. de Valent. l. (...) unit. and trinit. c. 9.
Gregory de Valentia in the same words: out of which you see, that T. M.
leaves out soli, to the Father alone, wherein consists the chiefest force of
the charge against Calvin: this then is the first trick. The second is, that
he would make his Reader believe, that for this only speech of Calvin our
Doctors, Bellarmine, Valentia, and others, had condemned him of Arrianisme,
whereas they not only for this, but for many other wicked speeches, as
blasphemous as this, do ascribe that crime unto him.

77. As for example, for that he writes Deum Patrem Diverse At (...) speeches
of Calvin.
genuisse quia voluit, that God the Father did beget his Son for that he
would, whereof ensues evidently that if Christ's eternal generation was
voluntary in respect of his Father, then was it not necessary, and natural,
and consequently he could not be God at all, nor equal to his Father, of whose
will his essence depended: Calvin. l. co^tr. Gentilem in Conf. 10. proth.
and again, That Christ as he is the second person of the Trinity, cannot
properly be called Creator of heaven and earth, and consequently not God, nor
equal to his Father. And yet further, Filium Dei subiectum esse Patri etiam
ratione diuinitatis, that the Son of God is subject to his Father, even
according to his divine nature. And Calu. l. 2.
yet more impiously, That Christ was a mediator between Instit. c. 14
God and Angels before the sin of Adam, and before his incarnation, and that
also according to his divinity: Out of which for that a mediator must needs be
inferior to him, to whom he uses mediation, all learned men infer that
Calvin in effect taught the doctrine of Arrius, who denied the equality of the
Son with the Father, and all this is objected by our Doctors in the places
quoted by T. M. himself. Whereby it is manifest that he did not of ignorance or
forgetfulness leave out these other accusations, mentioning only the first, but
of plain deceit, and wilful falsehood, for that he thought himself to have a
shift for answering the first, but not the other.

78. Yet Gregory de Valentia goes somewhat further, the charge of Gregory de
Valentia against Calvin.
adding moreover to these assertions of Calvin diverse other; as namely that he
did seek to eneruate, and make void, together with the Arrians, certain
excellent places of Scripture, which the ancient Catholic Fathers did urge
against them, as that of Joan. 10.
S. John; Ego and Pater vnum sumus, I and my Father are one, which Calvin says
is to be understood, of the unity of Calvin. l. 2. Institut. cap. 14.
consent and agreement, not of substance: whereupon one George Blandrata a
Trinitarian, founding himself (says Valentia) did in a certain public
disputation against the Disp. Alban. actio. 2. 2. dici.
Catholics, at Alba Iulia in Transiluania, allow and confirm this Arrian
interpretation of Calvin, saying:

We do remit our hearers to only John Calvin in this behalf who does every
where reprehend the old writers, for that they wrested these words, Ego and
Pater vnum sumus, to the unity of essence or substance. He notes also these
words in Calvin, Impropriam esse atque duram orationem illam Symboli Niceni,
Deus de Deo: that, that speech of the Creed of the Council of Nice, is an
improper and hard speech, God of God: Which speech notwithstanding S.
Athanasius did greatly urge (says he) in his days against the Arrians, whereof
we have treated somewhat before.

79. Now then may we see how fraudulently Thomas Morton has dealt in this
matter, by putting down slyly one reason only, for which our malignant Doctors
(as he calls them) do condemn Calvin for Arrianisme, and it is as if a
malefactor being condemned for many crimes, his Advocate would give out, that
he had been accused only of one, and then by diminishing that also make it none,
and so proclaim him quit in all. But for so much as he calls our said
Doctors malignant (from which crime I dare avouch them of all others most free)
and does say, That the judgment of the Lutheran Doctors, alleged by his
Adversary the moderate Answerer against him (namely of Doctor Philippus
Nicolaus, and of the Deane and university of Tubinga, who condemned Calvin for
the same crime of Arrianisme,) has been depraved, (as may seem, says he, by
their objections) by our said malignant Doctors; We shall here with as much
breuity as may be, bring forth the judgment of another renowned
Protestant-Doctor, concurring with the foresaid, he being a public Reader of
Deuinity in another famous University of Germany, namely Wittenberg, where
Martyn Luther himself once held the chair, as Calvin did in Geneua; and this
Doctor whose name is AEgidius Hunnius in a D. Aegidius Hunnius his book of
Calvin.
several Treatise set forth about a dozen years gone, entitled by him
Caluinus Iudaizans, and dedicated unto one David Pareus a principal Caluinian
Doctor, sets down the argument of his book thus, in the An. 1593.
Wittenberg. apud viduam Mathaei VVelaci.
first front thereof. This book is to show (says he) that John Calvin has
most detestably presumed to corrupt ( in favor of Jews and Arrians) the most
clear places, and testimonies of Scripture concerning the glorious Trinity,
deity of Christ, of the Holy Ghost, and above all, the predictions of Prophets
for the coming of the Messiah, his nativity, passion, ascension, and sitting
at the right hand of God etc. with a clear co^futation of his false
corruptions therein etc.

80. This is the title and argument of the book, which he does prosecute for
almost two hundred pages together, dividing the same into two parts, the
first wherein he shows, how John Calvin most wickedly, and maliciously under
pretense of interpreting the Scripture in different sense from the ancient
Fathers, did go about covertly to weaken, infringe, or take from the
Christians all the strongest arguments which they had, or have out of the
Scriptures for the Godhead of Christ, and his equality and consubstantiality
with the Father. And in the second Part, that he uses the same fraud, and
malice by overthrowing all the predictions, and foretellinges of Prophets
about Christ as he was man.

Out of the old Testament.. 1.
81. ANd for the first Part of perverting Scriptures, 1. example
he gives these examples out of the old Testament, Genesis 1.
first, that whereas Moses says in (...), Creauit Deus coelum and terram, God
created heaven and earth, the word in the Hebrew is ELOIM, Gods, in the plural
number, out of which D. Hunnius proves, that the Hunn. in Calu. Iudaiz. pa. 9.
ancient Fathers, and most learned also of later times in the Hebrew tongue,
do gather Moses to have signified the plurality of persons in the Bl.
Trinity, but Calvin to take from Christians this comfort, says: Colligere
solent hic in Deo notari tres personas etc. Here Christians are wont (by this
plural number ELOIM) to gather, that three persons are signified in God; but
for so much as to me it seems a weak proof of so great a matter, the
Readers are to be advertised to beware of such violent glosses. Thus Calvin.
And with 2. example
like spirit of presumption and arrogance, if not worse, he goes forward in
all the rest, as namely that of Genesis the 19. about raining of brimstome over
Sodom Genesis 19.
and Gomorrha, where the words are Pluit Iehoua a Iehoua (says Hunnius
according to the Hebrew text) and is applied by Christian writers, against the
Jews for Christ's divinity, Calvin most insolently rejects the same saying:
Quod veteres Christi Diuinitatem etc. whereas ancient writers endeauored by this
testimony, to prove the Divinity of Christ, it is but a weak argument, and in
my judgment they brabble much without cause, that so sharply urge the Jews
with this place.

82. In Genesis also Chap. 35. where Jacob built an Altar 3. example
to God, and called the place Bethel, for that ELOIM Gen 35.
the Gods had appeared unto him there, using the plural number not only in the
substantive, but also in the verb it self, Calvin without all probability of
reason, will needs have it meant, that not God, but Angels only appeared,
which Hunnius refuteth, for that Hun. p. 17.
the apparition of Angels was not a sufficient reason to name the place Bethel,
as Jacob did, that is to say, the house of God, or to build an Altar to God,
for that Angels only, and not God had appeared to him.

83. But that which much more imports, Calvin takes from the Christians that
other excellent place also of the second Psalm, wherein is proved the Divinity
4 example
of Christ by those words, (...) me us es tu, Ego hodie Psalm. 2.
genui te, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, whereby S. Paul
himself Act. 13. and the Author Heb. 1. and 5
(says Hunnius) of the Epistle to the Hebrews (for that Lutherans do not
admit that Epistle to be S. Paul's) and all ancient Fathers after them, do
allege these words for proof of Christ's divinity; but Calvin does overthrow
it by interpreting it to be understood literally of David himself, as Hunnius
at large proves, Page 21. 22
and exactly refuteth, as also his impiety, in taking away that other place of
the 33. Psalm in like manner, 5. example
Psalm. 33.
Verbo Domini coeli firmati sunt, and spiritu oris eius omnis virtus eorum: The
heavens were established by the word of God, and all their power by his holy
spirit. Out of which the ancient Fathers proved not only the divinity of
Christ, the second person in trinity, but of the holy Ghost also, and
consequently the blessed Trinity, which Calvin endeavoring to overthrow writes
Hun. p. 25.
in this manner: Subtilius veteres hoc elogio vsi sunt etc. The ancient Fathers
did more subtily use this place of Scripture, against the Sabellian Heretics,
to prove the eternal Godhead of the holy Ghost; but I would not dare to urge
Sabellius with this testimony to prove the deity of the said holy Ghost. And
again in another place lib. 1. Institut. cap. 13. sect. 15. it seemed (says
he) a plausible thing unto them, to cite out of David the words now rehearsed,
verbo Domini coeli firmati sunt etc. to prove that the Creation of the world
was no less the work of the holy Ghost, then of the Son the second person
in Trinity: Sed infirma illa ratio fuit, Page 28.
but that proof was weak. So Calvin, very piously as you see.

84. From this Doctor Hunnius passes to examine 6. example
these words of the 45. Psalm as spoken of the Son Psalm 45.
of God, Thronus tuus o Deus, in seculum seculi etc. propterea vnxit te Deus,
Deus tuus etc. Thy throne o Lord is to endure Hebr. 1.
for ever, and therefore has God, even thy God anointed thee with the oil of
ioyfulnes above thy fellows: which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
(says Hunnius) does expressly apply unto the eternal Divinity of Christ; but
Calvin overthrows the same, by applying the meaning to have been of K. Solomon
only. The simple and natural sense of this place (says Calvin) is that
Solomon did not govern Tyrannically, as other Kings, but with right and
equal laws, and therefore his Kingly seat should be stable for ever. See how
base a conceit this man had of divine things: but yet hear him further, for
in another place he writes thus: Faciendum Calvin. in com. in c. 1. ad Hebr.
est etc. We must confess that this Psalm was made of Solomon, as a
bridesong of his marriage with the King of Egypts daughter. Do you see the
prophanity of this man's spirit? But yet let us produce a far greater audacity
of his.

85. The Apostle S. Paul in the 4. to the Ephesians does 7. example
urge much for proof of Christ's divinity the words Psalm. 67.
of the Psalm 67. Ascendens in altum captiuam duxit captiuitatem, dona dedit
hominibus etc. He ascending up to heaven, did carry with him our Captivity as
captive, and distributed gifts to men upon earth: which thing S. Paul does
urge, as a point of singular moment for proof of Christ's divinity. But what
says Calvin? you shall hear what he writes both of the thing, and of his
Censure of S. Paul's simplicity, in so applying Page 35.
the same. Quia locum hunc Paulus (says he) subtilius ad Christum deflexit
Ephesians. 4. videndum est, quam been cum mente Dauidis conuenit: For so much as
Paul did more subtily wrest this place to Christ, it is to be considered how
well he agrees therein with the mind or meaning of David, showing in deed by
diverse reasons, that his exposition and application does not agree with David's
intention in that Psalm, which is a most impious insolency if it be well
considered.

86. After this the said Doctor passes on to cite that 8. example
famous place of Esaias the sixth, Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Esa. 6.
Exercituum, as a testimony for the blessed Trinity, Page 42.
by the witness and allegation of al ancient writers, whereas Calvin of purpose
calls the same into doubt, saying in favor of the Arrians: Whereas ancient
writers have used this testimony of Esaias, when they would prove the Trinity of
persons in the essence of one God, I do not reject their sentence; but yet if
I should have to do with Heretics, I would rather use more strong
testimonies, ne Haereticis ridiculi simus, least we be ridiculous unto
Heretics, and in truth the Prophet by this triple repetition ( holy, holy,
holy) does rather note a restles assiduity, or continuance of Angelical
melody, in the praises of God etc. And do you not see (says Hunnius,) how
this arrogant fellow, does Seni'em and veneranda^ canitiem petulanter vellicat.
saucely pull by the locks old venerable antiquity (making the same (...)) and
how he instructs the Arrians to illude, or shifte of this sacred testimony
for the blessed Trinity? Could the Arrians do more for themselves, or their
own cause? So he. Showing also the like boldness, and impiety in that he goes
about to weaken the Authority of Michaeas the Prophet, used by all ancient
Fathers for the proof of Christ's Godhead, 9. example
Mich. 5.
where he says, Et egressus eius ab initio a diebus aeternitatis, and his
going forth is from the beginning from the days of eternity; which words
Calvin, though he cannot but grant for the euide^cy thereof, to appertain to
the divinity of Christ, yet does he divert the Prophets meaning to a far
different sense, and says: Hic est simplex sensus, scio quosdam insistere
pertinacius, quod hic loquatur Propheta de aeterna essentia Christi etc. This
is the simple sense and meaning of the Prophet, albeit I know that some do
more obstinatly contend, that the Prophet speaks here of the eternal
essence of Christ: and for my part, though I do willingly acknowledge, that
the divinity of Christ is here proved; yet for that we shall never get the
Jews to confess it, I would rather simply take the words of the Prophet as
they sound. So he. And note here his good reason (says Hunnius) for that
because the Jews will not be brought to confess the truth of this text,
Calvin himself will dissemble it also, and pervert the Scriptures to another
meaning to please them. Is not this wickedly to betray the cause of Christians?
And is not this secretly to collude with the adversaries? Is not this by
dissimulation to weake^ our own forces in favor of the enemies? But hereof you
shall see more in that which ensues.

Out of the new Testament.. 2.
87. ANd with these places and some other the said Doctor ends his discourse
for corrupting of the Scriptures of the old Testament, in favor of Jews and
Arrians, and passes to the new, showing (...) no less to favor them both
therein, then in the other, but rather much more. And first he alleges 10.
Example.
that most excellent place of S. John's Ghospel before mentioned, Ego and Pater
vnum sumus, I and my Father (...). 10.
are one, which testimony al ancient Fathers, without exception, did urge
against the Arrians, as an invincible bulwark to prove the unity of Godhead in
Christ with his Father; But what says Calvin? Ego (says he) and Pater vnum
sumus, abusi sunt hoc loco veteres, vt probarent Christum esse Patri Homusion
neque enim Christus de vnitate substantiae disputat, sed de consensu, quem cum
Patre habet etc. The ancient writers did abuse this place, to prove (...) that
Christ was of the same nature and substance with his Father, for that Christ
did not dispute here of the unity of substance, but of the unity only of
consent between him, and his Father: which was the very answer and shift of
Arrius himself and of the old Arrians, and is at this day (says Hunnius) of
the new Arrians in Transiluania and else where, to wit of Franciscus, David,
Blandrata, and others.

88. And so in like manner where in the 10. and 14. of S. John, Christ our
Savior repeateth oftentimes 11. Example.
Ego (...) in Patre, and Pater in me, I am in my Father, and Joan. 10. and 14.
my Father in me, which was another great bulwark of ancient Christianity
against Arrians, Calvin overthrows it thus: Non hic (says he) de essentiae
vnitate sermo Hun. p. 53.
habetur etc. Here is not any speech of unity of (...) between the Father and
the Son, but only of the manifestation of Gods power in the person of Christ.
And again in another place: Non ad diuinam Comm. in c. 14. Joan.
Christi essentiam refero, sed ad modum reuelationis: I do not refer those
words to the divine nature of Christ, but to the manner of revelation, which
were also the Answers of old Arrians, and are at this day of the new.

89. And finally not to be tedious, I pass over many other examples, as that
Joan. 17. in Christ's speech to 12. Example
his Father: That my disciples may be one, as we are one. And Joan. 17.
again: That all may be one as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, which
ancient Doctors did interpret to signify the natural unity of Christ in
Godhead with his Father. But what says Calvin? Multi ex Patribus (says Page
45.
he) interpretati sunt Christum vnum esse cum Patre etc. Many of the Fathers
have so interpreted these words, as though they proved that Christ is one with
his Father for that he is eternal God, but their contention with the Arrians
drew them violently to this, that they should wrest broken sentences to a
wrong sense. The like he writes of that excellent place of S. John in his
first Epistle: Tres sunt qui testimonium dant in coelo etc. There 13. Example.
1. Joan. 5.
are three in heaven that give testimony, the Father, the word, and the holy
Ghost, and these three are one, which Catholic Deuines have ever understood of
the natural unity of the three persons in the blessed Trinity, against the
Arrians. But what says (...) on their side? Quod dicit tres esse vnum, ad
essentiam non refertur, sed ad consensum potius: In that S. John says these
three to be one, is not referred to their unity of nature and essence, but
rather to the unity of their will, or consent. And will you say now that Calvin
is not worthy to have his fee of the Arrians? Or will Thomas Morton say still
that our malignant Doctors do wrongfully accuse him? Quis non videt (says
Hunnius) diabolum per acutum suum instrume^tum Page 59.
etc. Who does not see that the devil by this sharp instrument of his, does
go about to disarme Christians, and arm the enemies of the blessed Trinity?
For if these should ask us, what testimonies we have, what proof of Christ's
unity in Godhead with his Father, we have none left, Vniuersa per aleatoriam
istam quiduis eludendi (...) e manibus (...): All are stricken out of our hands
by this dicing-deceipt of deluding any thing that is in Scripture for that
purpose. But D. Hunnius goes forward.

90. The like Comment makes Calvin upon those words of S. Paul to the
Colossians cap. 1. where the Apostle calls Christ Imaginem Dei inuisibilis,
the image 14 Example.
of God invisible, and those other to the Hebrews c. 1. Colos. 1.
Qui est splendour gloriae, and expressa imago substantiae illius: Page 61.
Who is the splendour of his glory, and the express image of his substance,
where manifestly the Apostle Hebr. 1.
does affirm the deity of Christ, and the ancient Fathers out of the same
words after him against the Arrians, and namely S. Chrysostom at large, what
evasion think you will John Calvin teach the Arrians here? You shall hear
him in his own words: Scio (says Page 62. 63.
he) qualiter veteres exponere soleant, quia enim certamen habebant cum
Arrianis etc. I know how the ancient Fathers are wont to expound these words,
for that they having combat with the Arrians, do urge the equality, and
consubstantiality of God the Son with his Father, out of these places; but in
the mean space they hold their peace in that which is the principal, to wit,
how God the Father does exhibit himself to be known to us in Christ. And as
for Chrysostom, who places all his ground in the word Image, while he
strives to prove thereby that a creature can not be the image of God the
Creator, it is tooto weak etc. So he.

91. And now (says Doctor Hunnius) what way can be more effectual then this
to overthrow Christian Religion, and bring in Arrianisme? Or what place or text
of Scripture remains now in force against the Jews, and Arrians for defense
of Christ's divinity, if Caluins censure be admitted against all those that
have been cited? It is evident (says he) hoc genus eludendi Scripturas Page
(...)
quo Caluinus vtitur, exoptatissimum diabolo adminiculum esse etc. that this
kind of eluding Scriptures used by Calvin, is the most desired help for the
devil, that can be wished, to shake the credit of one authority after another
in men's hearts, until, before they be aware, they become Arrians. Thus
Hunnius, who both for that he is a learned man, a Reader of Deuinity, a
Protestant, and proves all that he says out of Caluins own words, ought (me
thinks) to be of great force against him, or at leastwise with all others, to
look well about them, how they believe either him or his.

About corrupting and eluding of Prophesyes.. 3.
92. ANd this is now for the first Part of his book Page 6.
but in this second about the predictions and Prophesies of Christ and
Christian Religion, he says he has much more to produce against Calvin for
his foul corruptions, Quibus illustrissima vaticima Prophetarum de Messia
(...) is peruersionibus inuoluit, whereby he has with his Judicial
peruersities obscured the most notorious and clear predictions of Prophets
about the Messiah, or Savior of the world. In which expositions or rather
corruptions of his non modo (says he) Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum veterum and
recentiorum pias interpretationes altissime despexit and irrisit; sed in
nonnullis ipsorummet Euangelistarum (...) Sacrosanctas explicationes nequiter
illudere non est (...), quod nisi ad oculum demonstrauero, praesertim vbi ad
illa vaticinia Prophetarum deuenero, nolim ego nuhi vlla vnquam in re postea
fidem adhiberi. He does not only most haughtely despise the Godly
interpretations of all ancient and modern Ecclesiastical writers, but in
diverse things also he was not a fraid wickedly to elude the holy explications
of the Evangelists and Apostles themselves, which except I shall demonstrate
unto the eye, especially when I come to examine the predictions of Prophets, I
will never have any man to give me credit afterward. So confidently speaks
Doctor Hunnius of Caluins wickedness in this behalf, so to weaken and eneruate
the testimonies of Scripture that make for Christ, vt omnem ad probandum vim
atque valorem amittant penitus, says he, that thereby they wholly loose al their
force and value to prove any thing. And what can be more impious and perilous
then this?

93. It would be to long to run over the Prophesies by him alleged as
perverted by Calvin, though it were with the same breuity that we have perused
the testimonies of Scripture before mentioned (for I must remember that all
must go within a part of one Chapter:) yet some few lines I must bestow therein
for examples sake, thereby to leave a guess to the Reader for the rest which I
must omit. First then in the very first promise of all made Genesis 3. for coming
of the Messiah, 15. Example.
Genesis 3.
where God said to the serpent: I shall put emnity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed, she shall crush thy head, and thou shall
lay wait at her heel, which all Christian writers from the beginning, yea the
Apostles and Prophets before them, did understand of the emnity to be between
the devil and Christ the woman's seed; but this does Calvin wholly euacuate, and
Caluinus Com. in c. 3. Genesis.
turn to a mere mockery, interpreting it to be meant only of the natural
hatred that is between men and serpents, and that as serpents seek to sting
men, so men endeavor every where to kill serpents; by which interpretation, is
eluded (says Doctor Hunnius) the first foundation of all Christian faith,
whereby the Fathers of the old Testament did sustain themselves. And then he
turns himself to S. Paul, showing how Calvin Page 71.
does condemn his exposition of absurdity, about the said seed of the woman
mentioned both here, and in the other promise to Abraham, In thy seed all
nations shall be blessed, in which places Calvin (says Hunnius) expressly Call.
Com. in 3. ad Galatas.
against S. Paul to the Galat. will have it understood seeds in the plural
number, and not seed: Miror hominis proiectam confidentiam: Vbi frons (...) id
quod affirmat Page 74.
Paulus: etc. I do wonder at the desperate presumption of this man; where is
Caluins forehead, in denying that which S. Paul does affirm, and affirming
that which S Paul does so earnestly refute?

94. Then passes he to another prophesy out of Jeremy 16. Example
concerning Christ's nativity, where is said; God Hier. 31.
shall create a new thing upon the earth, a woman shall enclose a man, which
being understood by all ancient writers (says Hunnius) of the blessed virgin
Mary, and her sacred fruit of the womb, that in respect of the perfection,
which he had by his deity, even in the womb, was a perfect man: but Calvin
scoffeth thereat. Christiani (says he) fere vno consensu etc. Christians almost
with one consent have interpreted this Prophesy of Mary the virgin, and they
were moved thereunto by the name of a miracle, and thereupon perhaps they
snatched too greedily at those things that might seem to make for the mystery
of our salvation, saying, that Christ was both an infant and a man, for that he
was full of divine fortitude in his Mothers womb, albeit according to his
flesh he did grow in stature, in wisdom, and virtue; Merito hoc ridetur a
Iudaeis, but Page 75.
this is worthily laughed at by the Jews, and further, says he, the true
meaning of the Prophet is only that in the wars between the Chaldees and the
Jews, the Jewish women shall be stronger then the Chaldean men, and bring them
into straights, redigent faeminae viros in angustias, says he, women shall
drive men into straightes. And is not this a good Jewish Advocate? Could any
Infidel speak more co^te^ptuously of our proofs?

95. From this he steppeth to the fourth Prophesy of Aggeus about the coming
of Christ; Mouebo omnes gentes, 17. Example.
and veniet desideratus cunctis gentibus, and implebo domum Agg. 2.
istam gloria etc. I will move all nations, and the desired of all nations
shall come, and I shall replenish this house with glory; which Prophesy being
so clear, and so generally received by all Christians as signifying the glory
of Christ, and of the Christian Church that Calvin could not for shame deny it;
yet shall you see Page 81.
how he does seek to eneruate, and make void the same. This Prophesy (says
he) of the desired of all Nations may be understood two ways: first that all
Nations shall come and bring with them whatsoever precious things they have:
Nam Hebraei desiderium vocant quicquid habetur in precio, vt (...), honores
etc. For that the Hebrews do call desire or desired, whatsoever is much
esteemed, as riches, honor and the like; Sed possumus etiam intelligere de
Christo etc. But yet we may also vuderstand it of Christ etc. Sed simplicior
sensus est ille quem iam retuli, but the more simple, plain, or natural
sense, is that which I have now related, that Nations shall come with all their
riches etc. And here also does not Calvin play well his part? By this you may
know him in all the rest, and yet shall we set down one example more and so
end.

96. And this shall be that famous and most excellent Prophesy of Christ's
Forerunner S. John Baptist most 18 Example.
perspicuously uttered by the Prophet Esaias in his fourtith Isa 40.
Chapter, and in these words: Vox clamantis in deserto parate viam Domini etc.
A voice of a Crier in the desert, prepare the way of our Lord, make right the
paths of our God: which words both S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke, at
large do expound to have been understood of S. John Baptist preaching in the
desert of Jury and warning the Jews to prepare the way of the Messiah: all
which this miserable man, in favor of the Jews, endeauoreth to elude and
euacuate, applying the same wholly to another profane purpose, affirming, first
that by the voice of a Crier, is not understood any particular man as S. John
Baptist, but all Prophets in general: and then by the desert, he
understands not that desert of Jury wherein S. John did preach, but
metaphorically the desert of desolatio^ to have been meant by Esaias, when the
people were in the captivity of Babylon; and thirdly more fully to overthrow
the whole Prophesy, he asks this question: Quos compellat ista vox, an
fideles? minime. Sed Cyrum, Persas and Medos. To whom does this voice of the
Crier in the desert speak, unto faithful people? No, not at all. But only
unto King Cyrus, and to the Persians and Medes, that held the people of Israel
in captivity. So he. And how greatly then were deceived the three Evangelists
before mentioned, that so earnestly set forth unto us the comfort of this
Prophesy, fulfilled in S. John Baptist, which (...) now has endeauored to take
from us, Page 91.
whereupon Doctor Hunnius infers these words: (...) piae mentis haec legens
and audiens temperare sibi potest etc. What man of pious mind that shall read
or hear these things, can so over rule himself, as not to hate with a perfect
hatred, as the Prophet speaks, yea and detest this architect of Jewish
deceipts, that is not affraide to hold up his finger against the
interpretations of the Sacred Evangelists themselves. So he.

97. But to come to an end, I will leave nineteen or twenty more Prophesies
undiscussed, to wit three that remain of this first point about the coming
and nativity The corruption of (...). Prophesies more omitted for breuities
sake.
of Christ, eight that did foretell his sacred passion and particulers thereof,
four of his resurrection, and four or five more of his miraculous ascension,
and sitting on the right hand of God; all which does John Calvin with
metaphorical and malicious interpretations weaken, elude overthrow, and take
from us; yea though the Evangelists and Apostles themselves have expressly
expounded them literally to appertain to Christ; which this Doctor Hunnius
does notably and substantially prove out of Caluins own words throughout this
brief, but judicious book of his, making many exclamations against Caluins
impiety therein, especially in one place, where seeing the man endeauoreth to
take from us that whole Psalm, Deus Deus meus, Psalm. 22.
which sets down most of the particulers of Christ's passion, as the
percing of his feet and hands, dividing of his garments, and other such
points, which the Evangelists and (...) themselves do apply literally to our
Savior, and this man only in a metaphorical sense to King David; yea saying
further that the Evangelists did (...) things intempestiue ad praesentem Page
135.
causam, out of season to the present cause of Christ, Et quod dum negligunt
sensum metaphoricum a natiuo sensu (...), And whiles they did neglect Caluins
metaphorical sense, they departed from the true natural sense of the Prophet:
Doctor Hunnius (I say) upon Page 136.
these and other like insolences, breaks out into these words, that he
cannot sufficiently detest extremam Caluini impietatem, cum intolerabili fastu
coniunctam, quo se super sanctissimos Dei seruos, Euangelistas, and Apostolos,
quasi illorum censor effert, that extreme impiety of Calvin, joined The
extreme impiety and pride of Calvin according to D. Hunn.
with intolerable pride, whereby he sets himself above the most holy
servants of God, the Evangelists, and Apostles, as their Censurer: and
therefore after he had demonstrated this pride and impiety in all the rest of
the Prophesies by him perverted, drawing toward the end, he concludes thus:
Quapropter vt receptui canam, detectum satis superque iudico Angelum illum Page
184.
tenebrarum Iohannem Caluinum etc.

98. Wherefore that I may now (says he) retire my self, I do judge that Angel
of darkness John Calvin to be sufficiently, and more then sufficiently
discovered, who being raised from the pit of hell, to the perverting of
mankind, has partly by his detestable desire of wresting Scriptures, and
overthrowing the Bulwarks of Christian Religion, which it has against Jews
and Arrians; partly also by his impious pen a against the holy and sacred
Majesty of Jesus Nazarenus now exalted in heaven; partly also by his perverse
doctrine of the Sacrament, and horrible monstrous paradoxes of his absolute
predestination; By all these means (I say) he has (...) in these our later
days, no small part of the light and sun of Gods truth, and drawn with him
a great number of stars, as the Apocalips says, into the bottomeles pit of
eternal damnation. God everlasting out of his mercy, sign D. Hunnius
protestation and prayer against Caluinistes.
his servants that they be not corrupted with this pestilent plague of
Caluinian seducement, and bring back again unto Jesus Christ, the true Pastor
of their souls, those that are seduced by them, that they perish not in their
error, but be saved eternally with all those that faithfully love God Amen.
And this I had (says he) to admonish the Church of God, of the most wicked
deceiptes of John Calvin. And if Doctor (...) will answer any thing to this,
let him not entertain himself in general speech only, as his people are wont
to do, but come to particulers etc. So Hunnius.

99. And now M. Morton, will you say that all this also, which Doctor Hunnius
has brought against Calvin about furthering of Iudaisme and Arrianisme is out
of the spirit only of opposition and contradiction, as you shifted of the Deane
and College of Tubinga, alleged before by your Adversary? Will you answer in
like manner, it is not much to be regarded what he says, seeing he brings so
many great and substantial proofs for the same out of M. Caluins confessed
works and wrytinges? Or will you say, as you said before, The conclusion to M.
Morto^.
that their judgment has been depraved by our malignant Doctors? seeing that
you have heard this your own Doctor Hunnius speak in his own language and
sense so resolutly and earnestly against Calvin and Caluinistes? If you dare
not say this again enough, then was it but a shift and dissimulation before: and
if you should say it again now, you would be laughed at by all men. And though
you do not; yet every wise man will consider, with what truth or ground you
said it before, to wit, for a mere shift, not understanding or thinking, as
you speak. And conform to that will they esteem of the rest, which you say or
write, without further ground of real substance, but only that you must say
somewhat, and that it serves for your purpose to speak it for the present.
But now shall we return to the place and page of your Reply, from whence we
went forth in this digressio^ about Calvin.

100. You complain in the said place, as before has been showed, of the charge
of Arrianisme laid The Return to the Reply.
falsely upon Calvin, by our Jesuits, as you say, and this for one only speech
of his where he says; That the Father is by a kind of excellency God, which
you say both Page 17.
in speech and sense, is most orthodoxall, and agreeing with the tenor of holy
writ, and judgment of all ancient Fathers, as our own learned Jesuits
confess, and do produce (say you) for their authority an inquest of Fathers
to free Calvin in this point, which Fathers upon those words of S. John's
Gospel, my Father is great then I, do affirm that the Father is greater,
not in substance and being, but by reason of birth and begetting, for which you
allege Cardinal Tolet and Maldonate, both Jesuits, in their commentaries
upon S. John's Gospel.

101. But this Sir by your leave, supposing al were so, In what sense ancient
Fathers do understand the words My Father is greater then I to be understood
also in a certain sort as Christ was God, and the second person in Trinity.
does not free Calvin in this point of Arrianisme: for that he is otherwise
manifoldly convinced, as now you have heard. And secondly, for this sole point
or sentence here mentioned, albeit the two forenamed Jesuits do cite diverse
ancient Fathers, that do hold those words of Christ, My Father is greater
then I, are true, not only in respect of his humanity, but also in a certain
sort, as he is God, to wit, that between those personal relations of Father
and Son, Begetter and Begotten, in the blessed Trinity, there arises a more
honorable respect out of the former, then of the later; yet does not this make
that in the Godhead it self, the Father is more excellent then the Son, or
that by excellency he is God, or that the name of God by a certain excellency
does only belong unto him, as Calvin is accused to say, which in all sensible
construction must import, that the Son is inferior unto him in substance of
Godhead, which is a chief point of Arrianisine whereon the old Arrians did
principally stand, in all their disputes against Catholics.

102. And whereas T. M. for his last defense of Calvin says, that he was so
far of from Arrianisme, that our own Bellarmine does acknowledge that Calvin
did impugn the doctrine of the Arrians, in this also, as in all the rest, he
uses great fraud. For first Bellarmine has not this affirmative proposition,
as here is set down, How and whether Calvin did impugn the Arrians.
Calvin did impugn the doctrine of the Arrians; but only he confesses that
Calvin and other Sectaries, who out of their wicked doctrine co^senting with
the old Arrians have given occasion to the offspring of new Arrians in our
days, do notwithstanding write books against them, as (...) did; which thing
may arise upon diverse occasions, concerning either their persons or sect.
Bellarmins words are these: Albeit Luther, Melanchthon, (...) de notis
Ecclesiae c. 9.
Calvin and their (...) do (...) Arrius for an Heretic; yet can they not deny
but that themselves in their writings did sow the seeds of this error, from
whence afterward sprung up these new Arrians, which they themselves impugn:
So as Bellarmine does not speak in this place particularly of Caluins
impugning all the doctrine of Arrians, as here this man would seem to impose
upon him, citing falsely this sentence out of him: Arrianos Caluinus impugnauit,
and no more; but that he and other Sectaries of our days would seem in some
things to impugn the^, whereas in other things they held with them. For so
presently in the very next words does Bellarmine expressly declare himself,
where having reduced the Heresies of Arrius to two heads, says, that the
former sort are held publicly by the new Arrians of our days, whereof the
seeds were sown by Calvin and others: but the second sort are held expressly
by Calvin and other modern Sectaries, Alterum (...) Arrianorum docent omnes
huius temporis Haeretici says he. So as in this also there is notable
fraudulent dealing of T. M. as you see; yea nothing almost comes from him
without fraud.

103. But as for this brag of his and his fellows that Calvin did write
diverse books against the new Arrians, and Trinitarians of our time, as namely
against Seruetus, Gentilis, Alciatus, Blandrata and others, Doctor Hunnius that
Page 187.
has read their works and his, can best make answer, D. Hunn. opinion about
Caluins vvriting against Arrians.
and decide the matter, who says: Pridem and hoc inclaruit in orb Christiano,
quibus ex Scholis and Ecclesiis ipsa illa (...) portenta prodierint. It is now
well known in the Christian world, out of what schools and Churches those
foul monsters ( the new Arrians and Trinitarians) have proceeded, that is to
say, from the Caluinistes etc. And whereas (says he) it is vaunted that Calvin
did write against these Heretics, we deny not but that therein he did well,
albeit in truth he gave occasion to the devil by his manner of dealing, to
raise up no small Page 190.
number of enemies against the blessed Trinity, and consequently he did no
otherwise, then if one having helped some to set fire on a house, should after
the flame thereof waxes boisterous, help other men also for extinguishing or
restrayning the same. So Hunnius: who finally concludes with this prayer:
Dominus Jesus Satanam sub pedes nostros conterat cito, and a lue Caluinistica
Page 193.
clementer liberet Ecclesiam suam. Amen. Our Lord Jesus crush Satan quickly
under our feet, and of his clemency deliver his Church from the infection of
Caluinistes. Thus he, and with this prayer he ends his book.

104. And now if this man had been a Papist, great exceptions no doubt would be
taken against him; but being a brother of the same Gospel, and one of those
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) oath, promise, or
other band of conscience. As if an unjust Judge or Magistrate should ask us
things that are without his jurisdiction, to the prejudice of our selves, or of
others, as by enquiring after secrets that Cases con cerning secrecy.
do not appertain to him: Or if a jealous husband should ask his wife
whether she had ever committed falsehood against him, proposing the present pain
of death, except she answered directly thereunto, and many other such like
cases, which I purposely pretermit. And it seems that Thomas Morton has not
studied them, but Catholic writers, both Deuines, Scholasticall and Positive,
as also Lawyers both Canon and civil among us do discuss how men may bear
themselves therein, without sin or offense to God, when they fall out, and this
with more severity against lying, then any Protestant Author is seen to do,
as in the sequent Consideration will appear.

24. And here I ask Thomas Morton further what he will say to all the
stratagems in war, for so much as there may be as well lying in factes, as in
words, according as our S. Thomas and other Deuines do hold; how will T. M.
excuse these stratagems, that is to say policies, deceiptes, and
dissimulations of enemies in wars, from lies? Will he condemn all such
stratagems as sinful, as heathenish, as hellish, as impious? Why then do his
Protestant Captains and Leaders use them? why do his Protestant Ministers
that live with them allow thereof? Nay that which is much more, why does S.
Augustine approve the same, whose sentence is: Cum iustum bellum quis
susceperit, vtrum aperta pugna vel insidiis vincat nihil ad iustitiam interest:
When a man takes Aug. l. qu. 6. qu. 10.
upon him a just war, it imports nothing to the justice of the cause, whether
he overcome by open war Gratian. in causa 23. q. 2.. Dominus.
or sleights: which sentence is so well liked by our Popes, lawyers and
Deuines, as it is put into the corpse of the Canon law. And what will T. M. then
say to all this, yea to many express examples in Scripture it self?

25. And namely what will he say to the fact of Iosue Iof. (...).
that going about to take the City of Hai, gave order to his Captains: Ponite
insidias post Ciuitatem, nos terga vertemus etc. Lay an ambush behind the
City by night, and we shall follow with an army in the norning, and when those
of Hai shall come forth to assail us, we will seem to flee, simulantes metum,
feigning to The stratageme of Iosue.
be afraid: What will he say to this stratageme? will he deny it to be a
dissimulation, and consequently also an Equivocation in fact? The matter is
evident to the contrary by the text it self: will he call it a scarre of
infirmity of the old Testament (to use his own Ministerial or rather
Manichean phrase) and think to escape thereby? But against this is the express
order, and commandment of God himself: Pone insidias vrbi post eam, lay an
ambush behind the City, ergo stratagems in war though they contain
deceiptes, dissimulations, and Equivocations, may be used in some cases, and
that lawfully without the sin of lying.

26. Another example most manifest is in the fourth 4. Reg. 6.
book of the Kings, where the King of Syria sending certain Captains with
forces to apprehend the Prophet The stratageme of Elizeus.
Elizeus in the City of Dothaim, he going forth of the City, and meeting with
the said Captains, they not knowing him, said unto them: Non est haec via,
neque ista est Ciuitas; sequimini me, and ostendam virum quem quaeritis: This
is not the way (to Dothaim) nor is this that City, but do you follow me, and
I will show unto you the man whom you seek for, and so they did, and he lead
them into the midst of Samaria where the King of Israel his army might and
would have destroyed them, if the said Prophet had permitted: So as this
stratageme also, containing the exterior show: of a great untruth, and
falsehood, cannot be deined to have been lawful in this Prophet, as appears by
the concurrence of God with diverse miracles in the same.

27. The like may be showed out of the example of Judith 11.
Judith, who by the instinct of Almighty God, and his plain ordinance, as the
Scripture says, was sent to Holofornes, who told him a long narration of many
The stratageme of Judith.
things that in event and outward show were not true, as that he should get
not only (...), but Jerusalem also, and conquer the whole nation of the Jews,
adding thereunto this asseueration, Et misit me Dominus haec nunciare tibi, and
our Lord has sent me to tell you these things, by which stratageme (as you
know) she delivered her whole country from the forces of the said Holofernes,
which otherwise had been like to have destroyed them

28. And thus much in this place for stratagemes in war: but for other
examples great numbers might be alleged, wherein some Equivocations must needs
be admitted, though no ly; as that of the Angel appearing Tob. (...).
to Toby the elder, who being taken by him to be a man, and demanded of what
family or tribe he Other examples of Scriptures concerning Equivocations.
was, he said, ego sum Azarias Ananiae Magni silius, I am Azarias the Son of
the Great Ananias, whereunto Toby answered, Ex magno genere tu es, you are of a
great stock indeed; which yet was not so in the understanding of the speaker,
and consequently here must be confessed an evident Equivocation, or
amphibology of speech, whereby the hearer was deceived. And not unlike to this
is that speech of our Savior, when standing in the temple, he used to the
Jews demanding a miracle: Do you dissolve this Temple, and I will build Joan.
2.
it up again in three days, meaning the Temple of his body, but his hearers
understood him of the material Temple of Jerusalem, and so to their sense it
seemed Math. 27.
that he speak, for (...) cause they accused him afterward very solemnly
thereof at this passion, and insulted against him for the same upon the cross,
ergo Equivocation may not always be condemned for lying, as our Minister
avouches.

29. I pretermit diverse other speeches of our Savior of like quality, as that
when he said to his brethren: Joan. 7.
Ego non ascendam ad diem festum istum. I will not go up to Jerusalem to this
feast, and yet he meant to go up, and so went, but not in public, and therein
stood the: Equivocation of his (...); but his brethren understood not his
meaning, for if they had, no doubt they would not have gone up without him,
ergo one sense was understood by the speaker, and another by the hearer, which
we shall afterward show to be properly Equivocation, and yet no ly can be
enforced thereon, but with singular impiety.

30. These words also of S. Paul to the Hebrews: Melchisedech Hebr. 7.
King of Salem etc. which was without Father, without Mother, without
genealogy, neither having beginning of his days, nor end of his life, must
needs be confessed to have an Equivocation or amphibology in them, and somewhat
to be reserved by the speaker for their understanding: for as they lie, they
seem impossible to be true, that a man could be without Father, Mother,
genealogy, beginning or ending, and yet is there no more expressed by the
Apostle, but his meaning was that nothing is set down in Scripture of those
particularities.

31. And finally the same Apostle S. Paul, seeing himself pressed at a certain
time in judgment by his enemies, Some Equinocations used by S. Paul in his
answer to the unjust Jews.
and considering that they were of two factions, Pharisees and Saduces, whereof
the one sort confesses resurrection of the dead, and the other not, he
protested openly that the cause whereof he was accused, was about the said
resurrection of the dead, which Act. (...)
though in his sense was true, for that his chief trouble was for defending
the resurrection of Christ, and our hope of resurrection by him: yet was it not
so then in the understanding of the hearers, who upon this, deviding
themselves, let him go, yea the Pharisees began to excuse and defend him in
that Council, who otherwise were the greatest enemies of his Religion and
profession. By all which is seen that sometimes of necessity we must admit
some use of Equivocation without lying, for otherwise many places of the
Scriptures themselves and of other holy men's writings and doings cannot be well
understood, or defended, as afterward more at large shall be showed.

32. But now to pass no further in the recital of more arguments to this
purpose, we may conclude with that common doctrine of Schole-men taken August.
in Psalm. 5. 22. quaest. 2.
out of S. Augustine and other Fathers, that albeit a ly is lawful in no case;
yet often may it be lawful to conceal a truth, for that he handling those
words of the Psalm, Thou shall destroy all those which speak lies. he Psalm.
5.
says: Aliud est mentiri, aliud verum occultare; aliud est falsum dicere,
aliud verum tacere. It is a different thing to ly and to conceal a truth; one
thing to speak that which is false, another thing to hold our peace in that
which is true. And then concludes: Non est ergo culpandum aliquando verum
tacere etc. It is not therefore to be reprehended if a man sometimes do not
utter a truth; which hardly can be performed in sundry cases without some
amphibology or Equivocation of speech, and consequently that this may be
without lying. And heerof one example may serve for all, taken out of Hieremy
the Prophet, who having had a long conference in secret with Sedechias the King
in Jerusalem, and told him many things of the will of God about his voluntary
yielding to the Chaldeans and army of Nabuchodonosor, King Sedechias in
conclusion said thus unto him: Nullus sciat verba haec etc. Let no man know
those (...). 38.
words that thou have spoken unto me, and thou shall not dye, and if the
Princes or Noble men of my Kingdom shall hear that thou have spoken with me,
and shall come unto thee and say, tell us what thou have talked with the King,
and the King with thee, and see thou hide nothing from us, thou shall say unto
them etc. And the said Princes came to Hieremy, and examined him, and he spoke
unto them according to all the words which the King had commanded him, and so
they left him.

33. Thus far the Scripture, and no man can probably imagine but that in this
recapitulation made by Hieremy unto the Princes, of so long a conference had
with the King in secret, but that for covering of those things which the King
would not have to be uttered, and the Noble men were greedy to know, in such a
dangerous and suspicious time of seige as that was, Hieremy himself being held
for more then half a traitor to his country, for that he persuaded men to
yield themselves to the common enemy; no doubt (I say) but that in so strait an
examination as they would make about that matter, in whose power his life and
death (as the Scripture signifies) did ly, diverse Equivocations of speeches
must necessaryly be used by him, though always with a true sense in his
meaning, which is the difference between Equivocation and lying, as after more
particulerly shall be showed, if first we set down one other consideration for
better declaring the difference in these two things, and how far those are
from approbation of lying who in some cases do admit Equivocation in our
doctrine.

The fifth Consideration.. 5.
34. IN the fifth place it may be considered about this matter, how far the
teachers or allowers of 5. How far the allovvers of Equivocation are from
approving of lies.
Equivocation are from teaching or allowing of lies, which is the ordinary
calumniation of this malicious Minister throughout his whole seditious book;
which if it be proved to be a false charge, then falls all his accusation to
the ground, or rather upon his own head. Wherefore we must stand somewhat more
long upon this point, then upon the former, to the end it may appear how (...)
a Minister of Satan this is, whose principal exercise has ever been to
calumniate from the beginning: and we shall talk especially of the Catholic
writers of these last four hundred years by him mentioned, and of the Popes of
the same time, that have approved the same doctrine; for that of this
principal accusation, that they made no difference between lying and
Equiuocating, but expressly rather patronized the one as much as the other.

35. First then for battery of this wicked slander, we will begin our
confutation from the received authority of the famous learned doctor S. Thomas
of Aquin, D. Tho. 2. 2 quaest. 110 art. 1. 3. 4.
that lived and died above three hundred years gone. He proposes this
question in his most excellent Sum of Deuinity, Whether all kind of lying be
always a sin, and consequently unlawful for any cause? And he holds
affirmatively, that it is so, alleging many proofs and reasons for the same.
And the very same severity of doctrine in that point do hold all other Reply
par. 3. Page 62. Vasq. disp. 53. (...). 22.
Schoolmen, as well after him, as before him, and our Minister himself cites
Vasquez the Jesuit late Reader of Deuinity in Spain, in certain disputations
of his upon S. Thomas, affirming: Mendacium esse malum tam: intrinsece, vt
bonum reddi nulla ratione posset. That a lie is so intrinsecally evil of his
own nature, as that by no means it may be made good or lawful. And the like
D. Tho. 2. 2 quaest. 111. art. (...). and 4.
rigor of doctrine teaches the said S. Thomas in the next question after,
against dissimulation and Hypocrisy, which he says to be a kind of lie in
fact, deceauing a man by exterior signs or acts, as the other sort of lies
does by words: against both which kinds or sorts of lies or untruths he
holds this conclusion, The severity of S. Thomas against lying and
dissimulation.
That neither of them in any case is dispensable from sin, though in some
cases one may be a less sin then another; and if this be so, how then can
Equivocation be permitted by him, if he held it to be a lie, as our Minister
would have it. For if, as Vasquez said, no sort of ly can be made lawful by
any circumsta^ce; then must M. Morton grant, that it follows by the same
reason, that either Equivocation is no ly, or else that Vasquez the Jesuit, and
his fellows do not allow Equivocation in any case whatsoever, and
consequently that Jesuits are falsely accused by this fellow for admitting
Equivocation. But let us go forward, and show his folly out of other Authors
of no less antiquity.

36. Before S. Thomas, the Master of the Sentences Peter Lombard, in his third
book, and 38. and 39. distinction, Mag. Sent. (...). (...). did. 38. and 39.
holds the same severity against all sorts of lies, and falsities, dividing
them into three sorts, to wit, perniciosum, officiosum, and iocosum, the first
pernicious, or malicious that intends hurt without good, the second that
intends the good of some without hurt to any, the third in jest; all which
notwithstanding are condemned for sinful, and no ways to be practiced or
tolerated for any cause whatsoever, though the second The Master of the
Sentences doctrine (...) lying.
two sorts may be oftentimes venial sins only; but: yet of such nature, and
so intrinsecally evil of themselves, as neither for saving our own lives, or
the life of another man they ought wittingly to be committed, as out of S.
Augustine also, by him and other Schoolmen alleged is confirmed: yea they
allege eight several kinds, sorts, or degrees of lies out of the same S.
Augustine, some far less then others, but yet none allowable, and so they
conclude with this sentence of the said Doctor: Quisquis vero aliquod genus
esse mendacij, quod peccatum non sit, putauerit, decipit seipsum (...), (...)
Aug lib. de mend. ad cons. c. 14.
(...) se deceptorem aliorum arbitretur. Whosoever shall think that there is
any kind of lie, which is not sin, he (...) deceaueth himself by thinking
that he may be an honest deceauer of other men.

37. This is the doctrine of the Master of Sentences, for four hundred years
past, and of other School Doctors ensuing after him, unto our time, wherein you
see how rigorous they are in condemning lying, whereon this Minister Thomas
Morton either by chance, or his good hap stumbling, found store of matter to
wrangle with us in this controversy, and to make a show of some reading of
different Authors, wherein otherwise he must have been very brief and dry. For
whatsoever he has of ostentation in this behalf against Equivocation, is
stolen (...) of the said Master of Sentences, and Fathers by him alleged,
spoken, and meant by them against lying, and not Equivocation. And is not this
a goodly manhood trow you? deserves Thomas Mortons toys.
he not a laurel for this conquest? Our Authors detest lying, and admit in
some cases Equivocation, he applies their detestation to Equivocation, or
their admittance to lies, and says, that he deuideth our tongues, and turns
our own Authors against us: what a ridiculous toy and foolery is this? But let
us see yet somewhat further.

38. The same School Doctors stay not here, but do pass on to many other
particularities for showing their detestation against the foresaid kind of
lying, for favoring whereof they are brought into question by this Minister. As
for example, whereas they write that God is omnipotent, and can do all things,
and use his creatures to what end and use it shall please him; yet cannot he
neither by his ordinary, nor absolute power, either by himself, or by another
concur to the making of a lie fraudulently to deceive the understanding of
man or Angel, or induce another so to deceive the same, with intention indeed
of deceit or fallacy. Of which point of doctrine the said Schoole-Doctors Read
in 2. 2 quaest. 1. art. 3. Gregor. de Valent. Duran. in 3. did. 24. quaest. 2.
and others after them do dispute largely upon the third article of S. Thomas
his second Part, and first question of his Sum of Deuinity, demanding this
doubt: Whether any kind of deceit or falsity by any means, mediatly, or
immediately, may proceed from God; which they hold negatiuely, that it is
impossible, he being truth it self, and the fountain of all truth and
sincerity in others. (...). in 3. q. 14.
And albeit there be many and great arguments: Canus l. 2. de locis cap. 3.
alleged out of Scriptures, which in show do prove the contrary, to wit,
that God not only can by his absolute power, but has also oftentimes in effect
deceived Greg Arim. in 1. did. 42. q. 2. and alios.
others, by means of wicked spirits, as S. Augustine also holds, and is
evident by many places of Scripture, as 2. Reg. 22. where to deceive Achab, it
is said: Dedit Dominus spiritum mendacem in ore omnium Prophetarum. (...). 83.
q.q. vltima.
God gave a lying spirit in the mouth of all his false Prophettes. And Esaias 63.
Ezech. 14. Job 12. Romans 1. it is said expressly, that God delivers men into
a reprobate God cannot deceive or cooperate to an untruth.
sense, which is the worst sort of deceauing a ma^s understanding that may be:
yet to all this they answer out of the ancient Fathers, and Scripture it
self, that God does only permit men to be deceived, and to believe untruth,
but does not concur actually or effectually to the same by any cooperation of
his to any falsehood or untruth whatsoever, nor can he do it by any power of
his, for that he should impugn himself which is truth. And this is the
greatest and highest detestation of lying used by our Doctors that possibly can
be imagined: and yet will the lying Minister say that they are (...), Fathers,
and patrons of lying. But let us see more of our Schoole-Doctors in this
behalf.

39. Our learned countreyman also Alexander of Hales, living before S. Thomas,
and as some say was his Master, being held for one of the most learned of all
Schoolmen that ever were before or after him, does handle diverse questions
very learnedly and piously about Alex. Halens. 2. p. sum Theolog. q. 122.
this point for detestatio^ of lying, as namely one, Why theft and
manslaughter may be lawfully permitted in some cases and lying never. Also how
it comes to pass, that the least degree of lying that is to wit an
officious, or (...), which in ordinary imperfect men is only a venial sin,
may come to be in men of perfection a mortal and damnable sin, concluding
thus: Quod sicut de Adam dicitur, quod ratione status sui peccauit mortaliter,
ita and iste ratione status in hoc genere peccat mortaliter. As it is said of
Adam, that by reason of his high state of innocence he sinned mortally (in
eating an apple by disobedience) so this man professing perfection of life in a
religious state, by any sort of voluntary lying, sins mortally; for which he
alleges diverse authorities Aug super illud (...). 1. Been ergo fecit etc.
of S. Augustine, as namely this; Sanctus vir etc. A holy man that does
perfectly cleave to God, which is truth it self, is forbidden either
purposely, or rashly to utter untruth, and for that the Scripture says, He
that lies kills his own soul, and again, Thou shall destroy all those
that speak lies, perfect men do fly with all care these kinds also of least
lies in such sort, as no man's life may be defended thereby, least they hurt
their own souls, while they go about to profit another man's flesh.

40. Again the said Father in another place: Tam sibi clausum deputat ad
subueniendum hominem per mendacium, Aug. lib. contra mend. cap. 20.
quam si per stuprum transire cogatur. A good and perfect man does think the
way so shut unto him from helping another man by any kind of lie, (though
never so officious) as if it were required at his hand to help him by
committing rape or incest: nay yet Halensis goes further proposing this
question; Whether if a man did certainly know, that by any least kind of lying
on his behalf, he might convert an Infidel to Christianity, and not
otherwise, whether he might do it, or no, and then concludes that he may not
in any case, alleging this reason out of S Augustine, that as it The rigorous
sentence of Halensis against lying.
is not lawful for me to procure another man's chastity by my own sin of
carnality; so much less is it lawful to bring another man to the knowledge of
truth, by my corrupting of truth. So this holy Religions Countreyman of ours,
whose conscience let the indifferent Reader compare with that of this
irreligious Minister, who not only in jest, or officious lying to any man's
good, either in body or soul, but in malicious lying, in prejudice of both, is
every where taken most manifestly, as before you have seen, and shall again
after upon sundry occasions.

41. Well then this severity of doctrine is taught by our Catholic Deuines,
against the sin of simple lying. But if we talk of lying in an oath, which
is perjury, every man may imagine how much more earnestly the same is detested
by them, in so much as the famous Doctor Navarre before mentioned, who is held
Nau. com. 2. in com. in cap. humanae (...) res. 22. q. 5. p. 453.
to be one of the most liberal, and largest in admitting Equivocations both in
words and oaths, with the due circumstances, and has written three whole
Treatises about the same: yet is he so severe and rigorous against lying and
perjury, as he teaches, that it is a mortal and damnable sin to swear
falsely, even in jest. And others yet go further, auouching that it is
damnable to swear (...) by evil custom, Ludouic. Lopez in Instructorio
consc. c. 42. de iu ramento:. quanquam. Caetan. Comm. in 2. 2. q. 791. art. 3.
yea sometimes also though the thing in it self be true which he swears: the
reason whereof they allege to be this, for that the act of swearing being
actus latriae, as Deuines call it, that is to say, an act of highest honor to
God, for that he is cited and alleged in an oath, as an infallible witness,
the man that accustometh to swear rashly puts himself in manifest danger
to swear also falsely, and thereby sins mortally, albeit, for that time he
swears the thing that is true, but as easily would he have done it, though A
man may sin mortally in (...) truth.
it had been false, in respect of his ill custom of swearing rashly, and
consequently, no less dishonor and contempt does he use toward the Majesty
of Almighty God therein, then if he had sworn false, which is an important note
for rash swearers to consider of and remember.

42. Well now all this being so, will our Minister still stand in his obstinate
calumniation, that we are lovers of lies, patrons of perjury, defenders and
allowers of falsehood, Doctors of deceauing, and the like? will he still defend,
Conf. p. 48
that there is nothing but lying in Rome? and that the Sea Apostolic grants
out full privilege of lying, as before you have heard him avouch? how then if
I show that all this, and much more against lying which you have heard out of
the Schoolmen, and ancient Fathers, is not only allowed and admitted by the
Sea of Rome, but translated also by the Popes thereof into the corpse of All the
for mer (...) against lying and perjury approved by Popes.
their Canon law, and so not only approved, but commended and commanded also
to be observed? Can any thing convince more our Ministers Calumniation then
this? Let any man look then upon the second Part of Gratian his Decretals
throughout the two and twentieth Cause for five whole questions together, there
he shall find not only the substance of all this, that here I have said, but
much more cited out of all the ancient Fathers, Popes, and Councels to this
effect.

43. For there he shall find set down out of S. Augustine, and Canonized, the
foresaid distinction of eight sorts or degrees of lying, with a reprobation of
them Cansa 22. q 2. c. 8.. Primum est.
all, where having cited those words of S. Augustine; Non est igitur
mentiendum in doctrina pietatis, quia magnum scelus est, and primum genus
detestabilis mendacij; we must not lie concerning doctrine of piety, or marters
touching our faith, for that it is a heinous sin, and the first kind of
detestable lying: he passes downward by all the rest, excluding them one by
one, and concluding: Quod neque pro (...) temporali commodo ac salute veritas
corrumpenda est, neque ad sempiternam salutem vllus ducendus est opitulante
mendacio: Neither is truth to be corrupted for any man's temporal commodity,
nor is any man to be brought to eternal salvation by the help of a lie; So S.
Augustine: And so Gratian that alleges him above four hundred years gone;
and so all the Popes that have Canonized this saying of his, and determined it
for Canonical law ever since to our days. And with what impudency then says
this Minister, from whence shall a man except privilege of lying, then from
that place, where (as your own learned Bishop says) there is nothing but
Conf. p. 48
lying; which in deed is lying upon lying, for that Espencaeus whom he (...)
in the margent says not so, there is nothing but lying, as in another place
shall be showed; and if he did, yet the thing it self is evidently proved to
be false by this, that we have alleged out of the Popes Canons, affirming all
sorts of lies whatsoever to be indispensable. Let any man then believe these
fellows that will be deceived.

44. But the Popes Canons go yet further, and do decree, and determine out of
the authority of the same Cap 9. Ex Aug. de verbis Apostoli sermon. 31.
Father S. Augustine and other Fathers, sundry points of greater perfection
against the sin of lying, as this for example: Quod non licet alicui
humilitatis causa mentiri: It is not lawful for any man to lie out of
humility, saying less of a man's self then truth permits. And Cap. 10. ex
Aug. tract. in ^oa. 43.
again in another Canon: Non licet mentiri, vt arrogan^ia vitetur, it is not
lawful to lie, that arrogance thereby may be avoided.

45. And as for perjury which is a lie confirmed with an oath, the said Canons
are so severe, as they do not only detest the same, both in him that
forsweareth, and in him that induces another thereunto, but do also appoint
greiuous penitential punishments for the same. As for example: Qui compulsus
a Domino sciens peierat (says one Canon) vtrique sunt periuri, and Dominus and
miles: Dominus quia praecepit, miles quia plus Dominum, quam animam dilexit: si
liber est quadragint a dies in pane and aqua Cause. 22. q. 5 cap. 1.
paeniteat, and septem sequentes annos. If any man compelled by his Lord, shall
w^ittingly forswear himself, both of them are perjured, as well the Lord as
the servant: the Lord for commanding, and the servant, for that he has loved
his Lord more then his own soul: let him do penance by fasting in bread and
water forty days, and seven years afterward. Et nunquam sit Ibid. c. 4.
sine paenitentia, says another Canon, let him never cease to repent, and do
some penance for this greiuous sin, so long as he lives. And here is to be
noted, that S. Anselme does cite this punishment out of the penitential
decrees of our ancient Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, whereby it
apperteineth the more to my Lord that now is of that Sea, to look to this his
Chaplain, or miles Morton, and finding him guilty of lying against his own
often oaths and solemn protestations, as we have discovered him in this our
answer, to cast some little aspersion at least of penitential satisfactions
upon him. And if forty days in bread and water may seem to much, let him fast
some four with contrition, and that perhaps may do him more good then any
books or writing against him. But to return to Gratian. He recites diverse
other Canons out of sundry ancient Councels, Fathers, and Popes decrees, as out
of S. Augustine: Homicidam vincit, qui Causa 22. q. 5. c. 5. Ex Aug. ser. 11.
de sanctis.
sciens ad periurium hominem prouocat, he passes a murderer in wickedness, that
wittingly does provoke another man to perjury: and the reason heerof is added
in the Canon; for that a murderer kills but the body, this the soul; nay two
souls, both his that forsweareth, and his own that provoke. So that Canon;
which me thinks were seriously to be considered, by them that force others to
swear against their consciences, knowing or presuming probably that the
swearers consciences are opposite to that which they are forced to swear: and
consequently, according to this rule of S. Augustine do murder eternally both
their own souls, and those of them that do urge them thereunto. Neither shall
it be needful to add any more in this place seeing the said Canons are extant
to be read and seen by all, and allowed, authorized, and set forth for sacred
and authentical by all Popes whatsoever.

46. My conclusion therefore upon this fifth consideration is, that for so much
as Romish Catholic doctrine The Conclusion of this consideration.
does teach and prescribe all this rigor, and severity against lying and
perjury, which in Protestants books, touching cases of conscience, we have not
hitherto seen expressed; it may well be inferred, that if Equivocation were
held for lying; it would in no case be allowed by the same doctrine, as lying
is not. And that if the Sea of Rome did give out privileges for lying and
perjury she would not authorize such severe penitential Canons against the
same, and that if nothing but lying were there, as Morton says there is not,
then were this lying also that she does acknowledge these Canons, which yet is
proved by the printed books that are extant thereof: and to these inferences I
do not see what can be answered, or brought to the contrary, except only our
Minister would say, that all our Doctors are deceived, in distinguishing
between lying and Equivocation, which (...) he say, he does first quit us from
lying wittingly, and consequently from lying at all, for that according to S.
Augustine and all other Doctors, he that lies thinking that he does not lie,
lies not at all, quia non (...) linguam ream, nisi Aug. in Enchirid. cap. 18.
and cont me^d, cap. 5.
men's rea, nothing makes the tongue guilty of lying, but a guilty mind, and
consequently T. M. having accused us so often and (...) of wilful lying, has
wilfully slaundered us, and here unwittingly clears us. And as for the
second, whether our Doctors do well and rightly distinguish between lying and
Equivocation, shall now presently be (...) in the sequent Chapters of this
Treatise.

THE SVBSTANCE OF THE CAUSE IS ENTERED INTO; And it is discussed, What
Equivocation, what truth, what falsity, and lying is: And some other points to
this effect.
CHAP. VIII.
ANd forasmuch as all the Considerations laid forth in the former Chapter, have
been set down only by way of preamble, for better understanding the true state
of the controversy; it shall be now expedient, that we draw near to the
substance of the matter and issue it self, especially being called thereunto by
the (...) provocation of our Adversary, who having made that vainglorious
entrance to his Treatise of confutation, which before we touched; to wit, I am
now to encounter this new-bred-hydra and Conf. p. (...)
ugly monster etc. And I shall prove this Equivocation and approbation thereof
to be lying, and that no one Iota in all Scripture, no one example in all
antiquity, no one shadow of reason in the natural wit of man, can be brought
for any proof or color thereof: After these bragges (I say) he passes to
another solemn vaunt saying: Now must we come into the listes of Page 50.
this conflict, and enter upon our Equiuocatour to convince him a gross lier,
whereby you see his great confidence in the cause, which I cannot ascribe to any
thing, more then to ignorance. For if he had understood well, or weighed the
points before laid down, or these other which presently we are to adioine, I
do not see how he could have spoken so confidently in so bad a cause.

2. For what? will he hold that all kind of Equivocation is lying? If he do,
he forgets himself, for he granted in the very next precedent page, that one
sort of Equivocation (which afterward we shall prove to be the only) is no ly.
For that having set down, as it were, for a principle or foundation of all his
Treatise, Conf. p. 48
what we do hold in this behalf, he says, that we do teach a double
Equivocation, the one mental when any thing is reserved in mind, differing
from that which outwardly is expressed, as when a Catholic being demanded,
whether he have any Priest in his Two sorts of Equivocation.
house, may answer by Equivocation that he has none, reserving in his mind
that he has none whom he is bound to utter or discover: the other kind is
verbal, when one word (he should have said also speech) shall import two or
more significations, as if a man should say you go to fast, or you may not ly
in my house, the word fast, may signify either fasting or hasty going, and
lying may signify either remaining, or telling untruth. And the like example
may be taken out of Aristotle himself, Arist. 1.
of the word Dog; as if one should say, I am afraid of a Ele^ch. c. 3
Dog, the speech is doubtful and equivocal, for that the word Dog has a
triple signification, to wit a domestical dog, a dog fish in the sea, or a
sign in the heavenly sphere, wherein when the sun has his course we call
them dog days, of which some man being afraid for his health, may say, I
fear the Dog etc.

3. Now then these two sorts of Equivocations being set down, T. M. is forced
presently to grant, that the later sort, whether it be in word or speech, is no
ly of it self; for who would say, that a man lies in using the different
significations of any word or speech? Who will affirm that he says an
untruth, if Verbal Equiuocatio^ no ly.
for example, he being of a hoate and sickly complexion, and fearing the
Canicular-dayes, should say, I fear the dog, meaning the dangerous influence
of that celestial sign, or of those Canicular-dayes: so as now by his own
confession, (for in effect he confesses it in this place, and can do no
other) this second part or member of Equivocation, is no ly; notwithstanding
perhaps the hearer should be deceived, and understand the speaker to mean of a
domestical dog, when he means the celestial. And of this more examples
shall be given afterward out of the Scripture it self.

4. But here is to be noted that (...), whom M. Morton styles by the title
of Oracle of all Logitians, setteh down three sorts or degrees of
Equivocation: the first in word or speech, when it has diverse significations:
the second in custom of phrase: the third in composition of single parts
together. Of the first he gives the example before mentioned of a dog, that
has different significations, of the second, though he name no example, yet
this may be one, if I should say: I esteem him a wise man that can hold his
peace, Three sorts of Equivocation out of Aristotle.
it would be understood in English for him that can govern his tongue, and
this in respect of our English phrase or custom of speech, but in any other
language it would rather be understood for him that can live in peace, or
maintain the peace he has made with his Adversary; so as the Equivocation or
multiplicity of sense, rises here out of our English custom of phrase as you
see.

5. Of the third sort he alleges many examples, and among other this:
Possibile est sedentem ambulare, and non scribentem scribere: That one sitting
may walk, and one not writing may write, in which sentences the words being
taken separatly and a part out of composition, they have but simple and plain
significations, but being compounded in this manner as they ly, have manifest
Equivocation and amphibology in them, by reason of composition. For if we
understand that a man sitting, while he sits, can walk, or while he writes
not, can write, which is, as Logitians say, in sensu composito, it is not
possible: but if we understand it in sensu diuiso that he that sits now may
walk afterward, or he that writes not now, has power to write afterward, no
man will deny it; and yet are neither of those things falsities or lies but
only Equivocal or amphibologicall propositions, that may be true in diverse
senses, and yet deceive the Reader or hearer if he stand not attent.

6. But now whether T. M. will admit our former reserved proposition, which is
partly (...) and partly verbal, under any of these three sorts of Logical
Equivocations, I know not: but if he do, then must T. M. makes his oracle to
err in Logic.
he confess the said proposition to be no lie, which is contrary to his
asseueration in this place, saing that (...) such Equivocation is a gross lie:
and if he do not, then must he acknowledge his Oracle of Logitians to have
erred grossly in making an insufficient division, which comprehends not all
the parts of the thing divided. For if the said mixed proposition be an
Equivocation, then must it have place amongst some of these three kinds, or
else the division should be insufficient: Quia latius pateret diuisum, quam
(...) diuidentes.

7. But howsoever this be, yet M. Morton who every where pretends great skill
in Logic, and therein also to be a cunning Aristotelian, calling the first (as
you have heard) the art of arts, and high tribunal of reason, and the second
the Oracle, showing also some disdain, when his Adversary does but so much as
name Logic Page 53.
in his behalf; this man (I say) commits here one of the most childish
absurdities, against both Aristotle and Logic, that commonly can be committed
by one that knows the first principles thereof: for he makes Aristotle to
define the whole by the definition of a part, as if one should define a man by
the definition of the body, or the body by the definition of one leg, or the
whole science of Physic, by the skill of the herbal, or of the pulse, or
in-sight in waters, which are but several parts of Physic: even so does M.
Morton, taking upon him to set down the definition of Equiuocatio^, thereby to
impugn our foresaid mental proposition, says thus: Equivocation in word or
speech (says the Oracle of all Logitians) is when one word, or one speech does
equally signify diverse things, as when one shall say, I am Conf. p. 54
afraid of a dog etc. which how wisely he applies to his purpose to
overthrow our proposition thereby, and to prove it no proposition at all, shall
afterward appear; now only is to be noted that these words are not the words
of Aristotle in defining, but in dividing Equivocation, and the very first
thereof to wit, Equivocation Homonymia 'estin etc.
is etc. are fisted in by Morton himself, as also the Greek thereof set down by
him for ostentations sake in his margent, for that Aristotle there making a
division of three sorts of Equivocation before mentioned, Arist. l. 1.
describes only the first sort thereof in these words: Elench. c. 3
There are three sorts or manners of speech according to Equivocation, and
amphibology, the one, when a speech or word 'Eisi de treis tropoi ton (...) ten
homony mian, kai ten 'amphibolian. heis men etc.
does principally signify many things, as an Eagle, or Dog etc. so as here
besides the slight or falsehood which is familiar unto our adversary, he is
convinced either to have abused greatly his Oracle, in making him to err
grossly in setting down a division of three parts of Equivocation, whereas
there is but one, or in defining the whole by a part only, as before has been
declared, whereof would follow that his definition non conuertitur cum definito,
the greatest absurdity that in Logic can be committed. Or lastly (which I
easiest believe) that he understood not Aristotle, though he would make a
flourish thereof, and so following the bat in flying hastily without light, has
broken his head on the walls before he was a ware.

8. But to return to consider somewhat further of the nature of Equivocation,
you will ask me (perhaps) what is the proper definition of Equivocation, and
how is the former mixed proposition partly mental and partly verbal, truly
called Equiuocal or Equivocation, for so much as it seems by that which
hitherto has been said, that of the double kind set down in the beginning, to
wit mental and verbal, the second only may properly be called Equivocation,
that is to say, when a speech or word fignifieth diverse things equally, which
I grant also to be true, if we consider the proper nature of Equivocation
treated by Aristotle, and his particular (...) and reasons which he had in
treating thereof, which ends by his Expositours are said to be two.

9. The first as it serves to discern captious and sophistical sillogismes,
from demonstratiue and dialecticall; to which end he alleges six several
kinds Arist. l. 1.
of the said captious speeches in his first book of Elenchs; (...). c. 3
and Equivocation is the first, amphibology the second: which Equivocation is
divided (as you have heard,) into three degrees before specified, to wit, into
Equivocation of speech or words that have diverse significations; into
Equivocation by custom ction of the dead, whereof we shall have better occasion
to set down afterward many examples, which no ways ca^ be avoided from
untruth, but only by some kind of mental reservation in the speaker; though
Thomas Morton strive and struggle never so much to fly the same: but the more
he struggleth, the more he intangleth himself like a fox in a net.

12. His second conclusion also (for two only he makes containing the whole
subject of his (...) reatise) T M his 2 conclusion.
seems to me very fond, simple, and untrue, where he says: Our second
conclusion is this, that every Equivocation, whether it be mental or verbal,
if it be uttered in an oath, though it be no ly, yet is it an abominable
profanation of that sacred institution of God; and I would ask him why? for
that whatsoever may be truly said may be truly sworn also, and without
profanation, so it be done with Equivocation both mental and verbal shevved
out of Scripture.
the due circumstances of truth, justice, and reverence; an oath being nothing
else, as Deuines do define it, but the calling of God to witness in any thing
that is affirmed or denied. And as for mental reservation, I would ask T. M.
whether a man may not as well swear, as say the foresaid sentence of the
Prophet, wicked men shall not rise in judgment? And for verbal Equivocation, I
would demand him, whether a man may not swear that which Christ our Savior
says and affirms to be true, as for example, Elias iam venit. Math. 17.
Marc 11.
Elias is come; and again of S. John Baptist, Ipse est Elias, Math. 11.
he is Elias himself, where the word Elias has plain Equivocation in it, for
that it signifies both the person and spirit of Elias, and in S. John was the
one and not the other. And again that saying of our Savior, Joan. 2.
Dissolve this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, the word
Temple has an evident verbal Equivocation, for it signifies both the
material Temple, and Math. 26.
Christ's body, and thereby deceived even the wisest Marc. 14.
hearers, who understanding the one sense, which was the more common, objected
the same to our Savior both in his judgment, and upon the Cross; and yet was
there neither ly, falsehood, nor profanation in this speech, though Equivocal;
no if our Savior had sworn it, for his word was of more truth and reverent
respect to God his Father, then our oath can be. And heerby may our Minister
see his wit in setting down so resolute a conclusion.

13. But there be many more examples as evident as this, as, Et ego si
exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham ad meipsum; Joan. 12.
when I shall be exalted from the earth I will draw all things unto my self,
where the word Exaltation Ambiguous and Equivocal speeches of our Savior.
may have many senses, as to be exalted to heaven, or to glory, which most men
would understand, rather then an exaltation upon a Cross, which Christ
understood, and consequently his speech was mixed with amphibology and
Equivocation; as were also the words omnia traham, which may have sundry
senses, and some in appearance not true. And in like manner when he said of
Lazarus sickness, Infirmitas haec Joan. 11.
non est ad mortem, this sickness it not to death; and yet he died, and
consequently there was a further sense reserved. And in the same place, Lazarus
amicus noster dormit, our friend Lazarus sleeps; the word dormit signifies
Equiuocally either to sleep or be dead, Christ understood of the second, his
Disciples of the first: and will you say that he did abuse or deceive them, or
use profane speech in this Equivocation? And yet further the same Equivocation
our Savior uses in Luc. 12.
those words, Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo, nisi ut ardeat, I
came to cast fire into the earth, and what would I else, but that it burn? The
word fire signifies both natural fire, and zeal or fervor of spirit, and
burning has the like ambiguity; and is this also profanation, if it were to
be sworn, as Christ did speak it? of phrase; and into Equivocation by
composition of single, and simple parts together. His second intention was to
treat thereof in regard of placing each thing in due order, in his rank of ten
Predicaments, or show their relation thereunto; and for this cause in his first
Treatise upon the said Predicaments, he makes that notorious division of
words, so well known unto Homonyma legetai, hon 'onoma monon koinon, ho de
kata t'ounoma logos tes 'ousias, heteros etc.
Logitians into AEquiuoca, Vniuoca and Denominatiua, saying those things are
Equivocal which do agree only in name, but are different in nature and (...),
according to that name, as a living and painted man do agree only in the name
of a man, but not in nature, essence, substance or definition; and the like may
be said in the word dog ge before mentioned.

10. Now then whereas our proposition before mentioned with mental reservation,
tends not directly to any of these two purposes intended by Aristotle; and
further has no doubtful sense of speech or words by nature of the words
themselves, or their double or doubtful significations, but only that it
utters not all the whole sense of the speaker; it cannot properly Of
Equivocation and amphibology how they differ.
be called Equivocal according to Aristotle's meaning and definition; but
rather in a more large and ample signification, as Equivocal may signify an
amphibologicall, doubtful, or double-sensed proposition, in respect of the
speaker and hearer, whereof the one sometime understands the same in one
sense, and the other in another. For which cause the most ancient
Schoole-Doctors, Fathers, and other Authors do use in deed rather the word
Amphibology then Equivocation in expressing like kind of speeches as our
proposition is; which of later years only has been accustomed to be used in
this sense, but the other is most ordinary with antiquity, not only among
Philosophers, but also (and that especially) among Orators and Rhetoritians, in
which science it is held for lawful and most commendable in diverse occasions,
wheror both (...) (...) makes mention, and (...) (...) lib. in (...). l. 7. c.
9
(...) a whole Chapter The cause then why the answering by such a reserved
proposition, as before has been mentioned, is called by some Equivocation, is
(...) by a certain similitude, the^ propriety of speech, to wit that eue^ as
Equivocation properly by community of name in things of different natures by
variety of significations in the self same words or speech, by (...) of
phrase, and composition of sundry sorts (...) make different and doubtful
senses, and meanings to the hearer; so in this case by mental reservation of
some part of the foresaid mixed proposition, the like effect of doubtfulnes is
bred in the hearers (...), and thereby consequently is named Equivocation,
although improperly as Equivocation is taken for any doubtful word or speech
that may have diversity of senses or understandings.

11. But now to infer hereof as T. M. does in his first (...) of this his wise
dispute, that every such (...) by mental reservation is a gross ly, Page 49.
is not only a gross presumption, but a (...) ignorance also in my opinion,
not to call it a gross impiety; for by T. M. first conclusion.
this means he might condemn of gross lying a great number of speeches of
the holy Ghost, both in the old and new Testament, where diverse propositions
are set (...) and uttered with imperfect sense, somewhat being reserved which
necessarily must be supplied, to save the said speech from untruth. As for
Psalm. 1.
example, where the Prophet says Non resurgunt impij in iudicio: Wicked men
do not rise again in iugdment: if the Prophet reserved not somewhat in his
mind vnuttered, for the complement of this speech, as namely that they shall
not rise to glory, as S. Paul expounds 1. Cor. 15.
it to the Corinthians it would seem an Heresy, and contrary to the article of
our creed, I believe the resurrection spirit or life in ner, (...) the (...) of
marvel of that she saw; And again the same holy Ghost talking of the
immensity of Salomons wealth, said: Tantamque copiam praebuit argenti in
Jerusalem, quasi lapidum, and Solomon made (...) as stones in Jerusalem, may
a man swear this without untruth or profanation? what say you M. Morton? may
a man swear this in your Lords Court of the Arches? and the same I demand of
those last words of S. John's Gospel; There are many other things which
Jesus did, which if they should be particularly written, I do not think that
the world it self would hold the books that should be written thereof.

18. How can this be true M. Morton in plain and literail sense, and without
some amphibology or Equivocation? and yet I think you will not say it is a
lie, being part of the Gospel, or that it may not be sworn without
abominable profanation. How then will you, or can you defend it? Truly by no
other way, but by the license of a Rhetorical figure called Quint. l. (...).
inst. orat. cap. 6.
HYPERBOLE, which Quintilian defining says, it is Ementiens superiectio, a
lying exaggeration; and yet will no true Divine call it a lie indeed, and much
less perjury or profanation, if any man should swear it: whereby is made
manifest, and apparent the childish vanity of our Adversary in his former
conclusion that every verbal Equivocation is an abominable profanation. And
so much of this second kind of Equivocation, which you see how lawful and
usual it is, even in the Scriptures themselves, and in the speeches of our
Savior which is truth it self; whereby having repressed somewhat the insolency
and ignorance of this our vaunting Minister, we shall return now again to
the first kind of Equivocation by mental reservation, about which is our
principal controversy. And for that our Minister affirms two points about
the same, the first, that it is no proposition at all according to the true
nature of a proposition; and (...) second that it is untrue morally, and a
gross ly: we shall handle and discuss these two points severally in the two
Paragraphes that do ensue.

14. In these other words in like manner, Hoc est corpus meum (about which
there is so great a do now throughout Christendom) the Protestants for
defending their opinion about the Sacrament, must needs grant a verbal
Equivocation, trope, figure, and amphibology, whereby they have a double sense,
and one far different from that natural plain and common signification, which
all Catholics hold throughout About the words hoc est cor pus (...) whether
they contain Equiuocatio^ or not.
the world, which is the sense or senses which they and theirs do frame of
these words, whereby does follow in their sense and interpretation that they
are Equivocal, according to the definition of Aristotle; and yet did Christ
use them in a more sacred institution of the Sacrament, then was that of an
oath; and yet I think the impiety of Thomas Morton will not reach so far, as
to condemn Christ of an abominable profanation in that his sacred
institution; and consequently he may see that his second general conclusion
was but an inconsiderate, bold, unlearned, and untrue assertion.

15. And thus much of this second kind of verbal Equivocation, set down and
censured by T. M. which indeed is only true and proper Equivocation, as before
has been noted (for that mental in rigor is none) and agrees only to the
definition of Equivocation, delivered not only by Philosophers, but Orators
also, Cum pluribus rebus aut etiam hominibus (says Quint. l. 7. inst. orat.
cap. 1.
Quintilian) eadem appellatio est HOMONYMIA, vt Gallus etc. When one name
agrees to many things or men, it is called Equivocation, as the word Gallus
signifies both a French man, or a Cock, and some other things; by which
definition as also by these other descriptions alleged out of Aristotle
before, is evidently seen that the first kind of Equivocation by mental
reservation, cannot properly be called Equivocation but AMPHIBOLOGIA, ambiguity
of speech, which stretches larger then does Equivocation, and is Genus unto
it, as Quintilian in the same place affirms; and that the second kind, which
consists principally in the diversity of significations in words or speech
(such as before we have alleged out of our Saviors speeches) is properly
Equivocation, and consequently he an Equiuocatour in this kind, which Thomas
Morton says, that his soul does so much abhor and detest.

16. I might moreover to this purpose for further battering of this fond
conclusion of Thomas Morton, allege the use of all Rhetorical tropes, and
figures, and ask him whether, as they may lawfully be used in speech, so
likewise in an oath? As for examples when Christ our Savior calls Heretics
and evil Pastors lupos rapaces, ravening wolves, which is a trope called a
Metaphor, may a man swear it is true? for that in nature they are men and no
wolves. And so likewise 1. Cor. 4.
when S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians using a figure called EIRONEIA: Iam
saturati estis, iam diuites facti estis, sine nobis regnatis etc. Now you are
full, now you are rich, now you reign without us, you are wise, we are fools,
you are strong, we are infirm, you Ironicall speech a kind of Equivocation.
are noble, we are base etc. might S. Paul have sworn this which he writes
without an abominable profanation of that sacred institution of an oath? I
think he might, for that often he was accustomed to swear, that is to say, to
call God to witness, that he spoke the truth, and yet here he cannot be
presumed to think as he spoke, or as the words literally do import: where
then is Thomas Morton in this his conclusion?

17. Again I would demand of him whether a man might swear, without
profanation, that speech of the holy Ghost, concerning the Queen of Saba,
when (...). Paral. 9.
she saw the wisdom, riches, and greatness of Solomon, Non erat vltra in ea
spiritus prae stupore, she had no longer

THE SECOND PART OF THIS CHAPTER, Whether a mixed proposition, partly uttered,
and partly reserved in mind, may be a true Logical Proposition, and
Enunciation.. 1.
Having showed hitherto as well what Equivocation and amphibology is; as also
that all Equivocation is not lying, or rather that none is properly or can be
lying so long as it remains within the nature of Equivocation (which yet
afterward shall better be discussed) and moreover that simple and verbal
Equivocation either in words or speech, may be lawfully used by any good man,
to a good end; yea and sworn also with due circumstances, if need (...)
without perjury or profanation; and that our Savior Christ upon sundry
occasions did use the same: Now we must restrain our talk to the former part
of ambiguity, or supposed Equivocation only, which is by mental reservation,
to wit (not to depart from our adversaries example) I am no Priest, so as I am
bound to tell it to you; the first part thereof being uttered, and the later
reserved in mind, which so much displeases M. Morton as he would annihilate
the same, saying first, that it is not a hidden truth, but a gross ly, as
before you have heard in his first proposition, and then, that it is no (...)
at all, if we respect the laws of Logic, which he uttering in the vehement
heat of his spirit, has these words: Consult (says he) with the Ancient
logitians, Page 54.
and prove (mark what scope I yeald unto you) that from the beginning of the
world, in the whole Current of so many thousand generations of mankind, till
within the compass of these last four hundred years, and less; that ever
any Logitian, whether Infidel or belieuer, did allow your mixed proposition
(which is partly mental and partly verbal) or think it a proposition, and I
will be (which my soul utterly detesteth) an Equiuocator. So he. And we must
consider of this last point first, and afterward of the rest; for they are all
pregnant as you see.

20. And first to begin with Thomas Mortons soul, I know not what it does,
or may detest in Equivocation, but only perhaps the bare name, thereby to seem
to contradict us, seeing it is so frequent in Scripture, as Thomas Mortons soul
detesteth Equivocation, but not lying.
now has been said, and after shall be more amply proved: but sure I am that,
that soul of his detesteth not lying, as by manifold examples has appeared,
and consequently it were sin to admit him for an Fquiuocator, for he would
infame the lawful use thereof; for that Equivocation can not stand with lying,
as in the ensuing Paragraph shall manifestly be proved.

21. Secondly is to be considered in these his words the large scope which he
gives us, to prove from the beginning of the world, in the whole Current of so
many thousand generations of mankind, that any Logitian held our mixed
proposition for a proposition etc. Wherein I would ask him first, what he
means by the Cnrrent of so many thousand generations of mankind, or how many
thousands he thinks them to be since Logic was first invented, or brought
into art, which before Aristotle's time was either Arist. l. 2.
little, or imperfect, though he confesses in his Elenches Elench. c. 8
that Tisias after those that went before him, and Thrasimachus after Tisias,
and after him again Theodorus had collected some obseruatio^s; but how many
thousand T. M. his erroneous account of generations.
generations will Thomas Morton have past from that time to ours? S. Matthew in
the beginning of his Gospel recounting the whole current of generatio^s that
had run from Abraham unto Christ, which Math. 1.
were more then from Aristotle's time to ours, says they were but forty and two
in all, to wit, fourteen from Abraham to David, fourteen from David to the
transmigration of Babylon, and fourteen from thence to Christ; and where then
are so many thousand generations of Thomas Morton? Is not this a very childish
ouerlashing?

22. But there follows another simplicity much more notorious: Consult (says
he) from the beginning of the world, till within the compass of these late
four hundred years, and less, that ever any Logitian, whether Infidel, or
believe did allow your mixed proposition, or think it a proposition, and I will
be an Equiuocater; By which words you see that he excepteth against the
Judgment of all the Logitians that have lived within the compass of these last
four hundred years for trial, whether this sort of mixed proposition be a
true Iawfull proposition or no, according to the rules of Logic; which if you
consider it well, is one of the most solemn fooleries that ever man of
learning could utter. For if he had excepted only against them, and their
judgment in genere moris that is to say, for trial, whether the proposition
before mentioned be true morally, or in moral truth, as it is opposite to
lying; though it had been presumption to prefer therein his own weak judgment
before so many great and learned Deuines, and Philosophers as have lived, and
written in the time by him assigned: yet had it been less marvel, as The
foolish insolency of T. Morto^.
proceeding from the ordinary pride of an Heretical humor, exalting it self
above all in such affairs; but to reject them all in the art of Logic, as
not able to judge whether a mixed proposition be a true Logical proposition,
according to the rules of that science, wherein they were most exact, and
eminent, and are known to have been the chief, and almost only Commentatours
and expositours upon Aristotle in that behalf; this (I say) is supereminent
folly. For what? Did Albertus Magnus, S. Thomas of Aquin, and so many others of
that rank know logic? Or to omit externe writers, did our famous
Countrymen, Alexander of Hales, Scotus, Burley, Middleton, Occham and others
know Logic? If they did, why does Thomus Morton except against them all in
this science? If they did not, how did they write so many large and learned
Treatises thereof? And for proof I refer him to the last named William
Occham his famous Logic entitled: Summa totius Logicae Magistri Gulielmi
Occhami Anglici, Logicorum argutissimi etc. And he shall find therein more
Logic then he understands, and more judgment then he can conceive.

23. But to leave this, and to examine the matter about this proposition out of
his Oracle of Logitians Arist. l. 1.
himself, the said Oracle in his first book of Resolutions, Prior resolut. c.
1.
intending to set down the laws of a good sillogisme, whereof propositions are
the parts, defines a proposition Protasis men 'esti logos kataphatikos, 'e
'apophatikos, tinos kata tinos.
thus: Proposit to est Oration affirmatiua, vel negatiua alicuius de alique: A
proposition is a speech which does affirm, or deny any thing of another. As
for example (not to depart from the argument of M. Mortons speech) I have a
Priest at home, or I have no Priest at home, the one is a proposition
affirmative, the other negative, of which sort of propositions Aristotle
according to the matter, or subject he handles, assigns diverse divisions, as
here in this place, he first deuideth it into Universal, Particular, and
Indefinite; and then again into Syllogisticall, Demonstratiue, and
Dialecticall, and in his Topickes Lib. 1. Topicor. c. 12.
into Moral, Natural and Rational; but for so much as appertains to our
matter in hand, it shall be sufficient to note this division following, that
some propositions Diuersdiuisions of propositions.
be mental only, that is to say, conceived only in our mind, and affirming, or
denying any thing therein, as if they were uttered: and so according to all
Deuines there may be mental Heresy, when a man in his mind does affirm, or
give consent to any Heresy in his heart, for the which he may be damned
everlastingly, A mental proposition.
if he repent not, though he should never utter the same in word or writing to
any. And in like Math. 5.
sort Christ our Savior says in the Gospel, that there may be mental
adultery, when a man gives consent of mind to his concupisce^ce, though he
commit not the external act thereof.

24. And now that this mental proposition, is a true proposition in the nature
of a proposition (though not altogether such as Aristotle treats of in
ordine ad (...), in order to make a sillogisme, as after shall be declared) is
evident; for that it affirms or denies, consents or dissenteth to somewhat
in the mind: Arist. l. de interpretat. cap. 1.
nor can any man doubt with reason, but that there is a mental speech, as well
as verbal. And Aristotle himself affirms it, when he says: Ea quae sunt in
voce, earum quae sunt in anima passionum notae, and ea quae scribuntur, eorum
'Esti men ta 'en te, phoone. ton 'en te, psyche, pathematoon symbola kai aa
graphomena ton 'en te phoone.
quae sunt in voce, those things which are uttered in: speech are notes and
signs of those things which are in the mind, as those things that are written
are notes of that which is spoken. So that according to Aristotle, as the
external writing represents unto us a man's speech, so the external speech
represents unto us the internal speech, affection, or asseueration of the
mind. Wherefore of this there can be no controversy, but that there is a true
internal speech of the mind, affirming or denying, approving or rejecting,
consenting or repugning as well as in external speech, and consequently are
there true mental propositions to be granted and allowed. And in this I
think M. Morton will not stand with us, though we confess as I have said,
that Aristotle's end and purpose being in his Logic to teach us to dispute by
discourse of Enthimemes and Sillogismes, for attaining of sciences, he had no
use of these mental propositions, as neither of propositions by signs, or mixed
of diverse sorts; but only names the other two that consist in voice or
writing, as only making for his purpose. But yet we must not imagine that he
denied the other, which are clearly proved out of nature, reason, and use of
human life and conversation.

25. Wherefore the second member of this our division is, that besides the
foresaid inward mental propositions, there are external also uttered in
diverse Four sorts of external propositions.
manners, some by voice, some by writing, some by signs, some mixed or compound
of diverse sorts, as to give example only of this last (for that the former are
clear of themselves:) If a man lying on his death bed, should say before
witness, I give and bequeath unto Thomas Morton etc. And then his voice failing
him (...) call for a pen, and write a thousand etc. and then a palsy taking
also his hand he should point toward an Angel of gold, showing by signs that
he meant a thousand such golden angels, I doubt not, but in this case Sir
Thomas being a clerk would say in conscience (and so he might in justice) that
all this were but one Diverse (...): (...) of mixed propositions.
simple affirmative proposition, as if the sick man had said, I give and
bequeath to Thomas Morton a thousand angels of gold, though it were uttered by
him in three several sorts of propositions, vocal, literal and by signs,
as has been showed.

26. And if (...) be granted (as needs it must) then why should he cry out,
as he does, against that other mixed proposition, that is partly mental, and
partly vocal? why should he deny it to be a true proposition? If he answer
for that Aristotle did not handle any such mixed reserved propositions, he says
nothing. For that Aristotle's purpose being (as is said) to treat of
propositions in order only to Sillogismes, and argument, it was wholly from his
purpose to handle any, but such as served to that end, and so Aristotle handled
no sort of mixed propositions at all, either reserved or not reserved: and yet
you see by the former example of him that bequeathed in his Testament partly in
one, and partly in another, that in the common use, trade, and conversation of
man's life (whereof we treat) there may be use thereof, as in like manner,
there is of In moral: matters there may be mixed Propositions.
talking by signs, as deafe-men do, who utter truly their minds by signs
equiuale^t to true propositions, affirmative or negative, and so are
understood: and yet Aristotle treats of no such, not for that they are not,
but for that they appertained not to his purpose: of framing sillogismes for
attaining of science as has been said; for which cause also he professes to
exclude Lib. Periher. c. 4.
deprecatoriam orationem, all deprecatory speech, and all Rhetorical, and
Poetical tropes and figures, which yet, as we see, are fitly sometimes used
not only in the common conversation of men, but even in Scripture it self,
though they be not to the purpose of syllogisticall propositions which must be
simple, clear, and plain in their natural signification without translation,
figure, ambiguity, or Equivocation, and consequently it is no good argument to
say, that Aristotle handled not such propositions, and therefore they are no
propositions at all. For that Aristotle (as has been said) respected his
particular end of Sillogismes, we ours of common conversation. But our
adversary urges yet further, and it is the whole force of all he An objection
ansvvered.
says, that this mixed proposition partly vocal, and partly mental, to wit, I
am no Priest, with reservation of the other part, so as I am bound to utter the
same to you, can be no true logical proposition: for that according to
Aristotle, Every proposition is enunciatiue, that is to Conf. p. 56
say, it is ordained for signification to express some thing, but no mental
or inward conceit of the mind is ordained by God (says he) as a sign to
express, or signify as words, and writings do etc.

27. Whereto I answer, granting that every proposition must be Enuntiatiue,
that is to say (as before has been out of Aristotle declared) it must affirm
or deny Lib. de interp. c. 4. and prior. lib. (...). c. 1.
somewhat, true or false; but this is not done only by external voice or
writing (though Aristotle for the causes above mentioned, do only name those
two ways) but by signs in like manner as has been declared, Logos
'apopha^tikos 'en ho, to aleetheuein 'ee pseudest hai hyparchei.
and much more by internal actions and operations of the mind, which according
to all Philosophers are three, the first simple apprehension of any thing; the
second affirmation or negation of the same; the third discourse, when one thing
is inferred of an other, as in arguing or disputing, as this is so, ergo the
other is, or is not so. And to the first of these three inward operations of
the mind and understanding, do answer outwardly three external effects, as
to the Three internal operations of the mind.
first simple words, or speech, without affirming or denying, as in
definitions without the verb for examples sake, animal rationale mortale etc.
all which is nothing else but simple apprehension of the thing, without
division, composition or discourse. To the second operation do answer
composition and division, to wit affirmations and negations: and to the third
Enthimemes and Sillogismes, that by discourse do infer one thing of another;
so as in our mind there passes no less then in our outward speech, voice,
writing or signs, but rather more, for that as Aristotle before says, these
outward actions, are but signs of that which 1. Perihermen. cap. 1.
passes within. So as albeit the one part of a reserved mixed proposition, does
not (...) aliquid ad extra, express any thing outwardly to the hearer; yet it
does inwardly to the speaker. And if it be urged that it must be vox, according
to Aristotle, I answer, that as there is a voice in writing as well as in
speaking, according to Aristotle himself, so is there an internal voice, as
well as an external, and an internal speech as well as an external, which
speaks, affirms, or denies to the inward ears as well or better then the
voice, or letter to the outward; which is sufficient to correspond to the
Logical definition of a proposition, even according to Aristotle's rule, though
(as has been said) he defined properly external voices only, and propositions
consisting in speech or writing.

28. But our Minister will insist that it is not enuntiatiue or significant to
the hearer: Whereto I answer, That a mixed (...) ued proposition is (...).
that the definition of a proposition or enuntiation names not the hearer, but
that it be of his own nature enunciatiue, affirming some thing true or false,
whether the hearer understand it or no. For when a man talks to himself,
though those that stand by understand him not; yet is his speech enunciatiue,
for that it affirms or denies somewhat true or false of his own nature,
though no man hear, as when a man speaks to God, or with himself, or with
men also if one should utter a proposition in Greek or Hebrew, which the
hearer understands not, shall not the proposition be enunciatiue, or a true
proposition for that the Auditor understands it not? When Christ our Savior
spoke many high things of his divinity, humanity, passion, resurrection, and
other Mysteries which the Scripture says that his disciples understood Luc.
(...).
not, shall we say that his speech was not enuntiatiue, or his propositions no
true propositions in Logic? What will T. M. say to that prediction against
the obstinate Jews, They (...) hear (...) their (...), and shall not
understand etc. Meaning principally of the Math. 13.
preachinges of the Apostles, will you lay the fault that Ibid cap. 16 and 17.
the Apostles speech was not (...) or significant, for Marc 4. and 6.
that the Jews did not understand the same. Hence then appears, that it
depends not of the hearer to Luc. 2. and 8. and 18.
make the speech (...), or not, but it is (...) that it be so of it self, and
of his own nature.

29. And so now to apply all this to our own purpose in hand, this proposition
whereof part is uttered in voice, and part reserved in mind, being but one
simple proposition, denying, that I am a (...), with obligation to utter the
same, is truly enuntiatiue of it self, though the hearer understand not all,
but one part thereof only, and consequently it is truly and properly a
proposition, even according to the rules of Logic, for that Aristotle's
definition agrees thereunto which our Minister before so confidently denied.

30. But now here lastly he may seem perhaps to make some doubt whether this
mixed proposition partly uttered, and partly reserved be one (...) proposition,
or no, whereof yet in reason there ca^ be no doubt; for that here is but only
one single enunciation in Whether a mixed proposition be one only proposition.
the mind of the speaker, to wit, that he is no Priest with obligation to utter
the same; here is but one only simple negative enuntiation depending of one
only verb and negation that denies me to be a Priest with that obligation,
which is the thing appointed by Aristotle to make a persect enuntiation or
proposition, which may be proved also by this example: If I should utter those
words of the Scripture; Pater meus (...) me Joan. 10.
est, My Father is greater then I, reserving in my mind those other that I
affirm them according to the sense and meaning that Arrius had, I should
incur, Heresy and be damned for this proposition, but not (...) the former
part, for that they are words of Scripture, nor for the later alone that are
reserved, for that they affirm or deny nothing of themselves, as having no
verb; and therefore they (...) condemn me as part of the former, and
consequently all makes but one single proposition. For that for the first
operation of our mind only, which is simple apprehension without affirmatio^,
or negation, God condemns no man, there being no consent at all therein, and
consequently no merit nor demerit, but only in the second and third operations
before specified.

31. And to this effect that the two parts of these and like propositions, the
one partly uttered and partly reserved do make but one single and simple
proposition, we might allege many other proofs, both by reasons, and
examples. By reasons, for that they answer Proved by logical reason to be one
proposition.
but to one only conceit of the speakers mind that they contain but one only
negative (...), to wit, that I am no such Priest, as I mean, and finally that
they have but one subiectum, one copula, and one praedicatum (Logitians know
what I mean:) for the subiectum whereof all is affirmed is I, the copula that
ioineth together is the verb am, and all the rest is the praedicatum,
wherefore it cannot be diverse but one only proposition.

32. By examples the same may be confirmed diverse ways, I mean both by
profane, and divine. As first, if one should make an interrogation, and the
other answer, all in effect is but one proposition: as if one should say to a
servant, Is your master at home? And (...) answer, no it were in effect but
one only proposition equivalent to this, my master is not at home; yea though
the one part were uttered in signs only and the other in voice, or writing; as
if the servant should answer only by a shrugge of the shoulders, or by (...):
king his head, as in Italy they are wont, to express a negative.

33. But this is somewhat more perspicuous if the answer be ambiguous, as when
Cicero was demanded by his adversary in the cause of Clodius slain by Milo,
whom he defended, what time of the day Clodius was slain, to wit before noone
or after, thinking thereby to intrappe Milo, Tully answered sero, which word
signifying both toward the Evening as also to late, Cicero Two doubtful
answers of Cicero.
meant in the second sense, to wit, that he was slain to late, having deserved
to have been slain sooner, so as this only word sero contains the force of a
whole proposition in the sense of the speaker, though not of the hearer.

34. And the like answer was that of the same Orator to a base fellow that
having been a cook came See Quint. l. 6. Instit. Orat. c. 4, and Donat. in
come^t. in Adelphos Ter.
after by riches to pretend an office in the commonwealth, and asked of Cicero
whether he also among others that were to give their voices would favor him
therein? whereunto he answered, Immo, Ego quoque tibi iure fauebo, which answer
having two senses by reason of the words quoque and iure, the hearer took it
in the better sense, that he also would of right favor him; but Ego Coque tibi
iure fauebo.
the speaker meant, that he would show him favor due to ae cook with a mess
of pottage, and yet did not this reserved sense make it two propositions but
one.

35. And finally I might allege all the examples that Orators do use and
prescribe under the figure called by Cicero, Reticentia, and by the Grecians
APOSIOPESIS, as Quid plura? What shall I say more, or what shall I complain
more? which verbes say, complain, or the like were reserved in mind by the
speaker, and yet is it but one proposition; so that of Virgil, Quos Ego; sed
motos praestat etc. Whom I, if I had Virgil (...). 1
them in my hands, would etc. All which later part is reserved in the mind of
the speaker, and yet it makes but one proposition with the rest that is
expressed. And thus much of profane examples.

36. But if we would allege all the divine that might be cited out of the
Scriptures, there would be Divine examples.
no end, as that among other before mentioned out of the Psalm: Impij non
resurgent in iudicio, wicked men Psalm. 1.
shall not rise again in judgment, which though it seem a whole proposition;
yet is it in deed but a part, and the other part was reserved in the Prophets
mind, and expounded afterward by S. Paul to the Corinthians saying: Omnes
resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur: We 1. Cor. 15.
shall all rise again, but all shall not be changed into glory, and how do I
know that these later words were reserved in the Prophets mind? for that
otherwise his other words that were uttered should contain an Heresy against
the article of our Creed, I believe the resurrection of the dead, whereof is
inferred that those words uttered, with the other reserved, made but one only
simple and single proposition.

37. In like manner when our Savior said to those negligent virgins that came
to late, Non noui vos, I Math. (...).
know you not, it made but one negative proposition, with other words reserved
in his mind, to wit, vt saluem vos etc. I know you not amongst mine to save
you, or the like. And how know we that these or like words were reserved in
Christ's mind? For that the other alone had been imperfect and false, for he
knew them better, then they knew themselves, but he knew them not as his, and
so was all but one proposition, or enunciation negative. And to deny that this
was a true enunciatiue proposition, for that one part was reserved in the mind,
and another uttered, is against all truth and reason, as now we have declared,
and might further by infinite examples, but that a few do show the force of
the rest, and diverse of these examples out of Scriptures will come more fitly
to have their place in the sequent Paragraphe.

38. Wherefore to end that which now we have in hand, we see with what
confident ignorance, or ignorant The conclusion of this paragraph.
confidence Thomas Morton did so resolutly before tell, and promise us, that if
throughout so many thousand generations of mankind any Logitian whether
infidel, or belieuer did allow a mixed proposition partly mental, and partly
verbal, he would against the detestation of his own soul to the contrary, be
an Equiuocator: which if it be now proved a simple Hypocrisy, then may that
sinful soul of his begin rather to detest lying then Equiuocating, which may
stand with truth, as now more largely we are to (...)

THE THIRD PART OF THIS CHAPTER, Whether the former mixed proposition partly
uttered, and partly reserved be a ly, or no?. 2.
NOw come we to the chief point of this controversy to discuss whether the
foresaid reserved proposition be truly, and properly a lie, or no. Hitherto we
have handled that which less imported, whether it be properly Equivocation,
and properly a true and logical proposition, and therein discovered the small
substance and vain cauillations of our Adversary: but now we must examine that
which is of chief importance, whether it be a ly, perjury, deceit, falsehood;
and finally whether it be sin or no, to use the same in any case, or for any
cause whatsoever, for that our Adversary Thomas Morton his conclusion is both
arrogant, and universal, as before you have heard. Our first conclusion (says
he) is, that every Equivocation Page 49.
by mental reservation is not a hidden truth, but a gross ly: Now with what
rigor and severity our Catholic doctrine does condemn and detest lying, even
in the least degree thereof, we have declared partly in the former Chapter, and
for clearing the matter more in this place, it will be necessary to set down
briefly both the definitions of truth, falsity, lying, perjury, deceit, and
the like, and then to consider, whether our former proposition do incur any
of the foresaid imputations, or no?

40. And first of all this word Truth is defined in different manner by diverse
Philosophers, as also ancient The definition of truth.
Fathers, and namely by S. Augustine, S. Anselme, S. Hilary and others, who
have written of this matter. And S. Augustine in diverse places of his works,
and namely in Aug. lib. 5. and deinceps c. 36.
his books De soliloquiis, and de vera religione. S. Anselme also has written
a special book De ueritate, and it is a question, as you know, that Pilate
proposed unto our Savior in his judgment, but had so little care of the Joan.
13.
resolution thereof, as he would not stand to expect the answer; wherefore S.
Thomas gathers out of the said D. Tho. 1. quaest. 16. art. 1.
Authors diverse definitions, and before him again our learned Countreyman
Halensis gathers eight, and holds that every one of them is true in a
several Halens. 1. part. (...) q. 15. par. 3.
sense, some as they respect God, the first truth and measure of truth; some as
they respect man's understanding; some the things themselves; of all which
number of definitions, two seem to me most clear, and effectual, one of S.
Augustine, Veritas est qua ostenditur id quod est; Truth is that, whereby is
showed that which is in deed, to wit in the understanding, as S. Thomas
interprets, saying, that Veritas principaliter est in intellectu, secundario
vero in rebus: Truth consists principally in the mind and understanding, and
secondarily in the things themselves, for which cause he approves well this
other definition set down by a Philosopher, Veritas est adaequatio rei, and
intellectus; Truth is an equalling of the thing it self with man's
understanding, that is to say, when a man understands a thing as it is in it
self, and the thing in it self is in deed as it is understood, then is it
truth, and when this is not observed rises falsity.

41. For better understanding whereof we must consider (...). Sorts or degrees
of Tiuth.
three sorts or degrees, as it were, of truth, and consequently as many of
falsity; for that as the Philosopher says Contrariorum eadem est disciplina,
the self Arist l. 1. topicor. c. 8
same discipline or methood is to be held in contraries, let us treat then of
truth and falsity, as it is uttered in speech, for this is to our purpose, for
examining of truth or falsity in our foresaid mixed proposition.

42. The first sort or kind of truth is when that my Father is dead, if he be
dead, though the speaker think not so, then is this speech conform to the
thing, and it is truth in this first kind.

43. The second sort of truth is, when our speech is

44. The third sort is when our speech agrees both that my Father is dead, and
do think so, and it is so in deed; and this is the most perfect kind of truth
in speech, when there is an adequation of the speakers understanding with the
thing spoken, as the former definition prescribed.

45. And in contrary manner, there are three sorts 3. Sorts of (...).
of falsity, correspondent to these three sorts of truth, the first called
materia, material only, when our speech is not conform to the thing spoken,
though it be agreeable to the understanding of the speaker. The second, a
formal falsity, when the speech agrees not with the mind or meaning of the
speaker, though it do with the thing meant or spoken. The third is when the
speech agrees neither with the understanding of the speaker nor with the thing
it self, and this is a complete falsity, as if my Father not being dead, nor I
thinking him to be dead, should say notwithstanding he is dead, and these two
last kinds of falsity, or either of them do make a ly, and not the first:
kind alone, for that the essence and formality of a ly requires that the
speech do disagree from the mind and understanding of the speaker: in which
sense S. Augustine says, Non facit linguam ream nisi men's rea, Nothing Aug.
ser. 28. de ver. Apostoli.
makes the tongue guilty of a ly, but a guilty mind, meaning one thing and
speaking another.

46. And this same distinction of truth and falsity is ser down by S. Anselme
in other words, thus: Sicut est veritas triplex, rei, cognitionis, and
signationis, sic etiam est falsitas Ansel. in dialogo de veritate cap. 2.
triplex, rei, cognitionis and signationis, seu enunciationis: As there are
three kinds of truth, one of the thing it self, another of the inward
understanding, and a third of outward signification, so is there like wise a
triple falsity of the thing it self, of the knowledge or understanding, and of
signification or enunciation. The first is in the things, the second is in our
mind, the third in the voice or sign that utters: whereof he that will see
more, let him read our foresaid learned Countreyman Alexander of Hales in the
first Part of his Theological Sum in his sixteen question of falsity, and
first member.

47. And heerby it appears that mendacium, a ly, is a particular species or
kind of falsity, in so much as every speech that is false, is no ly, but only
that which has the essential point before mentioned of dissenting from the
mind and understanding of the speaker. For if I thinking, as has been said,
that my Father is dead, should say so, though he were not dead, yet I make no
lie, but only materially, which may be without any sin at all, and hereupon
are there diverse definitions, and descriptions set down by Doctors, and holy
Fathers of lies, and lying: first S. Augustine defines thus a lie: Mendacium
est falsa vocis significatio, cum intention Aug. l. de mend. c. 4. and l.
cont. mend. c. 12
fallendi: A lie is a false signification of speech, with intention to deceive.
In which definition or description rather Thomas Morton does interpret, that
by the word vox, as the most usual and principal sign, 2. 2. q. 110. art. 1.
whereby man's mind is uttered, S. Augnstine does mean all kinds of signs, or
signification whatsoever, either by word, writing, signs, or actions: for that
a man may lie also in factes, as he proves out of the Philosopher, in his
Moralles, and S. Ambrose words are Arist. 4.
clear: Non solum in salsis verbis, sed etiam in simulatis operibus Eth. c. 7.
mendacium est: A lie consists not only in false Ambr ser. de Abrah.
words but also in feigned works; though this in rigor be not so much to be
called a lie, as dissimulation. And to the imitation of this definition of S.
Augustine, do Schoole-Doctors frame diverse definitions Lib. 3. did. 38.
to the same effect, as the Master of the Sentences first out of S. Augustine:
Mentiri est contra mentem ire, to lie is to go against a man's own mind and
understanding: and then again of himself: Mentiri est loqui The essence of a
ly.
contra hoc quod animo quis sentit, sieve illud verum sit, sieve non; To lie is
to speak against that which a man thinks in his mind, whether it be true, or
false: For albeit he should spoke a truth thinking that it is false, he should
lie, as on the contrary side, he that should speak that which is false,
thinking it to be true, should not lie, says S. Augustine, nor be a deceauer,
but deceived: so as Aug. li. de mend. c. 5.
the very essence of a lie consists in this that the speaker do utter
wittingly that which he knows to be untrue, and not in deed meant by him.

48. And as for the other clause cum (...) fallendi, with intention to deceive,
S. Thomas does note that it is D. Tho. 2. 2 q. 110. ar. 1
an effect of lying which is not necessary absolutely to the nature of a lie,
but rather as an effect, to the full complement and perfection thereof. For that
a lie is essentially made by that as has been said, when a man wittingly and
willingly utters for truth, that which he knows to be false, though he
should have no express intention to deceive; which deceit is defined by
diverse thus: Decipere est falsam existimationem in alterius What deceit,
guile, fraud, and fallacy is.
animum inducere, diuersum ab eo, quem habet is qui loquitur; To deceive is to
engender in another man's mind a false existimation, judgment, or opinion of a
thing different from the understanding of the speaker, which deception if it be
in words or signs only, it is called dolus or fallacia, guyle or fallacy; but
if it be in work, Aug. li. 2. de doctrina Christiana c. 3. D. Tho. 2. 2 q. 55.
art. 4
or deeds, as is buying, selling, and the like, it is called fraus, fraudulent
dealing, whereof S. Augustine is to be seen in his second book De doctrina
Christiana, and S. Thomas in the second Part of his Sum, where he handles
this matter at large.

49. And now the nature of a lie being thus defined, Aug. li. de mend. c. 14
and in verba Psalm. 5. Perdes Omnes qui loquuntur mendacia.
it is divided also according to the said S. Augustine, and Schoolmen after
him into three kinds or sorts; The: one made out of maglignity to do some
hurt, and no good, and it is called a pernicious lie; the second to do: some
man good, and no man hurt, and it is called an officious lie; the third that
means neither hurt nor good, but is made in jest, and is only a merry lie.
And albeit one of these kinds be much more grievous then the other, as namely
the first, which of his own nature is a mortal sin, and the other two often
venial; yet are all three ever sins, and never willingly to be committted,
or permitted in speech or oath for any respect whatsoever, nor for any man's
good temporal or spiritual, according to the received sentence of the said
Doctors, as in the former Chapter has been declared.

50. Wherefore to pass on; An oath is when any thing is affirmed with calling
God to witness thereunto, What an oath is.
which when it is false, and falsely sworn, is a grievous sin, named
perjury, for the contempt used therein toward the Majesty of God, whose
testimony See Tolet. l. 4. (...). ca. (...). 21.
is alleged for the confirmation thereof. For avoiding of which heinous sin,
three conditions are required by Schoole-Deuines, as necessary to be observed
according to the admonition of Hieremy the Prophet, Ier. 4.
to wit, truth, justice and necessity, which latter includes due
circumspection and reverence.

51. Now then to apply all this to our present purpose, about the former
proposition, I am no Priest reserving The appli cation of the former
definitions to our proposition.
in mind the other clause, So as I am bound to utter it unto you:
Schoole-Deuines do easily show that such a proposition, according to the
definitions before set down, of truth, falsity, deceit, lying, and perjury
may be in certain cases, and with due circumstances truly avouched, and sworn
without incurring any sin at all; and I say in some cases, and with due
circumstances, for that hereupon depends much the lawfulnes of the thing. For
that if a Priest (for example) should be asked this question by his lawful
Superior or Judge, to whom the conusans of the thing demanded, did lawfully
appertain, and that the said Judge demanded lawfully, that is say, according
to: order of law and justice; then were he bound under pain of mortal sin
to answer truly and directly,: although it were with evident danger of his
own Of this see S. (...). 2. 2. q. 69. Siluest. verbo accusatio cap. 13. and
verbo co^fessio cri minis q. 1 Sotus l. (...). de just. q. 6 art. 1. and 2.
Gabr. in 4. did. 15. q. 6 art. 2.
life, or of others. And this is the common sentence, and judgment of all
Catholic School Doctors without exception, unless sometimes the smalnesse of
the matter it self should in some cases make it venial, but of his own
nature it is damnable, because it is against the Majesty of almighty God, whose
substitute every lawful Magistrate and Judge is, and against public justice
and the common good of each State and Kingdom, as also against charity toward
our neighbor, and obligation unto truth it self. Whereby it follows, that
albeit a man's present life or death stood upon it, and that by denying a truth
Angelus verbo co^fessio secreti.
without swearing he might save the same; yet is it not lawful to do it. And
this is our severity in that behalf.

52. But on the other side, if the Judge be not lawful Nauar. in manuale c. 18.
n. 57. etc. 25. n. 36.
or competent, or have not jurisdiction in that matter which he demands: as
if a lay Magistrate in a Catholic country would enquire of matters not
Bannes, Arragon and Salon comentar. in. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 69. and many others.
belonging to his jurisdiction, as for example, sacred or secret; or that he
should offer injury against law to the Respondent, in the manner of his
proceedings, whereby he should be disobliged in conscience to answer to his
meaning or interrogatories, yea somtims rather obliged not to answer thereunto,
when it concerns other men's hurt: then may he This do hold all the foresaid
Authors and others related by Petr Nau. l. 2. de restit. cap. 4. part. 2.
answer, as though he were alone, and no man by; for that he has no necessary
reference to him at all, nor to his demaundes, questions, or speech, but that
he may frame to him self any proposition that is true in it self, and in his
own sense and meaning, though the other that hears understand it in a
different sense and meaning, and be thereby deceived.

53. Neither is this to deceive another, but to permit him that offreth me
injury, and is no Superior of Mich. Sal. 2. 2. q. 69. art. 2. controu. 11.
Petrus de Arragon and Petrus Bannes upon the same place and others, as the
common consent of al.
mine in that cause, to be deceived by my doubtful speech, and by concealing
that which I am not bound to utter unto him: which kind of deceit or
dissimulation is lawful, as in the precedent Chapter has been showed, by the
example of stratagemes in war, whereby though many be slain, and (...) hurtes
done; yet nihil homo iustus (says S. Augustine) praeterea cogitare debet in
his rebus, nisi vt bellum iustum suscipiat, quod cum susceperit, vtrum aperta
pugna vel ex (...) vicerit, nihil ad (...) interest. A (...) man in war ought
to think (...) nothing, but that the war be just, that he takes Aug. q. 10.
in Iosue.
in hand, which being certain, it imports nothing in respect of justice,
whether he get the victory by sleightes, or by open war. And this he speaks
by occasion of the direction of God unto Iosue, when he Iosue 8.
taught him what snares and wiles he should use to intrappe the inhabitants of
the City of Hai, as he did, to their ruin and destruction: and thereby See
Henriq. quodl. 15. q. 16. Adrian. in 4. de restit.
all Deuines do infer, that such dissimulations and stratagemes are lawful
in just war, which yet S. Thomas does limite out of S. Ambrose to be true,
when the parties have not given their word and promise to the. Sed nunc.
Victor. relect. de iure belli. nu. 37. and others.
contrary: but yet both he, and all other Deuines do hold that these
stratagemes are no lies.

54. This same point also, that it is lawful in this sense to deceive, that is
to say, to permit another man to be deceived by our speech or doings, so we
utter D. Tho. 2. 2. q. 4. art. 3.
no lie, is made most manifest by the example of God himself, who though, as
before has been said, he cannot Ambros. li. de offic. cap. 29.
possibly deceive, or make a lie, no not by the omnipotency of all his power;
yet are there manifold places in Scriptures to show, that at least he
permits Though God deceive not yet permits to be deceived.
men to be deceived by words, and factes of his, and of so many holy
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints governed by his spirit; yea
of his own Son that is the most exact rule of all truth, for otherwise how
could so many Heresies arise, which are all commonly founded upon the evil
understanding of some words or sentences of our said Savior, and his
Apostles, or of the Prophets and Patriarchs before them, which yet Christ and
the holy Ghost did forsee, together with the infinite errores, and hurtes that
would ensue thereof; and yet did not they prevent that deceit, nor cease to
utter those speeches by which they knew that so many would be deceived: nay as
in the former Paragraph has been declared, Christ our Savior spoke (...)
things doubtful, ambiguous and Equivocal in themselves, that had or might
have different meaninges and interpretations; and yet I presume Thomas (...)
will not go about to bring our Saviors said speeches within the compass of
this clause of the (...) of a lie, cum mentione fallendi etc.

55. Wherefore to return to the application of both clauses of this definition
of lying to our proposition, I say, that neither of them do agree thereunto,
and much less both. Not the former, for that the speech The first clause of a
definition of a ly excluded from our proposition.
agrees to the mind, and meaning of the speaker, for that I do truly and
really mean that I am no Priest, in the sense that I speak it, which may be
any that pleases me, or that I list to (...) to my self, seeing I have no
obligation to respect any thing what the demaunder speaks or asks, for so
much as he demands me against law and equity, so as I may mean that I am no
Priest, such as I should be, such as I desire to be, such as is worthy of so
great an office, and sacred a (...), such as he ought to be that occupies the
place of God in governing of souls, I am no Priest subject to the demaunder,
or obliged to answer his demaundes, or the like: and as if I were alone I
might make to my self this proposition, I am no such Priest, and it were true,
and not false, for that it agrees as well with my meaning, as with the thing
it self: so also now is it truly meant and spoken in my sense, though not in
the hearers, and consequently the definition of truth before mentioned agrees
thereunto, for that there is here adaequatio rei and intellectus, an agreement
between the thing, and the speakers understanding, and so much for the first
clause of this definition of lying. For as touching examples to prove the
verity of like speeches out of holy Scripture they shall be alleged more
abundantly afterward.

56. The second clause also which is intentio fallendi, intention to deceive,
is easily excluded from this our The exclusion of the second clause in like
manner.
proposition, both by that I have said before of the lawfulnes of stratagemes,
when injuries are offered, and by the form of Christ's own speeches; as also
by that notorious distinction of S. Augustine to this purpose alleged, and
auerred by S. Thomas and other Schoolmen, August. in Psalm. 5. v. perdes omnes
etc. and li. 22. contra Faust. c. 33. and 36. and quaest. 26. in Genes. Great.
cause. 22. q. 2.
and related into the Canon law it self by Gratian, to wit: Aliud est celare
veritatem, aliud falsum dicere: It is one thing to conceal a truth, another to
speak an untruth. And again: Manifestum est (says the same Father) non esse
culpandum aliquando verum tacere: It is manifest, that it is not reprehensible
sometimes to conceal the truth. And yet further speaking of the fact of
Abraham, that desired his wife to say she was his sister, veritatem (says he)
voluit celari, non mendacium dici, his meaning was to have the truth hidden (to
Genesis 12.
wit, that she was his wife) but not a lie to be spoken, for that according to
the phrase of Scripture she might also be called his sister, for that she was
his brothers daughter, whereupon S. Thomas determines the matter D. Tho. 2. 2.
q. 111. art. 1
thus: Verbo mentitur aliquis quando significat quod non est, non autem quando
tacet quod est, quod aliquando licet: He lies in word who signifies a thing
that is not so (to wit in his mind) but he lies not, that concealeth somewhat
that is, which sometimes is lawful. And again in another place: It is not
lawful (says he) to make a ly for D. Tho. 2. 2 q. 110. art. 3. ad 4. Aug. li,
de mend. c. 10
delivering another man from any kind of peril or hurt whatsoever, but to
conceal prudently a truth by some dissimulation is lawful, as S. Augustine in
his book against lying does testify. So S. Thomas.

57. Now then in this our Case we do affirm, that there is no ly or untruth
avouched at all, but only a concealing of that truth-which I am not bound to
utter unto him, that demands it unjustly. For as if Avraham had been
demanded, whether Sarai were his (...), he might for concealing that truth
which he would not have known, have answered yea, and this truly, and without
a ly, according to S. Augustine, though in another sense then the demaunder
meant: So in our case, for that I deny my selse only to be a Priest in that
sense, which in my understanding and meaning is true, and I affirm nothing
false, or that is not so, but only do conceal some certain truth which, as
has been said, I am not bound to utter to him that demands, for that I am not
his subject in this cause, nor he my lawful judge; nor if he were, yet does he
not lawfully demand me, for that the matter in right appertains not to his
jurisdiction, as has been said: in this case (I say) my answer is lawful and
allowable by all the Catholic Deuines, Lawiers, and Canonistes that write of
like cases, as after in a several Chapter shall more particularly be declared.

58. There remains then only in this place to be considered whether I in this
case do deceive or no, or have intention to deceive according to the second
Whether in our pro position there be intention to deceive
clause of the definition of a ly cum intention sallendi, wherein according to
that which before has been set down, it is evident that my intention is not to
deceive in this proposition, but to defend my self against the captious, and
injurious demandes of an unlawful Judge, I speaking a truth in it self
according to my meaning, though he taking it otherwise is deceived thereby, but
without any fault of mine. For as in the examples before mentioned, when our
Savior said to his Disciples of Lazarus, Lazarus sleeps, and they Joan. 11.
deceived therewith, answered, If he sleep he is safe, Christ deceived them
not, but they themselves upon his doubtful words. And when the Jews were
deceived with those other word s of Christ, Dissolve this Temple and I will
build it up again in three days, the Son Joan. 2.
of God cannot be truly said to have deceived them, for that he spoke that
which was truth in his own sense, and permitted only the other to be deceived:
so in the proposed case, the unjust examiners are only permitted to be
deceived, for that the Priest his principal intent is not intentio fallendi,
intention of deceiving, as the definition of lying prescribes, or as S.
Augustine in another place says fallendi cupiditas, a desire of deceiving, but
rather euadendi desiderium, a desire to escape, and defend himself. And
therefore, as if he should go to one of himself without necessity, and tell
him that he is no Priest, he being a Priest, might be argued of lying, for that
his principal intent may be supposed to have been cupiditas fallendi, an
appetite of deceiving; so here the thing being evident that primaria
respondent is intentio, the first and principal intention of the answerer is
not to hurt or impugn others, but to defend and cover himself unlawfully
pressed, as he presumes, that his defense is by speaking a truth in his own
meaning (which meaning and understanding of the speaker is the chief rule and
measure of truth, as before you have heard:) it follows evidently, that it
can be no ly, nor deception on his part, though by his manner of answering they
deceive themselves, which is not to be imputed to any fault of his. And thus
much of this matter in this place; the rest shall be more fully explaned in the
Chapter that ensues.

THE TRVTH BEFORE SET DOWN IS FVRTHER DEBATED and proved by the assertion of
Schoole-Doctors, Deuines, Lawiers, both Canon and Civil, Reasons, Practice of
the Adversaries; and by the very instinct of nature itself.
CHAP. IX.
THat which briefly has been avouched in the later end of the precedent
Chapter, about the lawfulnes of the former proposition, might be greatly
enlarged many ways, if we would stand thereon, or handle the same to the
satisfaction of learned men; but for that the compass of this short Treatise
bears it not, and I must have a care as well of the capacity of the vulgar
Reader as of the more learned: I shall only add to that which has been said,
some few more perticulars, in sundry kinds of proof, fit for the confirmation
of our purpose; and in the ensuing Chapter lay forth some special and
principal cases, wherein the said ambiguous Proposition or Equivocation may be
used, whereby I doubt not but that the whole controversy will remain clear and
manifest.

The first Point about Schoole-Deuines, Doctors and Lavviers.. 1.
2. You have heard in the precedent Chapter, how Thomas Morton challenging us
to prove out of Logitians, that our former reserved proposition, I am no
Priest, with obligation to tell it unto you, is a true Logical proposition; he
excepted presently against all Logitians for these last four hundred years,
wherein Logic most flourished, and yet he calls it, a new-bredhydra (to wit
of four hundred years old by his own confession,) and adds further, Mark
what scope I yield unto you: which if you mark it well, is a very markable
point indeed, for that after Aristotle (by whose rules the said proposition is
proved) he can show I suppose A large folly.
very few Authors that have written of that science, until within the said
four hundred years: wherefore to except those, and yet to call it so large a
scope, is a large folly in my opinion.

3. And the same I say of Deuines, which have written within the said four
hundred years, commonly called Schoole-Deuines and Schoole-Doctors, against
whom he excepteth in like manner, notwithstanding they be those to whom it
belongs principally to discuss, examine, and determine this matter, as
afterward shall be showed. And yet as though he had made no such exception,
but admitted all kind of writers throughout all times in this matter, he makes
this new ridiculous vaunt: Show us (says he) for your mental reservation, but
one Father, whether Greek or Page 71.
Latin, one Pope whether Catholic or Antichristian, one Author whether
learned or unlearned, who did ever so fancy etc.

4. Whereunto I may answer, that if the maker of this vaunt had had but one
dram of discretion, he would never have set down so many ones, to confound
himself: for that presently we shall show so many Fathers, Greek and Latin to
have allowed of the foresaid speech, as had occasions to handle such
Scriptures, as contain like propositions; and so many Popes to have approved
the same, as have allowed the said Fathers sentences, or have lived since the
collecting of the Canon Laws, wherein the said Fathers An idle Phantasy.
sentences are abundantly cited and set down: and that so many learned, grave
and pious Authors have been of this fancy (if it be a fancy) as have been
consulted in cases of most moment, that comprehend this controversy. So as for
this Minister to except against four hundred years together (which in effect
contains a grant of all the learned of that time) and yet to challeng one
Father, one Pope, one Author learned or unlearned, shows a broken phantasy of
an idle brain indeed.

5. But now to lay before the Readers eyes some brief consideration what is
rejected in the exclusio^ of these last four hundred years, about our point
in controversy, it is to be noted, that the science of Deuinity, called by the
Greeks Theology, for that it is properly and immediately about God, and matter
belonging unto God, has grown from time to time, according to the growth of
mankind and to the most ordinate and excellent providence of almighty God, as
S. Paul divinely (...) in diverse parts of his Epistles, which we shall here
endeavor to declare by this particular deduction, that from the beginning of
the world unto the deluge, there passing above a thousand and six: hundred
years, to wit more then from Christ to this time, set down in Scripture under
the lives only of ten me^, there was no other Theology in all that time, but
only by speech and tradition, of Father to son, friend to friend, master to
scholar, and predecessor to successor: and from this again unto the time of
Abraham, which was upon the point of three hundred: years, the same was
observed: and from him to Moses, The deduction of Deuinity from age to age.
which was above other four hundred years, no: book is extant that was
written, though in these last four hundred years from Abraham to Moses God
had his several people, as is known, which were governed without any written
word at all.

6. But Moses having written the five first books of the Bible, commonly
called the Pentateuch so many ages after the beginning of the world, and sundry
other holy men diverse books and Treatises after him again, until the coming
of Christ; albeit the science and study of Deuinity was much enlarged thereby;
yet was it barren in a certain sort, in respect of that: which ensued after
under Christ, in the writings of the Apostles and Apostolic men, and large
Commentaries and expositions written thereon by succeeding Christian ages, which
in time growing to be so many and great volumes, partly of the said expositions
and explanations of Scriptures, partly of Treatises, books, and dogmaticall
discourses, partly of Ecclesiastical Histories, partly of discussions and
determinations The increase of Christian Deuinity.
of Councelles, both General, National, and Provincial, and partly finally
of resolutions and decrees of Bishops and chief Pastors, for direction of
their flocks, especially of the highest that held the Chair for governing and
moderating of all the rest.

7. These things (I say) growing at length to so great a bulk, and manifold
multitude of books, Treatises, tomes, and volumes, as many men had not time to
read them over, and much less leisure and judgment to digest or conceive
them, with that distinction, order and perspicuity, which was necessary; it
pleased almighty God, out of his continual providence, for his said Church, to
inspire certain men (...) four hundred years past, to reduce the said vast
corpse of Deuinity, to a clear method, by drawing The beginning of
SchooleDeuinity.
all to certain common places and heads, and by handling and discussing the
same so punctually, distinctly, and perspicuously, as any good wit in small
time may come to comprehend the whole, without reading over the other so many
huge volumes as before was necessary. And this method was called afterward
Schoole-Deuinity, for that it did principally consist in disputation and
discussion of matters exactly, by discending into particulers, and dissoluing
all doubts; whereas the other manner of (...) of Positive Deuinity.
Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors, Histories, and Counsels, severally remained
with the name of positive: Deuinity, as contenting it self only with assertiue
doctrine, without disputation or further discussion.

8. The first and principal Authors of this method, or methodicall study is
accounted to be Petrus Lombardus Bishop of Paris, above four hundred and fifty
years Master of the sentences.
past, who for that he gathered into the foresaid method of general heads,
all that any way appertained to Deuinity, out of the sayings and sentences of
Scriptures and Fathers, dividing the same into four books, and every book
into several distinctions, he was called afterward the Master of the
sentences, and many learned men in ensuing times wrote Commentaries thereon,
enlarging with great variety of matter, the said method which he had invented.
Others also made several Sums of Theology, different in name, but in effect
to the same imitation, whereof may be accounted one of the first, our often
named learned Countreyman Alexander of Hales in Suffolk, and after him S.
Thomas of Aquine, upon whom many other learned men, since that time have, and
do unto this day write large Commentaries. Diverse also considering that this
methodicall study has two parts, the one speculatiue, which is handled
principally by the exercise Speculatiue and moral Deuinity.
of our understanding in dispute, the other moral, that apperteineth to manners
and action of life; sundry learned men do betake themselves principally to
this later, as more necessary to practice of Christian life, and cases therein
to be resolved in Conscience.

9. And about the very same time, or little before, it came to pass by the
like providence of almighty God, that the same method was thought upon, for
reducing the Decrees and Constitutions of Councels, Fathers, Bishops, and
Popes, apperteyning to Ecclesiastical government (which grew now to be many)
unto like general heads, books, causes, questions and Chapters, (...) more
facility of comprehending and remembering the same, the chief Author thereof
being Gratian Collector of the Canon law.
Gratian, a learned Monk of S. Benedicts Order: which laborious and
methodicall compilation approved by Popes at that time, and from time to time
afterward, and expounded by the writings and Commentaries of many skillful
men in that science, is called the (...) Cano^ law
as the other part appertaining to civil affairs, deduced from the ancient
Imperial Roman Civil law.
Laws, is called the Ciuill-law; and both of them concurring together, in
this our cause, with the foresaid Schoole-Deuinity, and flourishing more within
these last four hundred years then ever before, as you have heard; the
exception made against them all by this our Minister, must needs be judged for
light, vain and impertinent.

10. For he that will cast his eyes upon the face of Christendom, for these
last four hundred years, and consider with himself that in all these ages,
the most eminent renowned men for learning, conscience, and virtue in all those
three sciences, or faculties now A consideration of moment.
mentioned, and unto whom for all doubts, and difficulties appertayning unto
justice, equity and truth, recourse was made, as unto Oracles of their days,
for the high esteem they were held in among all men, he (I say) that shall
consider this, and with what integrity they dealt in this affair, and must be
presumed to have dealt according to their skill, for that they were not
interessed therein for any temporal respect whatsoever; he that shall but
think of this, and weigh their uniform and grave resolutions upon this point,
that a man pressed unlawfully to answer by unjust manner of proceeding, may
delude his demaunder, and not answer to his intention but to his own, will
easily see, what difference there is to be made between these men's judgments,
and the clamours of a few unlearned Ministers in this behalf, that understand
not the grounds whereon the other, or themselves do speak.

11. And to name some few examples; who were accounted more learned School-
Deuines in their days in France, Germany, and Flanders, then the forenamed
Petrus Learned men of France and Flanders that defend Equivocation.
Lombardus Bishop of Paris, Master of the sentences? John Gerson Chancellor
of that University? Petrus Paludanus Patriarch afterward of Jerusalem?
Henricus de Gandauo Archdeacon of Tornay? Gabriel Biel a very Religious learned
man? Adrianus that was Master to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and after that
Cardinal and Governor of Spain for Philip the first, and finally Pope by the
name of Adrian the sixth? I might name also Iansenius Bishop of Gaunt in these
days, and others of our times, but of these their learned works are extant,
and upon diverse occasions they favor and defend the lawfulnes of Equivocation
in sundry cases, as in the next Chapter shall be more particulerly declared.

12. In Italy and Sicily also many might be named both for School- Deuinity,
Canon, and Civil law, but I In Italy and Sicily.
shall be contented with them only, whose works I have had time to look upon
for this point, as Gratian with his Commentaries, Pope Innocentius, S. Thomas
of Aquin, Cardinal Caietan, Astonsis in his Sum written almost three hundred
years since, Angelus de Clauatio, famous Siluester, Cosmus Filiarcus Chanon of
Florence, Abbot and Archbishop Panormitan, Bartolus and Baldus most famous
Lawiers.

13. But of the Spanish Nation many more, as Didacus Couarruuias President or
Chancellor of Spain, Martinus In Spain and the Kingdoms thereof.
Nauarrus his Master, both excellent Lawiers; Dominicus Sotus Confessor to
the Emperor Charles the fifth, Cardinal Tolet, Emanuel Roderiquez, Ludouicus
Lopez, Antonius de Corduba, Petrus Nauarra, Dominicus Bannes public Reader of
Deuinity in Salamanca, Michael Salon Doctor and Professor of the
Deuinity-Chaire in Valentia, Petrus de Arragon public Professor of the same
science in the foresaid University of Salamanca, Gregorius de Valentia, and
Ioannes Azorius public Readers in Rome, all renowned men for learning,
science, and conscience, and through whose hands great matters have passed for
direction of justice and equity both in foro fori, and foro poli, as Schoolmen
speak, both for divine and humane proceedinges; and yet do none of all these
condemn or deny absolutely the use of Equivocation in certain cases, but do
rather approve and confirm the same, I mean both lawiers and deuines, when
they treat upon these heads following, de seruando secreto, of concealing
secrets, both known in the Sacrament of Confession and otherwise: de mendacio
of lying: de iureiurandis, of swearing: de fraterna correptione and restituenda
fama, of brotherly admonition and restitution of another man's fame wrongfully
The titles under which Equivocation is ordinarily handled.
taken away: de Iudice, de Reo, de accusatore, de testibus: of a Judge and his
office, of the defendant, accuser, witnesses and the like, what they may do or
answer lawfully in cases that may occur.

14. Neither are these Authors to be accounted as single and separate from the
rest of the learned men of their ages in this point which we handle, but rather
are conioined wholly with them, both in judgment and practice; so as what these
men did define to be lawful, that did others in like manner both maintain and
put in ure in just occasions, especially if they were of the self same order
and rank: So as when for example we cite Siluester, Dominicus Sotus Caietan,
Paludanus, Lopez and Bannes, of the order of S. Dominick to have taught this
doctrine without reprehension of others of the same order, we may infer
probably that all or most learned men of that Order throughout Christendom are
of the same opinion. And the like we may infer of those of S. Francis order
in respect of Angelus de Clauatio, Astensis, Antonius de Corduba, here cited.
And the same of S. Augustines order, by Petrus de Aragon and Michael Salon. And
of the most ancient and venerable Order of S. Benedict containing many
thousands of learned men, by that which Abbot Panormitan, and Gregorius Sayer
our learned Countreyman Different orders of religious men concurring all in one.
have written upon this matter, and the later more largely then many others.
And the like may be inferred of the order of Jesuits, by that which is extant
written by Cardinal Tolet, Gregorius de Valentia, Emanuel Sa, Francisius
Suarez, Ioannes Azorius, Ludouicus Molina and others. So as by these few
witnesses we may take a notice of the whole body and corpse of learned men
throughout Christendom; for that Lawiers also both Civil and Canon, that have
written of the foresaid heads have conformed themselves to the same doctrine,
as lawful in equity and conscience. And if any have dissented, it has been in
particular cases only, as before in the seventh Chapter and third
Consideration has been noted.

15. As for example Ioannes Genesius Sepulueda Historiographer of Charles the
fifth Emperor, whose authority Thomas Morton does often times allege against
Joan Genesis (...)
us, though in the principal he make fully with us in his book entitled
Theophilus; De ratione dicendi testimonium in causis occultorum criminum; how a
man may bear witness in causes of secret crimes; yet in some cases he
dissenteth from the foresaid Authors, holding singular opinions by himself,
but yet upon such grounds as do indeed confirm the common sentence of the
rest, as afterward in due place shall be declared.

16. Wherefore to end this Paragraph about the Consideration of School- Deuines
and Lawiers, it shall be sufficient to have named these few, and though I had
purposed once to have set down in particular the several places of their
works, where they handle this matter, and show their opinions in approbation
thereof; yet finally not to trouble the Reader with so many quotations, I judged
it best to defer these unto the next Chapter, where I mean to lay forth some
particular cases in which their several sentences are to be alleged, and so
we shall pass on now to the other points of his Chapter that do remain:
only aduertising by the way, that if our few English Ministers that do
contradict this common received doctrine (for I do not think all to be so
rash or sensles) should be put in a pair of balance, for learning, piety, and
discretion, with these Authors here named, and that a man were to adventure his
soul with one party, I do not doubt, but that the discreet Reader will easily
see where it were reason to make his chose. And so much of this.

THE SECOND POINT touching Scriptures and Fathers, For mixed and reserved
propositions.. 2.
17. ANd first of all I have thought best for more breuity, to join Scriptures
and Fathers together, in this Point of mixed and reserved Propositions, for
that the exposition of the (...) going with the text of Scripture, does
evidently show both their senses therein, and conioine both their testimonies.
For if we can show that the holy Ghost in Scriptures does use such doubtful
and ambiguous propositions as is that, I am no Priest, with some mental
reservation, equal unto this of ours, with obligation to reveal etc.) and
that by ordinary sound and signification of the words uttered, the hearer may
be deceived, and take it in one sense, and the speaker by the part reserved in
his mind may truly understand it in another, and that the ancient Fathers do
by their expositions confirm the same, then do we prove directly our purpose,
both out of Scriptures and out of Fathers in like manner, notwithstanding
Thomas Mortons vain assertion, that not one Iota in all Scriptures, Page 48.
not one example in all Catholic antiquity etc. And albeit I have showed
diverse examples already in the two precedent Chapters, that do convince most
evidently that which we are to prove; yet for that we have not urged before the
exposition of Fathers upon those places, we mean here out of the abundance
that we have, to adioine sundry other testimonies, to the end the matter may
remain undoubted.

18. And we shall begin with an example so clear, as it shall be like to that
of ours in all points, if we chang only the names of the persons, and
conditions of (...) that spoke and heard. As that example of S. A clear
example out of S. John Baptist his answer.
John (...), who being examined and demanded by them that were sent unto him
from the Jews, whether he were a Prophet or no, he deined it. Propheta es tu?
Et respondit non: Are you a Prophet? and he answered no; and yet he meant not
absolutely to deny himself Joan. 1.
to be a Prophet, for that it had been false both in respect of that his Father
Zacharias had prophesied of him in his nativity, Et tu puer Propheta Altissimi
vocaberis Luc. 1.
etc. And thou child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, for that thou
shall go before his face to prepare his ways; as also for that the testimony
of Christ himself in S. Mathewes Gospel is clear, Quid (...) videre?
Prophetam? etiam dico vobis and plus quam Prophetam: Math. 11.
What went you forth to see in the desert? A Prophet? yea I say unto you, and
more then a Prophet. Whereunto our said Savior in S. Lukes Gospel adds,
(...) inter natos multerum Propheta Iohanne Baptista (...) 7.
nemo est, there is no greater Prophet among the children of women then John
Baptist.

19. Here then you see a proposition uttered by the holy Ghost, that of it
self is ambiguous and of a doubtful sense, and according to the ordinary sound
and sense of the words uttered, seems false, no less then our proposition I
am no Priest. For as this may be refuted by them that know me to be a Priest,
and as Thomas Morton still urges (though fondly,) is contrary to my knowledge
and conscience, that know my self to be a Priest: so here S. John's denial,
that he is a Prophet, may be refuted by Scripture, and must needs be contrary
to his own knowledge and conscience also, S. John had a men tall reservation.
after Mortons manner of urging, (...) that he could not but know himself to be
a Prophet, and is no less subject to the calumniation of lying, then our
speech of denying my self to be a Priest, except it be saved by some mental
reservation, which he uttered not in words.

20. But now what this reservation was, is not so clear among ancient Fathers,
though all do agree that there was some, and consequently do stand with us
against Morton, that some such reservation may be Chrysostom. ho. 5. yr l. 1. in o.
c. 14. Orig. tom. 7. Theoph. Euthim. and (...) in Graeca (...).
used. And first S. Chrysostom, S. Cyrill, Origin, Theophilactus, Euthimius,
Apollinarius, and other Greek writers do think this (...) to have been in S.
John's speech, that he was not that great Prophet promised in Deutronomy to come
at the time of the Messiah, of whom Moses said: Thy Lord shall raise up unto
thee a Prophet out of thy own Nation, and among thy own Brethren, as he has
raised me, and him shall thou hear, meaning of Christ Deuteronomy. (...).
himself. And their proof for this is, for that in Greek, the article ( ho) is
joined with PROPHETS, which signifies commonly an excellency, eminency or
singularity of the thing when it is added: so as these Fathers will have S.
John's meaning to be, I am not that eminent and singular Prophet mentioned by
Moses, which indeed as has been said was Christ himself.

21. But other Fathers, as S. Augustine and S. Gregory do understand another
reservation to have been in S. John's Aug. tract. 4. in Joan. Gregor. homil. 1.
mind, to wit that he was not only a Prophet, but more then a Prophet as Christ
said of him, and therefore denied himself to be a Prophet: As if a Bishop should
deny himself to be a Priest, for that he is more then a Priest. But Rupertus
and some others do interpret Rupertus in hunc locum.
this reservation of S. John to have been that he was no Prophet, by ordinary
office to foretell Christ as other Prophets did; but only that he was a Prophet
in spirit and virtue, to show Christ present: So as here are diverse
reseruatio^s discovered by these Fathers, which do make the proposition true,
that otherwise would be false, and consequently all these Fathers do agree,
Exposition of Fathers for me^tall. reseruatio^.
that there may be a true mixed proposition, partly uttered and partly reserved,
and thereby true in one sense and false in another, and one way understood by
the hearer, and another way meant by the speaker, which is properly the
Equivocation that we spoke of in this place, and is foolishly condemned by
Thomas Morton for gross lying.

22. And albeit I mean to make a several Chapter afterward of his wise
arguments that he alleges to prove his purpose; yet will I not pretermit in
this place, to touch one solemn foolery of his used to convince (as he says)
the former answer I am no Priest, with the referuation, to tell you, of a
manifest ly. And to perform this, he will needs leave for a time the School
of Aristotle, and his form of disputing, and fall to Socraticall demaundes and
interrogations. Suffer Page 52.
me (says he) Socratically to debate this point with you, and answer me
friendly to these demaundes. Quest. when being asked whether you are a Priest,
you (...) no, what signification has this word no? Answ. It does signify
directly I am no Priest. Quest. And yet Socraticall demaundes of T. (...).
you think you are a Priest? Answ. Yea I know it. Quest. Wherewith do you know
it? Answ. By my inward mind and understanding, my conscience testifying this
unto me. Quest. Can conscience bear witness, then can it also speak? Answ. It
speaks as verily to my inward soul, as my tongue speaks sensibly to your
ears etc. Quest. Then will this be as true, that when your conscience
affirms that which your tongue denies, that your tongue speaks against
your conscience, and this is that which we have proved to be flat lying: a
Conclusion that no art of Equivocation can possibly avoid. Lo here the victory
of Thomas Morton, which he might take against S. John Baptist, for denying
himself to be a Prophet, as much as against an English Priest, for answering in
such a case, I am no Priest.

23. For let us suppose it had been as punishable in Jury to have been a Prophet
in S. John's time, as it is now to be a Priest in England, and that he had been
demanded, as he was by those Priests and Scribes, whether he were a Prophet
or no, and he answering no, I would argue by interrogations, as Morton does,
what signification has this word no? And then S. John must answer, as Thomas
Morton answers for him I am no Prophet, which had been a direct ly in Mortons
doctrine, for that his tongue denies the thing which his conscience The
comparison of S. John's answer with the answer of a Priest.
testifies, knowing that he is a Prophet: and will Morton stand to this his
impious process against S. John, or will he have me to tell him his error, to
deliver S. John and our Priest also from his calumniation? Let him know then,
that this negative no, when he says, I am no Priest, does not fall only upon
the words uttered, according to the sense of the hearer; but upon the whole
proposition, as it is in the speakers mind, and meaning: so as when being asked
whether I be a Priest, I answer no, the word no serves to my signification,
that I am no such Priest, as I am bound to utter. And so in S. John's answer,
he being demanded whether Mortons error discovered.
he were a Prophet, and answering no, his meaning was, that he was no such or
such Prophet; so as this negative did not signify directly he was no Prophet,
as Morton would have it, whereby is fallen to the ground all his Socratical
science in arguing by interrogatories. It may be he desired to give a taste
thereby of his fitnes to have some office of an Examiner against Catholics,
for his sharp manner of concluding, which now men will see that he little
deserves, but in defect of a better.

24. I might (...) here to this effect and purpose, that ambiguous and
equivocal answer of the said S. John about Elias, Elias es tu? (said the
Pharisees) he answered Joan. 1.
Non sum: Are (...) Elias? he answered, I am not, and yet Christ our Savior,
that is truth it self, says of the same S. John: Si vultis illum recipere,
ipse est Elias qui venturus Math. 11.
est: If you will receive him, he is Elias that is to come; and the later
words make the sense more hard, for that it seems that he describes the
true Elias in deed that was to come. But all the fore alleged Fathers, and
others do agree, that S. John's negation was true in his reserved sense, to wit
that he was not Elias in person, as the demaunders took him to be, and
Christ's words also were true in his reserved sense, to wit, that he was Elias
in spirit, though not in person, without which two reseruations, neither of
their speeches can be verified, and with them they are made doubtful,
ambiguous, and equivocal to the hearer, but not false. So as now in one and
the self same thing, we have both Christ and S. John Baptist, for manifest
witnesses of amphibology and Equivocation; and consequently it is likely that
the thing is not so hellish, heathenish, heinous and monstrous, as Morton
makes it; nor is Page 48. and 49.
it such gross lying, as his first lying and unlearned conclusion avouches it
to be. But let us go forward.

25. The next place shall be out of our Saviors words to the Pharisees in S.
John's Gospel, where he Joan. 8.
says, Ego non iudico quemquam, I do not judge any man, which proposition
without some reservation cannot stand, for that it should be contrary to many
other places of Scripture, as that Pater omne iudicium dedit filio, Joan. 5.
the Father has given all judgment to his son: and again in the Acts of
the Apostles, S. Peter avouches Act. 10.
in his Oration to Cornelius, and those that were with him, that God had
commanded him and the rest of the Apostles to testify to the whole world, Quia
ipse est qui constitutus est a Deo Iudex viuorum and mortuorum, that Christ is
appointed by God, Judge both of the living and the dead, which S. Paul
confirms as well to Romans 14. 2 Cor. 5.
the Romans, as to the Corinthians, that we must all stand before the tribunal
of Christ to be judged by him.

26. So as if we take this proposition as it lies written without any mental
reservation, it is false. For if any man should ask of me whether Jesus Christ
be our judge or no, if I should answer no, I should speak How Christ is our
Judge and how he is not.
both falsely and impiously; and how then may this negative be made true (which
as uttered by Christ cannot be false?) Surely by no way, but by a mental
reservation of the speaker Christ our Savior, which reservation the ancient
Fathers do seek after, and lay forth unto us in diverse manners. For that S.
Augustine, S. Bid, and Rupertus in their explication of this place, do
affirm, that the reservation was secundum carnem according to the flesh; so as
the whole proposition was, I do judge no man according to flesh and blood, as
you Pharisees do, for that the words of Christ immediately going before were
these to the Pharisees; You judge according to the flesh, but I judge no man;
but other Greek Fathers S. Chrysostom, Leontius, Theophilact and In bune
locum.
Euthymius do think that this cannot stand, in respect of the words
immediately following: Et si iudico ego, iudicium Joan. (...).
meum verum est, and if I do judge any man, my judgment is true, which seems
should not be so, if he should judge according to flesh and blood as the
Pharisees did.

27. Wherefore these Fathers do propose another mental reservation of Christ
in this matter to wit in hac vita in this life, meaning that albeit he has
full authority Diverse reseruations sought out by the Fathers.
and power of judging all; yet that he came not into the world to exercise that
power in this life, but only to instruct, comfort, and save men, reserving his
exercise of judgment unto the last day, and in the next world, according to his
own speech in another place, God has not sent his Son into the world to
judge the Joan. 3.
world, but that the world should be saved by him. And yet other Greek writers
as S. Gregory Nazienzen and Elias Cretensis say, the reservation to have been,
as Christ was; man only, and of himself he had not power to judge, but from his
Father, according to that his saying; All power is given me in heaven and in
earth where he acknowledges Marc. vlt.
to have received all in gift from his Father. And others do propose other
interpretations and reseruations, but all do agree in one conformity as you
see, that this proposition of our Savior cannot be verified, but only by some
mental reservation, containing more then is uttered. And therefore these
Fathers do acknowledge the use of mixed reserved propositions, even in the
Son of God himself, and consequently also of amphibology or Equivocation,
when need requires.

28. But let us see some more examples: when our Savior was called to raise
from death the Prince or Archsinagoge his daughter, as in S. Matthew, S. Mark
and Math. 9.
Marc. 5.
S. Lukes Gospel is recorded, and he coming to the Luc. 8.
house, found the people in tumult, weeping, and lamenting for her death, he
repressed them saying: Recedite, The exam ple of Christ raising the
Archsynagogues daughter.
non est enim mortua puella, fed dormit; depart, for that the maid is not dead,
but sleeps; and yet is it certain that naturally she was dead, by separation
of her soul from her body, which is proved both for that the people did know
her to be dead, and therefore scoffed at Christ, for saying she was not dead,
but a sleep; as also for that otherwise it had been no miracle to raise her
again. So as if this proposition be taken (...) as it lies, without any
mental reservation by our (...), it cannot be true, neither in it self nor in
the sense of the hearers, no more the^ in our proposition, I am no Priest. For
if our Savior had been asked, Is this maid dead? and he had answered no: this
word no in the force of Thomas Mortons Socraticall argumentation must needs be
the negative of that which is demanded, and so, to use his words, directly to
have signified (...) she was not dead, which had been directly false, if it had
not been extended to a further reserved meaning of Christ according to our
doctrine, and thereby the said answer made true.

29. Which mental reservation in our Savior, according to S. Augustines
explication, and of other expositours was, that albeit she was dead in their
sight, and unto humane power: yet unto him, and unto his divine power and will
to raise her again, she was not dead, but only in a sleep. Verum dixit
Dominus, (says S. Augustine) no^ est mortua puella, sed dormit; sed illi, a
quo poterat Aug. sermon. de verb. Domi. 44.
excitari. Christ said truly the maid is not dead, but sleeps, to wit unto
him, that was able to raise her again. So as by this reservation, S. Augustine
defends Christ his answer conferred with ours.
Christ's proposition from falsity, and consequently acknowledges such
Equiuocatio^ in our Saviors speech as we treat of. For as Christ being asked
whether the maid were dead, and he answering no, says no untruth, for that the
negative no fell not upon the: words uttered only, but upon his whole meaning,
partly uttered, and partly reserved, to wit that she was not dead in respect of
his power and will to raise her again: even so our no to that demand, whether
I be a Priest or no, falls not only upon the words uttered or question of
the demaunder (for so it should be false) but upon the whole proposition, as
has been said, and so it is true.

30. I might allege almost innumerable places to this effect, as that of
Christ in S. John's Gospel (...) of the eating of his flesh: If any shall at
of this (...). 6.
bread, he shall live forever. And again a (...): He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood has life everlasting: and yet S. Paul says to the contrary,
whosoever shall eat this bread or drink the cup of our Lord unworthily, shall
be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord; And further, he that eats and
drinks unworthily, does eat and drink his own judgment, or condemnation,
for that he discerns not the body (...) our Lord By which words of S. Paul,
it is made manifest, first, that the former words of Christ cannot absolutely
be true, without some mental reservation or restriction in his understanding,
for that all eaters of his flesh, and drinkers of his blood have not life
everlasting thereby, but some rather damnation; and secondly is discovered, what
this reservation was, to wit digne, worthily: as if he had said he that shall
eat: worthily my flesh and drink worthily my blood, shall have life
everlasting thereby, which yet Christ uttered not but reserved the same in his
mind, as you see, and thereby left the proposition ambiguous and equivocal.

31. And in very like manner those other speeches of our Savior, If you shall
ask any thing of my Father in Job 16.
my name, he will give it to you: and yet we see by experience, that many do
ask and receive not, wherefore somewhat is reserved in Christ's mind and
meaning; which reservation S. James utters in these words: Iac. 4.
Petitis and non accipitis, eo quod male petatis; you ask and receive not, for
that you ask not as you should do; this mental reservation then was in
Christ's words, when he uttered the foresaid general proposition, to wit, that
he which should ask, as he ought to ask, should receive etc. And so again
those words in S. Marc. 16.
Marks Gospel; He that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved, the
reservation is, if he believe according to: Other examples.
Christ's commandments, as after both Christ himself in the end of S.
Mathewes Gospel, and S. John in Math. 28.
his Epistles do expound the same: according to which Io. epist. (...).
sense also, those words of the Prophet Joel: Whosoever Iocl. 2.
shall call upon the name of our Lord, shall be saved, are expounded by Christ
himself, when he says: Not every one Math. 7.
that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into heaven, but he that does the will of
my Father, that is in heaven; which reservation was not uttered, but kept in
mind by the Prophet. And all these being mixed propositions, partly of words
uttered, and partly of further hidden sense reserved, making the part that is
uttered doubtful, ambiguous, and equivocal, as you see; they do all
determine our controversy most clearly, and confound Mortons vanity most
apparently, that says, and avouches No one Iota to be found in all Scripture,
no one example in all antiquity, for the just proof or color of any such
Equivocation or mixed proposition.

32. I should utterly weary my Reader, if I would follow all, or the greatest
Part of that which may be said in this behalf, for that always commonly all
Prophecies that are minatory and do threaten punishment, have still some
secret-reseruation, if they repent not: as that of Isay to King Ezechias: Haec
dicit Dominus, Isa. 38.
dispone Domui tuae, quia morieris tu and non viues: This (...) our Lord,
dispose of thy household, for thou shall die, and shall not live, and yet he
lived (...) years after. If therefore the Prophet had been demanded; shall not
Ezechias live any longer? and he had answered no, upon what had fallen the
negative no? If only upon the words uttered, it had been false, for he lived
longer, but if upon that together with the reservation in the meaning of the
holy Ghost, it was true. And the like may be said of the Prophecy of Jonas:
Adhuc quadraginta dies, and Niniue subuerietur; There remain but forty days
before Niniue shall be destroyed, and so infinite other places. Wherefore in
this Th. (...) was greatly ouerseene in making of confident a chaleng, as
before you have heard.

THE THIRD POINT OF THIS CHAPTER CONCERNING Other Scriptures alleged, And
pretended to be answered by Thomas Morton.. 3.
33. But now we must come to a greater conflict, which is to examine how our
adversary has answered certain examples out of Scripture, alleged as he
says, (for I have not yet seen the writing it self) by a Catholic Treatise
in written-hand intercepted, whereby the lawfulnes of this kind of Equivocation
is avouched, and by his answer to those that are cited by himself, we may
imagine what he will be able to say to these other which have been here produced
by us, and innumerable others that might be alleged.

Examples out of the old Testament.
First then out of the old Testament, he produces two examples only, the one
of Jacob, that told his Father Two (...) out of she old (...).
that he was his eldest son Esau, which in deed he was not, and consequently
we must grant that either S. Ambrose, S. Augustine and others do piously
deny) or else that he had some reserved further sense in his mind, whereby his
said speech might be verified, and consequently his proposition be ambiguous,
and Equivocal.

34. But herunto T.M. answers first, that Cardinal Caetan, and diverse other
learned men do hold, that Jacob is inexcusable from some sort of (...) in this
his speech; and for this he alleges the testimony of Pererius a Jesuit in
his Commentaries upon Genesis; Perer. in c. 27. Genesis dis. 4. and 5.
who disputing this matter at large in five several disputations, whether
Jacob did ly, or sin at all in this speech, says, that the said Caietan with
some other modern writers do hold, that it may be granted that the said
Whether Jacob did ly or no in saying he was Esau.
Patriarch did commit some venial sin, by making an officious ly in that
behalf. But what? does (...) himself agree to that opinion? No truly? But
makes this title of his last disputation therabout. The common sentence of
Deuines (says he) is declared, and defended, which does excuse and free Jacob
from all manner of lying in his foresaid speech, and then beginning with S.
Augustine, who Aug. q. 74. in Genes. and l. 16 de Ciuit. Dei. c. 37. and l.
contra mend. c. 10
in diverse parts of his works does most earnestly defend the Patriarch Jacob
in this behalf, by many and manifold reasons, and authorities both from all ly
and sin, does show and declare that his speech was figurative, and not
deceiptfull, containing mysterium, non mendacium, a mystery, and not a ly. To
which effect one place out of his book against lying shall serve for all: Non
est mendacium (says he) quando silendo absconditur verum, sed cum loquendo
promitur falsum: Jacob autem quod matre fecit auctore, vt patrem fallere
videretur, si diligenter, and fideliter attendatur, non est mendacium, sed
mysterium etc. It is no ly, when a truth is concealed by silence but when a
falsity by speech is uttered: that which Jacob did by the persuasion of his
mother, as though he would deceive his Father, if it be diligently and
faithfully considered, was no ly, but a mystery.

35. And then a little after in the same Chapter talking of such misterious
speeches, that seem to say one thing, and yet do mean another, he says
thus: That mysterious speeches are Equivocal.
Vera non falsa dicuntur, quoniam vera non falsa significantur, seu verbo seu
facto, quae significantur enim vtique ipsa dicuntur, putantur autem mendacia,
quoniam non ea quae vera significantur, dicta intelliguntur sed ea quae falsa
sunt dicta esse creduntur. In a mysterious speech true things, and not false
are spoken, for that true things and not false are signified either by the
word, or fact that has a mystery in it, for that in deed those things are
spoken which are mysteriously signified by the speech, but they seem to be
lies, for that all men understand not those things that are truly signified by
the speech, but rather those things that are false are thought to be spoken.
So S. Augustine. Whereby is evident, what he means by a mysterious speech, to
wit, when one sense is gathered by the words, and another sense truly
signified, which the natural signification of the words do not bear, and
thereby a mysterious proposition must be called also Equivocal in the sense
that now we handle, and consequently also S. Augustine must needs be granted
to admit this kind of Equivocation without lying, Hier. in c. 2. ad Gal. Chrysostom.
ho. 53. in Genesis Greg. ho. 6. in Ezec. and lib. 17. Mor.
whereby he so earnestly defends this Patriarch from all kind of ly whatsoever.

36. And with S. Augustine do concur in this defense of holy Jacob both S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory, Theodoret, S. Ambrose, S. Isidorus, S.
Bid; and of later writers, Rupertus, Gratian, Alexander Halensis, Petrus
Lombardus, Theod. q. 80. in Ge. Ambr. lib. de Patria. Jacob. Isid. Beda. and
Ruper. in 27. Genesis
S. Thomas and almost infinite others; so as for Th. Morton to creep out now
under the shadow of Caie^tan, and two or three other modern Authors more,
against the whole streme, and torrent of so many ancient Fathers, and Catholic
Deuines, is a ridiculous evasion, and worthy of Thomas Mortons defense, and
full satisfaction.

37. His second example out of the old Testament, is Great. cau. 22. q. 2. c.
that of Hieremy the Prophet, set down by me before Quaeritur. Hal. 2. part
q. 139.
in my seventh Chapter and fourth Consideration thereof, which this Minister
the better not to be understood relates only in these few obscure words, Mag.
in 3. d. 38.
out of his adversaries answer: Such Equivocation (says he) did the Prophet
Jeremy use. Ier. 38. when he took advise of D. Tho. 2. 2 q. 110. ar. 3
the King. This relation is brief, abrupt, and dark as you see, but we have
declared the matter with the The second example.
circumstances in the former place, to wit, how Jeremy being urged to make a
repetition to the Captains, and Princes of King Sedechias, that were tempted
against Number. 32.
him, of that conference which had passed in secret between Conf. p. 70
him and the said King, of things that the King would not have the said
Princes to know, it seems The mode rate Ans. cap. 10.
by the text of Scripture, that albeit so great and holy a Prophet, sanctified
in his mothers womb, may be presumed not to have lied; yet that in so large a
repetition wherein diverse truths at the Kings request were to be concealed,
there must in all probality, pass diverse ambiguous, and Equivocal speeches,
for covering those truths that were not to be uttered, and that so it may be
gathered out of Hieremies own narration in the text; and therefore all
Equivocation is not lying, nor heathenish, or abominable profanation, as
Thomas Morton would have it.

38. This is the force of the argument: what answers he thereunto? First, he
says, that our own ancient expositor Lyranus in his Commentary, holds that
Jeremy did not ly, but what of this? So we say also, for that otherwise, we
should grant the Prophet to have sinned, and Equivocation to be lying, both
which we utterly deny. Secondly then he leaving quickly this first hold,
steepeth to another, more liked T. M. his answer refuted.
by him and his, who would have all men liars with themselves, and this is,
that Jeremy did ly in deed, in that his relation to the Princes of Sedechias,
if we judge (says he) Page 71.
the outward speech of Jeremy, was false; yet is it not written for our
imitation etc. And to this he applies the words 1. Cor. 10.
of S. Paul to the Corinthians: Let him that stands take (...) least he fall,
that is to say into lying, as Jeremy did: and herwith also he gives a general
note out of S. August. Aug. l. co^t. mend. c. 9.
who says, that all examples of the old Testament, wherein there may be any
scarres of infirmities, (to use the words of T. M.) are not to be imitated,
which is true in S. Augustines meaning, who alleges the example of Lot, in
prostitution of his daughters, and of David that swore rashly that he would
kill Naball, and the like: but it was far from S. Augustines meaning hereby
to touch any such holy Prophet, Patriarch, or Saint, as Jeremy was, or to
condemn them of voluntary lying: therefore here Thomas Morton shows less
piety then folly in shifting of thus this place of Scripture.

39. And if it were a scarre of infirmity in Hieremy, to cover sometimes a
truth by Equivocation, or amphibology of some speech for a good and necessary
end; T. M. his scarres of infirmity.
yet I hope he will not say so of Christ himself, nor lay his scarres also
upon him, though you have heard now already by many examples, how frequent that
manner of speech was with him, upon sundry occasions, and you shall hear more
presently, for that now we pass to the examples which he cites, as alleged
by his adversary out of the new Testament, and we shall see whether he will
answer them better then he has already done these two of the old. And if you
stand attent, you shall see him confirm our part as clearly, as if he had
written for us, and against himself.

Out of the new Testament.
40. THe first place which he takes upon him to The first place of the new
Testament.
satisfy out of the new Testament as objected by his Adversaries, is that our
Saviors saing in S. John's Gospel: All things whatsoever I heard of my
Father, have I made known unto you; and yet in the very next ensuing Joan. 15.
Chapter, Christ says, that he had many things to say unto Joan. 16.
them, but that they were not able to bear them away then; Whereof is inferred
that Christ's former speech had some mental restriction, or reservation in it,
as that he had told them all that he had received from his Father, that is to
say, all whatsoever he thought convenient for them to hear at that time, or
(...) fit to bear away, or to make their profit by, or the like, which yet was
not expressed in words in the former proposition, but reserved in Christ's
meaning, and consequently that proposition was mixed, and Equivocal in sense by
this mental reservation; what will Thomas Morton say to this? For if a Jesuit
should come to him, and relate him some case from another, with this
asseueration in the end, that he had told him all whatsoever he had heard from
the other, and yet the next A comparison expressing the case.
day after should say that he had many points more to tell him from the same
party, but it was not time to tell them now, I doubt not but that he would have
cried out, that the Jesuit had lied the day before, for the evil conceit he
has of Jesuits in that behalf: but if, on the contrary side he had held a
good opinion of that Jesuit his integrity in his point, and that for no
worldly respect he would make a ly, great or small, (as according to our former
doctrine he should not) then must M. Morton imagine at least, that that (...)
did Equivocate without a ly, and so consequently lying and Equivocation should
be two distinct things.

41. Well then now I expect what he will answer to this speech of Christ,
whom he will not grant I am sure to have Equiuocated, least he speak against
himself and authorize thereby Equivocation, nor dares he (I presume) (...)
say, that he lied, least he cast upon him so soul a scarre of infirmirty: I
expect (I say) to see how he will shift of this matter, for that the case
seems to be very like, or rather the same in both examples, setting a side
the maine difference of the persons. You shall hear what full satisfaction he
will Page 72.
give in this behalf. I answer (says he) with S. Augustine, now man's
infirmity plays her part, but know you that no Aug. l. co^t. mend. c. 19
man learneth of Chastity to be adulterous, or of godliness to be (...), and
shall we learn of truth to be liars, and periurious? God forbid. Thus he out
of S. Augustine as he pretends, but in deed so brokenly and corruptly
alleged, if you look upon the place it self, as it may scarsely be called
S. Augustines speech. But as for the sense it appertains nothing to our
purpose, for S. Augustine says, we my not learn of the truth to be liars, as
the Priscillianistes indeauoured to do by confirming the unlawfulness of lying
out of the words of Christ, which we do not, nor do we affirm that our
Savior when he said, All things whatsoever I have heard of my Father I have
made known unto you, did ly, or utter any falsity at all, but reserved
somewhat in his mind not uttered, which joined with his words made the
proposition most true, and how then is the sentence of S. Augustine brought in
against us for an answer to the difficulty proposed? By this (...) you may see
what full satisfaction he is like ^o give to these places of Scripture. But let
us hear the rest.

42. Touching this text (says he) your own Bishop Page (...).
Iansenius answering this objection says, that these kind of speeches, and all
such are to be expounded according to the circumstances either of state, place,
time or condition of the persons speaking, or to whom they were spoken, as
namely, that whatsoever you ask my Father in my name he will give you. What
any thing absolutely? Nay but upon condition if it be expedient for you. So
here Christ saying I have manifested all things, it is expounded by the
circumstances of the present state, signifying all that appertains unto you
to be known; so then (...) is no concealed sense to deceive the hearer etc.

43. Do you see what an inference he makes, that because Iansenius does show
the way how to seek out the reservation, or concealed sense in such ambiguous
propositions, therefore there is no such mental reservation, or concealed sense
at all? Can the Reader tolerate The confutatio^ of his ansvv.
such an impertinent writer? Nay does not all this speech of Iansenius make
wholly against Morton? For if he do set down these circumstances of place,
time, state, and condition, whereby to seek out the hidden sense of such
dubious propositions, may not we well, and justly infer quite contrary to
Mortons inference, Ergo there is some such hidden sense, more then is expressed
in the words, which we call reservation, whereby the hearer may conceive a
wrong sense if he hit not upon the said true reservation, which being not
manifest to every one, but rather a contrary sense appearing in the words
uttered, makes the proposition ambiguous, doubtful and Equivocal; for that it
may have diverse senses, one Circumstances to find out mental reseruations.
in the understanding of the hearer, and another in the meaning of the speaker.
And for that the whole importance depends of the later to wit of the speaker,
especially in the speeches uttered by the holy Ghost that cannot be false, the
ancient Fathers do labor by examination of the circumstances, set down here
by Iansenius, and (...) such like, to find out what the speakers true meaning
was, when the speech of it self is doubtful according to the words uttered.

44. Nor is the matter so easy to every man to find this out by consideration
of circumstances, as Thomas Morton would have men to think, that there is no
doubt or difficulty at all: for as in the places before alleged you have
heard sundry Fathers of sundry opinions, and judgments about the points that
were reserved by our Savior: so here in this place upon those words, Omnia
quaecunque etc. all things whatsoever Leont. Chrysostom. Theoph. Euthim. in hunc
locum.
I have heard of my Father etc. diverse Authors as Leontius. and others make the
reservation to be this, whatsoever I heard of my Father, with order to tell
you, that I have vtterd unto you; but S. Chrysostom, Theophilact, Euthimius,
and other Greek writers expound it thus, that whatsoever I heard of my Father
convenient for you to know, that I have revealed unto you. S. Augustine, and S.
Bid Aug. tract. in c. 15. 10. and Ep. 57. and lib. de Agon.
do think Christ's meaning to be, that he had revealed all to his disciples,
except such things as were reserved for the holy Ghost to reveal, and utter
unto them, as in the precedent Chapter he promised: so as albeit here diverse
Christ. c. 9.
learned Fathers by examining the circumstances Beda in hunc locu^.
before mentioned, do guess at diverse mental reseruations as you see; yet
all do agree that there were some not uttered in the words, and not so easy
to be Joan. 14.
determined, which does utterly overthrow our Ministers Diverse reseruations in
Christ his speech
idle imagination to the contrary, that the matter is evident for every man to
understand by circumstance of speech. And yet he concludes his answer in
these confident words, VVherby (says he) you may Page 73.
perceive that not that infallible verity, but your own infirmity and vanity
has deceived you in so perverting the truth, to patronize a ly. Would you not
think that the man had spoken somewhat to the purpose, that thus concludes?
Surely not a jot more then you have heard, wherein he has confirmed evidently
our part, and overthrown his own; and yet he braggeth like a Conqueror, as
you see: but let us leave him in his vanity, and pass to a second place, or
example alleged.

45. The second place is taken out of the Gospel S. Mark, where our Savior
speaking of the day of About the day of judgment. Marc. 13. Math. 24.
Judgment, said, that de die autem (...), vel hora nemo scit, neque Angeli in
coelo, neque filius, nisi Pater: Of that day, or hour no man knows, neither
the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father: which is repeated again
in effect by S. Matthew, who has Nemo scit nisi solus Pater, No man knows
thereof but only the Father: and yet does the whole course of Scripture run to
the contrary, showing that Christ must be Judge in Supra point 2.
that day, as before has been showed, and consequently must needs be presumed
to know thereof, S. Paul says also expressly to the Colossians, that all the
treasures Colos. 2.
of wisdom, and knowledge were hidden in Christ, ergo it is evident that the
former proposition of Christ had some reservation of mind in it, for that
otherwise it had been false. And for more perspicuities sake, let us frame the
case more plain: If those disciples to whom our Savior spoke those words,
had demanded him, if he knew any thing of the day of Judgment, and he had
answered, no, what would that no have signified according to Thomas Mortons
(...) argume^tation? Would it not have directly signified (as his words be)
that he had not known thereof in deed? and would not his hearers have taken it
so? and yet had it been false, and they deceived. Why? For that he had some
further reservation in his mind, whereon that ( no) did reflect, which his
words did not utter.

46. Well then compare Thomas Mortons case which he obiecteth against us and is
this: A Catholic having a Priest in his house, and demanded whether he know
where such a Priest is, he answers no, reserving in his mind a further true
meaning, whereon that no in his intention does fall, to wit, that he knows it
not so, as it is convenient to utter it unto them that Page 49.
ask him, Sir Thomas cries out, that this not a hidden truth but a gross ly.
But I would ask him why? And further entreat him, to set down the difference
between these two answers of Christ, and a Catholic in the manner of speech,
and nature of a reserved proposition.

47. If he would say that there is no reservation in our Saviors speech, but
that the sense is clear according to the words as they sound, it would be
ridiculous, both in regard of the opposite authorities before alleged out of
Scriptures; as also of the great variety of expositions, which the ancient
Fathers did leave unto us, for finding out the true reservation. And first of
all condemning for Heretics, as S. Damascene Dam. l. de Haeresib. haer.
Agnoetae.
testifies, under the name of (...), or Agnoetae, all those that following the
litterall apparent sense of those words of our Savior, did hold him to be
ignorant in deed of the day of Judgment, which being decreed and established by
the Church, each Father endeavored to find out the true reserved meaning, of
our Savior, as has been said; which by experience they proved to be so hard,
and therewith all to defend the same against the Arrians, who urged strongly the
litterall signification of the words, against Christ's Divinity, as some of
them held this text to be corrupted, as appeared by the testimony both of S.
Hierome upon this place, and S. Ambrose in his books de fide: Amb. l. 5. de
fide c. 8.
whereupon even at this day in S. Matthewes Gospel, where Christ uses the
same speech, the word neque filius, neither the Son knows, is not read
either in Greek or Latin, and yet was it found in diverse Copies of both
languages in old time, as may appear by Origin, and S. Chrysostom in Greek,
and S. Hilary, and S. Augustine in Latin, who did read it in their days in
their Copies of S. Mathews Gospel, as we do now in S. Mark, and thereupon,
as has been said, indeauoured each one to find out Christ's hidden meaning, and
mental reservation therein.

48. As for example Origin and S. Epiphanius do think Orig. tra. in Mat. 24
Epiph. haeres. 69. Chrysostom. (...) de trin.
Christ's reservation to have been, that he knew not the day of Judgment in this
life, but in the next; and others, that he knew it not, quoad experientiam, by
experience, for that he had not yet experienced the same; nor does S.
Chrysostom seem in one place altogether to mislike this interpretation.
Other Fathers in great number do think Christ's meaning and reservation Atha.
ser. 4. (...) Aria Am. (...). 5. de fide 4. 8 Naz. Orat. 4. (...) Theo. Cyr. l.
(...). de thesau cap. 4. Theod. An. cont. Cyr.
to have been, that he knew not of the certain day of Judgment, as he was man,
that is to say, by virtue of his humanity alone, without his divinity, for
though as he was man and God he knew it; yet not by force or power of his
humanity. And of this opinion are S Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory
Nazianzen, S. Cyril, Theodoret and others.

49. Many Fathers also, yea the greatest number of all, have an other
exposition expressing the very same reseruatio^ in Christ's words, which we
talked of in Aug. l. 8. q. 6. and l. (...). de trin. c. 1. and l. de Genesis
contr. Manicheos c. 23. Chrysostom. hom 78. S. Greg. li. 8. Regist. cap. 42.
our former proposition, affirming that Christ's meaning was, when he said he
knew not the day of Judgment, that he knew it not so, as he might discover it
unto them, or make them know it. And so does hold S. Augustine in many places
of his works, S. Chrysostom also in his homilies upon S. Matthew and S. Mark,
S. Gregory in his Register, S. Hierome and S. Bid in their exposition upon
this place, with whom do concur Theophilact, and diverse others.

50. Now then we have here, that there are three or four sorts of
reseruations at least, sought out by the foresaid circumstances touched in the
former example, al which do prove unto us, that in the proposition of Christ,
the Son of man knows not of the day or hour of Judgment, is an
amphibologicall and Equivocal mixed proposition, containing a mental
reservation of our Savior, not expressed in his words, which overthrows and
utterly undoes Th. Mortons whole Th. Morto^ brought to great straites.
Treatise: and how do you think will he play the man here to avoid all this
battery? You shall hear it presently, and see him brought to miserable
straites: for thus he begins to answer the matter, having confessed first
out of his adversaries Treatise of Equivocation, that Augustine, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Basil and Theophilact do expound it so, as lastly has been said,
that Christ knew not the day of Judgment to utter it to his disciples, whereunto
he answers thus.

51. It will not (says he) be pertinent to oppose the other exposition of
Fathers, who as your Maldonate says, were many, expounding this text thus,
that Christ as he was man knew not the day and hour. This is his first
struggle, and if it be impertinent, as himself confesses, why does he
allege it, but for lack of better defense, and that it is impertinent in
deed, is evident; for that this exposition of some Fathers alleged by him,
does rather prove that there were diverse reseruations in Christ's words, then
that there was none at all, which he should prove. Wherefore it falls out to
Thomas Morton in this case, as when playing a bad game at Tables that is past
recovery, he should say, this game is lost which way soever I play it, and yet
will I play it out with what shame soever, rather then give it up. Let us see
then what play he makes.

52. He follows on immediately after his former S. Augustines authority
alleged by F. Garnet examined.
speech thus: But the question is (says he) whether the former exposition of
S. Augustine and others does imply any mental Equivocation, and because Garnet
at his arraignment did select only S. Augustine of all the Fathers, we will
appeal to S. Augustine for answer to them all, by whose testimony it does
appear, that when our Savior said, I know not the day, signifying vt dicam
vobis, to tell unto you, this clause whereby he meant to conceal the time, was
not concealed from the^, who though they were by the sense of the speech held
in ignorance not to know the day; yet were they not ignorant of the sense of
the speech, which was, I may not let you know it. So he. And do you understand
him? or does he not labor as much to hold you in ignorance of his meaning, as
Christ did his Disciples of the day of judgment; but let us draw him out of
this affected darkness.

53. First he says the question is, (and he says well) whether the former
exposition of S. Augustine, and other Fathers do imply any mental
Equivocation or rather mental reservation, which makes Equivocation or
doubtfulnes of meaning; and I see not how The definition of Equivocation as
here it is understood.
he can deny it, sor that the proposition, Christ knows not of the day of
Judgment is false, without some reservation, but with the reservation gathered
upon S. Augustines exposition, to wit, that he knew it not to make them know
it, that is to say, to utter it unto them, it is true, ergo S. Augustines
exposition does imply and declare unto us a manifest mental reservation, and
consequently also an Equivocation. For that as before we have defined the
matter, Equivocation or amphibology in this our controversy, is nothing else,
but when a speech is partly uttered in words, and partly reserved in mind, by
which reservation the sense of the proposition may be diverse.

54. Secondly whereas Thomas Morton says, that Father Garnet at his arraignment
did select only S. Augustine, of all other Fathers to depend upon, concerning
the former exposition of Christ's words, and therefore that he also will
appeal to S. Augustine for answer to them all, it is a shift, thereby to avoid
the authority of all the other Fathers, both in this and the other expositions
before mentioned, all which do conclude against him, as has been said, that
there is a mental reservation in Christ's words, without which understood, F.
Garnets alleging S. August. at his arraignme^t.
the proposition is false. Neither did Father Garnet so select S. Augustines
authority at his arraignme^t to stand upon, as that he left any way the other
Fathers, but being pressed to be brief, he named him for all, and no small
marvel it is that at such an arraignment he had leisure, or list to name any
Father, or other proof at all, knowing how unequally the same would be heard
after the hydeous clamours of so many Ministers out of books, speeches, and
pulpittes against that doctrine: but sure I am, that if Henry Garnet, and
Thomas Morton had met together at any equal bar out of arraignment, to
plead and dispute this matter, there would have been as little cause for Thomas
to have triumphed of that disputation, as there is like to be now of this his
writing; and therefore he might have spared him here if he had pleased.

55. But his third act of manhood in his defense is most notorious, where
having fled all other Fathers, as you see, to stick to S. Augustine, he
brings in S. Augustine wholly against himself, as now you shall see, though
he endeavor by some, obscure words to dazzle the sense of his hearer. For in
the words of Saint Augustine by him alleged he says thus: Nescientem se esse
Aug. vbi supra.
dixit, quia illos nescientes occultando faciebat. Christ said he was ignorant
of the day of Judgment, for that he made them ignorant thereof, by hyding the
same from them. And in another place: Hoc nescit filius quod nescientes facit,
hoc est, quod non ita sciebat, vt tunc discipulis indicaret: the Son of God
is said not to know that, which he makes other men not to know, that is to
say, that he knows it not so, as he would utter it at that time to his
Disciples. And for proof of this exposition S. Augustine alleges that place
of S. Paul to the Corinthians: neque enim iudicaui me scire aliquid inter vos,
nisi Iesum 1. Cor. 2.
Christum, and hunc Crucisixum: Neither did I esteem my S. August. authority
wholy against T. M. that alleges the same.
self to know any thing among you, but only Jesus Christ, and him crucified,
where S. Paul says he knew no more of that thing, for that he thought it not
time to utter unto them any more: which is so plain for our purpose, as Thomas
Morton would never have alleged it, but upon plain despair of the game lost
in deed. For what is more conform then this to our answer objected by him, I
am no Priest to utter it unto you: I know not where such a Priest is, that is,
I make you not to know it by concealing the same, for that I am not bound, nor
is it expedient to utter it.

56. Now then here you see Thomas Morton in the dust, as one fighting against
himself. For to cavil, and quarrel, as he does afterward, that the Apostles
are to be presumed to have understood this reserved meaning, as well as S.
Augustine, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers Shifts confuted.
did, and that if they did, then it was no Equivocation: and further that it
were blasphemy to say that Christ did Equivocate with his Apostles; all these
shifts (I say) are but ridiculous. For first it imports not to our question,
whether the Apostles understood the secret meaning of Christ in this denial,
or not, but rather whether there were any reservation, and whether the speech
of it self were ambiguous, and Equivocal to the hearers (who were many
besides the Apostles) by reason of this reservation, and all Christians have
been and shall be to the worlds end. And then if this so, it is no blasphemy to
say, that Christ did Equivocate, that is to say, speak doubtfully, but rather
it is blasphemy by excluding all Equivocation, to condemn the same for lying,
as Morton is forced to do, or to say nothing.

57. And lastly where he concludes the whole matter Of Doctor Genesius,
Sepulueda
by the testimony of our Doctor Genesius as he calls him, I have told before
how he is ours, and how in some sort he may in this controversy be called his,
though he detested his Religion, as by his works appears. Ours he is, as in
all other points of Religion, so in the substantial and principal point of
this question, for that he defends the use of Equivocation in concealing some
secrettes, but denies it in others, wherein he favors somewhat the adverse
party, with small ground, as in the next Chapter shall be declared. But what
says this Doctor Genesius? He will tell Genes. Sepulu.
you (says Morton) that this sense (of this text of Scripture) l. de rat.
dicend. testim. c. 3.
which you conceal, is not only contrary to the sentence of all Fathers, but
also against all common sense. And is this possible? Will Sepulueda deny all
those Fathers alleged by me before for our interpretation to be Fathers? will
he say that their exposition is contrary to all common sense? Does not Genesius
himself in the very Chapter here cited allege both S. Hierome and S.
Augustine for this interpretation, and allows the same? What shameless dealing
then is this of our Minister to charge Genesius with such folly or impiety
which he never thought of? For Genesius denies not either the sense, or
interpretation of the place, and much less says, that it is contrary to the
sentence of the Fathers, and least of all to common sense, but denies only the
application thereof for use and practice to certain cases, wherein he admits
not Equivocation, and says, that upon this interpretation, to bring in such a
new law were greatly inconvenient (wherein afterward notwithstanding we shall
show him to have been greatly deceived) and his Latin words are: Contra non
modo veterum and grauissimorum doctorum, sed communem hominem sensum, quasi
legem inducere: to bring in, as it were, a law not only against the judgment
of ancient, and most grave School- Doctors (for of them only he speaks in
that place) but also against the common sense or opinion of men. This is
Genesius his speech, wherein though his judgment (...) rejected by other
Schoolmen as singular and paradoxicall in this point, as after shall be
declared; yet is he egregiously abused by Morton, who first makes him Genesius
much abused by T.M.
to say of the interpretation, and sense of this place of Scripture, that which
he speaks only of the application thereof, to use and practice in tribunalles.
And secondly he makes him to discredit the Fathers which himself alleges:
the^ he Englisheth ancient Fathers for ancient Schoole-Doctors: and last of all
adds consensum of his own, leaving out hominum, to make it sound common
sense, and other such abuses, which any man may see by conferring the place.
And these are other manner of sins, then simple Equivocation, if the art of
falsifying or forgery be any sin with him at all, and so much for this place
of Scripture.

58. The third place alleged, and pretended to be answered by this man, is
that of S. Lukes Gospel, How Christ did feign or dissemble.
Emaus, with his two disciples, Ipse se finxit longius ire, says the text;
himself feigned that he would go further: whereupon they forced him to stay
with them, Luc. vlt. ver. 28.
and heerof is inferred, that Christ used at that time some doubtful action or
words, importing a different external signification to his disciples, from
his inward meaning, which may truly be called ambiguity, amphibology, or
Equivocation in fact, for that Equivocation as has been said, may be used
either in factes or speech, and consequently that our Savior did here
Equivocate with his disciples making them believe a different thing from that
he meant, for he meant to go no further, but to stay there with them, as is
gathered out of the text it self, for that otherwise the Evangelist would not
have said, and he feigned to go surther; nor may it without impiety be called
(...) ly, of what sort soever, as S. Augustine expressly does Cap. 9.
prove in diverse parts of his works: how then will Thomas (...) deliver
himself from this labyrinth? He hathno probable escape at all, as you shall
see in the sequent point about feigning or deceauing, for that this place does
more properly appertain to that matter and subject, this being no (...)
proposition, but rather a dissimulation, or fiction in act, as is presumed, as
that our Savior went further then the place, or made show that he would do
so, or the like, and consequently we shall differ the larger declaration of
this place unto the ensuing point or paragraphe, which is the fourth and last
of this Chapter.

59. The fourth and last place then, which our Minister has alleged out of
the foresaid Catholic About our Saviors denial to ascend to the festival
day.
the same, is the speech of our Savior to his brethren or kinsmen in S. John's
Gospel, who exhorting him to go up to Jerusalem to celebrate the feast of
Tabernacles, and thereby to be known to the world, he answered with showing
first a great difference between his state and theirs, and how the world hated
him, but not them, and why, and then said, go you up to this festival Joan. 7.
day, I do not go up to this feast, for that my time is not yet accomplished;
but yet after they being gone up, he ascended also. Out of which speech and
fact is gathered, that Christ when he said to his brethren, I do not ascend,
or will not ascend to this feast, he had some further mental reservation,
which his brethren understood not, for that otherwise they would not have gone
up without him, so as here is a plain Equivocal proposition, that has one
meaning according to the words in the hearers understanding, and another in
the sense of the speaker, whereby the hearers were deceived: and yet was this no
ly. What then will Thomas Morton say to this? You shall see him bestirre
himself for some evasion, but with as good success as the good-wife that was
early up, and never the near, which example I use to temperate somewhat his
intemperate Ministerial speech of loving and embracing queanes in the very
beginning of his answer: for thus he writes:

60 You have (says he) bestowed many lines in Page 78.
commencing upon this text, to euince from hence your reserved conceit: let me
borrow a little leave to plead as well for truth, as you do for a ly, and show
VVanton and vndece^t speech of T. M.
you, how expounding this place, you blinded with the love of your Thais, had
rather snatch at any meaning, then take that which is meant: for those words, I
will not go up, in the Greek are, I will not go up yet: But your Helena the
Latin vulgar text must be embraced etc. Do you see what manner of accusation
he brings in against us, and in what light and lascivious words, in so grave
and sacred a subject as is the text of holy writ? Has he no honester
comparisons to bring in then the blind love of Thais, and embracing of Helena?
you may judge of the man's spirit by his words.

61. But what does he accuse us of in effect? forsooth that we have left the
(...) text, which has ' (...) nondum, not yet, and do follow the vulgar
Latin, which has only ' ou, that is non, not, the difference of which word
makes a maine diversity in the matter if you mark it well, for if the true
text be nondum, I will not yet Joan. 7.
go up, then is there no doubt or difficulty at all of the sense, for that
Christ had said plainly that he would not go up then, and so his going up
afterward had been no contradiction any way to his former speech of not going
up, as here our Maldonate cited by Morton does confess: but on the other side
if the matter were so plain by reading nondum in the Greek, why do the
ancient Fathers labor so much to find out the secret meaning, and reserved
sense of our Savior in Cap. 9.
Diverse expositions of the Fathers about Christ's mental reservation.
this sentence and seeming contradiction of his? For S. Augustine and S. Bid
after much search, do think his meaning to have been, that he would not ascend
to that feast with a humane spirit, to procure worldly honor, name or fame, as
his brethren exhorted him by making himself known, and admired to the world
by working of miracles etc. Strabus Jerusalem at Easter, according to the
appointment of his Father, and to this effect said, tempus meum nondum aduenit,
my time is not yet come. Eucherius in his questions Exodus 25. Leuit. 23. Deuteronomy.
16. And this exposition is approved in like manner both by S. Cyril, S.
Augustine and Ammonius and others in respect of those words of the Evangelist
verse. 14. Iam autem die festo mediante ascendit Jesus in templum; Christ
ascended to the Temple the feast being half ended: albeit this being spoken of
his going up to the Temple, other think that he went up to the city after his
brethren, before the first day, but not into the Temple to celebrate the feast.

62. Wherefore seeing these and other Fathers do labor so much to find out the
meaning of Christ in A clear argument.
this sentence, it is not like, that the matter was so clear as T. M. would
make it, by the clause nondum: for if that word had been in all Greek books,
and so held for the true text, there had been no question, or controversy as
expositours confess: yet we grant with Maldonate alleged by Th. Morton, that
very many Greek copies had it so in former times, and have it at this day;
neither does our vulgar translation deny or dissemble the same, for albeit it
have non, and not nondum; yet does it expressly signify in the margent, that
diverse manuscriptes have nondum, and so does set it down for varia lectio, yea
the Rhemes English Testament it self does express that translation also in the
margent, I will not go up yet: so as Mortons scoff of our Thais and Helena is
a mere calumniation as you see, and worthy of a man of his profession.

63. Nor do we reject the Greek text any where, when with more probability of
truth it may be admitted, as here in this place they are our expositours and
not his, that have taught him to talk of ' oupoo, nondum to wit, Iansenius,
Tolet and Maldonate. And the two The Catholics (...) not the Greek text where
it (...) more probably be follovved.
former for more facility of explication do follow the same, and the sense
thereof in their commentaries: we also in our vulgar Latin translation, which
Morton calls our Helena, do go nearer many times to the Greek then
Protestants, as here our said Latin text says, Ego non ascendo in the present
tense according to the Greek, I do not ascend, whereas Thomas Morton
translateth, I will not ascend in the future, which the Greek has not. And
again diverse Greek textes have not at all these words, I do not ascend to
this feast, according to Maldonate and Tolet, and diverse other Greek textes
have the word nyn ( nunc) added, that is, I will not ascend now, both which
notwithstanding are rejected by the Protestants themselves: all which being so,
you may consider of the wise speech of T. M. in this place: We will not (says
he) so strictly challenge Page 79.
our right in this equity approved by all antiquity, which is, that as in
discerning pure water, rather to examine it by the fountain (...) vain vaunt
of T. M.
then the river, so we judge of the truth of textes by the (...) rather then
the translation

64. And do you so Sir? And do we contradict this? Your very next immediate
words do clear us from this your calumniation, for it follows in your
speech: Your Latin text ( say you) does sufficiently betoken the same sense of
the Greek, (not yet) and so do two of the ouk (...)
principal Doctors of your Church, Tolet, and Iansenius paraphrase. And is it
so? how then are we so blinded with the love of our Thais, as rather to snatch
at any meaning, then take that which is meant? how say you that our Helena, the
Latin translation, is embraced by us before the Greek, if our Latin do not
only betoken the same sense of the Greek, as here you confess, but sets
it down so as varia lectio in the margent, as before has been showed; yea and
that two of our principal Doctors do follow the same in their paraphrases? Is
not this to accuse and defend, affirm and deny, and to speak contraries with
one and the same breath?

65. But to draw to an end, and conclude the principal point of this
controversy, you see how Thomas Morton seeks to avoid the force of this
place, where Christ denied that he would go up to the festival day, and yet
afterward went up, by this only evasion, that very many Greek copies have the
word nondum: and for this he alleges the testimony of our Maldonate in his
Commentary upon that place. But what? did Maldonate say, that all Greek copies
had it so? or Diverse (...) to prove that' oupoo (...) was not in the more
ancient (...) truer Greek copies.
that the most ancient, and purest did so read? or that he himself was of that
opinion? No truly: but the quite contrary, for he proves by diverse strong
arguments, that this word ' oupoo, nondum was not in the old copy in S.
Hieromes time, and before, when our vulgar Latin translation was set forth.
First, for that it is like that the said Latin translation would as well have
expressed it, as betoken it, to use Mortons own phrase, and put it in the
margent, especially for so much as the Cyril, Euthymius, and others do not
read ' oupoo but ' ou, non and not nondum, which is a token that those Greek
textes of the Gospel, which they used in their days had it as our Latin has
now. Thirdly for that Beda, Strabus, Rupertus and all other Latin Maldonats
judgment do read non and not nondum, who notwithstanding did confer with the
Greek Copies of their time, and especially S. Hierome most learned in all
languages, who is held for the principal Author of this our Latin vulgar
translation.

66. Fourthly all the Ancient Fathers before named Two strong arguments.
did not know this evasion in their days by the word nondum, for that it had
been folly to take so much pains to discover a meaning or reservation that was
clear of it self. Fifthly we do read in S. Hierome that Porphyrius the
Apostata in his most spiteful inuectiues against our Savior, did object this
as a principal (...) 2. co^tra Pel.
place to discredit him withal, that he saying he would not go up to that
feast, did notwithstanding go up afterward, which he being a most learned
Grecian, and using all the Greek textes of that time, for his The impiety of
Porphyr.
purpose, as having been a Christian before, it may be presumed, that if any of
them had then read ' oupoo, whereby his objection had been answered, he would
never have vpbrayded the same, especially against such learned Christian
Doctors of the Greek Church that lived with him, and wrote against him, as
Origin, Ammonius, Dionysius Alexandrinus and others, all within three hundred
years after Christ, who no doubt would have answered Porphyrius as Thomas
Morton does now answer us, with ' oupoo, if there had been any such thing in
the Greek text in their days.

67. And finally if Christ our Savior had answered asked him again, when he
would go, and would have stayed for him, and of likelihood would not have
departed without him; All which reasons, and considerations Thomas Morton
passes over and dissembleth, and is full glad that he has a hole to slipp out
any way. And yet to show one point of manhood in this his flight, he takes
upon him to answer one of these six T. M. his manhood in his flight.
arguments alleged against him, which is the fourth concerning the ancient
Fathers that labored to seek out (...) reserved meaning, and you shall see
how full satisfaction he gives according to the title of his book: What
shall we then say (says he) to the other expositions Page 80.
(of Fathers) objected? Only this; that whatsoever exposition they understand,
they did think that the same was as well understood of the Apostles as of
themselves. Here be two points insinuated, if you consider them attentyuely,
the first, that the ancient Fathers did suppose, that whatsoever Christ's
meaning was in these words to his brethren (whom Morto calls here the
Apostles) they did (the said kinsmen of our Savior) understand the same as well
then, to wit before the gospel was written, and before the holy ghost was
given, as the said Christian Fathers and learned Doctors did afterward by the
learning, and light they had from the spirit and tradition of the Church: which
proposition if he were put to prove in the presence of learned men, I doubt not
but that he would quickly be in a poor and pitiful plight.

68. The second thing which by this his answer he our joined reservation is
always supposed to Page (...)
be a clause concealed, and not understood. But this is a greater foolery then
the first, for that there may be a reservation in the speakers mind, though
understood to some of the hears. As for example in our proposition being
demanded, whether I be a priest, and I say no, reserving to my self, as often
before has been declared, that I am no such, or such priest, as I ought to
utter A reserved proposition may be understood by the (...) rers and (...).
the same to you, though some of the examiners should guess at my reservation,
or know the same certainly, for that otherwise they know I am a priest, this
does not make that this proposition in it self, and in my meaning is not a
reserved or equivocal proposition, for that they understand it. And yet as
though the poor man had played his prize well, he concludes (...) in these
words: Therefore (...) all these (...), there (...) not the least hair of your
fox (...) of (...): Scriptures forsake you, or rather you them, now will you
have recourse unto Fathers?

69. But whether Scriptures have forsaken him, or us in this conflict, or
whether the Fathers expositions have stood with his, or our cause, the reader I
suppose has sufficiently seen: nor is it needful for us, to make any further
recourse unto Fathers, having showed them to stand fully for us in allowing
reserved mixed propositions, which of necessity do make ambiguity, and
equivocation even in Christ's own speeches, as has been declared: Which if
Mortons uncircumcised mouth will call also fox-tayles we may well be contented
to bear such a Ministerial scoff in so good a cause and company. And finally
what this man esteems of holy Fathers when they make against him, is easily
seen by that he says in the next Chapter after, where having cyted out of the
former Catholic Treatise, the saying of S. Gregory the Greg li. 26. (...).
c. 7. The abuse of S. Gregory by T. M.
Great, that we ought not to respect so much the words of any speech, as the
will and intent of the speaker, (...) non debet intentio verbis deseruire, sed
verba intentioni; for that the inte^tion of the speaker ought not to serve to
his words, but his words to his intention; after a soffe or two against the
said Father, that if an Author must be sought for a lie, it was most likely he
should be a Pope, he makes this conclusion: I dare boldly conclude (says he)
Page 82.
that though S. Gregory, or a thousand of Saints; yea (...) celestial
Gabriel, or any Angel from heaven should teach, and authorize such a Doctrine
as this, we may from the word of God pronounce him Anathema. So he.

70. And he concludes boldly in deed, but who more bold then blind Bayard (as
the proverb says) he may as well pronounce Anathema and curse, not only upon
Saints and Angels, but upon the Son of God himself, as by this time his
discreet Reader has seen and considered. And can there be any more blind
boldness then this? Is he not ashamed of this so shameful oversight? does he
not remember what he Page 48.
said before, not one iota in all Scripture, not one example in all antiquity,
not one shadow of reason in all the wit of man can be brought for any color
of Equivocation? I will not pretermitt his very last words immediately
following, wherewith he concludes his twelueth Chapter, for that Page 82.
they conteyne a full vpshot of his folly. Now (says he) that we have wrested
your weapons out of your hands (by answering Scriptures and Fathers as before
he has answered) it will be easy to pearce you even with (...), the bluntest
kind of arguments that are: And then he follows on in the next Chapter to
pearce us with signs, coins, Giges ringes, and other like toys: but we, as
you have seen have pierced him in the mean pace wit h substantial arguments
of truth her self, out of both Scriptures and Fathers, and shall do yet more
in the ensuing paragraph, leaving him now to his similitudes, signs, coins,
Giges ringes, and other such like iugling words, and instruments fit for a
man of his disposition.

THE FOVRTH AND LAST POINT OF THIS CHAPTER About Scriptures, and Fathers That
defended Equivocation from the name and nature of Deceit and fallacy: WITH
Some other proofs out of common Reason etc.. 4.
71. I May be very breifin this, for that I have handled the same argument in
the later end of the former Chapter, and in this I have been longer then (...).
(...).
I had purposed, and therefore I will only adioyne in (...) (...). 55.
place some few examples more, for justifying of that which there we touched in
few words. For whereas according to S. Augustines defynition before set down,
two things are to be required to a ly, first to utter that with is false and
disagreeing from the understanding of the speaker; the other that there be
intention to deceive; the first, of falsitie, has been largly proved not to be
found in our reserved proposition, I am no priest, for that the speaker has a
true meaning in his sense: Now must we handle the second about deceit, of which
we have said (...), that neither this clause of the definition of lying is
found in the said proposition, for that the Answerers first and principal
intent is not to deceive the demaunder to his hurt, but to deliver himself by
concealing a truth only, which truth he is not bound to utter, and this in
effect is to permit the other to be deceived, and not properly to deceive, or
to have intention or cupidity of deceauing, as S. Augustines words are.

72. And for that I promised in the former paragraph About the fictio^ of our
Savior at the Castle of Emaus. Luc. 24. (...). 28.
to handle more largly in this place, the dissimulation or fiction of our
Savior related in the end of S. Lukes Gospel, when he went with his two
disciples to the Castle of Emaus, which by the Evangelist it set down in these
words: Jesus autem finxit se longius ire, Ie Prosepoieito (...)eroo poreuesthai.
sus did feign that he would go further, or as the Greek has it,
Prosepoieito, he did make show or pretend as though he would go further; I
shall here relate somewhat largely the words of a learned Bishop of our time,
upon that place to wit Iansenius oftentimes cyted by Thomas Morton himself.

73. Est mendacium (says he) secundum (...) Iansenius comment, in (...).
Euang. c. 146.
nem etc. Aly according to S. Augustines definition, is a false signification,
with a will to deceive; wherefore as it is no lie or fallacy at all, when a man
speaks that which in his own sense is true, though it be false in the sense
which the hearer conceiueth, so that the speaker do not utter those ambiguous
words with intention to deceive another, but only to conceal The discourse of
B. Iansen. about Christ's fiction.
profitably some truth; even so fiction and simulation which is in facts, is
not unlawful, but profitable and wholesome, wherewith a man does something by
which he knows that another man will conceive a false opinion of that he
says, so that he does not this with intention to engender this false opinion
in him, but for some other profitable end. As for example S. Paul in a certain
manner, did feign himself to be an obseruer of the Jewish Law, when he did
circumcise Tymothy, and did bear himself as a Jew with (...). 16.
the Jews, and under the Law with them that were under the Law, and he did
know that by keeping the ceremonies of the Law, the Jews would think him to
live under the law; but yet he deceived them not, for that he did not observe
those ceremonies of the Law, to the end to deceive them, but rather that by
concealing his own opinion for a time, he might gain them, or at leastwise
not alienate them from Christ: and so now Christ our Savior did feign himself
to go further, composing his gestures and motions of body, as though he would
go beyond that Castle; by doing whereof he knew, that his disciples would think,
that he had a purpose to go further; but yet he did not compose his gestures
and motions, to make them think so, but his end was by this means to stir
up in them their love toward him, and the virtue of hospitality, whereby they
might be made apt, and worthy to have their eyes opened to know him.

74. This is the discourse of this learned Bishop, for defending our Saviors
deed from reprehensible fictio^ and dissimulation; to wit, that his first and
principal intention was not (as neither that of S. Paul) to deceive his
hearers, albeit that did follow consequently upon their facts, that is to say,
that the other were deceived. And the very same falls out in our case,
Application of our case with this of our Savior.
yea with one principal circumstance more of justification, then is expressed
in the former examples, which is, that in our case (as before has been showed)
violence and injury is offered by the demander, meaning to punish the party
examined unjustly, or to draw secrets from him, which he is not bound to utter,
but rather is bound sometimes not to utter to his own and other men's
prejudice, hurt, and damage: by which circumstance of iniuryes offered, we have
recorded before that (...) in (...) are made lawful, by S. Augustine, and all
other Deuynes judgment. And to Supra. c. 7.
(...) more Fathers sentences in proof of this were wholly needles, for so much
as the practice thereof throughout all Christendom for all ages, amongst what
Religions or Sects soever, is admitted and put in ure without any doubt or
contradiction.

75. It remains then most certain among deuynes, Permitting an other to be
deceived is not to deceive.
and most (...) by Scripture it self, that the clause of S. Augustine in the
definition of lying, animus fallendi, intention to deceive, does not include
(...), when one permits another to be deceived; nor yet the clause set down
by diverse Authors in the definition Tolet. li. de sept. peccat. c. 46.
of deceit, which is to engender a false opinion in the hearers mind,
different from that of the speaker, includes the said permission, when I
suffer another Maldonat. coment. in cap. 24.
man to gather a false conceit or opinion upon any fact or speech of mine that
is true, and lawful in my sense. For if we should condemn this, we should
Luc. v. 28.
condemn God himself of injustice and iniquity, which were blasphemy.

76. And for proof of this do our deuynes cite many places, and examples out
of holy writ, besides those already alleged, whereby is showed, that Almighty
God, of whom otherwise all Catholics hold, as an article of faith, that he is
not able by any power of his D. Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. ar. 3. Bannes Vale^tia and
alij in eumde^ locum.
to deceive any man: yet that in this kind of permissiue deceit he may do it,
and has don it, and does it daily, according to that of the Psalm talking of
wicked men and their prosperity in this life, by which they are deceived and
overthrown, not knowing to use them well, the Prophet says to almighty God;
Veruntamen propter dolos posuisti eis; Thou have given Psalm. 72.
them (these riches) for snares to inta^ngle them, that is to say, thou have
permitted them to be entangled, and snared in them to their damnation, by
taking away thy light of grace from them.

77. Yea oftentimes God goes so far in this permission, and the Scripture
(...) the same in such effectual words, as it may seem at the first sight,
that God does not only permit men to be blinded, and mistake, and be deceived;
but rather that he does it actiuely and positiuely himself, to which effect
sound those words of the Gospel: Tenebantar oculi (...), ne (...).
eum (...); There eyes were held to the end they should not know him. And that
of Job speaking of Almighty God, Qui immutat cor Principum (...) terrae, and
Job. 12.
decipit eos, vt frustra incedant, and errare eos facit quasi (...): he does
chang the hearts of Princes of the earth, and deceaueth them to make them walk
in vain and does cause them to err, as if they were drunk. Who would not
think that this were more then only permission? We read also in the third
Book of Kings, that God appearing unto (...) the Prophet, sitting Cap. 22.
upon his state of Majesty, with an army of heaven about him, said, who shall
deceive King Achab, to make him go up and make war in Ramoth-Galad, and be
overthrown there; and when diverse had spoken diversely, a lying spirit stepped
forth and said that he would deceive him, and God answered, egredere and fac it
a, go forth and do so; whereupon Micheas infers presently dedit Dominus
spiritum mendacij in ore omnium Prophetarum, God gave a lying spirit in the
mouth of all the false (...) God co^curreth to deceit (...) permission.
Prophets, which seems may infer, that God did actually cooperate to that
deceit, and not only permit the same, and so have diverse heretics taken it:
but the Catholic Church has never understood the same further, then as a
permission, as that speech of our Savior to Judas, quod (...) fac citius, that
which (...). 13.
thou art to do, do it quickly, which was no commandment, but a permission,
and so the other fac ita, to the lying spirit.

78. And the very same is to be understood in many other places of Scripture,
as that of Isay; Quare errare (...) Isay 63.
nos Domine de viis tuis? why have thou made us: (o Lord) to err from thy
ways? And that of Ezechiel, Ezechiel. 14.
where God says of himself: Propheta cum errauerit, ego Dominus aecepi
Prophetam illum; when any Prophet does err, I the lord, have deceived that
prophet. And S. Paul to the Romans, speaking of the old heathen Philosophers;
Tradidit illos Deus in reprobum sensum, vt faciant ea quae Romans 1.
non (...): God has delivered them over into a reprobate sense, that they may
do these things that are not convenient. All which places, according to the
interpretations of holy See S. Hier. epist. ad Helio. quaest. 10. S. Gregor.
li. 13. moral. cap. 16.
Fathers, and Doctors of the Catholic Church (which were over long to recite
in this place) are to be understood that God does permit men to be deceived,
and to be delivered over into a reprobate sense for their sins, and so, as a
great Divine of our time does observe, it is not only Damascen. li. 4. Theolog.
cap. 14.
a simple permission of Almighty-God, but conjoined: also with his divine
ordination that ordayneth out of his justice such a permission for punishment
of their D. Tho. li. 3. contrae gentes c. 162. and lib. 12. quaest. 79.
sins, that are so blinded or deceived, which he proves out of the words
and reason of the last recited sentence of S. Paul, concerning the old
Philosophers, saying, propter quod tradidit illos Deus in reprobum sensum, for
which God delivered them over into a reprobate Dominicus Bannes. in 2. 2. q. 1.
ar. 3. dub 2. ad 7.
sense: what means this causatiue, for which, says this divine? S. Paul
himself does expound it, when he says a little before, Quia cum (...) Deum,
non sicut Deum glorificauerunt, for that whereas they knew him to be God, they
did not glorify him as God: this then (says Gods ordination joined (...)
with his permissio^.
he) is more then a simple permission in respect of their demerit, that God is
said to have blinded them, which is not said in the fall of the Angel, nor of
Adam that God did blind them, though he suffered them to fall. So this learned
Doctor.

79. Out of which observation is made evident, that the more fault the party
deceived is in, the more justly he is permitted to be blinded, and deceived,
and if it be lawful for a good end to suffer any to err or be deceived so we
utter no ly or falsehood of our part, but rather speak a truth in our own
meaning (as out of the former Doctrine of Iansenius, which is the common
Doctrine of all Catholics, and out of diverse sayings of Christ himself, and
his Apostles has been declared:) how much more is it lawful for a man's own
necessary defense to use the same; when iuiustice, violence, or injury is
offered as before has been declared?

80. And truly this matter is so clear even by the instinct of nature it self,
that God has left some refuge in reason for a man to declyne lawfully such an
assault, when it falls upon him, as to deny this, is to deny common sense and
feeling of all men. For who is there of any mean wit or capacity, that being
asked of a secret which he would not utter, and pressed so as he must either
incur great inconvenience by uttering, or make a lie by denying (which lie
every good mind by nature hates, as both Aristotle and Arist. li. 4 Ethicor.
cap. 7.
S. Augustine do confess:) who is there (I say) that naturally does not seek
out some evasion, by answering August. li. cont. mendac. cap. 15. and in
Enchirid. c. 22. Equivocation by (...) and instinct of nature.
doubtfully, but yet endeavoring to retain some true sense in his own
meaning? Do not all sorts of men even by the instinct of nature it self use
and practice this, without any instruction at all? they being commonly the best
mynds and most tymerous consciences, that do seek to use these (...) by
amphibologies, and equivocal speeches, whereas the other of worser minds, make
no scruple to lie at all?

81. And I would in this point ask my Adversary Thomas Morton this case, that
if a great man in England whose favor he much desires and esteems, and yet
would be loath to lend him money for that he knew him to spend much, and not to
hold payment of his debtes to be necessary to salvation, if: this great man (I
say) demanded him whether he had five hundred pounds to lend him, and
supposing that A peculier case proposed to Thomas Morton.
he had them, but loath to lend or loose them, what would he do or answer in
this case, if there be no other means, but either to confess that he has
them, and thereby loose them by lending, or deny that he has them, and thereby
incur a lie and loose his soul? Is there no mean between these two
extremes? Has God and nature left no lawful manner of evasion, by force of
wit and reason whereby a man may deliver himself from such an encumbrance? If
not, it may seem that God has provided worse for man's Stratagems of
unreasonable creatures.
defense in this case, then he has done for many unreasonable creatures, to
whom he has given such sharpnes of sense in this behalf for their lawful
defense, Plini. li. 9. cap. 42. Solin. cap. 38.
as the stratagems are very strange which Pliny, Solinus, Cicero, and many
other Authors do recount of them, as the Hare and Fox, by leaps, turninges,
and Cicero li. 1. de natura (...).
wyndinges, and going back again in the same trace they come, thereby to
deceive the dogs: the Hearnshaw and other fowls for deluding the faulcon; and
other creatures in like occasions of defense.

82. And for so much as the use of reason and wit is the chief armor and weapon
of mankind, there can be no doubt, but that a man may even by Law of nature it
self, extend the same to all ways of defense: that may be, without offense of
Gods law, and therefore seeing that we have showed before, that doubfull or
amphibologicall speech that has a true meaning in the speakers understanding
and is used by him not to deceive or hurt, but to defend himself, is noly, or:
falsehood at all, and consequently is lawful; it cannot be reprehensible in
just occasions to use the same. And I say in just occasions, according to the
explications thereof before set down, which afterward in like Wherein
equivocations may not be used.
manner, shall more particularly be declared; for that without just cause, as
in confession of our faith, common conversation, mutual traffic, and the
like where prejudice thereby may grow to any man, or to the common credit of
dealing there may they not be used, as often has been said.

83. Now then to return to our example of Thomas Morton and his five hundred
pounds, I do not doubt but that he would answer the Noble man, that he had
them not, though they lay in his chest, understanding by force of equivocation
(though never so much detested by his soul as he says) that he had them not to
lend him, or not in his purse, or not so, as he could spare them, or some other
like reservation, which we say that without a lie he might use. And I doubt not
but that either with a lie or without a ly he would practice it, if I be not
deceived in my opinion of his wisdom, and conscience in that behalf.

84. The like case might be proposed of his wife (if he have any) or of any
other married woman who being demanded by her jealous husband, whether An
other case proposed.
she had been false unto him or no, if she say yea, and confess the truth,
there goes her honor and temporal life therein; but if she say no, and make a
lie, there goes the spiritual death of her soul: what would you M. Morton
counsel her to do in this case, if you (...) her Ghostly Father? to ly you
may not advise her, according to S. Augustine before recited; no not for the
saving of her own life, or of any other: to destroy or disgrace herself by her
own confession, when the crime is secret, nor any witness or other proofs
extant, were hard to counsel her, and against equity: if then without making a
ly she might escape and deliver her self by using some equivocation of words,
will you call it heathenish, (...), and a monstrous hydra? But I do hope by
this time that you are somewhat calmed in your former heates against this
doctrine, and therefore I will urge no further your outrageous terms against
the same, but now shall pass to set down the particular cases, wherein our
Doctors do hold that some equivocation or amphibologie of words may be lawfully
used without ly or other offense.

OF CERTAIN PARTICVLER CASES, AND OCCASIONS, VVherin it may be lawful to use
the manner of Equivocation, or Amphybology before set down, either in speech
or oath: With the reasons thereof.
CHAP. X.
Hitherto have we treated of Amphibologie, and Equivocation in general, to
wit, what their nature is, how different from lying, and consequently that in
some causes, and occurrent occasions they may be lawful, and used by good men
without sin, or offense, and so have been by (...) and holy persons, yea often
by the holy Ghost himself, as before largely has been declared. Now then for
more perspicuitie it remains that we lay forth breifely some particular, and
principal cases, wherein the said use of Amphibologie or Equivocation by
learned Catholic Deuynes is admitted and allowed; which we shall do with the
greatest brevity, and perspicuity that we may, considering the great variety
of Authors, matters, and opinions, that upon such Cases do arise: the several
explication whereof would require a great volume. But it shall be sufficient for
the judicious Reader to understand, that as in all other human, and moral
matters, there may be and is commonly difference of opinions, how this or that
ought to be done or practiced, though they agree in the Doctrine: so here also
when and how, and in what words, and what form os speech a man may justly
use Amphibologie or Equivocation, for covering of Secrets that are not
convenient to be uttered, all do not agree, but have their different
judgments, though in the principal they do all concur that in some cases
the said Amphibologie or equivocation may be lawfully used without lying, or
other sin: of which Cases we shall here recite some principal.

The first case about the secret of Confession.. 1.
2. THE first and most general case, wherein D Thom. in 4. d. 21. q. 3. and 2.
2. q. 70. art. 1. ad 2. Caiet. ibi. in (...). (...). (...) ib. concl. 5. Arag.
ib. in solut. ad arg. 2. S. T. Palu. 4. d. 21. q. 3. ar. 1 (...). 1. and ar. 3.
co^cl. 1 Scot. ibi. 2.
all Sacramental Confession, to wit, if a Confessor or Priest that has heard
an other man's confession, should be demanded whether such a one had confessed
such a syn unto him or not, though no ways, nor upon any consideration
whatsoever he may tell a lie, according to our former Doctrine; yet may he not
only say, nescio, I know nothing, but answer directly, that he has not
confessed any such thing unto him, albeit he had so done; and that the said
Confessor may not say, but swear also this answer of his, understanding and
reserving in his mind, that the penitent has not confessed the same unto him
so as he may utter it. The reason of which answer,. de ista qu. co^cl. 1. and
2. Ant. p. 2. ti. l. c. 19.. 7. in fi. Sot. li. 5 de just. q. 7 ar. 1. ad 1.
and in rel. de tegen. secreto.
albeit diverse Authors do diversely explicate, as that this was confessed to
him, not as to man, but unto God, or as to Gods substitute in the tribunal of
Confession, and the like: wherein I remit the Reader to Dominicus Sotus, a
learned Divine, and to Doctor Nauar no less renowned lawyer, who handle the
matter at large in several Treatises; yet both they, and all other Deuines and
lawyers, as has been said, do hold that in this case (...). 1. q. 2. Syl. verb.
Testis.
of Confession, the obligation of secrecy is so great, as for no respect
whatsoever, nor to what person soever, though he be never so lawful a Judge,
Prince, Prelate q. 8. versu Secundu^. Nau. in m. c. 18. n. 51. and 52. and in
caput interverb. 11. q. 3. co^c. 6. (...). 64. number. 707. and alij omn.
or Superior, nor for saving of a whole Kingdom or common wealth, and much
less the lives of any particular men, or women, or of the confessor himself,
no nor of the whole world together if it were possible, or to work never so
much good thereby, nor though the said Confessor were put in never so great
torments, imo si mill mortes (...) essent, if a thousand deaths (says lib.
5. c. 66.
Tolet) were to be suffered by him, yet might he not utter the same. And
further if the Case should fall out that he could not confess his own sins,
without giving some particular, and personal suspicion of the other unto his
confessor, he were bound under sin to pretermit his own confession, until
he found another Confessor, unto whom without this peril he might be
confessed.

3. Which sacred and inviolable seal of this Sacramental secrecy being
considered, and that Amphibologicall and Equivocal speech with a true
reservation of mind is no lie at all, as in the precedent Chapters has been
largely proved, it is inferred that a Confessor in this case, is not only
allowed to use the same prudently, when need is, for covering of the said
secrecy, but is bound also in conscience thereunto, under greiuous sin, when
by no other means of silence, diuersio^, or evasion the said secrecy can be
concealed.

4. And in this al Schole-Deuines whatsoever do agree, as has been said, and
namely all those whom before we have mentioned in the precedent Chapter, and
first point thereof; and among other M. Mortons Genesius in like manner is with
us, and against him, whom he has picked out as singular and single among all
Catholic writers in this behalf, denying the lawfulnes of Equivocation in
sundry other Cases, but in this granting and auouching the same with great
asseueration Genes Sepulueda de rat. dicendi testim in causis occultorum (...)
cap. 3.
in these words: Deus and Ecclesia, ipsaque ratio naturalis arcanum sacrae
confessionis, quod multis scriptis legibus nominatim est sancitum, tam sanctum
esse voluerunt, vt in nulla (prudenti modo, and coacta) sic cognitorum
peccatorum inficiatione possit esse vel periurium, vel mandacium, propter
Sacramenti huius maiestatem, and maximam publicamque Religionis Christianae
perturbationem. God and the (...), and natural reason it self, would have
this secret of holy Confession to be so inviolable, which is established also
by many written laws ( of the Church) as by no denial of sins so known in
confession (so it be prudently done, and upon compulsion) can there be either
perjury, or lying, both in regard of the Majesty Genesius against T. M.
of this Sacrament of Confession, and of the great and public perturbation of
Christian Religion, which would otherwise ensue if matters revealed in
confession, might at any time, upon any occasion, be uttered again. So he.
Holding as you see, that no denial of matters heard or known by confession,
in what sort soever, can be a lie, or perjury: the reason thereof being not
only that which here Sepulueda does touch; but (...) for that which before
has (...) insynuated, that things known in Almighty Gods Court and
trybunall, and as uttered unto himself, may truly be denied to be known in a
human tribunal, and as the priest is a private man, and not a public
minister of God.

5. One only Case there is, wherein all the said Deuines agree that a Confessor
may utter any Crime Tolet. lib. 3. de instruct.
confessed unto him. Vnus est solus casus (says Tolet) in quo Confessarius
potest alteri manifestare peccatum Confessionis. etc. One only case there is,
in which the Confessor Sa erdot. cap. (...).
may manifest a syn heard in Confession unto an other, Nauar. comment. in cap.
human: aures 22.
to wit, by license and Commission of the penitent himself, which thing Doctor
Navarre does prove at large by the common opinion of S. Thomas, and other
School Deuines, with the concurrence, and consent q. (...). and de paenitent.
did. 6. cap. Sacerdos. nu. (...).
of the Canon law, and lawyes cyted by him And then must he reveal it also,
but to him alone for whom he has license, and qui (...) casu reuelat,
grauissime peccat (...) (says Tolet:) and whosoever in any other case Tolet
ibid. (...). cap. (...).
does reveal it he does sin a most grievous mortal sin, and (...) also
the punishment assigned by the church in the Canon law, for so heinous a crime:
And if further (says he) any wicked Judge should compel him to reveal the
same under an oath, he may (...), that he knows no such sin, though he know
it indeed, but yet knows it not so as he may reveal it. And this is the
common Doctrine of all, disputed more at large by the Reverend and learned man
Dominicus Sotus the Emperor Charles his Confessor, in a special Treatise
called, (...) omnis vtriusque sexus de (...). and rem ssione.
Relectio de tegendo (...): A Relection about covering secrets; wherein he
shows how far a man may disclose them, and what obligation he has of
conscience to conceal them, in every sort or kind. And thus much briefly for
this first case.

The second case about Secrets of the Commonwealth.. 2.
6. THE second Case that for obligation of secrecy comes next to this first,
though in a different degree, is, when Magistrates, and such as have
government in the Common wealth, as Senators, Councillors, Governors
Secretaries, Notaries, and (...) like, and con equently do know the secrets
thereof, (...) pressed to utter them, which they may not do in matters of
moment, and that may turn to the prejudice of the said (...) wealth, or of any
particular man, if the business be of great weight, and handled secretly by
the Common wealth, for any cause or peril whatsoever; yea though their lives
should go therein, for that they are more bound by reason of their offices to
the reservation of public secrets, both by law of nature, humane and divine,
then private men are: though as Dominicus Sotus in his foresaid book. De
tegendo Secreto Sotus relect. de tegendo secreto memb. (...). 9. 4 Conclus. 6.
does show, that a private man also coming to know any secrets of the Common
wealth, is bound under mortal sin to conceal them, and rather to suffer
death then to disclose the same, especially to enemies, as the Civil law also
declares; but much L. omne delictum ff. de re militari.
more those that are in public office, whereof Sotus gives this example among
other. If a Judge which hears a weighty cause, should be assailed by one
party, vt merita causae prodat, to utter the merits or secrets of the cause,
debet potius gladio succumbere, quam (...) (...): He ought rather to suffer
himself to be slain by the sword, then to break his faith by uttering that
secret: but much greater, and more greiuous sin it should be to utter the
same for money or bribery, hatred, malice, or other like cause. Et idem
crediderim (says he) de Scribis, quorum fidei causae graves committuntur: and
the same I would think of Notaryes, Scribes, or Secretaries, to whose faith
weighty matters are committed.

7. And finally the said Author having handled in the first part of his said
learned book, the great obligation that man has by law, both of faith,
justice, equity, and charity to conceal secrets, he puts these degrees
thereof: In primo gradu (says he) est secretum Sot relect. mem. 1. q. 1. and. 2.
Confessionis; in secundo secretum publicum etc. In the first degree is the
secret of Confession, whereof we have handled before; in the second degree, is
the secret of the Common wealth out of Confession; in the third Sot. ibid.
memb. 1. q. 2. conclus. 4.
degree, is the secret of private persons, and that in different sort, all
which we are bound to conceal ordinarily, under the pain of mortal sin,
except the smalnes of the cause do sometimes excuse the same, and make it
venial. So this learned man; and it is the common opinion of other
Schoole-Deuines in like manner.

8. Wherefore seeing the obligation not only of concealing How a man may use
equivocation or amphibology for defense of public secrets.
secrets heard in Confession, but of those also that be secular out of
Confession, is so great, especially of those that be public and appertain to
the common wealth; it follows that when a man shall be unjustly pressed to
utter the same, he may not only deny to utter them, which he must do upon pain
of damnation as you have heard; but also dissemble to know them by any way of
lawful speech, that may have a true sense in his meaning, though in his that
presses to know them, it be otherwise: whereof besides that which in the
precedent Chapters has been said, we shall have occasion to treat more in the
next case ensuing, which is more general. For if it be lawful for any private
man that is called in question touching matters concerning himself, and is
wrongfully urged to utter his secrets, to make evasion by any kind of lawful
amphibologie, or Equivocation, as presently shall be proved, then much more in
defense of the public secret, that concerns the good of the Common wealth,
may the said Magistrate, or public officers when they are iniustly demanded,
or urged contrary to the form of law, use the benefit of like evasion so they
speak no lie (which always is presupposed to be forbidden as unlawful for
what cause soever:) and so much the more, for that being public persons, and
as such, knowing the said secrets of the common wealth, they may as (...)
persons deny to know the same, with this or like true reservation of mind, so
as they are bound, or may utter the same unto him, that unlawfully demands.
etc.

9. And for that this case as has been said, is for the most part included,
and handled again in that which ensues, we shall here treat the same no
further, nor cite more Authors about the determination thereof, for that those
arguments and authorities that determine the one, do decyde also the other.

The third case about any Party accused or called in Question.. 3.
10. THE third Case considerable in this place, is de Reo, of the party
accused, or called in question in judgment, what or how he is bound to answer
unto crimes laid against him, or to interrogatoryes proposed. About which
point, first all the foresaid

See D. (...). 2. 2 q. 69 in corp (...). i. id. (...) 2. ration. Set. de tegen
secr. (...) 2 q. 2. and latius (...). 7. q. 1. and 2 and 5. lib. de (...).
(...). 6 art. 2. (...). 2. Cordu. lib. 1 q. (...). (...) du 3 Nau (...). 25.
Sum lat n. (...). (...) scip in d ca. interverb. n. 725. Et reuera ita tenet
and n. 814. and nu. 822. Couar. in (...). (...). 23. n. 5 Ga. br. in 4 d 15 g.
6 a. 2 co^. 6 R sell. v. (...). paragr. 1. Palud. in 4. d. 19. q. 4. n. 7.
Henriq. guodl. 1 q. 33. ex Iuri (...). Grego. (...). 7. tit. 29. l. 4. At
(...). (...). (...) quod dicitur (...) q 2 (...) inl. Marcel lus. ff. de
actionib. reru^ amotatu^ (...). de paenitentib. parag. 7. (...). 19. Roder.
Suar. l. (...). ti. 12. de las iuras. lib. 2 (...) um. Ant. Gom. to. 3. var. re
sol c. 12 n. 15 Bernat. (...). (...). (...) 6. 118. (...). in sum. lib. 1 6.
14. nu. 35
Schoole-Deuine, lawyers, and others do agree with one consent, that every such
party is bound under pain of mortal sin, to answer directly, truly, and
plainly, according to the mind, and intention of the demaunder, and not to his
own, and to confess the truth without art, evasion, Equivocation, or other
shift or declination, when soever the demaunder is his lawful Judge in that
matter, and proceeds lawfully, that is to say, according to form of law,
and equity therein. And if the said accused, or defendant either by wilful
holding his peace, or by denying the truth, or by deluding the Judge do refuge
to do this, he sins grievously therein. Neither may his ghostly Father absolve
him in confession from this, or any other sins, until he yield to perform
his duty in this behalf, though it should be to the evident peril, and loss
of his life by confessing the Crime. And this do the foresaid Authors S.
Thomas, and others prove clearly, first out of the Scriptures, as where it is
said Eccles. 4. Pro anima tua ne confundaris dicere verum, be not ashamed to
speak the truth though thy life lie thereon, (which is to be understood, when a
lawful Judge or Superior does lawfully demand it:) and Iosue also Cap. 7.
when by Gods direction he (...) Achan the son of Charmi, about the things he
had (...), used this phrase, Dagloriam Deo, and confitere, give the glory to
God, and confess the truth, whereby is inferred that he takes Gods glory from
him, and: sins grievously that refuses to consesse the truth to a lawful
Magistrate, proceeding lawfully against him, for that the Magistrate is in the
place of Almighty God, and he that resists him in his lawful of fice,
resists Gods power and ordination, and incurreth damnation thereby, as S. Paul
Romans (...). avouches. And for so much as the inquiring out, and punishing of
malefactors is one of the chief, and principal parts of the Magistrates
office, for conservation of the Common wealth, both temporal and spiritual,
to resist, deceive, delude, or contemn the Judge, or Magistrates authority in
this so principal a point thereof, must needs be a great and grievous mortal
sin, except as some Doctors do note, the smalnes or lightness of the matter
objected should be such as might mitigate the greiuousnes of the same. And this
is the severity of Catholic Doctrine for answering directly, obediently, and
truly to lawful Judges proceeding lawfully.

11. But now when the Judge is not lawful, or not co^petent at least in that
cause, or proceeds not lawfully; then all these foresaid obligations do cease
in the defendant. As for example, if in France, Spain, or Italy, a great man
that is no Judge, nor has authority from the Prince, Prelate, or common
wealth, should take upon him to examine any party of crimes without commission,
or other power, or being a lay Judge should examine priests of Ecclesiastical
matters, who both by divine and humane law according to Catholic Doctrine are
exempted from lay men's jurisdiction, (as largely has been proved of late in an
Answer against Sir Edward Cooks fifth Part of Reports, Cap. 2. nn. 37. and
38.
which I would wish the Reader to pervse:) or if his jurisdiction were
sufficient in that matter, yet if that Extra. de accusationibus. cap.
aequaliter and cap. inquisitionis.
he proceeded not iuridice, lawfully, or according to form of law in that
cause, indiciis, vel infamia, vel semiplena saltem probatione non
praecedentibus, that is to say, that neither signs, or tokens, or common fame,
or some one substantial witness at least be extant against When a man is not
bound to answer
him, (which circumstances of lawful proceeding are handled by lawyers in that
case:) when this (I say) or any of this falls out, then hold the former
Doctors that all the forsaid obligations of true answering unto him do no more
bind, for that he is no more a Judge: in that cause, but rather an enemy, for
that he proceeds contrary to justice, and form of law, by which he should
judge; and consequently that in this case the defendant may either deny to
answer, or appeal from him, if it may avail him, or except against the form
of proceeding, or deny all that is proposed in the form, as it is proposed, or
use any other lawful declination says S. Thomas, but yet so, as he do not
lie, D. Th. 2, 2. q. 69. ar. 1.
or utter any falsitie. Potest vel per appellationem (says he) vel aliter
licite subterfugere; mendacium tamen dicere non licet. He may either by
appellation, or otherwise lawfully seek some evasion; but yet so as he utter
no lie.

12. And hitherto now in this point all the former Authors do agree without
discrepancy, that the defendant being thus vninstly pressed, may use all
lawful means to avoid the injury offered him: and Dominicus Sotus that is the
most scrupulous in this matter, Sot. lib. 5. de Iur. iustit. q. 6. ar. 2.
says: Possunt and debent sic contra ius requisiti, quacunque vti
amphibologia, quam vsitatus sermo citra mendacium far possit: they that are
so required to answer against law, may and ought to use whatsoever
amphibologie, or equivocation the usual speech of men does, or may bear,
without a lie.

13. And thus far also does concur Genesius Sepulueda, whom Thomas Morton
has chosen out for some help in this matter; who though in some particular
points, he dissent from the rest, as presently shall be showed; yet in this he
agrees. For thus he writes: (...) Theologi ac Iurisperiti consentiunt, neque
reum in sua, nec Genes. Dialog de rat. dicen. testim. cap. 17.
testem (...) causa de occulto crimine rogatum, teneri vt veritatem
confiteatur, aut testificetur, (...) si dederit quidem (...) andum se vera
responsurum: Both Deuines and lawyers do generally agree in this point, that
neither the defendant in his own cause, nor a witness in another man's, being
examined of a secret crime, is bound to confess or testifye the truth, no,
though they have taken an oath first to utter the truth. So he of the General
eo^sent How (...) (...) co^curreth with the rest.
of all Deuines, and lawyers, adding his own opinion more particular in the
same Chapter, and telling us first, when the Judge demands unjustly, to wit,
when he demands of secrets, or matters not belonging to his jurisdiction, as
before has been said. In which Case he writes thus: Itaque vrgente Iudice
unjust vt neget, aut confiteatur, sine culpa (...) potest (...) Iudicem
appellare, and (...) alia quacunque ratione, modo sit honesta defugere, nulla
adhibita fraud, nullo dolo qui vim obtineat mendacij. When a Judge does
unjustly urge the defendant to deny, or confess, he may without any fault
either appeal to a Superior Judge (if it be permitted) or by any other honest
means declyne the force and violence that is offered unto him, so it be done
without any such fraud, or guyle, as may include the nature of alye: so as in
this all do agree, first, that for no cause a lie may be admitted, or
committed; and secondly that any manner of evasion either by amphibologie, or
equivocation may be used, which is not a lie. And this in general.

14. But now in particular what manner, or form of words may be used by the
defendant for avoiding the injury offered him, and deluding the unjust Judge, is
not so generally agreed of among all men. For this (...)
same Sepulueda holds that, (...) inficiatio very, as his words are, that is
to say, all manner of deny all of the thing that is true, except of matters in
confession, has the force of a ly, or falsehood, and consequently cannot be
admitted. But this is commonly refuted by all, and that with great reason, as
afterward shall be showed, for that otherwise in the examples before alleged,
neither S. John could truly have denied himself to be a Prophet, nor Christ
himself to be our Judge in the sense they did; for that they were truly both
Prophet and Judge in their meaning, and yet did they (...).
truly deny them both. (...) Sotus also, though he go further, and do confess
that the defendant in such a Case being iniustly pressed by the (...), may
lawfully answer, nescio, I know nothing thereof; yet dares he not, as he says
to allow that he may say absolutely non feci, I have not done it, as the priest
may say of matters confessed unto him non audiui, I have not heard any such
thing, for that in his judgment, as also in that of Sepulueda there is a great
difference in the cases, which though in some respects it be granted (...)
for (...).
also by others; yet in this point which is the only and principal, whether it
be a lie or no, all the rest do hold that this negative answer of the
defendant is no less free from the nature of a lie, then the other of the
priest, the one and the other being freed therfrom by the due, and just
reservation in the speakers mind, whereby the sense is made true, not only in
the meaning or understanding of the speaker, but in the sight of Almighty God
the highest, and supreme Judge of all, unto whom it is lawful to appeal in
heart and word, when any man is unjustly oppressed by humane iniquity.

15. To begin then with the Authors of this common opinion, that the defendant
may say, I have not done it, understanding, so as by right and law I am bound
to utter it unto you; first of all the famous Doctor Nauar that was
schoolfellow with Sepulueda and lived together with Sotus, discusseth the
matter at large in diverse parts of his works; but especially in a particular
large Commentary upon a Canon of the law, taken out of S Gregory's words that
begins, Humanae aures, where he proves that the said defendant being so
pressed unjustly to answer, when he has no other way left to defend
himself, may truly, and without any lie at all, say, he did it not, with the
foresaid reservation of mind, that he did it not in some such sense, as in his
own meaning, and in the ears of Almighty God, is true; though the unjust
Judge taking it in another sense, be deceived thereby, which falls out justly
unto him, for that he proceeds iniustly against law. And the said Doctor
proves this his assertion by many arguments taken both out of Scriptures,
Canon law, and reason it self, maruailling at the scrupulosity of Sotus in
this behalf, and alleging Psalm. 51
against him that of the psalm: Trepidauit timore vbi non erat timor, he
trembled with fear, where there was no fear, to wit, of sin or lying in
this case. And moreover refuteth his fellow-scholler (...), by telling Coment
(...) aures (...). nu. 9.
him, that he was greatly deceived in saying, that no Schoole-Deuine until
Gabriel had held this opinion; whereas says he both S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and
S. Thomas have in effect expressed the same; but more clearly Scotus,
Richardus, Henricus Gandauensis, Paludanus, (...), Io. Mayor, Siluester,
Angelus de Perusio, Ioannes ab Anania, whose places he cyteth out of their
works, and adds the Ordinary Gloss, ab omnibus nostris recepta, received
(says he) by all our Canonists in cap. Ne quis 22. quaest. 2. in locis infra
q. 2. nu. 10. and (...). citat is: This writes that renowned Doctor Nauar, who
was held for no less scrupulous, tender and timorous of Conscience, then any
other writer commonly in his days, as his austere manner of life did well
testify. And after him have written and defended the same opinion, the most
learned men for Scholasticall Deuinity in our age, as Lib. 3. c. 58. instruct.
Franciscus Toletus, coment. in 2. 2. q. 69. art. 2.
Michael Salon, Ibidem.
Dominicus (...), (...). 3. disput. 5. q. 13. (...). 3.
Gregorius de (...), lib. 11. inst moral. (...). 4.
Ioannes Azorius, li. 12. c. 17. Clau. reg.
(...), Relatus a Bannes
Franciseus (...), li. 8. de matrim. disput 25. nu. 15.
Tho. Sanchez, all public Readers of Deuinity, and others, which for
breuities sake I do omit, and shall pass to set down briefly the proofs of
this their opinion.

The arguments and grounds of this common opinion.. 4.
16. (...) first is taken out of that we have set down before about the
nature, and definition of truth and lying, that whenever any speech, is
conform in a true sense to the meaning of the speaker it is true, and not a
lie; though the hearer should understand it otherwise, especially when there is
no obligation at all of satisfiying the said hearer, or demaunder as here is
presumed not to be, and consequently says Valentia, a man may utter any true
proposition to The first reason given by Gregory de Valentia.
himself, though never so impertine^t to the demand proposed by the unjust
Judge, as if there were no man present, or as if no such demand had been made
at all: as for example, if a man that has stolen, should say to (...) alone,
or to God truly and sincerely, I have not stolen of malice or hatred to the
person, but of need, or necessity, or I have not stolen of my own
inclination, but by induction of others, or I have not stolen, so as I am bound
to confess it publicly, for that there is no witness, proof or presumption
against me, or the like: in all these speeches the proposition were true, I
have not stolen, though he reserved the other points in his mind vnuttered. It
were true (I say) in it self, and in the sight and ears of Almighty God, and
consequently no lie, whatsoever the unjust Judges do conceive thereof, whose
presence, or demaundes in this case are nothing to be respected, but that the
defendant may answer and speak as though he (the said Judge) or other hearers
that have no authority to examine him were not there, so he utter no falsity in
it self.

17. And for confirmation of this is alleged the Authority of S. (...) in his
book contra (...), S. (...) authority. Li. contr. (...), cap. 10.
cyted by me before, about the nature of a mysterious speech, that utters one
thing in words, an another in sense, and yet is (...) by S. Augustine to be no
lie. Quae significantur (says he) vtique (...) dicuntur. etc. Those things
that are signified in a mysterious speech are indeed truly spoken, but they are
thought to be lies, for that not the true things which are signified by that
speech are understood to be spoken, but those that are false. So S. Augustine,
whereby is evident that in his judgment the nature of a lie consists not in
that it be held for a lie by others, or that the hearer be deceived, but only
that it agree not with the judgment, and meaning of the speaker, as before
has been discussed.

18. But the authority of S. Greg. urged by Doctor (...) S. (...) his authority.
is more clear, who in his books of Morals taking upon him to defend the
truth of certain words of holy Job against Heliu, that calumniated the same
says: Quid (...), si a rectitudine (...) humano iudicio verba (...) S. Greg.
li. 26. (...) ral. cap. (...)
superficie tenus discrepent, quando in cordis (...) concordent? etc. What
imports it, if our words in outward show do seem to disagree from the
rectitude of truth in man's judgment, if in the hinge of our heart, our said
words be compact together, and agree thereunto? Man's ears do judge of our
words as they sound outwardly, but Gods judgment is according as he sees
them come truly from our heart: he knows that albeit man's will, and intention
may be declared or uttered in sundry forms of words; yet that we ought not so
much to consider words as the said will, and intention of the speaker. So S.
Gregory: whereby he shows evidently, that God considers the heart, and
intention of the speaker, and that when he has a true sense, and meaning in
the intention of his heart, though the same words seem false unto man, yet is
it no lie in it self, or in the ears of almighty God, who judges things as
they be in themselves, and not as they are taken by man.

19. An other foundation of the lawfulnes of this doctrine, A rule for
justification of Equivocal propositions with due circumstances.
is grounded upon this rule, that when in any proposition that seemerh
imperfect in sense, there may be supplied other particles, or causes for the
perfect sense thereof, out of the circumstances of place, time, and persons,
both of the speaker, and hearer, (which clauses for just reasons the speaker is
not always bound to express in words to the hearer) it is as much for the
truth of the proposition, as if the said clauses were expressed; and it is the
rule of Doctor Bannes, Salon, Azorius, and others, and it was touched Bannes
and Salon com. in 2. 2. q. 69. art. 3.
before by Iansenius in the precedent Chapter, as a mean whereby to supply the
imperfect sense of many speeches of our Savior, as those, I do not judge any
man: I do not ascend to this feast: The son of man knows Nauar li. 11. cap.
4. Ians. c. 9. punct. 3.
not the day, and hour of Judgment, and the like: which speeches though in
outward show of words they seem false; yet are they verified by the
supplement of certain reserved clauses not depending upon every man's private
imagination and will, but such as may be gathered and truly applied according
to the said circumstances of time, place, persons, etc. as clauses agreeable
thereunto.

20. As here, when the defendant that is guylty says, non feci, non vidi, non
occidi, etc. I have not done it, I have not seen him, I have not killed him;
if we consider only these bare words, and the judges demand to whom it
seems the defendant makes these answers (though indeed he does not but
speaks as if the other were not present at all) they are untruths, he having
done it: but if we consider the circumstances first of the person, that is
injuriously demanded, and thereby is not bound to answer at all to the others
intention, but to his own; and secondly the Judge that presses, and
demands unlawfully, and thereby deserves to be deluded; and thirdly the time
and place of judgment, wherein the defendant contrary to law is urged, either
to accuse him self, or to escape by having some other meaning in his words,
then is set down: these circumstances, I say, do easily defend the said speech
from the nature of a lie, agreeable to the matter, time and circumstances,
showing that somewhat is necessarily understood, or reserved in mind, which
makes the said proposition to be true in the speakers meaning, as has been
showed by many examples of Scriptures, and Fathers in the foregoing Chapters.

21. Wherefore all these Authors do conclude, that in How and with what
circumstances the accused may deny to have done that which he is not bound to
utter.
the foresaid case, when injury is offered against law, and when no
appellation or other refuge is permitted, nor any doubtfulnes of amphibologie
or words can take place, then is the oppressed defendant to turn himself to
almighty God the righteous Judge of all, and framing to himself some true
reserved sense, may say, I have not done it, I have not seen him, I have not
killed him and the like, understanding that he has not done it so, as the
examination or punishment thereof is subject to that tribunal, or he subject to
their jurisdiction, whereby he is bound to utter the same unto him.

22. Neither is this to deny a truth, or to lie, but to conceal some truth,
which the defendant is not bound to utter at that time, and to that man, and to
utter another, which is different from that. As for example he denies not,
that he has done the thing that he is demanded, but not being bound to
answer to that demand, he says, that he has not done it in this or that
manner, which is a truth not demanded: neither is this to lie, for that a lie
is when the: speaker utters a thing which he knows to be Supra cap. 8.
false, as before we have largly showed, which in this case happens not, for
that he knows that he speaks a truth in his own meaning, and in the sight
of God, which always he must do when he uses this evasion, for that otherwise
he should lie, and commit sin, if he had not some true sense reserved in his
mind, conformable to the matter, time, and place, and not feigned at random as
some fondly do imagine.

23. Nor is this doctrine prejudicial to the common conversation of man's life,
as Sepulueda and some other have objected, for that this manner of Equivocation
as Valentia, Sayer, and other learned men have noted, is Use of (...) not (...)
to common (...).
not to be used without necessity, or urgent causes, as particularly in
judgment, when the (...) is iniustly pressed to answer, and when he has
right duty, band, or obligation to conceal the secret which the Judge would
know: but in common conversation, though it should not be properly the syn of
lying, for the reasons aforesaid, nor against the negative precept of truth;
yet should it be an other sin against the public good of cyuill society, and
consequently against the affirmative precept of truth, bynding every man to
speak truth with his neighbor, according to the intention of the hearer, and
demander, except he should demand somewhat in prejudice of us, and we had right
to conceal the same. And thus much of this third case, whereby all the rest may
in a sort be determined.

The fourth case about VVitnesses.. 5.
24. IN the fourth place ensues the consideration of witnesses, who do testify
in another man's cause, as the defendant does in his own; and consequently D.
Tho. 2. 2. q. 70. art. 1. (...). Salon. Petrus de Aragon, Bannes in (...)
locu^. Halens. part. 3. q. 43. memb. 1. S. Antonin. p. 2. tit. 1. c. 19. Sotus
l. 1. de iustitia cap. 7. and alij.
many things of those which before we have touched concerning the said
defendant, do appertain also to witnesses. For first the common opinion and
consent of Deuines is, that when any man is called to bear witness against
another, before a lawful Judge, who proceeds rightfully, and according to
form of law does demand the truth of him, he is bound to utter the same
sincerely, and wholly under pain of mortal sin, for the same reasons which
we have alleged before, concerning the defendant; to wit, that the Judge
being in the place of almighty God, and of the Common wealth, and demanding
him justly, he is bound by the law of Justice, subordination, and obedience, to
reveal unto him the sincere truth of all that he is demanded, and knows in
that behalf.

25. Yea and further then this, he does not only sin mortally, as has been
said, in denying, or concealing the truth or any part thereof necessary to be
uttered: but is also bound in conscience to make restitution to the party
endamaged by his concealment of all those losses either in fame, estimation,
goods or otherwise which he has suffered, and might have avoided, if the other
had confessed the truth. So hold Syluester, Nauar, Sotus, Salon, Bannes,
Valentia, and commonly all Obligation of vvitnesses to speak the truth.
the rest. And this is the severity of Catholic Doctrine, about obligation of
witnesses for telling the truth, when they are called, and examined by a
rightful Judge, extant in all our Authors, as has been said; and I would
gladly know of T. Morton what his Deuinity does define, and prescribe in this
case, and what his Authors have written thereof for the practice; yea what the
practice it self is there daily with him, in all men's sight: which point I
think rather expedient to leave to every man's particular knowledge, and
conscience, to think and consider, then here to set down, what fruits their
new Gospel has brought forth in this matter about unconscionable witnesses.

26. But on the other side our Doctors say, that when the Judge is not lawful,
or that he enquireth of secrets, which appertain not to his jurisdiction, nor
that form of law does permit him so to enquire, then the same Authors are of
opinion, that he may refuse to answer, for that the Judge has no Authority to
demand him; yea although first he has sworn to answer directly, for that,
that oath did presuppose that he should answer directly to that which the
other should justly demand of him, and therefore in this case he may use the
same kinds of refuge, which before have been touched in the case of the
defendant, that is to say, he may hold his peace, How vvitnesses may deny or
(...) answering.
or refuse to answer, or appeal from him or deny all in form, as it lies,
or use doubtful, or Equivocal words, and other such manner of ordinary
euasions, which if they prevail not, then say these Doctors, that he may deny,
and say, nihil scio, nihil vidi, nihil audiui, I know nothing, I have seen
nothing, I have heard nothing, reserving in his mind the other part, that he
knows nothing, has seen nothing nor heard nothing, which in that iniust
examination he is bound to utter, as being demanded against law, and justice.
And this shall be sufficient for this case.

The fifth case about Equivocation in swearing.. 6.
27. THE fifth case that we mean to handle at this See supra cap. 7. and 8.
with the foresaid due circumstances of Truth, Justice, and Reverence: so is it
a greiuous sin when any of those points do want, and especially when truth,
and justice fails therein, it is the heinous sin, and crime of perjury, so
greatly detested in Catholic Doctrine as before has been declared in the
seventh and eight Chapters. Now only is to be considered, whether Amphibologie
or Equivocation may be used in an oath, or no, and how far without deceit,
and whether he that swears, be always bound to swear to the intention of
him to whom the Oath is made, or that sometimes, and in some cases, he may
without falsehood, or perjury, swear to his own true intention, keeping the
same secret from him that exacteth the oath.

28. About which point they do determine first, that who soever offreth himself
volu^tarily to swear, that is to say, of his own free- will and choice, he is
bound under pain of mortal sin to swear truly, and directly See about this
matter Alex. Halen. p. 3. q. 31. m. (...). Nauar. in man ca. 12 nu 8. Sot. lib.
8. de Just. q. (...). art. 7. D. Tho. 2. 2. q. (...). art. 7. ad 4. Caie. and
Arago^ ibi. Sylu. v. Iurame^. 3. q. 2. Cos. Philiar. de offic. Sacerd. p. 2
lib. (...). c. 14. Pedrazza in explic. 2. praecepti (...). Tolet. insum. li. 4.
ca. 21. and others.
according to the intention and meaning of him to whom he swears: the reason
whereof is, for that he swearing freely, and without compulsion, is bound to
utter the truth, and to follow the common use of swearing, which is to swear
to the intention of him that exacteth the oath. And the same they determine,
when any man is called, and commanded to swear by his lawful Judge, and
Superior, and in a lawful cause: and he that does otherwise, though it were
to the saving of his own, or another man's life, does commit perjury.

29. But if the Judge that exacteth the oath be not a lawful Judge, or
proceeds not lawfully in exacting the same, then has he that swears, no
obligation to swear to his intention at all, but may swear to his own, so he
make no lie, but have some true meaning and sense in his oath, according to the
circumstances of the place, times, matters, and persons before mentioned. Of
which point I think good to allege here the words of a great
Schoole-Deuine, that has written in our age, called by Morton the Great
Moralist, who proposing diverse rules concerning the subject of taking an oath,
sets down his second rule thus: Secunda regula (faith he) est, si (...) a
Iudice Azor. li. 11 (...). c. 4.
contra, vel praeter ius rogetur de crimine occulto patrato, etc. The second
rule is that if the defendant should be demanded an oath by the Judge about a
secret crime committed by him, and this contrary or besides the order of law,
he may with a secure conscience answer, The discourse of Azor, about Equi
uocation in an oath
and swear that he has not committed that crime, nor knows any thing of it:
the reason of which rule is, not that which some men do give, that it is
lawful for us, when we swear, to take words in our sense at our pleasure, or
as we feign them our selves, otherwise then the hearers understand them; but
this only is the true reason, that when our words may have an ambiguous
signification, we may take them in what sense we will, when we are urged
against law, though the hearers take them in another sense. And whereas the
ambiguity of our words may arise from diverse heads, as well of their
significations, of the circumstances of time, place, persons, manner of
proceeding, and the like before mentioned; we may out of these verify our
speech. As for example, when a priest denies to any Judge that he knows of
any Crime in Confession, which is a divine judgment and tribunal, it is
understood by the circumstance of his office, that no such crimes are to be
enquired of in that humane court or judgment. And so when the defendant
denies that he has done this, or that secret crime, though he seem to deny
it absolutely; yet the circumstance of the place, action, and persons may easily
declare, if a man look into them, that his true meaning may be, that he has
done no such thing, as ought to be enquired in that manner or uttered publicly
in that tribunal.

30. So he in this and all other like cases: about which this general
foundation is held by the foresaid Deuines; and related by our Countreyman
Sayer in his Sayer lib. 5. Clau. Reg. ca. 4. nu. (...).
Cases of conscience in these words. Interrogatus a Iudice incompetente. etc.
He that is examined by an incompetent Judge, or if he be competent and lawful,
yet does he not proceed lawfully, and according to form The discourse of Sayer
to the same effect.
of law, as examining him of secret (...), or matters, or circumstances
impertine^t to the cause, then in that case is he not obliged to swear
according to the intention of the said Judge, that offers the oath; nor on
the other side may he lie, or swear against his own intention, or true
meaning, for that he should sin deeply, and incur perjury; but he may when
he is thus pressed, and cannot otherwise avoid the violence, and iniuty offered
unto him, so accommodate his words, as they may be true according to his own
intention, and in the sight of God, though they be false according to the
intention of him that does iniustly exact the oath; and in so answering he
lies not, nor incurreth perjury, though the said Judge be deceived. For that
S. Thomas well notes the formal, and essential reason of a lie consists
not in the intention of the speaker, to leave the hearer deceived, for that
otherwise he should lie whosoever should use doubtful and equivocal words to
hide a truth (which both S. Thomas, S. Augustine and other Deuines do deny) but
it consists in this, that a thing is otherwise spoken then is in the mind of
the speaker, vnde mentiri, est contra montem ire, to ly, is to go against a
man's own mind, as Supra cap. 8.
before has sufficiently been declared. Thus Sayer.

Diverse other Cases in particular.. 7.
31. AND now in the last place shall we lay together some few several cases,
which upon these and like rules, reasons, and principles, (...) do resolve. And
the first shall be that case, which our Minister Morton so often proposes, and
odiously does exagerate about Couentry, saying: That our English Equiuocators
do teach, that if a man come from Tho. Mortons case of Couentry.
Couentry, which town is held to be infected with the plague, himself
dwelling in a part of that City which is free from infection, and being
asked at London-gates, whether he came from Couentry, they intending to ask
him concerning a place infected, he may answer no, for that herein he
deceaueth not the mind of the questioner, but answers directly to his
intention. So propounds he the case, as he pretends out of the Catholic
treatise of Equiuocatio^, which hitherto I have not seen, and consequently
cannot affirm how truly or falsely the same is related: but he having so
uttered the said case, does in opposition (...) cite the forsaid Jesuit Azor
his sentece against Azor. lib. 11. inst. c. 4. Primo quidem.
this, as though he said that if we admit this case: Nihil tam falsum esse
posse, quod non que at ab omni mendacio liberari: nothing is so false, but that
it may be freed from a lie; which words are indeed in Azor, but not applied by
him to this case, but to another, saying: That if it were lawful for us, to
feign what words we would in an oath without regard to the circumstances of
time, place, and persons before mentioned, then nothing were so false in deed,
that might not be freed from all lying: but this case of ours goes not
conjoined with these words of Azor, as Morton has perfidiously here tied them
together, but Azor speaking twice of this our case in one page, first in the
name of others by way of objection, and again in his own Azo. ib.. (...)
regula.
name by way of resolution; he says: Libenter concedimus de eo, qui ad portas
(...) rogatur, etc. we do willingly grant the example of him who coming to the
gates of a City, and being asked whether he came from a certain place, which
by error is thought to be infected with the plague, and is not; tuto citra
(...) iurare potest, se ex eo loco non venire, he may securely swear without
lying, that he comes not from that place; so as, he understand that he comes
not from any place infected with plague, nor that himself is infected. This is
Azor his judgment and resolution. And before him this case was so resolved by
Doctor Syluester, Syl. (...). q. 2. (...). in ma (...). c. 12. (...). 19.
Nauar, Tolet, Roderiquez, Cosmus Philiarchus, and diverse other learned men, as
after him also by our often-named Countreyman Gregorius Sayer: and the reason
of the lawfulnes of this answer is, for that the answerer being sure, that
either the place is not infected Tolet in Instruct. Sacer. c. 21 lib. 4. Roder
in sum map. (...). ca. (...). concl.: 4. Cosmus Phil. p. 2. lib. 3. c. 14.
Sayer lib. 5. c. 4. nu. 22.
from whence he came, or that himself has brought no infection about him (for
otherwise he should be perjured) it were great injury unto him to be stayed at
the Gate without cause, and therefore for declyning this injury and (...), it is
lawful for him to answer to the final end, and intention of the keeper, and
of the City or Commonwealth (whose intention only is to exclude infected
people) and not to their immediate words about the particular place.

32. And now all this being so, consider (...) pray you, the shameless forhead
of this deceauing Minister, in cyting Azor quite against himself, and his own
sense and meaning, and tying his words together that were spoken separatly to
another end: and yet as though he had played no such iuggling trick, but had
gotten some victory over us, hear his insolent speech about this answer set
down by so many learned men as you have heard named: An answer (says he) so
grossly false, that a Jesuit of high esteem in your Church (to wit Azor)
writing against this spiritual iuggling of his subtilelying-brethren does
confess, that if this kind of answer concerning Egregious impude^cy of T. M.
a place infected with the plague, etc. be not false, then there is no speech
so false, but it may be freed from falsehood, by whom your Equiuocators (says
he) may learn that if the man you fancied came not from a place infected with
bodily pestilence, yet this your Equiuocating proceeds from minds
spiritually infected with the contagion of pestilent lying. So he.

33. And I do willingly remit my self to the indifferent Reader, where this
contagion of pestiling lying reigns, either in these grave learned men, that
have decyded this question without lying, and against lying, or in Morton, that
has multiplied so many lies together in this place, as is a shame to number
them? For besides all that I have noted already, he corrupts also here the
very text of Azor, which himself alleges in his margent, by translating it
falsely into English, whereas Azor says in the Case proposed, Sivenit Diverse
gross untruths of T. M.
ex loco aliquo peste minime infecto, qui falso habetur pro infecto, he
Englisheth the same by leaving out the words minime and falso, sayng; If he
come from a place infected, which alters the whole case. For if either the
place, or himself be infected, he cannot swear without perjury as has been
said. Secondly he says that Azor the Jesuit does write against the spiritual
iuggling of his (...)-lying-brethren, and yet are neither the principal
Authors of this answer and resolution Jesuits, as by their names you have
heard, nor writes Azor against them, but with them, and for them in this case,
conforming his judgment as you see, to theirs, that a man coming from such a
place, may justly swear in the form that been said. Nor is their answer (...)
as the minister slandereth, but plain, and real dealing, yielding their
resolution together with the reason thereof, as has been declared. And all the
iuggling is on Mortons side, who declaming against lying, does nothing but lie:
and yet finaly concludes most ridiculously his speech thus: Therefore be you
exhorted for the love of God, who is truth, to recant your doctrine of
Equiuocating, the Metropolis of lies. Whereunto my answer is, that in my
opinion Thomas Morton is well worthy to be Metropolitan of that Metropolis.
For if ever man honest T. M. Metropolitan of his lying Metropolis.
or dishonest, lay or Clergy, learned or unlearned, (to use his manner of
exaggerations) did tell so many lies together and in print, and within the
compass of so few lines, as Morton here has done, I am much deceived. For
yet he has not done, but presently after the former lies, uttered against Azor
he proceeds to do the same with others also, and namely against Dominicus
Sotus in these words.

34. Behold (says he) one Doctor among you so Page 59.
subtle, that for that faculty, he has by figure of excellency been called,
The subtle Doctor, who does conclude all your Equiuocators for liars, saying;
to say that I did not that which I know I have done, although I speak it with
this limitation, or reservation of mind, vt tibi significe^, it is not
Equiuocatio^ but a lie. And then he quoteth Sotus in his books Deiure
iustitia, Sotus li. (...). de (...). q. 6. art. 2.
setting down also in the marget the latin words conform to this. But all is
treachery, falsehood, and lying in this impertinent impugner of Equivocation.
For first by the Subtle Doctor, according to the phrase of Catholic
Schools, every Child knows to be meant Ioannes Scotus and not Dominicus
Sotus which lived more then 200. years after the other, and was of the Order
of S. Dominicke, the other being of S. Francis; so Sotus falsely abused by T. M.
as this is foolish and ridiculous error, if it be error: but the other is
clearly false, and malicious, that these words as here they are cited are in
Sotus, which Morton will never be able to show, for saving his honesty in this
point; and much less will he be able to prove, that Sotus does conclude all
Equiuocators for liars, which is an other incredible impudency in him to
affirm, for that Sotus in this very book, question, and article by him cited
does teach and prove largely the plain contrary, to wit, that to Equivocate
is lawful in diverse cases, to which effect we have cited him before, when he
says in general: Possunt and debent sic contra ius (...) quacunque vti
amphibologia. They which are unlawfully required to speak or swear as we have
declared, may and ought to use any kind of Amphibologie, or Equivocation.

35. This is his general assertion, but afterward in particular he puts
many examples to prove the same. And first he sets down this proposition,
dum testis de alieno actu interrogatur, potest rite respondere se nesoire; when
a witness is ( unlawfully) demanded of an other man's action which he knows,
he may justly answer he knows nothing. The reason whereof he says is this;
Quia oration illa nescio, recipere hunc sensum citra mendacium potest, nescio,
vt tibi modo dicam: for that the answer I know nothing thereof, may without
falsity admit this sense, I know it not to tell it you at this time, sicut
filius hominis nescit (...) iudicij, vt dicat, as Christ knew not the Mar. 13.
day of Judgment to tell, or utter it to his disciples. And does it seem to
you that Sotus in this place does go about to conclude all Equiuocators for
liars, as Morton affirms? If he did, he concludes our Savior Christ also in
his sense. What extreme impudency is this in a Minister? But let us hear Sotus
yet further in this matter.

36. In his book detegendo secreto, his third member, and Sotus (...)
impugneth T. M.
third question, he repeateth again the very same conclusion here mentioned,
that a witness being unjustly Lib. de tegen. secreto m. 3. q. 3. Conclus. 4.
demanded whether he knows such and such a thing of an other, may answer he
knows nothing, though he secretly know it: and then going further, he
demands, whether I having seen Peter kill John, and being afterward
examined upon the same iniustly, whether I may say I know nothing thereof? To
which he gives this answer: Respondetur quod iure possum respondere nescio,
quia iure intelligitur nescio, vt dicam, aut nescio eo modo quo iure debeam
dicere. I affirm (says he) that I may rightly answer, I know nothing thereof,
for that by law it is understood that I know it not to tell it, or I know it
not in such manner, as by law I ought to utter the same. And presently he
refuteth Tho. Mortons Doctor Genesius refuted by Sotus.
Tho. Mortons Doctor Genesius Sepulueda, that calls this pulchrum commentum,
a fair gloss, and putting him in number of iuniores quidam, certain younger
fellows, that would reprehend that which they understood not, says: Hi aut
non capiunt, aut dissimulant vim argumenti: these (yonglings) either do not
understand, or do dissemble the force of the argument for this our doctrine.
And this note given to (...) Mortons Doctor (...) by so grave a man as Sotus
was, may easily wype out his authority about this matter of Equivocation, if in
some things he dissent from the rest, that were far more learned Deuines then
himself: about whom notwithstanding I cannot but marvel why (...) Morton, in
cyting him, does adorn him with this (...) title your Divine of (...), for so
much as we read not, that ever he was at Colen, but was borne at Corduba in
Spain, and there dyed, though for many years he lived in Italy: but whether
he did ever look upon Colen or no I know not, and consequently I would gladly
know Thomas Mortons mystery (...) naming him so confidently our Divine of
Colen. But whatsoever his mystery might be in this, sure it is, that his
Myserie was and is apparent in being taken in so many lives, about Sotus and
Azor, as here he has been.

37. And now for that we have been over long in this one example, drawn out by
the multiplicity of (...) manifold untruths, we shall briefly touch an example
or two more and so make an end. A wife being demanded by her husband, that is
no competent Judge, and compelled to swear, whether she be an adulteress, or
no, may lawfully swear, if the sin The case of secret (...).
be secret, (say our Doctors) that she is not, understanding, VT TIBI REVELEM,
that I am bound to reveal it unto you, and thereby avoid the danger that
otherwise she were like to incur. In which resolution, though Sotus do
somewhat differ from the rest, as also about the answer of a defendant in his
own act, whether he may say absolutely, he has not done it, or no, as before
in the third Case has been debated; yet does Doctor Navarre at large prove that
she may answer truly so, as a priest may answer also in matters of Confession
by Sotus own rule, though the Cases be different in other points. And with
Nauar com. in (...). humanae aures. q. 2. nu. 9.
Nauar do concur in this v. iuram. q. 2.
Syluester, p. 1. c. 42.
Lopez de offiic. p. 2. li. 3. cap. 14.
Cosmus Philiarchus v. (...). 4. distin. 1.
Angelus de Clauatio in expli. praecep. 2.. 3.
Pedrazza, li. 4. (...). c. 21. notab. 2.
Tolet li. 10. instit. c. 4.
Azor, and others.

38. An other Case is that a man having borrowed an hundred pondes of another,
and paid him again, but being not able to prove the said payment in judgment,
and thereupon forced by the Judges to swear that he will pay an hundred pounds
by such a day, he is not (...) if he pay him not, or have no intention to pay
him: for that in his oath, Soluam, I will pay him, is understood by law, and by
the very circumstance of the thing it self, that I will pay him: so much as I
owe him, for that this also must be presumed to have been the true intention of
the Judge, according to right and law, though otherwise by his external
actual judgment he bound him to pay it absolutely.

39. Many more such like cases and examples might be added, but it were over
long. The substance of Schoole-doctrine in this point, and of Canon-lawers is,
That when a man is offered injury, or iniustly urged to utter a secret, that
without his hurt or loss, or public damage he may not do; then is it lawful
for him without lying or perjury, to answer either in The conclusion of all
this Chapter.
word or oath, according to his own intention and meaning, so it be true,
though the hearer be deceived therewith: But whersoeuer this injury is not
offered, nor violence used, or that he has liberty to swear or not swear as
in common conversation and traffic it falls out, there is he always bound
to swear according to the intention of him to whom he swears, and this under
pain of perjury, and much more, where the Equivocation may turn to the hurt
of others that offer him no injury, nor cannot force him to swear against his
will. This is the resolution of Catholike-schooleDoctors, upon the grounds
which before you have heard, both of reason, equity, Scriptures and Fathers
against the unlearned clamors of a few English ministers, that out of emulation
and ignorance do impugn the same without proof at all. And this shall
suffice for this Chapter.

THE ARGVMENTS AND REASONS OF THO. MORTONS BOOK are examined, and ansvvered:
AND His notorious errors, follyes, and falsifications therein discovered.
CHAP. XI.
ALBEIT whatsoever has hitherto been said, and written by us about this subject
of Equivocation, has been in reprofe of Thomas Mortons reasons and arguments
against the same; yet have I not thought it amiss in this place, to look over
his book again, and to bring again into the Readers sight by way as it were
of methodicall repetition, whatsoever substance he pretends to have in this
affair: which though it be so small that it is scarce worth the repetition;
yet may the reuiew thereof make some impression, what (...) of people they are,
that take upon them to write books at this day in England against Catholiekes,
and to be Masters and directors of others, that are so ignorant, and far out
of the way themselves.

2. First then to pretermit the (...) exaggerations, used by him in the
beginning of this book, which upon some occasions I have touched before,
intituling Confut. page 1.
the same, Against more then heathnish Equivocation, and in another place,
Against the doctrine of sacrilegious Equivocation: and yet futther, Against the
impious conceit of Equivocation; Page 97.
and lastly, Against the wicked doctrine of Equivocation, Page 47.
against the new-bred-hydra, and vggly monster; a piece of the black art, the
mystery of iniquity, and the like: we shall briefly go to the substance of the
matter, for now already you have seen how vain, and childish these Childish
railing.
terms are, and much more that asseueration, That no iota in all Scripture, no
one example in all antiquity, no one reason in all the natural wit of man is
to be found for proof, or color of any lvwfull use of Equivocation. You have
seen (I say) how light and vain these words of his are, and have pittyed (I
think) the poor man's oversight in uttering them, forasmuch as so many
Scriptures, so many Fathers, so many Doctors, and grave learned men, both in
Law and Deuinity, so many evident reasons and arguments, have been alleged for
the just use thereof, in due occasions, times, matters, and places, as no
modesty can maintain the former fond and childish vaunts to the contrary.

3. To hasten then to the matter, I am first to admonish the reader, that
whereas this Minister does take upon him to confute a certain Catholic
manuscript Treatise, made in defense of Equivocation, and intercepted (as it
seems) by them, I could never yet come to the sight thereof, and therefore must
be forced to admit, what he says out of it, without controlment, here a
piece, and there a piece; though there be diverse conjectures, (...) he, as in
other matters, so in this, deals very unfaithfully: partly for that such
pieces as here are alleged, do not seem well to hang together, or to have
any due connection: and partly also for that I having taken Thomas Morton in so
many falsifications, of things alleged by him, as before you have seen, and
that the law says, Whosoever is once evil, is presumed to be evil still,
until he prove the contrary: I must in a manner assure my self, that the
minister has used notable legter-de mains, in citing the sentences, and textes
of this Catholic Treatise, which I have hope to see ere it belong, and if it
come in time, I may chance by some appendix, to give you more notice of the
particulers.

4. This then presupposed, we come to the (...) points of his whole Treatise,
which (...) as you have heard of two conclusions. The first, that every
Equivocation by a mental reservation, is not a hidden truth but Page 49.
Two propositions the grounds of his book.
a gross lie: The second, that every Equivocation whether mental or verbal,
if it be used in an oath, though it be no lie, yet is it an abominable
profanation of that sacred institution of God etc. And for proof of these two
conclusions, he alleges several arguments, which here we shall discuss
in order, to wit, seven for the first, and four for the later. His arguments
for the first are these. 1. The definition of a lie. 2. The definition of
Equivocation. 3. The description of lying. 4. The nature of perjury. 5. Truth
God, lying the Devil. 6. Scriptures Fathers Pagans. 7. Sign, interpretations,
coin, Giges ring. And for the second conclusion he brings 4. arguments. 1.
The form of an oath. 2. The end of an oath. 3. A minore from the less to the
more. 4. A paribus, or from things equal. And now shall you see one by one,
how equally vain, and of no force all these arguments be.

The first argument from the definition of a lie.. 1.
5. Now must we come (says he) into the listes Page 50.
of this conflict, and enter upon our Equiuocator, to convince him a gross
liar, by manifest arguments. Mayor. Whosoever uses any signification of
speech against his conscience, is properly a liar: Minor. But our Equiuocator
does use signification of speech directly against his conscience, Ergo he is
directly a lier. The Minor is not only the confession, but also the profession
of our Equiuocator, who says, that if a Catholic being demanded before a
Magistrate, upon his oath whether a priest be in his house, he may contrary to
his perfect knowledge, answer no; and can any man of conscience deny this
conclusion? Yet because we have to deal against Consciences daw bed up with
mortar untempered, we add a consirmation of the former argument. So he.

6. And I have thought good to let him play his part somewhat largely in this
first argument, to the end you may know him the better in the rest. You see how
he enters with menacing words, and then how he makes a sillogisme, and when
he should prove his Minor proposition, that we deny, to wit, that every His
first argument (...).
one that (...) Equivocation does use a signification of speech directly
against his conscience, he says, that we do not only confess, but profess
the same. And how does he prove this? Forsooth for that we hold that a
Catholic being exam ned whether he have a priest in his house, he may answer
no, though he know he be there. But now this simple fellow does know before
this time, if he has read that which in the precedent Chapters we have
written, that the (...), no, in this answer does not fall only upon those
words uttered, but upon my whole meaning, and reserved proposition, and
consequently does not signifye, that I know no priest to be there, but, that I
do not know him so to be there as I am bound to utter him, as S. John's, no, to
the Pharisees did not signify that he was no Prophet at all, but that he was no
such Prophet as they imagined.

7. (...) it is great folly for him here to say, that we both confess and
profess, that when we use (...) speech in a reserved proposition, we speak
against our knowledge, and conscience. For we speak as we think, and as we
think truly both in our meaning and in the sight of God, though the hearer by
his own default, as proceeding unjustly, be permitted to be deceived: so as,
when I say, I have no priest in my house reserving in mind this other clause,
which I ought and am bound to utter unto you, is a true proposition, and truly
meant by me, and not contrary, but conform to my knowledge, and conscience:
which being understood, all the daubing with mortar which the minister Morton
brings in here out of our own Authors (for other (poor man) he has none)
to (...) up his contradiction withal, dissolueth of it self, and falls to
the ground, as mere daubing in deed. For first we grant the definition of
lying, alleged out of the Master of (...), which is: Lying is when a man
speaks Lib. (...). dis. stinct. 38.
any thing, contrary to that which he thinks in his mind: for in this
proposition of ours I think as I speak, for I think and know that I have no
priest in my house, which I ought to discover. Secondly we admit also the
definition of S. Thomas of Aquin: A lie is when a man 2. 2. q. 111. art. 1.
will signify in outward words, another thing then that which he has in his
mind, which in our case we do not. We admit also the saying of S. Augustine
here alleged, Lib. de mend. c. 5. and ser 28. de verb. Apost. and abud D.
(...). 2. 2. q. 98. art. 1.
that the former property of perjury is to swear that, which I think is
false.

8. And now Thomas Morton having alleged these authorityes out of our own
Doctors, as you see, and making nothing for him, but altogether for us, he
passes on to urge us with his wise (...) interrogatoryes, whereof we have made
mention Supra Cap. 9. Page 51.
before, and makes this preface thereunto.

9. Now must we examine (says he) whether that we have not by this proof so
intrapped the Fox Equiuocator, that he cannot find any hole whereby to escape.
Suffer me Socratically to debate this point with you and answer me friendly to
these demaundes etc. Which childish trifling, for that we have answered
sufficiently before, we shall say no more in this place. And this is all he
has of any substance in this argument.

His second argument from the definition of Equivocation.. 2.
10. INTO this argument also he enters with like vaunt, as (...) the former;
That if ever (...) Logitian, whether Infidel, or belieuer did allow a mixed
proposition partly Page 54.
mental, and partly verbal, I will (says he) which my soul utterly
detesteth, be an Equiuocator But to this folly has been answered sufficiently
before in the eight Chapter, where his gross oversight is discovered in this
childish vaunt. (...) he goes forward saying: But I must not now expect
impossibilities from you, to try what you would prove, but show heerin what I
can disprove. Your proposition, I am no priest, mixed with your mental
reservation, to reveal it unto you, if it be true, it is either in his simple
signification, or by virtue of (...): but it is true in his simple
signification: This you grant. Neither can it be true by virtue of
Equivocation: This I prove.

11. Well Sir, we shall see presently your proof for this second point, but in
the mean space we deny the former, which you say we grant, but do allege His
second answer confuted.
no proof for it. For who is so simple, as to grant that this whole
proposition, I am no priest bound to reveal it unto you, or no priest subject
unto your jurisdiction, is not a true proposition in his own simple
signification? For it signifies to me simply, and plainly, that I am not a
priest subject to seculer men's examination, according to Canonical and
Ecclesiastical laws: how then do we grant that the proposition is not true,
in his simple signification, or where is that grant registered? Is not this
great simplicity, to presume a grant and to plead that grant in print, whereas
the thing is evidently denied? Who would argue thus but Thomas Morton? But let
us see your proof in the second, seeing you fail so much in the first.

. Equivocation say you) in word or speech, according Ibidem. Arist Elench. li.
1. cap. 4.
to Aristotle the Oracle of Logitians, is when one word or one speech, does
equally signify diverse things, as when one shall say, I am afraid of a dog,
this word dog has a triple signification, etc. This has been examined before
in the seventh Chapter, where it is showed, how you abuse Aristotle in this
place, by making him to define Equivocation in general by a part; that is to
say the definition of one, among three manners or degrees of Equiuocatio^ there
by him set down, whereby also you destroy unawares your own cause: for that if
this be the definition of Equivocation in general, then cannot our reserved
proposition have any equivocation in it at all, for that the words and speech
have no double, but simple signification of themselves, and consequently you do
accuse us unjustly of equiuocating, in using this answer, whereof also your
self say presently after: But your mixed and patched proposition is not one word
or speech, signifying equally diverse things, but contrarily diverse parts of
speech, one in the mind, and another in the mouth, which whosoever shall call
equivocal, may Page 55.
be justly suspected to be bvtten with the highest dog, the proposition is so
absurd, and unreasonable.

13. And now (good Sir) what will you prove by all this? That our mixed reserved
propositions are not ambiguous, doubtful, and equivocal? And why then (I pray
you) do you call us Equiuocators? yea hellish T M impugneth himself.
and heathnish Equiuocators for using the same? Who is like rather to be bitten
of the highest dog, either we or you that cannot tell what you say or prove,
either for you, or against your self? We have stood hithertoto defend those
mixed propositio^s against your imputations of hellish, heathenish, impious, and
sacrilegious Equivocations; and now you take upon you to prove, that they are
not equivocal at all, and that they are bitten with the highest dog, that say
so: and you are (...) earnestly set to prove it, as you dare adventure to
corrupt Aristotle's own text, to make some show thereof, not only in choice of
the definition before mentioned; but in the very words also of his Greek text
Homonymia 'estin hotan ho logos e'e t'ounoma kyrioos seemainei pleioo.
here cyted, where you say that Equivocation is in any one word, or one speech
that does equally fignifie diverse things, and by urging these ones, you exclude
our mixed propositions, for that they are not one word, nor one speech as you
say, but diverse parts of speech, whereas Aristotle has neither of these ones
in his text, as the Greek words alleged in the margent do show, but are
foisted in by Morton to overthrow himself. And is not this like to be the
bytting of a doggish influence indeed?

14. Wherefore to conclude, this argument is against himself, who understands
not the state of his own question, and therefore for instruction of the Reader,
I say, that albeit these mixed reserved propositions be not properly equivocal,
in the sense that Aristotle did Arist, lib. Elenc. c. 4.
define his three degrees of Equivocation, by words, custom or construction
(which Cap (...).
before we have related) for that they do not of themselves, nor their own
natures, signifye equally diverse things, but being understood wholly have a
single and simple signification in the mind, and understanding of the How
reserved propositions are equivocal and how not.
speaker: yet for that the hearer conceauing but one part thereof, apprehends
a different sense from the speaker, they may ab effectu be called ambiguous,
amphibologicall, and equivocal after a large, and improper manner of
equivocation, for that they leave a different sense in the hearer, and speaker,
albeit of themselves, as I have said, they be plain, clear, and true to them
that hear them out, or do conceive the mental reservation, as God, and the
speaker do. And this shall suffice for the second argument.

His third argument from the description of lying.. 3.
15. YOU have seen his first argument to have been deduced from the definition
of a lie, and now this his third is from the description of lying: what great
difference do you imagine there may be between lie and lying; why had he not
drawn one argument at least from the definition of truth, as we have done
diverse before against him? But let us hear 'Supra cap. 8.
the method of his arguing, thus it goes. Mayor. No man doubts (says S.
Augustine) but that he lies, Aug. li. de mendacio c. (...). and 5.
which speaks any thing which is false with intent to deceive another. Minor.
But our Equiuocators profess by a false speech to delude Protestant examiners,
etc. Ergo, by their art of equiuocating have they obtained a perfection of
lying. What can you answer? So he.

16. And my answer is, that I would gladly have this great disputer to prove
his Minor proposition, and His third argument confuted.
not to suppose it, and say we profess it, as he did in his first argument,
whereas we deny it, or that in our foresaid proposition we speak false with
intent to deceive, for we speak a truth, as often before has been declared;
nor is our intent to deceive, but to defend our selves, when injury is offered,
and to permit Supra c. 8. and 9.
the iniust examiner to be deceived. And so for that this has been amply
proved, and declared before, and this poor Cauiller brings nothing at all of
new, to prove the said Minor proposition, but fondly supposes us to grant it,
which we utterly deny as false: we shall say no more of this argument, but take
pity of the disputer, who calling upon us so freshly for our answer, is
brought with one simple denial to an evident Nonplus. For as for his
impertinent running into the example of Couentry infected, and one that comes
from thence, the case has been handled so sufficiently in the precedent
Chapter, and our Adversary convinced of so many notable untruths (...) the 6.
Case.
therein, as there needs no more to be spoken of that matter, wherefore we
pass to the fourth argument.

His fourth argument is taken a specie, or from a particular kind of lying,
which is Perjury.. 4.
17. THIS man as you see cannot yet get out of lying and perjury, and by naming
them only as impugned by him, he thinks to credit his own cause, and
discredit ours, whereas in deed by practicing either one or both in this his
very impugnation, he honors our cause, and overthrows his own. Let us
hear his formal argument. Mayor: Perjury, as Jesuits do confess, is a lie
made in an oath: Minor: But mental equiuocating in an oath is perjury: Ergo,
Simply in it self without an oath it is a ly. Here again I would desire our
disputer to prove his Minor proposition, that every speech mixed with a mental
reservation is petiuryif it be sworn: the folly and impiety of which assertion
is sufficiently detected before, Supr. (...). 9.
for that it being a most certain principle, as well in reason, as in
Deuinity, that what a man may truly say, he may truly also swear, And that it
is evident, that many such mixed and reserved propositions were uttered by
Christ, and his Saints, as holy Scripture testifies, and we have given many
examples in the ninth Chapter going before: as it were impiety to say that
those propositions were lies out of an oath; so were it The confutation of his
4. argument.
more impiety to conceive that they should be periuryes in an oath if they had
been sworn. And what will Thomas Morton now say to this? or what scrap of
proof can he bring for his Minor proposition, that every mental reserved
speech or other equivocal proposition is perjury in an oath? He alleges
first those words in Exodus; Thou shall not bear false witness, Exodus 20.
Ierem. 4.
expounded by our Azor (as he says) that we must swear in truth, and for the
confirmation of truth; but is this any thing against us? And do we not say,
that all such reserved propositions are true in themselves in the ears of God,
and mind of the speaker? How impertinent then is this proof?

18. But hearken further, for he will bring another more strange then this.
Your great Moralist Azor (says he) does condemn all Equiuocators heerin (to
wit for mental Equivocation in an oath) as perjured Page 60. and 61.
liars, or otherwise (says he) there is nothing in an oath that may not be
affirmed, and denied without a lie. Thus he. And I would demand him about this
matter, whether he will swear this to be true which he says of Azor? For if
Ministers and priests go Azor notably belyed by T. Morto^.
in equal rank in England, a Ministers word ought to be equal to an oath, as
a priests word, laying his hand on his breast, is with us: and then must I
needs conclude Tho. Morton for a perjured liar in deed, who has so
perfidiously belyed Azor in this place, and that in so many points. For first
Azor ha^dling in the book and Chapter by him cyted, De iureiurando, cui
videtur lib. 11. c. 4.. Quinto (...).
veritas aliquo modo deesse: Of an oath which may seem in some sort to want
truth, he does put down diverse examples (8. or. 9. at least) wherein the
swearer may swear truly in his own sense, though false in the sense of him
that exacteth the oath, all which are so many plain approbations of swearing
Equivocal propositions without perjury, and so many public contradictions
and confutations of Tho. Mortons notorious slander avouched here against him,
that he condemns al Equiuocators for liers. Of which cases here determined
by Azor against Morton, the first is, Si Sacerdosrogetur etc. If a priest be
asked any thing which he has heard in confession, he may answer, se nihil
scire, nihil audiuisse, that he knows nothing, he has heard nothing. And how
then does this great Moralist condemn all Equiuocators herein as perjured
liars? Is not this public lying in Tho. Morton, and that in print? And were
not this formal perjury, if he did swear it in any court whatsoever? as
namely in his Lords Court of the Arches? And should he not be punished in that
Court as a perjured person, if it were proved against him? And how then dares
he to commit the same so publicly without blushing? But let us leave him to
his Lords correction in this behalf; and so pass on to an other point.

19. Secondly then, not only the sense and drifte but the words themselves set
down by T. M. out of Azor Azor. lib. 11. c. 4.. Primo (...)
are most fraudulently and falsely alleged: Quidam putauit (says he) fas
esse cuiquam, vt vitam suam conseruet, hosti iurare, tantummodo eo sensu, quem
mente intus concipit, possemus enim hac ratione quiduis negare, and nihil non
absque mendacio dicere. Some have thought it lawful (says he) to every man,
for the co^seruation of his life, to swear to his enemy only in that sense,
which he conceaueth inwardly in his own mind, which if it should be granted,
then might we by this means deny any thing, and speak what we will without a
lie.

20. These are (...) for Azor his words, and in deed the most of them are in
Azor, but not together as they lie here, but some in one place, and some in
another, spoken to (...) purposes, and in different sense from that T. M.
alleges them corruptly in this place. And for proof heerof, and of the
egregious VVilfull and persidious dealing.
cosenage of this lying Minister, it shall be sufficient to let you know that
this special example alleged here as out of Azor, and as rejected by him of
one that swear to his enemy, for saving his life in another sense then his
words did sound, is not rejected but allowed, and approved by Azor. For that
he having proposed the case first, under other learned men's names, much after
the sense as here is set down by Morton, he comes at length to resolve, and
approve the same in his own name saying: Quare libenter concedimus id quod
paulo ante dicebatur de co, qui vt se saluum tueatur (...) latroni, tyranno aut
hosti daturum se illi pecunia quantitatem etc. Wherefore we do willingly grant
that, which before was proposed of him that by oath does promise unto a these,
a tyrant, or his enemy for saving his life, to give him a certain quantity of
money, which yet notwithstanding in his (...) he has no purpose to do,
swearing with this reservation, dabo, si debeo, I will give it if I owe it. Now
then consider good reader the honesty and truth of Tho. Morton, that brings
in Azor to condemn that as lying perjury which he does not only allow, as
truth, and no ly, but proves also the lawfulnes thereof by many examples; and
especially by this of him that swears by Equivocation, which example Morton
brings in as condemned by Azor, for periurious lying: what will you say? or
what will you do with such men? And do you note also that in the former words
of Azor, he cutteth of Latroni and Tyranno, and this to preueut a case resolved
against him afterward by Cicero, praedonibus and piratis, to thieves and
pirates perjury (...) not committed; what then (I say) is to be thought, or
said, or done with such men? Himself sets down a rule out of Tully in his
Epistle to the King, (...) such as are taken once in lying may never after be
credited again, which he applies against the Catholics, but (...) justly it
ought to be practiced in him, and his fellows, that are taken at every turn
in such notorious wilful lying, is evident to the discreet Reader.

His fifth argument, Truth God, lying the devil.. 5.
21. IF a man had time to loose in discussing this two-membred argument, it
might be some recreation to see the disputers folly, and weakness in that he
takes in hand. For first he sets down the words of S. Paul unto the
Hebrews, That it is impossible Heb. 6. Supra Cap. 7.
for God to lie, which we grant, as you know, and have proved it largely
before, and this, neque de (...) ordinaria neque absoluta; and then he
infers out of that, that it is as unlawful for God to Equivocate, for that
otherwise (says he) the elect of God should not have any strong consolation,
for that they may still doubt, that God does Equivocate with them: and so when
his spirit does witness to the spirits of his elect, that Romans (...).
they are the sons of God, and that they shall not perish; yet might they
suspect (says he) that it is spoken with some secret reserved clause of
delusion, which Page 62.
blasphemy (says he) be far from the hearts of his regenerate.

22. Whereto I answer first, that having set down that which we have before,
about the different nature of falsitie and Equivocation, every child will laugh
at Thomas Mortons inference: God cannot lie, or utter a false proposition,
Ergo, he cannot utter a doubtful or Equivocal proposition, that may have one
sense in the hearers understanding, and another in the speakers, such as that
was of Christ our Savior, when he said, dissolve this temple, and I will buyld
up the same again in three days, which the Pharisees, and all other hearers
commonly understood of the material temple, wherein he stood, when he spoke the
words, but they were deceived, for himself meant the holy temple of his
sacred body, Ergo, in this he did Equivocate according to the definition of
Equivocation now agreed upon between us: yea Aristotle's definition also
agrees to this speech of Christ, for that the word temple here does equally
signify two things, and consequently either Morton must deny Christ to be God,
or affirm that God can Equivocate, though he cannot lie. And the many examples
which we have alleged before in the 9. Chapter, and shall do afterward in
this, to the next argument, must needs put this Minister in a sack and stopp
his mouth in this behalf.

23. His second inference also, that if God could Equivocate, the consolation
of the elect could not be strong, is idle in like manner. For if God could lie,
this inference might have place, but an Equivocal How reserved propositions
are true and cert eyn in themselves.
proposition in the sense we talk of, that is to say, where some part is
uttered, and some other reserved in the mind, is as true and certain in the
understanding of the speaker, as any other proposit on is, or can be; and in
matters of religion it belongs to the faith of the hearer so to believe, and
to seek out the speakers reservation for his better assurance, as in the
examples before alleged, when God said by the Prophet, Iocl. 2.
That whosoever calls upon the name of our Lord shall be saved: and the hearer
on the other side sees all heretics and Sectaries whatsoever to call upon
the same name, and yet shall not be saved; yea he hears also those words of
Christ: Not every one that says unto me Matthew. 7.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, etc. Yet is he bound
under pain of Infidelity to believe that the former general proposition of
Joel the Prophet, which has a further reserved mental meaning then in words
is uttered, is true and infallible, and consequently he must seek out the true
reservation, or clause not expressed, whereby the whole proposition is made
true, which otherwise, as it lies, and sounds, is false; for that to speak
generally without reservation, That every one that calls upon the name of
God, shall be saved, cannot universally be true, for so much as the contrary
thereof is evident, that many who call upon that name, are not saved but damned.
And almost infinite other places like to this are found in Scripture, as he
that belieueth and is baptized shall be saved; he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has life everlasting; and such other, which cannot be
verifyed in the general (...) of the words, without some reservation not
expressed.

24. And as for that he would not have his new elect Protestants, to want of
their strong consolation, or to stand in doubt of some reservation (as he
says) when Gods spirit witnesses to their spirits, that they are the sons
of God, and that they shall not perish (which reservation he wickedly calls A
clause of delusion) he might more truly term that their fond presumption,
delusion, whereby they will needs apply unto themselves that thing absolutely,
which God speaks always with due reservation, and condition, as now has been
showed in the examples alleged, that not every one absolutely shall be saved,
that calls upon the name of our Lord, or belieueth and is baptized, or eats
his flesh, and drinks his blood, but they only that call upon his name
rightfully, and as they ought to do, and as Christ himself expounds it, to
wit they that call upon him, and jointly do perform the will of his Father
in keeping his commandments; and the like in those that believe and are
baptized, and live well, and those that eat his flesh and drink his blood
worthily: which conditions and reseruations must necessarily be understood also
in the speech of that spirit that speaks to protestants, if it be from
Incerteinty of salvation not on Gods part but on ours. Matt vlt. (...). Ep.
(...). cap. 2. 3, 4.
God, as both S. John and Christ himself expounds, and this is not blasphemy
as Tho. (...) imagines, but true humility, for here the doubtfulnes is not of
the assurance of Gods promise, but of our performance, that is to say, whether
we do perform (...) necessary conditions which always are to be understood in
Gods promises toward us for keeping his commandments. And thus much of the
first part of his argument apperteyning to God.

25. But now for the other part, concerning the His argument (...) from the
Devil.
Dyuell, it is much more childish, for thus he argues. MAYOR: That doctrine
cannot be true, which stopped a man's mouth from giving the Dyuell the lie.
MINOR: But if Equivocation be admitted, all mankind is silenced from giving the
(...) his due title of liar. ERGO Equiuocating is no doctrine of truth, etc.
(...) for proof of his Minor, he alleges only the (...) of Eve in paradise,
demanding of us, whether when the dyuell said to her: Though (...). 3.
you eat, you shall not dye, she might have said to him, thou lie For if we
deny that she may, then do we tie her tongue from calling the dyuell a liar,
and if we grant that she may say so, then would the dyuell escape by saying to
her, that he did not lie but only Equivocate.

26. And is not this goodly stuff? fit for a book? fit for a print? fit for a
Chaplyn of my Lord of Canterbury? Are these things suffered to pass without
controlment in England? If the dyuell be father of lies, and consequently of
them that do lie, of what kynred will he prove to be (...) this Minister that
has been taken now with so many notorious witting and wilful lies as before
has been showed? which how they are Equiuocatio^s also in a worser sense shall
be showed in the chapter following, and consequently that T. Morton is an
egregious Equiuocator in that sort and kind, which Satan himsefe did use to
deceive our Grandame Eve.

His fixed argument entitled, from examples of dissimulation condemned by
Scriptures, Fathers, Pagans.. 6.
27. HERE you see how he tyeth together Scriptures, Fathers, and Pagans, and
all do prove indeed his purpose alike; for that he brings nothing to the
purpose out of any of them. And first you see that he flies the word
Equivocation, and names only Dissimulation, Supra cap. 8
which Equivocation we have proved lately before to be a different thing from
Dissimulation, for that Equivocation What dissimulation is unlawful and
what not.
has a true sense and meaning in the mind of the speaker, conform to the
matter and circumstance that is handled, and most evidently used by Christ
himself and diverse holy men, as largely before has been declared, which yet
without impiety cannot be called or tearned Dissimulation, in such a sense as
Tho. Morton would have it, to wit, as Dissimulation imports Aug. lib. contra
mendacium c. 12. in fine.
deceit or fraud, for otherwise S. Augustine himself writing contramendacium,
against lying, does confess that in a good sense Christ did dissemble, when he
said: (...) tetigit, who touched me, when Marc. 5.
he knew well enough (...) it was; and of Lazarus, Vbi Joan. 11.
posuistis eum? where have you buried him? Per hoc, nescire se finxit, says S.
Augustine: Christ by this kind of speech did feign that he knew not. And
again in the same book, neither that which Jacob did to obtain Genesis 27.
Genesis 42.
the benediction of his Father, nor that which 1. Regum (...).
Joseph did to delude his brethren, nor that which David did when he feigned
himself to be mad, Neque Supra Cap. 7.
caetera huiusmodi mendacia iudicanda sunt, neither other such like
dissimulations as these are, may be judged for lies: Before also we have heard
his opinion for allowing all dissimulation in stratagems, so the war be just.
And thus much for the title of his argument, now to the substance.

28. First to begine with his examples out of Scriptures, I say that he might
better have said Example in the singular number: for whereas we of our part
have alleged so many, and so great variety of examples in our former
discourse to the contrary, he (poor man) out of all the body of the whole
Bible, has alleged but one, and that nothing to his purpose, as presently
shall appear. His example is out of the Acts of the Apostles, where it is
recounted how The fact of Ananias and Saphyra discussed.
Ananias and Saphira his wife, having sold a certain field of theirs, and
bringing a part of the price, and laying it at the feet of the Apostle, as
though it had been the whole price, were miraculously punished by Saint Peter
for defrauding the Community of that Acto. 5.
which they had promised, or would pretend to give; Page 64.
An Act (says T. Morton) proper to the infancy of the Church, to bring their
substance, and tender it to the Apostles for the common good of the Saints. By
which words if he allow that fact, as a form of perfection in that purity and
integrity of the Christian Churches beginning, why then now is the imitation
thereof in religious men of our days impugned by the Protestants? And if by the
word infancy he mean weakness or imperfection in the sense of S. Paul, saying:
Cum essem paruulus, etc. When I was a child or infant, I speak as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I came to the years of a
man, I cast of those things that belonged to a child: If this (I say) be
Thomas Mortons meaning to note the act of imperfection, the ancient Chrysostom.
(...). 12. in Acta Apostoloru^ Hier. epist. 8. ad Demet. August. ser. 27. de
verbis Apost. Fulge^tius epist. de debito co^iugali c. 8. Grego lib. 1. epist.
33. (...). Oecu^ enius Arator, Rabanus, Lyra, and alij in hunc locum.
Fathers do stand wholly against him, and do allow it rather for great
perfection, and that it was a vow of voluntary poverty to live in common, which
those first Christians had made by counsel of the Apostles, and consequently
do interpret those words, Nonne manens tibi manebat, etc. Did it not remain
in your power to give it, or not to give it? to have been meant by S. Peter
before their vow, which if it be true and that S. Peter did give so dreadful a
sentence upon the first vow-breakers of voluntary poverty, even for deteyning
somewhat of their own, how much may Thomas Morton, and some friends of his
fear the like sentence, for teaching it to be lawful to take away that from a
Religious co^munity, which themselves never gave.

29. But let us come to the application of this example against Equivocation,
which he has chosen to Page 65.
use principally about the woman's speech. The woman is asked (says he:) Sold
you the land for so much? Her answer is; yea, for so much, meaning but one
half, and concealing the other, in which dissimulation it is impossible, but
that your reserved clause must have come into her mind, to think but so much
to give in common, or to signifye unto you. Thus Thomas The vvomans examination
by S. Peter.
Morton teaches that poor woman to equivocate, after his manner of
Equivocation, that is to say, to lie: for that now I suppose he has learned,
by that which has been set down in our precedent Chapter, that to speak an
untruth, or to conceal a truth, or to use any Equivocation when we are justly
demanded by our lawful Superior, and when no injury, or violence is used
unto us, is a greiuous mortal sin in our Catholic Doctrine, and consequently
she being lawfully demanded by S. Peter in a lawful cause, touching her own
vow and promise, no clause os reservation could save her speech from lying, as
our Minister does foolishly imagine.

30. Wherefore S. Peter as most lawful Judge and governor of the universal
Church under Christ, and the holy Ghost in him, did worthily punish that
dissimulation and lying both in her and her husband, for example of others in
that beginning, and for manifesting the great and special assistance of the
holy Ghost, that assisted him, and should be in his Successors to the worlds
end in that their government, to the terror of wicked men that should impugn
it, or otherwise deserve by their demerites to be punished by the same. And
thus much of his examples out of Scriptures, which is but one as you see, and
that much against himself and his own cause if I be not deceived, for that it
proves all equivocation is not lawful, as (...) will needs suppose us to hold.

31. In the Fathers he is more copious, for he has two examples, but of as
small moment to the purpose as this. The first out of S. Augustine in his book
against Lib. cont. mend. c. 18.
lying, where he proposes a certain Case, that if a sick Father having a
son upon the point of death, whom he loves so tenderly, that if he should
know he were dead, it would endanger also his own life, S. Augustines case
about the sick man.
what might his friend answer unto him, who coming from his son, and
knowing him to be dead, should be demanded by the said Father, whether he were
dead or no: S. Augustines resolution is, that which Supra. c. 7.
before we have also set down in our general Doctrine to be true, that for
saving any man's temporal life, a lie is not to be made: But he will replye
perhaps, that S. Augustine says, he could not say, nescio, I know not whether
he be dead, or alive, which is allowed by us in some Equivocations, as in the
precedent Chapter has been said. But to this I answer, that this case is not
like those, for that here is no (...) demand, no force, no compulsion, no
injury offered, and consequently no right of using such evasion foriust
defense, for so much as this is in common conversation, from which we have
exempted before the use of Equivocations, albeit we have heard also out of the
same S. Augustine himself, Aliud est mentiri, aliud Supra c. 7. and 8.
veritatem celare. It is one thing to lie, and another thing to cover a truth
without lying. S. Augustine speaks against the first, and so do we, and
consequently this example proves nothing.

32. His second is out of the same Father in another The second case of S.
Augustine about B. (...) who would neither ly nor betray.
work of like argument, where he puts the example of a certain Bishop of
Tagaste in Africa, named Firmus, who in time of the Pagan Emperors having
hidden a man that fledd to his refuge, answered the Emperors officers that
came to seek him, nec prodam, nec mentiar, I will neither bewray him, neither
will I Aug. li. de mend. cap. 13.
make a ly, and so was content rather to suffer torments, then he would do
either: for which S. Augugustine greatly commends him, and so was he worthy,
for it was indeed an heroical act. And if therein he did more resolutly then he
was bound, as many priests in England have done, that presently upon their
apprehension have confessed themselves to be priests, it infers no law,
that all men are bound to do the like. For as the law it self says: Cuique
licet de iure suo cedere: It is lawful for every man to yield of his own
right what he please, as S. Paul, though in one place he says, that it is
lawful for him that scrueth (...). Cor. 15.
the Altar to live by the Altar, and that he which sows spiritual things,
may well reap temporal: yet of himself he says that he did it not, nor
would do it, and that he would rather dye then loose this glory, to wit, of not
1. Cor. 9.
having used his right therein. This was perfection in that glorious Apostle,
but not obligation: and though it edifye all, yet it byndeth not any to the
necessary imitation thereof, but he that will; and the like we may say of the
renowned fact of Bishop Firmus.

His third example of Pagan writers he sets down in these words out of
Cicero.. 7.
33. THERE was a man (says he) who together with mine other prisoners, being
dismissed Page 90.
out of the prison of Carthage upon his oath, that he within a prefixed time
should return again: As soon as he was out of prison he returned as though
he had forgot something, and by and by departs home to Rome, where he stayed
beyond the time appointed, The case set down by Cicero of prisoners let forth
upon their oath by Hanniball.
answering that he was freed from his oath: but see now the opinion of his own
Countryman ( Cicero) concerning this Equivocation of return. This was not well
done, says Tullie, for that craft in an oath, does not lessen, but make the
perjury more heinous. Wherefore the grave Senators of Rome sent this Coseming
Lib. 3.
mate back again to the prison of Hannibal their Officio.. Regulus.
enemy, from whom he had escaped. etc.

34. Thus relates Morton the case, and then makes this malicious conclusion
against us: This was the honesty of the ancient heathenish Rome, which must
rise up in judgment against this present Rome to condemn it, which has
changed that faithful Roman faith, in fidem Punicam, into Carthaginian faith,
which now by custom of speech is taken for perfidiousnes it self. And would
not you think that Morton did hold himself very free from this perfidiousnes,
that obiecteth the same so freely against us? And not only against us, but to
the whole Church of Rome it self, and to the universal Catholic Religion
conjoined therewith? Mark then the deportment of this man in this one point,
and if you knew him not before learn to know him by this.

35. First then I would have some Grammer-scholler Cic. lib. 3. Offic.. Regulus
and. (...) si.
that studyeth Tullies Offices, to turn to the places here quoted, and
comparing them with that which this Minister sets down in English, consider
how they hang together, and how he picketh out one sentence in one place, and
another in another, and leapeth forth and back to make some coherence of
speech, contrary to the Authors order, sense, and method, as is ridiculous to
behold, and fit for the Cosening mate of whom he talks in his text. And
secondly after this, is to be noted, that he sets down the narration it
self of ten men delivered upon their oath by Hannibal, not as Cicero does out
of two historio graphers Polybius and Accilius, and in particular against the
faith of both their histories, and Tullies asseueration, which says that those
ten were dismissed by Hannibal out of his camp, post Cannensem pugnam, after
the famous battle of Canna in Apulia, Morton ignorantly says they were
dismissed out of the prison of Carthage, whereas they of all liklihood had never
seen Carthage in their lives.

36. But the most notorious Cosenage is, that he peruerteth all Cicero his
meaning, words, sense, and discourse in this matter, alleging them quite
contrary to himself, as before you have heard him do many other Authors, so as
he belyeth and corrupts them T. M. much pressed with Punica fides, about
falsification.
all, both profane and dyuine: And if in this one point he can deliver
himself from Punica fides, I will say he plays the man indeed. For first
Cicero whom here he would seem to bring against us, does fully agree with us,
for that we say in the case of those ten Romans delivered by Hannibal upon
their oath to return again, if they should not obtain that which they were
sent for, (which was to persuade the Senate to redeem diverse thousands of
other Roman soldiers whom Hannibal had taken in the said victory at Canna) we
hold I say first that if they swore absolutely to return again if they
obtained not their suit they were bound truly to perform the same, and
secondly, that they being now justly by law of arms prisoners of Hannibal,
they were bound to swear sincerely to his intention, and not to any other
reserved meaning of their own as in the former chapter has been declared. And
this very same doctrine also (...) Cicero by light of nature in these words
perfidiously cut of, and left out by this Minister Morton in the very same
place, out of which he takes the rest.

37. Est autem (says he) ius etiam bellicum fidesque iurisiurandi saepe hosti
seruanda, quod enim ita iuratum est, vt men's conciperet fieri oportere, id
seruandum est: quod aliter, id si non feceris, nullum periurium est. There is
(...) a law of arms (says he) and a faith in our swearing to be observed
oftentimes, even unto our enemy, for that which is so sworn by us, as our mind
does conceive that it must be done, that is to be observed: but if it be
otherwise sworn, that is no perjury, if he perform it not. Behold here the
very same distinction which Catholic Deuines put down of swearing according
Cicero most plain against T. M. and for Catho like Doctrine.
to the intention, and understanding of the swearer, or of him to whom it is
sworn, and that the former is that byndeth, and makes perjury, if it be not
performed, and not always the second, to wit, when any violence or force is
used, which Cicero does express in the very next immediate words by the self
same example that Azor used (...): Si praedonibus pactum pro capite pretium non
attuleris, nulla fraus est, ne si iuratus quidem id non feceris, etc. non enim
falsum iurare peierare est: Sed si ex animi tui sententia iuraueris sicut
verbis concipitur more nostro, id non facere periurium est. Site enim (...):
Iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero.

If you should not pay the price or ransom unto public thieves, which was
agreed between you for saving of your life, it is no deceit, no though you
had sworn to perform it, for that perjury is not to swear false in any
sort: But if you swear a thing which you determine in your mind, and do utter
it in words according to the common custom of speech and do not perform it,
this is perjury. For well and fitly to the purpose says the Poet Euripides, I
have sworn with my tongue, but my mind has not sworn. So he.

38. And consider now here (I pray you) the Punica fides of our Minister
against our Roman faith. He T Morton convinced of egregious cosenage.
says that Cicero, and other heathenish Romans shall rise up against us at
the day of Judgment, for that they condemn all (...) or doubtful sense in an
Oath, and do condemn it for perjury: whereas Cicero affirms that there is
neither perjury, nor fraud therein. And the same Philosopher allows the very
same example of swearing with a reserved intention to a public thief,
without either meaning or obligation to perform it, which Morton obiecteth to
Azor in the precede^t Chapter (though craftily, leaving out the words Latroni
and Tyranno, for avoiding the force of this place, as before is noted) saying,
that Azor did condemn for lyiug all such Equivocation against his subtle
brethren, whereas he both affirms and proves the same, no less then Cicero
does here in this place, as before has been showed. Who then shall rise in
Judgment against Thomas Morton, for all this wilful lying? No doubt but Satan
himself, that is the Father of liars in this life, and shall be their
tormentor in the next. And so much about his sixth argument.

His seventh argument taken from a sign, an interpreter, a coin, and
Gigesring.. 8.
39. AT this argument I presume you laugh before you begin to read it, seeing
it is only of co^parisons, and similitudes: yet does he enter into the same
with this insulting preface. Now (says he) that Page (...).
we have wrested your weapons out of your hands it will be easy to pearce
you, even with similitudes, the bluntest kind of arguments. And then he
begins to lay about him with these blunt weapons, saying out of his first
comparison or similitude of signs: That where as voices and writings are by
our confession signs, and instruments to express a proposition, and that
every sign which is contrary to the signification is a lying sign, as an
Iuy-bush at a Bakers door is a lying sign, ydols in visible forms are lying
vanities, miracles not proceeding from omnipotent power above nature, are lying
wonders, the action of the stage player lifting up his hand to heaven, and
looking down with (...) O earth, is a lying gesture: so is the voice of a
priest, that says, I am no priest, a lying voice, and the pen that defends
this doctrine, a lying pen. This is all The first sign (...) against himself.
the force of this argument, which proving nothing as you see in it self, may
be justly rejected, and answered with this other comparison not in similitude
only, but substance of truth, that for a Minister to be taken in so many
apparent lies, as before has been (...) down must needs be no lying, but a
true sign of a false and lying spirit in that kind of men. And so much for
this.

40. His second, third and fourth similitudes are yet more blunt. For in the
scoend he says: That as if the Pope should send his Nuntio with an Interpreter
to congratulate our King, wishing him all health, and reserving in his mind,
admodu^ exiguam very small health: and in the the third; That as clypping and
impayring Three vain signs taken for arguments by T. M.
the kings coin is high treason: so Equiuocators by clypping of some words
of their speech, which is the Image of God, are guylty of higher then highest
treason. And in the fourth, that as Giges-ring when the pale was kept on the
back side of his hand he was visible, but being turned to the palm of his
hand, he was invisible: so (says he) our Equiuocator, when he shall happily
turn his equiuocating clause outward to manifest it in speech, he lies openly
and is easily known for a disloyal subject: but when he keeps it close in
his mind he is emboldened to practice against his King. So he.

41. And I think every man would condemn me of folly, if I should go about to
spend time or more words in confuting so vain, and idle conceits, cast out
only to entertayne the Reader for lack of better matter, without ground or
proof. Wherefore leaving to treat of these his blunt weapons any further, and
of this first conclusion, which you see how bluntly he has proved, or rather
improued against himself; we shall pass to his second conclusion, which yet
is more improbable, and absurd then the first, as by treating thereof will
manifestly appear.

Of his second conclusion and proofs thereof.. 9.
42. HAVING been longer about this first conclusion of T. M. then was intended
at the beginning, we shall now endeavor to be much breifer about the second.
Our second conclusion (says he) is, that no manner of Equivocation, whether
meant all or verbal, can be used in an oath without sacrilegious profanation:
and then presently, as it were, forgetting himself what he had Page 85.
said, he begins his Treatise with this plain contradiction to his own
conclusion: We deny not (says he) but ambiguous words may somtymes be used in
common speech, for so we read of Athanasius, who flying Socrates, Sozomen, and
alij.
by ship the malice of the persecutor, and being overtaken was asked, did not
(...) pass this way? who answered, yea, he is a little before, if you make
have you may overtake him, whereupon the persecutor imagining that a little
before must signify some other ship that went before, passed by and pursued a
butterfly.

43. This is his narration, and the silly disputer (for in that name he seems
to delight) has not the discretion to see that this example overthrows fully
his former proposition. For if it were lawful for Saint Athanasius to use this
Equivocation in speech and fact for deluding his persecutors; then had it been
lawful also to swear the same without sacrilegious profanation, if they had
urged him unto it. For as all Deuines hold, that which may lawfully be said may
also lawfully be sworn, what will T. M. answer to this? what will he answer
to that evasion of S. Paul mentioned by us before, when for escaping the hands
of the Jews, that pursued him in judgment, he used an apparent equivocal
speech, saying; That his trouble Act. 23.
was about the hope and resurrection of the dead. Paul knowing (says the text)
that one part of them that pursued him were of the Saduces, that denied the
resurrection of the dead, and the other of Pharisees that held the contrary, he
cried out in the iudgement-place, saying: De spe and resurrectione mortuorum
ego iudicor, I am called to judgment about the hope and resurrection of the
dead, which was true in one sense, but false in another; whereby the Pharisees
being deceived, took his part, Et facta est contentio (says the text) inter
Pharisaeos and Saducaeos, and soluta est multitudo, and upon this equivocal
speech there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and Saduces, one
interpreting it in one sense, and another in another, and so the people
departing the judgment brake up. And what will Thomas Morton now answer to
this? did S. Paul lie in this Equivocation? or was his dissimulation impious,
for that one part was deceived? or had he committed (...) profanation if he
had sworn it? I demand him also of that equivocal oath of the Patriarch
Joseph, who in one conference with his brethren, did twice Genesis 42.
swear unto them (...) Equivocation, that is to say, with a reserved sense
different from that he uttered to them in words, the Scripture saying: When
his brethren T. M. (...) to answer to (...) equivocation used in an oath.
had adored him, and he knowing them to be his brethren, spoke sharply unto
them as to strangers, saying, you are spies sent to discover the strength of
this land, I swear by the health of King Pharao, you shall not go hence, etc.
And again: Per salutem Pharaonis, etc. I swear by the health of Pharao that
you are spies, when notwithstanding he knew them not to be spies, and so
thought of them in his mind. And will T. M. say, that this was a lie or at
least a sacrilegious profanation of an oath? But I must go yet a little
further in prosecution of this folly against the Minister.

44. What then will he say to all those former examples of Equivocal
propositions, which I have alleged out of holy Scripture, out of the new
Testament, and from the mouth of our Savior himself, especially such as have
verbal equivocation in them: As, Dissolve this temple, and I will build it up
again in three (...). 2.
days, where the word temple, has evidently two significations, and was taken
in the one by Christ our Savior, and in the other by the Jews. And the other,
Our friend Lazarus sleeps And again, The maid is not Joan. (...).
deed, but sleeps; where the word sleeps is equivocal, (...). 5.
and has two significations, the one of death, the other of natural sleep,
and Christ understood it in the one, and his hearers in the other. And so the
like (...). (...).
where Christ said unto the Jews: Abraham vidit diem meum, and gauisus est:
Abraham did see my day, and did rejoice, the word see is equivocal, and
signifies either seeing in flesh, or seeing in spirit, and the Jews being
deceived with the equivocation of the word, understood it in one sense, and
Christ in another, whereupon they said unto him: Thou have not yet fifty years
of age, and have thou seen Abraham? And thereupon took stones to cast at him.

45. And the very like example is of our Saviors (...). 4.
speech unto the Samaritan at Jacobs well, by the City of Sychar. If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me water, thou
would ask of him, and he would give thee living water, where the word water
being equivocal, signifies both the element of water, and heavenly grace,
which is the water of life everlasting: which Equivocation the woman not (...)
ex (...) of scripture that allow as well verbal as mental equivocation.
understanding, took it in the common sense of natural water, and asked him
how he could give her water, for so much as he had no bucket to draw it up in:
but Christ our Savior adds an other equivocal speech to her, saying, That
he which shall drink of the water, which I will give him, shall never thirst
more, where not only the word water, but the word thirst also is equivocal,
and has two different senses, whereby the woman deceived, said, Give me (I
pray) of this water that I may thirst no more, nor come hither to draw,
understanding still of material water.

46. Now I would demand, that for so much as all these speeches were
manifestly equivocal, and had double senses, and significations, and that
(...) each one of them the hearers were deceived, conceauing another sense then
that which Christ mentally reserved to himself, I would demand (I say)
whether notwithstanding this, they were not true of themselves, and whether
Christ might not as well swear them as speak them. And if Thomas Morton will
have many examples together, wherein Christ our Savior after his manner of
swearing (which is Amen amen dico vobis) does swear or avouch by oath, sundry
equivocal propositions; let him look upon the later part of the sixth Chapter
of S. John; where Christ does put the Antithesis between himself and Moses,
and between the bread that Moses gave from heaven, and that which he was to
give, being his own flesh, and between the life that Manna gave, and that
which his flesh was to give, and he shall find many equivocal propositions,
both verbal, and mental, avouched by our Savior under this kind of oath,
repeated at least three or four times in that matter. One example of each kind
shall suffice.

47. When he says Amen amen dico vobis, qui credit in me babet vitam aeternam,
Truly, truly, I say unto you, that he who believes in me has life
everlasting, this is a mental reserved proposition, as before has been showed,
for that it is not true generally that every one that believes in Christ has
life everlasting, but he that believes accordingly, which was reserved in
Christ's mind; and then the words immediately following, Ego sum panis vitae, I
am the bread of life, have a Examples of equivocation sworn by our Savior.
verbal equivocation, signifying of bread that gave te^porall life or
spiritual life, as also the other words that ensue: Your Fathers did eat
manna in the deserte and are dead, but he that shall eat of this bread, shall
not dye. Dying here signifies either the death of the body, or the death of
the soul, and Christ meant of the later (...) the Jews of the first. Nay
which is more to be observed, as Euthymius notes and some other, Christ
himself without explicating his own meaning, in one part of the sentence,
meant of the one sort of death, and in the other part, of the other. For
where he says, Your Fathers in the desert did eat Manna and are dead, he
means there of the temporal death of the body, and in the other clause of
the Antithesis, But he that shall eat of this bread shall not dye, he meant of
the eternal death of the soul, though others also refer it to the eternal
life of the body, after resurrection.

48. In like manner that sentence of our Savior to the young man in S.
Matthwes Gospel; Dimitte mortuos Matthew. (...).
sepelire mortuos, Suffer the dead to bury the dead, has a plain
equivocation; Christ understanding in the former those that were dead in
spirit, and in the second dead in body, and yet was this no Cosenage nor
deceit in our Savior, nor had it been sacrilegious impiety to swear it. All
which being so, and we having tantam nubem testium, as S. Paul says, so great
a cloud of witnesses, and these omni exceptione maiores, without exception for
their credit, and the absurdity and folly of this second proposition appearing
so manifest in it self, as it does: what should we stand to examine the
arguments and reasons that may be brought for it by so fond a disputer, as now
Tho. Morton is proved to be? For so much as no reason can serve for upholding a
paradox so ridiculous as this is, even to common sense. And yet for that he
puts down four arguments, or reasons for the same as before has been said,
let us see briefly what they are.

49. His first argument for this conclusion is drawn from the form of an
oath, set down by us before, and here again alleged by him out of Tolet
and other Authors of ours (for of his own he seems to have (...):) That an
oath is a religious invocation of God, either Tolet lib. 4. Instruc. cap. 20.
expressly, or by impluation for witness of our speech, and the words (...) or
implicit are added, for that when we swear by creatures we swear by them in
respect of the truth of God that is in them, and so by God himself implicit.

50. Now then out of this principle T. M. takes upon him to prove this
proposition; That whenever, or to whom (...) we swear, we are bound in
conscience to answer A false principle and general proposition.
directly, that is to say, to swear to his intention, to whom we swear,
which we have proved before by general consent of Deuines and lawyers to be
false, and Cicero himself has so determined the case in like manner, as you
have heard, when a man should be compelled to swear to thieves: but yet let us
hear how Tho. Morton will prove this his new and strange Deuinity. His
syllogism is this in his own words.

The competency of God (says he) by whom we Page (...).
swear, makes every one competent Judges, and The absurd (...) of T. M.
neither true in form nor (...).
hearers to whom we swear. But by swearing by God wheme we cannot deceive, we
Religiously protest that in swearing we intend not to deceive. Ergo, Our
deceipfull Equiuocating is a profanation of the Religious worship of God.
51. This syllogism I leave to be discussed by Cambridge Logitians, where I
hear say the man learned his logic (if he have any) for here he shows
very little or none at all, no boy being among us of four months standing in
Logic or Sophistry which will not hiss at this argument, both for form and
matter. For as for form, it is toto ridiculous, the syllogism having no
medium terminum, at all, nor the conclusion any coherence with the premises
nor with his chiefest purpose that he would prove: nay, which is most absurd,
whereas according to Aristotle (whom as you have heard T. M. terms the
Oracle of Logitians) a good Syllogism has only three terminos, whereof the one
is called Mayor extremus, the other Minor Arist. lib. 1. Prior.
extremus, and the third Medius terminus; this syllogism Resolut.
of his has six terminos, and whereas the Medius (...). 1.
terminus should be repeated in the Mayor and Minor propositions, and the
conclusion should consist only of the extremes, as if a man should say: Every
man is a living Creature: Peter is a man; Ergo, Peter is a living Creature.

Here the word man is medius terminus, and so repeated in the Mayor and Minor
proposition; Peter, and living creature are the two extremes, whereof is framed
the third proposition or conclusion by connection of the said extreemes by
virtue of the medius terminus that has part in them both.

52. But now Thomas Mortons syllogism has no such medius terminus, nor any
such connection of his propositions together, but every one of them has his
extremes, The faults of (...). Mortons syllogism
to wit, his (...) and praedicatum separatly, not one depending of the other,
and consequently it is no syllogism or argument at all, concluding any thing
in form, no more then this syllogism. Every man is a living Creature: Ergo,
Every Ass has two long ears.

Where you see that there be six termini, as in Tho. Mortons sillogisme,
without connection, or dependence one of the other. And as much concludes this
as that. And now compare this his skill (I pray you) with that bragg of his in
the beginning of this his Treatise against Equivocation, when he said to his
adversary: Page 53.
Dare you appeal to Logic? This is the art of arts, and the high tribunal
of reason and truth it self, which no man in any matter, whether it be case of
humanity, or Deuinity, can justly refuse, who would not think but that the man
were very skillful in that art, wherein he presumes to give such a Censure?

53. But now let us help him out to make his foresaid syllogism in form. It
should have gone thus, if he would have said any thing in true form. The
competency of God by whom we swear makes every one competent Judges to whom
we swear:

And then by an other inference again he might The syllogism of T. M. brought
into form
have argued, that unto every competent and lawful Judge we have confessed
before, that a man is bound to answer directly, and to swear to his
intention, and not only to his own, Ergo, in no oath to whomsoever, may a man
Equivocate, which is his principal proposition. And thus had his form of
reasoning been good, according to the rules of Logic, though in matter it had
^yn false, as now also it is. For that his first Mayor proposition can never be
proved, to wit, That the competency of God by whom we swear makes every one
competent Judges to whom we swear, that is to say, for so much as God by whom
we swear is competent Judge of all, this makes every one to whom we swear
by God, to be our competent and lawful Judge, which is most absurd, even in
common sense. For that a man may swear (for example) to a thief or murderer
by God, for saving of his life, as also to a common queen, yea, and to the
dyuell himself, and yet this makes not the murderer, the queen, or the
devil to be his competent, and lawful Judge, or gives lawful jurisdiction,
so as he is bound to answer directly to whatsoever they demand, or swear to
their intention if he should be compelled by them. And the like in other such
examples whereof every man may frame infinte store unto himself, at his
pleasure: and the reason of this is, that albeit in every oath God be lawful
and supreme Judge, to discern whether I have a true meaning of mine Oath in
my mind: yet this does not make the other to whom I swear my lawfu^l Judge,
except otherwise he has jurisdiction over me, for that this absurdity, among
infinite others would follow, that if a King should swear to his Kitchin-boy
by God, he should thereby make his said Kitchin-boy his lawful and competent
Judge, and to have Jurisdiction over him, both to examine and command him, and
bynd him in conscience under sin to answer him directly: which how great a
folly and absurdity it is, each man that has reason will easily of himself
consider. Wherefore having showed this, let us now hear and comtemplate (if you
please) how Tho. Mor. himself will prove his said Mayor proposition, for it is
like he will do it substantially, it being the foundation of all his whole
drifte.

54. The Mayor (says he) is true, for that our Savior in auouching truth,
held Pilate a competent Judge, though he did not proceed (...), but falsely. S.
Paul in his cause appealed to Cesars tribunall-seate, who was a Pagan. Jacob
did covenant with Laban an Idolatour: and the maid to whom S. Peter swore, was
competent enough to hear a true oath, if he had been as ready to swear truly:
and yet neither the maid, nor that Judge did proceed iuridice, for she was no
lawful examiner, and he was a partial Judge. So he. And this is his wise
discourse, wherein the man descryeth himself fully what is in him, and that in
truth, he does not understand the very terms in the subject, whereof he
treats For we mean by a competent Judge, or hearer, and so do all Deuynes
and Lawyers, that understand what they speak, a Judge that has lawful Who
is a lavvfull Judge (...) with authority.
jurisdiction over him that swears, and may compel him to swear, and to
utter the truth sincerely under mortal sin. And when we say, that he must
proceed iuridice, it is understood, that he must proceed according to form of
law, prescribed by Ecclesiastical Canons or Civil Decrees. Now then according
to this explication, to say that Pilate was lawful Judge upon Christ, so as he
was bound in conscience to answer all his demands, I marvel how Thomas
Morton will prove it: and yet were it nothing to the purpose, for that Christ
is not read to have sworn to Pilate. And as for S. Paul's appealing to Caesar,
which at that time was Nero, and Jacobs covenant with Laban an Idolatour, what
does it make to our purpose, for that here is no swearing mentioned, nor do we
deny, but that an Infidel, or Pagan may be a lawful Judge over faithful
people in secular causes, if otherwise they have lawful temporal jurisdiction.

55. But of all other iestes, is most pleasant his conceit of the Maid, to
whom S. Peter swore, or rather forswore his master, that she was his competent
Judge, or hearer therein, if he had been ready to swear truly, though presently
he contradicts himself saying, that she was no lawful examiner, which is
false, if she were a competent hearer or Judge, which he seems to grant,
though he say she proceeded not iuridice, that is according to form of law,
with S. Peter in his examination; whereof ensues that she had lawful
jurisdiction over him, though the execution thereof were not iuridicall: and can
any thing be more ridiculous then this?

56. And yet all this notwithstanding having set down so vain and childish a
discourse as this is, he assumeth unto himself the person of a very grave wise
man against us, using these co^temptuous words in the next paragraph ensuing:
These our Equiuocators Page (...).
(says he) do by their new subtilityes foolefy the honest simplicity of their
ancient School, the two eyes whereof Lombard and Lomb. 3. d. 39. lit. K D. Th.
2. 2. q. 69. ar. 1.
Aquinas saw (...) in this kind of swearing an horrible profanation of the
sacred name of Almighty God. Here you hear him talk of foolefying, let us
see then his wisdom. First I ask him wherein we foolefy the simplicity of our
ancient School. He alleges some sentences out of Peter Lombard, as also out
of some others, to show that fraud and deceit is not to be used in an oath, as
also Isidor. 2. de summo bonoca. 13.
out of S. Isidore, alleged by Lombard, and the like out of S. Hierome to
show that fraud, deceit or subtility Hier. in. 7.
is not to be used in swearing, which is plainly to be Ezech.
understood when the Judge is competent, and proceeds competently, for unto a
thief, murderer, pyrate, or tyrant you have heard before how (...) has
determined that it is not fraus; and in this very S. Tho. alleged by Tho. M.
against himself.
place of S. Thomas by Thomas Morton alleged, the said Doctors words are:
That if a Judge, though otherwise lawful, should require any thing which by
order of law he cannot, the party accused is not bound to answer at all (and
much less directly to his meaning) meaning) but may either by appeal, or
other means, deliver himself by euasio^, though he may not speak a lie. So
S. Thomas. And what wise man does not see, but that this makes quite against
Thomas Morton. First if it be lawful unto the defendant not to answer at all,
even to a competent and lawful Judge, when he proceeds not according to
form of law, then much less is he bound to answer or swear directly to his
intention in that case, but may use any lawful evasion by doubtful speech or
otherwise, which is directly against our adversaries conclusion, so little does
he discern when he alleges authorityes flatly against himself.

57. And now by the full discussion of this first proof of his conclusion, we
may imagine what might be said, if with like diligence we would examine the
other three that remain, to wit from the end of an oath, a maiori, and a
paribus, for as for the end of an oath, To his other 3. arguments for his
second conclusion.
which is to put an end to contention, it is not hindered by the use of
Equivocation, where law permits the same, and I do not doubt but that T.
Morton has egregiously abused both in this and other places, the Catholic
manuscript Treatise against which he writes, by setting down certain
palpable absurdityes, which is impossible to be there in the manner that he
sets them down. And for that I find him to belie all kind of Authors
commonly, which he cyteth, I must presume the same of this until we find the
contrary by viewing the Treatise it self which I shortly hope for.

58. But now to his third argument a minore: That Jesuitical Page 59.
(...) is less honest then the doctrine of Infidels and Pagans, proceeds of
less wit, I suppose, then malice, Eman. Sa in Aphor. tit, suramentum.
seeing that for proof thereof he cyteth only this sentence of Emanuel Sa the
Jesuit: Iurans redire in carcerem, etc. He that swears to return into his
prison (except he were iniustly deteyned) is bound even with the peril of his
life to return to the same prison, yea, and some are of opinion that albeit he
were iniustly imprisoned, yet ought he to return, except his oath were
released by the Bishop. Mark this authority, whether it do prove the doctrine
of Jesuits to be worse then that of Infidels and Paga^s: the ministers malice
in cyting this determination of Emanuel Sa Jesuit alludeth to the place of
Cicero before mentioned, and is alleged by him immediately after in this
place: but you have heard that Cicero is quite against him; and fully makes
with us, first that a man Cic. 3. Offic. (...) sup.
being justly deteyned in prison, as those ten Romans are presumed to have
been that were let forth upon their oath by Hannibal (to return if they could
not effectuate their business) is bound in conscience to return again, which
is the first part of this speech of Emanuel Sa.

59. Secondly, that if he be iniustly deteyned, and made prisoner as by
thieves, pirates, tyrants, or the like, Cicero says, he is not bound to
return, albeit he had sworn it. Sa the Jesuit says, that some are of
opinion, that he ought notwithstanding to return, except his oath be dispensed
by the Bishop. Here then we agree fully with Cicero the paga^, adding also
some further restraint as you see, and now then is Morton so shameless as to say
and put in print upon this authority of Sa, that Jesuitical doctrine in this
matter, is less honest then the doctrine of Infidels or Pagans? Is this
honesty in a Minister? but especially in him, that professes himself a
Minister of simple truth? but such is his truth, and such is his simplicity, as
in his Ministry. Let us draw to an end.

60. His last argument a paribus whereby he compares To his last argument.
us to the heretic Arius, and unto his dissimulation in Religion, may better
fall upon himself and his fellows who more nearly do follow the spirit and
steps of that and other ancient heretics, and principally in this one point
of varying one from an other and among themselves, and changing their opinions
so often and frequently, as that which is noted by Tertullian in the heresies
of his days, That every year Tertul. li. de praese. cont. haereses.
brought forth a new faith. And this may be seen in the number of sects, that
have risen in this age from Lutber downward, which are come to be so many in
effect, as scarcely they can be numbered, and a hard matter it is to bring them
to any certainty of sentence, when they are pressed, but do dissemble,
Equivocate, and ly with such facility, as scarsely any thing can be proved
against them, whereof among many others before mentioned, we have had a good
example of Tho. Morton himself in this and the precedent Chapters, and shall
have of some more of his fellows in the next. Thomas Mortons conclusion and
Apostolical defense by protestations against lying.


61. And yet as though he were a great, and sincere lover of truth, he
entitleth the last paragraph of his Treatise thus: This our Apostolical
defense of Protestants I will conclude with the protestations of the Apostle,
I say the truth, and lie not my conscience bearing me witness etc. And again:
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. Romans 9.
And yet further to his scholar Timothy: I speak the truth 2. Cor. 11.
and ly not. And finally to the Galathians; This that I write 1. Tim. 2.
unto you, behold I witness before God, and ly not. Galat. 1.


62. And now consider here I pray you, Thomas Mortons Apostolical defense by
protestations, which more truly perhaps may be called Apostaticall, for that he
who shall read the monstrous multitude of his malicious and wilful lies, which
have been discovered, and laid open through out his book, and especially in
the second, sixth, and this Chapter, and withal hear him make these solemn
protestations against lying, must needs think that rather the spirit of
Apostasy then Apostleship does possess his tongue, pen, and heart, that
speaks, writes, and protests so desperately, and directly against his
deeds, knowledge and Conscience: which thing that you may the better
understand, I am content to adioyne also this next ensuing chapter for better
proof, and confirmation thereof.

OF TWO SORTS OF EQVIVOCATION. The one true and lavvfull; the other false,
and sinful. And that Catholics only use the first in certain cases, and
with due circumstances, and limitations: But T. M. and his fellows impugning
the first, do use ordinarily the second, which is false and lying Equivocation
indeed.
CHAP. XII.
HITHERTO we have declared, and made manifest (as I suppose) that all
Equivocation is not lying, both for that the definition of a lie agrees not
there unto, and for that Christ himself, and many of his servants both in the
old and new Testament have upon just occasions used the same, and the common
consent of Catholic Deuynes and Lawyers have allowed, and confirmed the
lawfulnes thereof in certain Cases, with due and just circumstances, and
considerations.

2. But now must we further distinguish the same into two different sorts or
kinds, the one proper, according to the true nature of Equivocation before
defyned, which though it may seem to have falsitie in it, and somtymes also
has in deed, in respect of the words only or understanding of the hearer: yet
always has it truth in respect of the speakers meaning. The other sort is
improperly called Equiuocatio^, for that no way it is true, and therefore his
proper name in deed is a lie, though after a large and improper manner, it may
be called also Equivocation for the reason which after we shall declare.

3. Now then both of those kinds of Equivocation Two (...) of Equivocations
(...) their (...).
are subdeuided again each one into two sorts, for that true Equivocation may
be either verbal or mental, as before has been showed. Verbal is that, when
any word or speech has either naturally, or by peculiar custom of particular
language, two or more significations, as out of Aristotle has (...) declared.
Mental Equivocation is, when any speech has, or may have a double sense, not
by any double signification, or composition of the words themselves, but only
by some reservation of mind in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made
different from that sense which the words that are uttered do bear, or yield
without that reservation. And of both these sorts of Equivocations that they
are lawful, and free from Cap. 9. (...).
falsity, and may be used without syn in certain cases before specifyed, we
have now laid forth so many examples out of Scriptures and Fathers in the
precedent Chapters, as it were a needles work to name them here again.

4. Wherefore all our speech in this place shall be about the second kind of
Equivocation, which is false and lying, and thereby also ever unlawful; which
False and lying Equiuocatio^
though not properly, yet in a general manner may be called Equivocation, as I
have said, for that the hearer is always wrongfully deceived, or intended to
be deceived by some falsity, which is known to be such by the speaker, and
consequently is plain lying: and for that lying has been showed also before to
be divided into two sorts, the one a material lie, when the thing spoken is
false in it self, but not so understood (...) c. 7.
by the speaker, the other a formal lie when the speaker does know it, or
think it to be false, and yet speaks it. This kind of Equiuocatio^ which
really is a lie, must have also the same subdiuisio^, so as the one sort thereof
may be called a material lying Equivocation, and the other a formal: and so
much worse, as a formal lie is in it self (which always is sin) then a
material (which oftentimes may be without sin of the speaker:) by so much is
a formal lying Equivocation worse, then a material. We shall give examples of
both that shall make all plain.

5. If one should say to me that my Father is dead, thinking in deed that he is
dead, though he be a live, it were a material lie, as before has been
declared, for that in deed my Father is not dead, though he perhaps that made
the lie may have said it without sin, for that he thought it so: and I say (
perhaps) for that in some case ignorance could not excuse him, if it were a
matter whereof he were bound to know the truth, and might with diligence have
learned the same. But if he should say, my Father is dead, knowing in deed that
he is not dead, and meaning to deceive me thereby, this is a formal lie and
always sinful, either venial or mortal, according to the importance of the
matter, wherein the lie is made. And conform to this may be the division also
as is said of lying Equivocation.

6. Examples of the first may be these, and other like: An Arian delivers to
the people those words of Joan.
Christ, Pater meus mayor me est, My Father is greater then I, understanding it
heretically according to their Material false (...).
meaning of the very Godhead: this is an Equivocation, and in his sense is
false, and consequently alye, for that the hearer is deceived, and yet because
the speaker thinks it to be true, the lie is but material in the Arian, and
not formal, and in that respect less sin then if it were formal: but yet
is it damnable by another way, for that this error, as has been said, being
wilfully defended against the Church is not excusable. The other sort of false
Equiuocatio^ called formal, is when the hearer conceyueth any false thing upon
the speech of another, which other knows it also a be false, and so utters
a lie against his own knowledge, and conscience. As for example: If Formal
false equivocation what it is.
a preacher in England who in deed is no Protestant in heart, should preach
Protestant doctrine that is false, and himself should think it also to be
false (as diverse perhaps do) this were to Equivocate both falsely and
formally, which is the worst kind of lying Equivocation that may be, and this
is that which I say that Thomas Morton and his fellows, who inueigh bitterly
every where against true and lawful Equivocation, do use almost at every turn.

7. As for example when he says, No one iota of Scripture, Formal lying equi
(...) in T. M.
no one example in all antiquity, no one reason in the natural wit of man, no
one Author Greek or Latin, no one Father, no any Pope Christian or
Antichristian, does make for Equivocation as we defend it, or any color thereof:
neither did they so much as fancy any such thing. Here is first seen a
notorious untruth of the assertion it self, and consequently it is a material
lie, and material Equivocation; for that the matter delivered is untrue, and
secondly it is most probable that Th. Morton must needs know it to be a lie;
having seen so many Authors and reasons alleged for it by the Catholic
Treatise, which he pretends to confute; whereof it follows, that it was a
formal lie also, and a formal lying Equivocation in the highest degree of
deceit and falsehood.

8. And so in like manner in the former Chapter when he alleges Azor,
Dominicus Sotus, and Cicero directly against their own meaning, words and
drifte in the very same places, which he cyteth, and takes words out of them
for his pretended purpose, he could not but see, and know that it was a lie, to
cite them to the contrary, and yet he thought best to do it, and tell his
Reader that they were of a contrary opinion: this then is formally to lie and
equivocate in the worst and superlatiue degree of false Equivocation.

9. About which point the Reader may be remitted to the second Chapter of this
Treatise, and last paragraph thereof, where he shall see diverse examples laid
together; as among other, that which he reports of the death of our English
Pope Adrian choked (as he says) with a fly, and cyteth Nauclerus for the
same, who though he mention, yet refuteth expressly that fable, which T. M.
concealed, where he is showed in like manner to corrupt notably a passage of
Doctor Boucher, auouching him to say that which he expressly impugneth about the
killing of a Tyrant by a private T. Morto^s talents in lying equi uocation.
man, and private authority. And the like corruption he is convinced to have
used in cyting Gratian the Collector of the Canon-lawes, and his Glosses,
perverting their words, and whole sense, as is there set down, with sundry
other examples, which show that the man did not lie of error or oversight, but
merely out of malice to deceive the simple and credulous Reader, knowing
indeed, that he did lie. And the same is demonstrated by many examples most
apparent, and evident throughout the whole sixth Chapter of this book, and
other places: so as if we had no other proof of this spirit, but in Tho.
Morton himself, it were sufficient to prove our purpose, for that of all other
lightly of his coat, he profesleth most innocence, simplicity, and sincerity
in this behalf, and by this does principally prove our purpose, which is, that
they equivocate and lie, both wittingly and willingly, and then most of all,
when they make greatest protestation of truth.

10. As when T. M. talks of his naked innocence in his epistle to the Kings
Majesty, of (...) Equivocation from his soul, of styling himself A Minister
of simple truth: and finally his usurping of those protestations of Saint Paul
before mentioned, That in all things he spoke the truth, and lied not, which
Thomas Morton, as we (...) have proved before, could not choose but know to be
a wilful lie in deed, having seen and read the Authors which so manifestly he
belyeth, as never in this he will be able to clear himself. And hereof we do
finally infer that he and his do equivocate in the worst kind, which by us
and ours is never used: and so while he declameth against lawful Equivocation,
and practices unlawful, he shows himself a plain preuaricator. And for
that this matter is of so great importance for the Reader well to conceive in
these days of controversies between us, I mean to stay my self somewhat in
this Chapter upon this point, and to show that indeed it is a substantial
sign, distinctiue between all Sectaries and us, at this time, and that in
matters of controversy our writers shall never be found guylty in these kinds
of false lying and malicious equiuocatio^s, where not only untruth is uttered,
but it is wittingly also uttered, the writer knowing that he writes untruth,
as often now has been said. Which manner of dealing infers two points; the
one that such a writer or speaker has no conscience that utters things
against his own knowledge, and which God sees to be false, and falsely meant
in his heart, and the other that his cause has no ground of substantial
truth, which cannot be defended without such wilful lies.

11. In this then if you please let us insist a while, and let Thomas Morton
bring forth any Catholic Authors whatsoever, that wrote against Protestants
since these heresies began, that has been taken in this impiety, I mean, that
has set down in print any such falsity, as cannot be excused either by
ignorance, oversight, negligence, error of print, translation, diversity of
editions, or the like, but that it must needs be presumed that he knew the
untruth, and yet would set it forth: of this kind (I say) let him show me but
one example among all Catholic writers of our time, and I will in my
conscience greatly mistrust, and discredit the Author, whether it be another,
or my self: But if he show me two or three in any writer of this kind I shall
never be able to believe him more. And whereas the number and variety of
Catholic writers is so great as the world sees, it were no great labor to
show it in some, if that spirit did reign among them, as it does in
Protestant writers, out of whom great volumes might be framed of this one
point, if a man would embrace them all throughout all nations: But I meaning to
speak of Englishmen, and those very few in respect of the multitude, and not
having al their works by meat this present, am forced only to use some few
notes taken heertofore out of their books, which notwitstanding shall suffice
for this short view, which we pretend. And for better method and memory, I
have thought good to reduce my Notes at this time to three sorts of men, that
have written against us. First Protestant Bishops; then Ministers, and lastly
Laymen, but of good sort, I mean, Knights; and of each one of these shall we
make our several Paragraphes.

The use of Equivocation in some Protestant English Bishops.. 1.
12. AND first in this rank may we worthily put in the first and chief place,
M. John Jewel called afterward Bishop of Salisburie, who being the first and
chiefest man that in the beginning of Queen Elizabethes M. John Jewel B. of
Salisbury.
reign, took upon him the public defense of Caluins doctrine in England,
and was named by many for that respect, The Jewel and prim-rose of that
Gospel, had primitias spiritus in that behalf, for cunning and artificial
deluding of others by these kind of false, and deceyuing Equivocations, as both
by his words, works, preachinges, and protestations, extant this day in
print, is most manifest, and the conversion of many men, from Protestant to
Catholic Religion, upon sight and consideration thereof, has evidently
couinced, whereof here we mean to give some brief taste for examples sake.

13. He then, as well in his Sermons at Paul cross, and the Court, set forth
afterward in print, and answered as well by Doctor Harding, as other learned
men of the Catholic party, did make such a general and universal challenge
against all Catholics whatsoever, for proof of 28. several articles, framed
out by himself, standinge in controversy between us, as he made the world to
wonder at him, and diverse of his own side that were more learned and
discreet, to murmur at his rashness therein; but many more with great disdain
to condemn his hypocrisy. For thus he began.

14. O merciful God, who would think there Master Ievvells challenge and
hipocriticall apostrophe in his printed sermon.
could be so much wilfulnes in the heart of man! O Gregory, O Augustine, O
Hierome, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionyse, O (...), O Sixtus, O Paul, O Christ!
if we be deceived herein you are they that have deceived us: you have taught us
these schisms and divisions; you have taught us these heresies. etc. and that
you may Fol. 41.
the more marvel at the wilfulnes of such men, ( the Papists) they stand
this day against so many old Fathers, so many Doctors, so many examples of the
primitive Church, so manifest Scriptures, and yet have they herein not one
Father, not one Doctor, not one allowed example of the primitive Church, I
speak not this in vehemence of spirit, or heat of talk, but even as before
God by way of simplicity and truth, least any of you should happily be
deceived, and think there is more weight in the other side, then in conclusion
there shall be found, and therefore once again I say of all the words of the
holy Scriptures, of all the examples of the Primitive Church, of all the old
Fathers, of all the ancient Doctors in these causes, they have not one. Thus in
that Sermon at Paul's cross, and in an other at the Court of the same subject,
which was the occasion and beginning of all the Combat that ensued afterward
between Catholic men and him.

15. And in another Sermon to the same effect he uses this speech for
confirmation of his former protestation. Here (says he) the matter it self
that I have now in hand, puts me in remembrance of certain things that I
uttered unto you to the same purpose at my last being in this place, I remember
I laid out then before you a number of things, that are now in Controversy,
whereunto our adversaries will not yield; And I said perhaps boldly as it might
then seem to some man, but as I my self, and the learned Singular (...).
of our Adversaries themselves do well know, sincerely and truly, that none of
them all that stand this day against us, are able or Yet afterward he denies
diverse Doctors that make against (...).
shall ever be able to prove against us, any one of all these points, either
by Scriptures, or by example of the primitive Church, or by the old Doctors, or
by the ancient general Counsels etc.

16. And again. Loath I am to trouble you with rehearsal of such things, as I
have spoken before, and yet because the case so requires, I shall desire you,
that have already heard me, to bear with me in this behalf, better it were to
trouble your ears with twice hearing of one thing, then to betray the truth of
God. The words I then spoke, as near as I can call them to mind were these;
that if any learned man of all our Adversaries, or if all the learned men that
be alive be All the learned men alive cannot bring one sentence.
able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor, or
Father out of any one old General Council, out of the holy Scriptures of God,
or any one example of the primitive Church, whereby any of these ensuing
articles, of private Mass real presence, Primacy of the Bishop of Rome,
setting up and honoring of Images, Common prayer in a strange language,
offering up Christ in sacrifice etc. may be proved, I am content to yield and
subscribe etc.

17. And again in an other place: My offer was this In his first answer to
Doctor Coals letter fol. 4.
( in my sermon at the Court:) that if any of all those things that I then
rehearsed could be proved by your side, by any sufficient authority, either of
Scriptures, Councels, or by any one allowed example etc. I would yeald: now it
stands upon you to prove but one example to the contrary. In his second
answer to D Cole fol. 13.
And yet further in an other place in my Sermon (says he) at Paul's, and else
where, I required you to bring forth on your part, either some Scripture, or
some old Doctor, or some ancient Council, etc. and if you of your part would
vouchsafe to bring but two Ibid. fol. (...).
lines, the whole matter were concluded. And yet further, I protest before God,
bring me but one sufficient Ibid. fol. 26.
authority, or one old Doctor, on your side, and I In his reply to D. Coals
last letter fol. 44.
will yield etc. At least you should have alleged Augustine, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Hierome, etc. I have offered you oftentimes bring me but two lines
of your side, Ibid. fol. 65.
and the field is yours etc. O M. Doctor deal simply in Gods cause, and say
you have Doctors when you Ibid. fol. 112.
have them indeed.

18. This and much more has he to this effect, all tending to show his rare
confidence in the Protestant cause, which he defended: but yet that he did not
speak as he thought, in these matters, and that his judgment did not concur
with his tongue and pen, and consequently, that he did Equivocate in this worse
sort of Equivocation, many arguments do mightily persuade me, and especially
these half dozen that follow.

Sixth arguments of Master Jewel his hipocrysy in this case.. 2.
19. FIRST for that he cannot be presumed to have been so ignorant, but that
how soever he might The first reason.
think of the Scriptures, that by his private interpretations he could shifte
them of, and deliver himself from their Authority: yet that the Fathers could
not so easily be dispached, whereof he had seen the proof but few years
before, in the disputation held in Oxford with B. Cranmer, Ridley, and Latymer,
upon the 16. 17. and 18. days of April in the year of Christ 1554. in which
disputation, M. Jewel as Fox says, was Notary among others, and saw so many
most evident testimonies, of ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin alleged
there, and urged against them, as they could no ways answer, or handsomely
shifte of, as you may see in Fox himself, though never so partially related,
but much more orderly and fully in a special See in the end of the second
part of the exame^ of Fox his Calender parag. 5.
Treatise, written of late of that matter entitled, A Reuiew of ten public
disputatio^s, about Religion, under the reigns of K. Edward and Queen Marie:
which euidency of testimony did work so greatly with M. Jewel himself, as
after these disputatio^s ended, he subscribed publikly in S. Mary-Church of
Oxford to the Roman Catholic doctrine in that behalf, as M. Doctor Harding
then present writes to himfelfe, in a special Epistle prefixed before his
Reioynder: which being so, with what conscience, could he say now so soon
after; Show me one only Father, one Doctor, one place, one sentence, two lines
and the like? for so much as lately before he had heard and registered so great
a multitude of Fathers sentences, that are yet extant in those disputations;
wherefore this must needs be Equivocation of the worst kind, which could not be
true, neither in the meaning of the speaker himself.

20. The second reason is, that M. Jewel could not be The second reason.
ignorant, that diverse ancient Fathers within the time by him limited, had not
only many sentences for the Catholic part in these heads of controuersyes
alleged by him, and others, but whole discourses also, homilyes, sermons,
chapters, and treatises, if not books thereof. As for example about the real
presence, if he had read the Fathers he could not be ignorant of the main
multitude of large Authorityes, alleged in these our days as well by Bishop
Claudius de Saints, as Bellarmin and others about that matter, not out of See
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Eucharisti^.
single, or doubtful sentences, but of whole discourses, as has been said,
and those as effectually written by the Authors for the truth of the real
presence, as we can do in a manner now, as namely S. Cyprian, S. Hilary, both
Cyrills, S. Ambrose, S. Basil, three Gregory's, Saint Chrysostom, S. Hierome,
and others downward. And the like multitude, or more, is alleged for the
Mass or daily sacrifice of the Catholic Church by the same Author. And
further no man can deny, but that S. Augustine for example, has many large
discourses, treatises, or Books directly tending to the proof of diverse
points now in controversy, between Protestants and us, as De cura pro mortuis
habenda. De libero arbitrio. De fide and operibus. De nuptiis and
concupiscentia, and many others, where he does largely, and of purpose impugn
diverse Protestant opinions, and confirm ours both about the valor of the
Mass, or daily sacrifice for quick and dead, merit of works and the like,
not only approving, but proving also the same by great variety of Scriptures.
And the like does S. Hierome against Iouinian and Vigilantius, and S.
Epiphanius against Aerius, and other heretics that held the same proposition
that Protestants do now. All which authorityes, if M. Jewel had read or heard
of them (as may be presumed he had) how then could he say with any conscience
at all, Bring me one Author, one Father, one Doctor, one sentence, one place,
or two lines, and the like, which he could not do without notable Equivocation
as you see, himself knowing that he spoke falsely in that behalf.

21. The third reason is that M. Jewel could not The third reason.
but have seen and considered the small accoumpt which other Protestant
writers more elder then himself had made, and did make of the ancient Fathers,
when in any thing they were against their opinions, nay their rejecting of them
with contempt, does evidently show that they held them for their adversaries.
As for example M. Jewel begins his challenge, as you remember: O Gregory! O
Augustine! O Hierome! O Chrysostom! O Leo! O Dionyse! etc. Now as for S.
Gregory, Calvin Calvin ad c. 2. Habac.
gives this general sentence of him: Gregorius homo multis erroribus imbutus,
Gregory a man corrupted with many errors: and Martyn Luther the Father of
Protestants writes of him: Gregorius admodum leuiter agnouit Luther. ad c. 49.
Genesis
Christum, and verbum Euangelij; Gregory did know Christ and his gospel very
slightly: and then talking of S. Gregory's famous works and writing, so
greatly esteemed by learned, and holy men, he says of his sermons: Luth. in
(...) Germ. fol. 499.
Gregorij conciones ne teruncium quidem valent; Gregory's sermons are not worth
a halfpenny. And then speaking of an other part of his works, or books
called his Dialogues, says: (...) eum in Dialogo suo crasse decepit: The
dyuell did grossly deceive him in his Dialogue: and thus of him.

22. And as for S. Augustine, who is the second in rank of his Apostrophe,
albeit they do not reject him with so great contempt as S. Gregory, yet when he
makes against Luth. co^t. lib. Reg. H 8. de (...).
them, they esteem him little. Quisest Augustinus? (says Luther against King
Henry of England) quis nos coget illi credere? Who is Augustine? or who shall
compel us to believe him? but S. Hierome whom next M. Jewel Luth. ad c. 22.
Genesis
adioyneth they handle much more spitefully. Quinte Hieronyme (says Luther)
conculcamus cum tua Bethlem, cuculla, and deserto: Know thou Hierome that we do
tread thee under our feet with thy Bethlem, thy hood, and they desert. And
again in an other place. What can be more carnally spoken, more wickedly,
sacrilegiously, and Lib. de seruo arbitrio.
blasphemously, then that of Hierome, Virginitas caelum, coniugium terram
replet? Virginity does fill heaven, and marriage fills the earth. And yet
further, I know no man In colloq. conuiual. (...). Theol.
(says he) to whom I am so much an enemy as to Hierome, for that he writes
nothing but of fasting, choice of meats, and of virginity, and in truth
Hierome should not be (...) Calu. adc, 4. loan. v. 14.
among the Doctors of the Church for that he was an heretic, etc. And Calvin
says of the same Doctor; (...) (...) natura fuit cauillator: Hierome was by
nature a wrangler. But Beza worse then all, calls him blasphemous, Beza adc.
13. Act.
wicked, and impious, and injurious to the Apostle.

23. Of S. (...) whom M. Jewel calls upon Luth. in colloq. con (...). c. de
Patribus.
in the fourth place, Luther writes thus: Chrysostomum nullo loco habeo; non
est nisi loquaculus: I hold Chrysostom in no account at all, for that he is a
brabling fellow. And the Magdeburgians in their history say of him
contemptuously, Magd. (...). 5. cap. 1.
that he was, bonorum operum Encomiastes, and liberi arbitrij patronu^ agebat,
a prayser of good works, and an advocate for freewill. So that you see, that
the cause of their reiection, and contempt is for that they are contrary in
their doctrine. As for S. Leo named by M. Jewel in the fifth place of Fathers,
it is easy to imagine of what credit he was among them, seeing that in the very
controversy of the Popes Supremacy here handled by him, both Calvin and Beza
do note and condemn him of Ambition, for taking upon him, and defending that
authority. Constat (says Beza) Beza in confess. Geneuen. c, 7. 12.
Leonem in epistolis Romanae Sedis antichristianae arrogantiam plane spirasse;
It is manifest that Leo in his Epistles does clearly breath forth the arrogance
of that Antichristian Roman Sea, which in other words Calvin Calu. li. 4.
also Beza his master, does confirm: which being so instit. c. 7.. 11.
and all this known to M. Jewel, I would ask, why he did call upon these
Fathers so earnestly, saying, If we be deceived heerin, you are they that have
deceived us, as though he had taught nothing but that they taught, and that
their authority had been his rule, as their aule was Paul and Christ? Nay, why
does he himself afterward, expressly, and by name, reject S. Leo in some of
these very articles for proof whereof he does here call upon him? And namely
about the Popes Supremacy Jewel in defense of the Apology pa. 111.
and sacrifice of the Mass, saying: That there was no credit to be given unto
him, etc. Is not this double dealing? Is not this pernicious Equivocation on
one side to call upon him and on the other to reject him?

24. Nay why did he add further, O Dionyse, O Anacletus, O Sixtus, as though
he had followed their doctrine also, or admitted their authority? whereas
neither himself, nor other Protestants are known to admit any book or work
of theirs now extant, but to reject, and rail against them all. Dionysius
Areopagita, (says Luther) nihil habet solidae eruditionis. Dionysius
Areopagita Luth ad (...). 7. Deuteronomy.
has no solid learning at all. Your counterfeit Anacletus (says M. Jewel to
Doctor Harding) does not claim all the Bishops throughout the world as
belonging to his Jewel Ibidem page 130.
admission. And the like they say of the other, out of all with is evidently
convinced, that this Apostrophe of M. Jewel to these Fathers, O Gregory, O
Augustine, O Hierome, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionyse, etc. if we be deceived
you have deceived us, was an hypocritical Equivocation to deceive the hearer,
contrary to the knowledge, and conscience of himself, that uttered the words,
for he could not be ignorant, but that they were against him, and his doctrine,
for that otherwise they had never been so rejected and discredited by him, and
his.

25. The fourth reason is, for that the said ancient The 4. reason.
Protestants, Masters of M. Jewel, and from whom he took his learning and
spirit, did in sundry of the Articles here by him named, reject and contemn
the ancient Fathers as contrary unto them, and their doctrine; and how then
could M. Jewel so confidently call upon them in the same. Let any man read
Martin Luther in his book de Captiuitate Babylonica, about the Sacrifice of
the Mass, and he shall find, that he rejects all the Fathers in that
controversy. Si nihil habetur Luth. de Capt. Babyl. c. (...).
(says he) quod dicatur, tutius est omnia negare, quam Missae Sacrificium esse
concedere. If there be nothing to answer to the Authorityes of the Fathers, it
is more safe to deny all, then to grant that the Mass is a Sacrifice. And in
an other book; Profiteor inprimis etc. I do in the very beginning make this
profession, against Lib de abroganda missa initio.
those that will cry out, that I teach against the use of the Church and decree
of Fathers heerin, that I respect none of these things. And yet further
against King Henry of England: Dicta Patrum induxit Rex etc. Lib. contr.
The King brings in the sayings of Fathers against Reg. Angl.
me, for his massing Sacrifice, and scoffeth at my folly, that I would seem
more wise then all they; but this is that which I said before, that these
Thomisticall asses have nothing to bring forth, but a multitude of men. And
then he goes forward, saying: That if a thousand Augustines, and a thousand
Cyprians stand against him in this matter, he cares not. And finally in
another book: Non moramur, si clamitent Papistae, Ecclesia, Libr. de (...)
priuata.
Ecclesia, Patres, Patres etc. We care nothing at all if Papists cry out
against us, the Church, the Church, Fathers, Fathers, they are but the sayings
or deeds of men, in so great a cause as this, we care nothing for them. And to
the very same effect disputes Calvin, though more cyuilly and cunningly about
the same matter, saying: Non est cur vlla hominum authoritate, vel Calu. lib.
4. instit. (...). 18.. 12.
annorum praescriptione, etc. There is no reason why we should suffer our
selves to be drawn a side from the doctrine we teach by any authority of men,
or prescription of years. Where you see, that he grants both antiquity of
time, and authority of the ancient Fathers to be against him, in that
controversy of the Mass, and Sacrifice. And as we have showed the same in this
article; so might we in all the rest, if time and place did permit, but this is
sufficient to prove, in my opinion, that the protestation of M. Jewel before
mencyoned which so solemnly he made in the A strange kind of simplicity
uttered with duplicity.
presence of almighty God, was feigned, and hypocritical, when he says, Not
one father, not one Doctor etc. and then adds for more asseueration, when I
say not one, I speak not in vehemence of spirit or heat of talk, but even
as before God, by the way of simplicity and truth. For if M. Jewel did know
that this his masters and elders, Luther and Calvin were forced to reject
generally all the Fathers, or the most part of them, for that they were
against him for the sacrifice of the Mass; then was it notable cosening
Equivocation to swear and protest before God in simplicity, that no one did
make for us, either in this or the rest of the articles.

26. The fifth reason is, for that we see by experience The fifth reason.
that all other English Protestant writers, succeeding M. Jewel, and being as
it were his scholars, and participating of his spirit, sense, and meaning,
began presently to reject, and cast of the Fathers, upon every occasion, wherein
they were pressed, by their authority, as by the writings of Doctor Calshill,
Doctor Humfrey, Fulke, Charke, VVhitakers, and others is evident, whereof I will
allege only one example out of the last named, in steed of all, who being
pressed with the consent of Fathers in a (...) controversy against D.
VVhitakers answer to D. Sanders demonstrat.
him, answered in this wise. We repose no such confidence in the Fathers
writings, that we take any certain proof of Religion from them, because we
place all our Faith and Religion, not in human, but in page 21.
divine Authority. If therefore you bring us what some one Father has thought,
or what the Fathers universally altogether have delivered, the same, except it
be approved by testimonies of scriptures, avails nothing, it gayneth nothing,
it conuinceth nothing. For the Fathers are such witnesses, as they also have
need of the Scriptures to be their witnesses. If deceived by error they give
forth their testimony disagreeing from Scriptures, albeit they may be pardoned,
erring for want of wisdom; we cannot be pardoned if because they erred, we
also will err with them. So Doctor VVhitakers. Where you see what account he
makes of ancient Fathers, and Doctors. Patres etiam simul (...), to use his
own words, yea all Fathers put together without proof of Scripture to
Authorize them, it (...) nothing (says he) gayneth nothing, it conuinceth
nothing. So as if M. Jewel had dealt plainly he might only have called for
Scripture at our hands, and not so often for Fathers, knowing by all
probability, as well as his scholars, that the Fathers were at least in many
controuersyes against him; and what Equivocation then was this to call so
often, and earnestly for ancient Fathers; yea some one place or sentence, some
two lines, for wynning of the field? was not this singular and extraordinary,
yea hypocrisy, and lying Equivocation in the highest degree?

27. The sixth reason is the consideration of his earnest The (...) reason.
exhorting of Catholics to answer his Challenge. Now it stands upon you
(says he) to prove but one affirmative Jewel in his 2. answer to D. (...).
against me, and so to require my promise of subscribing. And again, If you of
your part would vouchsafe to bring but two lines, the whole matter were
concluded. And yet further, Me thinks both reason, and humanity would, that
you should answer somewhat, especially being so often and so openly required,
etc. Why be you so loath, being so earnestly required to show (...) desire of
M. Jewel to have his vvritings ansvvered.
forth but one Doctor of your side, etc. What think you there is now judged
of you, that being so long time required, yet cannot be won to bring forth
one sentence in your defense? And yet again more earnestly. I protest before
God bring me but one sufficient authority in the matters I have required, and
afterward I will gently and quietly confer with you further at your pleasure.
And therefore for as much as it is Gods cause, if you mean simply, deal
simply, betray not your right, if you may save it with one word: the people
must needs muse at your silence, for think not that any wise man will be so
much your friend, as in so weighty matters he will be satisfied with your said
silence, etc. And not content with this, he concludes in these words of
earnest exhortation. Wherefore here I leave putting you eftsomes gently in
remembrance, that being so often and so openly desired to show forth one
Doctor, etc. You have brought nothing, and that if you stand so still it must
needs be thought you do it conscientia imbecillitatis, for that there was
nothing to be brought. And here once again I conclude, as before, putting you
in remembrance that this long time I have desired you to bring forth some
sufficient Authority for proof of your party. Thus far M. Jewel.

28. And would you not think that this desire, this entreaty, this urging, and
provocation did proceed from a great confidence in his cause? Truly if the
confidence were not great, the craft and dissimulation was singular: but what
ensued? M. Doctor Harding, and other learned men lying in Flanders being moved
by zeal of Religion, and prouokd by these insolent eggings, began soon after
to write books in answer of these challenges, and to lay open the untruths
and The books so earnestly called for procured by M. Jew ell to be forbidden.
vanities thereof, which labors wrought so great effect with diverse of the
discreeter sort, both Catholics, and Protestants in England, as M. Jewel
thought it best to procure the public prohibition of those books by the
Magistrate, for which he had so earnestly called before, whereupon there were
dilligent searches made to find out the same, both in the universities, towns,
cittyes, and ports of the Realm, as M. William Reynoldes.
one that was then a searcher among others, and a Protestant preacher in
Oxford, but converted afterward by these very reasons, and by the untruths
found in M. Jewel books, does testify at large in an answer of his written
to M. D. VVhitakers, whose words I have thought good to set down in this
place. For having refuted a speech of M. VVhitakers who pretended to be very
glad that the Rhemes English Testament was abroad in many men's hands, M.
Reynolds writes thus: With like phrase (says he) and character of shameless
M. VV. Reynoldes in the refut.
vaunting, wrote M. Jewel to Doctor Harding, saying: We never suppressed any
of your books, M. Harding, as you of M. Whi tak cap. rs. page 460.
know, but are very well content to see them so common, that as now children
may play with them in the streets. Thus his face served him co write then, when
in the self same Defense, he by leaving out suppressed the very substance of
that book, which he then pretended to answer, and when by help of his fellow
Superintendent, and other friends every corner of the Realm was searched for
those books, when the ports were laid for them, Paul's Cross is witness of
burning many of them, the Princess proclamation was procured against them in
the Universities by sovereign authority, Colleges, chambers, studyes,
clossets, coffers and deskes were ransacked for them, when not only children
were forbid to play with them, but ancient men, and students of Deuinity were
imprisoned for having of them, so that all this can be naught else, but a plain
example of palpable dissimulation, and affected lying.

29. So this learned and virtuous man, who was so moved by the said
dissimulation, as it wrought his conversion, and detestation of that doctrine,
which could not be mainteyned but with such shifts, and cunning lyings as
afterward more largely, and particulerly you shall hear him relate of
himself, for that conform to this general entrance by singular hypocrisy and
equivocation as has been declared, M. Jewel behaved himself also in
particular cases that did occur, making no (...) to affirm or deny any thing
that served for his purpose, though in his conscience he knew it to be never so
false, whereof we shall hear touch some few examples proportionable to the
(...) of reasons before set down, if not more; in which is to be remembered by
the Reader, that all the forsaid circumstances must be observed, to wit; that
the falsehood cannot be excused by any probable error, mistaking, or oversight
of the speaker, nor by any default of the Printer, edition, translation, or the
like, but that it must needs proceed of a (...) will to deceive wittingly, as
before has been said. And with this prevention, and admonition shall we pass
to the examples themselves.

Six Examples of Master Ievvells particular Equivocation.. 3.
30. THE first example then shall be where M. Jewel The first (...).
going about to prove in a certain sermon of his, that it was no sin to
marry after vows made of Chastity, brings in this sentence of S. Augustine
out of his book Cap. 10. M. Ievvel (...) his (...) at S. peter's in Oxford in
obe Lent.
de (...) viduitatis, to prove the same in these words: Quapropter no^ possum
dicere a proposito meliori (...) si nupserint (...) adulteria esse non
coniugia: I cannot say that women which are fallen from a better purpose (of
continency) if they marry, that their marriage is adultery and not marriage at
all: and upon this authority so alleged, and so plainly seeming to make for
the Protestants doctrine of Votaries marriages, you must imagine how M. Jewel
would exult, and make the Scholars of Oxford think that he had said much for
his purpose; but he that shall read over that short book de (...) viduitatis,
of the good that is in wyddowhood, written to Iuliana a religious servant of
God, as S. Augustine calls her, shall find that the whole drifte of this holy
Father in that (...), is directly against M. Jewel, and his fellows, proving
by many arguments, that (...) marriage in them that have made a simple vow of
Chastity, or (to use S. Austines S. August. egregiously abused and falsified.
words) that had a better purpose then marriage, be true marriage, and not
adultery (except there come afterward a solemn vow, which makes it no (...):)
yet does S. Augustine plainly prove, that the slyding back from that good
purpose and vow is damnable, not for that the marriage does not hold, but 1.
Tim. 5.
for that they have broken their first faith made to Christ according to the
words of S. Paul, which S. Augustine affirms to have been meant to this
purpose.

31. So then here is great wilful falsity, to allege S. Augustine as though
he favored the marriages of Votaries, whereas throughout this whole book he
does purposely impugn the same, yea that which is more, in the very next
immediate words that follow in the same sentence before alleged by M. Jewel
S. Augustines express words do overthrow all that is alleged for Votaries.
For whereas he writes, I cannot affirm that women fallen from a better purpose
if they marry, that their marriages are adultery, and not marriage, it
follows immediately: Sed plane non dubit auerim dicere lapsus and ruinas a
castitate sanctiori, quae vouetur Deo adulteriis esse peiores: but I do not
doubt at all to affirm (says S. Augustine) that the ruynes, and fallinges of
from holyer chastity, which is vowed to God, are worse then adultery; which he
proves by many strong reasons, and arguments. And now let the Reader consider
what Equivocation this might be in M. Jewel, and whether it be possible to
imagine that he was so occupied, and distracted, as he did read the one half
of the sentence, and not the other, or that he was so simple as he did not
understand, what was the whole drifte, and argument of S. Augustine in that
book: and if he did, and yet alleged him to the contrary, you see what
ensues. And thus much of this first example.

32. The second example is taken out of M. Jewels defense The second example.
of the Apology of England page 176. where taking again in hand to prove that
priests and Votaryes may marry (for he was very frequent and copious in that
matter, it importing them much in that beginning to draw priests and friars
unto them by this bayte) he alleges an example of a certain noble man
called (...) of Caesarea in Cappadocia taken out of Cassiodorus Cassiod. li.
(...). cap. (...).
the historiographer in these words. At that time they say that Eupsychius the
Bishop of Caesarea dyed in martyrdom, having married a wife a little before,
being as yet in manner a new married man etc. and he cyteth for this in the
margent Cassiodorus in the tripartite history. And in Hist. trip.
an other place he alleges the same example to the lib. 6 c. 14.
same purpose, out of Nicephorus; but as well these two Niceph. l. 10. hist.
(...). 10.
authors, as Zozomenus are witnesses against him, of a notable wilful
falsification in this behalf; for that Zozomen. l. 5. c. 11.
neither of them do say that Eupsychius was a Bishop or priest, but only that
he was Patritius Caesareae in Cappadocia that is to say a noble man, or
Senators son of Cesarea in Cappadocia: and the falsification is so plain to
him that shall read all the foresaid Authors, and places by him cyted, as no
modest man can but blush to see M. Jewel allege, and urge this forged example
twice Page 176. and 514.
in one book of his with such apparent falsitye: nor can any of the foresaid
circumstances of ignorance, error, or negligence probably excuse or defend him.

33. The third example may be that of M Jewels slanderous The third example.
speech concerning the holy man Augustine sent by S. Gregory to convert our
nation to the Christian faith, which Almighty God wrought by him so
myraculously, as both the said S. (...) and S. Bid after him, and all other
ancient historiographers, as Malmesbury, (...), and the rest do call him our
English Apostle, of whose many, and great miracles wrought in that work, not
only the said Authors, but S. Gregory himself Greg. l. 7.
Epist. 30. indict. 1.
does write a special narration to Eulogius Archbishop of Alexandria: yea
(...) Fox himself in his Acts Fox act. and (...). page 105. col. 2. (...).
and Monumentes, albeit not a little imbued with M. Jewels spirit, against this
holy man, for that he planted Catholic Roman Religion in England, yet
writing the story of the conversion of Ethelbert our first Christian English
King, he has these words at length. When the King had well considered the
honest conversation of their life, and moved with their miracles wrought
through Gods hand by them, he heard them more gladly, and lastly by their
wholesome exhortations, and example of Godly life, he was by them converted, and
Christened in the year of Christ above said 596. and the six and thirtith of
his Reign. So Fox. Whereunto I may add a testimony of much greater credit, out
of S. Bid, that lived near unto his time, and records the very Epitaph
remaining in his days written upon S. Augustines tomb in these words.

34. Here lies Blessed Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, S.
August.
Epitaph.
who was sent hither, by S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, Beda lib 2 cap. 3 hist.
and strengthened of God by working of miracles, who converted King Ethelbert,
and his Realm from the worshipping of Idols Angloru^.
to the faith of Christ. And thus much of the sanctity of this blessed man out
of their testimony that lived with him, or not long after him. But now what
writes M. Jewel of him, and with what truth and conscience? He was a man
(says he) as it was judged by them M. Tevvlls railing against S. Augustine in
his Reply page (...).
that saw him, and knew him, neither of Apostolic spirit, nor any way worthy
to be called a Saint, but an Hypocrite, a super stitious man cruel, bloody,
and proud above measure, and for proof of all this, he cyteth only in his
margent (...) of Monmouth, in his history of the Britans, which Ieffrey dyed in
the days of King Henry the 2. very near 600. years after S. Augustine, and
almost 500. after S. Bid, and writes no such thing at all of S. Augustine as
here is set down by M. Jewel, but rather much in his commendacion with note
of the emulous dealing of the British Bishops against him, for the hatred they
bare to the English nation, and their conversion.

35. So as here now M. Jewels assertion is not only false, and impious against
so venerable a man as Augustine was, but must needs be also against his own
conscience, and this in diverse points. For first he knew that there was no
Author extant that wrote in his days, saw him, and knew him, but only S.
Gregory, who writes (...) in his commendations, as you have heard. Secondly he
knew that S. Bid who lived in the very next age after him, and all other
English Authors succeeding for the space of eight or nine hundred years, till
our time, did highly commend him in their works, and especially the forenamed
Malmesbury and Huntington that lived with Ieffrey Moumouth. And lastly he knew
that this only witness, the said Ieffrey, had no such thing. And what then will
you say to this Equivocation? may not M. Mortons Epithets of hellish,
heathenish, impious, and sacrilegious, have place here?

36. The fourth example may be those words of The 4. example.
M. Jewel in the Apology of England, writing against the Pope. Let him in Gods
name (says he) call to mind, let Ievvel in the Apol. (...) part.
him remember that they be of his own Canonists which have taught the people,
that fornication between single folk is not sin, as though they had fetched
that doctrine from (...) in Terence, whose words are: It is no sin, believe
me, for a young man to haunt harlotts. And for this he cyteth in his margent Io.
de Magistris li. de Temperantia. And who would not think but that this
accusation were sure, for so much as it is so opprobriously urged and insulted
upon? But now I pray you considerthe particulers, and therwithal what a
conscience this man had.

37. First then Io. de Magistris was Martinus de Magistris, not a Canonist, but
a School- divine, that wrote a Treatise De Temperantia and Luxuria, so as it
seems Martinus de Magistris shamefully abused.
that he that gave this charge either had not read the Author himself, which I
suppose M. Jewel will not confess, or else meant to dazzle the eyes of his
Reader by naming John for Martin. Secondly this Author in his said Treatise, as
the fashion of Scholemen is, propounds this question: Vtrum simplex
fornicatio sit peccatum mortale; whether simple fornication be a mortal sin;
and according to use of Schools, says: Arguitur quod non. It is argued or
reasoned for the negative part thus, and so (...) down some arguments for
that side by way of objections, which afterward he solueth, and comes to
conclude absolutely in the affirmative part by six conclusions, that simple
fornication is not only sin, but mortal sin; for that it is forbidden by
Gods law, and excludes from the Kingdom of heaven, as S. Paul affirms. And
now 1. Cor. 6.
let any man consider of the conscience of him, that avouches in print the
other slander: Would Master Garnet or M. South-well, or any other Catholic
man accused for lawful Equivocation, ever have made so notorious a lie against
their own consciencies? Let our adversaries bring forth but two examples.

38. The fifth example shall be also out of his words The 5. example.
in the same Apology, writing against the reading of Saints lives in the
Church: The old Council of Carthage (says he) commands nothing to be read
in Christ's congregation, but the Canonical Scriptures, but these men read such
things in their Churches, as themselves know to be stark lies, and fond
fables. So he. But now let us see, whether it be more probable, that we know to
be lies those things which we read in our Churches or that he knew to be a lie
that which here he relates and printeth in his book. For if he read the
Canon it self which he mentioned, which is the forty and seventh of the third
Council of Carthage, wherein Saint Augustine was present, then must he needs
know that he lies indeed egregiously, for that the Cano^ begins thus: Item
placuit, vt praeter Scripturas Canonicas nihil in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine
diuinarum Scripturarum; sunt autem Canonicae Scripturae, Genesis, Exodus etc.
(...), ludith, Hester, Machabaeorum libri duo, etc. It has seemed good to this
Council, that nothing be read in the Church under the name of divine
Scripture, but only such as be Canonical Scriptures in deed, as are Genesis,
Exodus, etc. The two books of the Machabees, Tobias, Judith, Esther, and the
rest. Whereby we see that in alleging these words, that nothing be read in the
Church but Canonical Scriptures, is guylfully cut of the other clause that
expounded all, sub nomine diuinarum Scripturarum, under the name of divine
Scriptures. And secondly, that in relating which are divine Scriptures, the
books of the Machabees, Tobie, Judith, and others excluded by him and his,
from that number, are set down for Canonical. And thirdly which makes the
falfification most notoriously wilful, is, that in the self same Canon there
follows these words: Liceat etiam legi passiones Martyrum cum (...) dies
eorum celebrantur: It is lawful also to read in the Church ( besides
Canonical Scriptures) the passions of Martyrs, when their yearly festival
days are celebrated: which words do clearly decide the controversy, and prove
M. Jewel a wilful liar, and that he did know that he did lie, as nothing can
be more clear or evident. And besides, they decyde two several controversies
against them as you see, the first, that the books of Machabees were held for
Canonical by this Council in S. Augustines time: and the second that the
festival days of Saints were celebrated (...) year publicly in the Church,
and the histories of their (...) read in those days.

39. The sixth and last example in this place (for I The 6. example (...) 3.
cases.
have promised to pass no further) shall co^teyne two or three cases
together, the first out of Leo the great. Pope Leo says M. Jewel in the
Apology) holds, that upon one day it is lawful to have but one massem one
Church, Leo epist. 8. ad (...).
but these men say daily in one Church commonly ten masses 20. or 30. yea
sometimes more. So M. Jewel. But he that shall look upon the place it self
in S. Leo, shall find the quite contrary decreed, and set down by that holy
man, for thus he writes unto the Archbishop or Patriarch of Alexandria: Vt in
omnibus obseruantia nostra concordet, Leo epist. 81 ad Dioscorum (...).
(...)-pis. ca. 2.
illud quoque vloumus custodiri, etc. That our use or observance may agree in
all points (as well in Alexandria as here) we will have this also to be kept,
that when any more solemn sestiuity shall call together a more abundant
meeting of people, and that the multitude of the faithful shall be so great as
the Church or Chapel cannot hold them together, that then without doubt of
further deliberation, the oblation of the sacrifice be iterated, or celebrated
again, least otherwise if they only which came first, should be admitted unto
this devotion, they which came afterward might seem to be excluded, whereas it
is conform both to piety and reason, that so often as the presence of new
people do fill the Church wherein the solemnity is exhibited, so often also
should the sacrifice be offered, for that otherwise it must necessarily fall out
that some part of the people should be deprived of their devotion, if the
custom of saying one mass only being retained, none could offer sacrifice but
such as came in the first part of the day.

40. These are the words of S. Leo, by which you see that he does determine
and decree the plain contrary to that which M. Jewel affirms, to wit that
as (...) as any multitude of people should come to the Church; so often the
sacrifice of the mass should be reiterated for their devotion. In which words
though among Catholics there may be some question about S. (...) his meaning,
to wit, whether he meant of more then one chief or solemn mass, to be said
in one Church or Chapel, or that one and the self same Priest in such cases
might reiterate his own mass and sacrifice, if there were no other Priest
present, as Strabo and Strabo de rebus Ecclesiasticis cap. 21.
Dur and do interpret him: yet in this controversy there can be no doubt or
question, but that he says the quite contradictory to that which M. Jewel
affirms Durand. lib. 2. de ritibus Ec clesiasticis cap. 7.
him to say, who tells us, that Pope Leo says, that it is not lawful to say
upon one day mere then one mass in one Church; whereas S. (...) says, it is
both lawful, expedient, and necessary to be done. What Equivocation then call
you this in M. Jewel? And furthermore S. Leo in this place as supreme Bishopp,
prescribes and gives order in Ecclesiastical rites as you see, to Dioscorus
Patriarch of Alexandria, for offering and iterating the sacrifice of the Mass,
whereby is evident, that in these two articles at the least of Supremacy and the
Mass (which are of the first and principal that M. Jewel sets down) S.
Leo was against him, and flatly for us: so as it may please him now to leave
out of his Apostrophe, O Leo! if we be deceived, your have deceived us, etc.
And this for the first case.

41. The second case may be that of M. Jewel in the defense Pope Celestinus
that sarte in the Sea before Leo, he says of him thus: Pope Celestinus was a
Nestorian heretic; but cyteth no Author at all for it, and the assertion is so
strange, and so contrary not only to truth and reason, but also probability, as
of no man Pope Celestinus egregiously calumniated by. M. Jewel.
he could have spoken it more falsely and absurdly: for that it was Celestinus
that condemned Nestorius, and all his heresies: it was Celestinus, in whose
place Cyrillus the Archbishop of Alexandria sat President in the third
general Council at Ephesus, where Nestorius was accursed, and condemned. Of
this Celestinus the learned Bishop Prosper, who then (...) writes: Nestorianae
impietati praecipua Alexandrini Episcopi industria and Papae Celestini repugnat
authoritas: The special diligence of the Bishop of Alexandria, and the
Authority of Pope Celestinus resists the impiety of Nestorius And yet is Pope
Celestinus a Nestorian. Who would say so, but M. Jewel, who cares not what he
says?

42. The third Case is somewhat more pleasant, M. Jewel for the (...) of S.
Peter, in feeding and governing, that Christ had said to him alone: Joan. 2.
pasce oues meas, pasce agnos meos, feed my sheep, feed my lambs; M. Jewel
to (...) this privilege, alleges Jewel defense of (...) 108.
a sentence of Christ out of S. Marks (...), quoted in the margent: Quod vni
dico omnibus dico: What I say to one, I say to all, thereby inferring that the
foresaid words of Christ to S. Peter, as a so the other, Thou art Peter or a
rock, and upon this rock will I buyld my Chruch, and other such like
speeches, were equally meant also of the rest, whereas in deed, Christ never
used these words, Quod vni dico omnibus dico noris it to be (...) Marc. 13.
out of Scripture; but rather our Savior having made in S. Marks Gospel a
large Sermon about the day of Judgment, and the terror thereof, and exhorted
all sorts of people to be watchful, extended the same also unto those that
were absent or should live in succeeding ages saying: Quod vobis dico, omnibus
dico, vigilate. Christ's words egregiously abused by. M. Jewel.
That which I say to you here present I speak to all both absent, and to
come, be watchful: which last words M. Jewel leaves out of purpose, to cover
and conceal the meaning of our Savior, and adds of himself, quod vni dico,
which our Savior has not. And thirdly he peruerteth wholly the meaning of
Christ, which was to persuade attention, and watchfulnes about the day of
Judgment, and applies it against the pre-eminence of S. Peter his Authority,
which he well knew to be far from our Saviors meaning. And moreover there
ensues an other most gross absurdity, which is that our Savior speaking to
all and every one of them that were present, when he says, vigilate be
watchful, it follows (I say) that in M. Jewels sense, and application of his
words, every one to whom the word vigilate apperteyneth, which are all sorts
and sexes of people both there (...) and absent should have as great spiritual
authority over the Church of God, as S. Peter; quia quod vni dico, omnibus
dico, whatsoever I say to only Peter, to wit, that he must feed, that he is
the rock, and the like, I say to all men. And now let any indifferent man
consider with what conscience M. Jewel could feign Christ to say as he
alleges. A dilemma about M Iuells equivocation.
For either he had read the place in S. Mark which he cyteth, or had not. If
not, it was great negligence, the matter, and subject being so weighty as it
was: and if he did and yet alleged it quite otherwise then there it is found,
what shall we say of this (...) dealing. What of such lying, and perfidious
Equivocation? who in this can excuse or defend him for a man of any conscience
at all.

43. And yet was he (forsooth) the Father and chief master of all (...)
Caluinian doctrine in England, which was first established by Queen Elizabeth
at her entering (for that Zuinglianisme had been only admitted in King Edwardes
days) and he was not only held for the chief preacher and teacher thereof; but
for the public Champion also to defend it, and therefore as the doctrine was
false; so must he have a more special eminent gift of cunning and falsehood to
bear it out, then other men, for that others were to take (...) eius, of his
fullness in that science. And albeit he had diverse brethren also at that time,
that did participate with him of that spirit in their writings, as M. Horn
Bishop of Winchester by name, and some others; yet were they esteemed far
inferior to M. Jewel in this M. Horns equivocations.
point, especially in the elegancy of co^ueyance, though in will and substance
they might be equal. And so if you look upon six hundred fourscore and ten
untruths, which Doctor Stapleton gathered out of one work of the said M.
Horn written against Doctor Fecknam about the oath of the supremacy, you shall
find as many, and gross lies, as any lightly, of M. Jewel, but not so
slightly (...), nor smoothly faced out.

44. As for example where he avouches flatly that the conversion of our King
(...) of Britanie and of his whole Realm, and establishing thereof was done
without M. Horn to (...) page 9.
any knowledge or consent of Pope Eleutherius is so gross alye, as it is
refutable by all historyes from that time to ours; yea by John Fox and Bale
themselves, who were greatest enemies to all Popes: So as this matter was not
handsomely carried. And again in the same work M. Horn pretending to allege
some temporal lawyers to his purpose against the Popes Ecclesiastical Horn
page 89.
pre-eminence in England, cyteth one Broughton, as saying: That the king (...)
Supreme in his Kingdom, and saffereth Broughto^. li. 1. cap. de Papa.
Archiepis. and aliis Prelatis.
no equal or superior; and other such points which are not denied when speech
is of temporal men and affairs, and he leaves out diverse other passages in
the very same Author, and place, which he cyteth expressly, affirming that in
spiritual, affairs the Pope and Bishops are to Judge, and not temporal men,
which is the very decision of the Controversy.

45. And in this kind I might allege an excefsiue multitude, both out of the
one, and the other Bishops works, but that the repetition thereof would be over
tedious; albeit it fell not out, without Gods special providence in that
beginning, that so notorious falsityes should be uttered and published to the
world by these chief ringleaders: for that sundry principal Protestants,
that were curious to read these books in that (...) entrance of heresye, were
converted and made Catholic by this special and principal motive, that they
(...) so many notorious and inexcusable untruths uttered by these principal
men in their writings at that day: whereof I my self knew sundry, and in some
other place have named three; one in the university of (...), M. William
(...), a learned and zealous preacher of the Protestant doctrine: the other in
the court, Sir Thomas Copley (made afterward Lord by the King of France) a
great follower of my Lord of (...), and fervent in the new profession, as being
extraordinarily well seen for a man of his calling in controversies himself:
the third in London M. Doctor Stephens Secretary to M. Jewel and well seen at
that time in Deuinity and the learned tongues: all which made change of their
Religion, though to their great temporal losses upon the great auersion they
took at the discovery of the wilful falsehood of these chief teachers of new
Religion, whereupon the first of the above named three, makes this marginall
note in a book of his written against M. Doctor Whitaker: The M Will. (...)
in (...). of Whitaker. page 475.
incredible lying (says he) and falsisication used by the (...) writers of our
time, are a great motive to the Catholic (...). And then in the text he
declares the matter further in these words.

46. I know many (says he) who having been brought (...) not in Catholic
Religion, but in heresy with M. (...) and continuing a long time in the same,
and (...) it with all their hearts; yet coming afterward to better judgment
through the grace of God, upon consideration of such lying writers, as (...)
VVhitakers (...), to wit, Master (...), Master Horn, etc. have been so
altered, as they have detested his gospel, even to hell gates, of which number
I confess my self to be one. So he.

47. And surely if we consider the special learning and virtue of this man, and
how he had read exactly all writhers that could be gotten of the Protestants
side of what sort or sect soever, as by his writings does well appear, as also
with what singular patience, humility, and contentement of mind he lived for
many years after in voluntary banishment, and poverty for love of the
Catholic Religion, whereas by accommodating himself to the current of the
time, he might have received great preferme^t in his country, and was in the
way toward them when he left the same; he will say, that this motive of lying
Equivocation in Protestant writers, had made deep and strong impression in him
in deed. And thus much for the Bishops: now let us look into the like spirit
of Ministers in this behalf.

The use of Equiuocating in English Protestant-Ministers.. 4.
48. AS for this sort of men, though it might be sufficient which before we
have noted and set down out of the writings of this one Minister T. M. for
proof of our (...); yet to show the conformity of spirit in others also of the
same profession, and coat; we shall briefly here allege some few more
examples, and those of the chiefest English Ministers (for to talk of foreign
were infinite) that have written against Catholic Religion in these our days.

49. And with whom in this point may we better First example of John Fox.
begin, then with John Fox himself (not unfitly called by some, the Father of
lies) in his huge Volume of Acts and Monuments, who, as he was one of the first
that took upon him, in our language to set abroad the praises of that
Protestant Church by way of history, so did he by deeds leave a document what
liberty the writers of that profession do take unto themselves in this kind of
Equivocation, that avouches falsities, well known to be such to the vtterer.
For that not only throughout his whole work does he use the same upon every
occasion; but even in the very first lines, and title also of his book,
promising to set down, The continuance, and succession of his said Church,
from the beginning to our days: but indeed never meant to perform any part
thereof, as well knowing that he could not, as by a special Treatise has been
these years The Treatise of 3. Conuers. of Engl. part. 2. c. 2. 3. 4.
past most evidently made manifest, and that the said Fox toward the end of
his said volume was enforced to begin his broken succession, and continue the
same with notorious condemned heretics from Berengarius downward, as in that
Treatise is largely declared; and manifold examples are laid forth of his
voluntary falsehood in almost infinite points by him recorded against his own
knowledge, and conscience, as may be seen in the Table or Index of that book
under the word Fox.

50. And finally the same Author in the end of the third part of the said
work, does in one Chapter convince him of above an hundred and twenty wilful
lies uttered by him in less then three leaves in his said Acts and Monuments,
and those such, as no ways they may be excused, either by ignorance, error, or
other such circumstance, which before we have touched, but must needs proceed
of voluntary fraud and malice, himself knowing, that it was false which he
related. One only example will I cite here out of all the said 120. lies,
whereby you may make a guess of all the rest.

51. The Papists do teach ( Fox page 22. nu. 35.
says he) most wickedly, and horribly, saying, (...) Christ suffered for
Original sin, or sins See the ex amen of the last 6. months of his
Calendar ca. 19. n. 17.
going before baptism, but the actual sins which follow after baeptisme
must be done away by man's merits. And this assertion of ours he puts down
in a different letter, as though they were our own very words, and sense,
which is most false, for that we hold them neither in words nor sense, so as
the are rather two wicked, and horrible lies of his, then any wicked, or
horrible doctrine of ours.

52. For first we say not, That Christ suffered only for Original sin, but
for all sins, both original and actual, Confutation of John (...) his lies.
precedent and subsequent after our baptism. S. Thomas his words are clear
for our common doctrine in that behalf, part. 3. q. 1. art. 4. Certum est, etc.
It is certain (says he) that Christ came into the world to blot out not only
original sin, but all sins, etc. And this is the common doctrine of all
Deuynes amongst us. The second point also, That actual sins after baptism
cannot be done away by man's merit, but by the merits of Christ, and by the
grace, and virtue of his said passion, is no less evident in all our writings,
as you may see in S. Thomas for all 1. 2. q. 114. art. 7. where he says:
Nullus potest mereri sibi reparationem post lapsum, etc. That no man can merit
his rising again after sin, but that it must needs proceed of the only
grace of God, and merit of Christ. And the same teaches the Council of Trent
sess. 6. cap. 14. and 16. etc. So as these are two not orious lies, in re
grauissima, in a matter of most moment, as you see, and cannot be imputed to
error, or ignorance with any probability. And of the same kind are the other
hundred and odd, which before we have mentioned, and are uttered, as has been
said, within the compass of three leaves and thereby we may take a scantling of
John Fox his Consciencie in this kind of lying equivocation when it may make
for his advantage. And this shall suffice for the first example.

53. The second example shall be out of an other 2. Example. D Calfhill.
Minister, that lived jointly with John Fox, to (...), Doctor Calfhill of
Christ's Church in Oxford, who was a special great defender of M. Jewels
challenge in those days of the primitive English Protestant Church, to wit,
That no one Doctor, no one Father, no one Council, no one Anthority could be
brought for our doctrine, etc. But when a little after there were certain
ordinary (...) appointed every Saturday in a several isle of the said
Colledg-Church, for trial of Controversies, and for some (...) of the
Protestants confidence therein, those may remember that lived in the university
at that time, that M. Bristow, and some other (...) students in Deuinity,
repayring thither to dispute, forced M. Calfhill that was the moderator, to
deny or (...) to shifte of so many Fathers, Doctors and other ancient
authorities, as most men langhed to hear it: and his own friends were ashamed
at the matter. And when a little after he wrote a very irreligious, and profane
answer to a certain Catholic Treatise written by M. Martial of the Holy
Cross of Christ; he was oftentimes driven to the same follies, either of open
rejecting, or ridiculous shifting of the same Fathers: As for example when S.
Ambrose writing S. Ambr. Sermon. 55.
of the necessity of (...) sign among Christians, Calfhill (...). 78.
and especially in Churches (...); That a Church cannot stand without a Cross,
no more then a ship without a mast, etc. He answers that it cannot stand
without a (...) beam, or cross (...), or one piece of timber shut into
another: And do you imagine that he did think as he said?

54. Again in the same book where it is objected Athan. li. 2. de (...).
out of S. Athanasius words against the Gentiles, That infinite miracles were
wrought by the sign of the Cross, as casting out dyuels, and the like: yea,
and that S. Athanasius did provoke the Gentiles to come and make proof thereof
and Christians to use the same, saying: Vtatur signo, vt illi dicunt ridicule,
Crucis etc. Let him use against all inchauntments the sign of the Cross which
Pagans call ridiculous, and he shall see the Devils to be put to flight by
(...), southsaying to cease, Magic and poisoning destroyed, etc. So (...)
Athanasius: Whereunto Calfhill answers thus: If you gather (says he) that the
use Calf hill fol. (...).
of the Cross is commendable, because of miracles done; by the same reason the
(...) and thief may defend and maintain their unlawful doings, because as
great or greater miracles be wrought by them. So he. And do you not think that
he knew himself here to lie, and egregiously to Equivocate in the worst
sense? And yet (...) whereas the ancient Father S. Cyrill writing against Julian
the Apostata, that objected to Christians the use of making the sign of the
Cross upon their forheades, and setting up the same upon their doors,
answered: That such speech of the Apostata proceeded of wicked thoughts and
sauoured so extreme ignorance, and that the said Salutare signum, healthful
sign of the Cross (so are his reverend words) was made by the Christians in
remembrance of Christ's benefits, exhibited in his sacred (...), etc. M. (...)
teaches his hearer, that this was spoken by S. Cyrill, to excuse the
Christians and cover their fault, as though in deed S. Cyrill had been of the
same mind Cyril. lib. 6. (...).
with Julian the Apostata and had misliked the making (...). Calf hill (...).
172.
of that sign as he did, which is manifestly false, and a great slander to the
said holy Father. And what then will you say of this Ministers Equiuocating
spirit in the worst kind of (...)?

55. The third example we shall take out of the writings The 3. Example
Meridith Hanmer and William (...).
of Meridith Hanmer, and M. William Charke, Ministers, who being charged with
a certain pernicious doctrine (...) Martyn Luther whom they earnestly
defended, and not being other wise able to escape, used both of them a
notorious Equivocation in this kind of lying: The doctrine of Luther was this,
That if any Luther sermon de matri. tom. 5. VVittenb. fol. 120.
woman (says he) cannot, or will not prove by order of law the insufficiency
of her husband, let her request at his hands a divorce, or else by his consent
let her privily lie with his brother, or with some other man. And this doctrine
being objected Hanmer and Charke in their books against F. Campian.
to these two ministers, Hanmer thought best (you may imagine by what
Equivocation) utterly to deny the thing, as never written or spoken by Luther,
inueighing greatly against Catholics for raising such a slander upon him:
but Charke doubting least he should be convinced with Luthers own book and
Edition of VVittenberge, durst not stand to this Equivocation, but devised
another far worse, to wit, that Luther gave this Counsel, when he was yet a
Papist, and therefore, says he, if any shame be in this doctrine it lights
upon you and not upon us.

56. But two things do convince this of a notable wilful untruth. The first
for that the time and year being considered wherein Luther wrote this Sermon,
it appears evidently that he had left long before the Catholic union:
though yet himself said in this place, that he remained still with some fear
and dread of Antichrist, which he meant in respect that it was yet doubtful
unto him, whether the Protection of the Duke of Saxony would be sufficient for
his defense, against the Pope, Emperor, and other Catholic Princes that
sought to have him punished: but when in Process of time he perceived in deed
that he was secure, then he said he would give other counsel. Consilium Charke
in his ansvv. to the Censure.
tale iam tum impertij (says he) cum adhuc me detineret pauor Antichristi;
nunc vero secus long animus esset. I gave such Counsel, when I was yet under
some fear of Antichrist; but now my mind should be to give far other
counsel. And here William Charke breaks of, and leaves out the words of
Luther that immediately follow, and do solue the case, which are these: Talique
marito, qui adeo mulierem deludat dolis, vehementius Lanificium is here much
more modestly translated, then Luthers meaning seems to bear.
lanificium, immissa manu, conuellerem, etc. That laying my hands upon the
locks of such a husband, that should so craftily deceive a woman, I would
vehemently shake or pull him by the locks. So he. And what will you say now of
the crafty Equivocation of these two Ministers? which of them had least
conscience, either he that knowing it to be so, yet denied that Luther had any
such words, or the other that confessing the words, wittingly perverted the
sense, by cutting of that which should make all clear?

57. And I might cite also an other like deceiptfull Equivocation of William
Charke, not far from the Charke in his ansvv. to the Ce^sure. art. 2.
same place, where being pressed with sundry arguments that prove concupiscence
in the regenerate, to be no sin, if consent be not given thereunto, and namely
by the Authority of S. Augustine, saying: Concupiscentia Aug lib. 1. de nupt.
and concup. cap. 23.
non est peccatum, quando illi, ad illicita opera, non consentitur;
Concupiscence is not sin, when consent is not given thereunto, for working
things that be unlawful; he to avoid this authority of S. Augustine, forgeth
a place of the same Doctor to the contrary, thus: S. Augustines place (says
he) is expounded by himself afterward, where he says, Concupiscence is not so
forgiven in baptism, that it is not sin; but that it is not imputed as
sin: and cyteth for his proof the same book of S. Augustine De nuptiis and
concupiscentia. Cap. 23. and 25. But if you look upon the places, you shall
find that the Minister has here of his own foysted in the chief word, that
makes or marreth all, to wit, peccatum, sin, for that S. Augustines words
are these: Ad haec respondetur, dimitti concupiscentiam carnis in baptismo, non
vt non sit: sed vt in peccatum non imputetur, quamuis reatu suo iam soluto,
maret tamen, etc. To this is answered (says S. Augustine) that the
Concupiscence of the flesh is forgiven in baptism, not so that it is not: (or
remains not) but that it is not imputed unto sin, it remains still though
the guylt thereof be taken away. So he. And was not this a subtle Equivocation
to make in a trice S. Augustine to be contrary to himself.

58. The fourth example shall be of an other Minister The 4. example. William
Perkins.
William Perkins, who though he wrote since the other, yet in diuer, points
has he out-gone them, as well in this of false Equivocation, as in the deep
humor of phantasy, by which he has written and published many books with
strange tytles, some of them containing matter, that neither he, nor his reader
(I (...) say) do understand, as namely about the Concatenation or tying
together of causes of man's prodestination or reprobation, and the like: but
among other his pretiest fancy was, to write a book calling it, Areformed
Catholic, which was in deed that which by Logitians is termed Implicatioin
adiecto, An implicancy or contradiction of the one word to the other, for that
he which is a Catholic (if we speak of (...) belonging to doctrine and
belief, and not to manners) cannot be reformed, the essence of Catholic
Religion consisting in this, that all and every point of the received Christian
faith be believed and nothing more, or less, so as if any point must be added,
taken away, altered or reformed, it is not Catholic, and consequently A
reformed Catholic in matters of faith must needs be A deformed Catholic,
such a What is properly Catholic, and (...) (...).
(...), as Perkins in deed describes, that admits one, two, three, four
more or less points of the common Catholic received Religion: and yet
starteth from the fifth or sixth, as himself best likes, and this calls
Perkins A reformed Catholic, when the belieuer chooses to believe, or leave
what points do please him best: which choice we say, is properly heresy, for
that an Heretic is a Chooser, as the Greek word imports: and this heresy
or choice in matters of belief does Perkins profess to teach his hearer,
saying: That he will show them how near they may come unto the Roman faith,
and yet not iumpe with it, which is a doctrine common to all heretics, and
heresies that ever were, for that all have agreed with the Catholic faith in
some points, for that otherwise it should be Apostasy and not heresy if they
denied all: yea the Turks and Mores at this day do hold some points of
Christian Religion with the Catholics; but for that neither they nor
heretics do hold all, therefore they are no true Catholics, but such
Reformed Catholics as William Perkins would teach his disciples to be, to
wit, properly Heretics by their choice of religion.

59. And to the end we may see not only the man's Perkins in his (...).
folly in choosing his argument, but his falsehood also Cath. c. 1.
in prosecuting the same, I shall lay forth one only example out of his very
first Chapter that begins with his ordinary argument of the Whore of
Babylon, and by this one example, let the reader judge, whether he be not a fit
Chaplyn for that honest woman, iflying, cosenage, and calumniation be
propertyes of her profession. For that having spent many impertinent words to
show that the impieties prophesied by S. John of the said Whore of Babylon,
and Saints of Apoc. 17.
God to be slain by her; was not meant of the persecution of Rome under the
Pagan Emperors, but of the Church of Rome now under the Christian Bishopps and
Popes, he has these words.

60. This exposition (says he) of the Apocalips besides the Authority of the
text, has also the favor and defense of ancient and learned men: Bernard
says, They are the Ministers of Christ, but they serve Antichrist. And Sermon.
(...). 33.
again, the beast spoken of in the Apocalips to which a mouth is Epist. 124.
given to speak blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints of God, is now
gotten into Peter's Chair as a lion prepared to his pray. It will be said, that
Bernard speaks these later words of one that came to the Popedom by
intrusion, or usurpation. It is true in deed, but wherefore was he an usurper.
He renders a reason thereof in the same place: because the Antipope called
Innoce^tius, was chosen by the Kings of Alemaine, France, England, Scotland,
Spain, Jerusalem, with consent of the whole Clergy and people in these
nations, and the other was not. And thus Bernard has given his verdict, that
not only this usurper, but all the Popes for this many years are the beast in
the Apocalips, because now they are only chosen by the College of Cardinals,
etc. Thus he.

61. And now how many (...) decepts, and falsities there be in this little
narration is easy for any man to see, admyre, and detest that will but look
upon the places of S. Bernard by himself quoted. For in Diverse falsifications
of S. Bernards words.
the first place out of his 33. Sermon upon (...) (...) where he says: They
are the Ministers of Christ, but do serve Antichrist, he speaks against the
vices of the Clergy, especially of France where he lived in his days. And that
it is not meant particulerly of the pope, S. Bernardes own words do show in
that ve y place, saying: They will be and are Prelates of Churches, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Bishopps, and Archbishopps: so as this is falsely brought in to
prove any special thing against Rome, or the Pope, and much more wickedly
alleged to prove Perkins his exposition of the Apocalips, against Christian
Rome to be true in S. Bernardes sense, which he never thought of, or by any
least cogitation admitted, as by the whole course of his writings to the
contrary is evident: no man more extolling the dignity of the Pope, and Sea of
Rome, then he, even then, when most he reprehendeth evil life and manners.

62. But the other that follows is much more fraudulenty alleged: For if S.
Bernard complained greatly that in his time one Petrus Leonis, an usurper and
Antipope, being chosen by the (...) less number of Cardinals voices, did by
violence notwithstanding thrust himself into the Chair of Peter, and play
therein the part of Antichrist, what was this in prejudice of the true Pope
Innocentius the second, whom Saint Bernard does call Bern. epis. 124.
Christ's Vicar, and highly commends him as lawfully chosen by the mayor part
of the College of Cardinals, and exhorts all Christian Kings to obey and
follow him, as their high and true lawful universal pastor? So as here (...)
Perkins makes a notorious lie in saying, that Innocentius by S. Bernards
judgment was an Antipope, whereas he proved him expressly in the places here
alleged to be the true Pope and Vicar of Christ, and Petrus (...) to be the
Antipope. Numquid (says he) non omnes Principes cognouerunt, quia ipse est
vere Dei electus? Francorum, Anglorum, Hispanorum, and postremo Vbi (...).
Romanorum Rex Innocentium in Papam suscipiunt and recognoscunt (...) Episcopum
animarum suarum? Do not all Princes know, that Innocentius is truly the elected
of God? The Kings of France, England, Spain, and (...) do receive Innocentius
for Pope, and do acknowledge him to be the singular Bishop of their souls.

63. Secondly he lies much more apparently, when he says, that Innocentius
was chosen by the said Kings of Alemaine, France, England, etc. whereas S.
Bernard says not that he was chosen by them, but that he was accepted,
followed, and obeyed by them, as true Pope after his election: Alemaniae (says
he) Angliae, Franciae, Scotiae, Epist. (...). ad (...).
Hispaniarum and (...) Reges cum vniuerso clero and populis fauent, and
adhaerent Domino Innocentio, tanquam filij Patri tanquam capiti membra. The
Kings of Germany, France, England, Scotland, Spain, and Jerusalem together
with their whole Clergy and people do favor, and adhere to Pope (...) (he does
not say they choose him) as children to their Father, and as members to their
head.

64. Thirdly, Perkins lies most desperately of all in his last conclusion,
(...): And thus Bernard has given his verdict, that not only this usurper, but
that all the Popes for (...) Perkins in reformed Cath. c. 8.
many years are the beast in the (...), because now they are only chosen by
the College of Cardinals. This (I say) is a notorious lie; for that S. Bernard
gives no such verdict, but allows well the election of Innocentius by the
said Cardinals, saying: Merito autem illum (...) Ecclesia, (...). epist. (...).
cuius and opinio clarior, and electio sanior inuenta est. nimirum (...) and
numero vincens, and merito: Worthily does the Church admit him (to wit
Innocentius) whose estimation is more renowned, and whose election is found to
be more lawful as passing the others election both in number and merit of the
choosers. And so in these few lines we see how many wilful lies, and
falsifications this Minister has used, which cannot be excused, either by
oversight, ignorance, or error, but must needs be ascribed to wilful malice,
and express purpose of deceyuing his hearer. And so though I might allege
diverse other places to like effect, yet this shall (...) for one example; yea
for all them of that sort in this behalf. For albeit examples without number
may be alleged out of these men's works: yet by these few, (...) may be made
of the rest. I shall therefore adioyne some three or four examples more of
laymen, to show the conformity of their spirits to their spiritual guydes, and
so make an end.

The use of Equivocation in Laymen and Knights.. 5.
65. OF this sort of men I will allege only three in this place that in these
later days have written against Catholic Religion; but yet such as are more
eminent among the rest, they being Knights all three, whose honorable
condition, and state of calling, ought to have obliged them to defense of
truth, and that also by true means, and not by sleightes of this worst kind
of Equivocation, as here you shall see them do. The first is Sir Francis
Hastings that wrote the injurious VVatchword some years past, aga nst
Catholics: The second is Sir Philip Mornay, Lord of Plessis, that has
written many works much respected by those of his partiality in Religion. The
third is Sir Edward Cook late Attorney of his Majesty, now a Judge, and writer
against Catholics. And albeit the second be a Frenchman borne, yet for that
he has lived much in England, and wrote some of his books there, and all or
most part of them are (...) to be in the English language, I may well
accompany him with English Knights in this behalf.

66. For the first then which is Sir Francis, I may be The (...) of Sir Francis
(...).
the briefer with him, for that his adversary, or Antagonist has in his
Answers to the said VVatchword, and Apology thereof, often put him in mind of
his (...) against truth, even then, when himself must needs know it to be so,
and consequently, that it was not only voluntary, but witting also and wilful
(...), whereof I might allege many particulars, but two or three shall be
enough for a taste.

67. In his defense of the VVatch-word page 74. he treating against the abuse
of pardons, avouches out of sundry Chronicles, as he says, the story of the
poisoning of King John by a Monk named Simon, and this upon dispensatio^ first
obtained of his Abbot to do the fact without sin, which history being taken
by him out of John Fox his Acts and Monumentes, who affirms that most of the
ancient Historiographers A vvilfull untruth.
of our Country do agree in this matter, both of them are convinced of wilful
untruths, for that they could not be ignorant, but that of all the old
Historiographers that lived in the time of King John, or within two hundred
years after, no one did ever affirm the same, but rather the quite contrary,
setting down other particular causes and occasions of King John's death. And
further they could not but know, and have read John Stowes Chronicle printed
anno. 1592. who having made diligent search about this matter, out of all
authors of antiquity, could find no such thing: and so he testifyeth in these
words. Thus (says he) have I set John (...) in his (...) in the life of K.
John.
down the life and death (though much abbreuiated) of King John, according to
the writings of Roger (...), Roger Houeden, Rad. Niger, Rad. Cogshall, Matthew
Paris, and others, who all lived when the King reigned, and wrote for that time
what they saw or heard credibly reported etc.

68. Now then if this Chronicle of Stow was out, and in every man's hand some
years before Sir Francis wrote his VVatchword, and that hereby is evident
according to all ancient writers, that the foresaid poisoning of King John by a
monk, was neither written, nor reported by any in those days; with what
Conscience could (...) Francis and Fox allege the (...) again (...) a truth?
Was not here wilful deceit, nay (...) will and desire of deceauing?

69. The same is laid against Sir Francis in cyting of sundry others as namely
the Authority of S. Hierome, Defense of the 2.
for proof of common prayer in a vulgar tongue, Tota Encount. page 18.
Ecclesia (says S. Hierome) instar tonitruireboat Amen, The S. Hier. in proem.
lib. 2. Comen. ad (...).
whole Church like a mighty thunder does sound out (...), inferring thereof that
all by liklyhood did understand the language wherein public service was then
celebrated, for that otherwise they could not so answer: But mark the frauds
that are in this allegation. First the Knight does not explicate in particular
what Church it was whereof S. Hierome spoke, nor upon what occasion, nor to
whom, and secondly he does conceal the words 'that immediately went before
and followed after, for that they made al against him. For first S. Hierome
spoke of the Church of Rome in particular, where the latin tongue being in use
so commonly in his days, that it was, as it were, their natural language, no
marvel though the common people could sound out Amen, they understanding for
the most part the latin tongue: for we see also that in other Catholic
Countries where the latin tongue is not so commonly in use, the common people
by use and practice can, and do with common voice sound out Amen in Letanies,
and other parts of latin service; wherefore this circumstance was fraudulently
concealed.

70. As that other was in like manner, that S. Hierome wrote these words unto
two vowed virgins, Paula, and Eustochium, to whom he dedicated his said second
book of his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Galathians, commending unto
them the faith and devotion of the Church of Rome above other Churches, and
yielding a reason why the Apostle S. Paul did so highly commend the Roman
Christians in his time, both for their faith and obedience, saying of the
first: I do give thanks to my God by Jesus Christ for you all, sor that Romans
(...).
your faith is divulged throughout the whole world: and in the end of the same
Epistle, he says of their obedience in living according to their faith: Your
obedience is divulged Rom 16.
into every place of the world, wherefore I take joy in you, etc. Upon which
testimony of the Apostle S. Hierome writes thus: Romanae plebis laudatur
(...), etc. The faith of the Roman people is praised by the Apostle, for in
what other place of the world is there such continual concourse unto Churches,
and unto the Sepulchers of Martyrs as in Rome? In what place do they so sound
out the word Amen, to the likeness of a certain heavenly thunder? Not for
that the Romans have any other faith, but that which all Christian Churches
have, but only that there is greater devotion in them, and greater simplicity
to believe.

71. These are S. Hieroms words, which if Sir Francis had set down wholly and
simply as the lie in him, he saw how they would make against him in diverse
points, and therefore he willingly and wittingly cut of both the beginning and
ending, as you have heard, and applied the midst to a wrong sense, never
thought of by the Author himself. And the same is proved (...) in (...). 99.
vvarn.
against him in the allegation of many other Authors, as of S. Augustine page
18. of S. Bid, and Arnobius page 34. Bed. and Arnob. ibib. Encont 2. fol. 14.
and. 5.
and 35. and of S. Chrysostom page 52. all to one end corruptly and
fraudulently alleged for some show of proof that public service ought to be
in vulgar tongues only: which yet being truly examined make Chrysostom. hom 13 in 2.
ad Cor. vvarn.
nothing for his purpose, but quite contrary. And thus much in this place for
the first Knight.

72. As concerning the second Knight Sir Philip Mornay En ont. 1. (...) 63.
his case is notorious, that having published a great book full of authorities
against the Mass upon the En ont. 1. fol. 67.
year 1599. seeming to show great learning therein, the same was fond afterward
to be so full of deceipts (...) of Sir Philip Mornay.
and wilful falsifications, as a very learned man Monsieur Peron then Bishop
of Eureux, and now Cardinal made public offer to prove above five hundred
such wilful falsifications to be in that book, requesting also, by humble
suite, his Majesty of France to command public trial with his presence, as at
length it was effectuated in the presence of the King and great part of his
(...), and other learned men on both Acts de la Conference tenue enter le
Sieur Euesque d'Eureux, and le (...) du Plessis, etc. a Fou^tain-bleau le 4. de
May. 1600.
sides, upon the year 1600. and 4. of May, as appears both by the Kings own
letter extant in print, as also by the public Acts set forth by the
approbation of the said King and his Counsel.

73. In this Conserence of trial, five hundred wilful falsifications being
objected, as I said, to this Knight, and when the time grew near, three score
(...) exhibited unto him by the said Bishop out of which to make his choice for
the first days trial, the Imprimez chez Anthoine le Marie.
said Sir Philip Mornay choice 19. of those, which he thought himself best
able to defend or excuse, and of this number also he placed in the first rank
such as seemed to him to be of least enormity, whereof notwithstanding, the
straitnes of time permitting only 9. to be handled, he was convinced publicly
in all, and every one of them, and had sentence given against him, by the
Judges, as well Protestants chosen of his side, as the other that were of the
Bishops Religion: the sum whereof I shall briefly touch in this place.

74. The first was that he had falsified the ScholeDoctor In the french printed
Acts fol. 34.
Ioannes Scotus, alleging him as though he had doubted of the Reall-presence,
for that having proposed the question, whether Christ were really in the
Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine, he did according to the fashion
of Schools, make arguments to the contrary, saying: Videtur quod non, it
seems that he is not so there, for these and these reasons, which afterward
he solueth and holds the contrary position for true, and Catholic, to wit,
that Christ's body is really there, whereupon the sentence of the Judges was,
that Mo^sieur Plessis in this matter had taken the objection Printed acts fol.
52.
of Scotus for his resolution.

75. The second falsification whereof he was convinced was that he had alleged
Bishop Durandus an other Scholasticall Author very fraudulently about Act. fol.
46.
the controversy of Transubstantiation, affirming him to say, and hold for his
own position that which he cyteth only as an objection out of an other, and
answers the same. The third and fourth falsifications were, that he had
corrupted plainly S. Chrysostom in Act. fol. 52. and 58.
two several places by him alleged about prayer for the dead, producing two
particular testimonies out of him quite contrary to his own meaning, and
express words. The fifth was out of S. Hierome about praying to Saints. The
sixth out of S. Cyrill about honoring the holy Cross. The seventh out of the
Code or Imperial laws about painting or keruing the sign of the said Cross.
The eight out of S. Bernard about honoring our blessed Lady. The ninth and
last of an authority of Theodorete about Images.

76. All which places being diligently examined, and Sir Philipp Mornay suffered
to say, and allege what he could for his defense or evasion, he was convinced
manifestly by the said Bishop of Eureux, and sentenced by all the Judges to
have committed falfification, and untrue dealing in them all. And the like
would the said Bishop have showed, and declared in all the rest to the number
of five hundred, if the said Mornay could have been brought to have continued
the combat, which he would not, as you may see in the said public Acts printed
in French upon the year 1601. See in the 3. (...). 3. p in the end of the
first 6. mo neths of Fox his (...).
with approbation of the King himself. And he that will see more particulers
of this in the English tongue, may read a Treatise, or relation thereof set
forth in the year 1604. taken out of the foresaid French public Acts of the
said trial. And so this shall serve for this French Knight, whereby you may see
the conformity of spirit in them all, when occasion is offered to Equivocate in
the worst sense.

77. Our last example then shall be of S. Edward Cook Equiuocatio (...) Sir
Edward Cook.
lately the Kings Attorney, who having taken upon him these years past to be
both a sharp writer, and earnest actor against Catholics, seems therewith to
have drunk also of this spirit in such abundant measure, as he is like in
time to overrun all the rest, if he go forward, as he has begone. For that
being admonished not long ago by one that answered his last book of Reports,
of diverse notorious his excesses committed in this kind, he is (men See the
answer of the Cath.
say) so far of from correcting, or ame^ding the same, as he has not only in
a late large declamatio^ against Catholics in a charge given by him at Norwich
repeated Divine to the 1. p. of Sir Edw.
and avouched again the same excesses, but has (...) others also thereunto of
much more apparent Cooks Reports.
falsity. As for example, he was admonished among cap vlt.
other points, that it was a notorious untruth, which he had written and
printed, that for the first ten years of Queen Elizabeth's reign no one
person of what religion, or sect so ever did refuse to go to the Protestants
Church and service; which the Answerer confuteth so clearly, and by so many
witnesses, as a man would have thought that the matter would never have been
mentioned more for very shame; and yet now (they say) that the Attorney being
made a Judge, has not only repeated the same, but avouched it also again with
such asseueration in his foresaid Charge, as if it had never been controlled, or
proved false.

78. Nay further they write, that he adjoined with like asseueration diverse
other things no less appara^tly false then this: as for example, that Pope
Pius Quintus before he proceeded to any Ecclesiastical Censure against Q
Elizabeth, wrote unto her a letter, offering to allow and ratify the English
Service, Bible, and Communion-booke, as now it is in use in that Kingdom, if
she would accept it as from him, which she refusing to do, he did excommunicate
her; by which tale he acquitteth notwithstanding Catholics (if A notable
fiction against Pius Quintus.
you mark it) from procuring that excommunication for rebellion, which else
where he often obiecteth most odiously against them. For if upon this cause she
were excommunicated, what part had Ca holicks therein? But yet I must needs
say, that the sictio^ is one of the most unlikely things. and the most
impossible in moral reason, that any man can devise. For that Pope Pius
Quintus, albeit some man would imagine him to be so good a fellow as to care
for no religion (who is known to have been most zealous) yet had he adventured
his Popedom by making such an offer, for he should have allowed of diverse
points in the Communion-booke, which are held by the Catholic Church for
heresy, and so condemned by the Council Decret. p. 1. did. 40. ca. 6. Si Papa.
of Trent, and other Councels: and now you know it is a ground among us, that a
Pope that should be an heretic, or approuer of heresy, thereby cease to be
Pope; how improbable then is this of Pius Quintus his offer. And why had not
this letter in so many years been published to the world for the credit of the
English service, and discredit of the Popes? And yet the voice is, that the
Lord Cook did so earnestly avouch this matter, as he pawned therein not only
his credit and honesty bv express terms of protestation: but even his faith
also to God and man: A great adventure no doubt. And for that I assure my self
(...) the greater part of the auditory being discreet men, did imagine it to
be quite false, as I, and others in effect do know it to be; it must needs be a
great blemish to my Lords credit at the beginning of his Iudgeship, that in
other things also he be not believed.

79. But I understand that the book of this speech, The Lo. Cooks charge
against Catholics.
or charge now printed is expected shortly together with some other
appertayning to the same man, and then it may be that some body will examine
matters more particulerly (especially those that appertain to the iniuring of
Catholics) and afterward return with the aggreuances to the Judge himself
(seeing he is now a Judge) to give sentence of his own ouersightes: albeit I
must confess that as well my self, as diverse other men have lost great hope
of his Lordship by this accident, for before we did think that his ouerlashing
in speeches when he was Attorney did proceed in great part of the liberty of
that office, and that when he came to be judge he would reform his conscience
ratione status, in regard of his state of life; but now it seems that he is
far worse, though this (I say) shall be left by me to others to be discussed
upon the sight of the foresaid printed books.

80. My speech at this time shall be only about that which passed in his book
of Reports, while he was Attorney, and which has been disputed these months
past between him, and a Catholic Divine of our party, in his answer to the
said Reports, which answer is in England. And albeit thereby may easily be
seen the talent which M. Attorney had while he was Attorney in this kind of
worst Equivocation (notwithstanding his often declamations against the other
sort, that with due circumstances we have proved to be lawful:) yet will I
here adioyne one example more, but such a one as is worth the noting, and
bearing away. And it is this.

81. That whereas in answering of diverse laws, (...) and ordinances which the
Attorney alleged out of the reigns of sundry ancient Kings, to prove that
they did exercise spiritual authority, and jurisdiction, the Divine somtymes
not having the lawbookes by him, out of which the said laws or authorityes
were cyted, supposing the allegations to be ordinarily true (for who would
suspect lawyers to be The Divine deceived by the subtle ty of the Lawyer.
false in their cytations, that were wont to be accounted most exact in that
point) did answer the same with that sincerity of truth and reason, as to a
man of his profession appertayned, though somtymes also he was forced to
suspect some fraud, and thereupon requested such as had commodity in England to
see the books, that they would pervse the places, and take them out verbatim,
which some have done, and have found such store of Equivocations, and false
dealing in the alleging thereof, as never could be imagined in a man of his
calling. I shall only set down one example and it shall be the first that is
cyted by him in the whole book, to wit, of the Charter of King Kenulphus of
the West Saxons, unto the Abbey of Abindon in Barkeshyre, which Charter M.
Attorney set down with this preface: To confirm (says he) those that hold
the truth, and to satisfy such as being not instructed know not the ancient,
and modern laws, etc. these few demonstratiue proofs shall serve.

82. And then begins he with the said Charter King Kenulphus his charter
notably falsyfyed by M. Attorney. Report. fol. 9.
of King Kenulphus before the Conquest, meaning to prove thereby that the said
King did give unto the said Abbey of Abindon spiritual Jurisdiction, by virtue
of his temporal Crown, exempting the same from all Authority of the Bishop,
which in deed was done by the Pope, and so the Charter it self does plainly
express, if it had been truly related by M. Attorney. And for that the Case is
not long, I shall set it down verbatim, as the Attorney has it in his book
page 9. only putting into English that which is recyted by him in latin, and
left without any translation to make the matter more obscure: and then shall
we lay forth also the true case whereby will be seen how true a dealer M.
Attorney is in those his writings, and protestations, which after we shall
more largely consider of. Thus then begins the Charter.

83 Kenulphus Rex etc. per literas suas patentes, consilio, and consensu
Episcoporum, and Senatorum gentis suae, largitus fuit The charter as M.
Attorney alleges it an. 755.
Monasterio de Abindon in Comitatu Bark. and cuidam Ruchino tunc Abbati
Monasterij etc. quandam ruris sui portionem, id est, quindecim mansias, in loco
qui a ruricolis tunc nuncupabatur Culnam cum omnibus vtilitatibus ad eandem
pertinentibus-tam Stanford. lib. c. 9. fol. 1012.
in magnis, quam in modic is rebus, in aeternam haereditatem. Et quod
praedictus Kuchinus, etc. ab omni Episcopali iure in sempiternum esset quietus:
vt inhabitatores eius nullius Episcopi, aut suorum officialium iugo inde
deprimantur; sed in cunctis rerum euentibus and discussionibus causarum,
Abbatis Monasterij praedicti decreto subijciantur, ita quod, etc. Thus goes
the Charter as M. Attorney alleges it, which in English is as follows.

84. King Kenulphus, etc. by his letters patentes with the counsel, and
consent of the Bishops, and Counselors of his nation, did give to the (...)
of Abindon in Barkshire, and to one Ruchinus Abbot of that Monastery, a
certain portion of his land, to wit, fifteen Mansians, in a place called by
the countrymen Culnam, with all profittes, and commodityes great and small,
appertayning thereunto for everlasting inheritance. And that the foresaid
Ruchinus, etc. should be quiet from all right of the Bishop for ever; so as the
inhabitants of that place, shall not be depressed for the time to come by the
yoke of any Bishop, or his officers, but that in all euentes of things and
controuersyes of causes, they shall be subject to the decree of the Abbot of
the said Monastery: so as, etc. And then Mark M. Attorneyes Inference upon his
own falsification.
does M. Attorney continue his speech thus: This Charter was pleaded in 1. H.
7. and vouched by Stanford, as at large appears; which Charter granted
above. 850. years sithence, was after confirmed per Eduinum Britaniae Anglorum
Regem and Monarcham anno Domini. 955. by which appears, that the King by this
Charter, made in Parliament, (for it appears to be made by the Counsel, and
consent of his Bishops, and Senators of his Kingdom, which were assembled in
This is false.
Parliament) did discharge and exempt the said Abbot from the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop etc. And by the same Charter did grant to the same Abbot
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within his said Abbey: which Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction being This also is false.
derived from the Crown, continued until the dissolution of the said Abbey in
the reign of King Henry the eight. So he.

85. And by this you may see what an important conclusion he does infer of
the Kings supreme jurisdiction in spiritual affairs at that time. Whereunto
the Divine coming to answer, and supposing that M. Attorney would not falsity
or belie his Authors, M. Attorneyes so (...) protestation falsified.
having protested most solemnly fol. 40. of his his book, that he had cyted
truly the very words, and textes of the laws, resolutions, judgments, and
acts of Parliament, all public, and in print, without any inference,
argument, or amplification, Report. fol. 40.
quoting particularly the books, years, leaves, Chapters, and other such like
certain references, as every man at his pleasure may see and read them, etc.
The answerer I say) hearing this formal protestation, and supposing besides
that the man would have some respect to his credit and honor in this behalf,
granting all as it lay, answered the same, as you may see in his book: but now
upon better search, it falls out, that this whole (...) was falsely alleged
by M. Attorney in the very point of the principal controversy in hand about
the Kings spiritual Jurisdiction, for that whatsoever the Charter did ascribe
expressly to the Pope, and his Authority, the Attorney suppressing the true
words, relates it, as proceeding from the King, and temporal authority of
his Crown. For proof whereof I shall set down the very words of my learned
friends letter out of England about this point, after view taken of the
law-bookes themselves, and then let any man say how far M Attorney is to be
credited in any thing he writes, or speaks against Catholics.

86. As concerning (says he) the Charter of King The relation sent (...) of
England about the true charter of K. Kenulphus.
Kenulphus for the Sanctuary of the Monastery of Abindon, you must know that M.
Attorney has egregiously abused his Reader in that and other points. For the
Case stands thus. That in the first year of King Henry the 7. Humphrey
Stafford was attainted by Act of Parliament of high (...), and took Sanctuary
first in Colchester in Essex, and after fled to Culnam, and took Sanctuary in
the Abbey of Abindon, and being taken from thence brought unto the Tower of
London, and from thence brought unto the King's Bench, he pleaded, that he was
drawn by force out of the said Sanctuary of Culnam, and prayed his Counsel to
plead that point, which by all the Judges of both benches was granted unto
him. And so they pleaded in this manner

87. Idem Humphridus per Consilium suum dixit, quod Kenulphus Rex Merciorum,
per litteras suas patentes, consilio and consensu Episcoporum and Senatorum
gentis suae largitus fuit Monasterio de Abindon, ac cuidam Ruchino tunc Abbati
Monasterij illius, quandam ruris sui portionem, id est, quindecim Mansias in
loco qui a ruricolis tunc nuncupabatur Culnam, cum omnibus vtilitatibus ad
(...) pertinentibus, tam in magnis quam in modicis rebus in aeternam
haereditatem. Et quod praedictus Ruchinus ab omni Regis obstaculo, and
Episcopali iure in sempiternum esset quietus, vt inhabitatores eius nullius
Regis aut ministrorum suorum, Episcopiue, aut suorum Officialium iugo inde
deprimerentur, sed in cunctis rerum euentibus, and discussionibus causarum
Abbatis Monasterij praedicti decreto subijcerentur. (...) quod, etc. And here
cease M. Attorney leaving out as you see in his recital, the words that go
before, ab omni Regis obstaculo, etc. that the monastery should be free from
all obstacle of the King, as also these words, vt inhabitatores eius nullius
Regis, aut (...) deprimantur, that the inhabitants be not oppressed with any yoke
of any King or his ministers. whereby is evident that the King in his Charter
did for his part give exemptions from temporal and royal power: but
especially the fraud is seen by cutting of the words that do ensue, which
decyde the whole controversy, which are these: Et etiam allegauit vltra quod
Leo tunc Papa concessit dicto Abbati dictas (...), and (...). Et quod Eduinus
tunc Britaniae Anglorum Rex, and Monarchus concessit, quod praefatum
Monasterium omnis terrenae seruitutis esset liberum, quae (...)
praedecessoribus suis Catholicis, videlicet a dicto Sancto Leone Papa and dicto
Rege Kenulpho etc. Et quod virtute litter arum and bullarum praedictarum, and
tempore This decydeth the whole Controversy and therefore was fraudulently cut
of by M Attorney.
confectionis earundem, eadem villa de Culnam fuit Sanctuarium, and locus
priuilegiatus etc. Which in English is thus. And moreover the said Humphrey
Stafford by his Counsel alleged furthet for himself, that Pope Leo had
granted unto the said Abbot the said immunityes and privileges, and that K.
Edwin then King and monarch over all the English in Britany had granted that
the said Monastery should be free from all earthly servitude, which by his
Catholic predecessors, to wit, the said holy Pope (...), and the said King
Kenulphus, was granted; and that at the time of the making of the foresaid
letters patentes and Bulls, the said village or town of Culnam was a
Sanctuary, and privileged place by virtue of the said patents and Bulls.

88. This is word for word the very plea of Humphrey Stafford for the Sa^ctuary
of the Monastery of Abindon, as it was pleaded by his learned Counsel in law,
even as it is recorded in the reports of the years of 1. Hen. 7. printed by
Pinson and Brook tit. Cor. pl. 129.
King Henry the seventh, as they are printed by Pinson the law-printer in the
time of King Henry the eight before the Protestant religion came up. And the
Lord Brook in his Abridgement of the law, in the title of Corone, placito 129.
does accordingly set down the same case, with mencyoning of the Bulls of
Pope (...) for the said immunities and privileges. But all the Protestant
editions in the time of the late Queen A falsification of protestat printers.
Elizabeth printed by Tottell and (...)-were have committed a notable trick of
falsificatio^ in leaving out altogeathcr these markable words: That Leo then
Pope did grant the said immunityes, and privileges, and also those words of
King Edwyn, which of his Catholic (...) S. Leo and King Kenulphus were
granted, etc. And again, By force of the letters, and Bulls aforesaid the
said village of Culnam was a Sanctuary, and place privileged.

89. And hereby allois evident that the King did not by his Charter in
Parliament (for it appears to be made by the Counsel and consent of his
Bishops and Senators and not by Parliament, as M. Attorney does misreport it)
neither was there any Parliament held at that time in the land, or many hundred
years after (for as it appears by Holinsheds Cronicle page 34. When
Parlame^ts began in England.
the first use of Parliament in England was in the time of King Henry the first)
it is clear (I say) that the King did not discharge and exempt the said Abbot
from Jurisdiction of the Bishop, nor did grant unto the said Abbot
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the said Abbey, neither had that Abbot any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction derived from the Crown: But as it appears by
the authenticke report of the Case, the Pope and the King did both join in
making the said Sanctuary, according unto their several powers and
authorityes. So that the exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction did proceed
duly from the grant of Pope Leo; as likewise the exemption from all regal
and temporal Jurisdiction proceed from the Charter of King Kenulphus. Note
also that King Edwins grant was only that the said Monastery should be free
from all earthly servitude, and touches not any spiritual immunities, or
jurisdiction at all. The conclusion of all.


90. Thus far my friend out of England. And by this now you may see how well
M. Attorney has observed his foresaid protestation, that he had cyted the very
words, and textes of the laws, without any inference, argument, or
amplification at all. And this being my friends advertisement from England,
with like observation of many other places cyted by M. Attorney, with like
fidelity, I thought good to produce this one amongst many (being the first in
order) for a taste in this place, reserving the rest to a fitter, or at
leastwise to a second Edition of the foresaid answer of the Catholic Deuyne,
where every thing may be referred to his due place. And with this will I end
both this Chapter and the whole Book.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE WORK, With a brief exhortation unto
Catholics, not to use the liberty of Equivocation, even in lawful cases, but
where some urgent occasion induces them thereunto.
CHAP. XIII.
AND now, gentle reader, having brought this Treatise to an end, and justified
(as I hope) our Catholic doctrine in the eyes and Judgments of all
indifferent men, from the two odious imputations of Rebellion and Equivocation,
injuriously cast upon the same by the malice of Thomas Morton; there remains
nothing, but that I conclude this our small labor, with an exhortation to all
Catholic people, not only to abstain from the first, which is utterly
unlawful (I mean the attempting of any thing contrary to their loyal duties
in subjection, be their pressures never so great:) but also from the practice,
and frequent use of the second, though in some cases most lawful as abundantly
has been (...); except some urgent occasion, or obligation, either of defense
of Lavvfull causes of the use of Equivocation.
innocence, secresy, right, justice, or the avoiding of open wrong, do force
them to the contrary. For as the holy Apostle in two several places affirms
to the Corinthians in cases not much unlike to this about matter of scandal:
Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt: 1. Cor. 6.
All things are lawful unto me (touching meats, and other such things) but
all are not expedient to be practiced. And again: Omnia (...) licent, sed non
omnia 1. Cor. 10.
edificant; All things are lawful unto me, but all things do not edifye: So I
say in this case, that albeit a man may without breach of truth, or offense of
almighty God in certain cases, equivocate, or use a doubtful speech for a
good and necessary end, either in oath, or out of oath, though the hearer do
not always understand it, or be deceived therewith, and that many holy men have
done the same, yea Christ himself, that is the example, and pattern of all
holiness and truth in speech, as by many examples before at large has been
declared: yet considering the times, and condition thereof, wherein Catholics at
this day live in England, the offense, and scandal which Protestants, and some
others, that understand not the lawfulnes thereof, or will not understand the
same, do receive, or raise thereupon; my wish and counsel to Catholics should
be to use the benefit of this liberty most sparingly even in lawful things,
and never but upon great and urgent (...), and occasions.

2. And the reasons of this my wish and counsel are The reasons why
Catholics ought to use the liberty of Equivocation sparingly.
principally the two already touched: The one the avoiding of scandal even
with the Adversary himself: and that as Catholic Religion is the only true in
doctrine, so the practice also thereof in conversation; should not only be in
all truth, and sincerity re ipsa, in very deed; but in opinion likewise, and
estimation of others, in so much as the word of a Catholic man ought to weigh
more then the oath of an other, and the oath, or promise of a Catholic, more
then any band, or obligation of an other, which for the most part I doubt not,
but is so already taken in England. For that albeit by this doctrine before
declared about Equivocation, men do know that Catholics in certain cases may
use the same: yet know they also that the said cases are straightly limited with
many exceptions, and that in common conversation, as in buying selling,
traffic, and the like, Equivocation may not be See of these things before
and namely Cap. 7. Consid. 1.
used to the (...), or prejudice of any man: and that in Judgments and
tribunals, where most use thereof does fall out, all lawyers, Judges and
Magistrates do know in Catholic Countries, wherein the (...) may use
Equivocation, and wherein not, and consequently truth and Justice can suffer no
wrong thereby. And moreover they know, as before has been said, that the
obligation of a Catholic man, is so great to avoid all kind of lies, whether
venial, or mortal, as for the gayning of a world no one is wittingly and
willingly to be committed: which account I doubt whether men of other sects
and Religion do make or not. So as though already I persuade my self, that
Catholic people stand in good conceit with all sorts of men, for their
truth in concionable and upright dealing; even with those which endeavor most
in this point to slander them: yet would I wish the same to be confirmed more
daily by factes in respect of this new calumniation raised against them of the
liberty of Equivocation. And this of the first reason.

3. My other reason is, as before has been insinuated, in regard of the time
present, which being a time of trial and persecution, requires at Catholics
hands, a more perfect Confession of their faith, and of all matters belonging
thereunto, then at other times. And albeit in the former Treatise among the
Cases reserved, wherein Equivocation may not be used, confession of faith be
expressly and in the first place excepted, so as therein no doublenes or
doubtfulnes may be used: yet no man can deny but many factes and cases may fall
out, concerning matters of Religion not tending to confession ((...) in time of
persecution) wherein a man may or perhaps also must by obligation, if otherwise
he cannot avoid the wrong and violence that How a Priest may somtymes yield of
his right with more merit.
is offered to himself or others, use Equiuocal speeches, for concealing of that
which in conscience he cannot utter. But whersoeuer this obligation is not,
there my wish is, as now I have said, that Catholic people, but especially
Priests, whose example must instruct the rest, should yeald also of their
right for increase of their merit, and crown in heaven, and use all
playnesse, and sincerity in speech, and free discovering, not only of their
religion, but also of their state, where it is hurtful to none, but to
themselves: which yet I speak in that sense, and with that limitation, which
the holy Apostle did, when he said: That he gave counsel 1. (...). 7.
of himself, but no precept of our Lord. And for that this whole Treatise of
Equivocation has proceeded upon that question so often before repeated,
Whether a Priest being taken, may deny himself to be a Priest, or no, I shall
(...) down diverse circumstances, and considerations of the Case, whereby also
shall be made more plain, what my meaning is in this behalf.

4. When a Priest comes first into England with full intent and resolution to
offer his life if there be need, for the confession of Catholic Religion, and
is taken afterward, and brought before the Magistrate, either he is taken in
some man's house, of whose overthrow Diverse cases falling out in the examination
of priests.
he must be the cause if he confess that he is a priest, or be being taken
forth of any house; yet has he cause to suspect, and persuade himself, that
it may be known afterward by confession of others, that are also taken, or may
be taken, that he belongs to such, or such a house; and in these two cases
there is no doubt but that if he think, that his denying of himself to be a
priest, may save them from hurt, he is bound to deny the same with some kind
of lawful Equivocation, but without telling a lie, as Supra cap. 7. 8. 9. 10.
before at large has been declared. But if this priest should be taken in the
port, as he enters, or soon after in the high way or otherwise, and brought
before a Magistrate, so as his confessing himself to be a priest could not
prejudice any other, and presupposing that he is unlawfully demanded that
question, against law, reason, and religion, here is he at his own liberty to
deny or confess himself to be a priest, and no man can absolutely determine,
what were best for him to answer, but the spirit of God that speaks within
him, to whom Christ has promised to imparte such wisdom, Luc. ^^.
as is necessary for that time and action: yet if he were not a man of such
great extraordinary tale^ts, as by his loss or restraint, Gods cause were to
leese much, or that he were not sure by his denial to procure his liberty, or
that he might justly doubt that he should quickly come to be known in prison,
and thereby some scandal to arise to the simple, or ill affected by his denial;
In all these Cases I would think it more meritorious and of greater perfection
and edification Diverse consideration^.
to confess himself a priest without further denial, or declination, which I
speak not to condemn them, or their doings that being taken have done, or
shall do the contrary, for that they use but their own right, as has been
declared: but rather I speak it for information of others that may doubt of
the Case. Nor do we intend here to prejudice the most holy doctrine of S.
Athanasius, and other ancient Lib. de fuga sua.
Fathers of the lawfulnes of flight and escape in persecution, councelled by
Christ our Savior, and authorized Math. 10.
by the example of the Apostles themselves, and Act. 9.
namely of S. Paul, when he fled, and escaped out of a 2. Cor. 11.
window, and at an other time deluded the envious pursuit of his enemies by an
Equivocal speech to Act. 23.
the Pharisees, and Saducies, as before has been declared: but rather to show
that clear confession is somtymes also most commendable, and that in such a
time of trial, and of Crowns offered to Catholics, and especially to Priests
for the said confession of the Catholic faith as now is; no lawful occasion
is to be left for acquiring the same.

5. And this is so much as in this matter I had to advertise Catholics in the
Conclusion of this my answer, not meaning to descend into further perticulers
of actions and obligations that may fall out, which here are hard to be
determined; but only by the present circumstances of the time, place, and
matter in hand, with regard and respect unto the two principal virtues that
must govern us in these afayres, to wit, Truth, and Justice. Truth, that all
The two main virtues to be respected, Truth, and Justice.
manner of falsity and lying be utterly avoided: and Justice, that no injury be
done by us to Gods cause, our selves, or other men, which is the law of a just
man, and true servant of God, to be observed, whatsoever temporal hurtes, or
damages may ensue thereof.

6. And whereas my Adversary Thomas Morton, does conclude the very last lines of
his book with a fynall Charge again renewed of our Antichristian doctrines of
lying, and treason, and threatening us for the same, not fancyed fire of
Purgatory (says he) as for wood Conf. page 103.
and straw, but unquenchable hell-fyre, as for pitch, and tar, sulphur, and
powder; we shall more charitably conclude with him, wishing that his offenses
of malice, (...), and deceit discovered by us in this our Answer, may be wood
and straw, and that the fire prepared by Gods Justice for punishing the same
may be a purging fire, and not a consuming (...), or rather a consuming fire,
and not an vnconsuming fire, as that is of hell, which he threatens to us, but
in deed purchases to himself, by the course he hitherto holds.

7. And to this wish and prayer for him, I doubt not but to draw not only all
good, and pious Catholics that use it (...) for their enemies, and
persecutors, but the very Jesuits also, against whom he rages most bitterly,
even in the next precedent lines before his said conclusion, calling them the
Theological Alchimists of our time, that can extract aurum ex carbone, and
Mortons scoffs against Jesuits rejected.
the Monopolists of all (...) in whom notwithstanding he says, no art to be
singular, but that of Equivocation, and other such like intertaynments of his
uncivil Vrbanity, whereby he would seem to his Reader pleasant and ingenious;
but in deed makes himself ridiculous. For that all men know now, or at least
wise his Reader will by this our Answer, that the doctrine of Equivocation in
certain Cases, and with due circumstances, is not Alchimy of the Jesuits, but
the ignorance of Morton, and his fellows, who ascribe that unto them, as the
chife Authors, which was in use many hundred years before they were in the
world. And as for the Monopoly of arts, if he understand thereby, their
teaching above others of liberal Arts, and sciences in their schools
throughout Christendom, it is true in a certain sort, that this kind of
Monopoly, or preeminent labor may be granted unto their endeauours of their
Godly instruction and institution of youth. And happy had it been for Tho.
Morton, if he had been brought up under that Monopoly, for it is like he would
have had, if not more grace, yet more wit at least and understanding, then to
have objected unto them, as here he does, that no art is singular in them but
that of Equivocation, whereas the doctrine of Equivocation, as Catholics hold
it, and we before expounded it, is no art, but a sound position in Deuinity,
belonging to the direction of a good Conscience, against lying, whereof Morton
and his fellows have so learned the art, and The facility of lying in T. M. by
habit.
confirmed the habit thereof by repetition, and multiplication of so many acts,
as it flows now from them with as great facility in every occasion, as the
notes, and tunes of singing do from him, that has made a long habit therein, or
as the fingers of a musition, that without deliberation, or thinking of the
player do run their stoppes and perform their particular motions by virtue
of the habit before made and confirmed.

8. For proof of all this I refer my self to that which has been set down
in the former Chapters, and especially in the sixth, and so will here shut up
all this Treatise, adding only some few lines of advise and admonition, as well
unto mine Adversary, as also unto them whom he by his injurious and
slanderous sycophancy, has sought to draw into hatred and danger of the
State; and so to him I say, let him remember what the Justice of God does
menace, and threaten unto false accusers of their brethren, as have wrongfully
traduced so many innocent persons, as this fellow has, both in his Epistle to
the King, and Preface to the Reader, and throughout all his virule^t The (...)
behavior (...) T. M.
and spiteful Treatises, being three or four in number against all sorts of
Catholics, and the (...) body thereof, accusing them of most heinous
rebellions, and heathenish Equivocations, and for bloodthirsty men, and
speakers of lies without conscience: and himself (forsooth) to be a Minister
of simple truth, naked innocence, and to hate all lying and equiuocating even
from his very soul. But these things we have sufficiently I suppose laid open
before throughout this work, and have showed him (if I be not deceived) to be
one of the foulest, and most frequent liars, that ever (perhaps) set pen to
paper in these our days.

9. And now at this very instant having written hitherto, comes to my hands
the Catholic Treatise The Catholic Treatise of Equivocation (...) to sight.
it self of Equivocation before me^cyoned, against which Morton frames his
answer, and promises A full satisfaction in the title of his book; of which
Treatise not having been able to procure the sight until this time I find so
much occasion of new matter given thereby against the shifting falsehood of this
Minister, as I might dilate my self to the making of a new Treatise, if I
would pursue the particulers of his said deceipts and abuses therein offered. For
whereas he professes A full answer, and satisfaction, as has byr said, which
imports as much, as that he would answer it wholly and truly to the full
satisfaction of every indifferent Reader, he is so far of from performing
that, as he has not touched, or so much as mencyoned the tenth part thereof in
his answer, albeit the whole (...) it self be not large, nor conteyneth above
8. or 9. sheets of written paper: nay he does not so much as name or mention
diverse whole Chapters therein, and those which he does touch, he does it with
such art and subtility, skipping hither, and thither, forth and back, at
length, and crosse-wise, taking here a sentence, and there an other, as though
his principal care had been not to be understood, or at leastwise not to be
found out where he walks, whereof I shall give here some short taste, or note,
as it were, with the finger, whereby the rest may be coniectured. Stand attent
then gentle Reader, and mark his manner of answering.

10. First then to begin his confutation page 48. he A note upon the Answer
of T. M. to the Catholic Treatise of (...).
lays hands on the first words or title of the Preface, alleging thereof six
lines for his purpose, as for the ground of his whole workmanship, and then in
the same page he steppeth from the Preface to the fifth Chapter of the
Treatise, and takes thence three lines: then page 53. he recoyleth back to
the second Chapter cyting seven lines from thence: and page 55. he aduaunceth
himself forward again to the third Chapter, and produces an eleven lines:
and then in the very next leaf in two several times he draws from the same
Chapter some 9. lines; and after some ten pages of silence, cyteth 4. lines
more from the said third Chapter of his Adversaries Treatise, from whence
presently in the next leaf page 70. he gives a large leap to fetch 3. lines
out of the tenth Chapter, which is the last of all, and from thence in the next
(...) page 72. he runs back again to the 4. Chapter, and alleges but 7.
lines only: and page 73. five lines more; and page 78. 7. lines more out of the
said 4. Chapter: and then giving a stryde to the 8. Chapter page 80. he
brings thence (...) 3. lines to work upon; then page 85. gives a skipp back
to the 4. and 7. Chapters and out of them both draws some 6. or 7. lines
toward his buylding; and from hence again page 88. he stretches himself to
the tenth Chapter for some 3. or 4. lines to help himself withal; and page
93. and 99. for some 9. or 10. lines more, and with this ends his whole
answer.

11. And now consider prudent Reader what manner of full satisfaction this is,
that in so little a Treatise leaves out so principal parts unanswered, as
that of A consideration upon Mortons method of answering.
ten Chapters he omitteth wholly three without mention thereof, which are the
first, sixth, and ninth Chapters, and then in the other examineth the matter so
slenderly, as that out of the whole fifth Chapter he handles only three lines,
and out of the 7 scarce other three, and out of the second, but seven, and
none of all these Chapters are handled by him either in order or method as
they lie, or as they have connection together by designement of the Author; but
with skypping and leaping hither and thither, as has been showed. And the
chief and principal points thereof, which are very learnedly handled by his
Adversary, are either left out, and suppressed, or so weakly touched, the
difficultyes also so dissembled, and the reasons and authorityes alleged by
his Adversary so omitted or concealed, as a man may see that the Minister durst
not in deed come within the lystes of lawful combat, though as before you have
heard he vaunted greatly that he would.

12. And by this you may take some scantling of Thomas Mortons worth, what it
is, without (...) entrance into particulers of this Treatise, which are over
long for this place. If he reply, we may then perhaps examine the matter more
largely. Now I will conclude with him only with that admonition before
mentioned, that he consider how odious a matter it is, both in the sight of God
and man, to be so public a calumniator of his brethren, as he has showed
himself to be.

13. And as for the Catholics against whom his calumniations To the
Catholics.
are, small exhortation may serve to bear it patiently, and make their benefit
of it, for so much as all the whole streme of holy Scriptures, and exhortations
of the holy ghost does run above all other points to this end to comfort
godly men in this case, when lying lips, wicked tongues, slau^derous pens
opprobrious calumniations, and spiteful contumelyes do most insult against
them. For then is properly that time, and occasion whereof the Apostle speaks:
Cum 2. Cor. 4.
id quod in praesenti est momentaneum, and leave tribulationis (...), (...)
modum in sublimitate aeternum gloriae pondus operatur. When that which in this
present mortal life, is but momentary and light tribulation ( for what is more
light and momentary then the darts of wicked tongues, that pass with the
wynd?) does work notwithstanding ( being patiently borne) an eternal weight
of glory in heaven: Whereunto almighty God bring us all, and our enemies also,
if it be his holy will.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line fault Correction. 25. 20. my his. 74. 13. prison poison: 82. 1.
Reipublicae Respublica. 168. 4. our manner our name. 225. 18. assert assent.
252. 15. Faciendum Fatendum. 276. 30. dele way. 311. 28. fisted foisted. 317.
28. add dicitur. 385. 32. hominem hominum. 396. in titulo lege defend. 414.
25. refuge refuse. 436. 16. lives lies. 445. 4. is true is not true. 486. 16.
abe to be. 497. 29. aule rule.

Other lesser faults, it may please the gentle Reader himself of courtesy to
correct.

A TABLE OF THE PARTICVLAR MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK.
A
ADRIAN the fourth Pope, an Englishma^ by birth, cap. 2. nu 46. Egregiously
abused by Thom. Morton, ibid. Adultery when and how it may be concealed by
(...). cap. 20. nu. 37. Alexander Halensis his rigor against lying. cap. 7.
nu. 40. S. Ambrose abused and his text imbezeled by T.M. cap. 6. n. 17.
Amphibology how it differs from Equivocation. cap. 8. n. 10. Ananias and
Saphyra their fact discussed. cap. 11. n. 28. and 29. S. Anselme his
distinction between Truth and Falsity, cap. 8. number. 46. Approuers of
Equivocation in certain cases, who they be? cap. 7. n. 12 and cap. 10. number.
15. Their qualities and holiness of life. ibid n. 16. and 17. and cap. 9. n.
11. 12. 13. and deinceps. Archbishop of Canterbury (...) testimony of the
Primitive English Geneuians, cap. 1. n. 19. Archisynagoges daughter raised by
Christ, cap. 9. (...). 28. Aristotle his definition of Equivocation, ca. 8. n.
4. 5. 6. and 7. Aristotle Thomas Mortons Oracle of Logitians, cap. 8. n. 6.
Abused by him afterward, ibid. n. 5. 6. 7. and deinceps in aliis. locis.
Arrianisme whether favored by Calvin or not, cap. 6. part. 3. per totum.
Diverse Arrian speeches used by Calvin, ibidem nu. 77. S. Augustines definition
of Catholicum, Prefat. n. 16. His moderation about Heretics, and their
belieuers, cap. 2. n. 18. His severe sentence against them ibidem nu. 54. His
explication about heresy consummated in the understanding and not in the will,
cap. 6. n. 45. His definition of Truth, cap. 8. nu. 40. Item of a lie, ibid. n.
47. His authority alleged by F. Garnet at his arraignement for the lawfullnes
of Equiuocatio^, cap. 9. n. 52. and 54. His further authority for Equivocation,
cap. 10. n. 17. His case about a sickeman, cap. 11. n. 31. Abused notably by M.
Jewel, cap. 12. n. 30. and 31. and 34. Authors discourse against Cathol.
without name or truth of argument, Prefat. n. 13. 14. and 15. Azor the lesuite
falsified and corrupted by Thom. Morton. cap. 6. n. 48. and cap. 11. n. 18. His
discourse about Equivocation in an oath. cap. 10. n. 29. B
D. BARKELEY his writings against Protestants cap. 5. nu. 30. Bellarmine
notably abused by the Minister Morton. cap. 6. n. 27. 28. and 71. and alibi
(...). S. (...) abused by Perkins cap. 12. n. 61. 62. and 63. Betulia delivered
by the (...) of Judith, cap. 7. n. 27. Bishop of (...) somtymes temporal Lord
also of that City. cap. 4. n. 43. Books written by Protestants without name of
Author or truth, Prefat. n. 13. 14. and 15. S. Boniface an Englishman, Author
of the Canon Si Papa. cap. 5. n. 55. Falsified and abused by Tho. Morton, ibid.
43. D. Boucher calumniated and abused by T. Morton, cap. 2. n. 24. and 47.
Buckanan and Knox their wicked doctrine and revel in Scotland, cap. 4. n. 24.

C
CALVIN whether he denied Christ to be God of God, cap. 6. n. 53. His manner of
speech therein condemned by Bellarmine, ibidem, n. 56. 76. and 77. Whether he
favored Arrianisme, or not? cap. 6. part. 3. (...) totum. Diverse Arrian
speeches used by him, ibidem n 77. His inuectiue against the Ancient Fathers,
cap. 12. n. 23. Caluinian doctrine about obedience to Princes, cap. 1. n. 10.
11. 12. and postea. The pactice thereof by Protestants, ibidem. Carerius a
Lawyer abused egregiously by Th. Morton. cap. 5. n. 5. 6. 7. and cap. 6. n. 90.
Cassander the heretic his doctrine confuted, cap. 6. n. 67. Cases particular
of Equivocation, cap. 20. per totum. Catholics tolerable in a Protestant
state, cap. 1. per totum. Cause of setting forth this present book. cap. 3.
per totum. Celestinus Pope abused by M. Jewel, cap. 12. n. 41. Censure of
Thomas Mortons writings, cap. 3. n. 17. Charge of the Lord Cook against
Catholics at Norwich, cap. 12. n. 79. and 80. Charge of heresy against
Protestants by their own side, cap. 4. n. 11. Charke and Hanmer their
Equivocations, cap. 12. n. 55. and 56. and deinceps. Their Books against F.
Campian, ibidem. Charter of K. Kenulphus falsified by the Lord Cook, cap. 12.
n. 81. 82. and deinceps. Choice or election makes heresy, cap. 2. n. 20.
Christ his te^porall Kingdom, cap. 5. n. 18. Christ how he is our Judge, and
how not, cap. 8. n. 26. How he did feign to go further then the castle of
Emaus, cap. 9. n. n. 98. 72. and 73. His denial to ascend to the festival
day, ibid. n. 59. Cicero his doubtful answers, cap. 9. n. 33. and 34.
Commotion of Wales anno 1605. and for what cause, Pref. n. 7. and 8.
Comparison between the disobedience of Catholics and Protestants, cap. r. n.
27. Conference between two shameless Ministers. cap. 4. n. 47. Confession and
the secret thereof, cap. 10. n. 2. and 3. Equivocation lawful for not revealing
matters heard in Confession, ibidem. Consent of Emperors necessary for
gathering of Councels in oldtyme, and why, cap. 6. n. 33. Contention about the
expulsion of K. Ozias of Israel, cap. 6. n. 8. 9. 10. and 11. Contumacy
defined by Sayer the Benedictine, cap. 6. nu. 51. Coue^try case about the
plague cap. 10. n. 31. B. Cunerus abused by Thomas Morton, cap. 6. n. 47. 59. D
DAVID Q. Mary's Secrecary of Scotland murdered, cap. 1. n. 21. Definition of
Co^tumacy, c. 6. n. 6 Definition of Truth by S. Augustine, cap. 8. n. 40. Item
of a lie, ibidem nu. 47. Deposition of Princes by the lively word of God, cap.
4. n. 34 Deuinity deducted from age to age, cap. 9. n. 5. Increase thereof,
ibidem nu. 6. Schoole-Deuinity and positive their beginninges, ibid. nu. 7.
Deuinity speculatiue and moral. ibid. n. 8. Difference of contumacy and
pertinacy, cap. 6. n. 52. Disagreement between Protestants and Caluinists, cap.
2. n. 13. Dignity of Priesthood above Regalty, cap. 5. n. 4. 5. and deinceps n.
10. 11. and 12. Discourse against Catholics without name of Author or truth.
Prefat, n. 13. Disobedience compared between Catholics and Protestants, cap.
1. n. 27. Disputation of Plessis Mornay with the Bishop of Eureux, cap. 12. n.
53. and 54. Dissimulation when it is lawful and when not, cap. 11. n. 17.
Doctrine and practice of rebellion whether more in Catholics than
Protestants, cap. 1. n. 7. 8. 9. and deinceps. Dolman author of the Succession
egregiously abused by Th. Morton, cap. 2 n. 23. 34. and 35. E
ECCLESIASTICAL Supremacy in temporal causes, how it is to be understood, c.
6. n. 22. Sir Edward Cook his book of reports against Catholics, Pref. n.
9. and 10. His Paradox of English Kings, ibidem. His false and odious
assertions against Catholics, Ibid. n. 11. His Equivocations, ca. 12. n. 77.
vsque ad finem capitis. His notable fiction against Pius Quintus, ibid n. 78.
His Charge against Catholics at Norwich, ibid. n. 79. Emperors consent
necessary for gathering of Conncells in old time, and why, cap. 6. n. 33.
England her pitiful state at this day Prefat. n. 2. Equity of Catholic
doctrine tried by the effects, cap. 4. n. 13. Equivocation and the doctrine
thereof, how and when it is lawful, cap. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12. per totum.
How the same is defended, ibi. cap. 7. n. 2. 3. 4. The use thereof received for
400. years. ibid. n. 8. 9. 10. 11. and deinceps. The necessity thereof in
certain cases, ibid. n. 20. 21. and deinceps. Equivocation used by S. Paul,
cap. 7. n. 51, and alibi in diuersis locis. Equivocation what it is, cap. 8.
per totum. Equivocation of two sorts. ibi. number. 2. The definition thereof by
Aristotle, ibid. n. 5. 6. and 7. How it differs from Amphibology, ibid. n.
10. Equivocation mental and verbal, cap. 8. n. 3. and 12. Equivocation
defended by all foraine Cath. writers, cap. 9 n. 11. 12. 13. and deinceps. and
cap. 10. n. 15. Equivocation by reason and instinct of nature, cap. 9. n. 81.
Equivocation prejudicial to common conversation, cap. 10. number 23. Equivocation
in an oath, how and when it is lawful, cap. 10. n. 29. and 30. Equivocation in
Protestants stark lying, cap. 12. per totum. Equivocal and ambiguous
speeches of our Savior, cap. 8. n. 13. and 14. and cap. 9. n. 26. 27. 28. and
61. Examples of false dealing of Thomas Morton, cap. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and
12. per totum. Exasperations in England what they cause. Prefat. per totam. The
inconveniences that ensue thereby, ibidem. Exemption of Clergymen and Th.
Mortons notorious false dealing therein, cap. 6. n. 13. 14. 15. and deinceps.
Experience of time a good proof, cap. 7. n. 9. Extrauagant of Pope (...) the
eight falsified by Th. Morton, cap, 6. n. 43. F
MY FATHER is Greater then I, how ancient Fathers do understand the same, cap.
6. n. 100. and 101. Footinges of Protestants in periodes of antiquity, c. 5. n.
40. Fox his huge volume of Acts and Monumentes. cap. 12. n. 48. How he is
called the Father of lies, Ibid. The same confuted, Ibid. n. 50. and 52. Sir
Francis Hastinges his Equivocations, cap. 12. n. 66. 67. 68. and deinceps. His
vvillfull untruth about the poisoning of K. John. Ibid. His abuse of S.
Hierome, Ibid. n. 69. Fraud and Fallacy what they be, cap. 8. n. 48. 49. and
deinceps. Fraud and deceit of Thomas Morton in alleging all sorts of
Authors, cap. 2. n. 23. and 24. and cap. 5. nu. 5. 6. 7. and 49. and 53. and
per totum Caput Sextum, and deinceps per totum librum. G
F. GARNET his alleging S. Augustine for the lavvfulnes of Equiuocatio^, at
his arraignment, cap. 9. n. 52. and 54. Genesius Sepulueda his opinion of
Equivocation, cap. 9. n. 57. Abused notably by Tho. Morton. Ibidem. Giges-ringe
one of Thomas Mortons signs, cap. 11. n. 39. Gilby the Minister his doctrine
and immodest speech of K. Henry the 8. cap. 4. n. 35. (...) Cassander what he
was and his doctrine. cap. 6. n. 69. The same condemned by English
Protesta^tes. Ibid. n. 69. and 70. God cannot deceive or cooperate to an
untruth, cap. 7. n. 38. God how he permits men to be deceived, cap. 8. n.
54. and cap. 9. n. 77. Gods Ordination oftentimes joined with his permission,
cap. 9. n. 78. Goodman, and other English Protestants of Geneua their
doctrine, cap. 4. n. 16. 17. and 34. Gratian Collector of the Canon-lavv, cap.
9. n. 9. Gratians text corrupted and falfifyed by Thomas, Morton, cap. 2. n.
49. and 52. S. Gregory his authority for the lavvfulnes of Equiuocatio^, cap.
10. n. 18. Gregory de Vale^tia his Charge against Calvin for Arrianisme, cap.
6. n. 78. His authority for Equivocation, cap. 10. n. 16. H
HAMMOND his book of the Co^motion of Papists in Herefordshire an. 1605.
Pref. n. 7. Hanmer and Charke their books against F. Campian, cap. 12. n. 55.
Their Equivocations. Ibidem. n. 56. and 57. and deinceps. Hanniballs ten
prisoners their case set down by Cicero, cap. 11. n. 33. Heap of falsityes
together committed by Thomas Morton. cap. 5. n. 57. and 58. Henry the fourth
Emperor his submission to Pope Hildebrand at Canusium, cap. 6. n. 38. K. Henry
the 8. of England his Supremacy impugned by diverse Protestants, cap. 4. n. 35.
Heresy what it is, cap. 2. n. 19. Who is an heretic, Ib. n. 20. Heresy
consummated in the understanding and not in the will, cap. 6. n. 44. Heresy
cannot be decreed in the Cath. Church by Popes, as Popes. cap. 6. n. 63. M.
Horn his Equivocations. cap. 12. n. 43. D. Hunnius his book against Calvin,
cap. 6. n. 78. 80. His protestation and prayer against Caluinistes, Ibid. n.
98. His opinion about (...) writing against Arrians, Ibid. n. 103.

I
JACOB whether he lied or not in saying he was Esau, cap. 9. n. 34. B.
Iansenius his discourse about the feigning of our Savior to go further then
Emaus, cap. 9. nu. 73. Jewel Bishop of Salisbury his notable
lying-Equiuocation, cap. 12. nu. 12. 13. 14. and deinceps. His abusing and
railing against S. Augustine, Ibid. n. 30. 31. and 34. His Apostrophe in his
sermon at Paul's Cross, Ibid. n. 12. Impiety of Porphyrius the Apostata, cap.
9. n. 66. Incertainty of Salvation depends on our parts, cap. 11. n. 24.
Inconveniences of exasperation and despair, cap. 1. nu. 3. Insolences used
toward K. (...) of England by Protetestant-Ministers in Scotland, cap. 1. n.
24. Insurrections against lavvfull Princes by New-Ghospellers in our days,
cap. 1. n. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. and deinceps. Intention to deceive, a principal
clause in a lie, cap. 8. nu. 47. and 56. S. John Baptist his mental
Reservation, cap. 9. n. 18. 19. 20. and 21. His answer compared to the
answer of a priest in England, cap. 9. n. 23. and 24. John Calvin whether he
favored (...) or no? cap. 6. part. 3. per totum. His diverse Arrian speeches,
Ibid. n. 77. Whether he denied Christ to be God of God, Ibid. n. 53. His manner
of speech condemned by Bellarmine, Ibid. n. 56. 76. and 77. His extreme pride
and impiety, cap. 6. n. 97. Whether, and how he impugned the Arrians, cap. 6.
n. 102. Iosue his stratageme in taking the City of Hay by Gods appointment,
cap. 7. n. 25. Ironicall speech a kind of Equivocation, cap. 8. n. 16. K
KING Kenulphus his charter for Abindon-Monastery notably falsified by the Lord
Cook, cap. 12. n. 81. 82. and deinceps. Keys how they may signify authority
both temporal and spiritual, cap. 5. n. 37. King James of Great-Brittany his
speech in his Proclamation and Court of Parlame^t, Prefat. n. 16. His
moderation therein. ibidem. His affliction and molestation by Protestants in
Scotland, cap. 1. n. 23. 24. and 25. His judgment of English ministers notes
upon the Bible, cap. 4. n. 25. Kingly power or Priesthood in Christ whether
greater, cap. 5. n. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14. Knox his pestilent and wicked
doctrine against the sovereignty of Princes. cap. 2. n. 48. His Revel and
cruelty in Scotland against Catholics. cap. 4. n. 24. and 33. L
LAMBERTVS Scasnaburgensis abused by Thomas Morton, cap. 6. n. 37. S. Leo
notably corrupted by Thomas Morton, cap. 6. n. 19. 20. and 21. Lord of
Salisbury his book and answer to a threatening letter sent him anno 1605.
Pref. n. 18. and 19. The scope thereof, ibid. n. 20. 21. 22. and 23. How he was
deceived by his Deuyne, ibid. n. 20. and 21. Luthers wicked opinion of the
ancient Fathers when they make against him, cap. 12. n. 21. 22. and 23. Lying
and dissimulation how different from Equivocation. cap. 7. n. 34. S. Thomas his
severity against lying, ibid. n. 35. Item of the Master of Sentences ibid. n.
36. Lying defined by S. Augustine, cap. 8. n. 47. The essence thereof, ibidem.
Item by S. Thomas of (...), ibid. n. 56. and 57. M
MARTINUS de Magistris abused by M. Jewel, cap. 12. n. 36. Mental
reservation proved in S. John Baptiste his answer, cap. 9. n. 18. and 19.
Ancient Fathers their expositions for the same, ibid. nu. 20. and 21. Mental
reservation in diverse speeches of our Savior. cap. 8. n. 13. 14. and cap. 9.
n. 26. 27. 28. and 44. and 58. 59. 61. and cap. 11. number. 45. Metropolitan of
lying Metropolis, cap. 10. n. 33. Miters how they be above Crowns, cap. 5. n.
25. Murder of the Lord Darley K. of Scotland by Protestants, cap. 1. n. 21.
Murder of David Secretary to the Q. of Scotland, cap. 1. n. Ibid. Mysterious
speeches how they be Equivocal, cap. 9. n. 35. N
NATVRE of heresy and pertinacy, c. 6. n. 41. Necessity of Equivocation in some
cases, cap. 7. n. 20. 21. 22. and deinceps. Necessity not required to
perfection in many things, cap. 7. nu. 5. O
OATH what it is, cap. 8. number. 50. Oath of Supremacy in England and T. M. his
judgment thereof, cap. 6. n. 24. Obedience to Princes and doctrine thereof
delivered by Caluinistes, cap. 1. n. 10. Obstinacy necessary to make heresy,
and why? cap. 6 n. 43. Offers, and kind Offices of the Sea of Rome, toward
K. James of Great Brittany, cap. 2. n. 41. Old Testament a figure of the new,
cap. 5. number. 6. Opinion of Catholics for restrayning of evil Princes, cap.
5. n. 45. Opinion of foreign vvryters for the lavvfulnesse of Equivocation,
cap. 10. number. 15. Oracle of Logitians, cap. 8. number. 6. Orders of Religious men
that defend Equivocation, cap. 9. number. 14. Otho Frisingensis abused by T.
Morton, cap. 8. number. 36. Ozias King of Israel his expulsion, and contention
therabout, cap. 6. n. 8. 9. 10. and 11. P
PARLAMENTES their first beginning in England, cap. 12. number. 89. Perfection
requires not necessity in many things, c. 7. n. 5. Perkins the Minister his
equivocations, cap, 12. n. 58. 59. 60. and deinceps. His falsifying of S.
Bernard, ibid. n. 60. 61. and 62. Plessis Mornay his Equivocations, cap. 12. n.
72. 73. etc. His disputation with the Bishop of Eureux in France, ibid. n. 74.
75. His falsifying of Authors, ibid. Ponderations about the uncertainty of
Protestants doctrine, cap. 6 part. 3.. 4. per totum. Popes may and must be
deposed for heresy. cap. 5. n. 53. and cap. 6. n. 62. and 63. Pope less
dangerous without Superior, then many Princes, cap. 5. n. 61. Pope Pius Quintus
abused by the Lord Cook, cap. 12. n. 78. Pope Hildebrand slaundered by Th. M.
cap. 6. n. 33. and 34. The Emperors submissio^ unto him at Canusium, ibidem.
Porphyrius the Apostata his impiety, cap. 9. n. 66. Princes how they must
deposed by the lively word of God, cap. 4. n. 34. Prior James of Scotland made
Earl of Murrey, and Lord Protector of that Kingdom, cap. 1. n. 20. and 21.
Priesthood and the dignity thereof greater then Regalty, cap. 5. n. 32. and 33.
Two principal points thereof, ibid. n. 17. Priesthood and Kingly power in
Christ whether greater on earth, cap. 5. n. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 14. Proofs for
the lawfullnes of Equivocation, cap. 9. per totum. Prophesyes corrupted and
eluded by John Calvin, c. 6. part: 3.. 3. per totum. Propositions reserved, how
they be equivocal, and how not, cap. 11. n. 14. Protestants their books and
writings against Caluinistes, cap. 2. n. 12. 13. and deinceps.
Protestant-Princes many of them never molested by the Pope. cap. 2. n. 40. and
cap. 3. n. 8. Protestant-People more perilous then Popes. cap. 2. n. 44.
Protestants in what cases they may be subject to the penaltyes of heresies;
cap. 3. n. 9. Protestants charged with heresy by men of their own profession,
cap. 3 n. 12. and cap. 4. n. 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. Protestants footings in periods
of Antiquity, cap. 5. n. 40. Puritans condemned by Protestants and Protestants
by them, cap. 4. n. 9. Q
QVEENE Mary's of Scotland mother and daughter their afflictions by Protestants
cap 1. n. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. and 23. Queen Mary of England her government
impugned by Protestants, cap. 4. n. 28. 29. and 30. The conspiracy of Sir Thom.
Wiat against her, ibid. n. 37. Queen Elizabeth her government co^tradicted by
some Protestants at the beginning. cap. 4. n. 25. Quality and holiness of such
men as have admitted the use of equivocation for lavvfull, cap. 7. n. 16. and
17. R
REBELLION and doctrine of Protestants about the practice thereof, cap. 1. n. 6.
Rebellions against Q. Marie of England how they be ansvvered by Tho. Morton,
cap. 4. n. 29. 30. 31. and 32. Rebellions in Flaunders and Germany by
Protestants against their lawful Princes, cap. 4. n. 48. 50. 51. and 52.
Reseruations mental in Christ's speech, cap. 8. n. 13. and 14. and cap. 9. n.
26. 27. 28. and 44. Circumstances necessary to find out mental reseruations,
ibidem. Reseruations mental in Saint John Baptist, ibidem nu. 18. 19. and 20.
M. Reynoldes book of CaluinoTurcismus. cap. 2. n. 6. His collectio^ of modern
heresies, ibid. n. 8. Abused by Th. Morton, (...) number. 27. Royardus the
Franciscan abused by Th. Morton, cap. 7. n. 59. S
SSACRIFICE of Christians ceased in Alexandria, cap. 6. n. 20. Salmeron the
lesuite egregiously abused by Tho. Morton, cap. 5. n. 7. and cap. 6. n. 4.
Sayer the Benedictine falsified and corrupted by. Th. Morton cap. 6. n. 50. and
51. His Discourse about Equivocation in an oath. cap. 10. n. 30. Scarres of
infirmity in Tho. Morton, cap. 9. n. 39. Scottish-Ministers their absurd
positions and doctrine. c. 4. n. 23. Secretary David barbarously murdered in
Scotland, cap. 1. number. 21. Secret of confession, cap. 10. n. 2. 3. and 4.
Secrets of the Co^mon-welth, ibidem. n. 6. and 7. How Equiuocatio^ may be
lawful in defense thereof, ibid. n. 8. Sheep byters not tolerable in a
Common-welth, cap. 1. n. 4. Sociabylity in doctrine with Protestants not
sufferable. cap. 2. n. 5. Sotus the Deuyne abused and falsified by Th. Morton,
cap. 10. nu. 34. 35. and 36. D. (...) abused by Tho. M. cap. 2. n 25.
Stratageme of Iosue in taking the City of Hay, cap. 7. n. 25. Also of Eliseus
the Prophet, ibidem, n. 26. Of Judith in (...) Holofernes ibid. n 27. Supremacy
impugned by diverse Protestants in the beginning and why? cap. 4. n. 36.
Sutcliffe Deane of Excester and his notable shifting, cap. 4. n. 9. and 10. His
testimony of Protestants doctrine for deposing of Princes, ibid. n. 44. His
full and round Answer to the Three Co^uersions of England, how vain and
impertinent, cap. 5. n. 54. T
S. THOMAS of Aquin his severe sentence against lying, cap. 7. n. 35. Alleged
by T. M. against himself, cap. 11. number. 56. Sir Thomas Wiat his pretense
against Queen Mary, cap. 4. number. 37. Thomas Morton his book against Romish
doctrine, Pref. nu. 12. His maine drift and seditious scope therein, cap. 1. nu
1. 2. 3. and deinceps. The same confuted, Ibid. and alibi sape. His reasons
against the disloyalty of Catholics confuted, cap. 2. per totum. His
egregious abusing of all sorts of Authors, sacred and profane, cap. 2. nu.
23. 24. and 28. and cap. 5. number. 5. 6. 7. and nu. 49. and per totum libru^
deinceps. A Catalogue of his corruptions cap. 2. n. 57. and cap. 5. nu. 57. His
lending and borrovving of the Lord Cook, cap. 3. n. 2. His fond florishes,
Ibidem. n. 5. and per totum librum. His bad protectorshippe of Protestants,
cap. 3. nu. 13. His silly devise of flattery about the deposition of Kings,
cap. 4. nu. 26, and 27. Thomas Morton not able to defend his Religion from
heresy against his own Protestant brethren, cap. 4. number. 12. His Treatise of
the Popes Supremacy as head of Rebellion, confuted, cap. 5. per totum. His
great hypocrisy, cap. 5. number. 50. and vbique deinceps. His impudency, Ibid.
number. 58. His impertinent Reasons confuted, cap. 2. per totum. and cap. 5. number.
59. His conceit of the Oath of Supremacy in England, cap. 6. n. 24. and 25.
His notable abuse of ^ardinall Bellarmine, cap. 6. n. 27. and 28. Item the like
of Cardinal Tolet, Ibid. nu. 49. and alibi. His ten lies at a clap, c. 6. n.
64. His Oracle of Logitia^s, cap. 8. number. 6. His detestation of Equivocation,
but not of lying, cap. 8. number. 20. His Socraticall demaundes, ca. 9. number. 22.
His scarres of infirmity, cap. 9. number. 39. His Wanton and lascivious speeches,
Ibid. number. 60. His abuse of Doctor Genesius Sepulueda, cap. 9. number. 57. His
Couentry-case about the plague. cap. 10. nu. 31. His egregious impudency and
abuse of authors (...). Ib. nu. 32. and 33. His lying Metropolis, Ib. n. 33.
His book against Equiuocatio^ examined and ansvvered, cap. II. per totum. How
he impugneth himself, Ibidem. number. 13. His abusing of Azor, cap. II. n. 18.
and 19. His Punica fides about falsification, cap. II. nu. 36. His egregious
Cosenage, Ibid. number. 38. His absurd syllogismes, cap. II. number. 50. His
Apostolical defense against lying, cap. II. number. 61. and 62. Truth defined by
S. Augustine cap. 8. nu. 40. Three sorts or degrees thereof. Ibid. nu. 41.
Tumultes against lawful Princes practiced by Protestants, cap. 1. number. 13. 14.
15. and deinceps. Tumultes in Scotland, cap. 1. n. 20. 21. 22. 23. and 24.
Tyranny and Tyrants of two sorts, cap. 5. nu. 47. V
VALENTIA the Jesuit his Charge against Calvin for Arrianisme, cap. 6. n. 78.
His authority for the lavvfulnes of Equivocation, c. 10. n. 16. Vanity of
Thomas Mortons vaunt of Truth, cap. 6. n. 2. Vasquez his discourse about
pertinacy, cap. 6. n. 43. Venetians their disagreement with Pope Paulus
Quintus. cap. 5. number. 41. Uncertainty in Protestants doctrine, Cap. 5. nu. 46.
Use of Equivocation received by Cath. Doctors for 400. years, cap. 7. nu. 8. VV
VVHITTINGHAM deane of Durham his doctrine, cap. 4. number. 35. D. Whitaker his
absurd answer to Doctor Sanders, about the authority of Ancient Fathers, cap.
12. number. 26. Wiat his practice and conspiracy against Q. Mary of England, cap.
4. nu. 35. M. William Reynoldes his book of Caluino-Turcismus, c. 2. n. 6.
His collection of modern heresies, Ibid. number. 8. Abused by Tho. Morton, Ibid.
number. 27. VVitnesses how, and when they are obliged to speak the truth, cap.
10. nu. 25. and 26. Y
YESTVVERT the Printer his falsification in printing the Charter of K.
Kenulphus, cap. 12. nu. 88. Z
ZVINGLIVS the chief styrrer of Rebellion in the Cantons of Zuitzerland, c. 1.
number. 14. Slain. Ibid. Zuinglianisme impugned by Luther, cap. 2. nu. 15. and
16.

FINIS.

