THE LORD MARQVES IDLENESS: Containing manifold matters of acceptable devise; as
sage sentences, prudent precepts, moral examples, sweet similitudes, proper
comparisons, and other remembrances of special choice.

No less pleasant to peruse, than profitable to practice: compiled by the
right Honorable L. WILLIAM Marquis of WINCHESTER that now is.

Cicero ex Xenoph. Nec vero clarorum virorum post mortem honores
Permanerent, si nihil eorum ipsorum animi efficerent.
The honor of noble men could not remain after death,
If their minds should be idle and do nothing.
Scipio. Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus;
Nec minus otiosus, quam cum otiosus.
Imprinted at London, by Arnold Hatfield. 1586

DIEV ET MON DROIT



Floreat alma diu Princeps precor ELISABETHA.
R Roscida solatur rutilans vt gramina Titan, N
E Et radio exhilarat cuncta elementa suo: O
G Grata velut nutrix sic Anglis numina praebens, S
I Judith nostra (Deo praeside) clara viget. T
N Nobilis haec valeat, in scena hac, foemina semper, R
A Ac nectar gratum libet, in aetherea. A
ANGLIAE
TO THE HIGH, MIGHTY, AND HIS RIGHT GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN LADY, THE QVEENES
MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
THe Traveler (Right gracious SOVEREIGN) having bestowed some time in
surueying and observing the people, manners, and state of foraine countries,
upon return renders a reckoning of his time spent by report of the fruit and
effect received by his journey: whereby he gains unto himself the credit of
knowledge, and gives unto the hearer direction and comfort of travel. My
self having passed the morning tide of my Time (wherein I should have
conuersed with the learned for my better instruction) only in the vain
disports and pleasures of the field: And now at the Sun setting looking back
to view the benefit received thereby, do find the seed of pleasures to render
no fruit, and so by defect of learning, insueth the effect of Idleness, being
merely nothing. The profit of which experience, bestowed as a remembrance for
the better sort in their yoonger years, to mingle with their pleasures some
exercise of knowledge and learning, may happily produce in them an effect in
future time, whereby to conform themselves answerable to their degrees and
callings, both for the better performance of their duties unto the State, as
also for the administering of Justice in the weal public. For a magistrate
without learning is like unto an unskillful physician, who makes the whole
sick, and cures seldom the diseased: or rather more fitly compared with an
unlearned schoolemaister, who in steed of instruction gives correction. For as
he seldom well rules, who has not first duly obeyed: even so fails he
right to censure, who has not in him to discern betwixt right and wrong; the
offended, and the offense giver. As Idleness is the mother of ignorance, so is
it the nurse of aspiring and disloiall minds. Neither do I infer heerupon the
unlearned to be ill affected, but only the idle to be woorst disposed. And as
the qualities of Idleness are diverse, so are the effects accordingly; some end
in mischief, some others waste Time without profit, other some give good
instruction of reformation: which last of the three, is the whole sum of my
travel. For finding in my self the want of those ornaments and good parts of
learning which are requisite for the honorable, could wish others not to feed
the flower of their years with the vanities of Idleness, but to recompense the
benefit of time with some effect of knowledge, to the good of themselves, as
example of theirs. For in the perfection or type of man's life, the most that we
know is the least part of the rest whereof we are ignorant. My deceased
Grandfather (most gracious Soueraign) your Majesty's late officer and servant,
being a President unto his to shun Idleness and to perform their duties with
all loialtie and obedience passed many years in Court, as well to manifest the
humble desire of his dutiful mind toward his Princess, as also for the
instruction of his posterity to hold nothing (next unto the true knowledge and
fear of God) of like price, as the inestimable comfort of the good opinion and
favor of their Sovereign: whereof hoping, and by sundry assured experiments
finding no less from your Majesty toward me, as only proceeding from your
Highness gracious inclination and clemency, and not of any desert or my part
giving cause thereof; am thereby the rather emboldned most humbly to crave
pardon, as one by reason of many defects unable to perform that service which
in desire I wish, and in duty appertains, as chiefly acknowledging my self
greatly bound unto your Highness, in that your Majesty most graciously tendering
my long sickness and weak estate of body, would vouchsafe to license my late
absence from so special a cause of importance concerning the proceeding against
those unnatural and traitorous parts and practices, tending to the destruction
of your Majesty's sacred and royal person: sorowing the adverse event of my
health at the instant, especially such, as upon so firm an argument or token
of your Majesty's most gracious favor and good opinion conceived, not to be in
case by service to perform any thing answerable in desert to the least part of
so honorable a credit and fidelity reposed. But (right mighty and Sovereign
Lady) like as your Majesty of special grace has hitherto accepted my willing
and dutiful mind in lieu of action: Even so on my knee I humbly beseech the
continuance of so gracious favor, until my state of body will permit the
accomplishment (by service) of my humble good will and willingness. And albeit
my time spent has wrought no condign merit whereupon I should presume to
make this humble petition, neither does there proceed thereof any effect of
gratuitie worthy the view or acceptance of your Majesty: And though
discretion forbids me to present your Majesty with the fruit of my time
passed, as a remembrance by many degrees inferior and unfit to be offered to so
learned and prudent a Princess: yet dutiful good will, not having otherwise
to manifest it self upon experience of your Majesty's former graces,
comfort me of your highness favorable acceptance. Neither might I with
modesty presume to present your Majesty with so mere a trifle as the effect
of Idleness (for other title or term I may not woorthily give it, though in
truth it be the fruit of my time best spent, in respect of the residue more
vainly passed) were it so that upon return of my travel an journey taken in
the vanities of pleasures I had to report of better choice of commodity
received. And because Time requires me to render an account, (as whose Idleness
has been greater than of sundry others) and least my evil example might
withdraw the better disposed from the study and exercise of knowledge, I do
confess my error therein accordingly as the title of this Pamphlet gives
testimony, which approaching your Majesty's presence in so simple an habit,
craves pardon for so bold an attempt, as also becomes an humble petitioner
to be admitted to supply the place of his absent and diseased master, who in
all humility and loialtie of heart prostrateth himself at your Majesty's feet,
most humbly beseeching the continuance of your Highness former favors and
clemency, without which, neither he nor his shall be in case to perform such
offices as in duty and honor appertains. And thus acacknowledging my self
most bounden unto your right gracious and excellent Majesty, do according to
duty beseech the Almighty for the long continuance of your Majesty's
prosperous Estate and reign in all happiness and felicity.

Your Majesty's most humble and loiall subject, WINCHESTER.

To the friendly Readers.
THIS work is not entitled (my good friends) The L. Marquis Idleness for your
eyes to gaze on, or your minds to be amazed at, but as (by your leave) it may
be spoken by antiphrasin, so (by your patience) I discover no monster. In
showing an unnatural generation, happily you will imagine that Idleness can
bring forth no good action, and therefore an unkind issue, to be called by
the name of Idleness. But I answer, though your surmise or imagination may
engender such a report in the life of the L. Marquis: yet (you see) my
conception and delivery shows the contrary, in that I observed the former
idle time in reading and perusing the learned and wise, whose sentences and
good saiengs, I so greatly affected, that I did not only read them, but also
committed many of them to writing: which being done only for my own
recreation and benefit, I assure you (good Readers) was earnestly requested by
diverse my loving friends to make the same more manifest to the world, by
committing it to the press. In which doing, if I have neither done well, nor
satisfied your expectation, blame them that provoked my euulgation, and
deceived your hope, and yet for mine own part I will be excused by the title of
my book, which can warrant no more to you, than it afoorded to my self: which
is enough: if it keep you only from idleness, and yet I will assure you
something more, for you shall hear many wise, learned, and well experienced
men, which I have painefully requested to give you some advertisement. And if
your fantasies be not over curious, or your minds to scornful, I doubt not
but among so many variable blossoms, you may happily catch one savoring flower,
if not though it seems to be against all reason, that idleness can beget some
fruitful travel, yet you shall see a greater miracle, which is, that The
dead lives. I mean that they whose carcases are consumed many years since,
do now as it were, viua voce, speak, advertise, counsel, exhort, and
reprove, I assure you. I perused them to my no small contentation and delight,
not only to be instructed, but also to the end that idleness might not attach
me, whose great burden of vanities and suggestions, does not only surcharge us
with the manifold heap of sin, but also with the lamentable loss of golden
time, for (indeed) the want of some exercise brings us in open question with
the world, and in hazard of condemnation, either to be barren of knowledge, or
slow of will: for as the slanderer his tongue cannot be tied (though he
oftentimes utter follies) so the will of man should not be barren, whereby ill
toongs might be occasioned to take hold: and to say the truth, as we our selves
esteem not the knife that is rustie, nor account of the trees that are
fruiteles, so we must think that if men would not speak ill of our idleness,
very Time it self passing by our doors without entertainemet, would accuse
our life of sluggishnes, or condemn our consciences of contempt, and so we may
both stain our name, blemish our creation, and hazard our happy estate, that
when the judge of all judges shall hear the crime laid to our charge, our
consciences shall be assured to feel the gilte: therefore the great stay of
man's life requires labor, first in searching Gods word to know him, secondly
in bending of our endeavors for the benefit of our country, last of all by
looking into our selves, and beholding the great filth which most horribly
lies stinking in man's life, which for want of purge does oftentimes smell of
hypocrisy, ungodliness, uncharitableness, treason, devilish inventions and
wicked practizes, whereof satan has great store to plant in the idell soil.
Wherefore (my loving friends) I have done this for my self and for you, and
though I have not set it forth with profound learning, fined phrases, or
eloquent terms, which are expected but of wanton ears, yet I pray you allow
of me in mine old plain fashion, in the which if I cannot to your
contentation make sufficient show of mine assured good will, pardon my present
weakness being under the physicians hands, and I will with all my heart wish you
well, and commend you to the most highest. Basing this viij. of November.

Your loving friend WINCHESTER.

IN LAVDEM OPERIS HEXASTICON G. Chapter
Nobilis esto liber, quod te, tot philosophantes
Tanta, per antiquos, philosophia beat
Nobilior multo, quod tandem nobilis heroes,
Marchio Wintoniae, nobilitauit opus.
Nobilis es genitus; nutritus nobilitate es,
Et genus Appiadum nobile, te decorat.
The Table.
THe beginning of things. 1 The history of private men and of towns. 3
Adversity. 5 Ambition. 7 Captains. ibid. Covetousness. 8 Children and youth.
13 Counsel. 10 Death. 18 Discord and variance. 25 Envy. ibid. Evil and
wicked men, in which treatise all wickedness is contained. 27 Fame. 32 Folly.
34 Fortune. ibid. Friendship and friends. 36 Justice and punishment of God. 39
Justice and iusticers of this world, with judges. 40 Knowledge, wisdom,
foresight. 46 Law and ordinances. 50 Love. 51 Man and his life. 56 Mercy and
pity to the poor. 62 Obedience. 63 Patience. 64 Peace. 65 Pleasure. 66 Pride.
68 Princes. 69 Servants. 76 Slanderer. 77 Sorrow and grief. ibid. Tongue. 79
Time. 80 Wars. 81 Women. 82 good Works. 86 World and worldly prosperity.
ibid. Many pretty saiengs. 93
THE LORD MARQVES IDLENESS.
The beginning of beginnings.
THE first homicide of the world was Cain.

The first that died in the world was Abel.

The first that was blind in the world was Lamec, as some learned have
collected.

The first that builded was Enoc in the fields of Edon.

The first musician was Tubalcain.

The first sailer was Noe.

The first tyrant was Nemrod.

The first priest was Melchisedec.

The first Duke (as some affirm) was Moises.

The first that was called by the name of Emperor was Julius Caesar.

Thales was the first that found out the pole called the North star to sail
by: and the first that found out the division of the year, the quantity of
the sun and moon: and also said that souls were immortal. He would never
marry for the care to content his wife, and the thought to bring up his
children.

He was asked what God was. A definition of God.
He answered; Of al antiquity God is the most ancient thing: for all the
ancients past never saw him take beginning, nor those that shall come after
shall never see him have ending.

He was asked what thing was most beautiful. He answered; The world, because
no artificial painting could make the like.

Again, what was the greatest thing. He answered; Place, wherein all things do
stand: for the place which contains all must needs be greater than all.

Again, he was demanded what knew most. He answered; Time: because time was
the inuentor of new things, and that which renews the old.

What was the lightest thing He answered: The wit of man, because without
danger it passed the sea to discover and compass the whole earth.

Again, what was the strongest. He answered; The man that is in necessity:
for necessity reuiueth the understanding of the rude, and causes the coward
to be hardy in peril.

What was the hardest thing to know. He answered; For a man to know himself:
for there should be no contentions in the world if man did know himself.

What was the sweetest thing to obtain. He answered; Desire; for a man
reioiceth to remember the pains past, and to obtain that which he desires
present.

The life of Philosophers.
THe Philosophers lived in so great poverty, that naked they slept on the
ground: their drink was cold water: none amongst them had any house proper:
they despised riches as pestilence: and labored to make peace where discord
was: they were only defenders of the common wealth: they never spoke any idle
thing, and it was a sacrilege among them to hear a lie: and finally it was a
law inviolable amongst them, that the Philosopher should be banished that did
live idly: and he that was vicious should be put to death.

Only Epicurus gave himself to a voluptuous and beastly kind of life, wherein
he put his whole delight, affirming there was no other felicity for slothful
men, than to sleep in soft beds: for delicate persons to feel neither heat
nor cold: for fleshly men to have at their pleasures amarous dames: for
drunkards not to want any pleasant wine, and the gluttons to have their fill of
all delicate meat: for heerin he affirmed to consist all worldly felicity.

A principality of things.
THe taste of all tastes is bread.
The savor of all sauors is salt.
The love of all loves is from the father to the child.
The histories and lives of private men, together with the report of countries
and towns.
PHalaris was deformed of face, purblind, Ovid.
and exceeding covetous: never observed any thing that he promised: he was
unthankful to his friend, and cruel to his enemy. Finally, A tyrant.
he was such a one that the tyrannies that were severally scattered in others,
in him alone were altogether assembled: one only good thing was there in him;
that he was a fauorer of wise men. And in 36. years they never found that any
man sat at the table with him, spoke unto him, or slept in his bed: nor that
any man saw in his countenance any mirth, unless it were some Philosophers or
sage men, with whom and to whom he liberally put his body in trust.

Perillus being borne in Athens, Perillus.
and also being very excellent in metals, came to Phalaris the tyrant, saying:
that he would make such a torment, that his heart should remain revenged, and
the offender well punished. This workman made a bull of brass, wherein there
was a gate by the which they put the offender in, and putting fire under the
bull, it rored in manner as it had been a live bull, which was not only a
horrible and cruel torment to miserable creatures that endured it, but also it
was terrible to him or those that saw it. Phalaris therefore seeing the
invention of this torment, whereof the inuentor had hoped great reward,
provided that the inuentor of the same should be put within the bull: and that
the cruelty of the torment should be experimented on none other, saving in the
inuentor: showing himself therein rather a merciful prince than a cruel
tyrant.

Rome that in times past was a receipt of all the good and virtuous, Rome.
is now made a den of all thieves and vicious, I fear me least in short time
will have some sudden and great fall.

Cornelia of Rome said; A report of Rome long since, and found true now.
You shall see justice corrupted; the common weal oppressed; lies blown
abroad; the truth kept under; the Satires silent; flatterers open mouthed; the
infamed persons to be Lords, and the patient to be servants: and above all and
worse than all to see the evil live in rest and contented, and the good
troubled and despised.

If thou will enioie rest in thy days, Diogenes declaration.
and keep thy life pure and clean, thou must observe these three things.

First honor God: Honor God.
for he that does not honor him in all his enterprises shall be unfortunate.

Secondly, be diligent to bring up thy children well: Bring up thy children well.
for a man has no enemy so troublesome as his own son, if he be not well
brought up.

Thirdly, Gratitude.
be thankful to thy good benefactors and friends: for the man that is
unthankful, of all the world shall be abhorred. And the most profitable of
these three (although most troublesome) is for a man to bring up his children
well.

Rome never decayed until the senate was replenished with wise serpents,
Decaie of Rome.
and destitute of simple doves.

As thou have by tyranny made thy self Lady of Lords: Rome.
so by justice thou shall return to be the servant of servants. Why art thou
at this day so dear of merchandise, and so cheap of folly?

Marcus to his schoolmaister said; A schoolmaister his office.
My duty is to see that you be good, and your duty is to travel that your
disciples be not evil: for young men on the one part being evil inclined, and
on the other evil taught, it is impossible but in the end they should be
vicious and defamed: for there is no man so weak, nor child so tender, but the
force which he has to be vicious, is enough (if he will) to be virtuous. For
there is more courage required in one to be evil, than strength is required in
an other to be good: for to the master it is greater treason to leave his
scholar amongst vices, than to deliver a fort into the hands of enemies: for
the one yields the fort which is but of stones builded, but the other
aduentureth his son, which is of his own body begotten.

Adversity.
IF there could be found any estate, any age, any land, any nation, realm or
world, wherein there has been any man that has passed this life without
tasting what adversity was, it should be so strange to hear of, that by
reason both the dead as living should envy him.

In the end I find, that he that was yesterday rich, Misery in man's life.
to morrow is poor: he that was yesterday whole, is to day sick: he that
yesterday laughed, to day weepeth: he that had his hearts ease, I see him now
sore afflicted: he that was fortunate, is now unlucky: he that was yesterday
alive, is this day buried in the grave.

One thing there is that to all men is grievous, and to those of understanding
no less painful. Which is, That the miseries of this wicked world are not
equally divided, but that oftentimes the calamities and miseries of this world
lies on one man's neck only: for we are so unfortunate, that the world gives
us pleasures in sight, and troubles in proof.

These are the miseries incident to man. The grief of his children, Outward
miseries.
the assaults of his enemies: the opportunity of his wife: the wantonness of his
daughters: sickness in his person: great loss of his goods: general famine
in the city: cruel plagues in his country: extreme cold in Winter: noisome
heat in Summer: sorrowful death of his friends: the envious prosperity of his
enemies. Finally, man passes so many miseries, that sometimes bewailing the
woeful life, he desires the sweet death. If man has passed such things
outwardly, what may be said of those which he has suffered inwardly: Inward
miseries.
for the travels which the body passes in 50. years, may be well accounted in
a day, but that which the heart suffers in one day cannot be counted in an
hundred years.

It is not to be denied but that we would account him rash which with a reed
would meet one with a sword, Rashness.
and him for a fool that would put off his shoes to walk upon thorns: so
without comparison he ought to be esteemed the most fool that with his tender
flesh thinks to prevail against so many evil fortunes: for without doubt the
man that is of his body delicate, passes his life with many miseries.

The wounded hearts oftentimes utter the pains which they feel without any hope
to receive comfort of that which they desire.

He is no man borne in the world but rather a fury bred up in hell, that can
at the sorrow of another take any pleasure.

Ambition.
IT chances often to ambitious men that in their greatest ruff, Careless of
life.
when they think their honor spoon and wouen, that their estate with the web
of their life in one moment is broken.

The desire of men considered what things they procure, and whereunto they
aspire, I marvel not though they have so few friends; but I much muse they
have no more enemies. Blind that they see not their friend.
In things of weight they mark not who has been their friend, they consider
not that they are their neighbors, neither do they regard that they are
Christians, but their conscience laid apart, and honesty set aside, every man
seeks for himself and his own affairs, though it be to the prejudice of
another.

Captains and valiantmen.
Captains that go to the wars should not be cowards, for there is no like
danger to the common wealth, nor no greater slander to the prince, than to
commit charge to such in the field which will be first to command and last to
fight.

As captains should show themselves in the beginning cruel, so after victory
had of their enemies, they should show themselves pitiful and meek.

That captain is more to be praised which wins the hearts of his enemies in
his tents by good example, than he which gets the victory in the field with
shedding of blood.

The stout and noble heart for little favor showed unto him, Favor encorageth
forward.
binds himself to accomplish great things.

He ought to be called valiant that with his life has won honor, Valiant.
and by the sword has gotten riches.

What greater vanity can there be than that captains for troubling quiet men,
For evil acts they are gloriously received.
destroying cities, beating down castles, robbing the poor, enriching tyrants,
carrying away treasures, shedding of blood, making of widows, taking of noble
men's lives, should in reward and recompense be received with triumph?

Covetousness, and Covetous men.
THat covetousness is great which the shame of the world does not oppress,
neither the fear of death does cause to cease.

The covetous man seeks care for himself, What the covetous man procures.
envy for his neighbors, spurs for strangers, bait for thieves, troubles for
his body, damnation for his renown, unquietness for his life, annoiance for
his friends, occasion for his enemies, maledictions for his name, and long
suits for his children.

All naturally desire rather to abound, than to want, and all that which is
greatly desired, with great diligence is searched, and through great travel is
obtained; and that thing which by travel is obtained, with love is possessed;
and that which by love is possessed, with as much sorrow is lost, bewailed, and
lamented.

The heart that with covetousness is set on fire, cannot with woods and bows of
riches, but with the earth of the grave be satisfied and quenched.

God to the ambitious and covetous hearts gave this for a pain, that neither
with enough nor with too much they should content themselves.

Thales being demanded what profit he had that was not covetous, Riches
tormenteth.
he answered; Such a one is delivered from the torments of his desire; and
besides that he recouereth friends for his person, for riches torment him
because he spends them not.

Greedy and covetous hearts care not though the prince shuts up his heart,
so that he open his cofers: but noble and valiant men little esteem that which
they lock up in their cofers, so that their hearts be opened to their friends.

Periander had in him such liuelines of spirit on the one side, Governor in
Greece.
and such covetousness of worldly goods on the other side, that the
Historiographers are in doubt whether was greater the Philosophy that he
taught in the schools, or the tyranny that he used in robbing the common
wealth.

I am in doubt which was greater the care that virtuous princes had in seeking
out of Sages to counsel them, or the great covetousness that others have at this
present to purchase themselves treasures.

Liberty of the soul, and care of goods in this life, never agree together.

The prince which is covetous, is scarce of capacity to receive good council.

When covetousness grows, Justice falls; force and violence rules;
snatching reigns; lechery is at liberty; the evil have power, and the good
are oppressed. Finally, all do rejoice to live to the prejudice of another, and
every man to seek his own private commodity.

What love can there be betwixt covetous persons, Love betwixt covetous persons.
seeing the one dare not spend, and the other is never satisfied to hoord and
heap up?

The heart that is overcome with covetousness will not fear to commit any
treason. Treason.


If the covetous man were as greedy of his own honor, as he is desirous of
another man's goods, the little worm or moth of covetousness would not gnaw the
rest of their life, nor the canker of infamy should not destroy their good
name after their death.

It is as hard to satisfy the heart of a covetous man, Insatiable.
as it is to dry the water of the sea.

Counsel.
NOtwithstanding thou being at the gate of care, reason would that some should
take the clapper to knock thereat with some good counsel: for though the
rasor be sharp, yet it needs sometimes to be whet. I mean, though man's
understanding be never so clear, yet from time to time it needs counsel.
Virtue straieth where counsel fails.
Virtuous men oftentimes do err, not because they would fail, but because the
things are so evil of digestion that the virtue they have, suffiseth not to
tell them what thing is necessary for their profit. For the which cause it is
necessary that his will be kindled; A remedy.
his wit fined; his opinion changed; his memory sharpened; and above all now
and then, that he forsake his own advise and cleave to the counsel of another.

The world at this day is so changed from that it was wont to be in times
past, that all have the audacitie to give counsel, and few have the wisdom to
receive it.

If my counsel be worth receiving, prove it; if it does harm, leave it; if
it does good, use it; for there is no medicine so bitter that the sick does
refuse to take, if thereby he think he may be healed.

I exhort and advise thee that thy youth believe mine age; An exhortation.
thine ignorance, my knowledge; thy sleep, my watch; thy dimnes, my cleernes
of sight; thine imagination, my virtue; thy supicion, mine experience:
otherwise thou may hap to see one day thy self in some distress, where
small time thou shall have to repent, and none to find remedy.

If thou will live, Government
as young; thou must govern thy self, as old.

If any old man fall for age; Old age should not despise the counsel of youth.
and if thou find a young man sage, despise not his counsel: for bees do draw
more honey out of the tender flowers, than of the hard leaves.

Plato commands that in giving politic counsel it be given to them that be
in prosperity, to the intent that they decay not: and to them that be in
heaviness and trouble, to the intent that they despair not.

Happy is that common wealth, and fortunate is that prince that is Lord of
young men to travel, and ancient persons to counsel. Many things are cured
in time, which reason afterward cannot help.

No mortal man take he never so good heed to his works, nor reason so well in
his desires; but that he deserves some chastisement for some cause, or
counsel in his doings.

The examples of the dead do profit good men more to live well, than the
counsel of the wicked provoke the living to live evil.

Men ought not in any thing to take so great care, as in seeking of counsel
and counselors: for the prosperous times cannot be maintained, nor the
multitude of enemies resisted, if it be not by wise and grave counselors.

Thales being demanded what a man should do to live uprightly, Spendals that
leave none for themselves are bankrupts in the end.
he answered; To take that counsel for himself which he gives to another:
for the undoing of all men is, that they have plenty of counsel for others,
and want for themselves.

He shall never give to his prince good nor profitable counsel, Note.
which by that counsel intends to have some proper interest.

He is not counted sage that has turned the leaves of many books: but he
which knows and can give good and wholesome counsel.

Anacharsis said; Corruption to be shunned.
Thou shall promise me not to be importune with me to receive any thing of
thee: for the day thou shall corrupt me with gifts, it is necessary that I
corrupt thee with evil counsel.

It is easy to speak well, and hard to work well: for there is nothing in
the world better cheap than counsel.

By the counsel of wise men that thing is kept and maintained, which by the
strength of valiant men is gotten.

Ripe counsels proceed not from the man that has traveled into many
countries, but from him that has felt himself in many dangers.

It is impossible that there should any misfortune happen whereas ripe counsel
is. Good counsel auoideth mishap.


To give counsel to the wise man, it is either superfluous, One wise to
counsel an other.
or comes of presumption though it be true: yet I say in like manner, that the
diamond being set in gold loses not his virtue, but rather increases in
price: so the wiser that a man is, so much the more he ought to know and desire
the opinion of others, certainly he that does so cannot err: for no man's own
counsel abounds so much, but that he needs the counsel and opinion of
others.

We ordain that none be so hardy to give counsel, unless therewith he give
remedy: for to the troubled heart words comfort little, when in them there is
no remedy.

The woman is hardy that dare give counsel to a man; Women's counsel.
and he more bold that takes it of a woman: It is meant but of the common sort.
but I say he is a fool that takes it; and he is a more fool that asks it;
but he is most fool that fulfilleth it.

Children and youth.
IT is better to leave unto children good doctrine whereby they may live,
Childrens inheritance.
than evil riches whereby they may perish. And the cause is that many men's
children have been through the hope they had to inherit their fathers goods,
undone, and afterward gone a hunting after vices: for they seldom do any
worthy feats, which in their youth inherit great treasures.

It is better to have children poor and virtuous, than rich and vicious.

To be poor or sick is not the greatest misery, A great felicity to parents
to see virtuous children.
neither to be whole and rich is the chiefest felicity: for there is no such
felicity to fathers to see their children virtuous.

It is an honor to the country that fathers have such children that will take
profit with their counsel: and contrariwise, that the children have such
fathers as can give it them.

The father ought to desire his son only in this cause, that in his age he
may sustain his life in honor: and that after his death he may cause his same
to live. Duty of children.
If not for this, at the least he ought to desire him, that in his age he may
honor his head, and that after his death he may inherit his goods. But we see
few do this in these days, except they be taught of their parents the same in
youth: for the fruit does never grow in the harvest, unless the tree does
bear blossoms in the spring.

Too much liberty in youth is no other but a prophecy, Liberty in youth.
and manifest token of disobedience in age.

It is a grief to see, Parents great care quickly wasted
and a monstrous thing to declare the cares which the fathers take to gather
riches, and the diligence that children have to spend them.

There can be nothing more unjust, than that the young and vicious son should
take his pleasure of the sweat of the aged father.

The father that instructs not his son in virtue in his youth, is less
blamewoorthie if he be disobedient in age.

It is a good token when youth before they know vices, have been accustomed to
practice virtue.

It is pitiful to see, Sensuality in children.
and lamentable to behold a young child how the blood does stir him; the flesh
provoke him to accomplish his desires; to see sensuality go before, and he
himself to come behind; the malicious world to watch him; and how the devil
does tempt him; and vices blind him; and in all that is spoken to see the
father so negligent, as if he had no children: where indeed the old man by the
few virtues that he had in his youth might easily have known the infirmities,
as vices wherewith his son was compassed.

If the expert had never been ignorant; if the fathers had never been children;
if the virtuous had never been vicious; if the fine wits had never been
deceived; it had been no marvel though fathers were negligent to bring up their
children.

Little experience excuses men of great offenses; but since thou art a father,
Experience the best school. master.
and first a son; since thou art old, and have been young: and besides all
this, pride has inflamed thee; lechery has burned thee; wrath has wounded
thee; negligence has hindered thee, and gluttony surfeited thee: tell me since
so many vices has reigned in thee, why have thou not an eye to the child of
thine own blood begotten?

It is impossible that the child which with many vices is assaulted, and not
succored, but in the end he should be infamed: and to the dishonor of the
father most wickedly overcome.

It is not possible to keep meat well sauored, unless it be first salted: it
is impossible that fish should live without water: it is not unlikely, but the
rose which is ouergrowen with the thorn should wither: so is it impossible
that fathers should have any comfort in their children, unless they instruct
them in virtue of their youth.

The Lydes ordained a law, Inheritance belonged not to the eldest, but to the
most virtuous.
that if a father had many children, that the most virtuous should inherit
the goods and riches, and if they be vicious no one to inherit: for the goods
gotten with travel of virtuous fathers ought not by reason to be inherited with
vicious children.

I do not marvel that the children of princes and great Lords be adulterers,
and belly gods: for that on the one part youth is the mother of idleness, and
on the other little experience is the cause of great offenses: and which more
is, the fathers being dead, the children inherit the fathers goods being with
vices laden, as if they were with virtues endued.

The instructors and teachers of youth ought to be informed what vices or
virtues their children are most inclined unto, and this ought also to be to
encourage them in that that is good, and contrary to reprove them in all that
is evil.

The more a man gives a noblemans son the bridle, the more hard it is for
them to receive good doctrine.

Augustus the Emperor said to the senate; If my children will be good, they shall
sit hereafter where I do now: but if they be evil, I will not their vices be
reverenced of the senators: for the authority and gravity of the good ought
not to be employed in the service of those that be wicked.

What a thing it is to see the son of a laborer, Difference betwixt the poor
man's son and the rich.
their coat without points; their shirt torn; their feet bare; the head
without a cap; the body without a girdle; in summer without a hat; in winter
without a cloak; eating course bread; lieng on straw or on the earth: and in
this state so well given and virtuous, that diverse do wish to have such a son.

On the other side, to behold noble men's sons brought up and nourished
between Holland sheets laid in a costly cradle, shaped after the new fashion;
they give the nurse what she will desire; if perchance the child be sick they
change the nurse, or appoint him a diet; the father and mother so careful and
diligent, that they sleep neither night nor day: all the house watches:
eats nothing but the broth of chickens; asks nothing but it is given him
immediately. It is a world to see the waste that a vain man makes in bringing
up his child; specially if he be a man somewhat aged, and that has at his
desire a child borne: he cease not to spend so much of his goods in bringing
up of him wantonly while he is young, that oftentimes he wants to marry him
when he comes to age.

The poor brings up his children without the prejudice of the rich, and to
the profit of the common wealth; but the rich brings up his children with the
sweat of the poor, and to the damage of the common wealth: it is reason
therefore that the Wolf that deuoureth us should die, and the sheep which
clotheth us should live.

Oftentime^s parents for tenderness will not have their children brought up in
learning; Negligence in educating children.
saying, there is time enough and leisure to be taught. And further to excuse
their error, they affirm if the child should be chastened, it would make him
both sick and foolish. But what is their end, they become slanderous to the
common wealth: infamous and disobedient to their parents: so evil in
conditions: so light and unadvised in behauior: so unmeet for knowledge: so
inclined to lies: so envying the truth, that their fathers would not only have
punished them with sharp correction, but also would rejoice to have them
buried out of the way.

Whilst the Palm tree is but young and little, a frost does easily destroy
it: so whilst the child is young if he have not a good tutor, he is easily
deceived with the world.

It is impossible that in any city there be a good common wealth, except they
be careful for the well bringing up of children.

The cause is the covetousness of the master, Why many noble men's children are
wicked.
who suffers their pupils to run at their own wills when they be young, to the
end to win their hearts when they be old, so that their extreme covetousness
causes rich and good men's sons to be evil and vicious.

The father is bound no more toward his child but to banish him from his
pleasures, Duty of parents.
and to give him virtuous masters.

All the virtues that young men do learn, does not them so much profit, as
one only vice does them hurt if they do thereto consent.

Children ought not to use any pastime except there be therein contained some
commendable exercise: Play in youth.
for if in youth he dare play a point, it is to be feared when he comes to
years he will play his coat.

Play is not forbidden young children for the money that they lose, but for the
vices they win thereat, and corrupt manners which thereof they learn.

Of young men light and unconstant, comes oftentimes an old man fond and
unthrifty: What is laid in youth is hatched in age.
of too hardy, comes rebellious and seditious persons: and of
unshamefastness, slanderous persons.

What avails children to be fair of countenance; well disposed of body;
lively of spirit; white of skin; to have yealow hairs; to be eloquent in
talking; profound in science: if with all these that nature gives them they be
bold in that they do, and shameless in that they say?

Sensuality and evil inclination of the wanton child, Sensuality remedied.
ought to be remedied by the wisdom of the chaste master.

The trees that bud and cast leaves before the time come, hope is never to eat
of their fruit in season: so when children haunt the vice of the flesh whilst
they be young, there is small hope of goodness to be looked for in them when they
be old: for the older they wax, the riper be their vices.

Masters would correct the child, but fathers and mothers forbid them. Little
avails one to prick the horse with the spur, when he that sits upon him
holds back with the bridle.

Of Death.
O If we would consider the corruption whereof we are made; the filth whereof we
are engendered; the infinite travel whereunto we are borne; the long tediousnes
wherewith we are nourished; the great necessities and suspicions wherein we
live; and above all the great peril wherein we die; we find a thousand
occasions to wish death, and not one to desire life.

The excellency of the soul laid aside, and the hope which we have of
eternal life, if man do compare the captivity of men to the liberty of
beasts: with reason we may see that the beasts do live a peaceable life, and
that which man does lead, is but a long death.

I had rather choose an unfortunate life and an honorable death, What death is
better than life.
than an infamous death and an honorable life.

That man which will be accounted for a good man, and not noted for a brute
beast, ought greatly to travel to live well, and much more to die better: for
that evil death makes men doubt that the life has not been good, and the
good death is an excuse of an evil life.

The dead do rest in a sure haven, and we sail as yet in raging seas.

If the death of men were as beasts, that is to wit, that there were no furies
nor devils to torment them, and that God should not reward the good: yet we
ought to be comforted to see our friends die if it were for none other cause,
but to see them delivered from the thraldom of this miserable world.

The pleasure that the Pilote has to be in a sure haven; the glory that the
captain has to see the day of victory; the rest that the traveler has to
see his journey ended; the contentation that the workman has to see his work
come to perfection; all the same have the dead, seeing themselves out of this
miserable life.

If men were born always to live, it were reason to lament them when we see
them die: Whom we should mourn for.
but since it is truth that they are borne to die, we ought not to lament those
which die quickly: but those which live long, since thou know he is in place
where there is no sorrow but mirth; where there is no pain but ease; where he
weepeth not but laugheth; where he sigheth not but sings; where he has no
sorrows but pleasures; where he fears not cruel death but enjoys perpetual
life.

The true widow ought to have her conversation among the living, and her desire
to be with the dead.

Death is the true refuge; the perfect health; the sure haven; the whole
victory: finally after death we have nothing to bewail, and much less to
desire.

Death is a dissolution of the body; A definition of death.
a terror to the rich; a desire of the poor; a thing inheritable; a pilgrimage
uncertain; a thief of men; a kind of sleeping; a shadow of life; a separation
of the living; a company of the dead; a resolution of all; a rest of travels;
and the end of all idle desires.

If any damage or fear be in him who dies, it is rather for the vice he has
committed, than fear of death.

There is no prince nor knight, rich nor poor, whole nor sick, luckie nor
unlucky, with their vocations contented, save only the dead which are in
their graves at rest and peace.

If in youth a man live well, and in age study to die well, and his life has
been honest; his hope is that death will be joyful: and although he has had
sorrow to live, he is sure he shall have no pain to die.

This equal justice is distributed to all, that in the same place where we have
deserved life, in the same we shall be assured of death.

Cato being praised of the Romans for his courage at his death; laughed: they
demanded the cause why he laughed; A worthy saying.
he answered, Ye marvel at that I laugh, and I laugh at that you marvel: for
the perils and travels considered wherein we live, and the safety wherein we
die, it is no more needful to have virtue and strength to live, than courage
to die.

We see shamefast and virtuous persons suffer hunger, cold, thirst, travel,
poverty, inconvenience, sorrow, enmities and mishaps, of the which things we
were better to see the end in one day, than to suffer them every hour: for it
is less evil to suffer an honest death, than to endure a miserable life.

The day when we are born, is the beginning of death; and the day wherein we
die, is the beginning of life.

If death be no other but an ending of life, and that whiles we live we carry
death; than reason persuades us to think that our infancy dies, An
excellent reason.
our childhood dies, our manhood dies, and our age shall die; whereof we may
conclude that we are dying every year, every day, every hour, and every
moment.

Diverse vain men are come into so great follies, that for fear of death they
procure to hasten death. Having thereof due consideration, me seems that we
ought not greatly to love life, nor with desperation to seek death: for the
strong and valiant man ought not to have life so long as it lasts, nor to be
displeased with death when it comes. In such sort therefore ought men to live
as if within an hour after they should die.

If we travel by long ways and want any thing, we borow of our company; if
they have forgotten ought, they return to seek it at their lodging, or else
they write unto their friends a letter: but if we once die, they will not let
us return again, we cannot, and they will not agree that we shall write, but
such as they shall find us, so shall we be judged; and that which is most
fearful of all, the execution and sentence is given in one day.

Let not men leave that undone till after their death, which they may do during
their life; nor trust in that they command, but in that they do whilst they
live; nor in the good works of an other, but in their own good deeds: for in
the end one sigh shall be more worth, than all the friends of the world. I
exhort therefore all wise and virtuous men, and also my self with them, that
in such sort we live, that in the end we live for ever.

Those that visit the sick, Good counsel at the hour of death.
ought to persuade them that they make their testaments, confess their sins,
discharge their conscience, receive the sacraments, and reconcile themselves to
their enemies.

Many in our life time do gape after our goods, and few at our death are sorry
for our offenses.

The wise and sage before nature compels them to die, of their own wills
ought to die; that is to say, before they see or feel the pangs of death, they
have their consciences ready prepared.

What loses a wise man to have his will well ordained; what loses he of his
credit; who in his life time restores, which at his death he shall be
constrained to render? Wherein may a man show his wisdom more, than willingly
to be discharged of that which otherwise by process they will take from him?

How many lords which for not spending one day about their testament, The
inconniences for not making a wise will.
have caused their heirs all the days of their life after to be in trauerse in
the law, so that in supposing to have left them wealthy, have left them but
attorneis in the law?

The true christian and unfeigned ought every morning so to dispose his goods
and correct his life, as if he should die the same night, and so to commit
himself to God at night, as if he hoped for no life until the morning.

Princes and Lords ought to be perfect before they be perfect; to end before
they end; to die before they die; to be mortified before they be mortified: if
they do this they shall as easily leave their life, as if they changed from one
house to another.

The most part of men delight to talk with leisure; to drink with leisure; to
eat with leisure; and to sleep with leisure; but they die in haste: for we
see them send for their ghostly father in haste; to receive the sacrament in
haste; to make their wills by force; to use conference so out of season, that
oftentimes the sick has lost his senses, and given up the ghost before any
thing be perfectly ordered.

What avails the shipmaister after the ship is sunk; what do weapons avail
after the battle is done; what pleasure after men are dead: likewise what
avails the godly instructor when the sick is heavy and bereft of his
senses; or to unlock his conscience, when the key of his tongue is lost?

Let us not deceive our selves, thinking in age to amend, and to make
restitution at our death: for it is not the point of wise men, nor of good
Christians to desire so much time to offend, and yet will never spy any time
to amend.

Would to God that the third part of time which men do occupy in sin were
employed about the meditation of death; and the cares which they have to
accomplish their fleshly lusts were spent in bewailing their filthy sins.

All worldlings do willingly sin upon hope only in age to amend, and at
death to repent: but they that in this hope sin, what certainty have they of
amendment, and assurance to have long warning ere they die, since in number
there are more young than old which die?

The omnipotency of the divine mercy considered the space of an hour
suffices, Repentance.
yea too much to repent us of our wicked life: but yet I counsel all, since the
sinner for his repentance takes but one hour, that it be not the hour too
late.

The sighs and repentance which proceeds from the bottom of the heart,
Repentance.
do penetrate the high heavens: but those which come of necessity do not
pearce the seeling of the house.

What wrong does God offer unto us when he calls us away: The benefit of
death.
seeing from an old decayed house he is to change us to a new builded palace?

What other thing is the grave but a strong fort, The grave.
wherein we shut our selves from the assalts of life, and broiles of fortune:
for we ought to be more desirous of that we find in death, than of that we
leave in life.

Two things cause men loath to die: the love they have to that they leave, or
else the fear of that they deserve.

Now I enter into the field, not where of the wild beasts I shall be assalted:
but of the hungry woorms devoured.

We ought not to lament the death allotted, but the life that is wicked: that
man is very simple that dreadeth death, for fear to lose the pleasures of life.

There is nothing that shorteneth more the life of man, than vain hope and
idle thoughts.

The great estimation that we have of this life causes that death seems to
us sudden, and that the life is overtaken by unwary death, but this is a
practice of the children of vanity: for that by the will of God death visits
us, and against the will of man life forsakes us.

To the stout hearts and fine wits this is a continual torment and endless
pain, and a woorme that alwaie gnaweth, to call to mind that he must lose the
ioifull life which he so entirely loved, and taste the fearful death that he
so greatly abhorred.

O cursed and wicked world, thou that suffer things never to remain in one
state! for when we are in most prosperity, then thou with death do persecute
us most cruelly.

Death is a patrimony which successively is inherited; but life is a right
which daily is surrendered: for death accounts us so much his own, that
oftentimes unawares he comes to affalt us: and life takes us such strangers,
that oftentimes we not doubting thereof vanishes away.

When death has done her office, what difference is there between the fair
and the foul in the grave?

The man which is laden with years; When death is to be desired.
tormented with diseases; pursued with enemies; forgotten of his friends;
visited with mishaps; charged with evil will and poverty, is not to demand
long life, but rather to embrace death.

Death is that from whence youth cannot fly a foot, and from whence age cannot
escape on horseback.

Discord, Enimitie, and Variance.
FOr all that we can see, hear, or travel, and all that we can do, we did
never see nor hear tell of men that have lacked enemies. For either they be
vicious or virtuous: and if they be vicious and evil, they are hated of the
virtuous; if they be good and virtuous, they are continually hated and
persecuted of the evil.

In great armies the discord that among them arise does more harm, Discord in
armies.
than the enemies against whom they fight.

Many vain men do raise dissentions and quarrels among people, thinking that
in troubled water they should augment their estate, whereas in short space they
do not only lose their hope of that they sought, but are put out of that they
possessed. Dispossessed.
For it is not only reasonable but also most just, that they by experience
feel that, which their blind malice will not suffer them to know.

Envy.
AGainst envy is no fortress, nor cave to hide, nor high hill to mount on, nor
thick wood to shadow in, nor ship to escape in, nor horse to bear away, nor
money to redeem us.

Envy is so venomous a serpent, that there was never mortal man among mortals
that could escape from the biting of her tooth; the scratching of her nails;
defiling of her feet; and the casting of her poison.

Envy is so envious, that to them which of her are most denied and set fardest
off, she gives most cruel strokes with her feet.

The malady of envy rankleth to death, Stingeth to death.
and the medicine that is applied will not assure life.

I cannot determine which is the best, or to say more properly, which is the
woorst; extreme misery without the danger of fortune, or extreme prosperity
that is always threatened to fall.

I had rather mine enemies had envy at my prosperity, than my friends at my
poverty.

It is hard to give a remedy against envy, since all the world is full thereof.

We see that we be the sons of envy, and we live with envy, and he that
leaves most riches, leaves the greatest envy.

The riches of rich men is the seed of envy to the poor; and because the
poor man lacks and the rich has too much, causes discord among the people.

There were two Greeks, Homer.
the one Achilles, the other Thiestes; the which Achilles being extreme rich,
was persecuted with envy; the other which was Thiestes sore noted of malice,
but no man envied at him.

I had rather be Achilles with his envy, than Thiestes without it.

And in case all do us damage with envy, yet much more harm does a friend
than an enemy: for of mine envious enemy I will beware, and for fear I will
withdraw, but my friend with his amity will beguile me, and I by my fidelity
shall not mistrust it.

Among all mortal enemies there is none worse than a friend that is envious of
my felicity.

Honor, virtue, and riches in a man are but a brand to light envy to all the
world.

Thales being asked when the envious man was quiet; he answered, When he sees
his enemy dead, or utterly undone: for truly the prosperity of a friend is a
sharp knife to the envious heart.

The outward malicious word is a token of the inward envious heart.

What friendship can there be amongst envious men, seeing the one purchases,
and the other possesses.

Evil and wicked men, with their vices.
THe evil men do offend us more which we find, than does the good men which
we lose: for it is great pity to see the good and virtuous men die, but I take
it to be more sorrow to see the evil and vicious men live. The good man though
he die, lives; the evil though he live, dies.

Let us compare the travels which we suffer of the elements, with those which
we endure of the vices, and we shall see that little is the peril we have in
the sea and the land, in respect of that which increases of our evil life.

Is not he in more danger that falls through malice into pride, than he which
by chance falls from a high rock: is not he who with envy is persecuted in
more danger, than he that with a stone is wounded: are not they in more peril
that live among vicious men, than others that live among brute and cruel
beasts? Do not those which are tormented with the fire of covetousness suffer
greater danger than those which live under mount Etna? Finally they be in
greater perils which with high imaginations are blinded, than the trees which
with importunate winds are shaken.

Traian the emperor demanding of Plutarke why there were more evil than good,
and more that embraced vices, than followed virtues; The reason why vice is
more followed than virtue.
answered, As our natural inclination is more given to lasciuiousnes and
negligence, than to chastity and abstinence; so the men which do enforce
themselves to follow virtue are few, and those which give slack the reins to
vices, are many. And this proceeds that men do follow men, and that they
suffer not reason to follow reason.

The remedies which the world gives for the troubles, certainly are greater
travels than the travels themselves: so that they are salues which do not heal
our wounds, but rather burn our flesh.

Do you not know that extreme hunger causes heasts to devour with their teeth
the thing that was bred in their intrals: As Herennius did by his master Tullie
by experience we see that the worms devour the timber wherein they were bred,
and the mothes the clothes wherein they were bred: and so sometimes a man
beingeth him up in his house which afterward takes his honor and life from
him.

As the shamefast man should not be denied in any his requests being honest, so
the shameless and importunate man should be denied whatsoever he demands.

The ill rest and conversation of them that live, cause us to sigh for the
company of them that be dead.

Universally the noble heart can endure all travels of man's life unless it be
to see a good man decay, and the wicked to prosper, the which no valiant heart
can abide, neither tongue dissemble.

Of right ought that common wealth to be destroyed which once has been the
flower of all virtues, Vices.
and afterward becomes most abominable and defiled with all vices.

If the evil live, he is sure to fall; if the good die not, we doubt whether
ever he shall come to honor.

The wickedness of children are swords that pass through the hearts of their
fathers.

Proud and stout hearts obtaining that which they do desire, Pride.
immediately begin to esteem it as nothing.

Tyrannous hearts have never regard to the honor of another, Tyranny.
until they have obtained their wicked desires.

The hearts that be proud are most commonly blinded, Proud hearts.
proud and ambitious hearts know not what will satisfy them.

If thou be given to ambition, Ambition, prodigality, and pride.
honor may and will deceive thee; if to prodigality, covetousness often
begnileth thee; if to pride, all the world will laugh thee to scorn in such
fort; that they will say, thou followest will and not reason; thine own
opinion rather than the council of another; embracing flatterers rather than
repelling the virtuous, for that most sorts had rather be commended with lies,
than reproved with truth.

That man which is brought up in debates, A quarrelles.
dissentitions and strife, all his felicity consists in burning, destroying
and bloudshedding: such works for the most part proceed not from a creature
nourished among men on the earth, but rather of one that has been brought up
among the infernal furies of hell.

Where vices have reigned long time in the heart, Vices.
there death only and no other has authority to pluck up the roots.

To whom is he more like which with his tongue blaseth virtues, and imploieth
his deeds to all vices, than to the man that in one hand holds poison to take
away life; and in the other treakle to resist death.

I have mused which of these two are greater; None bolder than blind bayards.
the duty the good have to speak against the evil, or else the audacitie the
evil have to speak against the good: for in the world there is no brute beast
so hardy, as the evil man is that has lost his fame.

I would all men would call this to memory, that among evil men the chiefest
evil is, that after they have forgotten themselves to be men, and exiled both
truth and reason, with all their might they go against truth with their words,
and against good deeds with their toongs.

Though it be evil to be an evil man, yet it is much worse not to suffer
another to be good, which above all things is to be abhorred, and not to be
suffered.

Truly the shameless man feels not so much a great stripe of correction, The
shameless man.
as the gentle heart does a sharp word of admonition.

In the man that is evil there is nothing more easier than to give good
counsel, and there is nothing more harder than to work well.

Under the cristall stone lies oftentimes a dangerous woorme; in the fair
wall is nourished the venomous coluber; within the middle of the white tooth is
engendered grief to the gums; in the finest cloth is the moth soonest found;
and the most fruitful tree by woorms does soonest perish: so under the clean
body and fair countenance are hid many and abominable vices.

Truly not only to children that are not wise, Beauty sins.
but to all other which are light and frail, beauty is nothing else but the
mother of all vices, and the hinderer of all virtues.

There is nothing more superfluous in man and less necessary than the beauty
of the body: Beauty superfluous.
for whether we be fair or foul, we are nothing the more beloved of God, or
hated of wise men.

The man of a pleasant tongue and evil life is he, which with impostumes
undoes the common wealth.

Sensuality makes us inferior to beasts, Sensuality.
and reason makes us superior to men.

He that knows most the course of the elements is not called wise; but he
which knows least the vices of this world: for the good philosopher profits
more by not knowing the evil, than by learning the good.

Quarrellers and malicious persons will have their words by weight and measure,
Quarrellers.
but the virtuous and patient men regard the intentions.

Men naturally desire honor in their life, How men shall leave a good memory
behind them.
and memorieis after death; therefore I say as they come and attain thereunto
by high, noble, and heroical facts: so memory left by the good and legitimate
children. For the children that are borne in adultery are begotten in sin: and
that memory is infamous.

Adulterers are not only taken among Christians for offenders, Adulterers.
but also among the gentiles they are counted infamous. If the gentiles feared
infamy, the Christians ought to fear both infamy and pain.

Men are so evil and wicked, that they behold to the uttermost the offenses of
an other, but will not hear the faults of himself.

It is a natural thing, that when a man has committed any vice, forthwith it
repents him of his deed, and so again after his new repentance he turns
to his old vices.

Where the soul does not show her self mistres, Man a beast.
it wants but little, but that the man remains a beast.

The evil do refrain more from vice for fear of punishment, than for any
desire they have of amendment.

The Romans did not permit that liers nor deceivers should be credited by their
oaths, Liers and deceivers.
neither would they permit or suffer them to swear.

The simple man slaieth but one man with his sword of wrath, Illworks.
but the sage kills many by the il example of his life.

There is no man by his eloquence may have such renown, Eloquent men.
but in the end may lose it by his evil life: for he is unworthy to live
amongst men, whose words of all are approved, and his works of all are
condemned.

There is no beard so bare shaven, but that it will grow again: I mean there
is no man of so honest a life, but if a man make inquisition he may find some
spots therein.

Oftentimes they say they have been on pilgrimage at some devout Saint that is
dead, Privy fornication or carnal pilgrimage.
when indeed they have been embracing the body of some fair harlot aline.

Of Fame and Infamy.
THe infamy of the slanderous shall never die: for he never lived to die well.

To die well does cover an evil fame, and to make an end of an evil life
does begin a good fame.

When a noble man shall adventure to hazard his person and his goods, he ought
to do it for a matter of great importance: for more defamed is he that
overcomes a poor laborer, than he which is overcome of a sturdie knight.

The loss of children and temporal goods cannot be called loss, if the life
be safe, and renown remain undefiled.

Of the good man there is but a short memory of his goodness: if he be evil
his infamy shall never have end.

If he deserve great infamy which works evil in his life, truly he deserves
much more, which trauelleth to bring that evil in ure, that shall continue
after his death: for man's malice does rather pursue the evil, which the wicked
do invent, than the good which virtuous man do begin.

Noble hearts ought little to efteeme the increase of their riches, and ought
greatly to esteem the perpetuity of their good name.

The good life of the child that is alive keeps the renown of the father
that is dead.

The glory of the scholar always redoundeth to the honor and praise of the
master.

First, What is required in good tutors. 40. years old.
that he be forty years of age, because the master that is young is ashamed
to command: if he be aged he is not able to correct.

Secondly, Honest.
he ought to be honest, and that not only in pureness of conscience, but in the
outward appeerance and cleannes of life: for it is impossible that the child be
honest, if the master be dissolute.

Thirdly, True.
they ought to be true in words and deeds: for the mouth that is always full
of lies ought not by reason to be a teacher of the truth.

Fourthly, Liberal.
they ought of nature to be liberal: for oftentimes the covetousness of
masters makes and causes the hearts of princes to be greedy and covetous.

Fifthly, Moderate.
they ought to be moderate in words, and very resolute in sentences: so that
they ought to teach the children to speak little, and to harken much: for it
is a great virtue in a prince or noble man to hear with patience, and to
speak with wisdom.

Sixthly, Wise.
they ought to be wise and temperate, so that their gravity may restrain the
lightness of their scholars: for there can be no greater plagues to a realm
than princes to be young, and their masters light.

It behooves also that they be learned both in divine and humane letters,
Learned.
in such sort that that which they teach princes by word, they may show it by
writing, to the end they may put the same in ure: for men's hearts are sooner
moved by the example of those that are past, than by the words of them that are
present.

Also he ought not to be given to vices of the flesh: Continent.
for as they are young and naturally given to the flesh, they have no strength
to abide chaste, neither wisdom to beware of the suares: it is necessary
therefore that the master be pure and honest; for the disciple shall hardly be
chaste, if the master be vicious.

They ought to have good conditions, Good conditions.
because noble men's children being daintily brought up, are more prone to
learn evil than good conditions: the which their masters ought to reform
more by good conversation than by sharp correction: for it chances oftentimes
where masters be cruel, the scholars be not merciful.

Noble men never wan renown for the pleasures they had in vices, Renown.
but for the travels they took in virtue.

Folly and foolish men, with their vanities.
IT is a sign of little wisdom and great folly for a man to answer suddenly
to every question.

As the wise man being demanded makes a slow and grave answer: so the simple
and foolish man being asked, answers quickly and lightly.

The vanity of the common people is of such a quality that it follows new
inventions, and despises ancient customs.

Fortune.
IF all falls were alike, all would be cured with one salve; but some fall on
their feet; some on their sides; others stumble and fall not; and others fall
down right, but some do give them a hand: I mean some to fall from their
estate, and lose no more but their substance; others fall, and for very sorrow
lose not only their goods, but their life withal; others there are which
neither lose their life nor their goods, but their honor only, and so
according to the discretion of fortune, the more they have, the more still they
take from them.

It is greatly to be mused at, He that decaieth loses goods and friends.
that fortune when she does begin to overthrow a poor man, does not only
take all that he has from him, but also those which succor him, so that the
poor man is bound more to lament his friends hurt than his own lost.

The afflicted man does most desire the change of fortune, and the thing which
the prosperous man does most abhor, is to think that fortune is mutable: for
the unfortunate man hops for every change of fortune to be made better, and
the wealthy man fears through every change to be deprived of his house and
livings.

The sage prince and captain in the wars should not rashly hazard his person,
nor lightly or unadvisedly put his life in the hands of fortune.

Since fortune is a mistres in all things, and that to her they do impute both
good and evil works; he alone may be called a princely man, who for no
contrariety of fortune is overcome; for truly that man is of a stout courage,
whose heart is not vanquished by the force of fortune.

Since all men naturally desire to be happy, Happy.
he alone amongst others may be called happy, of whom they may truly say; He
gave good doctrine to live, and least good example to die.

Gentle hearts do alter greatly, when they are advertised of any sudden mishap.

I think him happy, who has his body healthful, and his heart at ease.

The misfortunes that by our folly do chance if we have cause to lament them,
Misfortune.
we ought also to have reason to dissemble them.

I think him happy, who has his body healthful, and his heart at ease.

Vbi multum de intellectu, Aristotle.
ibi parum de fortuna: Whereas is much knowledge, commonly there is little
wealth.

It is not good for a man to hazard that in the hands of fortune, which a man
may compass by friendship.

The unlucky man were better be with the dead, than remain here with the
living.

It is commonly seen, that when fortune exalts men of low estate to high
degree, they presume much, and know little, and much less what they are worth.

Of Friendship and Friends.
THat only is true friendship where the bodies are two, and the wills one.

I account that suspicious friendship where the hearts are so divided, that the
wills are severed: for there are diverse great friends in words which dwell but
ten houses asunder, and yet have their hearts ten miles distant.

The man that with words only comfort (in effect being able to remedy)
declares himself to have been a fained friend in times past, and shows that
a man ought not to take him for a faithful friend in time to come.

If hitherto thou have taken me for thy neighbor, I beseech thee from
henceforth take me for an husband in love; for a father in counsel; for a
brother in service; for an advocate in the Senate; for a friend in heart.

In the inconveniences of our friends if we have no faculty or might to
remedy it, at the least we are bound to bewail it.

Thy anguish and grief does so torment me, that if God had given power to
woeful men to depart with their sorrows, as he has given power to the rich to
depart with their goods; by the faith I owe unto God, as I am the greatest of
thy friends, so would I be he that should take most part of thy griefs.

I see not why mishaps ought patiently to be suffered, but because in those we
are to try our faithful friends.

In battle the valiant man is known; in tempestuous storms, the Pilote; by
the touchstone gold is tried; and in adversity a friend is known.

If true friends cannot do that which they ought, yet they accomplish it in
doing that which they can.

He that promises and is long in fulfilling, is but a slack friend: he is much
better that denies forthwith, because he does not deceive him that asks.

There is nothing more noisome than to judge a contention betwixt two friends:
for to judge between two enemies, the one remains a friend; but to judge
between two friends, the one is made an enemy.

In one thing only men have license to be negligent, that is, in choosing of
friends. Slowly ought thy friends to be chosen, and never after for any thing
to be forsaken.

The griefs that lie buried in the woeful heart, Grief to be revealed to none but
to faithful friends.
ought not to be communicated but to a faithful friend.

I do not give thee license that thy thought be suspicious of men, since thou of
my heart art made a faithful friend: for if unconstant fortune do trust me to
gather the grape, be thou assured thou shall not want of the wine.

Two things are to be respected, not to revenge thy self of thine enemies,
neither to be unthankful to thy friend.

He possesses much which has good friends: for many aid their friends when
they would have helped them more if they could, for the true love is not
wearied to love, nor cease not to profit.

One friend can do no more for an other, than to offer him his person and to
depart with his goods.

It is a general rule among the physicians that the medicines do not profit
the sick, unless they first take away the opilation of the stomach; even so
no man can speak to his friend as he ought, unless before he show what thing
greeueth him.

The heart never receives such joy Joy.
as when he sees himself with his desired friend.

Friends for their true friends ought willingly to shed their blood, and in
their behalf without demanding, they ought also to spend their goods.

The pain is greater to be void of assured friends, than assault is dangerous
of cruel enemies.

Our chests and hearts ought always to be open to our friends.

Friendship that is earnest requires daily communication or visitation. A man
ought not in any affairs to be so occupied that it be a lawful let not to
communicate or write unto his friend.

Where perfect love is not, there wants always faithful service: and for the
contrary, he that perfectly loves, assuredly shall be served. I have been, am,
and will be thine, therefore thou shall do me great injury if thou be not mine.

I have not seen any to possess so much; to be worth so much; to know so
much; nor in all things to be so mighty, but that one day he shall need his
poor friend.

The man that loves with his heart, What a true friend is, displaid.
neither in absence forgets, nor in presence becomes negligent; neither in
prosperity he is proud, nor yet in adversity abject; he neither serves for
profit, nor loves for gain: and finally, he defends the cause of his
friend, as if it were his own.

We ought to use friends for 4. causes.

1 We ought to have the company of friends to be conversant Conversation
withal: for according to the troubles of this life there is no time so
pleasantly consumed, as in the conversation of an assured friend.

2 We ought to have friends to whom we may disclose the secrets Open our
secrets.
of our heart: for it is much comfort to the woeful heart to declare to his
friend his doubts, if he does perceive that he does feel them indeed.

3 To help Help necessities.
us in our adversities; for little profits my heart in tears to bewail,
unless that afterward in deed he will take pains to ease him.

4 We ought to seek and preserve friends, to the end they may be protectors
Protectors.
of our goods, and likewise judges of our evils: for the good friend is no
less bound to withdraw us from vices whereby we are slandered, than to deliver
us from our enemies by whom we may be slain.

The Justice and punishment of God, together with his mercy, goodness, and
purpose.
WHen man is in his chiefest bravery, and trusts most to men's wisdom; then
the secret judgment of God soonest confounds and discomforteth him.

The mercy and justice of God goes always together, to the intent the one
should encourage the good, and the other threaten the evil.

I would to God we had so much grace to acknowledge our offenses, as God has
reason to punish our sins.

The great mercy of God does suffer much, yet our manifest offenses deserve
more.

With God God impartial.
there is no acception of persons, for he makes the one rich, the other poor;
the one sage, the other simple; the one whole, the other sick; the one
fortunate, the other unlucky; the one servant, the other master; and let no
man muse thereat, for that such are his ordinances.

We see daily that it is impossible for man's malice to disorder that which the
divine providence has appointed, but that which man in a long time decrees,
God otherwise disposes in one moment.

It is requisite that God should order his purpose: for in the end since man is
man, in few things he cannot be either certain or assured; and since God is
God, it is impossible that in any thing he should err.

Things that are measured by the divine judgment, man has no power with rasor
to cut them.

As it is meet we should trust in the greatness of Gods mercy, so likewise it
is reason we should fear the rigor of his justice.

It is the just judgment of God that he that commits evil shall not escape
without punishment, God will punish malefactors.
and he that counsels the evil shall not live vndefamed.

What the evil with their tyranny have gathered in many days, God shall take
from them in one hour. Likewise what the good have lost in many years, God in
one moment may restore.

God does not put us under good or evil fortune, but does govern us with his
mercy and justice.

Justice and Iusticers.
IT is an infallible rule and of humane malice most used, that he that is most
hardy to commit greatest crimes, is most cruel to give sentence against
another for the same offense.

We behold our own faults as through small nets, which causes things to seem
the lesser: but we behold the faults of others in the water, which causes them
to seem greater.

There is no God commands, nor law counsels, nor common wealth suffers,
that they which are admitted to chastise liars, should hang them which says
truth.

I am of the opinion that what man or woman withdraws their ears from
hearing truth, impossible it is for them to apply their hearts to love any
virtues, be it Senator that judges; or Senate that ordains; or emperor that
commands; or Consul that executes; or Orator that pleads.

The opinion of all wise men is; They are unwise that desire offices, because
they are burdens.
that no man except he lack wit, or surmount in folly, will gladly take on
him the burden and charge of other men.

A greater case it is for a shamefast man to take upon him an office to please
every man, for he must show a countenance outward, contrary to that he
thinks inward.

He that will take charge to govern other, seeks care and trouble for
himself; envy for his neighbors; spurs for his enemies; poverty for his
wealth; danger for his body; torment to his good renown; and an end of his
days.

The charge of Justice should not be given to him that willingly offreth
himself to it, The choosing of a Justice.
but to such as by great deliberation are chosen.

Men now a days be not so loving to the common wealth, that they will forget
their own quietness and rest, and annoy themselves to do others good.

Judges should be just and upright: for there is nothing decaieth more a common
wealth, than a judge who has not for all men one balance indifferent.

There are many in common wealths that are expert to devise new orders, but
there are few that have stout hearts to put the same in execution.

It is impossible for any man to minister justice, unless he know before what
justice means.

It is impossible that there be peace and justice in the common wealth, if he
which governs it be a lover of liers and flatterers.

That common wealth is greatly slandered, wherein the evil are not punished,
nor the good honored.

The desire of commandment is become so licentious, Lightness in offenders.
that it seems to the subject that the weight of a feather is lead; and on
the contrary it seems to the commanders, that for the flieng of a fly they
should draw their swords.

There is no worse office among men, than to take the charge to punish the
vices of another; Hatred the reward of correction.
and therefore men ought to fly from it as from the pestilence: for in
correcting of vices, hatred is more sure to the corrector than amendment of
life is to the offender.

Reason it is that he or she which with evil demeanor have passed their life,
should by justice receive their death.

Matters of justice consists more in execution than in commanding or
ordaining.

That common wealth cannot decay where justice remains for the poor;
Discipline.
punishment for the tyrants; weight and measure plentiful; and chiefly, if
there be good doctrine for the young, and little covetousness in the old.

Correction executed after a good sort has this property, that it incourageth
the good to be good, and fears the wicked from their wickedness.

If men were not endued with reason, and governed by justice! among all beasts
none were so unprofitable.

Justice being taken away what are realms but dens of thieves: for, to
affirm that men can live without justice, is as much to say as fishes can live
without water.

Do justice thy self if thou will be a minister thereof: for the good judge
with the right yard of his own life, ought to measure the whole state of the
commonwealth.

O to how much is he bound that has taken upon him to minister iusticel If
such an one be an upright man he accomplisheth that whereunto he is bound; but
if unjust, justly of God he ought to be punished, and likewise of men to be
accused.

No man neglects justice, Negligence in justice.
but for want of knowledge and experience; or else through abundance of
affection and malice.

Musing with my self wherein so many damages of the common wealth did consist;
Cause of offenses.
such disobedience, such contrarieties, so many thieves: in the end I find that
all or the most part proceed, in that they provide for ministers of justice,
not for conscience sake, but for covetousness and ambitions sake.

The virtuous and Christian judge ought rather to shed tears in the Church, Of
judges.
than by affection of men to shed blood in the seat of judgment.

There are many judges, which employ their study more to get friends, to
maintain their state proudly, than for to read books to judge men's causes
uprightly.

Great shame ought they to have, which take upon them to correct others, when
they have more need to be corrected themselves: for the blind man ought not to
take upon him to lead the lame.

If the poor come to demand justice having no money to give; The poor man's
suit for justice.
no wine to present; no friend to speak: after his complaint he receives
fair words, and promises of speedy justice: but in the end he consumes that
he has; spends his time; loses his hope, and is void of his suit although
his cause be never so honest and good.

If we sigh with tears to have good princes, we ought much more to pray,
that we have not evil officers.

What profits it the knight to be nimble, if the horse be not ready? Every
member ought to join with his head.
What avails it the owner of the ship to be sage and expert, if the pilot be
a fool and ignorant? What profits the king to be valiant and stout, and the
captain in the war to be a coward? I mean what profits it a prince to be
honest, if those that minister justice be dissolute? What profits us that the
prince be true, if his officers be liers? What to be loving and gentle, and his
officers cruel and malicious? What to be liberal, if the judge that
ministers justice be a briber and an open thief? What to be careful and
virtuous, if the judge be negligent and vicious? What avails it if he in his
house be secret just, if he trust a tyrant and an open thief with the
government of the commonwealth?

Judges ought to be just in their words; honest in their works; merciful in
their justice; and above all, not corrupted with bribes.

It suffices not that judges be true in their words; but it is very necessary
that they be upright in their dealings.

Judges ought not to have respect to those which desire them, but to that which
they demand: for in doing their duty their enemies will proclaim them just;
and contrariwise if they do that which they should not, their nearest friends
will count them tyrants.

Lycurgus made a law, whereby he inioined judges not to be covetous, nor yet
thieves: for the judge that has received part of the theft will not give
sentence against the stealers thereof.

Oftentimes it chaneeth that judges do eat the fruit, and the poor suter does
feel the morsel.

Since frailty in men is natural, and the punishment they give us is
voluntary; let judges show in ministering of justice that they do it for the
zeal of the common wealth, and not with a mind to revenge.

The beginning of judges are pride and ambition, Wicked judges.
their means is envy and malice, and their end is death and destruction: for
the leaves shall never be green where the roots are dry.

Offices are sometimes given to friends in recompense of friendship; Offices.
sometimes to servants to acquit their service; sometimes to their sollicitors,
to the end they shall not importune them: so that few remain to the virtuous,
which only for being virtuous are provided.

Idleness.
Every lightness done in our youth breaks down a loope of our life; The gate
whereinto evil enters.
but idleness whereby our enemy enters is it, which opens the gate to all
vice.

Of idle motions and outrageous thoughts the eyes take license without leave,
the mind alters, and the will is hurt: and finally, thinking to be the white
that amarous men shoot at, they remain as a burt full of vices.

In conclusion there is nothing that more chaseth the ball of the thought in
this play, than the hand set a work.

There is nothing breeds vice sooner in children, Parents do hatch idleness in
youth.
than when the fathers are too negligent, and the children too bold, as do not
keep the same from idleness.

The prince that occupies himself to hear vain and trifling things, in time
of necessity shall not employ himself to those which be of weight and
importance: for idleness and negligence are cruel enemies to wisdom.

Of knowledge, wisdom, foresight, and virtue.
WE cannot say that the man knows little, which does know himself.

Man giving his mind to seek strange things, comes to forget his own
proper.

We see by experience that in the fistula that is stopped, Foresight is good in
all things.
and not that which is open the surgeon makes doubt; in the shalow water, and
not in the deep seas the pilot despaireth; the good man of arms, is more
afeard of the secret ambushment, than in the open battle. I mean that the
valiant man ought to beware not of strangers, In trust is treason.
but of his own; not of enimes, but of friends; not of the cruel war, but of
fained peace; not of the open damage, but of the privy peril.

How many have we seen whom the mishaps of fortune could never change, and
yet afterward having no care she has made them fall.

Asignorance is the cruel scourge of virtues, Ignorance and overmuch
knowledge.
and spur to all vice: so it chances oftentimes that overmuch knowledge
puts wise men in doubt, and slandereth the innocent: forasmuch as we see by
experience the most presumptuous in wisdom, are those which fall into most
perilous vices.

The end why men ought to study is to learn to live well: for there is no
truer science in man than to know how to order his life well.

What profits it me to know much, The use of study.
if thereby I take no profit; what to speak strange languages, if I refrain
not my tongue from other men's matters; what to study many books, if I study
not but to beguile my friends; what to know the influence of the stars and
course of the elements, if I cannot keep my self from vices?

In all things we are so doubtful, and in all our works so disordered, that at
some times our understanding is dull and loses the edge; and at another time
it is more sharp than it is necessary.

Poverty causes good men's children to be virtuous, so that they attain to
that by virtue which others come unto by riches.

It is a rule that never fails, that virtue makes a stranger grow natural;
and vice makes a natural a stranger in his own country.

It is impossible a young child should be vicious, if with due correction he
had been instructed in virtues.

Noble men enterprising great things, ought not to employ their force as their
noble heart wills, but as wisdom and reason teaches.

There is no man so wise and sage, but erreth more through ignorance, than he
does good by wisdom: and there is no man so just, but wants much to execute
true justice.

The virtuous do so much glory of their virtue, Virtue.
as the evil and malicious have shame and dishonor of their vice: for virtue
makes a man to be temperate and quiet, but vice makes him dissolute and
wretchles.

The lack of a physician may cause danger in man's person, Wise men.
but the lack of a wise man may set discord among the people.

Marcus Aurelius at his meat; Wise men.
at his going to bed; at his vprising; in his travel; openly nor secretly
suffered at any time that fools should communicate with him, but only wise and
virtuous men, whom he always entirely loved: he had reason therein; for there
is nothing, be it in jest or earnest, but is better liked of a wise man than of
a fool.

If a prince be sad, cannot a wise man by the sayings of the holy scriptures
counsel him better, than a fool by foolish words?

If the prince will pass the time away, Wisdom is pastime.
shall not he be more comforted with a wise man that reckons unto him the
sauorie histories done in times past, than harkening to a fool speaking
foolishly, and declaring things dishonestly, and ripping up the saiengs of the
malicious of the time present?

That which I most marvel at is not so much for the great authority that
fools have in the palaces of princes and great nobles; Fools esteemed more
than wise men.
as for the little credit and succor that wise men have among them.

It is a great injury that fools should enter into the chamber of princes
unto their bed side, Boldness of fools admitted.
and that one wise man may not, nor dare not enter into the hall; so that to
the one there is no gate shut, and to the other no gate open.

Now in these days there is no wise man alone that trauelleth to be wise; but
it is necessary for him to travel how to get his living: for necessity
inforceth him to violate the rules of true philosophy.

Whether he be prince, prelate, or private, let him have about him sage and
wise men, and to love them above all treasure: for of good counsel there
comes profit, and much treasure is a token of danger.

Croesus said; Craesus.
I account my self to be dead, though to the simple folks I seem to be alive:
and the cause of my death is, because I have not about me some wise person: for
he is only alive amongst the living, who is accompanied with the wise.

Evil princes do seek the company of wise men for no other intent, but only
because through them they would excuse their faults.

We learn not to command, Anacharsis to Craesus.
but to obey; not to speak, but to be silent; not to resist, but to humble our
selves; not to get much, but to content us with little; not to revenge offenses,
but to pardon injuries; not to take from others, but to give our own to
others; not to be honored, but to travel to be virtuous: finally we learn to
despise that which other men love, and to love that which other men despise,
which is poverty.

To a man that has government, Too soon, too late.
two things are dangerous, that is to wit, too soon, or too late; but of these
two, the worst is too soon, for if by determining too late a man loses that
which he might have gotten, by determining too soon, that is lost which is now
gained, and that which a man might have gained.

To men which are too hasty, Too hasty.
chances many evils and dangers: for the man being impatient, and his
understanding high, afterward comes quarrels and brawlings, displeasures,
varieties, and also vanities, which loses their goods and puts their
person in danger.

It chances oftentimes to wise men that when remedy is gone, repentance
comes suddenly: and then it is too late to shut the stable door when the steed
is stolen.

He is wisest that presumes to know least, and among the simple he is most
ignorant that thinks he knows most.

Science profits nothing else but to keep thy life well ordered, and thy tongue
well measured.

Vain and foolish men by vain and foolish words, Pleasure revealed is folly.
do publish their vain and light pleasures, and wise men by wise words do
dissemble their grievous sorrows.

Profound science and high eloquence, seldom meet in one person.

There is no man in the world so wise, but may further his doings with the advice of an other.

There is nothing more easy than to know the good, and nothing more common
than to follow the evil.

As the fine gold defends his pureness among the burning coals, so the man
endued with wisdom shows himself wise, yea in the midst amongst many fools:
for as the gold in the fire is proved, so among the lightness of fools is the
wisdom of the wise discerned.

The wise is not known among the wise, Two contraries do make one the more
perfect.
nor the fool among fools; but that among fools the wise man does shine, and
that among the wise fools are darkened, for there the wise shows his
wisdom, and the fool his folly.

He only ought to be called wise who is discreet in his works, and resolute in
his words.

It is a rule that evil works do carry away the credit from good words.

There is nothing destroys sooner princes, tha^ thinking to have about them
wise men to counsel them, find them malicious, and such as seek to deceive them.

It is not the part of wise and valiant men to enlarge their dominions, and
diminish their honor.

Wise men ought circumspectly to see what they do, to examine that they speak,
Circumspection necessary.
to prove that they take in hand, to beware whose company they use, and above
all to know whom they trust.

The law and ordinances.
THe law which by will is made and not of right ordained, deserves not to be
obeyed.

The Achaians observed this for a law and custom, Achaians.
that the husbands should obey, and the wives command: for the husbands swept
and made clean the houses, made the bed, washed the buck, covered thetable,
dressed the dinner, and went for water. On the contrary part his wife governed
the goods, answered the affairs, kept the money: and if she were angry, she
gave him not only foul words, but also oftentimes laid her hands on him to
revenge her anger, whereof came this proverb, vita Achaiae.

Where men have so little discretion that they suffer themselves to be governed
(be it well or evil) of their wives, and that every woman commands her
husband, there can be nothing more vain or light, than by man's law to give
that authority to a woman, which by nature is denied her.

The laws are as yokes under the which the evil do labor, and they are wings
under the which the good do fly.

The great multitude of laws are commonly evil kept, and are on the other
part cause of sundry troubles.

The Romans did avoid the great number of laws and institutions: Romans
avoided laws
for that it is better for a man to live as reason commands him, than as the
law constrains him.

Laws are easily ordained, but with difficulty executed, and there be
thousands that can make them, but not one that will see the execution of them.

The law of Athens was that nothing should be bought before a Philosopher had
set the price: Athens.
I would the same law at these days were observed; for there is nothing that
destroieth a common wealth more, than to permit some to sell as tyrants and
others to buy as fools.

Of Love.
Believe not that love is true love, but rather sorrow; not joy, but
perplexity; not delight, but torment; not contentment, but grief; not honest
recreation, but confusion; seeing that in him that is a lover must be looked
for, youth, liberty, and liberality.

Straw that is rotten is fitter for the land than the house, so in a broken
body and aged, sorrow and infirmities are fitter passions than love: for to
Cupid and Venus no sort of people is acceptable, Which are fit lovers.
but young men to serve them. The liberal which spares for no cost; the patient
to endure; discreet to speak; secret to conceal; faithful to deserve; and
constant to continue to the end.

It is a misery to be poor and proud; Torments of love.
to be reuengefull, and dare not strike; to be sick and far from succor; to
be subject to our enemies; and lastly to suffer peril of life without revenge:
but for an old man to be in love, Love in age.
is the greatest wretchedness that can occupy the life of man: for the poor
sometimes finds pity, but the old man stands always rejected.

The coward finds friends to bear out his quarrel, but the amorous old man
lives always persecuted with passions.

The sick lives under the climate of Gods providence, and is relieved by hope,
but the old amorous man is abandoned all succor.

He that is subject to his enemies, is not sometimes without his seasons of
consolation and quiet, where to the old lover is no time of truce, or hope of
reconcilement.

There is nothing more requires government tha^ the practice of love, seeing
that in cases of hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and all other natural influences
they may be referred to passions sensible only to the body, but the follies,
imperfections, and faults in love, the heart is subject to suffer, feel, and
bewail them, since love more than all other things natural, retains always
this property, to exercise tyranny always against the heart of his subjects.

There is no doubt but imperfect love will resolve into iarres, contention, and
continual disquietnes: for that where is not conformity of condition, there
can be no contented love, no more than where is no true faith can be no true
operation of good life and manners.

Say what you will, and surmise the best to please fancy, but according to
experience, the best remedy in love is to avoid occasion, and to eschew
conversation: for that of the multitude that follow him, there are few free
from his bondage, where such as abandon him lives always in liberty.

Behold how deerly I loved thee; The nature of love.
in thy presence I always behold thee; and absent I always thought of thee;
sleeping I dreamed of thee; I have wept at thy sorrows, and laughed at thy
pleasures: finally, all my wealth I wished thee, and all thy misfortunes I
wished to me.

I feel not so much the persecution thou have done to me, as I do the wailing
forgetfulness thou have showed to me.

It is a great grief to the covetous man to lose his goods; but without
comparison, it is a greater torment for the lover to see his love evil
bestowed: for it is a hurt always seen; a pain always felt; a sorrow always
gnawing; and a death that never ends.

As the love of a covetous woman ends when goods fails: A covetous woman's
love.
so does the love of the man when beauty decaieth.

That woman which never loved for goods, but was beloved for beauty, did then
love with all her heart, and now abhor with all her heart.

The gallows is not so cruel to the evil doer, The slavery of love.
as thou art to me, which never thought otherwise than well: they which suffer
there do endure but one death, but thou make me to suffer a thousand: they in
one day and one hour do end their lives, and I every minute do feel the pangs
of death: they die guilty, but I innocently: they die openly, and I secretly.
What will thou more I say; they for that they died, and I shed hearty tears of
blood for that I live; their torments spreads abroad through all the body,
but I keep mine altogether in my heart.

O unhappy heart of mine, that being whole thou art divided; Operation of love.
being in health thou art hurt; being alive, thou art killed; being mine own,
thou art stolen; and the woorst of all, thou being the only help of my life,
do only consent unto my death.

Love bewitcheth the wisest, and blindfoldeth reason, as appears in many wise
philosophers: as for example; Gratian was in love with Tamira.

Solon Selaminus was in love with a Grecian.

Pitacus Mitelenus left his own wife, and was in love with a bond woman that
he brought from the war. Inconveniences of love.


Periander prince of Achaia, and chief philosopher of all Greece, at the
instance of his lovers slew his own wife.

Anacharsis the philosopher, a Scithian by his father, and a Greek by his
mother, loved so deerly a friend of his called Thebana, that he taught her all
that he knew: in so much that he being sick on his bed, she read for him in
the schools.

Tarentinus the master of Plato and scholar of Pithagoras occupied his mind
more to invent new kinds of love than to employ his mind to virtue and learning.

Borgias Cleontino borne in Cicill had more concubines in his house than books
in his study.

All these were wise, and known for no less:
Yet in the end were overcome with the flesh.
O how many times did Hercules desire to be delivered from his love Mithrida;
Valiantnes vanquished by love.
Menelaus from Dortha; Pyrrhus from Helena; Alcibiades from Dorobella; Demophon
from Phillis; Hannibal from Sabina; and Marcus Antonius from Cleopatra: from
whom they could never only depart, but also in the end for them and with them
were cast away.

In case of love let no man trust any man, and much less himself: for love is
so natural to man or woman, and they desire to be beloved, that where love
amongst them does once begin to cleave, it is a sore that never opens, and a
bond that never vnknitteth.

Many words outwardly declare small love within; and the fervent inward love
keeps silence outward: the intrals within embraced with love causes the tongue
outward to be mute: he that passes his life in love, ought to keep his mouth
close.

The love of the mother is so strong, Love of parents.
though the child be dead and laid in the grave, yet always she has him
quick in her heart.

Amongst the well married persons is true love and perfect friendship:
Matrimonial love.
as for parents and friends if they praise us in presence, they hate us in
absence; if they give fair words, they carry hollow hearts; if they love us in
prosperity, they hate us in adversity: but it is not so among the noble and
well married persons. In prosperity and adversity, poverty and riches,
absence and presence, in mirth and sadness do they love, and if not ought to do:
for when the husband is troubled in his foot, the wife ought to be grieved in
her heart.

We see by experience that love in marriage is seldom broken through poverty,
Marriage.
nor yet continued with riches.

The love betwixt the husband and wife ought to be such, that she by her
patience ought to suffer the imperfections of him: and likewise he by his
wisdom ought to dissemble the importunities of her, that they may the rather
love and agree together.

The dart of love is like a stroke with a clod of earth, What lone is like.
which being thrown amongst a company does hurt the one, and blind the other.

The heart which is entangled with love dare boldly adventure himself in many
kind of dangers, to accomplish that which he desires.

Women ought to know that for their beauty they are desired, Wherefore women
are desired and loved.
but for their virtue only they are beloved.

The love of the flesh is so natural to the flesh, that when from you the
body flies in sport, we leave our hearts to you engaged in earnest: and though
reason as reason puts the desire to flight; yet the flesh as flesh yields
it self a prisoner.

The man that willingly goes into the briers must think before to endure the
pricks.

What Man and his life is, with fortune and her frailty.
IF man would deepelye consider what man is, he should find more things in him
to move him to humility, than to stir him to be proud.

O miserable and frail nature of man, Man's nature considered, is nothing.
which taken by it self is little worth, and compared with another thing is
much less.

Man sees in brute beasts many things which reioiceth him, and if beasts had
reason they should see in man many things which they would shame at.

Man being borne can neither go, move, or stand, where all other beasts
as soon as they are disclosed can do and perform all these.

As the evil doer is imprisoned with his hands bound, Man bound hand and foot
at first coming and last going.
and his feet in the stocks: so likewise to the miserable man, when he
enters into the charter of this life, immediately they bind both his hands
and feet, and lay him in the cradle; and so they use him at his departure out
of this world.

It is to be noted that at the hour wherein the beast is brought forth,
though it know not the father, yet it finds the mother: for that it presently
sucketh the teats if it have milk; if not, it shrowdeth it self under her
wings: it is not so with man; for the day wherein he is borne, he knows not
the nurse that gives him milk; the father that begat him; nor mother that
bare him; nor the midwife that received him. Moreover, cannot see with his
eyes; hear with his ears; judge with his taste, and knows not what it is to
taste or smell: so that we see him to whom the seigniorie of all things does
appertain, to be borne the most unable of all other beasts.

To beasts nature has given clothing wherewith they may keep them from the
heat in summer, The apparel of beasts.
and defend the cold in winter, as to sheep, wool; to birds, feathers; to
horses, hair; to trees, bark; to fishes, scales, to snails, shelles.

Of all this man is deprived; who is borne all naked, and dies all naked, not
carrieng with him one only garment: and if in the time of his life he uses
any garments, he must demand it of the beast both leather and wool, and
thereto must put his labor and industry.

What care and travel had man been discharged of, The care of man.
if the travel to apparel himself, and to search for things to eat had been
taken from him: before he eats he must till, sow, reap, and thresh, he must
winnow, grind, and bake: and this cannot be done without the care of mind, and
sweat of brows.

We see the sheep flies the wolf; the cat flies the dog; the rat flies the
cat; and the chicken the kite. O miserable creatures that we are, we know not
how to fly our enemies, because they are in our own shape.

When man thinks oftentimes tht he has entered a sure haven, Danger in our
safety.
within three steps afterward he falls headlong into the deep sea.

O poor and miserable man, who for to sustain this wretched life is enforced
to crave the beasts help: they draw him water; they soil his land; they
plough his land; they carry his corn; and bear himself from place to place.

What state lives man in, that cannot but bewail the unthankfulness of his
friends, Sorrows of man.
the death of his children, the want of necessaries, the case of adversity that
succeeds them, the false witness that is brought against the^, and a thousand
calamities that do torment their hearts.

The innocence of the brute beasts considered, and the malice of the malicious
man marked, without comparison the company of the brute beast is less
hurtful than the conversation of evil men: for in the end if ye be
conversant with a beast, ye have not but to beware of him; but if ye be in
company with a man, there is nothing wherein ye ought to trust him.

Treasure consumed in making a man's grave is very vain, The making of costly
sepulchers is vain.
for there is no greater lightness or vanity in man, than to be esteemed much
for his sumptuous grave, and little for the life he has led. A painted case
for a stinking carkase.
It profits little the body to be among the painted and carved stones, when
the miserable soul is burning in the fiery flames of hell.

The man that presumes to be sage in all things, and well provided goes not
so fast that at every step he is in danger of falling, not so softly that in
long time he cannot arrive at his iourneies end: for false fortune gawleth in
steed of striking, and in steed of gawling strikes.

What evil happened to Hercules that after so many dangers, came to die in
the arms of an harlot; Alexander after his great conquest ended his life with
poison; Agamemnon that worthy Greek, after ten years wars against the
Trojans, Man's end is in the hand of God.
was killed entering into his own house; Julius Caesar after two and fifty
battles was killed in the Senate house with xxiij. wounds; Hanniball slew
himself in one moment, because he would not become a pray to his enemies. What
mishap is this after so many fortunes; what reproach after such glory; what
peril after such surety; what evil luck after such good success; what
dark night after so clear day; what evil entertainment after so great labor;
what cruel sentence after so long process; what inconvenience of death after so
good beginning of life?

The miserable life of man is of such condition that daily our years do
diminish, and our troubles increase; life is so troublesome that it wearieth
us, and death is so doubtefull that it fears us.

The philosopher Appollonius being demanded what he woondered most at in all the
world, answered but at two things, the one was, that in all parts wherein he
had traveled he saw quiet men troubled by seditious persons; the humble
subject to the proud; the just obedient to the tyrant; the cruel commanding
the merciful; the coward ruling the hardy; the ignorant teaching the wise;
and above al, I saw the most thieves hang up the innocent.

The other was that in all the places and circuit that he had bin in, I know
not, neither could find any man everlasting, but that all are mortal; and
that both high and low have an end, for many enter the same night into the
grave which the day ensuing thought to be alive.

Aristotle says, that man is but a tree planted with the roots upward, whose
root is the head, Man described as a tree.
and the stock is the body, the branches are the arms, the bark is the
flesh, the knots are the bones, the sap is the heart, the rottennes is malice,
The fruits of this tree.
the gum is love, the flowers are words, and the fruits are good woorks.

We see the vapors to ascend high; the plants grow high; the trees budde out
on high; the sourges of the sea mount high; the nature of the fire is always
to ascend upward; only the miserable man grows downewarde, and is brought
low by reason of the feeble and frail flesh, which is but earth, and comes
of earth, and lives on earth, and in the end returns to the earth from
whence it came.

Generally there is no man so good but a man may find in him somewhat
reprooueable, nor any man so evil but he has in him something commendable.

What man and his life is.
O Blindness of the world; Beauty.
o life which never lives, nor shall live; o death which never has end: I
know not why man through the accident of his beauty should take upon him any
vain glory or presumption, since he knows that all the perfitest and most
fair, must be sacrificed to the worms in the grave.

It is to be marvelled at that all men are desirous that all things about them
should be clean; Cleanlines in body, and filthiness in soul.
their gowns brushed; their coats neat; the table handsome; and the bed fine;
and only they suffer their souls to be spotted and filthy.

The fair and well proportioned man is therefore nothing the more virtuous: he
that is deformed and evil shapen, is nothing therefore the more vicious.

Corporal beauty early or late perishes in the grave, but virtue and
knowledge makes men of immortal memory.

Although a man be great, Bigness makes not strength.
it follows not that he is strong: so that it is no general rule that the
big body has always a valiant and courageous heart, nor the little man a
faint and false heart.

Julius Caesar was big of body, Caesar described.
yet evil proportioned: for he had his head bald, his nose sharp, one hand
more shorter than the other, and being young, had a riueled face, yealow of
color, went crooked, and his girdle half undone.

Hannibal was called monstrous both for his deeds and evil proportion: Hannibal.
for of his two eyes he lacked the right, and of the two feet he had the left
foot crooked, fierce of countenance, and little of body.

Truly he feels the death of another which always is sorrowful and lamenting
his own life. We feel an others death by lamenting our own life.


To esteem thy self to be handsome and proper of person, Thine own
estimation nothing.
is no other thing but to esteem thy self, that dreaming thou shall be rich
and mighty, and waking, thou find thy self poor and miserable.

What shall we say to this little flower that yesterday flourished on the tree
whole without suspicion to be lost, Man's life*
and yet one little frost wastes and consumes it; the vehement wind
overthrows it; the knife of envy cutteth it; the water of adversity undoes
it; the heat of persecutions pineth it; the putrefaction of death decays it,
and brings it down to the ground.

O man's life that art always cursed, Fortune with her force.
I count fortune cruel, and thee unhappy, since she will not that thou stay on
her, which dreaming, gives thy pleasures, and waking, gives thy displeasures;
which gives into thy hands travel to taste, and suffers thee to listen
after quiet; which will that thou approve adversity, and agree not that thou
have proseritie, but after her will, she gives thee life by ounces, and death
without measure.

The young man is but a new knife, Age compared.
the which in process of time cankereth in the edge; one day he breaks the
point of understanding; another he loses the edge of cutting; and next the
rust of diseases takes him, and afterward by adversities he is writhen, and
by infirmities diseased; by riches he is wheted; by poverty he is dulled
again; and oftentimes it chances, that the more sharp he is whetted, so much
the more the life is put in hazard.

It is a true thing that the feet and hands are necessary to clime to the
vanities of youth, and afterward stumbling a little, immediately rolling the
head downwards, we descend into the miseries of age.

What thing is more fearful or more incredible, The beauty of man changes.
than to see a man become miserable in short space; the fashion of his visage
changes; the beauty of the face lost; the beard wax white; the head bald;
the cheeks and forehead full of wrinkles; the teeth as white as Iuorie
becomes black as a cole; the light feet by the gout are crepeled; the
strong arm with palsy weakened; the fine and smooth throat with wrinkles
plaited; and the body that was strait and upright, waxes crooked.

The beauty of man is none other but a veil to cover the eyes, Beauty of man.
a pair of fetters for the feet, manacles for the hands, a lime rod for the
wings, a these of time, an occasion of danger, a prouoker of trouble, a place
of lechery, a sink of all evil; and finally it is an inuenter of debates,
and a scourge of the affectioned man.

O simple, simple and ignorant persons, how our life consumes and we perceive
not how we live therein.

Of mercy, pity, help, and compassion toward the poor.
HAppy not once, An hundred times happy.
but an hundred times is he that will remember the poor afflicted, and open
his heart to comfort them, and does not shut his cofers from helping them: to
him at the straight day of judgment, the process of his life shall be judged
with mercy and pity.

The pitiful heart which is not fleshed in cruelty, has as much pity to see
another man suffer, as of the sorrow and torment which he himself feels.

If a man behold himself from top to toe, he shall find not one thing in him to
move him to cruelty, but he shall see in himself many instruments to exercise
mercy.

For he has eyes to behold the needy, Anatomy of man.
feet to go to the church, ears to hear Gods word, hands to be stretched to
the poor, a tongue to utter good things, an heart to love God: and to conclude,
he has understanding to know the evil, and discretion to follow the good.

God has not given him scratching nails as to the cat, nor poison as to the
serpent, nor perilous feet as to the horse to strike withal, nor bloody
teeth as to the Lion, but has created us to be pitiful, and commanded us to
be merciful.

Obedience.
AS the element of the fire, the element of the air, and the element of water
do obey, and the element does command of the earth, or that against their
nature he brings them to the earth, and all the noble and most chiefest
elements obedient to the most vile, only to form a body mixed, it is great
reason that all obey one virtuous person, that the common wealth thereby might
be the better governed.

The second reason is of the body and soul: Offices of the body and soul.
The soul is the mistres that commands, and the body the servant which
obeys: for the body neither sees, hears, nor understands without the
soul, but the soul does these without the body.

In that common wealth where one has care for all, and all obey the
commandment of that one, there God shall be served, the people shall profit,
the good shall be esteemed, the evil despised: and besides that, tyrants shall
be suppressed.

How many people and realms because they would not obey their prince by
justice, has sithence by cruel tyrants been governed with tyranny: for it is
a just plague that those which despise the scepter of righteous princes should
feel and prove the scourge of cruel tyrants.

O happy common wealth wherein the prince finds obedience in the people, A
happy common wealth.
and the people in like manner love of the prince: for of the love of the prince
springs obedience in the subjects, and of the obedience in the subjects
springs the love of the prince.

Patience.
Look how much we offend through the offense, so much do we appease through
patience.

The patience which God uses in not punishing our faults, is greater than
that which men have in suffering the chastisement, because we justly offend,
and justly are punished.

I account all in me at the disposition of fortune, The phrase is heathenish;
for God rueth, and not blind chance
as well riches as other prosperities, and I keep them in such a place, that at
any hour in the night when she lists, she may carry them away and never awake
me: so that though she carry those out of my cofers, she should never rob me of
my patience.

Patience in adversity pleases God, where as wrath provoke his indignation.

We see in a man's body by experience that there are sundry diseases which are
not cured with words spoken, Comfortable words many times helps maladies.
but with the herbs thereunto applied, and in other diseases the contrary is
seen, which are not cured with costly medicines, but with comfortable words.

When the diseases are not very old rooted nor dangerous, it profits more
oftentimes to abide a gentle fever, than to take a sharp purgation.

The impatient heart, especially of a woman, has no rest till she see her
enemy dead.

No patience can endure to see a man obtain that without travel which he could
never compass by much labor. Unhappy.


He is most unhappy which is not patient in adversity, for men are not killed
with the adversities they have, but with the impatience which they suffer.

Though wise men leese much they ought not therefore to despair, but that they
shall come to it again in time, for in the end time does not cease to do his
accustomed alterations, nor perfect friends cease not to do that which they
ought.

That man only in this life may be called unhappy to whom God in his troubles
has not given patience.

Peace.
HE alone does know how precious a thing peace is, which by experience has
felt the extreme misery of war.

The life of a peaceable man is none other then a sweet peregrination, and the
life of seditious persons, is no other than a long death.

Every prince which loves foreign wars, Wars abrod is an enemy to peace at
home.
must needs hate the peace of his common wealth.

Aristotle does not determine which of these two is the most excellent, either
stoutnes to fight in the wars, or policy to rule in peace.

That peace is more worth that is honest, than is the victory which is
bloody.

In the good war a man sees of whom he should take heed, but in the evil
peace no man knows whom to trust.

Where peace is not, no man enioieth his own; no man can eat without fear;
no man sleeps in good rest; no man safe by the way; no man trusts his
neighbor; and where there is no peace, we are threatened daily with death, and
every hour in fear of our life.

Seeing Christ left to us his peace, and commanded us to keep the same,
Christ's peace.
we should not condescend for revenging injuries to shed man's blood: for the
good christians are commanded to bewail their own sins, but they have no
license to shed the blood of their enemies: and therefore I wish all princes
for his sake that is prince of peace, they love peace; procure peace; keep
peace; and live in peace; for in peace they shall be rich, and their people
happy.

Pleasure.
WHat comes of vain pleasure, Fruits of pleasure.
nothing but the time evil spent, famine in way of perdition; goods consumed;
credit lost; God offended; and virtue slandered.

Of pleasure we get the names of brute beasts, and the surnames of shame.

I would the eyes were opened to see how we live deceived, Pleasure vanishes
away with sorrow.
for all pleasures that delight the body, make us believe that they come to
abide with us continually, but they vanish away with sorrow immediately: on
the contrary, the infirmities that blind the soul, say that they come to
lodge as guests, and remain with us continually as householders.

Death is a miserable lake wherein all worldly men are drowned, for those men
that think most safely to pass it over remain therein most subtly deceived.

During the time that we live in the house of this frail flesh, Sensuality.
sensuality bears so great a rule, that she will not suffer reason to enter
in at the gate.

Reason leads voluntarily to virtue; and sensuality draws men against
their wills to vices.

Vices are of such a quality, that they bring not with them so much pleasure
when they come as they leave sorrow behind them when they go; for the true
pleasure is not in the daily vice, which suddenly vanishes: but in the truth
which evermore remains.

Wise men after 50. 50. years.
years ought rather seek how to apply their minds how to receive death, than
to seek pleasure how to prolong life.

How happy may that man be called that never tasted what pleasure means.

Men that from their infancy have bin brought up in pleasure, Pleasure the
cause of many offenses.
for want of wisdom know not how to chose the good, and for lack of force
cannot resist the evil, which is the cause that noble men's sons oftentimes
commit sundry heinous offenses.

It is an infallible rule, that the more a man give himself to pleasure, the
more he is entangled with vices.

The rich men win with their labor and watching, and their sons brought up in
pleasure do consume it sleeping.

Where there is youth; liberty; pleasure; and money; there will all the vices
of the world be resident.

The greatest vanity that ragineth among the children of vanity, Vanity of
vanities.
is, that the father cannot show unto the son his love, but in suffering him
to be brought up in the pleasures and vanities of this life.

I wish no greater penance to delicate men, than in winter to see them without
fire, and in the summer to want fresh shadow.

Why are there so many vices nourished in the palace of princes? Why vices in
princes palaces.
because pleasure abounds and counsel wants.

Play as Seneca says, Plays.
is compared to the property and raging of a mad dog, with whom if a man be
once bitten; unless he has present remedy forthwith he runs mad, and the
disease continues with him until the hour of death: for those that use it
hurt their consciences, lose their time, and consume their substance.

Marcus Aurelius says, Carnal pleasure.
if I knew the gods would pardone me, and also that men would not hate me: yet
I assure you for the vileness thereof I would not sin in the flesh.

Aristotle says, Carnal pleasure shamefast.
all beasts after the deeds of the flesh are sorry, saving only the cock.

In carnal vices he that has the least of that, Reason allows not
sensuality, therefore Tully said, pareat appetitus rationi. Fruits of carnal
pleasure.
that sensuality desires, has a great deal more than reason allows.

I see no other fruits of carnal pleasure but that the body remains
diseased; the understanding blinded; memory dulled; sense corrupted; will hurt;
reason subverted; their good name lost; and woorst of all the flesh remains
always flesh, therefore fire is not quenched with dry wood, but with cold
water.

In the war honor by tarrieng is obtained; The fame of conquest.
but in the vices of the flesh the victory by fleeing is won.

Pride.
THe proud and disdainful man for the most part falls into some evil
chance, therefore it is a commendable medicine sometimes to be persecuted: for
adversity makes a wise man to live more merry, and to walk in less danger.

What friendship can there be among the proud, since the one will go before, and
the other disdaineth to come behind.

Of Princes, with their acts and sayings.
A Poor woman coming before Claudius the Emperor with weeping eyes to crave
Justice, the good prince being moved with compassion, did not only weep as
she did, but with his own hands dried up the tears.

Oftentimes those that come before princes, The love of Princes is better
sometimes than Justice.
do return more contented with the love they show them, than with the Justice
they minister unto them.

Antonius Pius was such a favorer of poor widows and Orphans, that the
porters which he kept within his palace were not to let the entry of the
poor, but to let and keep back the rich.

To a prince there can be no greater infamy than to be long in words, and
short in rewarding his servants.

Covetous princes do not only suspect their subjects, but also themselves.

The diseases which God oftentimes sends to princes, comes not through the
fault of humors, but through the corruption of manners, the which no medicine
can resist, nor any other thing remedy.

It is the chiefest thing that can belong to a prince or other person, The
riches of Princes.
to be beloved for their gentle conversation, and for their upright justice to
be feared.

It is necessary for Princes to be stout and rich: for by their stoutnes they
may govern their own, and by their riches they may repress their enemies.

The prince which is too liberal in giving his own, is afterward compelled by
necessity to become a tyrant and take from others.

If princes be proud, Some hunger after strange realms
greedy, and ambitious after strange realms, it is most certain that they
need great treasures to accomplish their inordinate appetites: but if they be
reposed quiet, virtuous, patient, peaceable, and not covetous of the good of
another man, what need have they of great treasures.

Princes become not poor for spending of their goods upon necessaries, but
wasting it upon things superfluous.

High and noble hearts that feel themselves wounded, do not so much esteem
their own pain, as to see their enemies to rejoice at their grief.

It is better for a Prince to defend his country by Justice, than to conquer
an other by tirannie.

The prince is in great danger of damnation of soul if in his government he
have not always before his eyes the fear and love of the supreme prince,
Damnation of soul.
to whom we must render account of all our doings, for there is nothing so
puissant, but it is subject to the divine power.

That prince has great occasion to be vicious, which for his vice thinks not
to be chastised.

Princes fearing neither God nor his commandments, do cause their realm and
subjects to fall into great misery: for if the fountain be infected, it is
impossible for the stream thereof to be pure.

We see by experience that as a bridle mastreth an horse, People like affected.
and a stern the ship; so a prince be he good or bad, will after him lead all
his people. If they serve God, the people will also serve him; if they
blaspheme God, the subjects will do the like: for it is impossible that a tree
should bring forth other fruits than those that are agreeable to the root.

Princes ought to resemble God more by vertuousnes than others.

Princes.
WHat shall unhappy princes do which shall render al their account to God only,
who will not be deceived with words, corrupted with gifts, feared with
threatenings, nor answered with excuses?

That prince is more to be magnified which reformeth two vices amongst his
people, than he which conquereth ten realms of his enemies.

O princes if ye knew how small a thing it is to be hated of men, and loved of
God, ye would not cease night nor day to commend your selves unto God, for God
is more merciful in succouring us, than we are diligent in calling upon him.

God did never create high estates to work wickedness, but placed them in that
degree, to the end they should thereby have more occasion to do him service.

Princes take great pains to win other countries by cruelty, and little
regard to maintain their own by Justice.

All princes that be wilful in their doings be absolute of their sentence.

The prince that is wicked causes his subject to rebel, and the seditious
subject makes his lord to become a tyrant.

Without all doubt it is more intolerable to have the hearts burdened with
thoughts, tha^ the necks with irons.

God did not ordain princes and lords in this world, to eat more and drink
more, sleep or rejoice more than others; but he created them upon condition,
that as he had made them to command more than others, so should they be more
just in their lives than others.

The prince that has his mouth full of truth; his hands open to give rewards;
and his ears stopped to lies; and his heart open to mercy; such a one may well be
called happy, and the people fortunate that has him.

Thales being demanded what a prince should do to govern others; he answered,
First to govern himself, and then afterward others: for it is impossible the
wood should be right where the shadow is crooked.

As the office of the feet is not to see, but to go; the office of the hands
is not to hear, but to labor; the shoulders not to feel, but to bear, even
as these offices are not seemly for the members, but for the head: even so
should not subjects have to do with that which appertains only to the
prince which is our head.

To a king it should be no pleasure but a pain and grief, and to the common
people annoyance, that the prince should always be enclosed and shut up: for
the prince that shuts his gates against his subjects, causes them not to
open their hearts willingly to obey him.

Cursed is that prince, and also unhappy is that common weal where the
servants will not serve their lord but for reward, and the lord love them but
for their service: for there is never true love where there is any particular
interest.

Cicero in his Tusculanes says, that in old time the people persuaded their
princes to communicate with the poor, and that they should fly the rich, for
among the poor they may learn to be merciful, and among the rich nothing but
to be proud.

Princes and governors.
THe Prince for one vice cannot endammage the people, but for being too hautie
and presumptuous he may destroy the common wealth.

If lords and princes give many occasions of evil will, afterward one only
suffices to stir the subjects to destroy them: for if the lord show not his
hatred, it is because he will not; if the subject do not revenge, it is because
he cannot.

When a man will speak of princes that are dead before a prince alive, he is
bound to praise one only virtue which they had, and has no license to reveal
the vices whereof they were noted.

The good deserves reward, because he endeuoreth himself to follow virtue:
the evil likewise deserves pardon, because through frailty he consented to
vice.

What princes ought to do to be good: Theodosius Imp.
when sage princes shall walk they ought to have with them wise men, and when
he is at meat to reason how to order his life and the common wealth; and at
vacant times to counsel with the sage.

For the knight that enters into the field to give battle without weapon, is
as hardy as the prince that will govern the common wealth without the
counsel of wise men.

Princes that are young are given most commonly to vices: for in the one part
youth reigns, and on the other honesty wants; to such truly vices are
dangerous, specially if they want the wise to counsel them, to keep them from
evil company: for the courageous youth will not be brideled, nor the great
liberty chastised.

Princes no doubt have great need of wise men to counsel them near about
them: for since they are in the view of all, they have less license to commit
vice than any of all.

Princes ought to be circumspect whom they trust with the government of the
realm, The care of princes in chosing their protector, captaie, and
ambassador, and treasurer, and counselors.
and to whom they commit the leading of their armies; whom they do send as
ambassadors into strange countries; and whom they trust to receive and keep
their treasures: but much more circumspect ought they to be in examining of
those whom they choose to be their counselors: for look what he is that
counsels the prince at home in his palace, so likewise shall his renown be
in strange countries, and in his own common wealth.

Let princes know if they do not know, that of the honesty of their servants;
A princes well ordered house, is a welfare to the public weal.
of the providence of their counselors; of the sagenes of their persons; and
of the order of their house depends the welfare of the common wealth, for it
is impossible for that tree whose roots are dried up, should be seen to bear
green leaves.

The fault that princes have, is, that they are prompt and bold to talk of
virtues, and in executing them they are fearful and very slack.

And although we have license to praise their virtues, yet are we bound to
dissemble their vices.

Counselors and officers of princes ought to be so just, Officers about the
prince.
that sheares cannot find what to cut away in their lives, nor that there
needs any needle or thread to amend their fame.

Woe, woe, be to the land where the lord is vicious, the subject seditious, the
servant covetous, and the counselor malicious.

The prince that is a friend to flatterers, of necessity must be an enemy of
the truth.

The particular love of princes in that they show more to one than to another,
A great incontinencie when princes love one before another.
breeds oftentimes much envy in their realms: for the one being loved, the
other hated, of this comes hatred; and of hatred comes evil thoughts; and
of evil thoughts proceeds malice; of malice comes evil words, which
break out in to worse deeds.

Princes ought to forbid; and sages ought not to consent, that the quarrellers
should trouble the peacemakers: for when the people do rise, immediately
covetousness is awaked.

The noble and valiant princes when they see themselves with other princes,
Wherein princes should glory.
or that they are present in great acts, ought to show the franknes of their
hearts; the greatness of their realms; the love of their common wealth; and the
pre-eminence of their person: and above all the discipline of the court; and
the gravity of their counsel; for the sage and curious men should not behold
the prince in the apparel which he wears, but the men which he has to
counsel him.

Princes oftentimes of their own nature be good: and by evil conversation
only they are made evil.

They which have charge to govern those that do govern, without comparison
ought to fear more the vices of a king, than the enemies of the realm: for
the enemies are destroyed in a battle, but vices remain during life, and in
the end enemies do not destroy but the possessions of the land, but the vicious
prince destroieth the good manners of the common wealth.

Why do princes commit folly? because flatterers abounds that deceives them,
Why princes commit folly.
and true men wants that should serve them.

Princes deserves more honor for the good means they use in their affairs,
than for the good success whereunto it comes: for the one is guided by
adventure, and the other advanced by wisdom.

The land is with much misery compassed, A miserable land.
where the governance of the young is so evil, that all wish for the reviving
of the dead.

It is impossible that the people be well governed if the magistrates that
govern them be in their lives dissolute.

Princes in doubtful matters ought not only to demand counsel of all the
good that be alive, In doubtful matters.
but also to take pains to talk with the dead, that is, to read the deeds of
the good in their writings.

To a prince that shall be an inheritor, Punishment in princes necessary.
one years punishment shall be better worth then xx. years pleasure.

A prince is as the governor of the ship, The definition of a prince.
a standerd of a battle, a defense of the people, a guide of the ways, a
father of the orphans, a hope of pupils, and a treasure of all.

The glory of a prince is that in his works he be upright, Glory of a prince.
and in his words he speak very discreet.

The virtues of princes should be so many, that al men might praise them, and
their vices so few that no man might reprove them.

Princes are lords of all things, Lords of all things saving justice.
saving of justice, whereof they are only but to minister.

I would to God that princes did make an account with God in the things of
their conscience touching the common wealth, as they do with men touching their
rents and revenues.

Many crouch to princes with fair words, Dissimulatio^.
as though they meant good service to him, their intent being by deceit to get
some office, or to seek some profit.

Servants.
I Council those that be servant to great lords, that their labors be
accounted rather honest than wise: for the wise man can but please, but the
honest man can never displease.

Of the tongue, and of the slanderer or backbiter.
IT is most certain, that of Hollie we look for pricks; of Acrons husks; of
Nettels stinging, and of thy mouth malice. I have seriously noted, I never saw
thee say well of any, nor I never knew any that would thee good.

Octauian the Emperor being demanded why doing good to all men he suffered
some to murmr against him; Octauian.
he answered, He that has made Rome free from enemies, has also set at
liberty the toongs of malicious men.

That is a cruel thing that the life and honor of those that be good, should
by the tongue of the evil be measured.

As in the forge the coals cannot be kindled without sparks, The tongue.
nor as corruption cannot be in the sinkes without ordure, so he that has his
heart free from malice, his tongue is always occupied in sweet and pleasant
sayings: and contrariwise, out of his mouth whose stomach is infected with
malice, proceeds always words bitter, and full of poison.

It is an old disease of evil men through malice to backbite with their
tongue, Backbite.
which through their cowardnes they never durst enterprise with their hands.

Of sorrow and grief.
Grief is a friend of solitude, enemy of company, a lover of darkness,
strange in conversation, and heir to desperation.

Since fortune is known of all, she suffers not her self to be defamed of
one; and it is better to think with fortune how thou may remedy thy self,
than to think with grief how to complain.

There are diverse men which to publish their grief are very careful, but to
seek remedy are very negligent.

We suffer griefs and know them not; with the hands we touch them and perceive
them not; we go over them and see them not; they sound in our ears and we
hear them not; they daily admonish us, and we do not believe them: finally, we
feel the wound, and see not the remedy.

Experience does teach us, Avoid the taste of evil.
with a little blast of wind the fruit does fall; with a little spark of fire
the house is kindled; with a little rock the ship is broken; at a little stone
the foot does stumble; with a little hook they take great fish; and with a
little wound dies a great person: I mean that our life is so frail, and
fortune so fickle, that in that part where we are best harnessed, we are
soonest wounded and grieved.

The heavy and sorrowful hearts of this world feel no greater grief than to see
others rejoice at their sorrows.

To men of long life without comparison the diseases are more which they
suffer, The harvest of a long life.
than the years are which they live.

If the days be few wherein we see the elements without clouds, fewer are the
hours wherein we feel our hearts without cares.

As much difference as is between the bark and the tree; the marow and the
bone; the corn and the straw; the gold and the dross; the truth and dreams,
so much is there to hear the travels of an other, and taste his own.

Greater is the disease that proceeds of sorrow, Hard to cure the disease
engendered by thoughts.
than that which proceeds of the fever quartane: and thereof ensues, that
more easily he is cured which of corrupt humors is full, than he which with
profound thoughts is oppressed.

There is no grief that so much hurts a person, as when he himself is cause
of his own pain.

Men which have not God merciful, and men friendly; do eat the bread of
grief, and drink the tears of sorrow.

There is no greater torment to the heart, than when it is differred from that
which it greatly desired.

If all things as they be felt at heart, should be showed outward with the
tongue, I think that the winds should break the heart with sighings, and water
all the earth with tears.

If the corporal eyes saw the sorrow of the heart, Eyes see not the hearts grief.
I believe they should see more blood sweating within, than all the weeping
that appears without.

There is no comparison of the great dolors of the body, Grief of mind
incomparable.
with the least grief of the mind.

For all travel of the body men may find some remedy; but if the heavy heart
speak, it is not heard; if it weep, it is not seen; if it complain, it is
not believed.

I know no remedy but this, to abhor the life wherewith it dies, and to
desire death wherewith it lives.

The tongue.
NOble and stout personages though they would be esteemed and judged true in
their sayings, having seen many wonders with their eyes, yet when they make
report of them, they ought to be very moderate in their toongs: for it is a
very shame to an honest man to declare any thing wherein may be any doubt
whether it be true or not.

When a woman is merry, Merry women.
she always babbleth more with the tongue, than she knows in her heart.

Men do not utter half their grief, because their woeful and heavy heart
commands the eyes to weep, and the tongue to be silent.

The chiefest thing which God gave unto man, was to know and be able to speak,
for otherwise (the soul reserved) the brute beasts are of more value than
dombe men.

Pythagoras commanded that all men which are dombe and without speech,
Pythagoras.
should immediately and without co^tradiction be banished and expulsed from the
people: and the cause why he commanded this, was, that he said, that the tongue
is moved by the motions of the soul, and that he which had no tongue, had no
soul.

The tongue which is noble, ought to publish the goodness of the good, to the end
that all know it, and the frailnes of the wicked ought to be dissembled and
kept secret that it be not followed.

If the body of a man without the soul is little regarded; I swear unto thee
that the tongue of a man without truth, is much less esteemed.

As the sword pierces the body, so the tongue destroieth the renown.

There are many which are of a goodly tongue and wicked life.

Wise men ought to fear more the infamy of the little pen, than the slander of
the babbling tongue.

All corporal members in a man waxes old, Heart and tongue.
saving the inward heart and outward tongue: for the heart is always green to
bear the fruit of evil, and the tongue always fruitful to tell lies.

Time.
THere is nothing needs more circumspection than the measuring of Time: for
that Time should be measured so justly, that by reason no Time should want to
do well, nor any time abound to do evil.

That time may be accounted lost which is spent without the service of God,
Time lost.
or profit of our neighbor.

Time in all things brings such change and alteration, that those we have
once seen to be great lords, within a while after we have seen slaves.

Deceive not your self to say there is time for all amendment, for time is in
the hand of God to dispose.

Wars.
IN time of war princes cannot reform vices, nor correct the vicious.

They which move war, or entreat it, ought to consider that if it come not
well to pass all the blame shall be imputed to their counsel, and if his
substance be not able, presently to recompense the loss, let him assure
himself that his soul hereafter shall endure the pain.

In examining of histories we shall find more defamed for beginning of wars,
than renowned for vanquishing of their enemies.

In wars they do naught else but kill men, A confusion.
spoil the people, destroy innocents, give liberty to thieves, separate
friends, raise strife, all which cannot be done without hinderaunce of
justice, and scrupulositie of conscience.

Before wars be begun, Foresight in wars is necessary.
it would be considered what loss and what profit may ensue.

None are fit for the wars but such as little esteem their lives, and much
less their consciences.

If war were only the evil against the evil, there were no thought nor care
to be taken, but where honor, fame, glory, and riches are taken prisoners, it
is a lamentable matter that so many wise, good, and virtuous be lost.

Just war is more worth than fained peace, for look how much his enemy
offends for taking it, so much he offends his common wealth for not
defending it.

Women in times past were led to the wars to dress meat for the whole, Women
in wars.
and to cure the wounded: but now to the end that cowards should have occasions
to be effeminate, and the valiant to be vicious.

Men which in peace seem most fierce, in time of war show themselves most
cowards: The valor of men.
and likewise men full of words are for the most part cowards in deeds.

Women.
ANd since God has commanded and our face does permit, A friendly exhortation.
that the life of men can not pass without women, I advise the youth, and
beseech the aged, I awake the wise and instruct the simple, to shun women of
evil name, more than the common pestilence.

She that will be accounted honest, A looking glass for a woman.
let her not trust to the wisdom of the wise, nor commit her fame to the
wanton youth, let her take heed what he is that promises ought, for after
that the flames of Venus is set on fire, and Cupid shot his arrows; the rich
offers all that he has, and the poor all that he may, the wise man will be
for ever her friend, and the simple man for ever her servant, the wise man will
loose his life for her, and the simple man will accept his death for her.

It is great peril to wise women to be neighbored with fools; If you be a
lamb, take heed of the woolfe, if you be a woolfe devour not the seely lamb.
great peril to the shamefast, to be with the shamlesse; great peril to the
chaste to be with the adulterers; for the honorable to be with the defamed,
there is no slandered woman but thinks every one like hirselfe, or at least
desires so; procures so; and says so: in the end to hide their infamy
they slander the good.

Diverse things ought to be borne in the weakness of women, Women's weakness
pardonable.
which in the wisdom of men are not permitted.

I know not what justice this is, that they kill men for robbing and stealing
of money, and suffer women to live that steal men's hearts.

Women have more need of remedy, than of good counsel.

The beauty of women sets strangers on desire, and puts neighbors on
suspection: to great men it gives fear; to mean men ennie; to the parents
infamy; to themselves peril; with great pain it is kept that is desired of
many.

The most laudable and holy company in this life is of the man and woman, A
virtuous woman.
especially if the woman be virtuous: the wife withdraws all the sorrows
from the heart of her husband, and accomplisheth his desires whereby he lives
at rest.

A man of understanding ought not to keep his wife so short, that she should
seem to be his servant; nor yet to give her so much liberty that she
becomes thereby his mistres.

The good wife may be compared to the phesant, whose feathers we little
esteem, and regard much the body: but the evil woman to the Marterne, whose
skin we greatly account of, and utterly despise the body.

The complexion of women with child is very delicate, A woman with child.
and the soul of the creature is very precious, and therefore it ought with
great diligence to be preserved, for all the treasure of the Indies is not so
precious, or in value equal to that which the woman bears in her bowels; when
a man planteth a vineyarde, A similitude
forthwith he makes a ditch, or some fence about it, to the end beasts should
not crop it while it is young, nor that travelers should gather the grapes
when they are ripe; if the laborer to get a little wine only, which for the
body and soul is not always profitable, does this, how much more
circumspection ought the woman to have to preserve her child, since she shall
render account unto the creator of a creature, unto the church of a christian,
unto her husband of a child.

The birds when they have hatched, An other similitude.
having but six little ones, have neither milk to nourish them, nor corn to
give them; neither have they wings to fly; nor feathers to cover them; nor any
other thing to defend them; and yet the mother in all this weakness and
poverty forsakes them not, nor commits them to any other, but brings
them up hir-selfe; how much more ought a christian woman to nourish and bring
up that with her breasts which she once carried in her womb, rather than
commit it into the hands of another woman, who because she bare it not, can
not have the like tender care over it.

Children are never so well beloved of their mothers, as when they be nourished
of their own breasts.

If women for excuse should say that they are weak, tender, and that they have
found a good nurse; A nurse.
I answer, that the nurse has small love to the child which she nurseth, when
she sees the ungentleness of the mother that bare it, for she alone does
nourish the child with love, which did bear it with pain.

Aristotle says that a child at the most ought to suck but two years; How
long children should suck.
and at the least one year and a half; for if he suck less he is in danger
to be sick, and if he suck more he shall be always tender.

All women are bound to love their husbands, A woman's contentatio^ in
marriage.
since that willingly and not by compulsion they were not enforced to take
them. In like manner if the marriage please not the woman she has not so much
cause to complain of her husband for asking her, as she has reason to
mislike with hirselfe that accepted him.

The wife to serve her husband in his life time proceeds oftentimes of fear,
A black swan.
but to love him and honor him in his grave proceeds of love.

A woman cannot say evil of her husband, but she does witness dishonor to
hirselfe.

I would counsel women not to presume to command their husbands, and admonish
husbands not to suffer themselves to be ruled by their wives: for in so doing I
account it no otherwise than to eat with the feet, and travel with the
hands, to go with their fingers, and to feed themselves with their toes.

There is an old disease that happens to beautiful women, that there be
many that defy them, and mo that slander them.

It little avails man and wife that their goods be common, and their wills
private, for if the man and wife in love do differ, in their lives they shall
never be quiet.

The want of magnanimity in the female sex, Ingenio pollet cui vim natura
negauit.
is supplied with the excellency of quick conceit and invention.

The reason why women for the more part exceed men in beauty, and good
complexion is for that they are an effect of a pure cause, namely of man, a
creature polished, and not formed as man immediately out of gross earth.

After the creation of the world and mankind, God preferred the company of a
woman as a comfort unto man exceeding all others.

Good works.
THey that be old and ancient, ought to praise their good works rather than
their white hairs: for honor ought to be given for the good life, and not for
the white head.

To praise virtuous works we greatly desire, Praise but not practice.
but to put them in ure we are very slow.

If I have committed any evil, it is impossible to find any that will do me
good: but if I have done well, no man shall be able to do me wrong.

Men are not bound to judge others by the good nature they have, but by the
good and evil works which they do.

That man is perfect who in his own opinion deserves not that he has, and in
the opinion of an other deserves much more than that he possesses.

The virtuous ought to conform their works to that they say, Saying and doing
should be married without deuorce.
and publish their words with their deeds.

There is nothing more infamous than to presume to be wise, and desirous to be
counted virtuous: chiefly, for him that speaks much, and works little.

Our evil work suffices to deface many good works.

The world and worldly prosperity.
THe prosperous estate whereupon the children of vanity are set, are founded
of quick sand, in that sort that be they never so valiant, prosperous and
mighty, a little blast of wind does stir them, a little calm of prosperity
does open them, and suddenly death does confound them.

Men seeing that they cannot be perpetual, do procure to continue themselves in
raising up proud buildings, and leaving to their children great estates, wherein
I account them fools no less than in things superfluous. Admit the pillars be
of gold, the beams of silver, and that those that join them be kings, and
those which build them are nobles, in which they consume a thousand years
before they can have it out of the ground, or come to the bottom; I swear they
shall find no steadie rock where they may build their house sure, not cause
their memory to be perpetual.

If men knew the world with his deceit, why do they serve him, if they do not,
why do they follow him.

The world has this condition, The world full of deceits.
to hide much copper under a little gold; under the color of one truth he
tells us a thousand lies, and with one short pleasure he mingleth ten
thousand and displeasures.

Would ye not take the thief for a fool that would buy the rope wherewith he
should be hanged: and the murderer the sword wherewith he should be beheaded:
and the traitor that should offer himself in place for to be quartered: the
rebel that should disclose himself to be stoned: than are they I swear more
fools that know the world and will follow it.

The ancients in times past did strive which of them could furnish most men;
Our ancestors riches.
have most weapons; and keep most horses: but now a days they contend who has
the finest wit; who can heap up greatest treasure; and who can keep most
sheep. They striued who should keep most men, but in these days who can have
most revenues.

Now it is so, that one having money to buy a lordship, immediately he is made a
knight; and when he is made knight, it is not to fight against the enemies in
the field; but more freely to commit vices, and oppress the poor at home.

What profits us to desire much, to procure much, to attain to much since our
days are so brief, and our person so frail.

Men are deceived that think that temporal goods shall remain with them
during life.

I see no greater mishaps to fall to any, than unto them which have the
greatest riches: so that we may boldly say, that he alone which is shut in the
grave, is in safeguard from the inconstancy of fortune.

The earth is cold and dry; A description of the four elements.
the water cold and moist; the air hot and moist; the fire hot and dry.

The wicked world is the evil life of the worldlings, where the earth is the
desire; fire the couetice; water the inconstancy; air the folly; the stones
are the pride; the flowers of trees the thoughts; the deep sea the heart.

The worldlings and their worldly lives, are called the world: for sins they
be called the servants of sin, and must be subjects of the devil.

Pride, avarice, envy, blasphemy, pleasures, lechery, negligence, gluttony,
ire, malice, vanity, and folly: this is the world against which we fight all
the days of our life; and where the good are princes of vices, and vices are
lords of the vicious.

This world is our cruel enemy: A description of the world.
A deceitful friend that always keeps us in travel, and takes from us our
rest, he robs us of our treasure, and makes himself to be feared of the
good, and is greatly beloved of the evil. It is that which of the goods of
others is prodigal; of his own very miserable; the inuenter of all vices; and
the scourge of all virtues: it is he which entertaineth all his in flattery and
fair speech; brings men to dissolution; robs the renown of those that be
dead; and sacketh the good name of those that be alive. This cursed world is he
which to all ought to render acccount, and of whom none dare to ask account.

He should bear false witness that would say: that in this world there is any
thing assured, healthful, and true: as he that would say in heaven there is
any thing unconstant, variable, or false.

I marvel not though the worldlings at every moment be deceived, since
superficiously they behold the world with their eyes, and love it profoundly
with their hearts, (but if they desired as profoundly) to consider it as they do
vainly follow it, they should see very plainly that the world did not flatter
them with prosperity, but threaten them with adversity; fo that under the
greatest point of the Die which is the sise, is hid the least which is the ase.

The world is of such a condition, that if he let us rest our first sleep, that
commonly ere the morning, yea sometimes within an hour after, he waketh us with
a new care.

Suppose that the world does honor you much, Deceit of the world.
flatter you much, visit you often, offer you great treasures, and give you
much: yet it is not because he will give you little and little, but that
afterward he might take it all from you in one day: for it is the custom of
the world, that those men which above all men are set before, now at a turn
they are farthest behind.

O filthy world, that when thou do receive us, thou do cast us off; when
thou do assemble us, thou do separate us; when thou seem to rejoice
us, thou make us sad; when thou please us, how quickly thou do displease
us; when thou exaltest us, how thou humblest us; and when thou do chastise
us, how thou do rejoice.

As me^ be diverse in gestures, The world a Cater for all kind of people.
so are they much more variable in their appetites: and since the world has
experience in many years, it has appetites prepared for all kind of people:
for the presumptuous he procures honors; to the auaricious, he procures
riches; and to those which are gluttons, he presents diverse meats; the
carnal he blinds with women; the negligent, he feeds with rest; and thus
he does bait them as fish, and in the end will catch them in the nets of all
vices.

If at the first temptations we had resisted the world, it were impossible that
so oftentimes it durst assault us, for of our small resistance, comes his so
great boldness.

The world has made us now so ready to his law, In serving the world we are
made changelings.
that from one hour to another it changes the whole estate of our life: so
that to day he makes us has that which yesterday we loved: he causes us to
complain of that which we commended: he makes us to be offended with that
which before we did desire: and to account those our mortal enemies, which
before we accepted as our special friends.

If he did give any perfect or certain thing, we were the rather to serve him:
but he gives them with such condition, that they shall render it to him
again, when he shall demand it, and not at the discretion of him that does
possess it.

The world has no good thing to give us, but only by lending or by usury: if
it be by usury, there is no gain of money, but rather return with
restitution of vices: if ye ask whether he has any virtuous thing in his
governance, he will answer that he does sell such merchandise in his shop, and
therefore cannot give that which he has not for himself.

If ye exchange any thing with it, he is so subtle to sell, and so curious to
buy, that that which he takes shall be of great measure, and that which he
sells shall want weight.

They which are in prosperity have no less need of good counsel, than the
unhappy has of remedy.

When every man thinks he has made peace with fortune, than she has a new
demand ready forged.

Man being born in the world; nourished in the world; living in the world;
being a child of the world; and following the world; what is man to hope for of
the world, but things of the world?

Man alone thinks to eat the flesh without bones; to give battle without
peril; to travel without pain, and sail by the seas without danger: but it
is impossible for mortal men to live in the world unless they will become
subjects to the sorrows of the world.

We are now come to so great folly, that we forget and will not serve God that
created us, nor abstain from the world that persecuteth us.

O filthy world how far art thou from just; and how far ought they to be from
thee which desire to be just, for naturally thou art a friend of novelties and
an enemy of virtues.

How much do we put our trust in fortune; how lewdly do we pass our dais; how
much blinded in the world; yet for all that we give him so much credit, as
though he had never deceived us.

The world is an ambassador of the evil, and a scourge of the good; a nurse to
vices; and a tyrant to virtues; a breaker of peace; a maintainer of war; a
table of gluttons; and a furnace of concupiscence; it is the danger of
Charybdis where the hearts do perish, and the peril of Scylla where the hearts
do waste.

The men that are borne of women are so evil a generation, and so cruel is
the world wherein we live, and fortune so empoisoned with whom we frequent,
that we cannot escape without being spurned with his feet; bitten with his
teeth; torn with his nails; or empoisoned with his venime.

If a stranger or neighbor yea our proper brother do envy us, Note.
we will never pardon him though he earnestly request it, yet cease we not to
follow the world, though he continually persecute us, thus we see that we draw
our swords against flies, and will kill the Elephants with needles.

Some I see which willingly fall; Note.
and some which would recover themselves. I find that all do complain but few
that will amend.

Riches, youth, pride, and liberty, are four plagues which poison princes,
replenish the common wealth with filth, kill the living, and defame the dead.

How unhappy are they which are in prosperity, for justly they that be set up
in high estate cannot flee from the peril of Scilla, without falling into the
danger of Charybdis.

O miserable world, thou art a sepulcher of the dead; a prison of the living; a
shop of vices; a hangman of virtues; an oblivion of antiquity; an enemy of
things present; a snare of the rich; a burden to the poor; a house of
pilgrims; and a den of thieves.

O world, thou art a slanderer of the good; a rauener of the wicked; a
deceiuer; and an abuser of ail; and to speak the truth, it is impossible to
live contented, much less to live in honor, in the which is most to be
lamented, either the evil man advanced without desert, or the good man
overthrown without cause.

The tokens of a valiant captain are wounds of weapons: and the sign of a
studious person is the despising of the world.

Not those that have most knowledge, Riches rules.
but those that have most riches in the commonwealth do command, I doubt
whether the divine power has deprived them, or that the wordly malice has
lost the taste of them.

O world, world, I know not how to escape thy hands, not how the simple men
and idiot defends himself out of thy snares, when the sage and wise men
withal their wisdom can scarsely set their foot sure on earth, for all that
the wise men know, is little enough to defend them from the wicked.

He only passes without travel the dangers of life, which banisheth from him
the thought of the temporal goods of this world.

The traitorous world in no one thing beguileth the worldly so much as by
feeding them with vain hope, saying, that they shall have time enough to be
virtuous.

The more the world increases in years, The elder the world is, the worse are
the people.
so much the more it is laden with vices.

The world has always bin in contention, and rest has always bin banished:
for if some sigh for peace, others be as desirous of wars.

O world for that thou art the world, so small is our force, and so great is
our debilitie, that thou willing it, and we not resisting it, thou do swallow
us up in the most perilous gulf, and in the thorns most sharp, thou do
prick us, by the privy ways thou do lead us, and by the most stony ways
thou cariest us, thou bring us to the highest favorers, to the end that
afterward with a push of thy pike thou might overthrow us.

What, Burden.
I think I have somewhat in the world, I find that all that I have is but a
burden.

I have proved all the vices of the world for no other intent but to prove if
there be any thing wherein men's malice might be satisfied; All worldly vices.
and in proouing I find, that the more I eat the more I hunger; the more I
drink the greater I thirst; the more I rest the more I am broken; the more I
sleep the more drowsy I am; the more I have, the more I covet; the more I
desire the more I am tormented; the more I procure the less I obtain;
finally, I never had so great pain through want, but afterward I had more
trouble with excess.

Pretty saiengs in common places.
THou art such a one as never deserved that one should begin to love,
Commendation.
or end to hate.

How much the noble hearts do rejoice in giving to other, A good nature.
so much they are ashamed to take service unrewarded, for in giving they become
lords, and in taking they become slaves.

The rashness of youth is restrained with the raines of reason. Reason rules.


Although we be wise, Frailty of man.
we leave not therefore to be men, do not thou know that all that ever we
learn in our life, suffices not to govern the flesh in one hour?

I am sorry to see thee cast away: To him that is overcome with any folly.
and it greeueth me to see thee drowned in so small a water.

A brother in words, and a cosen in works.

I rest between the sails of fear, and anchor of hope.

Though we praise one for valiantnes with the sword, Diversities of gifts.
we will not praise him therefore for excellency with the pen; although he be
excellent with the pen, he is not therefore excellent with the tongue; though he
have a good tongue, he is not therefore well learned; and though he be learned,
he has not therefore good renown; and though he have good renown, he is not
therefore of a good life; for we are bound to receive the doctrines of many
which do write, but we are not bound to follow the lives which they lead.

When a father passes out of this present life, and leaves behind him a
child being his heir, they cannot say to him that he dies; but that he
waxes young in his child, The father dieng, waxes young in his child.
because the child does inherit the flesh, the goods, and memory of the
father.

The desires of young men are so variable, Youthly desires.
that they daily have new inventions.

Men that read much and work little; Teachers and not followers.
are as bells which do sound to call others, and they themselves never enter
into the church.

It is an old saying, A iuell nothing worth to the ignorant.
that a precious iuell is little regarded, when he that has it knows not the
value of it.

FINIS.

