An April Shower Shed in abundance of TEARS,

FOR THE DEATH AND INCOMPARABLE LOSS, OF THE RIGHT NOBLE, TRVLY RELIGIOUS, AND
Virtuous, RICHARD SACVILE, Baron of BVCKHVRST, and Earl of DORSET.

Who Departed this Life upon Easter day last, being the 28.th of March, at
DORSET House.

By Henry Peacham.

-- Sublatam oculis p^^rimus inuidi.

LONDON

Printed by Edw. Allde. 1624.

CLaruit his armis viuus DORSETIVS Heroes, Queis ornarat auos NEVSTRIA terra
suos. Nunc his ad postem fixis, latet abditus astris Host triumphato, nescius
ipse mori.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RELIGIOUS, AND Nobly minded Lady, ANNE Countess
Dowager of DORSET.
MADAME:
I Am bold; the first, to bewail in public, the Death of your dear
Deceased Lord of Eternal and Blessed memory; not that he can want Mourners,
whose loss concerns so deeply our Religion, King, State, your Self, your
Children, and thousands of true Lovers and Friends in particular: But because I
am loath (I must confess truly) to be prevented in manifesting my affection
unto him dead, unto whom living I was more obliged then any other of his rank
in the Land. And although I am of least ability in this kind (since the most
Learned Pens and skilfullest Pencils, must fall far short of limning him to
the Life, such were his excellent Parts) yet I had rather undergo any censure
then be Ungrateful, or like an unconscionable Debtor, refuse satisfaction when
it will be accepted for less then three in the hundred. It is too true, that
the Zeal of the most, expires with their Friends lives or fortunes: unfeigned
Devotion wears and waters their Tombs many years after: and so (Madame)
shall I his, though I creep thereto on my knees. For if ever Mortality clad
true Honor, and Honesty of Heart, she veiled either in the Person of your
Noble Lord and Husband; whose Piety to GOD, Zeal to Religion, Loyalty to his
Soueraign, Love to his Country, Courtesy and Affability to all; set of with
the rarest endowments of Body and Mind, (like so many Diamonds in Gold) drew
all Hearts to his Love, and Eyes to his Admiration. But he is gone, and we
follow as fast as may be: and as in Fruit the ripest; so with us in the world,
the rarest are soonest gathered for Heaven.

Immodicis brevis est aetas and rara Senectus.

I dare not presume farther of your Honors patience, already Exercised and
tried even to the height; only I desire of the Almighty, who is hope and
help of the Widow, and Father of the Fatherless, to send you Comfort from
Heaven, and his Blessing upon those sweet Ladies your hopeful Children, that
they may live many years to propagate your Names and happy Memories to all
Posterity for ever. I humbly take leave.

April, 18. Who is, and ever shall be devoted to your Honor, HENRY PEACHAM.

Epitaphium vere Honoratissimi, Nobiliss: pijs ac bonis, omnibus
desideratissimi, D. RICHARDI SACVILE, Baronis de Buckhurst, ac Dorsetiae
Comitis, Londonijs defuncti, and Withihamis communi auorum Sarcophago in agro
Sussexiensi sepulti.
HIc situs ille tuus Comes est DORSETIA, nomen
Qui clarum toto fecerat orb tuum.
Quem si Nobilit as generis, (nam Sanguine Regum
Cretus,) si Pietas, cum genio ingenium,
Census, honos, aut Musa potens valuisset ab vmbris
Infernis, pretio vel reuocasseprece;
Non Caput exigua Sanctum latitasset in vrna,
Nestoreos dignum vel superasse dies.
His Monument to the Reader.
Who thinks that DORSET lies Interred
Here-vnder, think that they have erred
For it is not he, it is but the Case
Wherein this precious Jewel was,
Who seeks for him must ask of FAME,
Who registers his Honored name;
Or search the Hearts of Friends, where he
Is lodged, and living like to be:
And if not here, to Heaven ascend,
There sure he lives world without end.
For though with me his dust does lie,
Believe it, DORSET cannot Die.
AN ELEGY. Upon the Death of the Right Honorable, RICHARD SACVILE, Baron of
Buckhurst, and Earl of DORSET.
MY LORD! (so must I call that Honored mind
And happy Soul of yours, which here behind,
Has left her earthy Pawn; e're any knew
Or could imagine DEATH would seek his due.)
Oh give me leave distractedly to rue;
The first of many, our dear miss of you;
Of you my Dearest LORD --
But Sorrow duls my Style, and tears mine Ink
Discolor weeping. DORSET dead? Me think
Though Fame in mourning tells it, it is not so
That such a Peer, but sewest days ago,
So Healthy, Young, so useful to the State
In these weak Times, that do importunate
The Heavens themselves, for help of Heart, of Hand,
Of Wisest and the ablest of our Land
To her Support. Ah! would it were untrue,
And that mine Eyes not needed to bedew
With Siluer-dropping April his black Hearse,
Sad Subject now of every Learned Verse.
For by the Genius (which I hold Divine)
Of each true Poet, (therefore none of mine)
I here profess, it is no by-regard,
Or expectation of a slight reward
Enforces me to weep. The common loss
Of KING, and COUNTRY, calls to bear their cross
And so I will; know then whom we have lost,
Even him, whom Arts and Arms may truly boast
To be their own. We trick not his Descent
And Images, which in our The Complete Gentleman, a work of the Author,
wherein he sets down his Pedigree at large.
COMPLEMENT,
Who list may view at large; nor say his Blood
(Except the Royal) was as equal good
As any else of NORMAN Race, since none
Can claim their Grandsires Virtues for their own.
No, like a Diamond he allured the sight
T'admire his own, and not a borrowed light.
For whatsoever could be wished, that one
Might make Complete and Absolute alone,
It wanted not in him; For, first his Mind
Was best composed, Religiously inclined,
Not with the World, to win an Aerie fame
Of Singular, or underneath the same,
To work (as many) some malicious end
While they the TRVTH and PIETY pretend.
Oh no! in him this Zeal was real good
And was the Ground, whereon the Model stood
Of that brave structure of his Noblest mind:
For who more Zealous, Pitiful, and kind
To heavenly TRVTH'S Professors? ye Divines
Of LONDON, SUSSEX, KENT, witness, my Lines
Do attribute unto him, but his due.
How was his Love extended unto you,
By adding Stipends to your Livings small,
Maintaining many who had none at all?
Your Debts often times (when least you thought) discharging
Your bounds, and grounds from his own means enlarging,
Nor did this Bounty, stretch to you alone,
But to Desert, in every meanestone,
That (as of TITUS) I may truly say;
From him Sad-hearted none returned away.
And which his Bounty, yet did more endeare,
And each reward made double to appear,
Was his Free-noble, Curteou entertayne,
Deuoid of Pride, and haughte-brow'd Disdain,
Who did not (monstrous) with his Honor swell,
He knew that was but rin'd and outward shell
Of Man, and best did with their humors suit
Whose insides poor, could only beg repute
From Plumes and Tissue: or whose Honors cost
The setting on, and must improoue them most.
No, this as but the vinet of Boule
That Is empty, whereuponthe thirsty Soul
Commends, admires, the Grauers hand and wit,
His thirst not quenched allthis while for it.
'Twas hence we knew hm affable and mild,
Denying not access ever to the Child.
(Though Greatness always cannot stand extent
But Bowe-like sometimeit must lie unbent.)
An enemy to garish Pride and Fashion,
The Epilepsie, of our English Nation,
For with the plainest plain, ye saw him go
In Civil black of Rash, of Serge, or so,
The Liuerie of wise Stayednesse; Except when
His Prince did call upon his Service, then
Stout DIOMEDE in Arms, not brighter shone,
Or man more Glorious was to look upon:
That had Death seen him at a Courtly Tilt
Brave mounted, Plumed, in Arms of Azure gilt
Encountering Princely CHARLES, while splinters fly,
And prayers of people, echo in the sky,
He would I know have lent him longer date,
He yet, not lost, and we been fortunate.
What Cunning Artistes pencill may I borrow,
Thrice-hopefull CHARLES, to limne thy grief and sorrow
For DORSETS loss, but there is no form can fit,
Or be imagined to decipherit.
"Light Cares may speak, the great amazed with wonder,
"Themselves then utter, sooner burst a sunder.
And hence proceeds the dulnese of each Pen
Our hopes thus, His Death immediately ensuing the Death of the worthy Prince
Lodowicke, Duke of Lenox, and Richmond.
stricken down and down again,
Oh whither Heavens 'twere your immediate hand
For his own good, (though to afflict our hand)
Or Hels deep Hate wrought his untimely end,
Occasioned by those roots (whch God defend)
I cannot say, but this I must profess
The Non-pareil, Pearl, Earl of Nobleness
Is (fairest BRITANE) from thy bosom torn,
And pawned by Death, though by another worn;
Thou like one lately robbed not know yet,
What thou have lost, or how to value it.
Believe (all-dreaded Empress) from thy KENT
To ORKNEY, utmost of thy large extent,
NOBILITY not bred a finer wit
With better judgment to dispose of it.
What various reading heigthned his Discourse
At all occasions, putting to the worse
A vulgar judgment by dispute, or when
H'encountred Papist, or the Puritan.
Who better reis'd in Scriptures and the Text,
The Ancient Fathers, and our Writers next,
Mine eyes I here a-vow did never read
Lines sweeter, then did from his Pen proceed;
Rare Poet sure was DORSET, therefore he
Was great MOECENAS of all Poesy,
What State, what Train, what Order, House kept he
At his fair KNOWLE, His House hard by Seuenoke in Kent.
a Paradise to me
That seemed for site, a Court for grearest Prince,
The Home of Honor, and Magnificence;
Where every day a Christmasse, seemed, that fed
The neighbor Poor, that else had famished.
How did his Love and Noblest Care extend
To all his followers, at his latter end
I need not tell, themselves will say for me,
Men never served a better Lord then he.
Ah dearest Lady, flower of the Stem
Of CLIFFORDS race, and Honors goodly Gemme
His truest Spouse, with (whom he loved so well)
That Pearl your MARGARITE, His only Children living, Margaret the eldest, a
hopeful and fair young Lady, Isabell an infant.
and young ISABELL.
How do I sorrow for your sake, whom Cross
(By Father, Mother, Son, now Husbands loss)
On Cross afflicts, of worldly help bereau'n,
Except the help (that never fails) of Heaven:
Oh let not grief that many one has slain,
Wherein not any profit does remain,
(For Sin except,) deject your soul a whit,
But Palme-like grow, the more oppressed by it.
And since I now the Common loss have shown,
Oh let me drop one tear, and show mine own,
Who never found a mind more Nobly-free,
Respective, Loving, Bountiful to me.
Yea Constant, (for no PYLADES could be
More faithful, where he did affect, then he;
That even in Childhood, whom he chose a Friend
His Love embraced to his latter end,
Such was his Honored mind; but he is dead,
And with him Hopes of thousands buried.
Sleep then in peace (Dear Lord) and lowly Dust,
Till thou receiu'st thy Portion with the Just;
For while I live, mine eyes shall never see
A Man, a Peer, a Patron like to thee.
A double Vision upon the Death of this Noble Lord.
Me thought I saw by DVROVERNVM, Cantuaburie, So called in old time.
where
Along the Siluer-streaming STOVRE does slide
A lovely Nymph, her wiery-golden hair
Sit rending, wayling that fair place beside,
More beauteous Creature the worlds Compass wide
Ne had: her raiment white, her cheeks besprent
With blubbred tears, and on a Cross she leant.
To whom, ah whom, shall now I make my moan?
Or who (she said) will pity my distress?
Since now my nearest dearest Friend is gone,
Who shall RELIGION (wel-nie Comfortless)
Commiserate? (yet many do profess
A seeming friendship) and her labors cherish,
Or give me Bread, that here I may not perish?
I find with many gracious entertain
(In Kentish soil) yet DORVS was the man
Whose love I had, and he my heart again,
Won by his Brave and Royal bounty, when
I deeply languish'd, that Physician
Of life dispaired, me he then relieved,
And gave most Comfort, when I most was grieved.
But he is Dead; with that a sigh she fetched,
As might have torn an heart of steel in twain,
And said; blessed Soul (with hands on high out-stretch'd)
Where-euer thou in Heaven do remain,
Enjoy thy Bliss, for hardly I again
Thy like shall find, therewith I waked in bed,
But River, Nymph, and all were vanished.
The second Vision.
I Saw a goodly Laurel, straight and Green,
Upon whose top sweet singing Birds did build,
Whose like PERNASSVS Bay-bound head I ween,
Nor TEMPE, pride of THESSALIE, could yield,
Whereto repayr'd the Shepherd of the Field:
But Muses most heere-vnder did delight,
In Heat, their Hymns and holy things endite.
But suddenly the envious owner came,
And at the root did lay with all his might,
That down it fell, together with the same,
The Nestes and tender Young, unfit for flight;
That much my heart was grieved at the sight,
But more, because the Muse had lost her Friend
Whose arms from harms her state did full defend.
To the Deceased Lord.
AS in that Royal Chapel, where
Seventh HENRY lies in Westminster,
From every Windows middle part;
A line direct runs to his Heart. So was the Plot devised, that from the
Center of every window a direct line came to the K heart, lying in his Grave.

So all our Loves by equal line
From far, concenter in thy Shrine.
NOblest DORSET, dead and gone,
My Muse with Poesy have done:
And in his Grave, now thrown thy Pen,
Sit down and never rise again.
FINIS.

