A TEMPERATE VVARD-VVORD, TO THE TVRBVLENT AND SEDITIOVS VVach-word of Sir
Francis Hastinges knight, who indeuoreth to slander the whole Catholic
cause, and all professors thereof, both at home and abroad.

Reduced into eight several encounters, with a particular speech directed to
the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Council. To whom the arbitriment
of the whole is remitted.

By N. D.

Psalm. 71. verse. 4. Iudicabit Dominus pauperes populi, and humiliabit
calumniatorem. God vvil judge his poor and afflicted people, and vvil make the
st^nderer to stoop. Imprinted with License.

ANNO M. D. XCIX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Could much have wished that Sir Francis Hastinges, who gives himself for
author of a certain injurious pamphlet, published some months past, against
Catholics, and entitled: Avvache-vvord, or whosoever made that biting libel
for him, with intention to dishonor him with the title, as on the one side,
he names himself knight (and all men know the Hastinges to be of a very
honorable family, and one also to be knight of that name) so on the other, had
he observed some term and style of nobility or gentry in his writing: in
which case, I had either wholy spared this labor of answering him at all,
leaving him only to the censure and rebuke of his equals, for meddling in so
base an exercise, as calumniation and railing is, in this his old years, or
at leastvvise, should he have received his check and refutation, with that
regard of worship and honor, as otherwise had been due to his rank, place, and
person.

But fynding him so far forgetful of all knightly temperance in his tongue, and
of all civil carriage in the drift and current of his book, as he holds no
rule or limit of modesty at all, but enraged rather (as it seems) with a
furious vein of inuectiue spirit, spares neither God nor man, so far forth as
they concern the catholic cause, or the cause them: he must bear with me,
and lay it to his own demerits, if I be driven to encounter with him in some
more egar and sharp manner, at certain meetinges, then either I allow of by
mine own lyking, or then the reverend respect I carry to his house and
family, and the particular affection I feel toward some of his own name
and lineage, would otherwise have induced me.

Who will not confess, but that lying, forging, and fal^ifying, ignorant
vaunting, odious scoffyng, malicious calumniations, seditious interpretations,
bloody exaggerations, Barbarous in sultations over them that already are in
affliction and calamity, ought to be far from the nature, pen, and tongue of a
knight or gentleman? and yet these are the flovvers or rather furies of this
skolding discourse, as afterward you shall see by that which is to be
treated. VVherin if the lives honors, states, and liuinges, of home-borne
subjects, were only touched, and brought in question (as they be) it were
more tolerable, though no way tolerable, being don unjustly, but the heat of
this hasty knight rests not here, but rusheth further, to the open assault
of forayne monarchs also, their honors, fame, and reputation, which is less
tolerable, and consequently, has need of some more sharp and forcible
reiection.

The violence of the Puritan spirit is not unknown to the wise of England:
whereunto also France and Scotland vvil bear sufficient witness. It has been
kept down many years, by the valor and prudenee of the Protestant, and the
known professors thereof have been held lean and hungry by her Majesty, to
no small benefyt of public peace and so may be still, while the Catholic
party has also some poyse and sway in the balance against them. If Sir
Francis be one of them, it may seem perhaps expedient in his vvisdome, that
(her Majesty growing now fast in years) things be brought to some trial by
garboile in her days, for that afterward, more then one part may chance to
join against them: wherefore if they might now oppress the catholic party
by the hand of her Majesty, their own would serve afterward more easily
to do the like against her and hers, and the way and means to effectuate them
both may seem perhaps no wise to be more potent or speedy, then to drive
many at home to desperation, by fears and terrors of oppressions, and by
opprobrious injuries, and personnal slanders, to enforce forayne princes, of
the same religion, to implacable ire and indignation. And this is the proper
course that Sir Francis takes, throughout his whole sedious vvach-vvord.
Which to cover the better, he falls to extreme flaterie of the other side,
espetially of the state, and of her Majesty's person in particular; which are
the fittest baytes to cover such hooks, as angle after popular favor, for a
further fetch.

To this man then I am to answer, as the substance and tenor of his
accusations, fictions, or calumniations, shall lead me, reducing all that I am
to say, for better order and memory, to eight or nine principal heads,
branches, and arguments, under the name of encounters, vvherin I dout not, but
the apparent truth of diverse points vvil come to light, which hitherto have
layen hidden and obscure, in the understanding of many, hoping that the discret
reader will pass over these fevv lines, with a beneuolent, or at least, an
indifferent eye; reserving the final judgment of all, to the Lords of her
Majesty's Council; whom, I my self have chosen for vmpires and arbitres of
the whole controversy, and so I end this entrance and vvil pass to my first
combat and encounter with Sir Francis Hastinges.

Your hearty friend that wishes your best and greatest good, N. D.
THE PRINCIPAL PARTS OF THIS VVARD-VVORD.
THe preface to the reader, about Sir Francis Hastinges manner of proceeding.
The first encounter, about blessings or cursings, received by change of
catholic religion in England. page. 1. The second encounter, concerning
certain absurd grovvndes of catholic religion, feigned by the knight: and the
defense of Saint Thomas of Canterbury. page. 11. The third encounter, touching
forged perils, to have been procured to her Majesty by Catholics, both before
and since her reign. page. 27. The fourth encounter, about certain principal
Englishmen, injured by name, as Bishop Gardener, Cardinal Allen etc. also about
father Persons, and other Jesuits. page. 41. The fifth encounter, about
Jesuits, and father Persons in Particular, whether they seek the Queens
blood, as S. Fra. affirms. page. 55. The sixth encounter, of Catholic
recusants now in England, and the fault of disloyalty falsely laid against
them. page. 72. The seventh encounter, of for ayn princes slandered, and first
about the Bishop of Rome, whether he be Antichriste or no. page. 90. The eight
encounter, about the present king of Spayn, and the Spanish nation, injured by
Sir Francis. page. 102. A speech to the Lords of her Majesty's privy Council,
remitting the judgment and arbitrament of the whole controversy, to their
censures: as also the judgment and petition of the ansvverer, for ending or
composing of matters. page. 119.
THE FIRST INCOVNTER, ABOUT THE BLESSINGS AND BENEDICTIONS, which Sir Francis
affirms to have come to England by the change of Catholic Religion.
WITTY was the answer of him who being demanded, Antigo. of flattery.
what enemy was to be holden for most perilous and pernicious; said, that of
domestical enemies, the flatterer; for that his wound is received commonly
with delectation, and by covering the truth, and praising the vices and
imperfections of the party flattered, he does lead him pleasantly and without
resistance, to perdition.

And as this is true in particular men (as all the world does experience daily)
so much more has it his effect in great communities and common wealths; where
the greater part being lightly of the simpler and more imperfect sort, they are
easily carried away with the poisoned melody of these Sirens songs of
adulatio^, and so he that will read over the stories of the beginninges,
proceedinges, fall and overthrow of realms and countries, shall find the
principal root of their ruin or changes; to have bin the ear and credit
given to flatterers, before the sincere counsel of them that spoke more
plainly, though les pleasantly. Let the onl^e example of the people of
Israel serve for this time, who being often told by holy men, and prophets of
God, of their dangerous estate, would never believe them, but harkened rather
unto flatterers that smoothed all, and told them of blessings; in so much as
God himself resolved one day to say plainly unto them (though it profited
little) P^pule meus qui te beatum dicunt, ipsi te decipiunt, Esa. 3.
and viam gressuum tuoru^ dissipant: My people, they who say thou art happy,
they are those that deceive thee, and do mar the way, where thou art to pass,
thereby to overthrow thee.

He that will consider with judgment and indifferency, the present estate of
matters in England and round about it (and this especially by reason of change
made in religion) and shall read together the flearing tale, The present state
of English blessings.
which Sir Francis Hastinges tells us in the first lines of his book, of the
i^finit and innumerable blessings received (as he says) by the said change:
he will either say, that the man lacked wit and discourse to see the
deformity and contradiction of his own talk, or else modesty and shame
fastness in uttering it.

For notwithstanding the rare parts, and good intentions, of her Majesty in
this her government (which no man denies, nor yet conioyneth with the evil
success of this alteration of religion, as well known not to have proceeded
of her own inclination at the beginning) who is there so simple that
discovers not, or so evil affected that rueth not from his heart, the
difficulties already grown and growing daily by this most unfortunate and
fatal alteration of religion? which this man calls, The fountain and
wellspring whence all the rest of this our little Islands benefits and
blessings do issue and flow. Nay does not the seely fellow himself in all
this furious, and scornful libell of his, endeavor to lay before us a
thousand fears and frightes of imminent perilles, which he says hang over us
by the division of hearts, of hands, of judgments, of affections, of parts
and partial^ties, and factions within the realm? Or is his whole argument any
thing else in effect, but a timorous abodement of infinite ruins, that do
beset the realm, at this day? And are not his own words these, after a long
discourse of perilles? I doubt not (dear countriemen) but that you are men of
wisdom, and can easilye conceive, what dangers we stand in, by that which has
bin set down before. And a little after: The life of Religion, of Queen, and
Country, is at the stake, etc. And how then does he pype unto us this feigned
note of melancholy music, amiddest so many dreadful cares and sorrows? has
he not read that: Musica in luctu importuna narratio, ^^cles 22.
it is importun chaunting, when other men are weeping? but let us hear his
manner of speech.

If I should take upon me (says he) to enter into the enumeration of all the
benefits, and blessings, that from the almigh^i have bin powered upon this
little Island of England, etc.

Here Sir Knight, seeing you mention our little Island, you must take in
Scotland also, or else you err in Cosmographie, and then your meaning must be,
that Scotland in like manner as well as we, has tasted of the same
benedictio^s, by change of religion, as no doubt but it has, with all other
regions and countries near about us, who being quiet before and settled in one
universal and general religion, did by Englandes alteration, receive the like
impression and motion in themselves; yet more then the rest (by their
neerenesse) Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, and France. Into the enumeration of
all which countries miseries, tumultes, calamities, and desolations, happened
by that change, if I should enter with Sir Frau^cis to recount them, I should
find a far more ample subject to enlarge my self upon, then he in recyting his
blessings, though he descended unto very poor ones.

For to begin with Scotland, Scotland.
and to say nothing of the Battles, Murders, destruction of Countries,
Provinces, Towns, Cities, Howses, and particular Men, which we have seen in
that Realm within these forty years, that the change of religion has bin
attempted; no man can deny but that three Princes, two Queens, and one King,
the Mother, Daughter, and Husband, have bin all brought to their bane, by this
occasion; besides the overthrow and change of so many Noble Howses and Linages,
as Scotish-men can recount, mong their Hamiltons, Dougleses, Stewardes, and
others; as also the Irish will tell of their Noble Desmondes, and other Peers
destroyed. But Flaunders and France Ireland^ Flaunders^ France.
have no end at all in these coumptes, when they begin, they are so many. And
all this, as they say (and is evident) by the Lamentable consequence of our
change of Religion in England, which drew them after us, or at least-wyse gave
example, heart, and help, to their change and euersion also.

But not to step from England England.
it self, where principally this blessing bringer does vaunt that his blessings
are powered out in abundance, let us examine the matter indifferently among our
selves: we are Englishmen, and we talk to men of the same language and
nation, that know the country and condition thereof: and many have seen the
change, and knew the stare of things therein before the alteration, or at
least-wyse have heard thereof since: by their fatheres and grandfathers, This
is not a contention about Terra Virginea, where only we must believe Sir
Walter Rawleighes Relations, or Sir Humfrey Gilbertes about Terra Florida. Let
every man then look about him, and say what he finds or feels of these
blessings, or maledictions in himself or others.

I for my part shall only for better direction of men's judgments, give this
advertisement, that all blessings of a commonwealth may seem to be reduced to
two heads or branches, the one spiritual, belonging to the soul and
conscience; the other temporal, that concerns the body and weale-publique.
Let the consideration of the spiritual, go before, for that they are the
worthier and most important for true Christians to be considered and esteemed.

There was in England before the alteration, Spiritual effects by change of
religion.
one God worshipped and adored after one and the self same manner, not only
thoroughout this little Island of England, and Scotland, but also of the whole
body of Christendom, one faith, one belief, one form of service, one number
of sacraments, one tongue in celebration, one sacryfice, one head of the
Church, one obedience, one judgment in all, Joan. 17. Act. 4. Ephesians. 4. Gal. 3.
2. These. 5. 1. Cor. 4.
with other like points and circumstances of union and unity, which made a
general uniformity also in the peace of men's minds, and is a benedictio^ so
highly esteemed and commended by the Apostles and Christ himself as nothing
more in Christian doctrine.

This was in England before the change, but now in these points, we English of
the new profession, are not only different and divided from the general body
of Catholics in Christendom (with whom we were united before) but also among
our selves and with other new sectaries sprung up with us or after us, we have
implacable wars and are divided in opinions, as from Lutherans in Germany
and Denmark, from Zwinglians in Swizer-land, from Caluinistes in Geneua,
France, Holland, and Scotland; and at whom what combats our Bishops,
Counselors, and moderate sort of Protestants, have to defend their Parliament
Religion and Q. proceedings as they call it, against Puritanes, Brownistes, and
other like good fellows, that by show of Scriptures do impugn it: All
Englishmen know and see by their books daily, so as this first and greatest
spiritual blessing of unity and uniformity, we have lost and not gained by
out change of Religion.

But here our Knight perhaps will say, that the blessing consists in that
by this change, they who follow the Parliament Religion allowed by the state of
England, (I do say Perhaps, for that I know not but rather do doubt much,
whether Sir Francis does follow it or no) have the only true Religion among
all others, that do err, or at least-wyse his puritan Religion, and thereby
that they only have this blessing by the change.

And, no doubt, but he said much if he could prove it of the one or of the
other, About certayntie in religion.
but this seems impossible (I mean) that he should either prove it to me, or
know it himself, but only by his own particular guess, which makes not
faith, but opinion and fancy; for I would ask Sir Francis, or any such man as
he is, that determines so resolutely, that his only Religion among so many
others (as are extant at this day) is true, and all others false; whereon does
he ground his certainty?

Two only means can Sir Francis have to guide himself in this case,

Yea and when all is done, if he had all these helps needful for such a
matter (as he has not) yet were it but a private man's opinion, and
consequently his faith should be grounded but upon his own particular
judgment, which makes no faith at all, but opinion only as often has been
said, for that faith must have Gods express authority for her foundation.

So that to conclude, the first blessing which Sir Francis in particular
thinks to have rec^yued by this change of his religion, is in effect, that,
whereas before, when he believed the Catholic and universal faith of
Christendom, delivered unto him by the universal church, as founded on
scripture (which church Christ and his Apostles, gave him express commission
to credit) his belief was properly faith and founded upon a rock, that could
not fayl: now, having left that fortress, and cast himself into the waves of
new opinions, he has nothing certain at all, but so much as he list to choose
of himself, or of other men's opinions; which choice is properly called heresy,
for that the word heresy in Greek (as all learned men know) signifies
nothing else, but a certain election and choice in matters of religion, to
wit, when a man leaving the common consent of the general Church, chooses
only to follow that which his own private judgment induces him unto.

And to make this more plain, A plain demonitiation against Sir Francis.
how all these people have no other rule of belief but only what their own
fa^sie leads them unto, I ask Sir Francis (not of any Catholyque Doctor, nor
of any ancient father, as S. Augustine, S. Ierom, or the rest, whom easily he
would contemn) but rather, of his own Doctors, Martin Luther, John Caluyn,
Theodore Beza, and such others, whom he supposes to have bin servants of
God, and endued with his holy spirit: and all the world knows that they were
more learned then Sir Francis; yet why should he believe his own judgment more
then theirs in points of faith? wherein they differ from him, as Luther about
the real presence, and the number and form of Sacraments, and many other
points; Caluyn in matter of the Q Supremacy, which he denies. Beza in the
whole government of their church. Or why should I believe Sir Francis or his
new masters of England, rather then these that were more learned then he or
his? or what reason, rule, or foundation, have any of these men, to believe
their own opinion, more then others, but only self will and fancy?

This then is the first and greatest spiritual benediction (or malediction
rather) that I find to have happened to our realm and nation by this woeful
alteration of religion, that whereas before we had ^ direct rule, squyre and
pole-starre to follow, which was the universal church; now, every man being
set at liberty, holds, believes, and teaches what he lists. Nor is there
any way or mean left to restrain him, for straight way he appealeth boldly
and confidently to the scriptures, and there he will be both master and pilot,
and boteswayne himself, to govern the bark at his pleasure, for he admitte^^
no judge, no interpreter, no authority, no antiquity, nor any other manner
of trial; which is the greatest madness and malediction that ever could happen
among men of reason.

And I have been the longer in this first blessing, for that it is the head and
welspring of all other spiritual miseries, insued by this alteration upon us,
which now in haste I will run over as men are wont to drinck a medicine with
as little stay or reflection as may for the evil savor.

After assurance, stabilitie, and union in belief, the next greatest spiritual
benedictions that can be expected of any doctryn, What effects of virtue new
religion has wrought.
are the good effects of virtue which it woorketh in men's minds and manners,
as it was foretold by Esaias the prophet, that Christ's doctrine, should so alter
men's conditions and natures, that such as were most fearce, sauadge, and wicked
before, should by this doctryn become most humble, Esa. 11.
kind and gentle. The wolf (says he) shall dwell with ^he lamb, and the
parde shall lie with the goat; the calfe, lion, and sheep shall abide together:
and a little child shall be able to govern them all.

Well then: has the protestants doctryn wrought these effects of peace,
meekness, mansuetude and agreement? I have touched before the bloody
tragedies raised in France, Flaunders, Scotland, and other places, upon the
first rising thereof, I might add Swizerland, and Germany, where their own
stories do testify, that above a hundredth thousand people were slain within
one year, by the rebellion and wars of the countrie-men against their
Lords, Sledan.
for the controversy of religion, such humility obedience, and meeknes of
heart im^rinted presently this new doctryn when it came.

But let us see other effects, Christ's doctrine exhorts to Pe^ance, to
Mortification of the flesh, Math. 3. 8. 4. Luc. 3. Act. 2. 2. Corinthians. 7. and
2. Romans 8. Coll. 3. Math. 19. 17 1. Cor. 7. Luc. 11. and 14.
to Continency, Virginity, Fa^ting, Praying, Alms, voluntary Poverty,
renouncing of the world, and the like. Are there more of these effects now
adays in England or before? Or are there more in Sir Francis and his men, then
in ours? does he and his ghospellers pay their debtes better then Catholics
do, or keep better Howses, or more Hospitality, or ^rayse their Rentes
less, or take less Fines, or use their Tenantes ^etter, or lend their
Neighbors more money, without usury? Or do they help to Marrye more Poor
men's daughters, and other such like good Works of Charity? Is Pride in
apparayle, Glut^onie, Drunkenness, Lechery, Swearing, and For swearing,
Coue^ousnesse, Cruelty, Falsehood, Deceipte, Theeuerie, Lack of Con^cience,
Oppressing of poor men, more of less noweadayes in ure or before, when yet
this change was not made? Let Sir Francis an^were me to this and not he only
but the whole country round about him, and then let him tell me with
witnesses, whether they be Spiritual blessings or curses that have insued
upon this change of Religion so much commended by him, and so I sh^l pass to
weigh his temporal benedictions, which perhaps he esteems far more then
these spiritual.

For better understanding whereof, Temporal effects by change of religion.
men are wont to bring into consideration two points. First, what was likely
to have bin, or ^allen out, if the the change of Religion had not bin made in
her Ma^esties time, and then what has insued upon the change made.

To the first they say, that if as her Majesty entered most happily and joy
fully into the Crown of England, by general consent of all, and promoted
especially by the peculier forces of Catholics, that were at that day most
potent without comparison; and that, as her Majesty entered Catholiquely, that
is to say, showing her^self in all points of religion and behaueour a
Catholic, according as she had done also before in her sister Q. Mary's
r^^gne and was now crowned and anointed Catholiquely by a Catholic bishop, at
a Catholic mass, and other like circumstances; i^ she had continued that
course still, and not yielded to the persuasion^ of some new counselors,
against the judgment of all her old (a^ in deed she was hardly brought to
yield thereunto at the beginning, for that she foresawe by her wisdom, diverse
of the inconveniences, that sythence have insued) then say these men, if this
had byn^ so, both her Majesty and the realm had been most happy at this day.
And in particular they allege these benefytes following, which of all
probability would have fallen upon us.

Strength and felicitic by union.
and among themselves, in Religion, judgment, affection, fidelity, and
frendshippe, as other realms Catholic of the world are seen to be, and as
ours for above a thousand years together with much honor and felicity, is
known to have remained.

Security.
Assaults, Treasons, Conspiracies, and the like, which this Wach-man
indeuoreth to lay before us, had ever come in consideration. For that England
united in it self, has ever since i^ was a Monarchy, made other Kingdoms and
Provinces rown^ about it to fear her forces (as by matters happened in France,
Ireland and Scotland, for many ages is evident) and she never greatly feared
any.

Issue of her Majesty.
for tha^ the principal cause of her graces not marying is to be presumed to
have proceeded of the different Religion of forrayne Princes, who desired the
same on the on side: and on the other, the inequaliti^ of blood in her own
subjects, for such aduaunceme^t. For to attribute this great resolution of her
Majesty, to the only love of sole life and Maiden head, I doubt how it can be
ius^ifiable, seeing that among Catholics where such profession is more praised
and practiced, they use sometimes to draw out even vowed Nuns from their
Cloisters to mariadge, for so weighty a cause, as is the saving of succession
in so great a crown as England is known to be. And among protestants virginity
is not of that necessity or merit, as for it to incurr so great
inconveniences, notwithstanding the base and servile flattery of this
crowching Knight, who casts in now and then the memory of a Maiden Queen,
without respecting the deadly wound which his country receives thereby.

Fourthly, Establishment of suecession.
of this had followed the sure establishment of the succession

Fifthly, if religion in England had not been changed, we had had Union with
Rome and see Apostolic.
nor consequently had the excommunication followed, whereof so great noise has
been made in the world abroad, and so great trouble at home. And what the union
and frendshipp of the Bishop of Rome may importe, even as a temporal Prince,
the effects showed of late in France, where espetiallie by his endeavor and
authority matters have been compounded that seemed very hard and desperate
before, not only between that King and his own subjects, but also between
that crown and Spayn and the states of Flaunders, which without such an arbiter
and vmpyre would very hardly, have ever been accommodated.

Sixthly, England had continued in her old ancient amity and leagues Ancient
leagues.
and with their dependents, and consequently had avoided all these long and
costly wars, which by that breach we have been enforced to manteyne with loss
of so many worthy men, and expense of so great treasure, as easelie may be
imagined, and the quarrel not yet ended.

Seventhly, so great and bloody wars and tumultes in Christian VVarres abroad.
had never happened, as before in part has been declared; and all the world
does impute the principal causes and motions thereof, unto the diversity of
religion in England.

And lastly, most doleful alterations in our own country had been Damages
received at home.
as the deprivation in one day of all the sacred order of Bishops in England,
with their perpetual imprisonment, for that they would not subscribe to this
unfortunate change of religion, wroong out in Parlame^t, as all men know, by
the odds only of one or two voices of lay men. The disgrace and abasing of so
many noble houses, with overthrow of others, whereof let Norfolk, Arundel,
Northumberland, Oxford, Westmerland and Dacres give testimony. For of the
rest I will not make mention, seeing perhaps themselves would be loath I should,
all which had passed otherwise by probability, if religion had not been
altered. The continual and intolerable affliction also of so many honorable
and worshipful Gentlemen, had never happened, for perseuering in their fathers
faith, whereto our country was first converted from infidelity, without any
other offense objected or to be proved against them, but only refusing to
accommodate themselves to this change. Recusantes.
The torturing, hanging, and quartering, of above a hundredth Priests for the
same cause; the most of them good Gentlemen, and youths of rare wit,
learning, and other parts, which other Common wealths would highly have
esteemed, and so would ours too in times past, and will again in time to come,
when these blastes shall once be ouerblown.

All these inconveniences and calamities had bin avoided, or the most of them,
if change of Religion in England had not been made; so that the innumerable
benedictions, which this poor man would needs threap upon us, by the change,
do come to be in effect these that follow.

First, The so^me of all that has been said.
in Spiritual affayrs to have no certaynty of Religion at all, as has bin
proved; no stay, no foundation, no rule, but only every man's own private
judgment, and fancy, wrangling and iangling without end, and without judge or
means to make an end: Novelties without number, and liberty of life without
fear or force of Ecclesiastical disciplyne to restrayn it. And the^ in
temporal matters the blessings are such as have bin discovered; our Realm
divided and shiuered in a thousand pieces; our Princess old, without children,
or hope of any, our Crown without Succession, our old friends and allies made
our enemies, our new friends uncertain, our own flesh and countrymen most
pitifully divided within their own bowels, and most miserably tossed and
turmoyled both abroad and at home: abroad and in other countries, with Prisons,
Yrons, Chains, Gallyes, and other Afflictions, even to Death it self; for
being Protestants, Pirates, Spies, Practisers, or other such imputations
incident to enemies. At home afflicted with no less persecutions of our own
Magistrates for being Catholics, or deemed to be such. So as I would fayn
know, who are they in our little Island that feel these innumerable benifits and
blessings by change of Religion, which this gentleman talks of, seeing there
are very few either of one Religion or other, that taste not of the miseries
whereof I have spoken, either in themselves, their friends, children, servants,
kinsefolks, goods, honors, or otherwise, and most of all the Realm and
Commonwealth it self.

It may be Sir Francis sits easier then other men, having gotten some fat
morsel to feed on, by this change, yet ought he to have some sens and feeling
also of other men's greefs, or at leastwise so much wit as not to put himself
to sing in public, when so many thowsands of other men do weep and complayn.
And so much of his blessings.

THE SECOND INCOVNTER, ABOUT CERTAIN ABSVRD GROWNDS and principles, forged by
this Knight to be in Catholic Religion.
WE have taken a scantling in the former encounter of this our knights folly
and flattery, now follows a fuller view of his cogging and lying; for these
two virtues commonly go together, Senec^.
qui adulator, idem and mendax, says one; the flatterer is a liar in like
manner. For neither truth can stretch herself to flatter: nor flattery can be
manteyned without lying. This man then, after he has flattered the state of
England so grossly and fondly as you have heard, by telling them of the
innumerable benedictions powered out upon the whole Island by the change of
religion, now he will needs take upon him to set before our eyes the spiritual
miseries and maledictions that Catholics were in before this change, to wit
in Queen Mary's days, and in former reigns of ancient Catholic Princes, by
reason of certain absurd and false principles, which (as he says) were then
received for truths in matters of Religion.

But before he come to set down those principles, he makes for his preface
acertain poetical description of the dark, clowdy, and mistie state of things
in Queen Mary's time, in these words.

It is not unknown (says he) to many yet living, Devised da^^^enes.
nether can it be altogether ^idden from the younger sort that lived with them,
what a dark mistie clowd of ignorance (which brought in popish idolatry and
all manner of superstition) did ouershadow the whole Land, etc. (and again
after.) In these dark and clowdy days, least the sunshine of knowledge should
dispearce the mists of ignorance and give light to the dimm of sight, etc.

Does it not seem that this grave gentleman describes the lake of Auernus in
Italy, or some foggy marsh in England, or some smoaky kitchen or wood-howse of
his own without a window, when he speaks of our famous Country in former
times? Above a thousand years the state of England and the Princes, People,
Nobility, and Learned men thereof had continued in that Egiptian or rather
Cimmerian darkness which he describes under, clouds, mists, and shadows, until
his new Sun-shyne doctors came in to inlighten the same. And it was accounted
then as w^se, learned, valiant, noble, and flourishing a Kingdom, as France,
Italy, Spayn, and other Catholic kingdo^s be at this day; where if one of
these our enlightened, and Sunborne, English ministers should appeer, he would
not dare to open his mouth in schools or matters of learning, among the great
number of most excellent learned men, which there are found, as we have well
experienced by such of our protestant people as now and then do go abroad to
forrayn Universities, and are quikly brought to confess, their inequality in
this kind, for that they skarse understand the very ordinary terms of the
learned sciences which the other do possess. And as for Q. Mary's reign in
England, Learning in Q. Mary's reign.
it is evident to all those that have judgment to discern what learning and
wisdom means (and indifferency to confess it) that there was not a more
learned Clergy in many ages before. And in respect of these poor creaturs that
occupy now their prebends, and sit in the Sunshine of their
New-pretended-gospel with their wives and children round about them, they were
great Rabbis and Patriarchs. One Tonstale of Duresme, one Watson of Lincoln,
one Christoferson of Chichester, for learning: one Fecknam of Westminster, one
Gardener and on White both Bishops of Winchester, for wisdom and learning
together, were able to hold at school all your Sunshine Clergy at this day,
for term of life and after, as by their woorks and wrytings yet extant does
well appeer.

But let us see how the knight goes forward in his tale; after he has told
us of these clouds, mists and darkness, that then raygned, he adds these
words: whereunto (says he) was added, and wherewith was mixed, all bloody and
sauadg cruelty against those that desired knowledge and were any way
enlightened by Gods grace, Manifest untruths.
with a glimering or small insight into true religion. For though it were but
only a desire to read upon the holy book of God; either the old or new
testament, then heretic was his title, heresy was his fault; ^^d for this was
he called before the Romish Clergy to receive their censure, and ^^ch never
departed from their clowtches till they had brandeled them to the ^aughter.

This is his narration. VVherin first we must separate open and ma^ifest lying,
from fond and rude ignorance: for that the former is less ^ufferable (in a
Knight that holds account of honor) then the second, ^specially in matters of
Divinity. And truly I am sorry that the writer of this book calls himself
knight, to whom in law of Chiualry a ^^a^ should not give the lie, but with
obligation to defend it in the field, ^ut for that I do presume when he
resolved to write and publish this book, and to diuulge so falls, fowl, and
slau^derous a libel, and to iniure ^o many men's honors therein, as he has donn,
and the honor of God and of his Saints especially, which is less to be
tolerated, he made account to renounce all privilege of Knighthood, Gentry,
and Nobi^ity. For this cause I am moved to make less scruple in that behalf
when necessity is offered.

And here I must begin in this very place to tell him, that two manifest
untruths, properly called lies (for that they are wilful) are set down by
him in the words alleged, and known to be such to very children and nouices
in the Catholic Religion.

The first, that it is holden for heresy, or ever was, to read upon the book
of God (as he calls it) in what language soever, Untruth.
for even in vulgar tongues it is permitted to infinite lay people in all
Catholic countries, by license of the ordinary, as all men know, and it can
not be denied.

The otherly is, that for this fault only men were called before the Romish
Untruth.
and brandeled to the slaughter.

These I say are apparent fictions; let the Knight defend his honor in auowing
them. It remains only to me to lay down what the Catholic Church did
ordain in this behalf, and what reasons she might have to restrain some of
this man's dim and glimmering people from reading at their pleasure, upon vulgar
B^bles without license, or without the spectacles of competent learning and
understanding requisite for to profitt thereby; and how far this prohibitio^ of
the Church streched, and whether this may justly be accounted bloody and savage
proceedings or rather prudent and provident circumspection for simple men's
safty.

First then, most certain it is, that no man or woman, was ever forbidden How
reading of Scriptures was forbidden and why.
to read any part of the holy Scriptures in any of the three learned
languages, wherein they were written, to wit Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. And
secondly, the restraynt that was made of vulgar translations, as French, Duch,
English and the like, was only that no such translation, should be admitted or
used, except it were first examined by learned me^ by order of the Bishop, and
Ordinary to see whether it were well and truly translated or no. And then such
men and women of the laity were permitted to use the said translation approved,
as should have license of the said Ordinary, and be thought fit and able to
profit, and not to take hurt or hinderance thereby; others had the same in
effect and substans delivered unto them by sermons, books, and other means.

This was the order; let indifferent men judge and determine what cruelty or
mercy, impiety or piety, might be herein. For first, no man will deny but if
the translator did not put down truly and sincerely the words of Scriptures
in his vulgar translation, then the simple reader that cannot discern, should
take man's word for Gods word, which were great inconvenience, and for this
cause only (if none other were) most necessary was it, that some order should
be set down for examining of translations, whereby might be distinguished when
God and when man speaks in the Scriptures. And secondly though it were
certain that the words of Scripture were ^et down truly in vulgar
translations, yet if the same reader by ignorance did take out of the true
words a falls sense; then sucked he poison in steed of wholesome doctrine.
Comparason.
If then in a fair and pleasant garden, there should be this danger, not only
that one herb taken for another might indaunger a man's life, but the self same
heard gathered and dressed in different sort, might be eigher poison or
treacle, who would condemn the master of the garden, if he suffered not every
one indifferently to gather herbs there, but such as either had skill of
themselves to discern, or were directed by others how to gather and use those
herbs to their help and health, and not to their hurt and destruction: and to
the very same end was the prohibition that ignorant people should not read
Scriptures, but with leave and direction.

Who can deny but that S. Paul talking of the Scriptures as they were in the
Learned tongues (especially of the old testament) says of them; ^. Cor. 3.
liter a occidit, Spiritus autem viuificat. the letter or literal ^ound does
often times murder the reader, and the only spirit that is the internal true
and spiritual meaning of the Scriptures, does give life. And albeit S. Augustine
in his learned book de Spiritu and litera, Ad Marcellinum.
does extend these words of the Apostle to a farther meaning also, yet he
teaches this too, and so do the rest of the ancient fathers, namely S. Hierom
^d Nepotianum, handeling the story of king David 3. Reg. 1. where the ^ong
virgin Abisag was sought out to heat him in his old adge: S. Hierom says,
that if we should follow literam occidentem, the mur^hering letter, it seems
a jest and fable, but if we fly to the hidden spiritual sense and meaning, it
is most holy.

But now let us ask of you Sir Knight, how will your unlearned ^eaders those
who^e you call dim and glimering people, discern these things without a guyd,
such as the Catholic Church does appoint for ^xpounding the Scriptures to
simple people, by Catechisms, Sermons, Homelies, teaching of pastors, and the
like, without delivering the whole Bible into their hands, to be used or
abused to their destruction.

Furthermore you cannot deny, but that the understanding of Scriptures is a
particular gift of God, Understanding of Scriptures a peculier gift. Apoc. ^.
reserved especially unto Christ, who had the key to open the book sealed
with seven seals, as S. John testifies, and to the same effect is it recorded
in S. Lukes Gospel for a singular grace, bestowed by our Saueour upon the
Church, tun^ ^peruit illis sensum, vt inteligerint Scripturas. Luc. 24.
Then after his resurrection did he open to them the sense, whereby they might
understand Scriptures of themselves. For ever before he had interpreted the
same lightly unto them, as in the Gospel apeareth. Act. ^.
He sent also S. Phillip the Apo^tle by commandment of his Angel, to go and
interpret a certain place of the Prophet Esaias, unto the great Eunuch and
Tresurer of the Q of AEthiopia, when he would convert him. And it is to be
observed, that albeit Christ might have opened the sense of the Scripture to
himself immediately, yet would he send him a guide. Yea though the said Eunuch
were learned (as may appeer by that being an AEthiopianred the Prophet in
Hebrew) and though he were also instructed in the Jews religion (as it is
proved by that the story records that ^he came to adoie in Jerusalem)
yetall this notwithstanding, was he so far from the pride of our peevish proud
protestant people now a days, which make no bones at any difficulty of
Scriptures, as when he was asked by S. Phillip, Putasneintellig^s, quae legis?
Ibidem.
think thou that thou vuderstandest the Scripture which thou read? he
answered, how can I understand it, except some body do expound the same unto
me? which answer I believe many a good wife in London, that goes up and down
with her Bible under her arm, would be ashamed to give if she were asked
whether she understand the whole Bible or no.

These then (Sir Knight) are the reasons why some of those your glimmering and
enlightened people, were restrained by Catholic discipline to read upon (
Gods book as you call it) vulgar translations; no^ to bar them from light as
you maliciously calumniate, but rather leas^ they being but half blind should
become whole blind, that is t^^ say madd and obstinate blind of ignorance,
and unlearned blind; for such effects do insew some times of the rash reading
of this book of God, when thereof is engendered falsehood and Heresye^, that is,
the doctrine of the devil, for proof whereof, let us consider whether in a^
thousand years together in England, France, Germany and other places of
Christendom, while this prudent restraint of Catholiqu^ church lasted, of not
permitting all ignorant people to read Scriptures at their pleasures,
Experience of hurtes come by permitting the reading of scriptures to the
ignorant.
in vulgar languages, without an interpreter, there arose so many Sects,
Heresies, and alterations about Religion, as there have risen in fifty or
threescore years, since this reading was left open to all; there is no
comparison. And if we consider only England, the^ matter is evident, that more
sects have sprung up of late by many degrees. Yea though we leave all other
sects that are permitted, or wi^ked at in England, and respect such only as
have bin punished openly by the magistrate, namely such persons as have bin
whipped or burned in London, Norfolk, and other places for Heretics, in the
time o^ her Maiestyes reign that now is, for denying Christ himself or other^
points of the blessed Trinity, being altogether unlearned people, as our
Chronicles testify, of whom I ask, had they ever fallen into such errors and
obstinacy, but only by reading Sciptures in the vulgar language? had ever
william Hacket dreamed himself to be Christ, or william Geffrey before him,
but by this way? we see then the inconvenience.

In King Henry's time when Tindal had translated and printed the new Testament
in English at Colen, and began to seck means to have them dispersed in
England, the laws and kings commandment being then against it; there was a
certain foul fusteluggs, dishonest of her body with base fellows, as was openly
reported, whose name was Joan knell alias Burcher, Ioan^ Burcher burned.
if I forget not, who beginning to be a great reader of Scriptures her self
became a principal instrument also in that time to deuulge such Bibles as were
sent, especially in the court, where she became known to certain women in
authority; and to convey the books more safty, she used to bind them in
strings under her aparrell, and so to pass them into the court: but her
nearest friendship was with An Askew, who^e king henry afterward caused to be
burned for denying the real presence in the Sacrament of the Altar.

But this other scripturian profited so well, as in the fifth year of king
Edwards reygn she was burned also by the protestants of that time, for denying
Christ to have taken flesh of the Virgin Marie. Who when she was condemned to
dye, spoke very scornfully to the Judges, and said: It is a goodly matt^er to
consider your ignorance; it is not long ago since you burned Ann Askew for a
piece of bread, and yet came your selves soon after to believe and profess
the same doctrine, for which you burned her: and now (for sooth) you will needs
burn me for a piece of flesh, and in the end you will come to believe this
also, when you have red the scriptures and understand them, and when she came
to dye in Smithfield and D. Story endeavored to convert her she skoffed at him,
saying, he lied like, etc. and bad him god read Scriptures.

And thus much may serve for the repelling those clouds, mists, and darkness
which this wach-woord-giuer will needs imagine to be among us, for that all
cobblers do not clowt Scriptures in our commonwealth. But let us see now what
positions and principles he says we have for our direction amiddest this
darkness.

In these dark and clowdy days (says he) least the sunshine of knowledge
should dispers the mists of ignorance, and give light to the dimm of sight,
this position was set down for their maxim or rule in fallible; The first
forged position.
that ignorance is the mother of devotion, and that the sacred word of God,
which was given to be a lantern to all our feet, and a light to our steps, was
forbidden to the lay sort (for so they called them) as matter unfit for them
to look into, etc.

How manifest a falsehood it is that reading of Scriptures is forbidden to all
lay men, is sufficiently showed by that which goes before; for in any of the
three learned tongues, any lay man or woman may read them at their pleasure,
and in vulgar tra^slations also such as have license. And I think Sir Frauncis
will not deny, that many of the laity understand latin; how then, and with
what face complains he so piteously or rather hipocritically, that the
sacred word of God which was given to be a lantern to our feet, etc. was
forbidden to the lay sort? Again what malepart ignorance is it in him to
scoff (as he does) at the word lay sort, with this parenthesis (for so they
called them) as though the Catholics of late days had made this distinction
between laytie and clergymen; Distinction of laytie and clergy.
whereas from the very Apostles time in all Fathers and general Counsels the
words and distinction is ordinary? As in the first Counsel of Nice near
thirteen hundred year agone almost in every canon, namely in the 1. 3. 8. 17.
18. 19. the matter is handeled expressly. And before that again, Origin. hom. 7.
in Herem.
Origin proved the same distinction out of the words of Scriptures themselves;
and S. Epiphanius, S. Hierom and other Fathers, have donn the same since. Here
then is much malice, Epiph. Episc. ad loan. Episcopum Hierosol. Hieron. Co^. in
cap. 12. Hierem.
joined with gross ignorance, in our Knight of the word. But let us see his
forged positio^, wherein we affirm ignorance to be the mother of devotion.

If Catholics did hold that ignorance were the mother of devotion, then might
they hope to see Sir Francis Hastings a devout knight in time, for that he is
ignorant as ever lightly took pen in hand to write. But we deny this maxim or
infallible rule to be ours (Sir Francis) and do say that it is your
calumniation only, and that among us it is nether maxim nor minime. Maxim.
And for you to prove it a maxim you must show that all Catholics or the
most part do hold it. And to prove it a minime Minime.
at least you must show that some one does hold it: neither of which you can
ever do, and so you remain disgraced. It may be you have heard it objected by
some idle or ignorant minister there, that invented it for sport, and knew
neither what science, or ignorance or devotion means. And it seeming a pretty
ies^ unto you, you thought best to put it in your note book, against this
occasion of writing your wach-worde; whereby you awaken men to discover your
own folly and ignorance, and the malicious peevishness of your sect, that
has nothing to found it self on, but upon feigned calumniations against
Catholic doctrine.

And this were sufficient to refute you with shame, and to put you to the
proof, seeing you have written and printed, that we hold this position. But I
will go further with you, and deal more liberally, and send you to one who
will tell you perspicuously what all Catholics do hold in this behalf about
devotion, and her mother and^ daughter also, that is both of her cause and
effect. And this is the famous universal Doctor, D. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 82.
^r. 20.
S. Thomas of Aquin, who above three hundred years agone set down the
Catholic doctrine in this point. And what he holds we all hold; which were
a hard thing to find amongst you, that all agreed in one for a far shorter
space of time. And if you will have also a more ancient author, read S.
Augustine lib. de Spiritu and anima, ca. 50.

But let us see what S. Thomas says, first he shows how devotion is a
spetiall act of religion, What devotion is, and whence it proceeds.
importing nothing else, but a deuowing of a man's heart to the pro^pt service
of almighty God. And secondly he shows that the intrinsecal immediate cause
of devotion in us, is contemplation and meditation of Gods benefits, and of our
own defects, according to the saying of the Prophet, Psalm. 38.
in meditatione mea exardescet ignis. the fire of devotion waxes hot in me by
meditation. And thirdly he declares by diverse arguments that the proper effect
of devotion is gladness and hilaritie of mind. So that here ignorance enters
neither for mother, nor daughter, nor grandmother, nor sister of devotion but
rather the contrary, devotion proceeds of knowledge gotten by meditation,
both of Gods perfections and of our imperfections, as has bin said: and S
Augustine in the place before alleged, says in confirmation of this,
Meditatio parit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio deu^tionem,
deuotio perficit orationem. Meditation brings forth knowledge, knowledge
compunction, compunction devotion, devotion makes perfect our praier^ where is
here then mother ignorance alleged by Sir Francis?

And further to make more evident the wilful malice of these good fellow^s,
that devise matter to play upon, S. Thomas makes this objection to himself.
Why the best learned are not alvvayes most deuout^
If contemplation which breeds knowledge be the cause and mother of devotion,
how happens it, that the greatest wits, and most learned men, and most apt to
high contemplations, be not ever the most devout, but often times the simpler
sort, as women and the like, do f^el more devotion then they? To which he
answers, that those contemplations only serve to bring forth devotion, that
are fit to engender in us the love of God, and compunction of our sins, as S.
Augustine also notes. In which cogitations simpler people do exercise
themselves often times with more diligence and affection then the greater
learned men, who are distracted with other speculations, apperteyning rather to
speculation then motion of mind, and in this sense said most truly S. Paul,
1. Cor. ^.
scientia inflat, charit as edificat, knowledge does puff up with pride
oftentimes, but the love of God and our neighbor, is that which makes up the
building, and devout John Gerson, mallem sentire in me compunctionem, quam
scire eius definitionem. I had rather feel in my self compunction for my
sins, then know his definition.

Thus the^ you see, Sir Francis, that we hold not ignorance for mother, nor
daughter, nor kinswoman of devotion; but rather to the contrary, we hold that
devotion is founded and proceeds of knowledge, whereof Catholics have bin
ever and in all ages, The Catholics more authors of knowledge then
Protestants.
more studious and greater enimyes to ignorance, then protestants can with any
reason presume, for demonstration whereof, I would ask you Sir Francis (if you
be a man of any discourse) who have left more monuments of science or knowledge
to the christian world, your men or ours? who have builded our schools and
universities in England? who have founded our colleges? who have instituted
the degrees of Doctors, Licenciates, Masters, and Bachelors, and appointed
preferments for them, you or we? And to speak of positive Divinity only and
Scriptures, whereof you will seem to bragg, who have conserved and published
the Bible in the learned tongues of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, even in our
days? Were not the Biblia Complutensia, in all three tongues printed and set
forth by the expenses of a fransiscan friar Cardinal Ximenes Archbishop of
Toledo, within these three or fourscore years? And were not the last Biblia
Regia set forth in four or five tongues by Catholic men, by the authority
and charges of his Catholic Majesty of Spayn? And are not the Comentaries
written upon the Scriptures by Catholic men even at this day, above twenty
for one, more then those of Protestants? why then do heretics, like apes
bragg, and prate in presence of lions, that in every kind o^ learning do bear
them down? But now to the second position.

When they had thus settled this blind course (says our knight) to keep the
people from knowledge, etc. Then they offer an other position, The second
feigned position.
that it was not for lay men to meddle with matters of religion, that belonged
only and wholly as (...) privilege to Priests; thereby making them secure and
careless of God and a^ godliness.

In setting down of this forged position, there is some subtlety joined with
impudency. For first in the former part, where he says we hold, that it is
not for lay men to meddle with religion, he subtely leaves doubtful this word
(meddle) either to signify that lay men must not determine or defyne matters of
religion, or else not to meddle or care for them at all. In the former sense we
grant, that in Synods and Counsels, where controversies of faith are to be
treated, Priests and Clergymen have only authority to define and determine:
Act. 20.
for that S. Paul says that they are appointed by the holy Ghost to govern
the church, though before they come to determine, they do help themselves also
by the learning of lay men, and take their judgment when they may give light,
as in all Counsels is seen. But in the second sense it is most impudent that
he infers, that hereby we would make lay me^ secure and carele^ of God, and
all godliness. For how does it follow? The Queen of England does refer, the
determination of all good laws, orders, and virtuous proceedings within the
realm, unto the voices of her privy counsel, or of the parliament, ergo heerby
she makes free, secure and careless, all the rest of her realm, from
observation of good orders, law, and honest behaueour. Or in the self same
matter of religion, I may argue thus, the determination of matters of faith is
remitted only at this day in England, to Bishops and ministers, and not to
their wives; ergo heerby those ^ood wives are made secure and careless of God
and all godliness: there (...) no difference in the consequence at all.

Wherefore as malice here lost her eyes, so does she also her wits in that
which follows; for presently he leapeth to rail upon the ^aints of heaven,
and namely upon S. Thomas of Canterbury (though ^mpertinent to his purpose) for
he was treating of lay men as you ^aue heard, whom he says we make careless
of God and all godliness, ^or that we refer the determination of controversies
in religion, not unto them, but unto Priests only, and now let every one
consider how ^his consequence holds (which enseweth) and it is enough (says
he) ^f one of these fellows come diligently and devoutly to hear mass, and
go to confes^ion once a year, to be as religious a man (secundum vsum Sarum)
as could be wi^hed; and though he were to be tainted and to be taxed with the
grossest sins, ^et Rome by the authority from their vicar general, had at
rik to hale them into the ^able of their Saints, and so to canonize them; as we
have example of Thomas Becket in Henry the thirds time, whose treasons to the
prince were apparent and manifest, etc.

But before I answer in the cause of S. Thomas, About S. Thomas of Canterbury.
I will advise this ^alumniator, first that his skoff of a religious man,
secundum vsum Sa^um, is ridiculous on his side, if we compare him to his holy
ministers that follow the use of the tauern at chaering cross, and do neither
hear mass nor go to confession once in seven years, nor mean to amend or
^^ake satisfaction; and then it is a great lie, that we require nothing else ^ut
going once a year, and a far greater that men of the grossest sins ^re made
Saints among us: and finally nothing else is here but jests and lies.

Secondly I put Sir knight in mind, that talking of lay men, S. Thomas example
(that was a Priest and head of Priests) was not to his purpose. Thirdly most
grossly and ignorantly he erreth in the times; for that S. Thomas his death and
canonization was in King Henry the second and not the thirds, as fondly he
affirms: but above thirty years before king Henry the third was borne.
Fourthly that this poor man makes an unequal match to fight with Saints, and
will rest in the end with a broken head.

And finally that he says S. Thomas his treasons to his prince were apparent
and manifest, is a manifest slander. For there is nothing in all the whole
discourse of his controversy with King Henry the second, that sauoureth of
treason, or that impugned any one law of the realm then in ure. For that the
recourse he made to Rome, was lawful at that day, as it is now in any other
Catholic country. The controversy was only about the liberty of the English
Church, which the king sought to abridge, and the other as primate to defend
Nor did the king or his officers chardge him with treasons, nor could they by
any show of Justice. For if in every contention or dissension that a spiritual
subject, or Ecclesiastical Prelate may have with his temporal prince, the
subject shall be condemned of treason (according to this servile censure of
Protestants, that to flatter princes make them absolute lords both of body
and sowl) then John Baptist also must be accounted a traitor, that dealt so
peremptorily with his king Herod, that was his liege Lord in temporal
affairs. Or if you will have examples of Christian princes, S. Ambrose must be
a traitor, first for resisting openly his Lord and king Valentinian the younger,
and then for handling so hardly the elder Theodosius Emperor, Theodor. lib. 4.
c 6. and lib. 5. c. 17. and deinceps.
in Millan, as he shut him out of the church, and made him go home again with
shame and do penance. S. Hilarious also, and S Athanasius shall be traitors,
Zozom. lib. 8 fere per totum.
for their contentions with Constantius their lawull Emperor and temporal
Lord, who b^nished them from their Bishoprikes. And the former of the two wrote
two vehement books and inuectiues, against the said Emperor, and yet no man
ever accounted him a traitor for the same, but rather a great Saint, for his
Christian liberty and constancy. S. Chrysostom in like manner shall be
condemned for a great traitor, Socrat. lib. 6. c. 16.
who had greater contentions with his temporal Lords, Zozom. lib. 8. c. 17.
Arcadius, and Honorius, Christian Emperors, and with their wives, Theodosia,
and Eudoxia, then ever S. Thomas had with king Henry the second. Niceph. l. 14
c. 43.
For he pr^ached against them publicly, with great vehemency, and thundered
out excomunication against them, and was twyce banished and driven out of his
Bishoprike by their disfauor, and died in exile. And yet was he never called or
accounted a traitor, but a singular holy man; and Theodosius the younger son of
Arcadius, brought his body, with great solemnity, honor, and reverence, into
Constantinople, and wept most bitterly for the sins of his pare^tes in
persecuting so blessed a man. And as the story says, Math. Paris.
made prayer to him now dead for pardon of his fathers sins. As did also
often our king Henry the son, for the offense of his father in being some
cause of the death of this just man, his pastor and spiritual father.

Well then to conclude this matter, treason there was none, nor could be in this
contention of S. Thomas against king Henry; for it was donn with all due
respect of the Archbil hopes part, and according to the laws ecclesiastical,
both of church and realm. And as for the man's behaueour and actions in the
rest of his life, if we believe three or four historiographers together, Vide
apud Lippoman, and Surium Mense December.
of great credit and sanctity, that lived at the same time and conuersed with
him, they were admirable in all kind of virtue. His death was by wilful
murder, without justice or commaundment of king or any magistrate, as all the
world knows. His canonization was presently upon his death by diligent
inquiry of all factes and circumstances, and by universal applause of all
christendom. King Henry the second excused himself of the murder, admitted his
canonization, builded his shryne and sepulcher, adorned the same with great
gifts, came thither in person, and not only denied (as I have said) that his
intention ever extended to his murder, but also took severe punishment and
penna^ce of himself for the unjust wrath that by incitation of others he had
conceived against so holy a man: Edoard in vita D. Thom^, cap. 26. K. H. his
voluntary penance.
of which penance of the kings, one that lived at the same time and saw it,
writes that he opened his naked shoulders at the sepulcher, and received first
five ierkes at five Bishops hands, and fourscore and three at so many monks
^andes, and after lay on the bare ground, and other such circumstances, as in
the author you may read.

All those that had been enemies to the blessed man, or had had part in his
death, came after to great misery by Gods just judgments. And finally, all
the Christian world for these four hundred years have holden him for a
glorious martyr, and builded many a church to God in his memory, in other
countries: many great mo^arches have come to England of purpose to visit his
sepulcher, and others have sent great presents and donaries. Many miracles
have ^yn recorded by grave authors and public testimony of the whole ^ land,
to have been wrought by God at his sepulcher, in witness of his ^anctitie. All
these testimonies then being extant in the world for so many hundred years
together, let any man judge whether they ought ^ot to be of more weight with a
wise and pious Christian, then this ^raynles calumniation of a mad hasty hot
spurr, that knows ^ot what he says, and much less cares or indeuoureth how
to ^roue it.

But let us see now his third position that he feigneth to be among ^s, as a
ground of religion. These two irreligious and profane grou^des (says he)
^eing laid, though you have seen that the knight has laid them as fi^ions of
his own and grownds of ours, they proceed to a third, The third feigned
position.
and set it down ^r a Popish ground also, that it was a dangerous and deadly
sin for any man (...) disobey the Pope and his clergy, in any of their
orders enjoined and commanded: in such reverence and regard must he and his
clergy be had, that the meanest^ mass Priest coming with authority from
him, Impudent calumniation.
must be obeyed under pain of damnation, though he command that which is
blasphemous before God in Christians, and disloyal to men in subjects.

This is his narration, from which if ye separate a manifest lie o^ two with
some fond exagerations (for without this kind of leui^ the poor knight can
make no batch) as for example, that the Pope an^ his Clergy must be obeyed
though they command blasphemies against God, and disloyalty against princes,
which is a shameless slander, and that the disobedience (if he speak of
omission) in any one order enjoined by Pope and Clergy is a deadly sin, and
the like: if you separat^ (I say) these over lauishings of the hasty knight;
all the rest he obiecteth is rather commendation of Catholic religion, then
any reproach at all, for in that he says we obey the meanest priest as the
highest, if he come with authority of the highest, he shows thereby that we
have among us true obedience and subordination, and tha^ for conscience sake.
Not respecting so much the person that commands, as him for whom, and in
whose name and authority h^ commands; and therein we fulfill, the precept of
S. Paul. Obedite pra^positis vestris and subiacete eis, Heb. 13.
ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem pro animabu^ restris reddituri. Obey
your Prelates and humble your selves unto them (he distinguishes not between
high and low) for they keep diligent watch over your souls, as men that must
render account thero^ to God. And in other places he says, that this obedience
must b^ with such reverence, humility, and inward affection, as unto Chry^^
himself, Ephesians. 6.
whose substitutes our spiritual superiors be, though never so mean or
contemptible in man's sight.

And again, S. Paul says, this obedience must be, non solum propte^ iram, sed
etiam propter conscientiam, Romans 13.
not only for fear of punishment, but also for conscience, that is under pain
of deadly sin, or of damnation, though this wise knight do jest at the
phrase, which yet is the proper phrase of S. Paul himself in the same place,
saying, qui autem resistu^ damnationem sibi acquirunt, those that resist to
obey, procure damnation to themselves. And this is answer sufficient for so
idle an obiection^ that we obey the meanest mass Priest coming with authority
of the highest, in which matter I could teach Sir Francis a spiritual poin^ of
doctrine, if he were capable of it, and most true, to wit, that the meaner the
substitute is, that is obeyed in the name and place of any potent prince or
superior, the greater honor is donn to the said prince or superior, and the
greater virtue is argued thereby to be in him that obeys, for that he is not
induced by any talent or commendation of the said substitute to obey him, but
only for love, respect, and reverence, of the party whose authority he has
and in whose name he comes, and by this way a catholic man that obeys a
mean Priest coming in the Popes authority, or a mean qualified Pope coming
with the authority of Christ, leeseth nothing, whatsoever the pride of
heretics do prattle to the contrary, and so much of this.

There remains then only the fourth grownd or position The fourth feigned
position.
to be examined (for he would needs have a whole mess of the^) and this he
sets down in these words following.

And having thus made an open passage without stop to the mark and matter they
aimed at, and so he^med men in, as they could not see which way to escape
danger, but by them that laid the snare for them, they propound unto them a
mean of delivery from all dangers (even when they sinned immeditly against
God) which is a pardon from his holiness, Shameless lyinge.
and absolution from his holy Priests. But if the decrees or ordinances of
their Romish sinagogue were transgressed, hardly any mercy was to be had.

Thus writeh our knight if you will believe him, but having taken him trip, in
so many falsehoods, forgeries, and calumniations before, I presume that the
discree^ reader will give credit to him and his assertions hereafter, by weight
and measure, looking to his fingers as well as to his lips, as men use to do
when they deal with egyptians. Now then let us examine what truth there is in
this tale of his.

First and foremost, who sees not, how egregious a cauil it is, to say, Many
cauiles and falshoodes.
that Catholics by teaching men to obey their superiors simply and ^or
conscience sake, and under pain of sin as you heard also S. Paul to teach,
that thereby they do bring men into snares, Romans 13.
or hem them in as this man's phrase is. By which argument he may prove also,
that God himself when he gave the law to the Jews, did hem them in to ^nares
of sin; which yet the Apostle so vehemently confuteth in the ^. and 8.
chapters of his epistle to the Romans. Secondly, it is a noto^ious untruth to
say, that the means we prescribe of delivery from ^ll dangers of sin, is the
Popes pardon: and a far greater and more ^mpudent lie it is, when he adds by
a parenthesis (even when they sin ^mmediatly against God) for that the
Catholic doctrine is clear in this ^oint, that the Popes and Churches
indulgences, Vide quest. 26 and 27. addit. 6.
avail not to re^oue mortal sins, Tho. ad 3. p. and caet. tract. 9. opustul.
de indulgentijs.
but only are given where all such sin, is already ^ardoned, by contrition
and confession, and virtue of the Sacrament, and that there remains only some
temporal punishment in this or ^he next life to be remitted. Neither can the
Pope pardon the guilt of sin it self by any other way then by the means of
the Sacrament of confession, and absolution (which Sacrament has his force of
the blood of Christ) as every ordinary Priest authorized to hear
confessions, may do the like.

And so thirdly, it is great ignorance in our knight if not malice, to join
together (as he does) the Popes pardon and the absolution of his holy Priests,
which have great difference in this matter; for that the pardon stretches not
to remit sin it self (as has bin said) but only the temporal pains
depending of sin, after it is remitted: but priests absolution in the
Sacrament of confession is sufficient to remitt any sin, Joan. 20.
if the penitent be contrite, according to commission given by Christ, quorum
remiseritis peccata remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis retenta sunt,
whose sins ye forgive shall be forgiven, and whose sins you shall retain
shall be retained. So then absolution is a different matter from indulgence and
pardon.

Fourthly, that the transgressions against the decrees and ordinance^ of the
Catholic church (which wickedly he names the Romish Synagogue) be more
hardly forgiven among us, then greater sins and those namely that be
immediately committed against God himself is a shameless slander, and never
taught by any Catholic man i^ the world, and so unworthy to be further
refuted.

Now then he having set down these four absurd grounds of religion in our name,
feigned by himself, and accompanied with so many o^ther lies and falsehoods, as
you have heard: you shall see how he makes his conclusion, A fond conclusion.
and triumphs as though he had donn somewhat of importance: these are his
words.

Thus have you the blind course they sought to hreed us in, by debarring us the
clear light of the holy written word of God; and the carelesnes they sought to
settle in us of all religion, by making it a thing impertinent to us, as though
we had no soule^ to care for, etc.

This conclusion to him that has red the former foolish positions with their
confutations, may serve for some disporte^ and recreation to behold how his
seely knight bestirreth himself upon castles builded in the air by himself,
falls imaginations, and sotish apprehensio^s o^ his own, especially in a long
ridiculous discourse that he makes immediately upon these words in his book;
where imagining that al^ goes by pardons with us, and that pardons may be had
for money, he infers that all rich men may easily be saved in our religion,
without any difficulty: and yet says he, Christ taught us, that it was a^^asy
for a camel to pas thorogh a needles eye, as for a rich man to go^ to heaven:
and so he marueileth how these things can stand together.

To which I might answer, that it seems as easy to teach a bear to play upon
a taber, as to learn Sir Francis to be a good divine, and that I would more
easily take upon me to make a camel to go thorough any needles eye (in the
sense that Christ spoke it) or any rich man in the world to enter into heaven
(if he would follow my counsel) then to frame Sir Francis old head to
understand the depth of Catholic doctrine. And therefore amiddest his doubts,
I leave him to his ministers, except he will resolve to be a catholic and go
to confession, for then his ghostly father, by the penance he may chance to
en^oine unto him, will let him see and feel that all goes not by pardons, nor
yet by money among us. And that there is another more straight needles eye for
him to enter (seeing he is rich) then the buying of pardons, if he will go to
heaven after the catholic manner; to wit, by contrition, confession, and
satisfaction, which God grant him to do, for otherwise he will never come
there, seeing that the open and easy cart way of only faith, is far different
from the needles eye and narow path that Christ speaks of.

THE THIRD INCOVNTER, ABOUT GREAT PERILS SVPPOSED TO be wrought to her
Majesty by Catholics, both in the time of Queen Marie and since. With the
clearing of diverse particular men that are slandered therein.
AS the principal mark that parasites do commonly shoot at with great Princes,
is not only to handle pleasant and delightful matter, to gain grace to
themselves, but to mingle also biting stuff now and then, whereby to pinch and
draw blood of their neighbors: so this gentle knight, having heaped many
things together by ^atterie and forging, in the beginning of his book, to claw
thereby ^he present state and prince, as in the former two conferences you have
^een: he enters now upon a more odious argument, to exasperate ^oth the one
and the other against Catholics, The malignitie of Sir Francis.
whom he would gladly ^aue destroyed, if the strength of his horns, were
according to the measure of his hatred. But he being but a barking beagle among
the ^owndes of Huntington, though never so cruel and bloody mouthed I hope so
to rebate his choler before I make an end, or at leastwise his force, as
albeit he bark still yet shall he not much byte, nor do any other effect of
moment, then discover the worm of heresy, that lies under his poisoned
tongue, inciting him to fury and woodnes against Catholics.

First then touching perils past by her Majesty, during the reign of Qu.
Marie, this gentleman writes thus in recital of the same.

I hasten to put you in mind of our most blessed and happy delliuerance out
of this spiritual pit and thraldom of popery and superstition, by lady Queen
Elizabeth, as the instrument: whose peril and danger before she came to that
ability to perform this holy work among us, I may not pass over; for by
Gods goodness only and wholly she was preserved, her life being maliciously and
with great cunning shot at, by the Romish clergy, then in place of credit. For
Gardener that most proud and bloody monster, left no corner of his wit unsought
(being wise enough to work mischief) but set all his skill and cunning awoorke
to shorten her days, and to prevent her by bloody slaughter of her sacred
person, from ever being our Queen: and no reach of man can yield me a reason of
her doliuerance, but the mighty God of power, etc.

In which words you may see how our poet to make the succes of his feigned
comedy more wonderful and plausible, frames strange mister^es and miracles of
mil-wheeles, devising mtghtie dangers and mayn perils avoided without any means
humane at all; neither is there any reason able to be rendered to him of his
riddle as himself affirms, but I shall endeavor to solue both the one and
the other and that without any miracle, by humane reason only if Sir Francis
can understand it, and now I begin.

That the state of lady Elizabeth now our Souereign Queen, The estate of Lady
Elizabeth in Q. Mary's time.
was subject to diverse suspicions and dangers during the reign of her sister
Queen Marie, no man of discretion in matter of state will deny, or can greatly
merueil at; for she being the next heir to the crown, and her sister having no
issue, nor any great probability ever to have: and furthermore being presumed
by many, to be inclined to a different religion, though she showed it not, and
that all the disconte^ted of that state depended of her, and made their recours
unto her as to their rising sun and future hope; no marueil though she was bad
in jealousy, especially seeing the often and perilous attemptes of VVyate,
Courtney, the Carews, Cobham, Throgmorton and the like, did seem to lean also
that way (for I will enter no further to discus those affairs) and so did hold
both the Queen and state in suspense and care. Which circumstances what
dangers they are wont to bring to future pretenders, diverse examples under our
former kings, and lastly that of the Queen of Scots in our days, may easily
teach us.

But that the life and blood of her grace at that day, should be so earnestly
and maliciously sought after, by so many and so pote^t men and means, as this
knight here and in other places of his book, does affirm, and would have
believed, to wit, by Bishop Gardener then Chancellor, by B. Bonner, D. Story,
and all the Catholic clergy by name: and furthermore by the King of Spain
himself and by all Spaniards; by the Queen also then in government, and
consequently by her counsel and nobility with her, and by all catholics
together, who had power at that day to do as they thought best, and no
impediment either at home or from abroad (that I know) to let them in their
^^esignments, and yet all this notwithstanding, that nothing in this affair so
much desired should be effectuated; this passes indeed (if it were true) all
rule of reason, and might set Cicero to school again, who teaches in his
thetoriques, for an evident for me of argument, that, qui potuit facere and
voluit, fecit. he that both would and could do a thing must needs be presumed
to have donn it. Which yet, in this our case holds not, as it seems, for
that our knight affirming that the parties aforenamed would have made away the
Lady Elizabeth, and I assuring that they could; yet is it evident that she was
not, and therefore either I am deceived in their power, or he in their wills,
or some other secret cause must be sought out, which he will needs have to be
miracle, but I think it not necessary, and so shall endeavor to re^ell the
mystery by way of reason if it may be.

First then, I do not deny, but that the preservation of Lady Elizabeth's life
in Queen Mary's time, may be referred to the providence of ^lmightie God, as
the first and principal cause, who above our reach ^or reasons to himself best
known, does dispose of all matters, but ^specialy of princes lives and states:
yet deny I that no secondary or ^mmediate humane causes can be found to have
concurred also with ^his providence of God, as this our miracle-maker
affirms: for I can ^ecount him diverse causes and those pregnant also, and
potent, which ^id concur in those days to the preservation of her grace, which
being most evident and true, Causes of security to Lady Elizabeth in Q. Mary's
time.
do deliver the case from all such necessity of miracle as this poor knight
would persuade unto us.

And first of all was the age and young years, bewty, felicity, meek^es, and
other good graces and talents of the princess her self, which ^rought much
with all sorts of men, but especially with the Span^ardes, and other
strangers, and above all with the young king himself, as often his nearest about
him at that day have reported since. And namely the Duke of Feria while he was
alive, who being then but Count and sent Ambassador from the king (then lying
in Flanders) to visit Queen Marie, had such earnest and spetiall charge to
visit and comfort the L. Princess Elizabeth immediately after his Embassage to
the Queen, that all of the court of England merueiled at it and some perhaps
did not greatly like of it, and in very deed the young lady was so
extraordinarily favored, and affected by his Catholic Majesty, and all his
nobility present with him in England, as it is most base and barberous
ingratitude in this sicophant to deny it now, and monstrous inciuility to
accuse them of cruelty in this behalf, their affections being so notoriously
known to the contrary in those times, and this was one cause and perhaps not
the least of her graces safety.





Now then, let our miracle-maker tell me, whether these be no reasons, and
whether no reach of man can yield him any reason of her graces deliverance. If
his reach and insight in matters of state be no greater then this, it is no
merueil though he be not of her Majesty's counsel, though he flatter never so
deeply for it, and thus much may be said of her graces dangers in Queen Mary's
time. Let us see now what has happened since. This notable calumniator
begins thus.

But when this our Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth was fully possessed of this her
princely place, Wicked calumniatio^s.
and had the royal diadem and crown, with the applause and liking of all true
hearted Englishmen, both nobles, clergy, and commons, as a due by right
belonging unto her; then began Satan to rage, and his ministers to fret and
chafe.

I would ask of this Sir knight, by whom was Queen Elizabeth put in
possession of this her princely place, and by whose hands and helps received
she this royal diade^? was it by hands of protestants only or principally, or
of Catholics? he cannot say of protestants, for he names also here the
clergy; whereof none of the principal (that is of the Bishops that had hand
in this work) was then a protestant; and very few of the nobility, and far the
less part of the co^monalty: now then could these men that were Catholics,
fret and chafe so soon, to see her Majesty placed in the crown, wherein
themselves had willingly and freely placed her, advanced her, crowned her, and
a^ointed her, taken her oath of preserving the laws and privileges, of ^he
realm, and sworn fidelity to her again? These calumniations of this carping
knight are but tales of a tub, to intertain fools and igora^t people, that know
not how matters passed at that day. But let us ex^mine notwithstanding, some
particulers of the hostilities which he ^lleageth: aduising first the reader by
the way that if it be honorable ^o her Majesty now (as it is) to be named
sacred and anointed, as the ^anderer himself seems also to take it, for that
often he uses the ^ermes, this also she has only and wholly from the
Catholics, for that protestants do not use but rather do jest at the
ceremony, calling ^t greazing, Leu. 4. and ^. Number. 35. 1. Reg. 19. 15. 16. 17.
espetially in Priests, to whom yet first of al and principal^y this sacring
and anointing by Gods ordenance was used, and afterward to kings and princes
by imitation only of Priestly dignity in ^his behalf: and these are the
benifits her Majesty has received of Ca^holiques; now to the hurts and perils
objected by this calumniator.

In the first place he brings in D. Story, About Doctor Story.
whom he titleth by the ^ame of a blood-sucker, as he called before B^
Gardener, bloody monster (for ^ou must note as he is light witted so is he
foul mouthed also) and he ^lleageth against D. Story, that he should say in
the first parliament when he saw how matters were like to go in religion) that
if his counsel ^ad bin followed in Queen Mary's time, they had stricken at the
root meaning ^ereby (says this man) the bereauing of our deer Souereign of
her life: a bloody ^each of a bloody traitor, who afterward was brought by a
good chance from be^nd the seas, indicted, araigned, found guilty, and
condemned of treason, and recea^ed his judgment at the seat of justice, and was
executed accordingly, as he was ^ell worthy at Tiburn: and so may all speed
that wish to Queen El^zabeth as he ^d. Thus far the accuser.

In which narration, three things may be considered: first Doctor ^ories
words; then the interpretation thereof by this accuser; and ^irdly the
punishment which he suffered for them. And in all three ^u shall see more
passion then truth, and more rigor then reason, ^ I be not deceived, whereof
let the reader be judge with in^fferency.



Doctor Stories z^le and complaynt.
misliked exceedingly a^^ stormed also publicly one day, before the Bishops
and privy Council, in a public consistory (for that Counselors also for
honors sake, and to protect their friends and kindred, would needs be
inquisitors in that government) complaining grievously of this abuse, in so much
as he would needs have given over publicly his office (...) Commission in
presence of all the rest of the inquisitors and Counselors together, for that
some of the said Council had opposed themselves against him about the
apprehension of a certain gentleman heretic, which he took very unkindly, and
then indeed he^ foretold them freely what would insew of this their partial
manne^ of proceeding. Whereby also it is much more probable that his complaint
of the root of heresy remaining and not touched, was meant rather of the
infected nobility and gentry, within the land (in which number perhaps your
brother the Earl and your self also ^id enter) then of lady Elizabeth at that
day, for that in deed she was not the root then, nor did the change of religion
spring of her principally afterward, but of those other inferior roots which I
have men^ioned.

But yet let us grant further, for arguments sake, that he did speak A
Counselour may speak freely.
yet do I ask why should they be made treason or punished for such, in this
Queens reign? was not her Majesty as subject then, and the D. as a Counselor,
and thereby bound to speak freely that which ^he thought surest for his prince,
and realm at that day? it might argue perhaps some lack of tender affection to
the lady (and yet perhaps not that neither, seeing the father in such a case,
does speak often times against his only son or daughter) but treason in no
rigor right or reason can it make no more then for a Counselor in this
Government of her Majesty that now is, to speak what he thinks freely, about
any person that may pretent to the crown hereafter. Wherefore, though all this
were true which this man aleadgeth (as many arguments prove them to be falls)
yet D. Story leaving afterward his coun^rie, and going over the seas either
with license or without (when there was no statute to the contrary) and being
brought home again by force and treachery of a shipman, that alured him into his
ship, and so carried him away; all this I say makes neither treason, nor any
other trespass of moment, in the sight of indiferent men, and consequently
neither his hasty araignment, condemnation and execution upon his return
^wherof this cruel hearted knight triumphs) does so much prove that he was
guilty of great crimes, as that he had potent and passionate enemies (as
Christ had before Pilate, that by shoots and clamors sought his blood by any
means whatsoever) for that he had bin a more zealous catholic then some other
of his coat and degree, in Queen Mary's ^aign, for which catholic men think,
that he is to receive a great ^rown of glory and fame also eternal upon earth.
And so the trial of this matter lies still in the dark to be examined by that
great judge when he comes to look over the judgments of mortal men and re^eal
that which is amiss. And so much for this matter.

Next after D. stories affair, About the Bull. of Pius Quintus.
comes in the roaring Bull of Pius Quintus, with the excomunication of her
Majesty, which serves for a ^ommon bugg against all catholics every where,
as well at bars benches, and places of justice, where other particular and
personal accusations do want, as also in pulpits, schools, sermons, books, and
declamations, for making up the complet furniture of those places; and still it
is so urged, as though all english catholics must needs be guilty of this
fact of the Pope, and so be participant also of the offense given thereby
against her Majesty, if any way they believe or admit his Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and authority; which consequence notwithstanding is so apparently
falls and cauillous in it self (for that all catholics were not privy to Pius
Quintus his reasons and informations in that behalf) and it has bin so
evidently refuted heretofore, by diverse most clear and manifest reasons and
treatises, that I mean not to stand at this present upon that point, especially
with so silly a concurrent as this gentleman is, in matter of dispute: whose
ridiculous proposition in this place, that no mortal child of man has power
to dispose of kingdoms, or to depose princes, or to dispense with subjects for
not obeying etc. A ridiculous proposition.
seems to proceed not only of deep ignorance both in reason and story, but of
so base a breast also and servile a cogitation, as if temporal kingdoms were
matters of Godhead and immortality.

And no doubt, but if such a knight had lived in Nero or Caligula his time
(that would needs be Gods) he had bin a fit fellow to fall down and adore them;
and tell the people most religiously, with both hand^ held up to heaven (as he
does here) that no mortal child of man had power to judge of their doings
(being great and high princes) or to deny them obedience in any matter having
once sworn obedience in temporal affairs, for this is our case here, whether a
prince once admitted and established, may be towched afterward or disobeied in
any matter, or for any cause either of religion or otherwise, and that by any
mortal child of man, and our tender conscienced knight resolves the case
that he cannot, and consequently that the romans did evil in disobeying such
Emperors as would be Gods, and other mortal children of men for displacing of
their princes once received, for what cause soever, for all this enseweth of
his fond and heathenish position.

But let this Prince-idolater that professth to be a great Bible-clark, read
over the four books of kings, and he shall see how many kingdoms were disposed
of and princes deposed by mortal children of men, and the same allowed also by
God himself. And in our kingdom of England since it was a monarchy, both
before and since the conquest, he(...) ha^ find very many examples of
mutations in like manner made by mortal children of men (seeing they are now
dead that made them) which yet he must approve for good and lawful, except he
will impugn the succession of her Majesty that now is, which is not likely,
seeing the poor man flattreth so seriously with all the art and power he can.
And therefore leaving this matter as over long an argument for me to ^andle in
this place, I shall only consider briefly of three points upon this his speech,
that may yield sufficient light to the matter in hand.

The first is, Three things considerable in this knights accusation.
that whereas this accuser affirms the Catholics of England to have begun to
fret and chafe against her Majesty, as soon as she was in full possession of
her crown, and consequently to practis treasons by the Pope of Rome, let it be
noted out of our own chronicles, what year this Bull of Pius Qinutus came
forth, Anno Domini 1570. regni 13.
and thereby they shall see, The king of Spain and Popes malice (says he) to
the Queen, is not for that she is daughter to king Henry the eight, and sister
to Queen Marie, but because she has banished the Pope that Antechriste of
Rome; etc. ergo the Q. began with the Pope, and the Pope not with her.

But secondly let it be considered, in what manner this banishment of the Pope
was contrived, Incitation of Popes by the English Protestants.
and that in this time of peace between Rome where was cried out of and
reviled, made a matter of scorn and infamy, not only in all sermons pulpits
and conuenticles, but also in comedies pl^ies and interludes, by every base and
contemptible companion.

In the schools of universities most ridiculous propositions were set up as
paradoxes, Contemptuous proceeding.
to be defended, that the Pope (forsooth) was Antechriste, the man of sin
talked of by S. Paul, and other like toys. And that which moved perhaps more
then all the rest, was that these things were not only practiced and allowed of
in England and Ireland subject to her Majesty; but were begun to be introduced
also by ou^ means, that is, by the turbulent attempts and practices of
protestants (her Majesty perhaps knowing little thereof) in all the realms and
regions round about us; and namely in France, Flanders, and Scotland, where the
wars, tumults, rebellions, deuisions, sects, heresies, and other outrages
came to be so many and excessive great, as the lawful^ and natural princes of
those contries, seeing themselves so far indomaged and highly endaungered
thereby, were enforced, first of all to complain unto the Pope, as chief pastor
and common father of all to use such spiritual redress, as he might for his
party, in respect o^ his ecclesiastical souereigntie, whilst they prepared
also to defend^ themselves, and their troobled countries by force of arms.

Not malignitie then of the Pope and his adherents against he^ Majesty's crown
and diadem (whereunto willingly they had concur^^ and assisted) moved this first
breach and bickering as this malignan^ barking-whelp would beat into men's
ears, but necessities of great^^ violence enforced the same. And if perhaps we
in England after the change made in religion, had taken that course which
Protestants did in Germany, to follow our new opinions without gawling of
others none of these open hostilities had ever insued. And let this stand for
the second notandum, whereby is ouerthrown all this slanderous ca^lumniation of
the kinght.



In it self it was an act of jurisdiction between two superiors, The
excomunication against the Queen.
the one Ecclesiastical, the other temporal, wherein the subjects sentenc^ or
consent was never asked nor admitted.

Secondly, it was no new thing, for that we see and read that the like has
happened often and upon many occasions, between the Bishops of Rome and diverse
other great princes, commonwealths Emperors, Kings, and monarchs, and
sometimes also with kings of England, and of late with the king of France, as
all the world knows. And yet the subject is neither afflicted nor accused for
it, nor ^nforced to change their old received belief about the Popes autho^itie
in such matters, though in that particular fact for reverence of their natural
Prince, and dew respect in like manner to the other, ^hey will not meddle, nor
yet discuss the question whether the Pope ^ad just reason or sufficient
information whereupon to proceed, but with dutiful love and honor to the one,
and to the other, they choose ^ather to commend the matter to almighty God,
which is the only thing that rests for a pious and dutiful subject to perform
in such ^ases, when two superiors shall disagree, until God by his goodness
shall determine the controversy and bring all to some happy end, as ^e has
donn of late in France, where after the foresaied excomuni^ation by the sea
Apostolic, the same king has received exceeding great favors and benefytes
from the same sea; and Bishop, which almighty God grant we may once see also
in our country, to the con^entment of all parties, and thereby all such hasty
hoate-spurres as this ^s, who still would kindle more fire, and bring all to
desperation may ^e rejected and put to silence.

And with this I might end the matter of her Majesty's perils, Other hostile
actions objected.
were (...) not that this playntiffe proceeds on with a long rehearsal of
other ^ostile actions, committed (as he says) by English Catholics also
^gaynst her Majesty. As the rising of the two earls in the north,
^orthumberland and Westmerland; the rebellion of diverse of the ^obilitie in
Irland; Doctor Sanders going thither, Master Francis ^hrogmortons practices in
England, M. Charles Pagets going ^orth of the land, the other two earls, of
Arundell, and Northumber^ands commitment, and the like. All which are over long
to examine more in particular, and all put together do weigh so little in the
matter we have in hand, as by that which follows shall appear.

None of all these actions brake out to any hostility, saving only ^he two
earls rising, and gathering their tenantes together in the ^orth, where yet
there followed neither battle nor bloodshed, and ^hey were no sooner almost
together nor heard of at the court, ^ut they were severed again and retired
into Scotland and Flanders. And this is all the actual rising, that has been
among Catholics within England during the reign of forty years;
notwithstanding ^ll the pressures, vexations, dishonours, rapines, slaughters,
impri^onments, and deaths which they have suffered in this space, at the hands
of Protestants, Puritans, and Atheists for their religion. Which afflictions
laid together have been more then ever subiecte^ since England was a monarchy,
suffered at home in this kind.

Now then mark that which follows. If we look one our own chronicles, Of the
patience of Catholics.
we shall scars find any one Princes reign (though o^ far fewer years then
this) even when the people were all of one reli^gion, and none of these
afflictions and pressures laid upon them, bu^ that many more commotions,
troobles, and rebellions happened, then in this long time, and among so
infinite exasperations have insued. And if we look upon the short reigns of
king Edward and Queen Mary, and the part of king Henryes time after alteration
in religion, there is no comparison. And whence comes all this (trow^ you) but
of the singular virtue and unspeakable patience of the Catholic subjects of
our time under her Majesty, that have lived and suffered all this with
gronning only, and secret tears, without further breach to defend themselves,
or revenge there injuries.

And truly when foreign nations do both see and read the bloody list of laws
made against Catholics and Catholic religion in England, within these
forrtie years; and do hear of the rigorous execution of the same, together
with the incredible molestations that thereby are laid upon so great and potent
numbers of people, that lack no^^corage also to adventure even to death it self
in favor of their said religion, they rest astonished, and do wonder how either
the countri^^ can remayn void of continual tumults, or the prince free from
infinit^ daily perils; seeing that desperation in such matters is the next door
to all extremities, especially the persecution being so rigorous and violent,
so universal and exorbitant, as infinite people are interessed and touched
thereby, either inmediatly by themselves, or in their children, servants,
kinsfolks, or friends, whereupon finally they do greatly admire (as I have
said) the modesty, patience, and longanimitie of the English Catholics. And
so much the more, for that the Protestant when he is under and dis^auored, has
no patience at all, but breaks out continually to most violent tumultes and
rebellions.

If we do consider the deportement of the protestants in Queen Mary's time,
The patience of Protesta^tes.
and how every month almost they had either rebellious or new turbule^t
practices against the state and Queen (not being ashamed at length also by
public books to make all weomen incapable of royal government) a man would
think this fellow very shameless, Goodmans book.
not to blush to make this discourse against Catholics, so soon after those
broiles of his own people. And yet these differences are to be noted in the
cause, first that Q. Maryes government dured but ^tle more then four years,
and this of her Majesty has done forty: ^en were the principal protestants
not touched nor pressed, but now ^o Catholics at all is spared: they were
restreyned only, from brining in of novelties, these are forced to renounce
their old religion, that ^om the first conversion of the land they and their
fathers have profes^ed, and vowed to keep: they had few or no forrayn princes
of their ^eligion round, about to give them courage or assist^nce, these have
^e most and strongest in Christendom, and yet are quiet: and this for England.

But if we pass our eye beyond this little Island also, and consider that revel
these friends of Sir Francis, though not of Saint Francis, The revels of forayne
heretics.
^aue made in other countries, since the beginning of their innoua^ions to wit
in Germany, France, Flandres, Poland, Swethland, Demnarke and Scotland,
against their true and lawful princes; what ^rmies, camps, battayles, and
insurrections, what desolation of coun^ries, cities, towns, and linages, they
have caused; and what slaughter and hauok of Christian blood they have
procured; more impudent and ^idiculous will this clamor and exaggeratio^ of our
crowching knight ^eem to be, about two earls only, Northumb. VVestmerl.
that upon fear of force gathered their servants, neighbors, and tenants
together, and presently fled, and of two or three other gentlemen, whereof the
one was put to death ^or having a description of certaynes ports and havens
only found in ^is chamber, Fr. Throg. Char. Page
and for that he had some intelligence with the Queen of Scotts and with Don
Bernardin de Mendoza Ambassador for the King of Spain resident in England
(though nothings else could be ^roued against him) the other went beyond the
feas for that he could ^ot live with his conscience at home, and never hurted
them since. And of two earls more committed, the one upon suspicion, and
nothing proved against him, that was known before his piteous death, which God
only knows how he came unto: the other for flying first for his conscience,
Northumb. Arundel.
out of the realm (he being taken on the sea and brought back again) and
after diverse years of imprisonment without any further matter laid to his
charge was after condemned, principally if not only for a Mass heard or
caused to be said in the tower of London, which was such a treason as all his
noble ancestors would have been glad to have been condemned for, and his
posterity may glory that he was: for that never Earl in England since it was
Christian was ever brought to the bar for such and so glorious and so holy a
treason.

And to conclude all these accusations in deed laid together against English
Catholics are but very tryfles and triuial things, that daily happen in most
quiet and peaceable commonwealthes, where no man is afflicted by the state at
all. But that infinite greater and more heinous stirs and breaches have not
bin raised within the space of forty years, where so deadly differences in
religion, and so continual persecution against so great a body have bin in ure;
this I say (as I said before) that to men of judgment and indifferency, and
of experience in government, is a marvelous wonder, and a most famous
canonization of the patience, magnanimity, and fidelity of English
Catholics; and her Majesty and the realm are happy that they have such
subjects. And if they will not believe me, let them but turn the leaf a little
against protestants, puritans, and other new sectaries, and restrain them from
their desires, and pinch them with persecution, but a quarter of that they have
donn to Catholics, and they shall se and feel by experience which kind of
people is more apt to obey, or to woork turmoiles and perils to their
weal-publique and governors. And thereby also will appear the vanity and
malice of this impertinent and spiteful slanderer, who ends his inuectiue
with these words.

There is no end (says he) with this people, their practices are pestilent,
their persuasions perilous, their platforms traitorous, and to serve their turn
they want not cunning to execute all: so violent they are in their vilanies and
treasons, and so shameless they are in their falsehoods and dissimulations. And
again: by this taste you shall see the brutish vilanyes of our bastard
countrymen, and understand what just cause there is to detest both the traitors
and their treasons, etc.

To all which I answer, that a railing tongue untied, is a wild beast without
a bridle, and to ruun after him with a cudgel, though at certain turnings many
blows and bastinadoes may be given him (as in part there has bin I suppose
to this man, by conuincing his falsehoods, raylings and calnmniations) yet is it
a wearisom exercise even to the giver himself, and therefore I will let him
runn, until wearied by his own furye, he become more calm, and enter into some
more temperate cogitations, if not of truth and charity yet of christian honor
and honesty, and with this I end our third encounter.

HASTINGES VVACH-VVORDE. THE FOVRTH INCOVNTER, ABOUT BISHOP GARDENER AND
Cardinal Allen, by name, and of their vnvvort^ie and slanderous usage by this
vvachvvoord-geuer.
THough against all Catholic people that come in his way, the tongue of this
knight be very lavish and approbrious (which neither proceeds of chiualry nor
yet of nobility) yet two principal persons above others he seeks chiefly to
disgrace and wound in his discourse, which are D. Gardener Bishop of winchester,
and high Chauncellor of England in Queen Mary's days, and Doctor Allen late
Cardenall of Rome. Two such eminent subjects for Ecclesiastical men, as
setting a side the only difference of religion which made the^ ungrateful to
the present state, our land has not had lightly their equales in many ages
before. Both of them of high wits, The Comparison betvveen Bishop Gardener, and
Cardinal Allen.
exqui^ite learning, and singular good natures, both of rare virtues, the one ^
chief Counselor to two great princes of our realm, the father and ^aughter,
and the other fit to be Counselor to any prince living, and was of council to
the highest consistory in Christendom, Bishop Gardener was carried through
great variety of prosperous and adverse ^ortune, and ever showed himself
superior to them both, except once ^nly in his youth and prosperity, when he
went a little astray by fear, ^ut sore repented it soon after. Cardinal Allen
that never was in properitie at home, but trained up for the most part of his
days in ba^ishment, and in the disgrace and frowning countenance of his
coun^rie, for religions sake, bare the same with incredible constancy and
^lacritie, and toward the end of his life was highly advanced to ho^or for his
virtue by forain potentates, as the world knows. B. Gardener was a master
and common tutor to English young nobility ^n his days, and his hows a famous
school of great men's children ^n England. C. Allen was a public father to
all sorts of that age^nd to all degrees that left their country for religion,
and he procured them both howses and schools in forain nations. The Bishop was
^beral and had much to give of his own while he was suffered to ^ossesse it;
the Cardinal though meaner in temporal wealth yet mu^ificent of mind, and so
much respected and credited by others that were richer then himself, that he
gave more perhaps in his days then the other was able of his own, according to
that of the Apostle, qua^ egentes, multos autem locupletantes, 2. Cor. 6.
as poor, and yet enriching many others. And to be short, a peerlesse pair of
prelates they were whyl^ they lived, and full unworthy to be thus bayted by
the wyld tongu^ of this slanderous backbyter, but let us hear in particular
what he^ says of them.

Of Bishop Gardener you have heard before his encomion or commendation, Of
Bishop Gardener.
where he said. Gardener that most proud and bloody monster left no corner of
his wit unsought, to shorten her Majesty's days, and prevent he^ by the
bloody slaughter of her sacred person, from being our Queen. And afterward
again making his inuectiue against the Catholics, that for conscience refuse
to go to Church, he says thus.

The recusants of our age cannot profess nor make greater show of loyalty and
love to our dread Souereign, neither can serve her outwardly with greater
appearance of faithfulness, nor can protest more deeply by words and oaths,
their true and good meaning to her, then did Gardener, Bonner, and Tonstal, to
her noble father and brother, which they did confirm by printed books. For
Gardener did writ^ his book de vera obedientia, and Bonner added his epistle
to it. And Tonst^ published a flat treatise against the Pope. But when these
two noble Princes were called to their last and everlasting home and kingdom in
heaven, and Queen Marie possessed the government of this kingdom upon earth,
then Gardener did tear o^ his glorious visour, and showed himself in his right
colors and shape; for he an^ his accomplices never rested till they had brought
in the Spainard, and had matche^ him in marriage with the Queen, by which they
betrayed God, her, and the whol^ realm.

This bloody intention by this linck thus strengthened, then comes Gardener
ou^ publicly in pulpit with this sentence, Romans 13.
hora est iam nos de somno surgere perverting the sacred scripture most
profanely and blasphemously to his bl^ody purpose, etc. this far goes the
accusation.

And first here you see there is nothing but blood and bloodines, when he
talks of Bishop Gardener; whereof I could greatly marueyl if this poor man
followed either ryme or reason in any discourse that he makes, for verily I
believe, that if a man should ask any good natured Protestant that lived in
Queen Mary's time, and has both wit to judge, and indifferency to speak the
truth without passion, he will confess that no one great man in that
government, was further of from blood and bloodines, or from cruelty and
revenge, then Bishop Gardener, Bishop Gardener his gentle nature.
who was known to be a most ^e^der-harted and myld man in that behalf; in so
much that it was some times, and by some great personages objected to him for
no small fault, to be euerfull o^ ^^^^^^on in the office and charge that he
then bare: yea to him especially it ^as imputed, that none of the greatest and
most known Protestan^s in Queen Mary's reign (and some of their names I have
men^^oned before) were ever called to account, or put to trooble for ^ligion:
which also was noted in diverse criminal great causes, and ^amely that of the
lady Smith burned for killing her husband, the ^rd Sturton executed about
Harguile, and the Duke of Nor^umberland beheaded for public rebellion. All
which three (to ^aue others) it is known that Bishop Gardener labored
earnestly ^r to save their lives, and this only upon compassion, and he passed
^ far in this behalf as he wauted not some rebuke for the same, espe^ally about
the last, to wit the Duke, for whom he sued importun^, notwithstanding he had
been extremely misused and injured by ^he said Duke in K. Edwards time (or at
least permitted by him to be ^iured by others) as namely to be deprived of his
dignity and Bishop^ke, and held in the tower all the time of that government,
wherein the ^uke ruled all, but yet the duke being condemned to death, and
knowing ^e gentle nature of the Bishop, and that he was nothing vindicatiue, he
^esolued to rely upon him of all other men, and so made petition (after sen^ce
of death given against him) that he might speak only with the Bi^hop before
his death, as well about matters concerning his soul and conscience, as also
for disposing of his other affairs. Which pe^tion being granted, though
somewhat hardly, by the Queen and ^ouncel, for that it had been hindered by the
Dukes adversaries that ^new and feared in this case the Bishops tenderness of
heart; at last he ^as sent to the tower in the company of an other Councelor to
be ^resent at their talk, who afterward recounted (and I have heard it ^om his
own mouth) the hearty tears that the said Bishop shed at ^e sight and
conference with the Duke, who after much speech said ^o the Bishop toward the
end with great affliction of mind: My ^ood lord B. And is there no hope at all
for me to live, The Dukes speeches to Bishop Gardener.
and to do ^ome penance in the rest of my days for my sins past? alas let
me ^ue a little longer, though it were but in a mous-hole. To which the Bishop
answered, o my lord, I would God that any thing could have ^ontented your grace
but a kingdom, when you were at liberty and ^n prosperitier: and now also, I
would it lay in my power to give you ^his mous-hole, for I would allow you the
best palace I have in the world to be your mous-hole, and I do offer to do for
you what I can ^o^sibly. But yet for that your offense is great, and sentence
is past a^aynst you, and your adversaries are many, it shall be best for you to
provide for the woorst, and especialie that you stand well with God in matters
of conscience and religion, for to speak playnlie, it is mos^ lykely that you
must dye.

To that the Duke answered, that he would dispose him self, and desired he
might have a learned priest sent him for his confession, The Duke of North.
religion.
and spiritual comfort. And as for religion (said he) you know (my Lord B.)
that I can be of no other but of yours, which is the Catholic: for ^ never
was of any other in deed, nor ever so foolish as to believe any of that which
we have set up in King Edwardes days, but only to use the same to my own
purpose of ambition, for which God forgive me, and so I mean to testify
publicly at my death, for it is the truth, and so he did, and his confession
was put forth in print, as the world knows, and at this day much of it extant
in Stowes chronicle^ B. Gardener went away with an afflicted heart for the Duke,
and shed many a tear for him on the way as he returned, Stow. ^n. 1. Reg.
Man^e.
and presently went to the Queen and entreated so earnestly for him as he had
ha^ gained her consent for his life, which so much terrified the Dukes
adversaries, as presently they got the Emperor Charles (that was i^ Flanders)
to write to the Queen a very resolute and ernest letter that it was not safe
for her nor the state, to pardon his life, and with that he was executed.

All which story I have been enforced to repeat a little the more larger, thereby
to check the malignant speech of this our sicophan^ knight, against so worthy
a man, whom he will needs make ^ bloody and cruel monster, and to have sought
maliciously the death of her Majesty when she was Lady Elizabeth. Which was
so fa^ of from his condition and nature (espetially she being at that time an
object rather of love and compassion then of envy and hatred) a^ I dare say he
does him apparent and wilful wrong. Yet it may be, that he has heard somewhat
about the discovery of a certayn^ bracelet, imputed to the Chancellor in
examination of Sir Thomas Wiattes affairs and his accomplices. In which bracelet
it was said that all the secretie of that conspiracy lay hidden, A mysterious
bracelet.
and that the Chancellor did pearse the matter further then others, which may be
als^ true, that point belonging then to his office and obligation, but that he
ever used or urged the knowledge gotten thereof to the ladies peril, this
Hastinges neither in have nor by leisure will ever be able to prove. And so
much of this point touching her Majesty's person.

Let us examine the rest that he writes of B. Gardener, some ^ the words were
repeated before, but here they are necessary against by reason of the commixion
with that which follows.

The recusants (says he) cannot profess more loyalty and love to the Queen
that now is, then did Gardener to her father and brother, writing a book de
vera obedientia, etc. But when these two noble princes were dead, and Queen
Marie in the kingdom, then he did tear of his glorious vizard, for he and his
compli^ces, never rested until they had brought in the Spanyard, and matched
him with Queen Marie, by which they betrayed God, her, and the whole realm.

It seems that this poor seely man is either very ignorant in matters of our
own realm, Of Bishop Gardeners fall.
or very badly bent to tell manifest untruths. For who knows not, that albeit
Bishop Gardener at the beginning of king Henryes defection from the church of
Rome, being born away with the stream of the time, and with some fear of the
kings violent proceeding, and not very full instructed perhaps in that
controversy of the Supremacy (for that it was at the very first entrance to
his Bishoprik after the fall of Cardinal Wolsey) shaken also with the frailty
of humane infirmity, he shronk with S. Peter, and stepped somewhat aside in that
book of his, de vera obedientia, etc. But yet how soon he did recall himself
again, and condemned his own doing therein, and how much also he prevailed in
secret with the king himself in that point of doctrine, you shall hear
afterward by his own testimony. And as for king Edwards reign, it is a flat
fable and fiction which our knight tells us, of Bishop Gardeners following
the sway also of that time: for it is well known, that he being one of the
chiefest among those sixteen counselors that were appointed by king Henry's
testament, and earnest charge of mouth at his last hour, to govern his son
and realm, during the minority of the young king, with express commandment
also of the dead king, that neither protector should be chosen, nor yet any
point of Luthers, Zwinglius, or Caluins religion brought in, Bishop Gardener as
a faithful counselor striued what he could at the very first entrance, to have
both these orders of king Henry observed. But ambition ouerbearing all, first a
Protector within 40. hours after the kings death, and then soon after an
innovation also of religion, was thrust upon the realm, by violence of some
that packed together for their gains, more then for devotion: which Bishop
Gardener seeing and not able to resist, he spoke his mind plainly touching
religion, in a sermon before the young king and council upon Saint Peter's day
(which was but five months after king Edwards reign) for which sermon, he was
sent to the tower the morning after, and lay there prisoner all king Edwards
time, and came not out, until Queen Marie at her first entrance into the tower
of london when she was Queen, delivered him and other catholic prisoners
together, Sto anno 1. ^d 6.
and how then does our steel-brow-knight, write, that Bishop Gardener Hattered
both father and son, and never showed himself in religion until both of them
were called to their last home, and Queen Marie entered the crown: let some
friend blush for him if he have not shame to do it himself.

Again, it is as great an untruth and as gross ignorance besides, to say,
About bringing in the Spaniard in Q. Mary's days.
as this man does, that Bishop Gardener and his accomplices brought in the
Spaniard, and mached him in marriage with Queen Marie. For that every child
acquaynted with that state knows or may learn, that Bishop Gardener was of
the contrary part or faction that favored young Edward Courtney the Earl of
devonshire, and would have had him to Marie the Queen, whom Bishop Gardener
had held for his spiritual child in the tower all king Edwardes time. And now
the matter was so far forward as the marriage was held for certain, but that
the contrary side and especially the Lord Paget, partly by the acquaintance
and credit he had gotten with Charles the Emperor in Flanders during king
Edwards time, and partly for the ielosie he had (perhaps) of B. Gardeners
great affection to the Duke of Northumberland, his greatest enemy, who in king
Edwards reign had endeavored utterly to disgrace him, they procured (I say) the
said Emperors most earnest and effectual letters to the Queen, about her
marriage with the Prince of Spain, which they did so urge to the said Queen,
and with so many arguments against Courtney (espetially that he was neither
sound in body nor religion) as they got her consent, and subscription to the
said letters of the Emperor. And then there was no further dealing to the
contrary; for that Queen Mary bore such exceeding love and reverence to the
Emperor Charles her Cousin, as she would not fayl in her word given to him for
all the world. VVherby we may imagine what a mortification Bishop Gardener and
all the rest of his side that favored Courtney did receive by this change of
the Queens will and purpose, and thereby also perceive the folly and temerite of
this rash accuser, who lays to there charge the bringing in the Spaniard,
which yet if they had done, or had been cause of that greatest and most
honorable marriage, that for many ages has been in Christendom, and of greatest
consequence, if issue had followed thereof; if this (I say) bad been so (as it
was not) why did they betray therein both God, the Queen, and there country as
this wise Censurer affirms, what grownds, what reason may there be aleaged of
this triple treason? God received by this marriage the strengthening of his true
religon, the Queen got the greatest noblest, and richest husband that was
extant in Europe, our country got many a thowsaud of Spanish treasure, without
loss of any as hereafter shall be showed. And wherein then stood this great
offense?

But let us pass over these follies of our knight in matters of state for that
perhaps his praise and skyll is only in arms; yet one point more must I
examine, wherein he condemns B. Gardener, and this is for his sermon made at
S. Paul's cross, upon the words of the Apostle to the Romans, h^ra est iam
nos de somno surgere. It is now high time for us to rise out of sleep, Romans 13.
the night has gone before, the day is come, etc. and the rest that follows
there. All which sacred scripture this learned religious knight says very
peremptorily, that it was most profanely and blasphemously perverted by the
said Bishop, and that to bloody purposes, which we shall now a little discuss.

This famous sermon was preached, as I said before, at Paul's cross, The
Sermon of Bishop Gardener at Paul's Cross.
after the marriage was celebrated between the King and the Queen, who both were
present at this speech of the Bishop now also high Chancellor, and there prsent
in like manner both Cardinal Poole legate of the sea Apostolic, as also the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, french King, and other Princes, and a marvelous
great learned and noble auditorie besides, as ever perhaps was at any sermon in
England before or after. The Chancelors discourse was, how long they had run
astray, and been in darkness of division and strife among themselves, since first
king Henry left the old trodden path of his ancestors, kings and Queens of
England in matters of religion, and brake from the union of the church of Rome,
and of other catholic kingdoms round about him, and that now it was time to
arise out of this sleep, and to look about them.

And in this discourse and sermon, the Chancellor uttered two principal things
among other, that greatly moved the whole auditory.

The first was the hearty and humble accusation of himself for his ^all, and
consenting to King Henryes will in that book de vera obedien^tia, which he did
utter with so great vehemency of spirit and abundance of tears, as he could
not go forward, and was forced diverse times to make some pawses; which in such
an audience (especially of strangers, also he being the cheifest person of the
realm after the prince, we may imagine what a temporal shame and confusion it
was unto him, and how greatly it would move the hearers and lookers on to see
him make such an accusation of himself willingly, of his own accord, without
compulsion and with such earnestnes as he did. And that there was no fiction or
dissimulation in this act of his, the end declared; for when he fell sick
afterward, and drew near unto his death, he desired that the passion of our
Savior might be read unto him; and when they came to the denial of Saint
Peter, and how after Christ had looked back upon him, he went out and wept
bitterly; the Bishop cried out and bid them stay there, Bishop Gardener his
repeutance at his death.
and see whether his sweet Savior would vouchsafe also to look back upon him,
and give him some part of Saint Peter's tears, for (says he) negaui cum Petro,
extui cum Petro sed nondum fleui amare cum Petro, I have denied Christ with
Peter (meaning that subscription to the supremacy of king Henry, I have gone
out with Peter (meaning the participatio^ of that schism, but yet I have not
wept bitterly with Peter; so bitterly as I should do, and by often repetition
of those words, and asking God sorgeuenes with cries and syghes he
intertayned himself until great floodes of tears came down upon him, and so
gave up the ghost.

The second notable point which the Bishop uttered in this sermon, was
concerning king Henry the eight his lord and master, which moved the
auditorie no less then the other. And this was that the said king a little
before his death, had dealt with him very secretly and seriously, K. Henry
the 8. inclination to reconcile himself.
to have sent him to a certain dyat in Germany, under pretense to treat other
matters, but in deed the cheef point should be, to seek out some honorable way
and means (as from himself, and not from the king) either by the Emperor,
legate, popes Nuntio, or other fit instrument, to reconcyle him again to the
church of Rome. And this the Bishop affirmed to be most true upon his oath and
fidelity to God and the world, and to the memory of the said king his master
dead, whom he showed to love so tenderly and dearly, as he wept most bitterly
also in that place, for that this holy motion had not taken the effect he
desired, attributing the let thereof to Gods severe judgments, and to the great
difficulties which the said king found of making that reco^ciliatio^ with his
honor and reputation, which temporal honor he lamented much that it was more
regarded by the king and some that counseled him, then in so weighty a woork
of eternal salvation ought to have bin.

Thus then was the substance, and these were the circumstances of that sermon.
Let us now consider whether the theme he took, iam, hora est nos de somno
surgere, were fit and to his purpose or no: or whether it were profanely and
blasphemously perverted, as this wise gentleman affirms, who takes upon him
to censure the matter.

First let it be considered, that if ever any man of our realm might take upon
him to talk of a sleep or dream in matters of our commonwealth, as a
Counselor, and of his own knowledge, Bishop Gardener might do it, which had
seen such alterations both of religion and temporalityes within our land, such
chopping and changing, such pulling down and setting up, as he might fitly
call the time a time of sleep or dream. For as in a sleep things are
represented to a man confusedly, and out of hand they pass away, and contrary
representations come in their place, so had Bishop Gardener seen in the
public affairs of the realm, no less alterations of comicall and tragical
acts, after he came to be a councellor.

For first he had seen his own king and master, king Henry the eight, so
earnest in the defense of the catholic faith, The sleep and dream noted by
B. Gardener in England.
and of the sea of Rome in particular, as he wrote a book in defense thereof,
though he were dissuaded by some of his counsel to do it, for reason of state.
And after that again being to send this very man, Gardener (then his
secretary) to Rome for his Ambassador, about soliciting of the divorce between
himself and Queen Catherine, he commanded him to tell the Pope and College of
Cardinales, that whatsoever they determined in that matter, he would accept it
with all indifferency, and ever be a most obedient child of the Roman
church. And this commission he gave him in the presence of Cardinal Wolsey,
and yet soon after he saw the same king so changed, for the affection he bare
to an other party, as he brake with the Pope and church of Rome, and pulled
down the said Cardinal, and put to death two of the men that he esteemed most
for virtue and learning of all his realm, or of any other foreign kingdom of
Christendom, and whom he had loved before exceedingly, to wit, Doctor Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More Chancellor.

Again, Gardener had seen the same king wax weary soon after of the party, for
whose love he had first begun to make all those stirs, and to put her to
death openly, and yet to continue his former breaches, and to run from one
difficulty to an other, and from one inconvenience to an other, and never to
stop the fountain from whence all this unquietness came. He had seen him also
pass from on wife to another, to the number of six, dismissing some and
putting others to death, according to the affection or disaffection which he
bare to each of them for the time. He had seen him make diverse and different
acts of parliament, Seem. He^r. 25. cap. 22. and an^. 28. cap. 7. and 17.
in prejudice or preferment of his own children, now for their legitimation and
inheritance, now for the contrary, as by the statutes themselves yet extant in
print, is evident to the world. And from the liking or disliking of his said
wives, he passed also to the liking or suspicion of his own kindred, subjects,
and familier fr^nds: of which he pulled down so many, as by the stories may be
seen. And Bishop Gardener was wont to say of him (that knew him full well) that
after he once left to love that person, which by Gods law and man's he was
bound to love above all others (to wit, his first wife and Queen) he never
loved any person har^ely and constantly afterward.

Moreover, he had seen the poor king so combered, and troobled about matters
of religion, K. Henry's perplexity about religion.
as was pitiful to behold. For that on the one side the point of his spiritual
Supremacy taken up in his chole^ against the Pope, seemed to touch his honor so
near, as he might not show to yield any one jot therein: and consequently he
was fain to put to death all such Catholics as denied the same, though
otherwise he both loved and highly esteemed them and on the other side, his
judgment and conscience in matters of the Catholic truth against the
protestants and all new sectaries, convinced his conscience and understanding,
as he clearly uttered in the statute of six articles which judgment also
enforced him to burn as many of that fide ^ were convicted.

And finally being wearied toward his later end, with these combats of
conscience and honor, judgment and passion, he conferre^ with Bishop Gardener
as you have heard, about the mayn remedy and only sure redress of all, which
was his returning to the union of the Roman church, and the rest of
Christendom.

And besides all this, Bishop Gardener had seen the same afflicted king,
brought to such streights and doubts in his later hours of life, about the
weightiest affairs that he had in this world, as he could not tell what to
determine ordain or establish, for the security of his own children,
espe^ially of his only son prince Edward, tha^ had but nine years yet of age
and for that cause was the father^ heart more pe^siue about him. For first he
was afeard to leave any protector unto him, remembering the eue^t of king Edward
the four^^ his children under their uncle protector the Duke of Gloucester. And
secondly, he was as greatly afeard and afflicted also to think, least after his
death the perilous waves and fluddes of heresies should enter upon him, by the
very same gate that himself had opened.

VVhetfore both these points he forbad expressly, and appointed for execution
thereof sixteen governors, as I have said, with equal authority, all in his
opinion (or the far greater part) very catholic. But he was no sooner dead,
but all these orders of his were overthrown, and a protector made, the third
day after the kings death, and sone after religion changed, and the law of six
articles abrogated, and as little regard had to king Henry's will and
ordinances, as if he had never been king of this realm, or master to the
breakers. And among other these changes, was displaced Gardener himself, one of
the cheef of those sixteen appointed for governors by king Henry, and not only
thrust from all authority, but sent also to the tower of London prisoner, as
before I have showed; and other Catholic Lords removed in like manner from
the Council, for like ends and purposes.

Then began a new world of making new Lords, The stirs in king Edvvardes
days.
new Earls, new Marqueses, and new Dukes, and in dividing great states offices
and dignites in good fellowship among themselves, and all in the name of the
child king (though he were not yet crowned, nor three weeks past since his
fathers death) New men also were called out of Germany, to wit (Peter Martyr
and Martin Bucer two apostated friars with their wenches) that had been Nuns
who must come to teach a new religion in England; but with express condition
to be indifferent to reach that sect and opinion, either of Luther, Swinglius,
or Calvin, or other that should be determined and agreed upon by the Parliament
then in gathering together; and so they were contented, and with that condition
they were sent the one to Oxford, and the other to Cambrige. Then was the new
English form of service drawn out in have by certain of the Protectors
chaplayns in Somerset place in London, not fully agreeing to any of the
Captains doctrine aforesaid, but somewhat mingled of them all and much also of
the Catholic ryte and form, all which was approved soon after for
apostolical and established by the lay part of the Parliament, (for the clergy
reclaymed) and all men enforced to sweat unto it, and so for the old religion
received by the universal church, and continued in England for above a thousand
years, and confirmed by so many miracles at the beginning, as S. Bid and other
ancient authors do affirm, and allowed by the consent of all our learned
English for so many ages, now was there a new religion devised in corners and
set up by certain obscure and hungry fellows in have, within the space of
two months, and authorized by a parliament of unlearned lay men to be the rule
of our salvation.

But in the mean space the Duke of Somerset now head of this church (for that
the child king was at play and could think nothing of it) attended principally
to his temporal advancement and to purchase good old land, and caused his
servants to set forward the new religion, without troobling him therein, saying
that all should be examined and approved afterward by the authority of the
young king, as true head of the Church, and so it was.

Then followed great tumultes and rebellious in the realm, as also iarring and
falling out of the great protestant Counselors among themselves. The protector
first cut of the head of his brother the Admiral, and then the Earl of
Warwick cut of the head of the Protector, and diverse of his friends, and made
himself duke of Northumberland, and then plotted with the duke of Suffolk to
cut of all king Henry's children, and to bring in Suffolkes daughter and
Northumberlandes son, as they did. For which soon after both their heads
were cut of also by Queen Marie, and Catholic religion was restored again to
the state wherein first it was, when king Henry her father began this tragedy,
and first put all out of joint.

Thus passed the matter briefly, and all this Bishop Gardener had seen and
passed through, and had played his part in diverse acts, and pageantes, to
wit, as an actor in the beginning and as a patient after, as has been showed.
And being now restored to his old estate again, and more over made Chancelour
of the realm, and looking back upon the dream past, had he not (trow you) just
cause to preach, hora iam est nos de somno surgere, it is time to arise from
sleep, wherein we have slumbered these twenty years and more, in such variety
of tossinges, and to walk with more light and stead fastenes for the time to
come? let it be left I say to the judgment of every discreet reader, whether
this theme and parable were fitly chosen and well applied by B. Gardener or no,
or rather blasphemously perverted, as our Hunting deuyne Sir Francis will needs
have it, and so much for this time of Bishop Gardener.

About C. Allen, Of Cardinal Allen.
for that I have been over large in B. Gardeners affairs, I mean to be very
breef, and so much the breefer for that the matters objected against him by
this accuser are very cauils, if we consider the substance of the thing it
self; for he says, that this English traitor, though he were a Cardinal at
Rome and sworn to the Popes pa^table has sent from thence many slanderous and
seditious pamphlets, and in one (which was the treatise against the English
execution of justice) he seems to wish that doctor Sanders and doctor
Bristow, had spared to speak so much in defense of Pius Quintus Bull, against
her Majesty, and yet he doubts not to affirm, that these two learned men of
^reat zele and excellency, had their special reasons to do so; which he will
neither desend nor reprove, etc.

And further he proceeds (says this man) to excuse all the priests and
students beyond the seas, and all such as have come over, and says, that all
of them ^ince that censure of his holiness (to use ( says he) his own
words) did use all ^euerence and respect to her Majesty, uttering in no
preaching, speech, or book, ^o not at the hour of their death and martyrdom,
nor ever before in any their confessions to the magistrate, any disloyal word
against her Majesty.

These words recyteth Hastinges out of the discourse against their English
justice, as words of moderation, or rather blushing as he ^ermeth them, for
that which was done before, and yet he says that ^n an other treatise of
defense of Sir William Stanlies act in giving ^uer Deuentrie to the king of
Spain, the Cardinal comes to ^tter himself as far as either Sanders or
Bristow, or any other, in approbation of the said excomunication; which thing
albeit this kinght ^o greatly condemn, yet cannot I any thing marueyle
thereat; considering that the Cardinals opinion (being as he was) could be no
other in substance touching matters of controversy, then was that of doctor
Sanders, doctor Bristow, and the rest. And though for peace, ^^oderation, and
edification, he liked well in others, and specially ^n the younger sort of
priests, that they should avoid all occasion of ^ateful speech in this odious
controversy, yet might he speak his mind plainly (being in the place and
dignity he was) when occasion should be offered, which I shall endeavor to
express more clearly ^y the example following.

In a great and noble house, where there are many children of the ^elf same
parents, Why Doct. Allen. D Sa^de^s and other like might vtten their minds
more plainly.
if those parents do come to breach and to fall out ^etween them selves, what
can the children do but besorowfull and ^ent, and sigh at such contentions,
without taking willingly any ^arte, for that they love, fear, and reverence
both the parties that ^^e fallen at debate for which respect also they dare not
so much as to ^terpose there iugdmentes and censures in the controversy except
they ^^e forced, and especially they onger sort of children, who be fitter to
^eepe and morn such contentions, then to determine them with their verdict:
yet it is not so altogether with the elder brethren, that ^eing come to man's
estate, learned and wise, and seeing the breach to grow greater daily between
their said parents and superious, have authority and right to speak more
freely then the rest. And not only to entreat for peace, but to interpose also
their judgments (though ever with due reverence to both parts) as well in the
question de iure as de facto; that is to say, not only to judge and discern
where the greater authority or higher preeminence of commanding lies by
right, either in the one parent or other, in the father or in the mother, but
also in the particular fact about which they fell out, to wit, who had more
reason then the other, or who was most in fault: which second point is much
more hard and hateful, and subject to offense, then the first, and yet may
discreet and loving children say their opinion also in that behalf, when need
requires, without breach of dew respect and duty.

Even so then stands the case in this our controversy. Her Majesty being
our Queen is thereby also a mother, How the Q is ou^ mother, and he Pope our
father.
and norisheth us her subjects as a careful parent: the Bishop of Rome to al
catholic men of the world is their spiritual father, that has principal care
of their souls by Gods commission; and for such has he ever been taken, and is
at this day in all the catholic states and kingdoms of Spayne^ France^
Italy^ Germany, Pooland and other provinces, that hold the ancient belief of
Christendom. And so has he been held also by all our ancesters, kings and
Queens, clergy and temporaltie of England, for above a thousand years
together But now our said two parente^ are fallen at debate, for which all
their Catholic subjects, who are children to them both, are hartelie sorry,
and do lament the case: all sorts of people commonly both lay men and priests
within England, do hold their peace and sobbe at the matter as younger children,
and do only attend to pray to God for their good atonement, and so do the
rest also that are abroad in other nations. But yet if doctor Sanders, doctor
Bristow, doctor Stapleton, doctor Allen, and such like, that are men of greater
learning, antiquity, and judgment, and elder brethren among the rest, if these
men (I say) do put in their judgments concerning this controversy of their
parents, as well de iure, as de facto^ that is, do tell first what authority
and iurisdicton either temporal o^ spiritual each one of these two parents and
superiors have, and wherein they are or ought to be subordinate the one to the
other: and secondly de facto ipso if the falling out it self do insinuate
where and by whom the cause of this breach and discord was first or
principally offered, and which part has most fault in this contention and
disagreement; if they do this (I say) as any subject may do in any other
Catholic kingdom of the world, without offense in like controversies,
between his prince and the Pope, why should this act be made so heinous a
crime by this our skolding knight, as to call so worthy a man (as our late
Cardinal was) an archtraytor, a tugling compagnion, a shameless dissembling
liar, that villanously stuffeth his book with blasphemous slanders, devilish
persuati ns, and impudent lies against her Majesty? Let all men judge of this
man's immodestie.

THE FIFTH INCOVNTER, ABOUT IESVITES AND FATHER Persons in particular, whether
they seek the Queens blood, as Sir Francis affirms.
FOR the grownd and foundation of all that is to be examined and discussed in
this conference and encounter, I shall first set down the accusation of Sir
Francis, in his own words, which are these that insew.

I do not hear (says he) that the Popes holiness is so purged from ambition,
or so reconciled to religion, as he means not to continue his claim for the
Supremacy, or will cease to setle the dre^ges of his poison and superstitious
doctrine among us. I cannot perceive that the thirst of Parsons, and his pew
fellows, is yet quenched, for seeking the blood of our dear Sovereign, and
in her the destruction of us all, the cause remaining still for which
heertofore they have sought it, etc.

This is the knights narration or rather calumniation, fraught (as you see)
with his ordinary terms of dregs, poison, and bloodshed, with which his
accustomed knightly speech is wont to be ^awfed. Wherein so much as concerns
the Popes holinsse, sbalbe considered of more amply afterward, in a particular
conference that we are to have about his holiness actions, authority, and
jurisdiction.

Now only is to be noted the fond and ridiculous manner of Sir Francis
fantastical writing, Sir Francis ridiculous.
telling us very gravely that he does not yet hear (for belyke the poor man
does much hearken after it) that the Popes holiness is so purged yet of
ambition, or so reconciled to protestants religion, as he means to leave of
his old claim of spiritual Supremacy over England, or his indeuoring to setle
Romish doctrine among us (for I omit willingly the terms of dregs and
poison, as more fit and proper to Sir Francis dish, who feeds upon so many
old heresies, condemned for poisoned dregs, by Gods Catholic church for so
many ages past) and this tale of Sir Francis, is no less ridicul^^^ and
childish, then if he should say to any temporal prince, or to the Queen of
England her self, that he sees not her Majesty so purged yet from ambition,
as to leave of her claym of commaundry over all her tealm, or of settling
justice in her name throughout her dominions, for that no less proper and
essential to the Popes office and state, is Ecclesiastical Supremacy over all
christian nations in Ecclesiastical matters (as after more particulerly shall be
proved) then to her Majesty the commaundrie over England, in temporal
affairs. And as to her Majesty by virtue of her royal authority it
apperteineth and incumbeth, to setle and mainteyn justice throughout her
realms, so to the Popes pastoral and Apostolical authority is annexed the
obligation of preaching, and settling his doctrine (by himself or others)
throughout all Christian states and kingdoms or that may be christian, which
obligation grows by that great and high commission given to Saint Peter, in
special manner above all other Apostles (as after shall be demonstred) by Christ
him self over all christian souls, in these words thryce repeated: pasce oues
meas, pasce agnos meos, Joan. v^t.
feed my sheep, and feed my lambs. Which feeding he could not perform, nor
can his s^ccessors, but by doctrine to all, and government over all.

And therefore whenever Sir Francis (sitting in his wache) shall discover or
hear, that the Popes holiness leaves of this claim of Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, or is so purged as he becomes a Protestant (which none ever yet
was, nor will be by all liklyhood) let Sir Francis know, that he leaves also to
be Pope; and whenever he cease to endeavor the establishing of his Roman,
universal, and catholic doctrine in England, or any other country else, where
sheep or lambs of Christ are, or may be had, there he cease also to perform
the duty, for which the Popedom or principal See was ordained by our Saueour.
And consequently a very impertinent and childish discourse was this of Sir
Francis, about his holiness purgation, and reconciliation to Protestants
religion. Let us see (if you please) the rest concerning father Persons and his
pewfellowes (as he scornfully calls them) whom albeit he slandereth falsely
in the imputations laid against them, about seeking the Queens blood, yet does
he much honor them all, in joining them in slander and calumniation with the
Pope himself.

First of all then, for that it seems that by father persons pewfellowes,
this pleasant gentleman understands those of his order and society, known
commonly by the name of Jesuits I shall first treat somewhat of them, About
Jesuits in general and their co^tradictors.
and their estate and doings in general, and afterward descend to father
Persons more in particular, though moderatly of them both, in regard of the
friendship that for many years I have held with them, and least any man should
attribute the things I am to say, rather to affection, then judgment in this
behalf.

Notorious it is to them that have experience in the affairs of our days, and
much more that travail through diverse countries, and do weigh with judgment
what passes in the world, that these kind of men (I mean the Jesuits) as
they are greatly loved and esteemed by most catholics, so have they many
adversaries and maligners also, and those not only such as in matters of faith
and opinion do dissent from them, both Heathen, Turk, Heretic, Atheist,
Infidel, and other like (that all ioyntely do band against them) but diverse
others also of catholic profession, for other causes; so as it seems, that
to them may be applied not unfitly, that saying of the Roman Jews to Saint
Paul, when they spoke of Christian religion newly begun de secta hac notum est
nobis quia vbique ei contradicitur. Act. 28.
This only we know of this new sect of Christians, that every where there is
contradiction made against it, to wit, by Jews, gentiles, philosophers,
astronomers, necromantes, heretics, vicious and divided Christians, and other
the like, and to say the truth, it was no evil sign (though uttered by
enemies) of the excellency of the thing it self, for so do diverse ancient
fathers gather in their apology for the Christian cause, against the heathens,
that objected this matter; they gather, I say (and namely Saint Iustine Martyr,
Justin. apol. 2. ad Anton. Pium. Tert. apol. aduersus ge^tes.
and Tertullian) the great perfection of true Christian and catholic
doctrine, by this general contradiction made of all hands against it, and this
partly for that truth is one, and errors many, and that excellent things have
ever many difficulties, and that Christ foretold this, and finally, for that
the trial of gold by many and strong fyers, shows it to be pure, if it abide
and bear them all; in which sense the holy ghost said of the just man
Certamen forte dedit ille Deus, vt vinceret, Sap. 10.
God has given him a strong battle, to the end he might win, and thereby his
victory to be the greater. And king David speaking in the same sense of
himself, and other servants of God, Psalm. 79. 7.
complayneth sweetly: Posuisti nos in contradictionem vicinis nostris, thou
have put us in contradiction even to our own neighbors, that is, to them that
make the same profession also of thy service with us: and finally of Christ
himself it was foretold: Eccepositus est in signum cui contradicetur, Luc. ^.
Isai. 8.
behold he is put for a sign against the which great contradiction shall be
made; which in his passion was chiefly seen, whereof Saint Paul speaking to
the Hebrew Christians, Heb. 12.
said: Think of him which did suffer with patience so great a contradiction
of sinners against himself, and he not weary, nor faint hearted in like
occasions. Causes of tribulations to Gods servants.
This then perhaps may be some cause of so manyfold contradictions, by sundry
sorts of men at this day, against the Jesuits, if as they bear the name so
also they draw near to the life and steps of Jesus their master, whose
particular badge and livery seems to have been ever that his nearest followers
and dearest friends should have most contradiction in this life, for so the
life of all his Saints do testify, which is nothing else, but a rehearsal of
their contradictions and difficulties, and himself discusseth the matter very
largely in Saint John's Gospel, where having showed extreme love to his Apostles
and disciples, and said, that now they were no more servants to him, but
rather friends, for that he had imparted with them all his secrets, he tells
them this secret also for the vpshot of all, about contradiction and opposition
of the world: Joan. 18.
If the world hate you (says he) know ye that it hated me before you, if you
were of the world, the world would love that which is his own, but for that
you are not of the world, and I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the
world hates you, remember the saying which I was wont to use unto you, that
the servant is not greater then his master. Thus Christ in familiar and
confident speech to his best beloved: in which sense also he said after his
resurrection to Ananias, about Saint Paul, when he had chosen him to be his
fauoryte: vas electionis est mihi, Act. 9.
etc. ego ille ostendam, quanta oporteat eum pati, pro nomine meo. He is a
chosen vessel unto me, and I will show him how great matters he must suffer for
my name, and so he did afterward, laying so many contradictions and
tribulations upon him, from all hands, as the poor man could not tell which
way to turn him: vt taederet etiam viuere, 2. Cor. 1.
that he was weary even of his life: for that on one side the Jew, of another
the Gentill pursued him, of an other false brethren betrayed him, of an other
heretics made divisions, of an other seditious Christians raised factions
against him, and added pressures to his chains, of an other side wordly
Christians waxed weary and forsook him as himself complayneth.

And for that our age also wants not of the same quality of men for exercise
of such as profess the same occupation of seeking souls that S. Paul did,
Diverse sorts of contradictors of Jesuits.
it is no maruayle though the Jesuits do find the same effects; for albeit
Jews and Gentiles do not trouble them so much now as they did S. Paul (though
also they want not their contradictions and persecutions also in diverse places
of the world where they bestow their labors) yet all the rest of the good
fellows before mentioned our age has them in abundance, for as for those
that make division, saying: 1. Cor. 1.
Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego Cephae. I am of Luther, I am of Calu^, 1.
Timoth. 1^
as also others qui circa fidem naufragau^runt (as S. Paul says) that have
made shipwrak in matters of their faith, we have greater store and variety of
them and much more cunning, diligent, and spiteful they are, against such
earnest Catholics as Jesuits be, then were those heretics of S. Paul's
time, though they were troublesome enough.

Furthermore for falsi fratres false brethren whereof he complained, 2. Cor. 11.
to wit, false hearted catholics which either of cowardnes, coldness, lak of
zeal, of constancy or confidence, do betray the cause, and the best friends
thereof, the store is also great. Moreover there want not many a Diotrephes, 1.
Joan. 2.
qui principatum in Ecclesia amantes, verbis malignis garriunt, as Saint John
complayneth, such, as to be of more authority themselves, they talk
malignantly of others. Many also of that generation who of malice endeavor,
Philip. 1.
suscitare pressuram fratrum vinculis, to stir up pressure and more acerbitie
to the tribulation of their own brethren, 1. Timoth. 1.
sundry like Hymenaeus and Alexander repellentes bonam conscientiam, that cast
of all care of a good and godly conscience, falling to vice, wickedness and
dissolution of life, and these also presently become enemies of Jesuits, as
the other were of Saint Paul, for that their manner of life is contrary. Many
a Demas in like manner is found, 2. Timoth. 4.
qui diligunt saeculum, who love the world, and for this love, not only do
break from good men, as Demas did from Saint Paul, but also do slander,
calumniate, and speak evil of them, least it might seem that without just cause
they broke from them, and left their friendship. And finally many causes there
be, which do procure hatred and emulation at this day unto Jesuits, which may
be understood in part by this which has bin said, but yet for more perspecuity
I will reduce all to three general heads, which are, their rule and profession,
their learning and doctrine, their life and conversation.

The first, Profession of Jesuits.
touching their rule, institute, and profession, is the same in substance which
all other religions have, to wit, three essential vows, leading to perfection,
by obedience, chastity, and voluntary poverty, against our three sworn
enemies, the flesh, the world, and the devil, 1. Joan. ^.
and against their three squadrons mentioned by Saint John, the concupicence of
the flesh, the concupicence of the eyes, and pride of life. Some
particularities also are added for more restraint, and for the necessities of
these times, by their first founder Ignatius, as that they vow particulerly to
go to all parts and places of the world in missions, for gayning of souls,
where they shall be sent: that they can neither seek nor accept of any wordly
preferments, or dignities whatsoever, unless it be laid upon them by such a
superior as may force them to take it under pain of mortal sin, which is
only the Pope: that they must teach and preach freely, without taking any
reward or recompense at all, that they may accept the charge of schools,
universities, and colleges for the advancement of learning and piety, of
which points, some may breed them emulation (as you see) of our own people, as
the other, much hatred, fear, and contradiction of heretics, besides a
certain malignant spirit that some have naturally against religious life
(though otherwise catholics in opinion) thinking that course and habit to
condemn theirs of imperfection, whereof you may see more for ancient times, in
those three books that Saint Chrisostom wrote in his days, Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
and hom. 2. de vit. monach. Basil. sermon. de institut. monachi. Nazianz. ^rat.
1. in Julian. Apostat.
aduersus vitae monasticae vituperatores, against the reprehenders of
monastical life: and Saint Basil and Saint Nazianzen, do often treat the same
argument. And for later ages you may discover the same spirit against the most
excellent and holy religious orders of Saint Dominik and Saint Francis, when
they first began, as is set down by Saint Thomas of Aquin, in his treatise
contra impugnantes religionem, against the impugners of religion, and by Saint
Bonauenture of the same age, in his apologia pauperum, the apology for poor
men. And this very spirit dureth also in our days, in such as either have not
their passions sufficiently mortified (whereby they are not greatly devoted to
piety) or otherwise do suffer themselves to be deceived by heretics or other
enemies.

The second point, Jesuits doctrine.
concerning the learning and doctrine of Iesuit^ (which is known to be much
and very catholic) brings in also the like effects against them, for that
by the first, they incur easily emutation of their friends, and by the second
open hostility of their enemies, so as by experience they find the saying of
the wiseman to be true, Eccles. 1.
qui addit scientiam, addit laborem, he that multiplieth knowledge, multiplieth
pains, but yet these men's rule and profession bynding them to this kind of
holy trade and exercise, to instruct men to their salvation, they must not be
wearied with any difficulties or contradictions, but rather hold out, and
expect the reward set down by God himself in the prophet Daniel: Dan. 12.
Fulgebunt qua^^ stella in perpetuas aternitates, qui erudiunt ad iustitia^
multos: they shall shyn^ as stars for everlasting eternities, etc. that
instruct many to justice.

There rests the third thing, which is the life and conversation of Jesuits,
The name lisfe and conversation of Jesuits.
called into question in this place by Sir Francis, and by many other in other
places, upon prejudice only (as it seems) of their name made odious by their
enemies, without particular offenses alleged against them, so as it is enough
with these men to say he is a Jesuit, to discredit him, though personal crime
there be none against him, and the reason of this seems to be, for that
heretics and diverse other weak and passionate Christians (or scandalous
catholics) joining together in these out days, have made a certain league
and conspiracy against this name of Jesuits, as Saint Iustine the martyr said
to the enemies of the Christian name in his time: Justin. apol. 2. ad Imp.
Anton.
In nobis (says he) nomen accipitis pro crimine, you punish in us our name for
trespass, which injurious dealing Tertullian refuteth very amply soon after
Saint Iustine, in the three first chapters of his apologetious: Tert. apol.
si nominis odium est (says he) quis nominum reatus, quae accusatio
vocabulorum, nisi aut barbarum quid sonent, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut
impudicum? If the hatred be against the name, what guilt can be in words,
what accusation against names, except they sound some barbarous thing, or
signify some unlucky slau^derous, or filthy matter? which these words do
not, but rather the contrary.

Toplif the preest-tyrant of famous memory in putting them to death, Top liffe
the preestqueller.
is accustomed diligently to put up in his slanders when he brings them to
the gallows (to do it with the more sole^nitie, such a one traitor Jesuit, as
though the fiction only of this name Iesu^it were a sufficient condemnation of
the party, and clearing of the quest that condemned him, though often times it
falls out that neither is he Jesuit, nor ever was.

In France a young man that sometimes had studied in the Jesuits schools of
Paris, Ihon Chattel in France an. 1594. offered to kill the king.
was found afterward to offer violence to the kings person that now is, he was
examined upon the torture, whether any Jesuit living, had given him council,
courage, or instruction in that act, or was privy to his intention, which
constantly he denied; the like did his father who also was put to torture, and
the same did Ioannes Garetius his master, upon like torture, and so was
delivered, and by public testimony of the magistrate declared to be
innocent. Yet another reader of the same order called Johannes Ghineardus was
put to death for that in his studdy was found the question discussed on both
parts without resolution, Ioanes Ghineardus martyred.
vtrum liceat aliquo in casu occidere tyrannum, whether in any case it be
lawful to kill a tyrant, which question notwithstanding every where handled by
all divines in printed books, allowed by all learned men both heretics and
Catholics, and red publicly in all famous schools, and Cicero in his book
of offices handled it, Cic. lib. 2. off. D. Tho. 2. sent. did. 44. art. 2. and
de Regim. principum cap. 6 Caet. in D. Thom. 2. secundae q. 64. art. 3. Sot. de
just. lib. 5. q. 1. art. 4.
before Christian religion was begone, and since him among Christians Saint
Thomas, Caietan, Sorus, and all other scholastical deuines all which this
innocent man said truly at his death might as justly be pulled out of their
graves and burned for the doctrine as he hanged for having the question handled
in his study, and yet was he made a way, and upon this prejudice since that
time conceived against the name of Jesuits made odious by heretics, and by
such as adhere unto them (as though all were malefactors) have there diverse
general decrees of persecution been set down against the whole order in that
kingdom, without any other proof of particularitie against them at all then I
have here rehearsed, which manner of proceeding if Tertullian did so much
mislyke in heathens, how much more would he condemn it in Christians against
Christians if now he were alive again.

But to proceed in this matter of Jesuits lives I might ask and urge as the
same Tertullian does in like accusations, who accuses? what alleges he?
Diverse enemies of Jesuits.
what has ener been found against them? let it be uttered and laid open to the
world; hosts eorum (says he) tum extranei, tum domestici, their enemies be
both forayne and domestical, they are wached, they are pried on, they are
besette; error, malice, envy, hatred, emulation vice sin, dissolution of life
are soldiiars against them and spies waching must diligently at their doors,
what have they found? what have they brought out? if same only be persecuted
against them, fama mendax (says he) quae ne tunc quoque cum aliquid very
affert sine mendacij vitio est detrahens, adijciens, demutans de veritate,
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 8.
fame of her nature is given to lying, and even then when it tells some
truth, it ^ seth not to pass without some part of lying, detracting, adding
and changing somewhat of the synceritie of truth it self. O quanta illius
praesidis gloria esset, qui aliquem eruret, q^i centum iam infantes comedisset.
Cap. 2.
O what a glory would it be to any president or judge that should bring forth a
Christian that had eaten a hundredth iufantes, in his days for that Christians
were commonly charged to eat infantes flesh in their meetinges and co^munio^s,
which yet of Caluins bare bread would never have been suspected: And as
Tertulian said this of the callumniations against Christians so may we of no
less false and malicious against Jesuits, but yet let us see a little further
in this affair.

Among all other adversaries that Jesuits have, one is so domestical, as they
have bin of their own body, for diverse years, I mean of their order and
profession and for their defects are dismissed by a special privilege which
these religious men have for their conservation above other orders, and these
men often times become the greatest opposites of all others, quia ex illis
exierunt, and ex illis non erant, Apostatical Jesuits. Joan. 3.
they went from them and were not of them, nor had their true spirit and
unction, and some of them also go so far as by little and little they become
plain heritiques and apostataes, or dissolute of life, and of these also their
want not perhaps some at this day among you, and of yours (Sir Francis, for of
such rags you make the pillars of your new church) let them be examined what
they can say in this behalf, of life and manners against lesuites, what they
have seen, what they have proved, what they have felt, Deuteronomy. 32.
and fiant enimici iudices, let their enemies be judges.

The holy martyr of Christ Saint Iustine, that lived before Tertullian, even
in the first feruor of persecution against good Christians, uses an argument
for their defense in life and manners (notwithstanding their many slanders
raised against them) which seems to me may be used also fitly in this defense
of Jesuits: his words be these.

When I was a scholar (says he) in Plato his school, Justinius Apolog. prima.
and delighted with that doctrine, and heard that Christians were accused
every where of evil life, and yet saw otherwise that they went to dye
willingly and lived poorly, and feared not those things which to other men are
most horrible; I began to think with my self, that is was impossible for those
men to be vicious and given to pleasures of the world, for then would they be
loath to dye, and to be deprived of their said pleasures.

Thus argued he, and we may do the like of Jesuits now adays, of whom we
have seen before, how they profess voluntary poverty, contempt of the
world, incapacitie of earthly promotions, great labors of studies and other
such painful exercises, we read also in their peculier rules that their
chastity must imitate the purity of Angels, Part. 6. Constant. cap. 1.
both in mind and body, and as for wordly commodities, that they must abhor
(those are the very words of their rule and institute) altogether and not in
part from all these things which the world does love and esteem (as honors,
Exam. admit. cap. 4.
promotions, riches, pleasures and the like) and embrace and desire with all
their forces the things which Jesus their master esteemed and loved for our
examples, as contempt, poverty, persecution and affliction, showing by this
liuerye of his that they are his true servants and followers. And furthermore
we hear for confirmation of this, and partly also do see their voluntary
sufferinges tortures and martirdomes in the Indies, in Ethiopia, in Iapone, in
England, Frace and other places for setting forward the service of their
master, wherefore by Saint Iustines reason, it is not like that these men are
dilighted with vicious life, which make so little account of life, and do handle
so roughly their life in this world.

An other objection also was accustomed to be brought against religious men in
old time, Jesuits labors and endeavors for the public.
as also against all Christians generally of the primitive church, as
Tertullian affirms, to wit, that they were unprofitable men to the
commonwealth, idle, retired, siluestres, and filuicolae, Tertul. Apol. ^^p. 42.
that is fitter for woods and wilderness, then for the society of man, this
objection (I say) is easily answered in the behalf of Jesuits, seeing their
manifold labors extant in the world, to the help of all sorts of christian
people, they begin with children as soon as they are able to speak, teaching
them christian doctrine, and elements of other learing, afterward they read to
them arts, tongues, sciences, and higher professions; they frame their manners
and affections as well as their judgments and understanding to al Christian
knowledge and piety, if they be poor and needy they labor to provide for
them also temporally what they can; they do set them forward and advance them
in learning and piety, they preach to all, administer sacraments to all, they
write books, they make peace between enemies, they visit prisons and
hospitales for comfort of the poor and sick, they procure them favor, get them
alms, help them to dye in Gods fear that either by sickness or Justice are
called thereunto, and finally taking a child from his christian cradle, they
carry him along and accompany him with continual assistance, comfort, and
help, in all fortunes, states, and conditions of life and death, until they
deliver him up again into his creators hands, that sent him into the world;
and this without earthly reward or recompense, and often times with ingratitude
and enmity of the parties so benefited, and this is the life use and exercise
of these men.

B^t (say their adversaries) they are ambitious notwithstanding, Objections
against lesuites ansvvered.
they are proud, they will have no equals, they will have all pass by their
own hands, they will be masters, formen of the quest, singular in all
respects; to which I might answer that albeit these speeches do savor rankely
of envy, which follows ever at the footsteeps of virtue, and that they might
in like manner be objected against the Apostles themselves in respect of
others, whom they exceeded in holiness of life, yet will I examine them somewhat
in this place. I ask therefore, Ambition.
wherein consists this ambition, this singularity objected against Jesuits?
in seeking (perhaps) promotions or preferments, but we have seen before that
they can have none, that they do voluntarily renounce and forswear them all.
In getting government perchance, or jurisdiction over others? but we see by
experience and by their rule that they have none at all, nor will have: wherein
then consists this ambition, does it consist in laboring, toyling,
contending more then others in the cause and course they have in hand? a happy
and holy ambition, 1. Cor. 1^.
whereof Saint Paul him self gloried much when he said, abundantius illis
omnibus laboraui, I have labored more abounda^tly then all the rest of my
fellow Apostles. This objection then is vain, or worse then vain, as
proceeding not only of a deceived judgment, but of malign interpretation
also; in that which is known to be excellent in it self, and worthy of all
praise, love, and admiration.

There follows the second objection of professed enemies (for the former will
seem in outward show to be friends) that Jesuits are troublers of common
wealths, Whether Jesuits be seditions and trooblers of common vvalthes. Act.
24.
seditious perturbers of states, peruerters of kingdoms, dangerous to princes,
such as Saint Paul was accused to be by Tertullus the orator, inuenimus hunc
hominem pestiferum, and concitantem seditiones omnibus Iud^is, we have found
this man to be pestiferous, and to stir up sedition among all the Jews, and
against Saint Paul's lord and master Christ him self, the same accusation was
laid and urged with all asseueration, by many principal and grave men together:
Luc. 23.
Hunc inuenimus subuertentem gentem nostram, and prohibentem tributa dari
Caesari, we have found this man (mark you how they speak of their own
knowledge, troblesome and to pervert our people, persuading them not to pay
tribute to Caesar. And this is a very plausible accusation in the ears of
worldly princes, espetially, such as have not leisure, nor means, nor will
perhaps to examine matters in particular, but alienated and carried away with
the first apprehe^sions and impressions of such odious calumniations, leave no
place afterward for the accused to defend ^he^selues or show their innoce^cie.

Yet one kind of sedition I do easily discover in very truth to be in
Jesuits, A holy kind of sedition.
which is that, wherein their master confessed also himself to be seditious, to
wit, in separating fathers from children daughters from mothers, kindred from
kindred, and in setting them of one and the self same household at contention
and hatred and war among themselves in Gods cause, and in matter of there
salvation, of which holy sedition Christ himself professes (as I have said) to
be the author: do not think (says he) that I came to bring peace into the
world, Luc. 12.
for I came not to plant peace but the sword, and to divide a man against his
own father^ and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law
against her mother in law, and to make emnitie betwixt them that are
domestical. And in an other speech, Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo
nisi vt accendatur? I came to bring fire upon earth, and what will I but that
it be kindled? S. Bonauent. stim. diuini ^^noris.
O faelices incendiarij (says one servant of God) o happy fierbrandes, or
setters a fire of other men's houses whereby gold is severed from earth and pure
corn tried from chafe, and all dregs of wickedness are burnt and consumed,
this is a holy, this is a happy sedition, and this is that in deed which is
laid against Jesuits at this day, for that by their zeal and industry many a
separation is made between good and bad, many a heat enkindled in Christian
hearts, where deadly cold occupied the place before, many a battery given to
fortes possessed by Satan, many an heathen and heretic made Christian, many a
frostie catholic made a hot recusant, many a vicious liver made obseruant,
many a a careless and earthly mind stirred up to apprehend and think of
eternity, many a groueling soul plucked from the ground and quickened with
the warmth of true Christian spirit, and finally to many a worldling, Eccles.
41.
pacem habenti in substantijs suis, whose dammable peace lay before in his
earthly substance, to wit in his riches, ease, and commodities of this life,
war is made by means of Jesuits, and sedition is put into his house before
he was aware; his reason falls out with his sense, and his conscience with
his ease, and with all the residue of his former trade of life, and here by both
him self and all the country round about him is put in comotion, and Jesuits
are accused of this offense for putting of fire in this house, hew and cry is
made after them, many complain, others curse, that are either trobled or
endamaged by this war, and this is the true state of Jesuits at this day,
and these are the causes for which they are made odious and termed seditous.

For as for the odd and idle callumniation of the heretics of our time,
Whether Jesuits do seek the deaths of princes. Joan. 12.
whereunto Sir Francis also as a devoted child of theirs, does set his hand in
this place, that they do practice the deaths of princes, and procure their
destruction (except only he mean that practice wherein they join with their
master, vt princeps huius mundi ^ijciatur for as, that the prince of this world
may be cast forth) and that in particular they have sought the blood of our
Sovereign of England, with such thirst as this man avouches, and that
generally they be princequellers, king-killers, and the like, is an accusation
no l^sse found, then false and malicious, and as easy to prove, as that Sir
Francis is by occupation a iugler, for what men are Jesuits to attend to such
attemptes? or what profit or emolument can arise to them, more then to other
men, by such murdering of princes albeit you would faign them to be so void of
conscience, as you insinuate, or where, or when, or by whom was ever any such
enterprise proved against them? you will allege perhaps the case of France,
mentioned before to be attempted by John Chattel, a youth of nineteen years of
age, The fact of John Chattel in france the 27. of Dece^b. 1594.
that had once bin their scholar (for he was not actually, when he attempted
that fact) and if he had bin, who sees not the vanity of this accusation,
that the offense of one particular scholar, should be atributed to all his
masters, or be punished upon them, who had above a thousand scholars more in
that place, at that time, and diverse thowsands in other places of France, at
which the devil enuyed not a little. Furthermore, the acquitall and free
delivery of father John Gueretius, particular master that had bin, of the said
Chattel, by the public magistrate, without any punishment at all, and after
he had bin held in prison and tortured, and most rigorous trial made upon him,
does evidently show as well his innocence, as that of all his fellows; for
that so rann the humors of their conspiring enemies against them at that day in
Paris (where the trial was made) that if any least show of probable offense,
could have bin found and fastened on them, they had all smarted for it, as
since has appeared. This fact then of France is their full clearing, and no way
their condemnation.

Their follows another attempt of later time in Holland, set forth by the
kings rebels of those provinces, An other deuyse against Jesuits in Holland.
since Sir Francis wrote his book, for if it had bin published first, he would
have taken (no dout) a large argument thereof, to have discoursed thereon, and
rayled more at random, the fact is set out in print, under the name of a
sentence of death given by the magistrates of Leyden, the two and twentieth day
of June last past of this year 98. against one Peter Pan native of Ypers in
Flanders, for that he took, upon him, at the persuation of the Prouincial of
the Jesuits, together with the Rector and prefect of studdies of their college
of Doway, to kill (as they say) Co^te Mauris, Governor of Holland, and in the
end of their narration (which they auow to be Peter Pan his own confession)
they do add, that this justice is done upon him to terrify men from favoring
the bloody and murderous sect of Jesuits, which (as is notoriously known to
the world) do in^ent daily, a thousand most execrable practices and traiterous
entrepryses, and do seek to put them in execution, for killing and murdering
kings, princes, and principal personages, especially such, as will not admit
them, nor approve their papistical superstition, called by them, the catholic
Roman Religion, etc.

These are the words of those magistrates, in their printed sentence, whereby
is manifestly seen, the end that moved them to publish so lying a pamphlet, as
also to faigne the whole narration, for defaming of Jesuits, and making them
odious (if all were feigned) or at least to induce Peter Pan to confess it,
or to accept and publish so manifest false a confession, without further
examination of the truth and circunstances thereof.

For that since, upon further trial of the matter, before other magistrates of
other places, Refutal of the fable.
to wit, of Ypers itself, where the party dwelt, and of Doway, wbere the
covenant was forged to be treated and concluded, and of other places in
Flanders, it is found that all was a mere fiction, so far forth as it touches
the Jesuits, and so is it testified by an answer printed by authority of the
said magistrates, the five and twentieth of August, next ensuing of the same
year 98. and by diverse other books and declarations afterward set abroad, for
justifying of the truth, and in one of them, there are observed above
threescore manifest lies, laid down against the Jesuits in that shameful
confession: as for example, among other points it is showed and verefied, that
Peter Pan was no catholic at all, nor ever had doing with the Jesuits;
that he was a vagrant cooper given to drunkenes and running up and down the
country like a mad man, for which faults, and for his debtes, he was often put
into prison, and sometimes being delivered, he put in himself again of madness;
that his fre^des would have bound him in chains in his own house, that he was
extremely well affected to Count Mauris, and consequently no fit man for
Jesuits to deal withal to kill him, if they had had any such intention, as
their was no cause why they should have, seeing they were to gain nothing by
his death.

Moreover that Peter Pan never provided the Jesuits college in Doway of
butter in his life, as is affirmed in the sentence, nor ever was seen in that
college by any, nor that there was ever any such servant of the college named
Melchior de val, feigned to have been the messenger to solicit this matter with
Peter Pan, neither was ever there any treaty with Peter Pannes wife in
Ypers, to this effect, or other, as is affirmed in the confession, nor had she
ever any acquayntance or dealing in her life with Jesuits, as in the feigned
narration is set down, that all the tale of Peter Pannes coming to Doway in
the rogation week last past, and his dyning and treating with the Prouincial,
Rector, and Prefect after dinner, and their exhorting him to the enterprise,
with making him many offers temporal, and assuring him for his soul, that if
he died in the enterprise, he should go to heaven presently, both in body and
soul, and many other such circumstances set dow^e in the printed narration,
all I say, are showed manifestly to be false and forged, upon examination and
attestation of catholic magistrates of the places aforenamed, and of the
persons themselves, mentioned in the fable, and among other points it is
proved by many witnesses, that the Prouincial of the Jesuits in the rogation
week, which they do name, was in Bruxeles, to wit, above threscore miles of,
and had departed from Doway in the month of January before, and of Peter
Pan also it is proved, that he was not in Doway at that time, nor could be,
for that he was working in his masters shop at Ypers.

So as by these and many other most evident demonstrations, there to be seen,
it is made clear, that this is but an heretical fiction to defame Jesuits, for
their zeal in Gods true religion, in which respect, as they are more dear to
almighty God, so ought they to be also to all good men, that behold these
devilish devises of Satan and his instruments against them.

But let us return to England, Whether Jesuits seek her may. blood.
where Sir Francis beats also upon the same nayl, as you have heard, at the
beginning of this encounter, saying, that he cannot perceive the thirst that
Persons and his pew-fellowes have of seeking her Majesty's blood, to be yet
quenched: but how does the poor man prove, that they have had that thirst? no
way. how does he prove that it is not yet quenched? for that he perceives it
not, nor yet how it may be, the causes still remaining, why they sought it
before; o silly disputer, how he flies still from the point he should prove?
I requier that he should prove that Jesuits have sought the Queens Majesty's
blood, and he gives a reason why they have not left to seek it; and what is
this reason? for that the same causes of seeking it, do remayn still, that were
before. What are these causes? he names them not, but it seems they can be
no other, then the difference of religion, and the persecution made upon them
for the same. Well then, all the substance of this argument is brought to this
issue, that for so much, as Sir Faancis old head cannot perceive, how Jesuits
persecuted for religion by the Queen, can love her or pray for her, or cease to
hate her, and not seek her blood, therefore it is so, and must be thought so.

But to this argument answers Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2.
when he says, animalis homo non percipit ea quae spiritus Dei sunt, a fleshly
and sensual man perceyueth not the things that are of Gods spirit, such for
example) as are the loving of a man's enemies, and praying for them, and
rendering good for evil, which yet spiritual men (such as Jesuits are taken to
be) may perhaps both perceive and practice, and so I persuade myself they do,
and I have heard in particular by such as come from English Seminaries beyond
the seas, where Jesuits and especially father persons here accused, has a
hand, that there is a custom and precept, not only for all in general, to
remember her Majesty in their ordinary prayers, but also in the particular
devotions assigned to every particular person, at the beginning of every
month. The Queen of England has her particular place of recommendation among
other princes, and before them also, in the number of them that are assigned to
pray for her, so as this practice of praying for persecutors, so much praised
by Christ though it enter not into Sir Francis worldly spirit, and fleshly
understanding, yet may it, and does it (as it seems) into Jesuits.

And this might serve now as well for defense of all Jesuits in general, as of
father Persons in particular, seeing no several matter is laid against either
of them; but yet I may not let pass by law of common friendship, to add some
few lines also in the fathers case by name, seeing that by name he is accused of
so odious a crime, as is to have a thirst of shedding the blood of our
Sovereign lady and Queen. Defense of F. persons in particular.
About which accusation I would ask this accuser, how this appears? and how
it comes to pass, that in so many years, so many others having been
suspected, some apprehended, other indicted, condemned, and executed, for
imputation of like heinous crimes, none ever (that is known) accused father
Persons by name, to have induced or persuaded them to the like enterprise?
though if they had, it had been no condemnation, but much less probability,
when not so much as an accusation is extant. Let the examinations and
arraynementes of Parry, Savage, Ballard, Babington with all his fellows, that
were condemned with him, Polewheel also, Daniel, Hesket, and such others be
vewed over, and see whether any of them do accuse father Persons to have been
partaker o^ privy to their councels, actions, or attemptes, in this behalf,
let the records be sought out of all the priests declarations that have been
put to death, within these twenty years (which are more then a hundredth) and
consider whether any have confessed fathers Person^ ever to have proposed any
such matter unto them, and yet the most part of them were acquaynted with him,
and many also sent into England by his direction, and if he had felt such a
deadly thirst of blood, and of her Majesty's blood, as this accuser says, the
readiest way for quenching thereof, had been to persuade some of these men (that
come of purpose to adventure their lives for religion, and fear not the
leesing of any thing in this world) to have taken the enterprise upon them, for
the common good, and for setting the use of their religion at liberty there by.

But there is no such matter, and these are but fictions and deuyses of
enemies, An evident demonstration.
to make men odious; no priest hitherto nor Jesuit (that I have heard of)
has ever confessed of himself, or others of that vocation, any such attempt or
meaning at all. It seems they are governed by an other spirit and rule, to
wit, by that of holy David, who made this vow, 1. Reg. 2^.
touching his enemy and persecutor Saul: Viuit Dominus, quia nisi Dominus
percusserit eum, aut dies eius venerit, vt moriatur, aut in praelium descendens
perierit, propitius sit mihi Dominus, ne extendam manum meam in Christum
Domini. As the Lord lives (says he) except God stryk him, or that his day
come of natural death, or that he going into the field to fight, do perish
there, God be merciful unto me, that I lay not my hands upon his anointed.

So then father Parsons protests (as I am credibly informed) that he was
never consenting, witting, willing, inducing, yielding, nor privy to any such
personal attempt against her Majesty in his life. Moreover he avouches, that
he has dissuaded, hindered, and diuerted some that might perhaps have had such
inclination, and namely one Gentleman, some years past beyond the seas (he
says not of what nation he was) that having resolved upon the only zeal of
religion, and for delivering of catholic people from persecution to leese his
own life, or to take away that of her Majesty; he was entered some hundredth
miles and more into his journey toward England, for that purpose, having made
himself ready to dye, by discharging his mind of all worldly cares and
cogitatons, neither had he doubt of the effect, for that he pretended not to
escape alive: all which notwithstanding, upon father Parsons earnest
dissuasion, that met him on the way, he was content at length to retire, and
give over the enterprise, principally upon this reason (for others he persuaded
himself to have examined sufficiently before) that English catholics
themselves desired not to be delivered from their miseries by any such attempt;
and this to be most true, he affirms upon his conscience.

By this then it may seem to appeer, that this father is not so thirsty of her
Majesty's death and des^r^ction, nor of so bloody a disposition, as Sir Francis
would make him, which I have heard also confirmed by many protestants
themselves, who meeting with him in catholic kingdoms, where he might have
donn them hurt, has always donn them good, and I could name some, if I thought
it would be no hurt or disgrace unto them, let those fourscore and fifteen,
whom at one time he delivered out of the chains of galleys of Spayn, in the
year 90. (whereof diverse are gentlemen now dwelling in England, and those
thirty and four which this present year of 98. he delivered from like misery
in the galleys of Naples, and many other particular men benifited by him
besides, speak for him in this case, for that these works are of more weight
with wise men, then Sir Francis bare words to the contrary. And so with this
I end also this encounter.

THE SIXTH INCOVNTER, ABOUT THE CATHOLIQVE RECVsantes that refuse for
conscience sake, to go to the Protestants churches, and to be present at
their service in England.
AS in many other points this hasty hotespur plays the Herodian, showing
himself without conscience at all, and ready to pawn his soul for pleasing
the prince and state where he lives, so in no one thing does he more discover
this devilish and detestable disposition, then in his cruel and malicious
calumniation against the better and more religious sort of English
Catholics; who refusing to dissemble, do utter their consciences plainly in
matter of religion. And according to their obligation in this behalf do abstain
from going to the churches, preachings, and services of them that be of a
different religion. And albeit he cannot but confess, that many of them do
give good example of life in their behaueour, or (to use his own words) do
show a good outward civil carriage in civil matters (which I dout whether all
his neighbors will testify the like of him, and of those of his profession)
yet (says he) let not that possess you with too great a regard of them, and
to deliver you from the danger of such deceytfull baytes, I must assure you,
that this is a true position, that without the true fear of God, there can be
no true religion. And unless the religion be found, the face and show of civil
honesty (seem it never so glorious in the eyes of flesh and blood) is but a
deceitful visour upon a crabtree face, covering the most vile and cankred
parts, of a deceitful heart, and so I come to show their dissimulation.

Thus far Sir Francis; to whom I will not answer by examining faces and
visours, whether that of his be crabtree, plumtree, peartree, or figtree, let
other men judge that know it. Neither yet by discussing how many sorts of
cankers there be, where with Sir Francis himself may be touched, 2. Timot. 2.
especially if heresy be one, as Saint Paul does signify, and all holy
fathers have held after him. But to the matter it self I answer, that whereas
Sir Francis makes so light of good life in Catholics, About good life.
calling it a deceytfull bayte, Christ teaches us to make a far different
collection, when in his first sermon on the mountain, he gave this
advertisement: Beware of false Prophets, etc. by their fruits you shall know
them, for as men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of brambles, Math.
7.
so does every good tree bring forth good fruits, and every evil tree
brings forth evil fruits,? Neither can a good tree bring forth evil fruits,
nor evil tree, good. Saint James said in like case, thou have faith and I have
works, show thou to me thy faith without works, and I will show thee my faith
by my works. Jacob. 2.
If then here be works and good life in these Catholics, it must be presumed
to come of good faith according to Saint James. And if there be figs, and
grapes, and such other good fruits found in their behaueour, then must the tree
be judged good also, if Christ's rule be not false. And for that our Savior
gave this rule to discern true and false prophets by, it is not evil that Sir
Francis and his men do fly from it so openly in the plain feeld, leauinge good
works to Catholics, and reseruinge only threed-bare faith to themselves, for
thereby they discocouer what prophets they be.

And of all this I do not greatly marueyle in Sir Francis, for he sees (poor
man) how bare a harvest he has in hand, when he talks of works among those
of his sect, and how the hare goes clearly away on our side, if he hunt after
good life in his new prophets. But much I marueyle of his lack of shame, that
talking against these recusant Catholics, he makes mention so often of
deceyt and dissimulation; seeing that of all other people of the realm, these
men dissemble least, but rather do publish themselves, even to the face and
vewe of the magistrate, yea they are punished expressly for that they will not
dissemble, as many others do, and go to your churches with a repyning and
repugnant conscience; for if they would do so, then were they no more
recusants, and consequently f^ee from al your claws, penalties and vexations
though never the more yours thereby in mind, then now they be.

But to the end this matter ma^e be better discussed, let us hear Sir Francis
triple accusation against them, his words are these.

I do note (says he) three things in this kind of people, worthy to be
known and obscrued, first the hurt thy continually do, secondly ihe hurt they
would do, and thirdly their deep dissimulation. Here are three heads you see
of a grievous accusation set down, let us see the particulers.

For the first (says he) it would ask a long discourse to discover all the
hurtes done by them, The first charge against Catholics.
they are so many, and manifould. This is nothing but words and rhetorical
exageration hitherto, let us see some substance.

My own experience tells me (says he) that when the gentleman and man of
wealth refuses to come to the church, and is in any sort borne with all,
there the meaner sort receive infection, and draw back from obedience also,
for Above maiori discit arare minor. Of the elder ox, the younger steer does
learn.

This is Sir Francis first charge, which as it is grave and weighty in it
self, so is it as substantially proved, with a poetical verse taken from his
plow and stawle of oxen and from his steeres. Let us see what this justice of
peace has more to say of his own experience, for be-lyke he speaks of his
practice in that office against Recusantes it follows then in his book.

If the man come to thurche and the wife refuse (which is a cunnning trick much
practiced of late years) then is the household both servants and children in
danger wholly to be corrupted. And sure it is, that the wives of the meaner
sort are infected greatly by them, and the nightcrowes persuation preuayleth
much, and in mine own knowledge, within these three years, many of the meaner
sort are fallen away, and do fall away daily, for that, impunitatis spes magna
peccantium in illecebra, the hope of impunitie is a great bayte to offend.

Here is all now that our knight can allege in particular concerning the hurts
(so many and so manyfold) which before he said the recusantes do woork in
England, which in effect comes to be no more (as you see) but that if the
goodman refuse to go to church (though the good wife go) then those of the
meaner sort begin to refuse also; and if the goodwife refuse (though the
goodman go) then are the servants and children in danger to do the like. And
then generally he setteh down this doctrinal assertion, that the night crows
persuasion preuayleth much, and this knows he of his own knowledge partly
(perhaps) by experience of his own night crow, and partly by tampering in
these affairs: who (as is probable) has bin some principal actor in the long
persecutions upon Catholics, either by playing the part of Judas to betray
and take them, or of Caiphas or Pilate, to condemn and afflict them. And so by
this experience he has found out (as he says) that many goodwiues of the
meaner sort are fallen of late, and many other by their example do fall away
daily: a grievous accusation, and fit for a carpet knight.

But Sir, you that are such an enemy of night-crowes, and have such knowledge
of the afayres of all the goodwiues of your country, tell me, whereunto do
these wives, or children, or servants, or tenants, or husbands fall, when you
say they fall away? is it perhaps, to any enormitie of sin or to wickedness of
life? no, but to have a scruple to go to the protestants churches. And why? for
that they are of a different religion. They are Catholics, and do think your
religion and service naught. Well then, religion and conscience is cause of this
refusal, and not evil will or rebellion, as you maliciously interpret and
consequently the way of true remedy is, not to beat, and bind, and drive them
to your churches by force and punishment, as you do persuade the Magistrate to
do (Sir consciencelesse knight) but first you must make them of your religion,
that they may go of devotion and conscience: for if they go otherwise it is a
dooble sin, both to them that go, and to you that make them go, albeit the
act otherwise in it self were never so good and lawful: as all men of learning
and conscience do well know, that an erroneous conscience also binds: though
your ignorance be so gross in all christian learning, as you seem to be both
ignorant and careless of so manifest a truth.

I say, it is a manifest truth, that a man's conscience An erroneconscience
also byndeth.
is to be followed, though it did err, and much more when it erreth not, and
the reason of the former is, that forasmuch as our conscience is nothing else
but the voice and determination of our reason and judgment, about matters to
be donn or not to be done, it follows that we are bound to obey that
direction (be it right or wrong) so long as we have no other light to guide us.
For that according to this we shall be judged at the last day, to wit, according
as each man's conscience (says Saint Paul) shall accuse or defend him: Romans 2.
and not according to the nature or quality of the thing it self that he does:
which point, schoolmen (if I be not deceived) do express in these words,
that the goodness or malice of a man's will, is to be measured by the object
that moves the will, and not by the thing it self that is done. As for
example, if I apprehend a thing to be evil and yet do it, I do sin, albeit
the thing in it self that I do, were not evil: for that in my apprehension and
judgment it was evil: and so I did it under the conceit and formality of evil,
and consequently my will and intention was naught, in doing it, though the thing
in it self were lawful. As for example, if in the night time seeing a beast in
a bush and thinking it to be mine enemy I should kill it, though the thing it
self be no sin, yet should I commit manslaughter therein before God, for that,
my apprehension was of mine enemy, and consequently, mine action should be judged
according to the object I conceived, and not according to the thing in it self.

This very case determines S. Paul himself particulerly, Idolothita.
through out the whole foureteenth chapter of his epistle to the Romans, about
eating the meats that had bin offered up to Idols. And the same matter he
handeleth again throughout the eight chapter of his first epistle to the
Corinthians. And in both places he determines that to him that either eats
simply without enquiring whether it were offered to Idols or not, or has so
much true christian knowledge as he understands thereby that an Idol is
nothing, and that all creatures are lawful to be eaten by a christian man (so
it be donn without scandal of others, and with other due circumstances) albeit
I say to such a man it be lawful to eat of those meats that had bin offered to
Idols, yet to him that had a contrary conscience and judgment it should be a
greiuous sin to eat thereof, for that he did it against his own judgment
and belief, though it were erroneous. I do know and trust iu Jesus Christ
(Says Saint Paul) that no meat is unclean or unlawful now, but only to such
as think it unlawful. So as only to think it unlawful, makes it unlawful,
according to Saint Paul's rule. And again the same Apostle, qui discernit, si
manducauerit, damnatus est, quia non ex fide, he that discerns or judges,
the said meat to have bin offered to Idols, Roman. 14.
and that it is thereby made unfit to be eaten and yet eats the same, he is
condemned: for that he does not according to his own judgment and belief. And
after all, he concludes his speech with this general proposition omne autem
quod non est ex fide, peccatum est, all that is not according to a man's
belief and conscience, is sin, for so expound this sentence, Origin, Saint
Ambros, Saint Chrisostom, and other fathers, and not to signify, that all the
works of Infidels, done without faith, should be sin, though Saint
Augustine apply it also to that sense sometimes: Aug. lib. 4.
but the other sense is the literal and most true, as appears manifestly by
the whole discourse of Saint Paul. contra Judah cap. 3.
Of all which insueth that no man may do against his conscience though it were
awry. An erroneous conscience does ever excuse.
Not for that a wrong conscience excuses in all cases (for that is a different
question) but for that a wrong conscience, byndeth evermore, and some times
excuses also, when it proceeds of invincible ignorance. But howsoever it
comes by right or wrong information, no man may go against it without sin so
long as he cannot persuade it to change, and if this be so, how much more are
the recusant Catholics of England bound to follow their consciences in the
point they stand in, for not going to church, being founded upon so sure and
evident growndes as any demonstration in the world can lay down, for proof of
any manifest truth what so ever, as for example, first, that the religion they
profess is true, and the only truth that among Christians is to be found, and
secondly that they being of that religion, may not dissemble or seem to
profess any other, by going to their service sermons, or churches, and hereby
also appears how great impiety and folly it is for any man to enforce them
thereunto, as our barbarous knight would have the English magistrate to do: I
say it is impiety to enforce any Christian to do an act against his
conscience and belief, for that it is to enforce him to his damnation, as Saint
Paul before has taught us, Roman. 1^.
I say also it is folly, for that by drawing men's bodies to church by violence
(their minds being repugnant) nothing is gained at all, but more internal
hatred and rancor rather enkindled, and the infotcers are made pertakers of the
others sins and damnation.

And further the Protestants do greatly hereby discredit their own doctrine
which they were wont to teach, Protestants discredit.
that no man should be forced in matters of his conscience. And more over they
do show hereby unto the world that they seek not the inward man, but the utter
show and body, with what great repugna^ce soever it be of the soul, which is
quyt contratie to all piety, and a most base manner of proceeding in respect
of the Catholic usage, which albeit it punishes such as do wilfully and
obstinatly leave the universal ancient faith of Christendom, which once they
have received and sworn unto, yet as long as they are evil persuaded of the
same, they are not only not forced to Catholic churches; or to hearing of
masses participation of Sacraments or to other like exercyses of contrary
religion, but are barred also though they would come, if they be supposed to
come with repugnance, or that there be any least suspicion that they go
f^ynedly or against their wills, for that their soul and mind is sought in
Catholic religion and not the body only.

And this may be sufficient for repelling Sir Francis first charge against
English recusantes concerning the present hurt (he says) they do in England,
by giving others example to follow their consciences and not to dissemble. And
by giving, them example of good life of modest behaueor, of patience in
adversity, of courage in Gods cause, of contempe of earthly prosperity, of
care of their salvation of fear of Gods judgments, of fidelity in following
the direction of their consciences, of magnanimity in not yelding to betraye
their own cause and belief: all which is contained in the most excellent and
heroical act of the refusing to go to churches and service of a different
Religion. In which point of refusal also the Puritanes were wont to concur
with Catholics for defense of their profession, but it may be they have
thought it best now to alter that course, for that as they have no other grownd
of their religion but their own judgment, so it byndeth them no further then
they list, and that it stands with their comoditie, and it may be, that in
this point now they have thought it best to follow those whom Christ says,
Matti. 13.
temporales sunt, and in tempore tentationis recedunt, they are according as
the time serves, Marc. 14. Luc. 8.
and do retire in time of trial or persecution.

I come then to the second charge, which our knight gives upon our recusantes
about the hurtes About the hurtes that recusantes would do.
that he will needs have men believe they would do if they could, of which he
writes thus.

Touching the hurt they would do, who doubts but they would have up their
mass again, and bannish the sincere worship of God, their whole Catholic
government and religion I am sure they long for. And yet to pronounce these men
to carye holow hearts to Queen Elizabeth is thought to be an uncharitable
sentence.

Do you see how wise a charge this is, and how learnedly proved? If a man
should reason thus against him, and his brother the Earl, that died not long
agone in York, you both are puritanes in religion, as you are taken, and
consequently no man can dout but that you would have up your geneuian
disciplinarie for me of government, whereby all the Bishops in England must be
pulled down, and other Ecclesiastical dignities discomposed, the Queens
Supremacy also must be taken away, and other like points of the English
church overthrown, whereby a man may pronounce that you carry but holow hearts
to the present state, and to the Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding all your
flattery.

And this is an argument (Sir Francis) which logicians call, Argumentum ad
hominem.
ad hominem, in which kind I could urge you yet further, and make you scratche
your head, towching wishes and bearing hollow hearts toward Queen Elizabeth
and her government, if I would follow presumptions, as you do against
recusantes, for that besides your religion, if a man consider whence you
descend, and what pretenses be or may be about succession, it is not hard to
guess what your wishes may be to have Queen Elizabeth, or some other person to
sit in her place, and yet to pronounce you to carry a hollow heart to Queen
Elizabeth, as you say in jest, that it is thought to be an uncharitable
sentence, and I say it in earnest quia charitas non cogitat malum, 1. Cor. 14.
says Saint Paul, charity judges not the worst of things, and so I will not
judge what wishes you have or may have: only I will tell you that if you have any
in this later kind, they are more perilous and prejudicial to Queen Elizabeth,
then those which you presume catholics to have, for that the things, which
you imagine catholics do wish (as restoring of mass and catholic government
and the like) may stand with her Majesty's life, reign, security, and
prosperity (if it would please almighty God to inspire her to admit them)
even as they have stood with the honor and prosperity, of all her noble
ancestors, Kings and Queens of our realm before her: but your wishes cannot
prevail but with her ruin, if they be such as may be presumed.

But as I said, I will not urge you in this behalf what you would wish, nor is
there any well governed common wealth in the world, in my opinion, that urges
men upon such vain points of inward wishes and secret cogitations or
desires. No subjects to be urged upon inward desires.
The Turk does it not upon the Christians that are under him, nor Christian
Princes upon Jews that dwell in their states, nor the king of Spain upon the
Moriscos that live in his kingdoms, nor the Emperor, king of France, king of
Polonia, or other Catholic monarchs upon the Lutherans, Swinglians,
Caluinistes or other sects, that are tolerated in their states. Only this
barbarous knight of ours, contrary to all reason and humanity, would have it
urged upon catholics in England, what they wish and what they desire: where
notwitstanding if the same should be enforced against all persons, that any way
be discontented in court or country, and in their hearts would wish perhaps
some alteration, who sees not, but that as in other commonwealths, so
especially and above others in ours, where so many divisions and dissentions do
reign, as well by reason of religion as otherwise, many thousand ^nward sores
and ulcers would be discovered, that now lie hidden, and is expedient that so
they should remayn, notwithstanding the ridiculous folly, or rather fury of
this frantik man in persuading contrary.

Let us see now his third chardge against recusantes, The third charge against
recusantes.
touching their dissimulation as he calls it, his words are these in most
odious manner set down, These civil honest men (says he) that under pretense
of conscience rebel against God in religion, and refuse to yield a loyal
obedience to their liege Lady and Sovereign, seem to carry a most lamentable
resolution lurking in their bosoms, against Queen, country, and us all: when
they will seek the life of their and our Queen, the thraldom of their and our
country, and the ruin of us all that profess the gospel, to have their
popish Priesthood, and Massing sacrifice up again. And if this be conscience, I
know not what conscience means, and yet this conscience they fetch from Rome.
etc.

To answer first to that which is here last, if we should grant this great
absurdity, Sir Francis Hastinges conscience.
that Sir Francis Hastinges knows not what conscience means, either in
nature and definiton, or in practice and feeling, what great inconvenience
would follow thereof trow you, for as for the definition of conscience it were
easy (I suppose) to pose Sir Francis, seeing that his bringing up has bin
rather in court and hawking, then in schools and studying. And for practice or
feeling of conscience, how little sense he has, there needs no other
argument but only this slanderous libel, stuffed with such monstrous lies and
calumniations, as no man of any conscience would ever have set down, were he
never so different in matters of religion. Nay truly it may be doubted; whether
easily there might have bin found any so careless or conscienceles an atheist
about London, that so resolutely for any bribe would have accused so many
worshipful honest civil men, as himself confesses the recusant catholics of
England to be (which is so much as any civil commonwealth can requier of
their citizens) as this man does, and that of most heinous crimes, of
treacherous falsehood, disloyal dealing, and wicked treasons to their prince, and
of lamentable lurking resolutio^s in their bosoms, against Queen and country,
and of seeking the life of the one, and thraldom of the other: and all this
upon so vayn and light suppositions as you have heard, before which yet he
would have so constantly to be believed of all men, as that the said recusantes
(notwithstanding his own former testimony of their civil good life) must be
condemned for the catalines of the land, and out castes of the comon-wealth,
for to Cataline and his compagnions, he compares them in the end of his
inuectiue, in these words.

We may well say of them as Tullie said of Cataline the conspiratour in one
of his orations, Notorious railing and calumniatio^ against recusaut
Catholics.
that in all or most of these happy years of her Majesty's most prosperous
and peacable government, there has been no traiterous practice against her
person or our country, but it came always from them, and by them: whom
neither shame of their villainies, nor fear of punishment, nor any sound
reason out of Gods book, nor yet the rule of true Christian policy, could
withold from pursuing their traiterous purposes and pract^ses. And to see or
hear that the royal person of our Sovereign lady was in danger was pleasing to
them. As contrariwise the news of her happy escape was irk some. So that,
where there is only the bare sense of a true English ha^t, these popish
recusantes cannot bewitche or deceive with their hypocritical holiness, or
civil honesty, and so I leave them.

Though you will leave them (Sir hoatespur) in this your choler, yet mean I not
to leave either them or you, until this matter be better examined. And first in
this inuectiue, if we take away railing speech without proof, there is nothing
added to that you have scolded before, against the recusantes. And if in the
rest we consider how you stammer still at the good opinion of Catholics,
fained holiness, and civil honest life (a hard bone as it seems for you to
digest) there is much to their praise and commendation in this your
accusation. But yet to shift off this matter, and to bring in contempt the
persuasion of their good life, and to induce men not to make account thereof,
and much less to be bewitched (as your phrase is) by the same, you require the
sense only of a true bare English heart to resist this witchcraft of persuading
by good works, A bare English heart what it is.
and what you mean by a bare english heart to serve you in this conflict, I know
not, except it be some hard heathenish heart, as strong as flint, to resist the
knockes of all Gods motions, and as bare of all piety, remorse, and conscience,
as yours seems to be, to which also if you do add the English cut (as
hearts go there for the most part among protestants at this day) and
furthermore if it be so truly and barely English, as it has seen no other
countries,, nor known other paradise then English earth, nor thought of other
bliss then with you is commonly treated, and that it be as seruilly tied to
oxen, and steeres, and other temporal base commodities, as your soul shows it
self to be. And that for a further perfection, it be seasoned also with a dram
or two of your English sole faith and bare belief, to the contempt and hatred
of all good works: this heart (I say) and the only bare sense thereof, which
you repuire, is sufficient not only to resist the bewitching of recusants good
life, but of all other Saints besides, and of Christ himself: and to condemn
their scrupulous standing in defense of their consciences, for folly or
hypocrisy, as here you do the scrupulosity of English recusantes, for refusing
to go to church, but we do measure the matter by an other balance, then by
the sense of so bare an English heart, and so no merueil though we agree not in
the weight and poyz of that which is weighed.

And thus I might leave (Sir Francis) now with some disadvantage perhaps of his
side, as he before in haste would leave the recusantes, were it not that I
desire to see some proof also of his skill and learning, as we have seen over
much of his lauishing tongue, and railing. Let us examine then how substantially
he does prove, that Catholic recusautes ought to make no more bones at the
matter, but go to the Protestants churches without staggering or scruple.

I hold it (says he) for a sound ground and not to be controlled, that every
christian ought to strive to keep these three things sound within his breast:
his conscience before God, his loyalty to his prince, and his love to his
country. All which three (for my part) I account so nearly conjoined each to
other, as they cannot justly be severed.

Here I will pose Sir Francis in this his position and grownd, which he says
is so universally true, as it may not be controlled, and thereby you shall see
both the knights divinity and conscience together.

Can a man's conscience to God never be justly severed from the external
obedience of his prince, An absurd position of Sir Francis.
and natural love of his country? Genesis 12. and 19.
How then was Abraham commanded by God to abandon his country, and Lot the
same? How were the ten tribes of Israel incited by God (as himself testifyeth
after) to leave their obedience to their lawful and natural king Roboam, and
the love they had to their ancient commonwealth, 3. Reg. 12.
and to set up Jeroboam, a stranger, against the one and the other? 4. Reg. 3.
How did Elizeus the Prophet send one of his disciples to persuade Iehu a
subject, to rise and rebel against his lawful and natural king and master
Ioram, and to slay both him and his mother the Queen together, as he did, and
turned vpside down that whole commonwealth? How did the Prophet Jeremy
persuade the inhabitants of Jerusalem to deliver up that city and
commonwealth, Hier. 38. 39. 40. etc.
against the kings will, into the hands of the enemy Nabuchodonasor and his
captains, which seemed great treason both to king and country; and yet was
allowed or rather commanded by God himself.

And to come near home to Christian Princes, how did that famous holy
Athanasius so often abandon his country of Egypt and Alexandria, and resist
the commandmentes of diverse Emperors his temporal liege lords (though
infected with heresy. How did Eusebius Vercellensis, Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Hilarious of france, and others, do the same, resisting both Prince and
country for religions sake, as most notoriously is known? Zozom. lib. 3. cap.
12.
And can there no cause then fall out which may justly sever a man's conscience
from the temporal obeying of his Princes will and commandment, Socrat. lib. 3.
cap. 4.
or the laws of his country? What A^heist would ever say so? or what fond
man would ever put a position for absolute and uncontrollable, that may be
checked with so many instances to the contrary? for except he will say a prince
cannot err, nor command a thing dissonant to Gods law, or to right, reason, or
good conscience, or that a man's country cannot go wrong, or runn astray, or
that we are bound to conform our consciences to whatsoever the prince or
country apointeth, be it right or wrong in matters of religion, there is no
way to defend this fond principle and heathenish position.

The wisdom of God says to a devout soul, Psalm. 44.
Au^i filia and vide etc. Hearken daughter and consider, and bend thy ear, and
forget thy own people, and thy fathers house etc. Christ also allows
greatly of them that despise father and mother, and country, and kindred, yea
they are willed to hate them, Math. 17. Luc. 12.
and to make war against them, for his sake, and consequently also the like is
willed against princes in the same cause, for that the obligation to obey
fathers is greater then to princes, and so we see that there may happen
occasions, wherein conscience to God may be justly severed from obedience to
princes, and from worldly love to our earthly country.

But for that this animalis homo (as before has bin noted) does not perceive,
1. Cor. 2.
nor feel the things that be of the spirit of God, I will reason no further in
spiritual conceiptes with him, but will pose him with more palpable arguments
about his own protestants. Let him tell me then, what did the protestants that
fled to Geneua in Queen Mary's time, Domestical examples.
or rebelled at home? those that rose in Scotland against their true lawful
Queens, the mother and daughter? Those that have made wars so many years in
Flanders and France, against their natural true kings, went all those three
things together in them, to wit, conscience to God, obedience to their
princes, and love to the present state of their countries? Speak here Sir
knight, and defend your sound ground and uncontrollable position: you see how
vain and false a proposition it is; but yet the refuge of this peoples defense
in all their fancies and follies, is, their show of some words of Scripture to
prove the same, wherein also our knight will needs prove himself a Rabbyne. Let
us examine briefly how substantially he performs the matter.

Our conscience (says he) cannot but tell us, that all obedience is dew to the
sovereign Magistrate, for we are taught it out of the book of conscience, the
holy scriptures, which teach us that we must subject our selves to all manner
of ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2.
whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, etc.

Thus far Sir Francis. And heerby you shall discern, how wholesome a thing
Scripture is, About obedience to temporal Princes.
in the hand of an ignorant or sensual minded man, even as precious stones
before hogs, as Scripture it self does affirm. For in these few words, as
Sir Francis alleges them, may be founded the perfect sect of the Herodians,
that made Herod's pleasure, the rule and platform of their conscience and
actions. Our conscience (says he) must needs tell us that all obedience is due
to the sovereign Magistrate. Yea, all obedience? what conscience the knight
teleth us, of the conscience of an atheist, or of a servile mind, proiected to
the beck and pleasure of earthly princes? Sure I am, that the conscience of
Saint Peter and his fellow Apostles, taught them not so, when they answered the
lawful magistrates of Jerusalem, that commanded them to speak no more of the
afaires of Christ, ^at they would rather obey God then their commandment,
Acts. ^.
ergo, these men's consciences, had not yet told them, that all obedience
without exception, was due to the civil Magistrate. S. Paul's conscience also
told him not so, when he refused to obey the commandment of Nero, and died for
the same, and so did many other Martyrs, for resisting both him and other
princes and lawful magistrates, in Gods cause. And it is a special praise given
to Martyrs by the church in their feasts, contempserunt iussa principum, they
contemned the commandementes of princes, for Christ's sake. How then says this
Herodian knight that all obedience must be yielded to them in all matters
without exception? let us see how he proves it.

We are taught it (says he) out of the book of conscience; by the words now
alleged of Saint Peter, False taanslation.
Submit your selves to all manner of ordinance of man.

But first I would ask him with what conscience, does he corrupt and falsely
allege this book of conscience, for the words of Saint Peter are, 1. Pet. 2.
Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum, sieve Regi quasi
praecellenti, sieve ducibus ab eo missis. Be subject to every humane creature
for Gods sake (meaning thereby the civil magistrate elected by the
comon-wealth) whether it be to the king, as more eminent then the rest, or unto
captains and under magistrates sent from him: why does Sir Francis translate
omni humanae craturae (which is the very same also in Greek) all manner of
ordinance of man? but that it served more to his purpose, and they can make
their book of conscience to say what they will have said without scruple of
conscience: why does Sir Francis translate, sieve Regi quasi praecellenti,
whether it be to the king as superior etc. and why does he cunningly leave out
the words that follow immediately, or to the Captains (or under Magistrates)
sent by him, etc. but that he would make Saint Peter to say, that the king is
absolute superior, and that all obedience is due unto him, as to the Sovereign
magistrate as this sely man has taken upon him to teach us, though Saint Peter
does name also the inferior magistrates in like manner, and says only, that
the king is to be obeyed as the more eminent among them, but yet puts him
not for absolute, or that all obedience is due to him, as our man would have
men now believe, for that it makes to his purpose, and thereby euacuateth the
precept of Saint Paul, who appoynteth to Christians an other obedience also,
far different from that of kings and temporal Princes in matters, belonging to
their souls, when he says, Hebrae. 13.
Obedite praepositis vestris and subiacete eis, ipse enim peruigilant, quasi
rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri. Obey your Prelates, and ly under them,
for that they do keep diligent wach over you, as men that must render account
of your souls.

And who those Prelates be, Spiritual go uernours.
the same Apostle expounds in an other place, when he speaking to them
selves, says, Attend to your selves and the whole flock, Acts. 20.
over which the holy Ghost has placed you for Bishops to govern the church
of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Which words of tender
love and prerogative (to be placed in their dignities by the hand of the holy
ghost himself, over the chosen people that God had bought with his own
precious blood) we shall never read to have bin spoken to temporal kings and
princes, and consequently all obedience is not so absolutely due to them, as
this profane divine holds, but much is also to be reserved for the others,
and in matters of highest moment.

First then we see, most manifest falsehood and treachery used here, by this our
Bible-clerk-knight in corrupting and translating wrongfully for his purpose
this little piece of Scripture alleged by him, what would he do think you if he
had to allege many places, seeing he handles so pitifully this one only?
Secondly, we may see the egregious absurdity and impiety of the sense which
he would pick out thereof, to wit, that all obedience absolutely, and in all
matters and causes, is to be yielded to the soueraygn temporal magistrate
without restraint: and consequently also, Most absurd doctrine.
that all manner of their ordinances and laws are to be obeyed without
exception. Which doctrine if it be true, then were the Apostles bound to go to
the Infidels temples and sacrifiise also, when they were commanded: for that no
man will deny, but that this precept of obedience set down here by Saint Peter,
was meant expressly and particulerly for obeying the seculer magistrates and
princes of that time: all which were Infidels commonly, and Idolaters. So as if
there were no exception of causes, then did Saint Peter himself (that gives
the precept) very evil, in not obeying the magistrates of Jury first, and
after in refusing to obey Nero the Emperor, when he willed him to consorme
himself in matters of religion.

And if there be any exception of causes or matters, wherein by Gods law,
princes may be disobeyed, then impiously and fondly is it set down here by Sir
Francis so resolutely, as out of Scripture, that all obedience is due to the
soueraygne magistrate, and that also (as his words be) in all manner of
ordinances without exception, which heath enis^h doctrine includes a thousand
denyals of God himself. And further I say, that the same is fondly affirmed,
for that the Protestants greatest contention has been hitherto against
Catholics, to the end, that they should not obey the precepts of men, though
they were set down by the whole Church, and now comes in this guylt
spurre-Doctor with a quy^e contrary ground, that we must submit our selves to
all manner of ordinance of man. Which is as far to the other extreme of base
seruilitie, as the former was to the contrary, of pride, to obey no ordinance
of man at all, they proving the same then by that text of our Savior, Mat. 15.
1. Pet. 2.
In vain do they worship me teaching the doctrine and precepts of men. And
now the contrary by Saint Peter, that we must obey all manner of men's
ordinance, which yet Saint Peter says not, but Sir Francis falsely alleges
him.

And by this you see how these poor people do range up and down without rule,
limit, or certain ground at all but only their own will and present fancy.
Moreover I say that this text of Saint Peter of obeying civil magistrates
(though it were so as he alleges it) yet is it very impertinently alleged
against Catholics in our controversy about their not going to protestants
churches, for that they do offer all due obedience in temporal and civil
actions unto their temporal magistrate. How recusantes do obey, and how they
may not.
And do stand only in matters of religion, that concern their souls and
consciences, and consequently this text is nothing to the purpose against them
in that behalf. And with this I will leave also Sir Francis as simple a soul
as I found him, but yet somewhat more shufled out of his cloutes, and
discovered for a conscienceles corrupter of his book of conscience.

To Catholic recusantes whom he impugneth I can say no more, but that they
are happy men to have such an adversary, A speech to catholic recusantes.
and that the course which they have hitherto held is most honorable and pious
before God and man, I mean in showing first their duty toward God, by
standing constantly and suffering for their conscience: and secondly in
offering all loyal obedience in temporal causes to their liege prince. And
lastly in edifying their neighbors by their good life and behaueour. Which is
the exhortation of Saint Peter in this very place alleged. Having your
conversation good (says he) among these people, in such sort, as they
considering your good works, 1. Pet. 2.
in that they go about to slander you as wicked men, God may be glorified
thereby in the day of his visitation. And again, the will of God is, that you
by your good life, do stop the mouths of foolish and ignorant men, that talk
against you, etc. And yet further, this is a great grace if any man suffer
sorrow for his conscience toward God, being afflicted unjustly, for if you
suffer for sin (^or evil life) it is no glory but if while you live well, you
do suffer patiently, it is a great grace with God ^for in this is your
vocation, and to this you are called, for that Christ suffered so for us, and
left you example to follow his steps, etc.

And as for obedience, you are to yield it simply (my dear brethren) and
plainly (as I have said) with a true loyal heart and good will, as unto
Christ himself, unto all kind of magistrates whatsoever, temporal or
spiritual, though yet with that distinction which Christ him self appointed,
quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, quae sunt Dei Deo, giving unto Caesar, those
things that are Caesar's, and reserving to God those things that are Gods.
Math. 22.
Which distinction Saint Paul to the Romans expounds more particularly,
Marc. 12.
when having commanded all superior powers to be obeyed even for conscience
sake, as the ministers of God, though they were Gentiles, he sets down this
conclusion Give therefore to all sorts of men those things that are due unto
them, Romans 13.
tribute, to whom tribute, tole, to whom ^^le, fear, to whom fear honor to
whom honor belongs.

Unto our temporal prince and head of our earthly commonwealth, Temporal.
Magistrate.
whereof we are citizens, we owe all temporal obedience in civil matters,
according to the law of God, nature, and nations, and according to the
particular ordinances of the country wherein we dwell; and so we are to serve
him with our bodies, goods, life, and whatsoever other earthly means or
comoditie we have besides, 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
in all just causes. And this with all honor, fidelity, redines, alacrity,
and promptnes of mind, as to the minister of God, ordained (as both the
forenamed Apostles say) for punishing of the wicked, and comforting the good.
And this obedience was due also unto heathen magistrates in Christ's time: Note
this point.
for in this temporal go^ernment, Christ altered nothing at all, but left it as
he found it. And for that some Christians after Christ's ascension, partly by
the common opinion of the Jews, who held that the Messiah should make them free
from all temporal subjection, and partly upon those words of Christ himself
in Saint John's Ghospel, Joan. 8.
si ergo vos filias liberauerit, vere liberi eritis, if the son of God once
deliver you, you shall be truly free (which was meant of spiritual freedom)
yet for that some Christians imagined that they were now free from obedience
also of temporal magistrates, the foresaid two chief Apostles, Saint Peter and
Saint Paul, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.
took upon them most earnestly to remove this error, in the places alleged,
and to persuade all due temporal obedience also, in all civil afaires, to the
civil magistrate, of what life or religion soever he were.

I say in temporal and civil afaires, for as for matters of religion and the
soul, no man of sense or judgment, will imagine that the said Apostles would
bynd christians to obey those civil magistrates, that were not yet christians
in the Apostles days, nor ever meant to be, but rather persecutors.

And heerof also insueth, that their must needs be some other distinct
superiority and government for matters of the soul, Spiritual magistrate.
whereof I showed the commandment before out of Saint Paul, and it is that
which we commonly call Ecclesiastical or Spiritual government, concerning
afaires of religion and conscience. And this government over souls, Christ
himself came properly down from heaven to found and erect upon earth, and to
make himself head thereof: being a government far different from the other,
whereof he would take no part at all, and so he fled when the people would
have made him a king: and to Pilate he denied that his kingdom was of this
world: Joan. 6.
and being called upon to divide the inheritance between two brethren (which
was an act aperteining to the te^porall magistrate) he answered, Luc. 12.
who has appointed me a Judge or a deuider over you? But yet when he talked of
the other superiority that aperteineth to teaching, instructing, and governing
of souls, be acknowleged his authority. Joan. 13.
You call me master and Lord (says he in one place to his disciples) and you
say well for I am so. Math. 23.
And again in an other place your only master is Christ, etc.

This superiority therefore and tribunal over souls, for instructing,
directing, chastising, bynding and loosing of sins, and the like, Christ did
peculierly erect and setle at his being here, making himself the head, and
leaving his Apostles and their successors for his substitutes, to guyd the
same under him unto the worlds end. Neither did Christ at his departure
commit this authority, or any part thereof, unto Caesar, or unto any other
temporal prince, but to his Apostles, giving them that supreme dignity in
joint commission with his own person, when he said, who hears you, hears
me, and who contemns you, contemns me. Luc. 10.
Nor did Saint Paul when he talked of matters of the soul, subject Christians
unto Caesar, or unto temporal princes as he did in temporal affairs, but unto
their prelates, as before has been alleged, Heb. 13.
and adds this reason, for that they wach for us and are to yield account of
our souls to almighty God, as a matter of their peculiar charge.

And to the end it should appear how distinct and different these two
governments and jurisdictions are, Temporal and spiritual jurisdiction.
Christ provided that this spiritual government of his Church should stand in
the world for three hundred years together; without any temporal government at
all in the hand of Christian Princes, to wit, until the time of Constantyne the
great, and then and after, when any temporal kings and princes were converted
and made Christians (as our Ethelbertus king of kent, king Clodoueus of France,
and others) all entered and submitted them selves under this spiritual
government of the Christian Church and prelates thereof, as subjects and not
as superiors, as sheep and not as pastors, and as children under their fathers
and prelates, and not as commanders in that behalf. And so they continued still
for many ages together, contented with their princely authority in civil
matters, and with their subjection in Ecclesiastical, until certain libertyne
heretics of our time, to put themselves out of the burden of obedience to
their Ecclesiastical superiors, have sought to trooble and confound this holy
distinction, appointed by our Savior, and to cast both gouernmentes and
jurisdictions into the hands of the temporal magistrate, thereby to make a
confusion, Occham to the Emperor.
and to be free themselves from correction, due unto their wickedness and
dissolution, and crying to temporal princes (as one did in the like case)
defend you us with the sword, and we shall honor and defend you with the word.
And this is the true state of matters in this behalf: whereby the godly
proceeding of our English recusantes is most clearly justified, and the
profane flaterie of their adversaries discovered And with this I end the sixth
encounter with S. Francis.

THE SEVENTH INCOVNTER, ABOUT FORRAYNE PRINCFS AND NAtions: And first
concerning the Pope of Rome.
IF the immodestie of Sir Francis railing speeches and calumniations, had
contained it self within the compass of home-born subjects, and had not
ouerlauis head also to the open injury and slander of foreign pote^tates and
nations; the matter might more easily have bin passed over and dissembled; for
that he sitting at home, under the favor of the state and present time, has
more liberty thereby to rail at his pleasure, and to tiranize with his tongue
over such as are their kept down, and dare not answer him or reply. But when
with the same audacitie (or impudency rather) he will presume to use the like
approbrious speeches against the sacred honors of anointed princes, and the
greatest monarchs of Christendom, contrary to the law both of nature and
nations; he is to be restrained and checked even for the very honor of England
it self, and our nation, and so I mean to do in this seventh encounter.

And to begin with his raging at the Bishop of Rome, calling him the proud
Priest and arche-prelate of Rome, bloody monster, Antechriste, the man of
sin, Opprobtiousspeaches
the son of perdition, and other like unseemly terms, and wicked
maledictions: the answer were quickly made, if I would be as cholerique and
immodest as he, and say, that these are but rauings of a lunatique brain, and
belkings of a burdened stomach, with the surfeit of heresy: and other such
like terms, but I will not encounter in this kind with him, but rather will
endeavor to ouerrule him by reason, and convince him by argument, if he be
capable of the one or the other.

First then, that the Popes of Rome be Antechristes or the man of sin,
Whether the Popes of Rome be Antichris^^^
whereof Daniel, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles do speak, and that Rome
is Babylon (in the sense that these goodfellowes do mean, that is, Rome
Christened) it is a mere jest; and invented by a scoffing Apostata friar or
two, and mayntained by men of like humor and qualities And in deed the jest is
fitter to entertain some pleasant crew at a tauern or alebench, then to move
any learned auditory or discreet reader, though it be frequent matter in
English pulpits at this day, for that as the true Christ was one singular man,
Antich. one man.
and not any succession of men, one after another, as the Popes of Rome are;
and this is evidently gathered by the ancient fathers, out of the words of
diverse holy Scriptures, as namely Daniel. 7. and 11. Joan. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1.
Joan. 2. Apoc. 13. and, 17.

Moreover the Jews shall receive the true Antechriste for their Messiah, as
they refused to receive Christ, and so Christ says Joan. 5. verse. 43. I
came in the name of my father, Antichrist declared by the jews.
and you receive me not, if an other come in his own name him you shall receive
etc. but it is not likely that the Jews will receive the Pope of Rome for their
Messiah, and much less so many Popes as are already dead.

The Gospel and doctrine of Christ must be first preached to all Antichrist
when.
Math. 24. and, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and so the consent of old Doctors upon these
places do agree, which thing is not yet fulfilled, as Saint Augustine in his
time did largely declare, Epist. 80. and we may also show in ours much more, by
the vaste infidel countries daily discovered.

The proper Antechriste by all reason and likelihood, must be a Jew borne, and
circumsized, and will profess (at least for a while) to Antichrist a Jew.
to draw them after him. And they shall accept of him for their Messiah, as
before has bin showed out of Christ's own words, which they would never do,
except he were a Jew both by generation and profession. Of which two things
neither can be verified of the Popes of Rome, to wit, that they are either
Jews by birth, or do profess the Jewish doctrine, and therefore they can not
be Antichriste.

Antechriste when he comes shall pitch his kingdom in the city Antichrist in
Jerusalem.
and go about to restore the temple of Solomon, as is plainly gathered out of
Saint John's words in the Apoc. cap. 11. where he says, that the bodies of
Hen^ch and Helias that shall be slain by him, shall lie unburied in the streets
of that great City, where their lord was crucified. And the same is deduced
out of the same book. cap. 17. and out of Saint Paul's words 2 Thessalonians. 2. and
by many ancient writers. And how then can the Popes of Rome be said to be
Antechriste?

Antichrists doctrine.
are gathered plainly out of holy Scriptures. The first, that he shall deny
Jesus to be christ, 1. Joan. 2. verse. 22. and consequently shall deny Baptism,
and all other Sacraments and doctrine brought in by Christ. The second that he
shall teach, himself to be true Christ, and the Jews shall believe him. Joan.
5. The third, that he shall affirm himself to be God, and so requier to be
adored for God, 2 Thessalonians 2. v. 4. but the Popes of Rome do not teach these
points of doctrine hitherto and therefore cannot be Antechriste.

Again scriptures do teach us, that Antichriste when he comes Antichrists
miracles.
Math. 24. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. and some of those miracles are specified Apoc. 13.
to wit that he shall make fire descend from heaven, and the image of a beast to
speak, and feign himself to dye and rise again, but these miracles no Popes
hitherto have wrought, or do work, ergo etc.

Antichrists time of reign.
as is gathered by ancient writers, out of the Prophet Daniel, chapter 7. and
12. and out of the 12. chapter of the Apocalips where it is said that he shall
reign a time, and times, and half a time, for so S. John himself interprets
the matter c. 11. and 13. saying it shall be for 42. months, which make just
three years and a half, but the Popes of Rome have reigned for more ages then
these are years, and consequently cannot be Antichrist.

Beside this, the Scripture teaches us plainly, that before Antechrist Henoch
and Helias.
Henoch and Helias shall return again, to oppose themselves against him, and
in the end shall convert the Jews, Malach. 4. Ecclesi. 48. Math. 17. Apoc. 11.
but we see not yet this point fulfilled, to prove the Pope to be Antechriste,
ergo, etc.

Lastly, (for I will be no longer in this matter) straight after the end Day of
iugdment.
as before has bin showed) shall ensew the day of judgment and consummation of
the world, as the Prophet Daniel foretells cap. 7. and Saint John in the
Apoc. cap. 20. and the same is gathered out of Christ's own words also, Math.
24. and the foresaid Prophet Daniel speaking again of this matter in the 12.
chapter, says, that the kingdom of Antechriste shall endure a thousand, two
hundredth, and ninety days, which makes the former number of three years and
a half. And then he adds these words, happy is he that expects and
ariueth unto a thousand three hundredth and thirty and five days (which is
forty and five days after the death of Antechriste) for that then Christ
coming to judgment, shall bring the crowns of justice for those that are
victors etc. And seeing that the Popes of Rome have endured now so long, and
yet the end of world has not ensued, it is manifest as well by this reason, as
by all the other before alleged, that these Popes cannot be properly
Antechriste, as our new malignant raylers do affirm.

But it may be some will say (seeing the absurdity of the former false
position) that the Pope of Rome is not properly, How there are many
Antichrists
that Antechriste which is foretold by the scriptures, but only a forerunner of
his, and such as disposes the way to his coming, at the end of the world, in
which sense Saint John having said, Children this is the last hour, 1. Loan. 2.
and as you have heard Antechriste comes, or is to come (for so the greek
verb signifies plainly, being of the present tense, and not of the time past,
(...) venit.
where the latin is doubtful, and may be taken both ways) Saint John (I say)
having foretold in his epistle that Antechrist was to come in this last hour
or age of the world after the appearing of the true Christ, he adds
immediately these words. And even now many Antechristes are made, and thereby we
know that this is the last hour etc. Which is, as if he had said, that
forasmuch as we do see many become Antechristes (that is to say do become
opposite to Christ both in spirit and operation) and do begin to work the
mystery of iniq^itie (as Saint paul calls it) against true Antechristes
coming, heerby we know that this is the last age from Christ to Antechriste,
2. Thessal. 2.
and so to the worlds end, which immediately is to ensew after Antechristes
ariual.

If I say our knight and his compagnions will confess this, that the Pope of
Rome is not that proper Antechriste foretold here by Saint John, to come in the
end of the world but only that he is one of those other forerunning
Antechristes, already made and appearing in S. John's days to prepare the way
(which yet no heretic nor Sir Francis himself though never so shameless, will
da^e to auow of the Bishops of Rome of the primitive church, when Saint John
wrote those words, that they were Antechristes, they being known to be Saints
and holy martirs for some ages together) if this I say be granted; then it
follows, that all these men's ianglings in books and pulpits, against the
Popes of Rome to prove them Antechristes, faleth to the ground, and is made
ridiculous, for that in this sense all evil men whatsoever, may be called
Antechristes (that is contrary to Christ) who do work iniquity and
cooperate to the kingdom of sin, which Christ came to overthrow; and so all
Turks, Moors, Tyrants, Persecutors and other wicked people are Antechristes
in this sense, as forerunners of true Antechriste and contrary to Christ,
neither is there any thing peculier to the Popes of Rome, though we should
confess them to be never so wicked in life, but the very truth is, that
principally and above others in this sense the name of Antechriste is proper to
heretics and sectaries who under the name of Christ, do impugn Christ, and
leaving the common received union of faith, do find out contrary paths by
themselves. And against such men did Saint John especially speak those words,
that many Antechristes were already made, to wit, the Ebionites, Cer^^thians,
and Nicholaites then newly sprung up. And for this cause also does he say,
Antichristi facti sunt, they are made Antichrists, and not borne so, for that
by their own malice they made themselves such, in departing from union. And
now whether Popes or the Protestants do participate more of this quality of
heretical Antichriste, by breaking union in faith and religion from the whole
body of Christendom, I leave to the discreet reader to ponder. And thus much
may serve about calling the Pope Antichriste.

As for Rome, How Rome is Babylon.
whether it be Babylon or no, little imports it to the matter we have in hand,
so we agree in the sense: for not only Saint John in his Apocalips, but Saint
Peeter also in his epistle, does call Rome Babylon, and we deny it not, for it
was in respect of the great confusion of iniquity, Idolatry, and persecution,
that the infidel Emperors used, and were to use against Gods Saints. But that
either Saint John, or Saint Peeter, did call is Babylon in respect of the
Christians that were in it at that time, I think Sir Francis himself will blush
to say, and consequently the name of Babylon given to Rome when it was impious
and pagan, aperteineth nothing to Rome now after it is Christian; nor has this
fond objection need of any further answer.

For the rest of the railing and contumelious speech, whereby the Pope is termed
the proud Priest and Archeprelat of Rome, touching the words Priest and Prelat,
they are names of his dignity, as they were in Christ and the Apostles
themselves, About the Popes external honor.
who were both Priests and Prelates, and Arche-prelates also, in that they were
more principal then others. As for proud, that depends of the Popes inward
disposition, which our knight ought to have known in all law of good
christianity, how it stands, before he auowch it outwardly. For if he judge
only by the external show, and outward honor of his estate, he may as well
condemn of pride, all other princes and great men in the world, for admitting
honor according to their degrees, and among others, our present Bishops of
England may be called in question (as they are by the puritanes) for being
termed lords, and for the lord-lyk honor donn unto them in outward demeanure.
To the Lords also of her Majesty's counsel may be objected the like, for
causing men to kneel unto them at the counsel table, and such other like
external honor admitted.

As for bloody monster, it is a monstrous slander, and a great monstruositie of
inciuilitie in a gentleman's mouth, so to speak: for it is well known that the
Bishop of Rome that now is, and many of his predecessors in our days and eyes,
have used and do use daily, great courtesies to infinite protestants, that
pass through their states. And as for blood, I think verily, that there has
bin more shed in only London for religion in one year, within these last
twenty that have passed, then in all the whole twenty, within all the towns,
cities, and states of the Bishop of Rome, and this is easy to be verefied.

Well then (Sir knight) you rayl at randon, and little do you seem to think or
consider what peril of Gods justice may hang over you for the same. The peril
of Sir Francis railing. Exodus 22. Leuit. 20.
You may remember it is written, principi populi tui non maledices: and again,
qui patri suo maledixerit, morte moriatur. The Bishop of Rome has ever been
held for our spiritual prince and parent in England, until with in these few
years, and so is he still holden by all Catholic kingdoms round about us,
and in ours also by such as follow the old universal faith, which if it be
true, then are you in danger of damnation by this your fury. And you remember
that Saint Paul was so respective of this danger, that having spoken a hasty
word against Ananias, calling him whyted wall, for an open injury donn unto
him in public judgment against the law, Act. 23.
yet when he understood he was high priest (notwithstanding S Paul well knew
thar his priesthood now was nothing worth, the old law being abrogated by the
death of Christ, he did openly recall his word again, and showed to be
sorrowful for having spoken it against one that bore that title. But Sir
Francis has no such feeling or remorse of conscience in him, for that he is
not governed by the same spirit of humility and piety that Saint Paul was,
whereunto notwithstanding I would gladly persuade him if I might, and for that
respect do mean to allege unto him the considerations ensuing, about the
Bishop of Rome.

First, himself in the 31. page of this his libel has these words, The Lord
from heaven commands to all men upon earth, Romans 13.
that every soul should be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power
but of God, and every power is ordained of God. How power is to be respected.
Which words if they be true, then must the Popes power also be of God, seeing
it has been an acknowledged power by all Christendom for so many years and
ages, and not only for a lawful power but also for a holy and supreme spiritual
power, and then let men judge in what cause Sir Francis stands that not only
resists, but reuileth also this sacred power, notwithstanding that the
illation which Saint Paul infers immediately after the former words, is
this, wherefore he that resists power, resists Gods ordination, and those
that resist Gods ordinatio^, do purchase damnation unto themselves.

More over, that saying of Christ unto the Apostles, he that hears you, Luc.
10.
hears me, was not spoken only for them selves, but for all their successors
also, that by succession should govern the church unto the worlds end, as all
men will confess. And co^seqe^tly the other part also of the same sentence, he
that contemns you, contemns me, must needs in like manner belong unto the
same man. And that the Bishops of Rome be successors in the Apostle Saint
Peeters seat, is no less manifest to all men of understanding and learning.
And albeit Sir Francis will say presently, that they follow not Saint Peeters
steps (and will prove it at leisure) yet if that were true, the princes
authority is not taken away hy his evil life or deportement, for then should we
have few true princes in the world. But above all others it pleased Christ
himself to take away this objection touching Popes and Ecclesiastical princes,
when he said, that upon the chair of Moses should sit both Scribes and
Pharisees, Math. 23.
and that we should notwithstanding observe and do whatsoever they said, but
not according to their works. So as still there remains the obligation to
obey them, though their lives and hehaueour were not correspondent, but much
more the obligation not to slander, contemn, and revile them, as our harebrain
and headlong knight does.

I say it is harebrain and headlong dealing, Harebrayne and head long dealings
of Sir Francis.
to run so furiously in so dangerous a path as this is. For besides that
maledicus, a railing tongued man, is placed by Saint Paul among them, that
shall never attain the kingdom of heaven: it is much more grievous sin to
use this vice against Magistrates, 1. Cor. 5. and 6.
that represent the power of almighty God, and far yet greater against
spiritual magistrates, that have this authority in a far higher degree then
temporal magistrates, but most of all against him that represents immediately
the person of Christ Jesus upon earth, which is the Bishop of Rome as
presently more particulerly shall be showed.

Furthermore if all the holy and learned men of Christe^dom have not bin
deceived for so many ages together, as they have confessed this general
doctrine, of the Pope of Rome his prerogative, without doubt or contradiction:
then is Sir Francis out of his way, then is he in the open path of perdition,
then is he furious, frantik and besides himself, in railing as he does. And
that this only uniform consent of such and so many holy learned men gone before
us, were a sufficient argument to make any man (that were discreet and fearing
God) to enter into doubt (at least of his doing in this behalf) cannot in
reason be denied: and so without doubt would Sir Francis also do, if his
temporal life lay on the bargain as his eternal does.

For let me ask Sir Francis, if an herb should be presented to him to eat, A
demonstration against Sir Francis madness.
that all learned physicians for a thousand years together have held for
strong poison, and only some one or two of later years have begone to teach
the contrary without actual experience whether it be so or no, but only by
discourse and new arguments of their own, would he abstain to eat it (think
you) or no? Or if an action should be offered him in England, which by all old
lawyers judgment of former times has been taken for high treason ipso facto,
and loss of life and lands though some ^iewer lawyers were of contrary
opinion that now it is not, I persuade my self S. Francis would look twyce er
he lept once in committing that action, for the love he bears to his
temporally f^nd state: but in this other case though all ancient diuynes and
doctors for above a thousand years together have taught that it is blasphemy
to rail at the Bishop of Rome appointed by Christ to govern in his place, and
damnation not to acknowledge his authority, and only Martin Luther a loose
Apostata friar, and Sir John Calvin a sear-backt priest for sodomie, Luther.
Calvin.
have begone in our days to teach the contrary for fear to be punished by
him for their wickedness, yet Sir Francis rusheth on and casts at all, and
will hazard hell and all eternity of torments thereon depending, rather then
not to satisfy his passion in this point and please the state, wherein he
lives, by showing himself a forward man. And who will deny, this to be
headlong and hare brain dealing.

And yet further though this universal consent of Christendom, against two or
three so contemptible authors of novelties be more then sufficient to induce
any man of reason to look about him, and to consider what he does, and whether
he may adventure his soul upon such inequality of testimonies as this is,
between two or three nouellants and twenty millions of holy and grave ancients
(which difference of witnesses I suppose would prevail in VVestminsterhall,
with any equal and discreet judge or jury) yet for further light to such as
wilfully will not shut their ears and eyes, I will set down here some other
considerations also to the same effect, besides the prescription of time and
antiquity before mentioned, and besides the weight and number of so many holy
and learned men's judgments of former ages, whom yet in reason we cannot
presume to be inferior to ours, if we be not over fond and passionate in our
own cause.

Diverse reasons for the Bishop of of R^ome his pre-eminence.
but that Christ our Savior instituted a church to continue, and to be
governed, not only for that first age after himself, but even until the worlds
end, and so himself shows Math. vltimo.

This government was to be under Bishops and Prelates, ordained act. 20. 1.
Tim. 3. 3. Tit. 1. And this succession was to endure to the worlds end also, by
continual new ordination and imposition of hands, so as none could enter by
stealth or violence into this rank, but such as lawfully should be admitted.

Plato in polit. Arist. lib. 3. polit. cap. 5.
For so he forshewed by light of nature to all Philosophers, who held without
controversy that the monarchy or government of one head in highest degree was
the best among all other manner of regimentes, and consequently it is like that
Christ took not the wurst for the regiment of his church and spiritual
common wealth.

God practiced this kind of government in the creation of Angels, Agust. lib.
11. ciuit. Dei. cap. 15.
And afterward when Lucifer fell he remained still head of the wicked spitites,
and Michael of the good, as is signified playnlie Apoc. 12.

1. Cor. 10.
giving them one high priest to govern direct and hold in union and obedience
all the other priests, which were almost infinite in all their synagogues
throughout the world.

He practiced the same in like manner in all other things lightly of

For if there were many governors thereof jointly under himself,

And finally, this church is compared to an army that needs must have some
known general, and not only to an army simply Cant. 4.
acies castrorum ordinata, a well ordered army, that has all other officers
also in good order under the Captain general. And it is compared in like
manner to a house, to a sheepfold, to a ship, to the Ark of Noah, and the like,
all which things have one head governor, as the world knows.

And that his privilege was given by our Savior to Saint, Peter among all the
Apostles, if no play ne commission were extant (as the re Saint Peter chief of
the church under Christ
is) yet Christ's proceeding with him far different from any of therest of the
Apostles sufficiently declares his intention in this matter.

That he reuey led unto him first of all the rest the hidden mystery of his
incarnation and of the blessed Trimitie, Math. 16. That he said only to him,
rogaui pro te ne deficiat fides tua, I have asked for thee that thy faith shall
never fail (having said first that the devil was to sift them all) Luc. 22.
That he promised only to him that the gates of hell should never prevail
against his seat, Math. 16. That he paid tribute only for Peter and for
himself, Math. 17. That he changed his name from Simon to Cephas or Peter that
signifies a rock or stone, Joan 11. (which is the name of Christ himself
attributed to him by the prophets as is to be seen, Isa. 8. and 28. Daniel 2.
Psalm. 117. That Christ called only Peter to walk with him upon the water, Math.
14. That he preached and wrought two such notable miracles in the only ^hip of
Peter as appears, Luc. 5. and Joan. 21. That he foretold only to Peter the
kind of death he should dye (allotting him the same that himself was to suffer
upon the cross) Joan 21. And that he being to go toward the same death he
washed Peter's feet before all the rest, Joan. 3. and August in hunc locum. Luc.
24.
And that after his resurrection he appeared first of all the Apostles to Saint
Peter, and besides this that his angel willed the woman to tell Peter by name
of Christ's resurrection, Marc. 16.
etc.

All these things (I say) and many other do show the pre-eminence of this
holy Apostle above his fellows, by Christ's own declaration, which were
overlong to set down how many ancient fathers do deduce and enlarge upon these
places of scriptures and factes of our Savior alredie rehearsed.

And again after the ascension of Christ to heaven that Saint Peter first of
all called the Council of Apostles together, Act. 1.
and caused Saint Mathias to be chosen in place of Judas. That he first of all
the rest did publish and promulgate the ghospel after the coming of the holy
ghost, and converted five thousand at one se^mon. That Act. 2.
he wrought the first miracle in healing the lame man at the temple gate
called, Act. 3.
Speciosa: That he first of all as high judge gave sentence and condemned to
death Ananias and Saphira for their hypocrisy: That he first of al presumed to
preach the ghospel of Christ to Gentiles as he had don before to the Jews.
Act. 5.
That to him alone was Act. 10.
showed the vision whereby Christ declared that the time was now come to admit
Gentiles to Christianity. Ibidem.
That of him only is written, dum transiret vniuersos, Act. 9. Chrysostom.
Ibidem. Gal. 1. Chrysostom. homil. 87. in Joan.
(that is as S. Chrysostom says) whiles he as a general of an army walks
up and down to see what is in order and what is not. That of him only among all
the Apostles S. Paul writes, after three years I went up to Jerusalem to
see Peter, the reason whereof Saint Chrysostom affirms to be, quia os erat,
and princeps Apostolorum, for that he was the mouth and prince of the Apostles.
And finally that by Christ's particulir order (as is to be supposed) he left
the bishoprike of Antioche, and went and took upon him that of Rome, that was
head ci^tie of the world.

All these things put together do well argue that Saint Peter well knew the
dignity and prerogative he had above the rest, both for himself and for his
successors: whereunto if we ad the plain commission given by Christ in two
distinct places of scripture that are recorded, besides other perhaps that are
not written, the matter will be more evident.

The first is, Commission of Saint Peter.
where after that glorious confession made by S Peter of the God head of Christ
recorded in S. Matthew his ghospel our Saueour says to him again, Math. 16.
Thou art Peter or a rock (for to this end Christ before had given him that
name that signifies a rock) and upon this rock will I build my church, and I
will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. By which words is
promised to Peter the principality in government of the church, as the words
themselves do show, and the consent of ancient fathers both Greek and Latin do
expound.

The second place is in Saint Ihons ghospel, where Christ after his
resurrection gave to Saint Peter that pre-eminence which before he had
promised, Joan. 21.
for being in the company of diverse other principal Apostles he asked Peter
alone, three several times whether he loved him more then the rest or no (which
holy fathers say was don in respect of the three times that Peter had denied
him before) and the other answering that he loved, etc. Christ three times
says to him, pasce agnos meos pasce oues meas, feed my lambs and feed my
sheep, making him pastor general of all his flock, and committing the whole
church to his pastoral charge, by those words, as both the words themselves
do import (being uttered to Peter alone and with particular emphasie for him to
feed Christ's flock above the rest of the Apostles, as he had thryce been asked,
whether he loved more then they) and as all antiquity with one consent have
ever taken the sense to be, quia solus profitetur ex omnibus, omnibus
antefertur, says Saint Ambrose, Ambrose in cap. vltim^^ Luc.
for that Saint Peter only did profess to love so extraordinarily above the
rest, he was preferred in charge before all the rest. And Saint Augustine upon
this place oues ipsas pascendas, id est, docendas regendasquod committit.
August. in Joan. 21. Chrisost in Joan 21.
Christ committed here his sheep to be fed by Saint Peter, that is to say, to
be taught and governed: And Saint Chrysostom upon the same words, alijs
omissis Petrum duntaxat affatur, and fratrum ei curam committit. Christ leaving
the other Apostles there present, speaks only to Saint Peter, and commits
the charge of his brethren to him. And a little after again, Cum magna dominus
Petro communicasset, and orbis terrarum curam demandasset, when our lord had
imparted great matters to Peter and had given him the charge of the whole
world, etc. And Saint Epiphanius, Hic est qui audiuit pasce oues meas, cui
concreditum est ouile, Epiphan^ in ancor.
This is he to whom it was said, feed my sheep, to whom the whole flock of
Christ was given in charge, etc.

I have thought good to ad this little taste of ancient fathers interpretation,
How Saint Peter's charge is imparted also to others.
leaving out infinite others to the same sense, to prevent heretical shifts in
this behalf, who first would make this commission of pasce oues meas, to be
only to feed by preaching, and not to govern with superiority: and secondly
to be a common and indifferent commission given to all the Apostles equally,
and not to Saint Peeter above the rest, which is aparently false. For albeit we
gra^nt that this commission pasce oues meas, in a general sense may be and is
understood and spoken not only to Saint Peter but also to all the rest of the
Apostles, and not only to them but to all other inferior pastors besides: yet
in pre-eminence and highest degree of special authority oueral, it is spoken
in this place to S. Peter alone, as has bin showed, and consequently also to
his successors: and by the same consequence it follows in like manner, that
if Sir Francis Hastinges and his people be either lambs or sheep of Christ,
or do any way apertain to his flock and fold, they apertain also to the
government and jurisdiction of this universal pastor Saint Peter's successor;
against whom he rayleth and rages so pitifully as in his book appears.

And for that all the Christian world has made ever this most certain and
infallible deduction, Saint Peter's successors Popes of Rome.
that Christ gave not to Saint Peter these eminent prerogatives of authority
and superiority for himself alone, but for his posterity and successors also
that should ensue him in his seat and charge over the church of Christ unto
the worlds end, for this cause they have reverenced and respected so much the
Bishops of Rome, as by all general Councels, fathers, and Ecclesiastical
stories does appear: and only certain broken heretics both in old times and
ours, as guilty people fearing their judges, have set themselves against them,
but ever to there own perdition: among which rabble not withstanding if Sir
francis Hastinges will needs be one still (having red what here has been
alleged) I can say no more, but leave him to Gods judgments; and cum
apparuerit princeps pastorum, 1 Pet. 5.
when Christ the prince of pastors shall appear, to take account of the
obedience or rebellion used to his under pastors, then will these reckoninges
be cleared, and every man shall receive according to his merits.

And if all Christian nations have and ought to bear such reverence and respect
to the sea of Rome, The Particular obligation of English toward the Bishop
of Rome.
then much more our little Island of England (as this man calls it) for that it
has received more singular benifits from thence then any one nation in the
world besides, to wit, it has bin twice converted from paganism to Christian
religion, by the especial diligence, labor, and industry of the same sea;
once in the time of the Britans, about a hundredth and ninety years after
Christ: at what time Elutherius that holy Pope and Martyr converted king
Lucius and his subjects by the preaching of Saint Damianus and his fellows,
sent from Rome to that effect: and the second time, about five hundredth years
after, when our predecessors the English Saxons were converted, by Saint
Augustine and his fellow preachers, sent by Saint Gregorye the great, then
Bishop of Rome, to the same end. And if it be most certain, and cannot be
denied, that these two benifits rightly considered are the greatest that under
heaven our land could receive from any mortal men, and that the obligation of
this dooble spiritual birth of ours is so much greater then the band we owe to
our carnal parents, by how much more weighty and important is our eternal
salvation then our temporal life: let all men consider the barbarous
ingratitude of this man, that barketh with such spite against the sea of Rome,
the mother of our Christianity: and against her Bishops, the woorkers of so
high a blessing unto us. And with this consideration I leave the modest and
discreet readers, to judge of the matter as reason and religion shall induce
them, and with this cease to pass any further in this matter.

THE EIGHTH INCOVNTER, TOUCHING SPANIARDES, ASvvell the whole nation, as their
present King.
Having made the ward which you have seen, in the former encounter, both to
Rome and her Bishops, against the peevish wranglinges, and spiteful
calumniations, of this wach-worde-geuer, there remains yet an other bickering
about the Spanish king and nation, which I have reserved to this last place, as
the subject wherein our cockish knight presumes principally to crow and
triumph without modesty, and to lavish out lies without number or measure,
imagining that all is both lawful and grateful which he says in that kind,
and that no man will adventure to check him therein, in respect of the present
wars and hostility that are betwixt our realm and them. But he is deceived,
for that the wiser sort of our nation, have learned even by the laws of moral
civility, that a man must speak moderatly also of his enemy, and the more
religious sort do know by the principles of Christianity, that not only of our
temporal adversary (which may be afterward our friend) we must notly or feign
reproaches, but neither of the Devil himself, though he be our spiritual and
immortal enemy, and Gods also: so detestable are lying lips and calumnious
tongues in the sight both of God and man, where either reason or religion
bears rule, as neither of them seems to do, with the enraged and distracted
spirit of Sir francis Hastinges.

Which point that we may better consider of, Raging against the Spanish nation.
I shall first begin with that which he utters in diverse parts of his
libel, against the whole nation of Spaniards in general, terming them by the
names of proud, ambitions, bloody, tyrannical, ravening Spaniards, a nation
cursed by God, for that the Pope that cursed man of sin has blessed them,
etc. And in one place he descrybeth them in these words: I must remember unto
you, that it is recorded of the Spaniard, that in dissimulation he surpasses
all nations, till he have attained to his purpose, and when he can once
prevail, he goes beyond them all in oppression and tyranny: also that he
disdayneth all other nations, and that in pride and carnal voluptuosnes, no
nation comes near him, and these be his qualities.

This our gentleman's censure, gathered out of records (as he says) but I
would gladly he had cited the author where he found this record, as he ought to
have done for discharging his faith and honesty in so grievous an accusation
as this is, and that touches so many, if he had regard or respect thereof. And
hardly do I believe that he has ever found, or shall find, any writer of
credit be he of what nation soever) that will show himself so fond and
passionate, as to set down by writing so prejudicial a censure, and so general
a reproach as this is against any nation: Why Spaniards are maligned.
notwithstanding I know, that the Spaniardes at this day, have many emulators
and adversaries, partly for hatred of Catholic religion (which is their
greatest glory) and partly by reason of their large dominions, which is not
strange, for so had the Romans also before them, and the Graecia^s, and
Assyria^s before them again, when their Monarchies were potent, quia virtutis
comes inuidia, as the common proverb says, envy follows virtue and valor:
and in this sense our English proverb is also most true, it is better to be
envied then pitied. And when the Roman monarchy was fallen, and the french
also, that was set up by Charles the great, our English nation had the greatest
of any one of Christendom, for some ages together, when we possessed our ample
old states and dominions in france, during which time, he that will see the
inuectiues made against our English manners, Speeches of English, when they
were pote^t.
and against our proud and tyrannical kind of proceeding (as then it was
termed) let him but read over the records of the french chronicles, extant at
this day: and yet no reason that these records should condemn or disgrace our
whole nation now, nor then neither, when they were written, being set down by
our adversaries and emulators, and by those that were either under us, or
feared us, and consequently were nothing equally affected unto us, as many are
not at this day against Spaniards.

Moreover if some Spaniardes should be found in deed to have some of those
vices or defectes which here by their calumniator Sir francis are named, (as
among other nations no man can deny, but the like are also to be found) what
reason or equity is there (to omit conscience and christianity, with which
this man seems to have little to do) what reason is there (I say) that these
defectes should be attributed universally to the whole Spanish nation, wherein
there are to be found thowsandes that have no part nor fault, as on the other
side, if some Englishmen as they pass over other countries, by sea and land
at this day should behave themselves scandalously, by gluttony and
drunkenness, (as diverse have been said to do) is it a lawful consequence to say
or think, that all English are such at home, and that these are the qualities
of the English nation, as Sir Francis says here of the Spaniardes? or to take
a comparison from himself, if one English knight of a noble family, have been
so madheaded, as to make a fantastical book, stuffed with ignorances, lies,
and calumniations, is it reason that foraine nations should judge hereby, thar
all our knights and nobility of England are so fond and frantik, and have so
little respect to their honors and credit as he? I trow no.

Wherefore as concerning the Spanish nation in general, Of the spanish nation
no such prejudice or slanderous rule can be given, as this malignant spirit
sets down, for that they are in this point as other nations be, where all
sorts of people may be found, some bad and many good: and if comparisons may
be made without offense (for that comparisons are odious in such affairs
between nations) no nation in Europe has more cause to glory, and give God
thanks for his gifts, abundantly powered upon them, both natural, moral, and
Divine, temporal and spiritual, for times past and present, then the Spanish,
1. Match. 8.
who have a country both rich, ample, fertile, and potent, and praised in
scripture it self, a people able and apt in respect both of wit and body to
attain to any thing they take in hand, as in old times appeared by the most
excellent Emperors, Rare Spaniards.
Traian, Theodosius the great and some other of that nation that surpassed all
the rest, as also by their famous learned men, in ancient times Seneca, Lucan,
Martial, and others, when they were yet heathens; Osius, Damasus, Leander,
Isidorus, Orotius and such like old renowned Christians, both for learning and
sanctity: by their most famous martyrs in like manner, Saint Laurence, Saint
Vincent, and many others: and in our age, he that will consider after their
valiant delivering of themselves out of the hands and captivity of the mores,
that invaded and oppressed their country what Christian Zealous Princes,
Kings, Emperors, Captains, Knights, and famous soldiers they have yielded
to the world, and do yield daily, and what store of singular learned writers
do appear from thence from time to time, what countries they have conquered by
the sword, and how many millions of souls they have gained to Christ by
preaching his word in diverse and most remote parts of the world: all these
things (I say) put together do make ridiculous and contemptible this malignant
description set down by Sir Francis, whose spetial hatred against them is
founded in that which of all other commendations is their greatest, to wit,
their constancy and zeal in defense of the catholic religion, for which
probably God has so greatly exalted them already, above other nations of
Europe, and will do more daily, if they continue that fervor in defending his
cause, notwithstanding any other humane infirmity or defect in life that as to
men (of what nation soever) may happen, which our merciful lord in regard and
recompense of the other rare virtues of zeal justice constancy and feruor in
his cause, will pardon (no doubt) and give grace of true amendment and rising
again, while the prating heretic that scornfully sits down to score up
other men's sins, shall walk for his own to his eternal habitation, prepared
in hell, for that his one malicious and obstinate sin of heresy (if it may be
called one) prepondereth with Gods justice more grievously then all other
infirmities and sins put to gither which catholic men do or may commit of
humane frayltie.

And thus much of this point, Particular obligations of Spaniards
may suffice, for if I should ad to this the ancient love and amity of the
Spanish nation toward us in times past, the large leagues that England has
held with them heretofore, the great wealth and gaynes we used to gather and
reap by their trafique, the noble and bountefull Queens of that lineage married
into England, which above all others taken from forayne countries have been most
grateful and beneficial to our land and people; the exceeding charity of the
present king and of his whole nation showed to our English catholics abroad,
in this long time of bitter banishment, and persecution for their faith; these
things (I say) if I should repeat or set out at large, would perhaps help
nothing to the argument we have in hand but rather give offense (times standing
as they do) and therefore I recount them not in particular, but leave them to be
considered with piety and gratitude by such as are indifferent in these days,
and to be recorded in the honorable monumentes of our posterity.

And so having answered thus much about the injury offered to the Spanish
nation (by Sir Francis) in general, The defense of the King of Spain in
particular
I will pass to the approbrious speeches used personally against their present
famous and noble king (once also ours) with such indignity of uncivil and most
reproachful terms as is not sufferable. And if any of the said kings
subjects were to answer our knight in this demand, he would cast him his
gauntlet, and give him the lie, and challenge him to the defense of so notorious
calumniations, and thereby prove him either a lying or cowardly knight, or both.

His ordinary terms of the most excellent and most Catholic king Philip are
these, the ambytious king of Spain, the usurping tyrant, the proud popish
champion, treacherous, cursed, cruel, and the like, all which vices the world
knows (^nny herself being witness) that his Catholic Majesty is most free
of, and is indewed abundantly with the opposite virtues, whereof no nation has
had better proof then England, by the experience we had of his sweet nature and
condition, both in princely behaueour and pious government, during the few
years he lived amongst us and ruled over us, which time notwithstanding of his
being in England this malicious sycophant will needs calumniate, and draw into
suspicion of great mysteries of iniquity meant by him (as he says) against
England and English people by means of that joyful marriage and government
which there he had.

If you will give me leave (says he) to call to your remembrance the manner
and meaning of his coming into England, when he came not as an inuader to
conquer but as a friend to fasten a strong league of amity by a marriage, I
doubt not but to discover the treacherous cruelty of his heart. This is Sir
Francis promise and you shall see after you have given him leave, how wisely
he will perform the same, and how substantially, he will declare unto us the
kings intention, or at least his own invention.

But before I set down his discovery under his own hand, I shall declare a
little the state of things whiles the Spaniards were in Queen Mary's days in
England, and how the king did actually bear himself, by testimony of all
those that knew him, conuersed with him, or lived under him. And then shall Sir
Francis tell his tale of that he imagines or faigneth the king would have don
in time, and before we both have ended, I believe that in steed of this
discovery promised of the treacherous cruelty of the kings heart, we shall
discover both treacherous cogging and shameless forgerie in the heart and hand of
this counterfayt knight. Thus then I begin the declaration.

The conditions of that most famous and royal marriage between the two greatest
Monarchs of Christendom, The condition of the marriage with the Spanish King.
king Philip and Queen Marie, and the conuentions agreed upon between both
nations, and between the princes themselves, Quee^ Marie, the Emperor Charles,
(then resyding in Flanders) and king Philip, and each of their Councels and
Parlaments, are yet extant, and for the most part in print: whereby it may be
seen that all those points that this sely fellow comes in withal now after
the market ended, about the succession of our realm, the privy Council, of
what nation they should be, the condition of our nobility, the Parliament, the
laws of the realm, the ports, castles and garrisons, the officers of the
court and household, and other like circumstances were particulerly treated,
agreed upon and provided for before hand, by all parts. Neither was there ever
any complaynt that the king or his nation brake any one of them while they were
among us, but added rather diverse benefytes and courtesies of their own accord
above that which they had promised and were bound unto.

As for the expenses, and for the furniture of the marriage (so much I mean as
came from abroad) as also for the two Spanish and English nauies that
accompanied the king when he came into England were at his cost and charges
until they arrived at Portesmouth, and the whole train from thence to
winchester, where he met with the Queen, and the marriage was celebrated, at the
charges of the same King of Spain.

All the Spanish nobles and gentlemen that came with the king, came so
furnished with all necessaries and brought such store of money with them, as
within two or three months after their arryual, all England was full of
Spanish coin. King Philips usage to made the English.
The privy council of England was wholly and entirely as it was before,
neither was any Spaniard ever put into it, the officers of the Queens household
were altogether English, the king for his own affairs, and his other
kingdoms, had a particular Council, which interrupted not ours, the nobility
of our land was exceedingly honored by him, and many of them had particular
great pensions also yearly from him, the captains and soldiers that he used of
our nation as namely at the war of Saint Quintins, he honored highly, and
made them equal in all points of service and honor with Spaniardes, and paid
them himself without further charges to England save only giving them their
upper cassockes with the cross, according to the custom. The marchantes
commonly he made free to enjoy and use all privileges and preferments
throughout all his kingdoms, countries and provinces: and in England he had
such care to yield our nation contentment, as he gave express order that if
any English man and a Spaniard fell out, the English should be favored and the
Spaniard punished, which he caused to be executed with such rigor as it cost
diverse Spaniardes their lives, when the English were much more in fault: and I
have heard it spoken by some of the Council at that time, that Queen Marie was
so afflicted diverse times with this partiality of the kings toward the
English against his own nation; as it cost her many a bitter tear for very
compassion and shame.

And so much the more was she moved therewith for that she saw many English,
partly upon this indulgence of the kings, The usage of English toward Span.
in Q. Mariestyme
and partly for that being secretly heretics, they had auersion and hatred to
the Spanish nation, to abuse themselves intollerably in offering most inhumane
and barbarous injuries unto them: No Spaniard could walk by night (nor scars
by day alone) but he should be either wounded, or thrust between two or three
swashbucklers, that attended particulerly to those exercyses, and so put in
danger of his life. Villainous words were ordinary salutations to them in the
streets, as also often times in churches, but no remedy was to be had, nor
would any man bear Witness lightly in behalf of the Spaniard against the
English though the injury were never so manifest. If any thing were to be
bought in the market, the Spaniard must pay dooble for it, and for that most
Spaniardes drunk water, they must buy it also dearly in many places, if they
would drink it, and often could not have it for money, and diverse wells were
said to be poisoned of malice thereby to destroy the Spaniardes. Many devises
were used to draw Spaniardes into private houses, and familiarity was offered
them to that end, and if any entered to talk with the wife, daughter or servant
(as they were thought prope^se in that kind) then rushed forth the husband
father brother or master, that lay in wait with other catchpoles of the same
conspiracy to apprehend them, and to threaten death or imprisonment except
they redeemed themselves with good store of money. And I have heard from the
mouth of a great noble man a Spaniard that was in England at that time and now
is a Vyceroy under the king that some English would send their wives and
daughters of purpose into the fields where Spaniards walked, to allure them to
talk with them, and thereby to entrap them and get money from them.

I omit to name more violent means of taking purses and plain roberies and
other like arts to get the Spaniards money from them by force, which yet were
many and some most barbarous and shameful to our nation, and the mention and
memory thereof makes us blush when in other countries we are told of them, as
namely this that follows which my self have heard recounted from a nobleman
himself that is yet alive, to wit, The Count of fre^tsalida robbed pretily in
England.
the old Count de Fuensalida cheef steward at this day of the kings household,
who being in England with the king made a great supper one night to diverse
noble men of his nation, and to some others, and being at the table merry and
fearing nothing (as in a peaceable and civil commonwealth, it seemed he had no
cause) there came rushing in, some twenty or thirty maskared good fellows
with their swords drawn, and commanded that no man should stir under pain
of death, and so kept them all at the table, and their servants shut up into
diverse houses of offices where they were found, until the thieves had ransaked
the whole house, and packed up the silver plate that was in store, and so
departed.

And these are the heroical acts and honorable histories which these noblemen
and other strangers do recount of the civility and courtesy of our
countriemen toward Spaniards in those days which being objected unto us in
all forayne nations where we travail (the french also recounting as bad or
worse done to them, to whom at that time we were open enemies) it cannot but
make modest Englishmen ashamed, and their ears to burn in respect of the
dishonor of our country, as also to consider what fine fruits, First fruits
of new ghospellers.
our new ghospel then freshly planted, and yet in the bud began to bring forth:
for that all this hatred and barbarous usage toward Spaniards and other
Catholic forayners, rose principally upon the difference of religion lately
begone within our realm, and these lads as the first professed proselites
thereof upon heat and zeal committed these holy actions, as the first fruits
of so heavenly a seed. But since that time we have had much larger experience
thereof, and I presume that most men's minds in England are sufficiently
cleared in this case, and if not, let them behold the behaueour of Sir Francis
in this libel, who is an ancient branche of that plantation.

And so having seen the state of matters how they stood at that time, and in
particular what king Philip had promised to do, and what he was bound to do,
and then what in deed he performed really while he was among us (which was more
in deed then either he promised or had obligation to perform, as has been
showed) let us hear now what Sir Francis says he would have done if he
could, or if his abode had been longer in England. The tale shall go in his own
words for better declaring his spirit. Thus then he writes.

This marriage was sought for and intended also in show only to strengthen the
hand of the Queen of England, A discourse of Sir Francis, of King Philip secret
meaning.
to bring in the Romish religion and government into this land, and to
establish it with continuance, with purpose and meaning to ad strength to all
the corners of Christendom to continue Popery where it was, and to bring it
in, where it was not, that so the Arche-prelate of Rome might hold the scepters
and power of all princes and potentates of Christendom in his hand, to dispose
a^ his pleasure: but the plottes and practices laid and pursued by the Spanish
king, had made a woeful proof to England of a further mark shot at (which was
discovered in a letter to some of our nobles, from a true hearted Englishman in
Spain) had not God almighty in his rich mercy prevented their purposes, and
defeated them in their determinations, as it shall appear hereafter, etc.

This is the preface and entrance which Sir Francis makes to the discovery he
promises of great hydden mysteries, about plottes and practices not only laid,
but also pursued by king Philip while he was in England, which never came to
light until this day, though at that time they were discovered (as he says)
in a letter to some of our nobles, from a true hearted Englishman in Spain.
But for the credyt of so new and weighty, and incredible a secret, it had been
good he had named the parties and particularities thereof, as well who wrote as
also who received that letter. For first the Englishman in Spain though he
were true hearted to the faction of S. Francis side (to wit, to the
Protestants) yet might he perhaps not be so true handed or true tongued at
that time, or so truly informed of things, or of that authority, that this
his letter or report may bear credyt in so great a business against so great
men, it being taken up perhaps at tauerns or port towns and market places by
some merchantes servant or factor, or other like wandering compaignon, as well
tipled with Spanish seck as with English heresy, who might wryt these news
from Spain of K. Philip as John Nicols the minister brought and printed from
Rome, and Italy, in our days, of the Pope and Cardinals.

And that this discovery (if any such were, and that the tale be not wholly
forged by Sir Francis himself) could have no better ground then that I have
said, The letter out of Spayn discredited.
to wit, the report of some vulgar people, or the conjecture of some
particular discoursiue head, as is evident in it self, for that this being a
most secret designement and drift of the king himself, and of his privy
Council, who were all at that day remaining in England, and had this project
within their own breasts only; how could it be discovered by an Englishman
from Spaynerthink you.

Again the nobles in England to whom he says the letter was written, might
be such, as probably it may be judged to have been written of purpose to feed
their humors, or to comfort them in those days, or that themselves did procure
it to be written and sent for their credit, or that themselves devised it in
England, to make thereby the Spaniards more odious and their doings more
suspected; L. Courtenay
and to draw by this means more English after themselves to impugn the present
state and government: as when the lord Courtenay Earl of Deuonshyre for
missing the marriage of Queen Marie, began to practice, and to think of
leaving the land upon coffeehouse, and when the Carewes and other of that
crew fled the realm for conspiracies, to the same effect, The Carevves.
such a letter was much to their purpose. But I shall not need to call in
reasons and circumstances for showing the vanity of this letter, for that the
manifest and shameless falshoodes which it relates, will easily discover the
forgerie, as also the forge it self, from which it proceeds: I will follow
then the continuation of Sir Francis narration, in his own words.

Now to proceed (says he) to lay open the right mark that in deed this king
shot at, A malicious forgerie against King Phil.
though when he made way to join in marriage with Queen Marie, he made
semblance of great conscience to Catholic religion, and great care to bring
the whole land into the obedience thereof, and seemed to glory much when it was
brought to pass, as his letter to his holy father at Rome written out of
England does make show, wherein he expresses what a worthy work he had
done, when he had drawn the nobles and commons of the land to submit
themselves to his holiness as their cheef (those are his words) yet little did
the nobles and commons know what was intended toward them by this catholic
child of Rome, for under this colorable name of catholic religion, was
hidden the ambitious humor of a most proud usurping tyrant, whose resolution
was upon mature deliberation and consultation with his machiuilian counselors
to seek by all the possible kind means he could, to win the principal of our
Nobles to affect him, and in their affection to possess him of the crown, and
so to establish him in an absolute power over poor England, and to bring this
to pass, he decreed to spare neither cost nor kindenes, etc.

Hitherto is the asseueration of Sir Francis concerning king Philips intention
to gain our crown, but never a syllable more of proof then you have heard
before, to wit, his own word and bare assertion: which he taking to be
sufficient, passes over presently to explicate and exaggerate the dangerous
effects that would have ensued upon us when the king should have gotten his
pretense.

But I must pull him by the sleeue and request him to stay, and prove a little
better, that the king had this intention to get the kingdom as he says, for
if it were a mature deliberation and consulted also with his counsel in England
(as this discouerer says) then some act and monument belike is extant to
testify the same, or at leastwise some witness, or other firm argument fit to
prove it, or if not, how could the true hearted Englishman know it in Spayn,
and write it to the Nobles of England? Or with what face can our rash and
falstongued English knight profess to know it now, and to write it so
confidently? Shall so great, so grievous, so heinous a slander, against so
mighty, so munificent, so bountiful a Monarch, pass out to the world, upon a
bare assertion and malignant interpretation of one English hastie-hote-spurre,
that shows malice in every syllable, and turns even the kings love and
favors to our nation, and his expenses and benifits toward our people, unto a
deceitful meaning? And upon that, without other act of hostility on his part
appearing, shall he be called ambitious and proud usurping tyrant? Who sees
no^ that this fellow in steed of discovering the kings malice bewrays his
own, and in place of proving the king an usurping tyrant, does show himself a
shameless sicophant.

But let us see what effects he says, had like to have ensued, upon this
devised designment of the king.

If once (says he) this king had obtained the crown, then as in the letter of
discovery is laid open) the council table must be filled with his Councelors,
Feigned effects of an imagined usurpation.
the haven towns must be possessed with governors of his appointing,
fortifications must be made by his direction, soldiars of his own must be
placed in garrison at



A taste whereof (of these intolerable taxes) I will give you (says Sir
Francis) as that for every chimney and other place to make, fire in, as ouens,
fornaces, Smiths forges, and such others, a frinch crown was yearly paid to
him. He had also powling pence for all manner of corn, bread, beef, mutton,
capons, pigges, geese, hens, ducks, chicken, butter, cheese, eggs, aples,
pears, nuttes, beer, wine, and all other things whatsoever he feed^th upon:
yea no farmer, yeo-man, or husbandman durst eat a capon in his house if his
friend came to him, for if he did it must cost him six shillinges eight pence,
though the capon was not worth twelve pence; and so toties quoties: and these
be the benifits and blessings that this catholic king sought to bring in
hither by his absolute authority sought for.

If a man did not see these things written and printed with Sir Francis
Hastinges name unto them, he would never imagine a man of his name, About taxes
paid to the King of Spain.
house, and calling, would publish such childish toys and manifest untruths
to the world. For who is there that has travailed Spain (as many Englishmen
have done in these our days) which knows it not to be an open shameless lie,
that for every place to make fire in, as oven, furnace, and the like, a french
crown is to be paid? In the kingdoms of Castil and Andaluzia there is no such
paiments at all, in Aragon and Catalonia, there is some like tribute instituted
by old kings, before these states were united to the crown of Castile: but
neither is it so much as this wise man sets down, nor do they pay for every
place of making fire, but one only fire is accounted to one howshold, though
the people have twenty fyers within it.

Touching his powling pence upon things that are sold, there is in the
foresaid kingdoms of Castile an old rent of the crown, instituted by ancient
kings called Alcaualla, The tribu^ of Alcaualla.
containing a certain tribute upon things that are sold and bought, but this
tribute is not paid in all Spain, and namely not in Biscay, Nauar, Portugal,
Aragon, Catalonia, nor in the kingdom of Valencia: and much less in forayne
kingdoms and states under the Spaniardes, as Naples, Sicilia, Sardinia or
M^llan. Nor in Castillia it self is it exacted with the rigor that this fellow
forgeth, but every town and city agrees in great for this tribute by the
year, nor does it descend to such minute things as he recounteth up, and much
less to beer whereof there is little use in Spain, and the simple fellow would
needs feign his account after the English manner, but among other toys the
lie of six shillinges eight pence forfeyture for eating a capon toties quoties,
is so notorious, as it may win the whetstone: and the very phrase it self
discovers the forgerie, for that the Spaniardes have no coin answering to
our noble or six shillinges eight pence, consequently it is not probable that
they would appoint such a penalty as they can hardly in whole money make up,
the account. But let us see somewhat more of this kind of cosinage.

My author (says he) does further unfold this kings treacherous purpose
toward this land, A shamles tale.
by discovering upon his own knowledge and hearing, his intention to be, by
little and little to root out the nobility, and to keep the commons in
beggerie, and not to suffer one to live here, that was borne in twenty years
before, but either to destroy them, or to make them slaves among the Moors,
the color whereof was because they were borne out of the Catholic church of
Rome. And to make up the measure of all impiety, and the faster to set his
crown upon his head from removing (if he had gotten it) he laid his plot to
destroy our dear Sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth, having decreed with
himself, that neither she nor any of that cursed nation (so he termed it and
yet the Popes holiness had absolved it) should govern England any more. But
blessed be God who has blessed us with the life and reign of our blessed
Queen, who I trust shall live to give him such a deadly blow as neither his
cursed self nor any of his cursed nation (justly so to be called, because the
Pope that cursed man of sin has blessed them (shall ever see the day to rule
in England.

And thus you see that under the color of this marriage salvation of souls
seemed to be sought for, but in deed destruction both of our bodies and souls
was pursued, etc. for without regard of sex, age, or degree, all were destined
to slavery and bondage at the least, howsoever they escaped with life.

This is your sottish and impudent narration Sir Francis, for what can be more
sottish then to say that your wise author before named, discovers upon his
own knowledge and hearing, that the kings intention was to root out the
nobility, The improbabilitie of the calumniation.
to oppress the commonaltie, to slay or send to Barbary for slaves all that
were born within twenty years before? If your author knew this of his own
knowledge, how say you also by hearing? and if he heard it of others, how could
he know it of his own knowledge? But whatsoever you say, how could he in
Spain discover so great a secret that lay in the kings breast in England?
Besides this, how incredible are the things in themselves that he recounteth?
namely that dream or old wives tale of making all slaves within twenty years
old? of which number and within which age he had taken diverse already into his
se^uice in England and used singular courtesy unto them and one of his Grandes
in Spain, (to wit, the Count after Duke of Feria) had married an English lady,
Duchess of Feria.
that as I guess was within the compass of that age, or not much a^boue it at
that day, and should all these have been sent think you to Barbary together?
Impudency then it is in this fond knight to allege such improbable and
palpable lies out of an author without name, and much more lack of shame is it
to avouch them himself for truths, and to add other fables that are yet more
monstrous, as of the kings destining to slavery and bondage not only those
before mentioned that were borne within the space of twenty years, but of all
other English also (as this man says) without regard of sex, age, or degree,
and that he used to call our nation cursed, even then when the Popes holiness
had absolved it, who will give ear or credit to such absurd inventions?

And further, King Phil. sought not Queen (...) destruction.
to fill up (says he) the full measure of his impiety, he had laid his plot
to destroy and make away the lady Elizabeth now Queen, whereas all the world
notwithstanding knows the king to have been at that day her cheifest stay and
defense, as before I have showed at large in the third encounter, as also that
very little plotting of the kings behalf would have served at that time to
have wrought his will, if he had wished her destruction, for the manifold
reasons that there I have alleged, he fynding her in disgrace and in prison at
Woodstock when he came into England, and hardly pressed about wyats
insurrection, from the peril whereof and other like assaults he espetially
deluiered her, and procured her return to the court again: and consequently I
said there, and here I repeat it again, that it is most barbarous ingratitude
in this uncivil knight to pay the careful protection of her person, which his
Majesty yealded to her grace in those days of her distress, with these
intolerable slanders, and outrageous false criminations now, and that no modest
man can cease to wonder how so infamous a libel could be suffered by supreme
authority to pass to the print, espetially containing diverse other personal,
reprochefull, contempteous, and villainous calumniations against so great and
potent a prince, as the king catholic of Spain is.

And namely that where this good fellow having told a story how one Fabritius
the Roman Captain refusing the poisoning of his enemy Pirrhus) that was
offered to him for money, by his physician, he sent the said physician bound to
Pirrhus himself, and then he adds this illation.

But the king of Spain dealt not so with the Queen our mistress when her
poysonable portugal physician Lopus would have poisoned her, for from such
hopes he takes heart, etc.

By which words he would have men to imagine that his catholic Majesty had
either hired Lopus to do that fact (if any such matter was indeed intended) or
at least that he was privy and consenting to it, About lopus the Physitia^
for how otherwise could he have warned the Q. of the danger intended? and yet
it is manifest that no such matter was ever or could probably be known to the
king of Spain. Neither did ever Lopus give any such signification or suspicion,
at his death, or before, of the king of Spaines priuitie: nor was he a man to
have correspondence in Spayn, being known to be a Jew in religion and fled
from those parts, and was enemy to the king in all respects as well touching
religion as the afaires of Portugal, and only England is the receptacle of
such people at this day: nor had his catholic Majesty any Ambassador or
other agent or correspondence in England, to plot such treaties: nor ever was
it heard, that he would hearken to such base ways of revenge upon his enimyes.
And therefore all this put together does make it more then Turkish impiety to
put in print such infamous stuff against the Majesty of so high a prince by
name, without any proof at all, as though there were no God, no conscience, no
judgment, to make account unto: nor any respect in earth to be held to such as
are in lawful authority, which yet our dreaming knight himself alitle before
will needs prove out of S^ Peeter and S. Paul, to be due to such princes as he
likes to assign it, In the 6. Encounter.
even in spiritual and ecclesiastical matters belonging to the soul, and
consequently also to an other tribunal, so unconstant and mutable are these
good fellows, not only in their sayings and doctrines, but also in their
actions, as led wholly by passion and interest, and referring all to times,
persons, and occasions, serving their turns and commodities.

And thus much have I thought convenient to be answered to the malicious
calumniations of this sla^derous wach-word-giuer, against the noble and
renowned nation of Spanyardes, and their most Catholic, pious, wise, and
potent king, whose excellent virtues are greater then by my pen can be
expressed, and his love and favors to our nation such and so many (especially
in this extreme affliction and banishment of catholics) as no gratitude of
ours can equal, nor make due recompense, in the state we stand in, and
therefore must leave it to our posterity.

And albeit for the present there be wars and hostility between our nation
and our prince and theirs, The conclusion.
and that especially in respect of religion, yet our trust is, and our prayers
are continually to our everlasting God of peace that he will once finish well
that controversy, to all our comfortes and benefits.

And in the mean space I do presume so much of the good natures and civility
of most protestants in England, that they allow not of such bitter and barbarous
proceeding, as Sir Francis Hastinges has used to his own discredit, and
dishonor of our nation in these malignant calumniations against so modest a
prince. In which respect also, I have bin somewhat the bolder to give him his
check, with more freedom and feruor. I pray God it may do him the good I wish,
or at least keep others from being deceived by him.

THE REMISSION OF THE WHOLE ANSWER TO THE IVDGEMENT and arbitrament of the
Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Council, with the ansvverers opinion and
petition for the ending of these dissentions and controversies.
ANd now (right honorable) having brought to an end so much as I thought
expedient to be answered at this time to Sir Francis Hastinges injurious libel,
none occurred more fit unto me to have the first sight, and view and judgment
of the whole, then your Lordshippes: who though in the controversy it self
between him and his and us and ours, I cannot expect to have you equal judges
nor indifferent arbiters (you professing the religion you do) yet in the manner
of prosecution thereof, I presume so much of the good parts that God has
endued your Lordshippes withal, as I dare remit the arbitrament to your
selves, to whom if this railing wachword had been first presented before it was
punished (as in right it ought to have been, you being by office the wachme^ of
that commonwealth, and not Sir Francis who intrudeth himself) I think verily
that either it had been wholly stopped and repressed, or at least wise so
moderated, as it should not have given the offense that it has and will do,
for unto grave men such troblesome sticklers as these are ever commonly (and
ought to be) ungrateful and suspected, and unto wise Councelours and honorable
persons such railing and slanderous tongues, are contemptible and odious, and
to all good natures and civil conditioned men (be they of what estate or
profession soever) such base detractions and contumelious fictions (as here you
have heard) are insufferable, and rather severely to be punished, then any way
to be permitted.

But yet so much the more in this case of ours, where the injury is not
offered only to your own home-born subjects (whom yet in all rightful quarrel
your place requires that you protect and defend) but also to great and potent
anointed princes, with whom you have had, and may have again most honorable
freindship hereafter, and negotiation in important and weighty afaires, and
whose honors you ought not to permit injuriously to be violated, by the passion
and rage of any particular man, which cannot after make recompense, with any
humane ability that he has (though his life also should go therein) for the
hurt ensewing thereof.

Diverse authors do note that the cheef flame of that furious hatred which grew
to be implacable afterward betwixt Marius and Sylla, Effects of yuel tongues.
Pompey and Caesar in the Roman commonwealth was inkindled first by certain
opprobrious speeches uttered by some followers of those Princes, which yet the
parties injured, interpreted to come from their patrons that bare them out, and
thereof followed such wars, murders, and other lamentable tragedies, as all
the world can well remember. And our English chronicles do also make mention
that some reproachful words cast out by King Harold against Duke William of
Normandy and his daughter (whom he had promised to take to wife) stirred him
chiefly to make that fatal army, by which he conquered England, and brought
all the English nation in to his subjection. As also an other scof uttered by
king Phillip of France against the same William now king, touching his fat
belly, cost France full dear, and many thousand men their lives of both sides:
so impacient are princes commonly of contumelyes, and do easier remit and forget
any other kind of injury then reprocheful speeches.

Wherefore my first petition to your Lordships wisdom and moderation should
be, to restrain such turbulent spirits as those are, which more of a mad and
malicious kind of wantonness, then of wit, do loose their tongues with over
much liberty against the honors of mighty Catholic princes abroad: and
thereby do put in adventure to trooble the waters of commonwealths more
deeply, then either themselves or others can easily calm again afterward.

My next desire and humble supplication should be in the same matter, A
supplication to the Council for moderation.
but of far more moment, that your Lordships by this occasion, and by some fit
concurrance of times and business which at this present, may seem to offer
themselves, would voutsafe to enter more seriously into the consideration of
matters depending between your Lordships and the Catholic part of her
Majesty's subjects, who for many years have had a hard conceyt and heavy hand
born over them, and are brought to terms of extreme affliction: and that your
Lordships as fathers of your commonwealth, would resolve at length to be
mediators unto her Majesty (contemning the dangerous and seditious eggings of
unquiet spirits to further extremity) for some more gentle, mild, and
merciful course to be taken with them. Unto which resolution me thinks, that
many circumstances might justly move your Lordships wisdoms, which though by
the same wisdom you will better consider of then I, yet for that it may be I
desire it more then you, and consequently have more thought thereon (albeit
more for your good also and the public, then for any particular interest of
mine own) I shall with your good leave represent some before you in this place.

And first of all, the time it self does seem to inuit greatly to some such
cogitation, Reasons for moderation
when great princes and monarchies round about us, that had greater differences
and difficulties then these are, have not only treated but concluded also a
most honorable peace and friendship: and the great most Christian King of
France, showing himself worthy of that name, has remedied the very root of
al calamities springing to his noble realm before, by returning to the union
of the Apostolic sea of Rome, which sea (as commonly it falls out) has been
the principal means of this so great and general a good to all those nations
that are included within that peace and league, which are many and great as by
the articles thereof does appeer. And no less courteously and honorably is her
Majesty invited also to the same, and all that desire the true good both of
her person, state, and crown, do wish and hope that it may take effect. And
truly never could this weighty afaire be treated (as it seems) with more
honor or facility then at this present instant, times and matters standing as
they do: and so fit a means and mediator, as is the mighty king of France
occurring for the purpose, potent and grateful with all the extremes. For with
England and her Majesty, he cannot but be so, in respect of matters and
frendships past: with Spain he is also to be presumed now, by means and virtue
of this new peace and great league concluded, with his holiness of Rome, all
christendom knows him to be, as well in respect of his being a catholic,
as also for many particular and extraordinary tokens of love, which his
holiness has showed toward his person.

The persons also and qualities of the parties with whom this atonement is or
were to be treated, Qualities of the princes to be dealt vvithall.
are such as do greatly facilitate the enterprise, and confirm the hope, that
all men have of good success.

For if for many ages God have placed in the seat of Saint Peeter, Pope Clement
viij.
a meek, mild, sweet, and holy man, this Pope Clement the eight is one, known
to be a man without gawle, enmity wrath or revenge, of singular piety and
zele in Gods cause, and most tender hearted toward them that are out of the
way, especially in heresy, of whom he suffers diverse with his own
particular license to come to Rome, and to his own presence, and uses them
with all manner of courtesy and fatherly tenderness, dismissing them again with
much kindenes, and diverse benefits, as by experience we have seen.

As for the king Catholic of Spain, who knows him not to be Solomon
pacificus, K. Phillip.
that peaceable and wise Solomon of this our age? who not only has bin
peaceable in himself during the time of his so long a government, offering
molestation and war to none (except provoked in his own defense) but also
has kept diverse other states round about him in peace likewise, as by those of
Italy has bin manifestly seen upon diverse occasions: and as for his facility
to make peace, where any reasonable conditions are offered, it has bin
sufficiently seen in this, lastly made with France, with restoring of so many
important towns and states which he possessed of that crown and for his
constancy in keeping peace once made, all former times of his reign have
given testimony, and so will this (I doubt not) and the future time also in
preserving inuiolably this peace now knit up with the king most christian, and
his alyes and dependants.

So as with neither of these princes is there any cause of dout either of great
difficulty, or of fraud or of breach, if this treaty might be concluded: and
much less of the dutiful behaueour of English Catholics both at home and
abroad, if it please her Majesty and your Lordships to come to some moderation
and peaceable manner of proceeding with them. The Catholics of England their
cheef desire
In which point their first and highest desire should be, that almighty God
would inspire her Majesty and your Lordships to think upon the honorable,
godly, and prudent course which the most Christian king of France has taken of
late; to wit, by re^^iting himself and his kingdom again with the sea
Apostolic of Rome, mother of all true union among Christians, for that by
this act only all difficulties and ielousies, both domestical and forrayn
depending of religion were ended and taken away. But if for our sins this
cannot be, or not so soon as is desired, then their humble petition will be
that at least they may have the same liberty and favor in England for their
consciences, as Protestants have in France and in other states of the Empire
at this day under catholic kings and Emperors; which petition seems so
reasonable, so easy, and so profitable to the realm it self, and so honorable
to her Majesty, and to your Lordships (who are desired to be mediators therein)
as they verily trust, that by this good occasion you will not deny to lend them
your helping hands, for so public and precious a benefyte in all respects.

And though I do not doubt but that diverse of S. Francis Hastings hot humor
will step up against this proposition, The fury of purita^ical spirits.
and cry rather fire and sword and blood against Catholics, then any
toleration or relaxation; yet other men's hope is, that your Lordships and
others of the wiser and grauer sort of the realm will consider and suggest to
her Majesty what reason and humanity requires, and not what the furious
passion of those men demands; who cease not to exclame with the merciless
Jews, Crucifige, Crucifige, and further also would be content for satisfying
their malice, so they might obtain like sentence of injustice against
Catholics, as the Jews did against our Saueour (espetially if they found a
fit Pilate to grant it) to cry with them, Sanguis eorum super nos, and super
Filios nostros, let their blood fall upon us and our children; and so it fell
in most heavy measure upon them, and the like will do upon these when time of
payment comes appointed by almighty God, if they change not their affection.

But your Lordships I presume be of a far different mind and condition; and
that you will rather leave peace, love, and good will of all men to your
children and posterity, then the inheritance of these enmities, exasperations,
and deadly feudes, for that blood enough (and over much if Gods will were) has
there been spent already in our realm, within these twenty years last past
about this controversy of religion: and by this long experience your wisdoms
have seen what has been the event, and what is like to be, if like proceeding
be continued still.

Saint Cyprians sentence has been manifestly verefied, Cyprian ^p. 93.
sanguis martyrum Ecclesiae semen, The effects of dying for religion in England.
by the blood of martirs the church increases. Above a hundredth and thirty
English priests of the only seminaries beyond the seas (as most men accounte)
have lost their lives in this quarrel within the foresaid time; all men of
peace, patient, and humble, learned, virtuous and meek; young in age for the
most part, but old in godliness, and in sapientia sanctorum, in the wisdom of
Saints for the life to come: a great part of them very worshipfully borne,
and tenderly brought up by their parents, and might have lived many years in
great delights and pleasures of this world, if the love of eternity had not
made this vale of vanity contemptible unto them. And albeit their death was
reprehensible in the sight of some vulgar or passionate people, that consider
nothing but the present spectacle and popular voice, that they died for
treasons; yet to themselves who remembered the false accusations made against
their master for troobling the people, Math. 21.
and for dehorting the payment of tribute unto Caesar, and other such
calumniations; and that his innocence could not deliver him, but that at last
he was preferred to die in the middle of two thieves upon a cross; to them (I
say) that remembered and did meditate these things, to them this circumstance
of treason in their araygnments was sweet and comfortable, their consciences
clearing them before their said master, from all such act, meaning or
intention of treasons, as falsely was laid against them; and so much the more
willingly they went to the ladder: and their example with the same reasons and
meditations have put the same desire in four times as many, of their own
coat, as they were: and in thowsa^des of others within the land, which would
never have thought of this perfection of dying for religion, if God had not
taught it the^ by this persecution and example of others.

And Sir Francis himself co^playneth also (as before you have heard) that
within these three years upon his knowledge many have fallen away and do fall
away daily, from his religion to ours, by example the one of the other, for
that (as he says) Of the elder ox the younger steer does learn.

So as by this may be gathered what will be the success of this pursuit on
the catholic side, if the rigor be continued. But on the other hand, what it
may come unto, God only forseeth, whose cause if the catholics do defend, and
if his spirit be with them (as to most men it is evident) then must they win
in the end, and his wrath will appear at length against the other part that
iniustly afflicts them, howsoever it be delayed and borne of for a time. Nor
is the argument good that some do use to make, we have endured thus long and
prospered, etc. For the holy ghost himself answers, Ne dixeris: p^ccaui, and
quid mihi accidit triste? Eccles. ^.
altissimus enim est patiens redditor. Say not: I have done amiss, and no
hurt has happened unto me, for that God is a patient paymayster, and in the
end pays for all. The wise Solon told rich Craesus in his prosperity that
the measure of his felicity could not be taken but at the end of his life,
Justin. lib. 3.
which in deed fell out to be most miserable: and in England king Henry the
sixth concluded a long reign of forty years with a troblesome and pitiful
perturbation of the same. And yet was there no such violent vexation of
subjects in those days as now is, and has been for many years, wherein truly
if we set aside all respect of religion and of Gods intermedling in the case,
and consider only reason itself, and the opinion of wise wordly men and
Philosophers, no man is ignorant but that they agree all, that: nullum
violentum est durabile. And again, that: malus di^turnitatis custos, Cicero
off. lib. 2.
est metus. And Christ our Savior much more fully: Luc. 11.
Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur. All which grounds and principles,
cannot, but lay before your Lordships wisdoms the importance of some
mitigation and mollification of matters for preventing further inconveniences,
The dangers after her Maisties death.
if not for the present, yet at least for the time to come, espetially if God
in his justice and anger should take from us her majesty, all men may forsee
in what terms we shall be quickly; when to the differences of religion shall be
added the other also about the succession, entangled perhaps principally by
these respects of religion. And then when exasperated minds shall come to have
more commodity of working their wills, and wreaking their wrathes, great
extremities may be feared, except the way be made before hand by some
temperature of mitigation: for that English natures are vehement (as all men
know) in whatsoever they take in hand, but espetially in these kind of
differences, as former times have made lamentable experience, and the future I
fear will declare the same much more, if prevention be not made; seeing that
never in times past concurred so many circumstances of sharp contention both
from at home and abroad, as now are like to be: no foreign prince being near
about us but will be desirous to have an oar in the guyding of this bark if once
it be aflote, either for their own pretenses or for their friend, or against
their opposite: besides the different reasons of state that may move diverse
parties at that day, as France, Fla^dres, and De^mark, that our future king be
not ouerstro^g, Spain, France, and Fla^ders, that he co^cur with them in
religion: England generally that he subject us not to an other crown; England
in part that he be homeborne; and England in three parts to the favor or
disfavor of three distinct religions, Protestant, Puritan, and Catholic,
every part for his own.

And as these things are manifest in themselves, so is it also no less
evident, that the only or principal mean to prevent these dangers, were to
mittigate somewhat these acerbities now, to the end that men of different
religions dealing more freindly together, might in time either come to be all
of one opinion, or at leastwise to agree in some good temperature for this
public afaire of the commonwealth, which is impossible to do while matters
of religion are pursued with such hostility, as for many years they have bin.

To which consideration there comes also an other of no less moment in mine
opinion, which is, that her Majesty having reigned now a goodly number of
years (being near the one and forty of her scepter) as she follows fast on
the rate of Octauianus Augustus years of Empire, The example of Aug. and other
kings.
so would she imitate his sweetness and felicity also in disposing his later
years (even from the number of forty that her Majesty is now at) to the
exhilerating of all her people generally as he did, and thereby came to be so
dear, and so entirely beloved of all, as the public tears of all did
testify at his death, all crying and wishing, that either he had never bin
borne, or never dyed, never bin their Emperor, or never left to be, referring
the former part of their wish unto the beginning of his government, which had
bin prejudicial to their common wealth, and the second to his latter end, which
was most grateful to all.

And this particular point of Augustus his proceeding, Kings of England.
diverse noble, kings also of her Majesty's progenitors have endeavored to
imitate by special dissignement, and namely the two famous Henryes the fourth
and seventh, and Edward also the fourth, who albeit they entered by dint of
sword, and had many sharp bickerings for diverse years, with their oposite
factions, yet all three of them so disposed themselves to clemency toward
their later days, as they were most dear even to them that had bin their
enemies, and oposit at their first entrance to the crown.

Which circumstance notwithstanding of difficulty, does not occur to her
Majesty in the matter proposed for favor of the Catholics, for that she
neither entered the crown by force of arms, nor had she the catholics of
her realm against her therein, In the 6. encounter.
but rather they were the people that principally and with most hearty affection
assisted her Majesty to the quiet and peaceable possession of the same, as in
another place more at large has bin declared. And ever since they have lived
with that dutiful obedience to her Majesty in all temporal matters, which to
any of her catholic ancestors has ^uer bin exhibited by their dearest people.

Wherefore seeing there is no difficulty nor demerit on the behalf of the
catholics why this benifit should not be granted to the^, who were in
possession of it at the entrance of her Majesty to the crown, and had express
promises to have it continued still: and on the other side, there be many and
most weighty reasons to move her Majesty to have compassion of them, and to
aleuiate their grievous pressures and vexations after so many years of
sufferance, your Lordships have the most honorable, just, and pious cause in
the world, wherein to be mediators to her Majesty for so principal a part of
your commonwealth, as your catholics be.

And for so much as this cause has not only these three parts specified of
piety, justice, and honor, to move your Lordships withal (which yet I presume
would to such men be sufficient) but also includes so many other like
perswasiue motives, as either prudence or christian reason of state can
comprehend (as namely security, continuance, strength, union, peace, defense,
utility, comfort, ease, ornament, alacrity, facility, and the like) great
hope is conceived that your Lordships will not refuse to embrace the same.

And surely (my lords) the same reasons and many more might justly move her
Majesty and your Lordships also to take in hand the perfection of that
greatest work, The example of King Henry the eight, and the King of France.
so earnesty thought upon by her Majesty's noble father King Henry the eight in
his later days, as before you have heard, by the public protestation and
other of Bishop Gardener, his nearest and dearest Councelor in those days. And
you have in the same matter the present example and president of the great king
and kingdom of France, In the 3. encounter.
which most wisely and happily has followed the same resolution, and has
found infinite ease, honor, and benefyte thereby, both before God and man: and
it is and will be of great consequence in Christianity, and ought no doubt to
move her Majesty and your Lordships much. Yet for that the hearts of Princes
are in the hands of God to be moved, when to his divine wisdom, mercy, and
justice shall be thought best, and for that the sins of our country are great
and manifold, which have brought forth so grievous afflictions upon our selves
by our selves: if the multitude of these our demerits be such as do hinder so
great and universal a blessing as would be for us to see her Majesty and the
realm re^nited again to that spiritual fountain of the sea^ Apostolic by
which all perfect vnion^ must ensue, yet in a secondarie degree of comfort is
desired, that at least the persecution for religion may cease against
Catholics, and they be suffered to live in the religion wherein her Majesty's
noble ancestors, and your Lordships forefathers lived and dyed most
christianly, and honorably, from the first conversion of our land from
paganism to christan religion even unto these our days. An important
consideration.
The memory of which your progenitors now dead, and of their souls yet living
and what sense and feeling they have of these things, and what they would say
to you and do in this behalf, if they were here again to see men afflicted and
pursued for that faith and religion which they so much esteemed and sought to
advance, and by which we cannot but piously presume and hope, that they be now
saved and made partakers of Christ's everlasting glory, with whom we can never
have part nor fellowship again, if we follow not their steps in the same
religion, this cogitation (I say ought greatly to move your Lordships to do
somewhat in this so weighty and important suit of the afflicted catholics.

And further I appeal to your Lordships wise consideration what a comfort it
might be to her Majesty, now in her elder age, and later part of her
government, and to your Lordships also to see once all sorts of people merry,
contented, loving, and confident within the realm, A joyful state.
al to laugh and sing together, all to pray to God most heartily for her
Majesty's health, wealth, and prosperous long continuance; al to be united in
defense of the realm; all made friends and familiar together, as in Germany
and other places men be, notwithstanding the differences of religion, which
more easily perhaps would be taken away and union brought in; when freely and
confidently men might confer, and each man show his reason without fear, and
hear another man's argument without suspicion of fraud or violence to be used.

This was the first proposition that Protestants made unto the world at their
first appearance, which they accompanied with many scriptures and reasons both
divine and humane that faith ought not to be forced. The first proposition of
Protestants in the world.
They have obtained in sundry countries their petition, and therefore cannot in
reason and honor be against the same petition now made by Catholics to her
Majesty and to your lordships in England: and that with so much more equity
and justice, by how much longer Catholics have been in possession of their
Religion, then Protestants of theirs, especially within England.

Your Lordships have had many years experience now of the present manner of
proceeding by affliction of Catholics, where one part of the land has wept,
while the other has laughed; the one sort sighed, while the other singed, the
one triumphed, while many others have mourned, complained, and exclaymed: let
some proof be made of the other way also, whereby contentme^t is given to all,
let it be tried once in her Majesty's days how matters will go when all
emnitie and hostillitie is taken out of the bowels of our commonwealth, when
the catholic man and woman in England may deal with their neighbor in love
and confidence; when our noble and worshipful gentlemen abroad may return
home, and show their loyal duties to their Sovereign without offense or peril,
or force offered to their conscience for matters of religion; when our English
merchantes may traffic freely throughout the world without peril of piracie
or confiscations, when our home gentlemen may travel with like liberty where
it seems them best for increase of their experience to serve their country,
when our English students may visit forrayne universities without restraint,
and strangers come to ours and speak, confer, dispute, and reason with
modesty without danger of intrapping.

Let this (my good Lords) be proved for a time, and let your honors as
principal members of this afflicted body of our divided realm, be suitors unto
her Majesty, as to the head, for this sweet and wholesome medicine by peace and
composition within it self.

Whereby there is no doubt but much honor and m^^it will grow unto your
Lordships, much comfort, ease, and security, to her Majesty, much joy and
utility unto all her subjects, much edification unto our neighbors about us,
much care and solicitude be taken away from all sorts of English, much trooble
and charges of wars excused, much strength added to the commonwealth, many
perils diuerted, both for the present, and the time to come, many benefits and
benedictions insew every way, if I be not deceived: which yet I leave to the
high and most holy inscrutable providence of almighty God, to determine at his
pleasure, and to your Lordships wisdoms to consider with due maturitie.

And so most humbly I take my leave. This first of September 1598.


