THE First part of Pasquils Apology.

Wherein he renders a reason to his friends of his long silence: and gallops
the field with the Treatise of Reformation lately written by a fugitive, John
Penrie.

Printed where I was, and where I will be ready by the help of God and my
Muse, to send you the May Game of Martinisme for an intermedium, between the
first and second part of the Apology.

Anno. Dom. 1590.

THE FIRST PART OF PASQVILS APOLOGY.
IF it be a vanity and vexation of heart, for a man to toil in his life to
gather-treasure, when he knows not whither he be wise or foolish that shall
inherit it: we may think the sweat of our spirits to be somewhat frivolous,
which write and print, when we cannot tell whether they will prove sober or
frantic to whom we leave the possession of our labors. It is now almost a
full year, since I first entered into the lystes against the Faction, promising
other Books which I keep in yet, because the opening of them, is such an
opening of waters, as will fill the ears of the world with a fearful
roaring. Were I but a dog, wise men would suffer me to bay in the defense of
mine own master, but being a lively stone, squared and laid into Gods
building, by the hands of many excellent workmen in the Church of England, when
I see the thief, and the sent of Church-robbers is in my nosthrils, shall I
not lay out my throat to keep them off?

I know, that since the beginning of all these broils in our Church of
England, not only the L. Archb. of Canterbury in his learned works, but many
other reverend, religious, and worthy men, both at Paules-crosse, and the
Pulpits in City and Country, have with great skill and sobriety, touched
every string of the holy scriptures, and warbled sweetly, to cast out the
foul spirit of the Faction with David's harp: but their madness on the
contrary part has so increased, that their attempt is still to nail our best
men to the wall with the spear of slander.

By these events you may easily perceive what success they are like to have,
that deal with so leaden and sandy brains, he that hazards his time and cost
to teach them, adventures to waken the drowsy out of a dream, their heads
fall down the lower for the lifting up, and they defile us with dust when they
snake themselves.

I could for my part be well contented, to throw my self at their feet with
tears, and entreatie, to stop their course: that the weak (for whom Jesus
Christ has dyed,) may not see us run one at another like furious Bulls,
foming, and casting out those reproaches, which hereafter we shall never be
able to wipe away; and when we should join to encounter the common enemy,
the first view of each other, will enforce us to braule again. But seeing
sobriety will do no good, let them be well assured, that if I catch such a
brimse in my pen as I caught the last August, I will never leave flynging about
with them, so long as I find any ground to bear me. Contention is a coal,
the more it is blown by dysputation, the more it kindles, I must spit in
their faces to put it out.

Ever since the last Michelmas Term, many thousands of my friends have
looked for me, whom I am loath to enforce to loose their longing: and though in
silence I gloate through the fingers at other matters, yet am I not careless
of the quarrel now in hand. The peace of Jerusalem, which the faithful are
bound to pray for, is the only thing that has brought me to this long and
quiet pause; wherein I have set the example of David before mine eyes, seeking
with my heart a surcease of Arms, even of those that hated peace, and prepared
themselves to battle when I spoke unto them. The case so standing, I trust I
am worthy to be held excused, if I muster and train my men a new, that the
enemies of GOD, and the state wherein I live, may be stopped of their passage and
driven back, or utterly foiled in the field and ouerthrown.

My labor in this piece of service will be the less, because the bishop of my
soul, my L. Archb. of Cant. struck off the head of the serpent long agone, it
is nothing but the tail that moves now. Some small rubs, as I hear, have
been cast in my way to hinder my coming forth, but they shall not profit. It
is reported, that a student at the Law, has undertaken to be a stickler
between us all, his book is not in print, and I came a day short of the sight
of the coppie of it. For any thing I hear, he quenches the strife with a
pint of water and a pottle of fire. I little thought his leisure would have
suffered him, to have any more then a common kind of knowledge, in matters so
far removed from the course of his study, place, and calling.

They that are most conversant in the Scriptures, find the book to be shut
with many seals, it is not for every finger to break them up; the word is a
treasure kept under many locks, which are not to be opened with every key. He
only that has the key of David, has granted out a commission to the lips
of his Priests to come within it. So that if I doubt of any matter there, I
may not knock for it at the Chamber-dore of a common Counselor, but have
recourse unto them, whom God himself appointed to teach Jacob before any Inn
of court was reard. I can tell him that M. Bucer, Peter Martyr, and that
ancient Entellus of the Church of England the B. of Sarisburie, have trauast
our Church with as grave a gate as he, and found nothing in it to stumble at.
Therefore what I say to him, I say to the rest of our Reformers, whose tongues
are so busy to lick out the moates of their bretherens eyes, if they have any
wisdom in their vessels, let them be careful how they lend it out, least
that when the sudden shoute of the coming of the Bridegroom shall be given,
and every virgin would be glad to trime his own Lamp, there be not enough
for them and others.

Some other things there are that made me look back, and measure the raze I
had run already, before I bid any man the bace again. To this I was stirred
up, by the dislike that some had of the ierke which I gave to Friar Sauanarol:
o quoth one, he was the first that invented our Religion; this fellow seems to
have a Pope in his belly as big as Alexander, he would make you believe,
that our Church has borrowed the light of her Torche at a Friars Taper, which
is far otherwise. Our Religion in England is no new excrement of the brain of
man, but drawn out of the fountain of all truth, God himself, who spoke in
old time to our fathers, to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah, to Abraham, and so
downward, to the Patriarchs and Prophets that were all under the cloud, and
saw the promise a far of, which was in the latter days made manifest to us
in Jesus Christ. Our faith and Religion, is the faith and Religion of our
father Abraham, fulfilling the prophecy of Zachary, who told us before, that
all nations should take hold of the skyrte of a Jew, and say, we will go
with thee, we have heard that God is with thee. Considering what was the hope
of our fathers, and the hope of us, what was preached to them, and what to us,
our Religion may say with the Son of God; I came out of the mouth of the most
Highest.

I took another nybling like a Minew about Bezaes Icones, where you shall
find commendation is given to Sauanarol, and the fish that was strooken with
Bezas hook, is Perceuall the plain, but because his hand so shook when he
carried his coppie to the Press, that he crossed his accusation out again, I
will sheath every weapon I had drawn in my defense. Only I will give the
Readers to understand, that the commendations which either M. Fox, or M. Beza
do give to Sauanarol, are to be attributed to the best parts that were in him,
that is, to the glimmering he had of the face of God in so dark a time,
wherein he inueighed against the pride of the Court of Rome, a matter that
Petrarche the poetical Priest touched as well as he; I can show you even by
the Sermons that spunne him a halter to stop his breath, he was no Protestant.
For in some of them he taught the popish distinction of venial and mortal
sin, in some he preached merit, in some the real presence in the sacrifice
of the Mass, and in the end of his fixed Sermon made in Florence, upon the
finishing of Noah's Arc, consider what he says. Io vi voglio riuelare vno
secret: che insino a qui, non ho voluto dirlo: perch non ho haunto tanta
certezza, come ho haunto da diece hoar in qua, ciascuno di voi credo che
conoscesse el conte Giouanni della Mirandola, che staus qui in Firenze: et e
morto, pochi giorni sono. Dicoui, che l'anima sua per le orationi difrati, and
anche per alcune sue buone opere che fece in quest a vita, et per altre
orationi, e nel purgatorio. Orate pro co. etc. I will tell you (says he) a
secret, which to this day I have refused to utter, because I had no great
certainty of the matter until within these ten hours. I think every one of
you knew the County John Mirandola, which lived here in Florence, and died
within these few days. I tell you that his soul, by virtue of the prayers of
the Friars and of some good works he did whilst he lived, together with some
other prayers, is now in Purgatory, pray for him.

See here how many blaines break out of the Friar in a little space. A
revelation concerning merit, purgatory and prayer for the dead. Therefore as
S. Ierom commends Origin for his memory, labor, and sharp sight into many
places of holy Scripture, yet reproves him for his errors: so I think well
with M. Fox and M. Beza of that which was good in Friar Sauanaroll, though I
compared him with Martin for his factious head, pleading in Florence as Martin
did in England for a new government, at such a time as Arms and invasion
clattered about their ears. It may be I am of some better sent then you take
me for, and finding a Machiauellian trick in this plot of innovation, I was
the more willing to lay Sauanarols example before your eyes, that having
recourse unto Machiauell in whom it is recorded, you might see Machiauels
judgment upon the same. His opinion is, that when such a peaze may be drawn
through the noses of the people as to bear a change, the Masters of the
Faction are most happy, they may do what they lust without controlment.

I heard a byrd sing more then I mean to say, but riddle me, riddle me, what
was he that told a very friend of his, he would owe never a penny in England
in one half year? His living considered, though it were fair, the sale of
all he possessed would hardly do it, the time was so busy when he spoke it,
that no such largess could be looked for at the hands of her Ma. who had
requited every penni-woorth of duty with many a pound of favor long before:
no fingring of Spanish coin might be mistrusted: and the Philosophers stone
to turn mettles into gold, is yet to seek; I cannot devise which way so
round sums could be so readily compast, but by the spoil of Bishoprics,
Deaneries, and Cathedral Churches, which very shortly after were stoutly
pushed at. Credit me, he spoke somewhat nearer the point then himself was
ware of, for if his soul be gone the way of the just, his debt is already
canceld. Let him go, let him go, I could tell you mysteries, but there is a
whole Chamber full of sentences in the land, the very painting of the walls is
wisdom, whence I learned this lesson. Acerbum est ab eo laedi, de quo non
poteris tuto queri: it is a shrewde matter to be wrunge by him, against whom a
man cannot with any safety open his mouth to make complaint. Sure I am that
by practices and policies, the garment of Christ is torn in pieces, and the
Church is overtaken with such a flawe, that it is high time every fugitive of
the faction were hurled with Jonas into the Sea. They thunder their sentence
out of the clouds, and contrary to the rule of Gods Apostle, they take upon
them to judge men before the time. Whosoever reads the Epistle and treatise
of John Penrie concerning Reformation, shall discover this swelling and saucy
humor in him against her Majesty's right honorable privy Counsel.

I remember the wisdom of the land in a grave Oration delivered in the
Star Chamber, compared our Nobility and men of mark, to the flowers that
stand about the Princes Crown, garnishing and giving a grace unto it, to
deface any one of them, is an open injury offered to the Crown it self. How
Penrie or any Puritan, that reaches at the ornaments of the Crown, can be
faithful or dutiful to her Majesty, I leave it to the judgment even of the
meanest that is but endued with common sense. I will let pass the grave
testimony of so grave a Counselor, and set the axe of the word to the root
of this withered tree.

The great commander of the world, has appointed certain bounds and land
marks unto our lips. Exo. 22. 28. Thou shall not rail upon the Judges, nor
speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. You may resolve upon this, that there
is no time of the Moon set for us to open the Master vain. To charge her
Ma. right honorable privy Counsel, with insolency, injustice, murder in
the highest degree, yea more, the very killing and crucifying of Christ a
fresh, is nothing else but to remove the Landmarks and lymits by God
prescribed, that never a a subject hereafter might know his duty. I warrant
you the cunning Pap-maker knew what he did, when he made choice of no other
spoone than a hatchet for such a mouth, no other lace then a halter for such a
neck. Yet is Penrie become a man of law, he can frame an Indictment out of the
Psalms, against such as sit and taunte at their brethren in every corner,
when the plea may be turned upon himself, in that none have given their mouth
unto evil so much as he. Let me deal with him for it by interrogatories. Who
had the oversight of the Libell at Fawslie? John of Wales: Who was corrector to
the Press at Couentrie? John of Wales: Who wrote the last treatise of
Reformation so full of slanders, but John of Wales? Is it so brother John, can
you byte and whine? then hear thy self indicted again by Pasquill. Thou have
railed upon the Judges, and spoken evil of the Rulers of thy people: thou have
ascended above the clouds and made thy self like to the most High.

What sentence shall we look for against him now? I must set the trumpet of
Esaias to my mouth, and deliver him nothing but points of war. Thou that have
set thy throne above the stars, shall be brought down unto the grave, the
Princes shall sleep in glory, every one in his own house, but thou shall be
trodden as a carcass under feet, and every one that beholds thee shall say,
is this the iollie fellow that shook kingdoms*

Having given many hisses of the old serpent against his betters, in the
Epistle to the treatise, in the treatise it self he begins to roll up his
head within his scales, and would feign prove that Puritans be no Traitors.
Will you see his reason? Because in the treasonable attempts against her Ma.
these 31. years, no one Puritan can be showed, says he, to have had any part
in them. Is this the best proof he can affoorde us? I am so sick in the
stomache when I read it, that if some of my friends did not hold my head, I
should cast every minute of an hour; Has the Toade no poison before he spits
it, and the Scorpion no sting in his tail before he thrusts it out? Be there
no more Traitors in England then be taken? And is it such a matter as cannot be
found, that ever any Puritan became a Traitor? Without doubt he speaks like
an Island man, that imagins there be no more beasts abroad, then such as graze
upon the Mountains of Wales at home. You that are Oxford men, enquire whether
Walpoole were not a Puritan when he forsook you? and you that have travailed
answer for me, whether he be not now a Jesuit, in the Italian College of
Jesuits at Rome? a sworn servant to the Pope and counsel of Trent, read the
oath in the end of the book you that have the Counsel, and then resolve me
whether no one instance may be given of any Puritan, that in all these thirty
one years has become a Traitor? I could reckon up unto him now, what
excellent hope the English Cardinal conceiueth of a Puritan; he that has
such a dubble quartane of curiosity before he comes amongst them, will prove
passing treacherous, and passing superstitious as soon as he is burnt with the
sun of the Alps.

But give me leave a little, to search what treason may be laid to Puritanes at
home. Popish traitors hold, that they may excommunicate their King, if he
hinder the building of their Church, and he being excommunicate, they say they
are discharged of their obedience. If such a privy Fistuloe do not eat into
the hearts of Puritans at home, I refer you to the Physicians that dyscouered
this mischief before I was able to epsy it. You shall find such a matter in
the Appendix to the first treatise of the Answer to the Abstract. They pitch
Page 194. 195.
themselves upon a Law of Tenures for vassals and Lords, and would draw it out
like a wier from subjects to Princes, from which they are roundly beaten by a
learned Ciuilian in the land. Above all other, read the defense of the Answer
to the Admonition, in the whole Treatise of the Princes right in matters
Ecclesiastical, beginning Page 694. My L. Archb. of Cant. has so bruised the
Faction, and cut them in the skull, that they have lain groaning and panting,
breathing and bleeding ever since; many as blind a Surgeon as Penrie,
endeavoring to close up their wounds has made them wider, and left them all
desperate upon their death head. Considering how weak his Purgation is, let us
examine his Reformation, and try whether that be any stronger.

The first petition he makes, is for a preaching Ministry, he comes in very
late with this request, we have this already. Thousands of able Ministers in
the Church of England, number for number, no kingdom under heaven can show the
like. Nevertheless, because the reading of the word has his place in our
Church as well as preaching, it is vinegar to his teeth, and makes him very
saucy with his g. of Cant. He callengeth the Archb. for affirming reading to
be preaching, wherein my Reformer does nothing but play the Iugler, he packs
vnder-boord, and shows not how far forth the Archb. has affirmed it.
Preaching, says the reverend father, is taken two ways in the holy
Scriptures. Generally, as it signifies every kind of instruction by the word.
Acts. 15. 21. Where it is said, that Moses is preached in the Cities every
Sabbath, when Moses is read in the Cities every Sabbath. Particularly,
strictly, and usually, preaching is taken for expounding the Scriptures, and
applying the plaster unto the sore. He neither says that reading is
expounding, nor that reading is preaching, in respect of him that reads, but
in respect of Gods spyrite, which waters the word, and makes it fruitful to
conversion in us when it is read. For proof whereof the testimonies of S.
Cyprian and Ma. Fox are there produced, together with the example of S.
Augustine, who was converted by reading the latter end of the 12. chap. to the
Romans. Cyprian says, that God himself speaks unto us when the Scriptures
are read; and Ma. Fox gives in his evidence of many that in the infancy of
our Church, were brought out of darkness into light by reading, and hearing the
new Testament in the English tongue.

Penrie speaks not one word of all this, because he was built but for a
Flie-boate, to take and leave, when the skyrmish is too hot for him to tarry,
he may set up his sails and run away. It is a wonder to see with how
terrible an outcry he takes his heels, charging the Archb. to be a deceiuer,
to have his right eye blinded, and to deserve to be condemned for an Haeretick.
Tantara, tantara, is he fled indeed? let me send a Sakar after him. Is the
holy Ghost a deceiuer, that says Moses is preached when Moses is read? Is the
right eye and understanding of God put out, because he commands the message of
Jeremy to be set down in writing, and to be read unto his people? Are Christ
and the Apostle to CAP. 36.
be condemnd for Haereticks, because the one stood up in the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day to read, the other LVKE. 4. 16.
charge Timothy to give attendance to reading till he com? Was the reading
of the word when there went no 1. TIM. 4. 13.
preaching with it, no better then Swines blood before the Majesty of GOD?
How comes it to pass then that God would have it so? and why does he
attribute an effect of preaching unto reading, Iere. 36. 2 affirming that by
this means the people may hear and repent, and he may forgive them their
iniquities?

I will thresh at his shoulders before I leave him, let him make his complaint
to his Master Cartwright, and let him dress him, if he please, when I have
done with him. It is not his empty reply of empty feeders, dark eyes, ill
workmen to hasten the harvest, that shall stop my mouth. I look for
scholasticall graspes, and aunswers to so grave and weighty arguments; he may
not think to beguile mine appetite as women do their children that cry for
meat, when they give them a babble to play withal. As a man comparing the joy
of heaven with the painfulnes of fear, cannot say there is fear in heaven:
yet as fear is taken for a reverence, and admiration REVEL. 15. 3. 4.
of the works, the wonders, the justice, the truth, and majesty of God, it is
no hard manner of speech at all, to say there is fear in heaven, fear in the
holy Angels, fear in the bosoms of the blessed: so if you compare the
exposition and application that are in preaching, as preaching is strictly
taken, with the bareness of reading, in respect of the person of him that
reads, you cannot say there is preaching in reading, nor that reading is
preaching, without derogation unto preaching: yet as preaching is taken in holy
Scriptures for every kind of instruction by the word, the speech may be
swalowed with ease enough, to say there is preaching in reading, and reading is
preaching, as the Answer to the Admonition teaches you.

Though they grinne with the mouth, grind with the teeth, stamp with the
feet, and take stones with the Jews to hurl at me, this truth shall be
defended against them all. Nevertheless, I will not be their vpholder which
lie sleeping and snorting in their charges, unapt or unable to stand in the
breach, or to run between the wrath of God and the people when the plague
approaches, for I wish with my heart that every Parrish had a Watchman, who
with the tongue of the learned might call upon them: but this is such a matter
as cannot by all the Bishops in the land be brought to pass. For suppose that
all they who cannot preach could be removed, where will you find sufficient
men for so many places as would be void? If you go to our Universities, they
cannot afford you one for twenty, which matter T. C. saw well enough, when he
had no other shift to answer this, but to say he looked for help from the
Innes of Court. No doubt many excellent learned wits, and religious minds are
nursed there, and suppose the Gentleman whose unprinted book I spoke of, could
find in his heart to make such an honorable change of life, as to forsake the
bar to plead for GOD, I doubt how many hundreds would follow him.

The Church of the Land being still unfurnished, what shall we do? I know
what morsels Penrie would have before he gapes, he will cry, let them be
restored that are put to silence. If we should yield so much unto him, (though
the number of them also would not fill up the empty places) yet they must be
examined by the Apostles rule of cutting and dividing the word a right, and not
one of them should be admitted, that has not a steddie hand to cleave just
where the joint is, where would they stand trow you, which in stead of sound
doctrine to feed our souls, have given us the wine of giddines to turn our
brains? I will not trouble them at this time with their trial by the
touchstone of Contradicentes redarguere, for then I should find them so ill
appointed, that they must be thrown over the Pulpit as thick as hoppes.
Therefore Penrie began to gather his wits unto him, when he limited his
Petition to certain bounds: he would have able men in every Congregation
within England, as far as possibly they might be provided. Here his wit is
at the fullest, and presently it begins to wane again, foreseeing the
matter, though possible with God, impossible with us, it is very boldly done
of him, before he knows the way of his own spirit, to judge the spirit of
another man, and pronounce condemnation to a Bishop, before the tribunal seat
of God, where he must stand to receive sentence upon himself.

What a watch had S. Ierom before his mouth, when writing against an erroneous
Bishop (which neither all Warwick, nor all Wales, shall ever be able to prove
by the Archb. of Canterbury) with great humility and humblenes of spirit, he
said, that if the honor of the Priest-hoode, and reverence of the very name of
a Bishop did not withold him, and but that he called to mind the Apostles
answer, I knew not that he was high Priest: he confesses with what outcries
and heat of terms he could find in his heart to inueigh against him. If so
learned a Father as S. Ierom, to whom Cartwright and Penrie may go to school,
had such a respect to the place and person of the Bishop of Jerusalem, even
then when he was suspected of the haeresies of Origin and Arrius, and refused
personally to appear in a Counsel to clear himself, what a reverend regard
ought every one of us to have of the Bishops of Jesus Christ, which are and
have been the very hands, whereby God has delivered his truth unto us? He
that receives and honors them, receives and honors not them so much as him,
whose Bishops undoubtedly they are. Herein neighbor Cartwright I challenge
you of a dangerous Angina in your throat, how durst you presume to make so
loud a lie as to say the B. of Sarisburie D. Iuell, calls the doctrine of the
holy Ghost wantonness? You would Page 91. sect. 1.
make us believe, that if humanity stayed you not, you could break up his
grave and bite him being dead, whom you durst not look in the face whilst he
lived. That Bishop has a great many learned sons, first taught by him in his
house, afterward maintained by his purse in the university, they are all of
the nature of the Elephant, the more they see the blood of their Master shed,
the more their courage increases, and they break with the greater force into
the battle. They have all vowed to hale thee out of thy trenches by the head
and ears, Pasquill is the meanest of them.

Moreover brother Penru, I challenge you, and the whole rabble of your
confederates, for all your malepart, murderous, and bloody railing, against
the Archb. of Canterbury, one of her Majesty's right honorable privy
Counsel, against whom it appears your tongues are bent, to shoot still in
secret, and not to cease till satan's quiuor be spent, and no venim left, for
any Haereticke to use that shall come after you.

Assure your self, the more you revile him, the greater will his honor be,
the world sees it well enough, and such as are not able to read his works, may
justly imagine by the course you take, that whom you cannot conquer by learned
writings, you go about to kill with words. What is this, I pray you, but to
fall groueling to the earth in the questions and controversies scand between
us, and being down, to use the last refuge to kick and spurn.

As for the reverend Bishops of our souls, they know it better then I can
tell them, that this is the way, through which the Apostles of God were led,
through good report and evil, as deceivers and yet true; They are no better
then the Prophets, which dwelt as it were in a nest of Hornets; They are not so
good as their Ma. Christ, they must feel the scourge of evil tongues as he
has done. And though in this dogged generation and age of ours, wherein both
Prelates and Princes are depraved, they live every day in danger to have their
skins torn, yet God for his Churches sake sprinkled over all the kingdoms
of the world, shall give them a body of brass to withstand the enemy, and
make them a pattern to other Nations.

The second venue the Welch-man has bestowed upon us, is a wipe over the
shinnes of the Non Residents, which me thinks might very well be returned to
the brotherhood of the faction in Warwickshire, of which I have seen more
then I mean to name, mounted upon their dubble Geldings, with their Wives
behind them, ryding and iaunsling from place to place, to feast among the
Gentlemen of the Shyre, and retire to their charge when the whole week is
wasted in pleasure, to preach to Gods people upon a full stomach. These be the
fellows that cannot away with a virgin Priest. Go to, go to, but for
Choleric diseases this scorching wether, I could point you out one by one,
with a wette finger. Yet because that by the length of other men's frailties
every man may take the measure of himself, I will carry my mouth in my heart,
and let them pass, and though there be a pad in the straw that must be rousde,
I have taken out this lesson from the Wise; there is a time for speech, and a
time for silence.

I will not fly from the cause to the person of men, but grapple with the
Reformer hand to hand. He gives us a voley of Scriptures against Non Residents,
not one of them proouing the matter he takes upon him. The places shall be
singled out, that you may see how his wits wandered one from another when he
quoated them. Romans 10. v. 14. The Apostle says, we cannot call upon God
without a Preacher. I grant it. Now because we cannot worship him, before
we have learned how to worship him, shall we say we cannot do is when we have
been taught it, except we have a Preacher continually present with us? I
deny it. It Is to reason thus, Mystresse Penrie cannot call upon GOD without the
presence of a Preacher, ergo, she cannot pray in her bed without the presence
of a Preacher. He coucheth that in the Scriptures which the Scriptures never
meaned.

To the next, to the next, more sacks to the Myll. 1. Cor. 9. v. 16. Paul
confesses he must of necessity preach the Gospel, woe is him if he do it
not. And 1. Cor. 4. v. 2. The Minister must be faithful. Transeat, for this
concludes nothing, but a necessity of teaching before learning, and in them
that teach, a right cut of the word, without gigges or fancies of
haereticall and new opinions. This tieth not a Preacher to one place
continuailie. Forward Sir John, you must change your argument. 1. These. 2. v.
10. The Thessalonians were witnesses of Paul's behavior among them. And 2.
These. 3. 10. He desires to see their face. Give me thy hand, this makes for
me. When he was among them, then he was Resident, when he did long personally
to be with them again to teach them farther, then he was absent. o Paul art
thou guilty of the blood of the Thessalonians? if not, woe be to that wretched
mouth of Wales.

These places are too short in the waste to serve his turn, he will be with us
to bring anon I doubt not. 1. Peter. 5. v. 2. The Minister must feed his
flock willingly. What of this? ergo he must never be away. Hoe Ball hoe, I
perceive the fellow is bird eyed, he startles and snuffes at every shadow. Is
his brain so bitten with the frost, that no better proof will bud out of it?
Yes I warrant you, either we go to the wall now or never. Acts. 20 v. 18. 19.
20. Paul tells the Church of Ephesus, that he had been among them at all
seasons, and taught through every house. All seasons, and Every house. How
like you this? A rod for the Grammar boy, he does nothing but wrangle about
words. What a stur have we here with All and Every? The word All, is taken
sometimes in the Scriptures for all sorts, or all manner, as Luke 11. v. 42. The
Scribes and Pharisees are said to tithe Omne olus, that is, all sorts, and all
manner of herbs, Minte, Cummin, Anise and the rest. Sometimes the word All in
the Scriptures is taken for Many. Romans 10. v. 8. By the transgression of one,
all are damned (as the Apostle there teaches us,) but by the benefit of one,
all are saved, that is, Many: for so he expounds himself in the next verse
following, where he says: that as by the first man Adam, there be many slain,
so by Christ there be many saved. To the point now, Paul was among the
Ephesians at all seasons, not that he was never absent from them, for how
could he then have preached in Macedonia and other places after he had
preached at Ephesus? It falls out answerable to this distinction, that his
conversation among them at all seasons, was all sorts of seasons, all manner of
seasons, early, and late, and many seasons. In his absence from Ephesus, it
may be that he lost some of his sheep among the Ephesians, as he did among the
Galathians, yet when he comes to Ephesus to see them, (determining to go from
thence to Jerusalem, concerning his former absence past, and his latter absence
to ensue,) he washes his hands from the blood of them all, and says he is
guilty of none of them, in respect he had delivered them all the counsels of
God before. People may not look to lay all upon the Parsons shoulders, but
they must search, and have recourse unto the Scriptures, which are able to make
the man of God perfect.

By the end I have given the Welch-man to his All, he may stitch up his Every
when it pleases him. John. 1. v. 9. The Evangelist declares Christ to be the
true light, which lights every man that comes into the world. Has every
man that is borne the light of Christ? happy were it then with Turks
Infidels, Atheists, and happy were it then with Penrie, for he should see, how
unto this day he has reeled up and down like a drunken man, having no
scriptures at all to stay himself upon.

When the Apostle says he taught the Ephesians through every house, he makes
a difference between his public preaching and private counsel, whereby when
any were sick or weak, or occasion required to give them private exhortation,
he went unto them, to bind up the broken, and bring them into the fold, not
that he did this every day, or that he set his foot over every threshold
that was in Ephesus? And this is performed by our Ministers, which in visiting
the sick and breeding of peace between man and man, have ocsion sometime to
go from house to house.

Here the Reformer being fallen into the net, and fearing it would be some
bodies chance to take him up, tumbling and struggling to get away, he curses
all those that go about to answer him, neither considering that the curse
which is causeles shall not come, nor remembering the Apostles counsel, who
exhorts us all to bless, and not to curse, because we are the heirs of
blessing. This is but a stone, thrown up with fury into the air, and is
likely to fall upon his own pate, Motus in autorem redit.

To be answered by distinctions, that Chawlke may not bear the price of
Cheese, nor copper be current to go for payment, he thinks to fore-stall or to
dyscourage us, by terming it a scornful rejecting of godly examples, and a
matter altogether childish and unlearned. Wherein you may behold, what violence
he offers to the holy Ghost, to the Apostle Paul, and to S. Augustine. Is
the holy Ghost a scorner? Is Paul childish? Is Augustine that famous pillar
of the Church unlearned? The distinction wherewith I have shaken off his
proof, is taught me by the holy Ghost and the Apostle in the places cited, and
by S. Augustine, Enchirid. cap. 13. De correp. and Gra. cap. 14. and 4. Cont.
Iul. cap. 8.

Other excellent points I could press and pinch him with to the like purpose,
were I not contented to strike the winge, and come down to his capacity, whom
I pity to see so bare a schoole-man. He has no way now to slyppe out of my
hands, but to take sentrie in the Hospital of Warwick, with this or some such
like shift of descant; That Paul was an Apostle, who had the whole field of
the world to till, Apostles are now ceased in the Church, and every Minister is
tied to a particular plow-lande, from which he may not be absent, as Paul was,
from the places where he had planted. He perceives not in all this, that I
have his leg in a string still, though I suffer him to fly to make me sport, I
can pull him in again when I lust. Indeed, the immediate calling of the
Apostles, their working of miracles, their commission to quarter out the world,
is ceased, but in respect of preaching the word, in any place of the dominion
wherein the Preacher lives, though he have a particular plow-land of his own,
Apostles cease not, but continue still in the Church, and shall do until the
coming of Jesus Christ. Ephe. 4, 11. The place is plain. He gave some to be
Apostles, for how long I pray you? unto the measure of the age of the fulness
of Christ. Let them take heed how they deal with this authorite, for this
being a place upon which they have built their Presbiterie, if they pull but
one straw out of the nest, al their eggs are broken.

How lawful a matter it is for a Minister to be from his particular
plow-lande, when it tends to the commodity of the same, by his conference
abroad with better learned then himself, or when it redowndes to the benefit
of the whole Church of the kingdom wherein he lives, or when he is called
forth by the authority of his superiors, is so soundly proved, in the
defense of the Answer to the Admonition, by my L. Archb. of Cant. that I
rejoice to trace after him aloof, with reverence and honor unto his steps.
To be short in this point, and shut it up, that I may the better withdraw the
Welch-man from seeking any succor of T. C. concerning the two points already
handled, I will show you three pretty brawles between them, and so leave them
close together by the ears. Cartwright and Pen, both at buffets. Page 126.
line. 14.


John Penrie, in his treatise of Reformation, says preaching is the only
ordinary means to work faith in the peoples hearts. Tho. Cartwright says, it
is the most ordinary mean, and most excellent, therein confessing a less
ordinary, and less excellent mean then preaching is. Again, John Penrie,
tyeth the Minister to a continual feeding, until his Master come, that his
Master MAT. 24 45 46.
may find him so doing. Wherein he considers not, that the Pastor either
preaching sometimes in another place out of his charge, continewes feeding; or
conferring with the learned provides food to be given to his fellow servants
in due time, and there-withall, having put out his talents to use, and
increased them, shall at the last enter into his Masters joy. T. C. loses the
cord, Page 49. sect. vlt.
and lets it out a great deal farther, for he holds, that a Pastor may be
absent from his Parish upon occasion of necessary worldly business, it may be
he means about purchasing, as he has done.

Last of all, John Penrie, to snatch up the cord again, and tie him shorter,
tells us that a Minister may put no Substitute in his room, and so
consequently cannot be absent. His proof for it, is in Ezechiell, Where the
Priests are reproved for appointing others to take the 44. 8.
charge of the Sanctuary under them: a common fault of his, to allege
Scripture before he understands it. That place is not understood of every
Substitute, but of uncircumcised Substitutes. T. C. seeing well enough though
he say nothing, that little help could be gathered out of this place, teaches
us, that a Pastor may provide another in his absence if he be an able man. In
these three assertions where the one of them dasheth out the others teeth, T.
C. is the wariest of the two, for he treads nicelie, as one that daunceth upon
a line, mistrusting every foot an ouer-turn: the Welch-man leapes bluntly
into the briars with a leaf on his shinne, caring not much whether head or
heels go foremost.

The last point of Reformation to which the treatise leads me, is a desire
the Reformer has, that the Bishops of the land should be thrown down, and
the Jews Synedrion set up. And why? because from the bebeginning of the new
Testament to the latter end of it, there is not a word spoken of a Lord
Archbishop, nor a Lord Bishop. Will he never leave to play the lubber? what a
lazy, lowtish kind of argument is this, to reason ab authoritate negative? it
is condemned and hyssed out of all Schools of learning* had it been a matter
of salvation, I could have borne with him to hear him reason negatiuelie from
the authority of holy scriptures, and all Schools of Philosophers should
have veiled the bonet unto GOD; the case standing as it does I cannot but draw
my mouth awrie. Not satis-fied with the slip he has given the Universities
and Laws of learning, he is as bold with the Scriptures and school of Angels.

Bishops, says he, pollute the Church two ways, the one is by their dealing
in civil matters, the other, by their superiority over inferior Ministers. I
might justly scorn to look upon so foul a vomit, were I not persuaded, that
the poison being tasted before, the drink I must give you, will be the better
welcome. His proofs for these two points are these. Math. 10. 24. 25. The
Disciple is not above his Master. etc. Which lesson our Savior gives his
disciples, to encourage them to bear the persecution, hatred, nyppes,
taunting, and evil speeches of the wicked, according to the pattern he had
given the^, inferring upon it, that if they called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, much more they would do so to the servant, and they must look for
the like entreaty. You see there is no such matter as the Reformer would force
upon us. But you may imagine what a terrible burning fit he is in, by his
tossing and turning from place to place to recover rest, though it torment him
much the more.

From the tenth of S. Matthew, he thrustes himself into the 18. of S. John. v.
36. My kingdom (says our Savior) is not of this world, if it were, my
servant would fight for me. There was an accusation framed against our
Savior to put him to death, the maine point whereof was this, that he affected
the Scepter, and sought innovation and change of the present state, whereupon
Pilats interrogatorie ministered unto him was, Art thou the king of the Jews?
Christ's answer unto him cleeres him of it. They might see by his
proceedinges that he had no such pretense, for then he would have sought it by
Arms and invasion, as they that hunt for kingdoms do. No brovles nor
commotion being made by him, or by his followers, they might perceive he was
wrongfully accused, to seek any subversion of the state. This is Caluins
judgment upon that place. Had he found it to make against mingling of
Ecclesiastical and civil authority in one person, I dare avouch he would have
bent the nose of this Canon upon us presently.

But when Christ says there, His kingdom is not of this world, he takes it to
be spoken in respect of the transitorinesse of worldly kingdoms, that must
pass over the stage with all their pomp, and come to a winding up at last,
when his kingdom shall have no end.

They that abused this place, to prove out of it, that the cause of Religion
ought not to be defended by sword, though it be by sword invaded, had a little
more tincture from hence to lay upon their opinion, than Penrie can have, yet
both are from the meaning of the text. The other quotation of John. 6. v. 15.
helps him as little as this. Christ's hyding himself out of the way when the
people went about to make him king, was because he came to suffer, not to
reign: and to show them their error, who thought it was in their power to make
a king, the setting up of Princes, pertaining not unto them, but unto God. To
gather from thence, that a Minister may not deal in civil causes, is to reason
as I heard an Ironmonger did in a Pulpit the last Summer, Moses refused to be
the son of Pharaohs daughter, ergo, a Minister may not meddle in civil
causes. Bounse, there is a gunne gone off, do not the Bishops quake at this? o
that I could draw him out of his hole, to print me the points which he has
preached, the spirit of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets, and his
spirit and doctrine examined by the spirit and doctrine of the Church of
England, you should see me so clapper-claw him for it, that he should have no
joy to run into Reformation, before he be better learned. The pearl of the
word, must not be weighed in those scales that men commonly use to weigh their
iron, it is a nicer work.

Now me thinks the Reformer should smell ere I go any further, that the rest
of his reasons have taken water, and are rotten before they come to shore. I
see not one of his proves that will abide the hammer, they are so beaten to
powder by the examples of the old and new Testament. In the old you shall
find, that Melchisedeck, Aron, Eli, and Samuel, were both Priests and Judges,
they both offered Sacrifices, and sat upon civil causes. In the new
Testament, Christ who refused to be made King of the Jews, took upon him to
overthrow the tables of the money changers, and whipped the buiers and sellers
out of the Temple. Paul also requested Timothy as a Judge, to receive no
accusation against an Elder, but under two or three witnesses.

This authority being received from the Prince, under whom we live, and being
exercised in the Church under her. The B. of Sarisburie judges to become
Ecclesiastical, in that it serves to the furtheraunce of the Church. The
matter having been so well debated, and resolved upon by so reverend learned
men, as with great study and travail have run the race before us, to teach
us that come after how to use our weapons; I wonder how these seely snayles,
creeping but yesterdaie out of shoppes and Grammer-schooles, dare thrust out
their feeble horns, against so tough and mighty adversaries. Moreover, it is
very strange to consider how many gashes the Faction have given unto
themselves, in denying this jurisdiction unto our Ministry, and seeking it
unto their own, wherein they will have some of their Elders to be governing
and preaching Elders, to handle the word and the sword together; and whereas
our Bishops receive their authority from her Majesty, exercising it in her
name and under her, Tho. Cartwright would have his authority to be above her,
in the ruling of the Church, and her Majesty to be fitted unto him, and to his
Alder-men, as the hangings to the house.

Look what a pitiful Megrim it is, that troubles them in this point, the
like God wot makes their brains to crow in the superiority of Bishops
above their brethren. Are all Ministers I beseech you of equal authority?
How then commands Paul Titus and Timothy, and they obey him in the
matters he gives them in charge? Is he that is directed and commanded, equal
with him that directs and commands? Their crosse-blowe of Fellow
laborers, will not save their ribs, if they be no better Fencers.

The Archb. and inferior Minister are both equal, in respect of their fight in
the Lords battles, as the General of the field and the common Soldiers
are, but not in respect of ordering and disposing of the fight, when every
Soldier is appointed to his place. This equality being hatched by Aerius,
it is well proved by Ma. Doctor Bancroft in his Sermon at Paul's cross, both
out of Epiphanius and S. Augustine, to have been condemned for an haeresie,
with the consent of the whole Church.

When S. Ierom hears of such a matter, he wonders at it. For the Bishop of
Jerusalem being requested to appear in a Counsel, and refusing it, sent one
Isidorus a Priest in his stead, a Bishop was looked for, a Priest came, who
to cover the Bishops absence, had nothing to allege but that it was all one,
and the authority of the one, as great as the other, because he was a man of
God that sent, and a man of God that came. Nihil interest inter Presbyterum et
Episcopum, eadem dignitas mittentis et miss: hoc satis imp^^^^e, in portu vt
dicitur naufragium. Ep. ad Pammach.
What, says S. Ierom, is there no difference between a Priest and a Bishop?
is the dignity of him that is sent, as great as his that sends him? This is
spoken without wit or learning, and this is even at the first putting into
harbor, to east away the ship.

The first lifting up of a Bishop, as S. Ierom notes, was the very physic of
the Church against Schism, least every man drawing his own private way, the
joints of Gods house should be pulled one from another, and so the building fall.

The weakest sight in the world may well discere, that this busy seeking of
an equality among the Clergy, is the practice of Nahash with the men of
Iabesh when they were besieged. He would admit no conditions of peace with
them; except he might thrust out their right eyes, and bring a shame upon all
Israel. Bishops were lifted up into the highest places of the Church, as the
right eyes of the people of the Lord, to keep watch against Schism and
Haeresie; no peace, no truce, no silence, no agreement will be gotten at the
hands of the Faction, except we suffer them to bore out these eyes, that a
shame and reproach may be brought upon all Religion.

This is the conclusion of Penries prayer in his Epistle to the Treatise, that
the Bishops may be thrust as one man out of the Church, and the name of them
forgotten in Israel for ever. Now is the brood of hell broken loose, the
Church is a besieged Iabesh, the devil having whetted the sword of Spain
against it, and finding open force to be nothing worth, he calls out his
Pianers, and sets Martin and Penrie a work to undermine it. But here is our
comfort. As the spirit of God came upon Saul, and stung him forward, to put to
sword, and to scatter the host of Nahash in such sort, that there were not
two of them left together; The spirit of the Lord shall come upon her
Majesty, and kindle her sacred heart with a new courage to strike home, that
there may not one couple of the Faction be left together in the Realm of
England, not so much as to bind up each others wounds, nor one to be-mone
another.

What is it else to desire this equality, but that every man might be his own
judge, and reach what he will in his own charge, when he has no Bishop
above him to control him? How dangerous this is in the high and hidden
mysteries of the word, a man may perceive by experience in common matters, for
even in things daily subject unto our senses, a man's own advice, is commonly
the worst counselor he can have. Solomon who was a great deal wiser then any
Sect-master ever was, or will be, has given us warning, That if a man begin
once to be wise in his own conceit, there is greater hope of a fool then of
him. And I dare avouch, that whosoever is possessed with an ouerweening, or
gives two much credit unto himself, needs not to be tempted of the devil,
because he is a tempter, and a devil unto himself.

At the delivery of the Law in Sinay, GOD commanded EXO. 19.
his people to be folded up, and to stand within the bars, vppon-paine of
death; At the delivery of the Gospel, our Savior branded his sheep with
these two marks, hearing, and following. They must harken to IOH. 10. 3.
the voice of him that teaches, and follow the trace of him that leads;
they may neither command, nor go before. When they begin to snuff up the
wind in their noses, like the wild Ass in the Wilderness, which tyreth all
that follow her; when they stand upon the pinnacle of every Tower and Castle,
built in the air by their own conceit, and say to the Bishops as the
people did to Jeremy, What soever comes out of our own mouth, that will we
do, then they are very easy to be deceived. And then it fares with them, as
it did with the Disciples of our blessed Savior, he appearing unto them upon
the Sea, they took him for a spirit, and imagining their Master to be a
bugge, they grew very fearful of a great benefit.

Such a dazzling it is that afflicts the eyes of our Reformers, our Master
Jesus offers himself unto us in this excellent government of the Church, by
grave and learned, Lord Bishops, but they mistake it to be Satanicall, and
tremble and quake at their own commodity.

But to come to anchor, if they be of one faith, and one hope with us, let them
help to twine up a threefold cord, and become of one heart with us. Let
wit, which is windy obtain the less, that Charity which edifieth may
gain the more. No doubt but our Savior had an especial care of the unity of
his Church, both when he made his request unto his father, that we might be one
as the father and he are one, and when he took his leave of his Church with so
kind a farewell, My peace I give you, my peace I leave unto you

If this peace will not be had at their hands, that have so long troubled the
Church of GOD among us I cast then my Gauntlet, take it up who dares, Martin or
any other, that can draw out any Quintessence of villainy beyoynde Martin, the
cause shall not want a Champion.

I have now gallopped the field to make choice of the ground where my
battle shall be planted. And when I have sent you the May Game of Martinisme,
at the next setting my foot into the styroppe after it, the signet shall be
given, and the field fought. Whatsoever has been written to any purpose of
either side, shall be led out into the plain, the foot men and horse, small
shot and artilerie shall be placed: every troop, wing and squadron ordered,
and the banners displayed. Therwithall I will make both Armies meet, and the
battle join, bullet to bullet, staff to staff, pyke to pyke, and sword to
sword; the blows dealt, and the breach made upon the Puritanes shall be
discovered, you shall see who be fallen and who be fled, what Captains are
slain, and what Ensigns taken.

It shall be shown how like a good General the Archb. of Canterbury has
behaved himself with his battle-axe, and how the brains of Tho. Cartwright
fly this way and that way, battered and beaten out, every bone in his body
pitifully broken, and his guts trayling upon the ground: here a leg,
and there an arm, of his followers shall be gathered up, and the carkases of
the dead, like a quarrie of Dear at a general hunting, hurled upon a heap.
Wherein my Supplication shall be to the Queens most excellent Majesty at the
end, that our Conquerors returning from the chase, may by virtue of her
highness favor and authority, hold still the honor which they have won,
and well deserved, in the service of GOD, and the crown of England.

Therefore as the Reformer has made proclamation for Armor and Munition,
desiring you to help him to a book of Church discipline, which he says was
written in the days of King Edward the sixth, the Authors whereof, he says,
were M. Cranmer, and Sir John Cheek. The like proclamation make I in his
behalf, because mine, peradventure, will come to more hands then his. Furnish
him I pray you, the better he is provided, the greater honor it will be to
overthrow him. I would be glad he should have it, (if there be any such) and
set down what he can ere I come forth again, that I may drive all before
me, and root out the very name of a Puritan from under heaven.

In which exployt, as Berzillai the Gileadite, refused to court it in his age,
resining that place to his Suns, as fitter for younger years; So, I beseech
all our Bishops, Doctors, and ancient men, upon whose silver heads the
Almond-tree has blossomde; to give up this task to me, and fit and judge of
my labors. The spirit of the Lord assisting me, opportunity, and other
circumstaunces concurring with it, I trust they shall see me prick it, and
praunce it, like a Caualiero that has learned to manage Arms. From my Castle
and Colors at London stone the 2. of July. Anno. 1590.

FINIS.

