A Brief description of Ireland: Made in this year, 1589.

by Robert Pain, unto xxv. of his partners for whom he is undertaker there.

Truly published verbatim, according to his letters, by Nich. Gorsan one of
the said partners, for that he would his countrymen should be partakers of the
many good Notes therein contained. AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Dawson.

1589.

To his very good friend M. Nicholas Gorsan of Trowell in the County of
Nottingham, and the rest of his xxv. partners for Ireland, give these.
LET not the reports of those that have spent all their own and what they
could y any means get from others in England, discourage you from Ireland,
although they and such others by bad dealinges have wrought a general
discredit to all English men, in that country which are to the Irishe
unknown.

These men will say there is great danger in traveling the country, and much
more to dwell or inhabit there: yet are they freed from three of the greatest
dangers: first, they cannot meet in all that land any worsse then themselves:
secondly, they need not fear robbing for that they have not any thing to
loose: lastly, they are not like to run in debt, for that there is none will
trust them. The greatest matter which troubles them is, they cannot get any
thing there but by honest travel, which they are altogether ignorant of. These
men cannot tell what good fruits England has, the which Ireland wants,
neither can they justly say, but that it lies better for the vent of all
commodities then England does.

What these men have reported or what the simple have credited, that would
rather believe a runneagate then travel to see: I care not. But what I have
discovered or learned in that country, I will herein recite unto you.

First, the people are of three sorts, the better sort are very civil and
honestly given: the most of them greatly inclined to husbandry, although as
yet unskillful, notwithstanding, through their great travel many of them are
rich in cattle, some one man there milketh one hundred kine, and two or three
hundred yeawes and goats, and reareth yearly most of their breed.

Their entertainment for your diet shall be more welcome and plentiful, then
cleanly and handsome, for although they did never see you before, they will
make you the best cheer their country yields for two or three days, and
take not any thing therefore. Most of them speak good English and bring up
their children to learning. I saw in a Grammar school in Limberick, one
hundred, and threescore scholars, most of them speaking good and perfect
English, for y^ they have used to conster the Latin into English. They keep
their promise faithfully, and are more desirous of peace then our English men,
for that in time of wars they are more charged: And also they are fatter
prays for the enemy who respects no person. They are quick witted and of
good constitution of body, they reform them selves daily more and more after
the English manners: nothing is more pleasing unto them then to hear of good
Justices placed amongst the^. They have a common saying which I am persuaded
they speak unfeignedly, which is, Defend me, and spend me: meaning from the
oppression of the worser sort of our countrymen: They are obedient to ye
laws, so that you may travel through all the land without any danger or
injury offered of ye very worst Irish, and be greatly relieved of the best.

The second sort being least in number are called Kernes, they are warlike men:
most of that sort were slain in the late wars.

The third sort, are a very idle people, not unlike our English beggars, yet
for the most part, of pure complexion and good constitution of body: one of ye
greatest ouersights in the better sort is, for y^ they make not that idle sort
give account of their life.

They have the English laws and governors as is in England: First, there is
a Lord deputy over the whole land, that represents her Majesty, also a Lord
Chancellor, a Lord Treasurer, a Lord chief Justice, and all other Magistrates,
Officers and Courts, in like manner as belongs to Westminster.

The land is divided into five great parts: that is to say. Munster, Lanster,
Conath, Mead, and Vlster. In Munster, are these vit. great countries:
Owrmwood, Deasmond, Cork, Waterford Typerare, Lymbericke, and Carrey: a great
part of Munster, was forfited to her Majesty by means of ye Deasmondes late
rebellion.

There is two very rich countries called Kennory and Conelogh, both within the
county of Lemereck: they are called the gardens of the land for ye variety
and great plenty of all grain and fruits, and also there is more plenty of
venison, fish and foul then else where in Ireland, although in every place
there is great store. This land belonged sometime to the knight of ye valley,
who for high treason was executed at Lemerecke. Over every part is an
Englishman liefetenant which has authority as fully as the Marshall, to
erecute Marshall laws upon the Irishe offe^ders at al times. Also there are
Judges of assize for every circuit, who keep their assizes as our Judges do:
if any matter be to be tried there between an English man and an Irish, the
Jury is half English and half Irish. There is a sheriff of every county,
with vndersheriffes, Arrant Bayliffes, and al other officers appertaining. Also
there is a convenient number of Justices of peace in every county with
Constables and petty Constables, who keep their quarter sessions orderly.

The country is situated some what nearer the Equinoctial line then England,
but yet for that it lies more upon the Ocean seas and is full of Rivers and
small brooks, it is not so hot in summer as England, neither is it so cold in
winter, for that the seas fretteth away the Ice and Snow there, much more then
in England.

The general Map of Ireland, which is joined with the old Map of England, is
most false: The author (as it seems) drew them both by report, and the
common computation of miles: and made his Scale after the English measure, that
is one thousand paces, or five thousand footes to the mile: but therein he
greatly deceived himself, for the shortest miles in England are much longer
then that measure, and an Irish mile is longer then two of those miles, by
which means he has made the Map of England less by ye half then it should
be. Notwithstanding, he has over reached in his number of parish Churches, and
the Map of Ireland littell more then one fourth of that it would be, if it were
truly drawn. This seems strange, and has deceived many ignorant in
Geometry: but always take this for a principle, that the square of two miles
contains just four times so much as the square of one mile, and so of al
proportions from the greatest to the least: wherefore as much may be said of
the long mile which contains two short miles.

Some mistrust that the Spaniardes will enter the land, and that the Irish will
relieve them: no doubt there are some Traitors in Ireland, I would I could
truly say there were none in England: but this I dare assure you the greater
number, and all the better sort do deadly hate ye Spaniardes, and yet I think
they bear them fair weather, for that they are the popes champions, and a
great part of the Irish (for want of good preaching and discipline) are greatly
inclined to papistrie.

But their intertaineme^t this last year amongst ye Irish (notwithstanding
they brought the popes holy candles and pardons) shows how they affect
Spa^ish government. Most of ye better sort of ye Irish have read of their
mo^sterous cruelties in ye west India^s, where they most tiranously have
murdered many millions more of those simple creatures the^ now lives in
Ireland, eue^ such as sought their favors by offering unto the^ al yt they
had, never resisting nor of fering the^ any harm. Wherefore I doubt not that ye
Irish are so foolish to entertain such proud guestes knowing their tyranny,
and having not so well deserved at their hands as those simple souls who^ they
so cruelly murdered. Neither are ye Spaniardes so un wise to trust those irish,
who so lately imbrued their hands in their blood, slaying them as dogs in such
plentiful manner, that their garments went about ye country to be sold, as
good cheap as beasts skins. If you have not the said book of the Spanishe
cruelties, I pray you buy it, it is well worth the reading, I have for got the
title, but it is of a small volume in quarto: it is written by a learned Bishop
of their own country about forty years since in ye Castalian toonge, and
dedicated to their king for reformation of those cruelties: afterward
translated into English and diverse other languages, to make their monsterous
tyranny known to the world. When you have read the same, conunend it to our
Catholics that will be saved by their works, and yet will not give God
thanks at their meat, for that they will not once have in their mouth ye
prayer for our Queen, annexed to our usual thanks giving at meat. I pray God
open ye eyes of their vpholders, and let them see what these men gape for,
which is no doubt the ruin and overthrow of her highness, whom I pray God
preserve. But none are so blind as they that will not se. The Catholics are
borne with for their conscience sake, yet from such consciences spring all the
Traitorous practices against her Majesty.

Although some of small judgments (which think every soil good that bears
long grass) have failed of their erpected woad crops, by means of their un
skillful choice of ground, yet assuredly the commodities of the country are
many more then either the people can well use or I recite. Their soil for the
most part is very fertile, and apt for Wheat, Rye, Barley, Peason, Beans,
Oats, Woade, Mather, Rape, Hoppes, Hemp, Flax and al other grains and
fruits y England any wise does yield. There is much good timber in many places
and of ye straightness and so good to reaue, that a simple workman with a
Brak axe will cleave a great Oak, to boards of less then one ynche thick,
xiiii. inches broad and xv. footes in length, such a board there is vsuallysold
for ii. d. ob. There is very rich and great plenty of Iron stone, and one
sort more then we have in England, which they call Bogge mine, of the which a
Smith there will make at his forge Iron presently. Also there is great store of
Lead Ore, and Wood sufficient to maintain diverse Iron and lead works (with
good husbandry) for ever. A barrel of Wheat or a barrel of bay Salt
containing three bushels and a half of Winchester measure, is sold there for
iiii. s. Malt, Peason, Beans, for ii. s. viii. d. Barley for ii. s. iiii. d.
Oats for xx. d. a freth Sa^mo^ worth in London x. s. for vi. d. xxiiii.
Herrings or vi. Makerels, vi. sea breames, a fat hen.xxx. Eggs, a fat Pigge,
one pound of Butter, or ii. gallo^s of new Milk for ape^ny. A red Dear
without the skin, for ii. s. vi. d. A fat Beef for xiii. s. iiii d. A fat
Matto^ for xviii. d.

There be great store of wild Swannes, Cranes, Phesantes, Partriges,
Heathcocks, Plouers green and gray, Curlewes Woodcockes, Rayles, Quails, and
al other fowls much more plentiful then in Engand. You may buy a dosen of
Quayles for iii. d. a dosen of Woodcocks for iiii. d. and all other fowls
ratablie. Oysters, muskels, cockles and Samphiere about ye sea coasts are to
be had for gathering great plenty: the Physicians there hold, yt Samphier is a
present remedy against the stone: you may buy the best Heafers there with
Calves at their feet. for xx. s. a piece, the which are nothing inferior to
the better sort of Lyncolnshire breed. Their chief horses are of as great
price as in England, but carthorsses mares, and little hackneyes are of very
small price, the mea^est Irish man disdayneth to ride on a mare. You may keep
a better house in Ireland for L. li. a year, then in England for CC. li a
year. Al your commodities you may transport from ye sea side in ye county of
Cork (where I have provided for each of us four hundred Acres of land) to
England for viii. d. ye hundred weight, so that you make the same ready about
S. Andrews tide, when the herring fishers go home from Ireland. The charg of
which carriage for so much as you barrel, you may save a great part through
Cheapenes of the caske, and then will ye most of your commodities, viz. Butter,
Cheese. Bacon, Beef, Honny, Ware, Tallowe, Corn, and Herring with diverse
other Merchandise be ready for the market.

The worsser sort of undertakers which have seignories of her Majesty, have
done much hurt in the country, and discouraged many from ye voyage: for they
have entyced many honest men over. promising them much and performing nothing,
no not so much as to pay their servants, and workmen wages. They will not let
any term, above xxi. years or three lives, and ye demand for rent xii. d. ye
Acre: this is so far from the meaning of her Majesty, as appears by her
highness grant, y^ as I think they have, or shortly will make all their estates
void. They find such profit from the Irishe tenantes, who give the^ the
fourth sheafe of al their corn, and xvi. d. ^earel^ for a beasts grass,
besides diverse other Irish accustomed duties. So that they care not although
they never place any English man there. But ye better sort of under takers
being many good knights and gentlemen of great worship, do seek by all means
possible to plant their lands with Englishmen according to ye meaning of her
Majesty's grant: they offer to any man either three hundredth acres of land in
feefarme or four hundred acres by lease for one hundred years, for vi. d. the
acre without any fine.

Sir Richard Greenefield takes a very good order for artificers and
laborers: he will let any poor man of honest behavior a house, xl. acres of
land and vi. milche Kyne for xl. s. the year, for the term of three lives,
and if any of these men after they have bread on the same stock a sufficient
number of cattle to store their ground, do deliver their stock again, then
shall they pay but xx. s. rent for the rest of their terms. And if any of the
said Kine be stolen, and the owner do track which way they were driven from
has ground, the said sir Richard will deliver him so many Kyne for them, for
that the law is there, if you tracke any stolen goods into any man's land, he
must tracke them from him, or answer them within xl. days, so where the
track cease, the goods must be answered.

A man may be as well and cleanely tabled at an English house in Ireland for the
profit of five Kyne and fifty sheep, all which will be bought for vii. li. x.
s. and for ye rent of so much land as will keep them, which is xx. s. the year,
as at the best ordinary in England for vi. d. a meal: all which amounts but
to xxxv. s. vi. d. a year, accounting ii. s. in the pound for interest of the
stock. Wo^en may be borded for the prest^e of four Kyne, xl. sheep, and xvi.
s. rent. Servants for iii. Kyne. xxx. sheep, and xii. s. rent. Children, for
ii. kine, xx. sheep and viii. s. rent. Thus may a man that is xii. in
household, viz. Himself, his wife, ii. servants, and viii. children be very
well tabled a year for the profit of xxxi. Kyne, iii. C. and x. sheep, and vi.
li. x. s. rent: al which stock will be bought for less then lx. li. The use
whereof being vi. li. the whole charge of a year for xii. persons is xii. li.
x. s. which is xx. s. x. d. a piece. This has not been long used there, but
now ye Englishman thinks himself happy that can make such a bargayne with
an honest man: for although yt which is not every way to the guess above xii.
li. x. s. may make the host with good husbandry more then a hundred marks.

One hundred pounds will buy lx. milch kine, CCC. yeawes, xx. swyne, and a good
teame: the ground to keep these cattle, and use this tea^e on, will be CCCC.
acres at x. pound rent so your yearly charg will be with interest of your
money, xx. li. for the which you may have yearly upon good security with
warrant of your stock, xl. sirkins of butter, and forty great ways of cheese,
of the milk gathered betwirt May, and Michaelmas, which at x. s. the firkin,
and xxv. s. the way, is threescore and ten pounds, and the wool and lamb of
your sheep. cannot be so little worth as xxx. li. a year, all which amounts
to one hundred pounds: so may you declare besides your interest and rent,
eighty pounds a year.

To husband this farm, your tenant must keep viii. persons, which may be well
done with the profit of the swyne, winter milk, calves and the crop which he
should get upon your land with your teame.

Most of the coin in Ireland, and that which the people generally desire
there, is base money made of copper or brass, they will not change you an
angel into that money without iiii. d. gains: I would to God her Majesty
would coin four hundred thousand marks of the same, and lend it to the
English marchantes gratis for two years, to be employed there in mather,
woade, rape, hoppes, hemp, flare and such other commodities, as might set some
great number of our English men to work by which means (in my judgment) ye
land might be very well peopled her Majesty disburthened of a great part of her
charge there, the marchantes made great gayners, and yet at the two years end
pay her Majesty her full sum in current English money for that base
mettell, whereby her Majesty might gain at least CC. thousand pounds without
hurt to any, and good to many thousands. I have sent you herein closed an
instruction how you shall make a warraine for connies of two acres of ground, ^
shall be sufficient for a gentleman's house in which warraine, you may also make
an Orchard, and the connies shall not bark your trees nor make their berries
under the roots, neither shall the said connies go forth of two acres. Thus
with my hearty commendations, I bid you heartily farewell. From my house at
Pains end, this xxv. of June. 1589.

Your loving friend Robert Pain.

The copy of an instruction for a Warraine.
FIrst, you must choose two acres of very dry ground, and compass it with a
ditch as round as a circle, five footes deep and seven footes wide, let the
slope side of your ditch be toward your warraine, and that ways throw up all
your earth, let the outsid be plum upright, which you must presently payle
otherwise the earth will sal in: then plant your trees not above viii. inches
deep, and at the least xxiiii foot asunder, lay at every root close about the
tree, as much pease straw as a man will carry under his arm, the which will
keep the root moist in summer, and warm from frostes in winter. The best
time to set your teees is shortly after Michaelmas: which verefieth an old
proverb in Kent if thou will a good tree have, let him carry a green lease to
his grave. In the very midst of your ground you must make a little lodge, in
the which you must have eight several hutches, so placed that they may be
always open into the warraine, in every hutche you must tie with a little
chain a tame bucke conny of the best kind: then store your warraine with 64.
of the better sort of tame female connies, which is for every bucke viii. does,
every week the first quarter: and then monthly you must wash your trees with
water, so high as a conny can reach wherein you must burst the garbadg of a
conny. Also every week you must draw a piece of carraine at the foot of your
payle in the bottom of your ditche round about your warraine, by which means
your conies will never offer to touch your trees, nor come near the payle to
scrap themselves out. You must feed your connies with the shortest and
sweetest hay you can get: you may give the^ grass, mallows, cole wortes sow
thistles, the, tops of carrats, scarrates, and any yeaths or weeds, they will
eat four days in a week in summer, and two days in winter, but not above
for fear of the rotte: yet let the^ have haie enough at al times, you may
fat them with grains mixed with oats, bran, or French wheat: you must give
your co^nies every day one oate sheafe, which will always keep them hearty,
sound, and fair skinned. I do account your charges in keeping your co^nies to
be xx. marks a year, that is your warrainers board and wages, viii. li. and
the conies meat v. li. vi. s. viii. d. the increase at an indifferent
reckoning, will be seven litters a year: every conie of the best kind will
bring vi. Rabbits at a litter, where one of that sort brings fewer, two will
bring more, some will bring ix. litters in ayeare: and that do is not worth the
keeping, that brings not vii. litters a year. The value of this increase
after the foresaid rates, and at viii. d. the couple, (which ^ very skins
with good husbandry of most of them will be worth,) amounts unto the sum of
xliiii. li. xvi. s. a year. But for fear you should fail in your reckoning,
as the woman did that supposed all the eggs in her basket were capons: I would
have you allow for casualties, xi. li. ix. s. iiii. d. so rests above all
charges of the warrainer, and their meat, xx. li. by year declaro, which I
think being welvsed can yield no less: although this kind being bred in
houses do not eat sweet, yet being bred after this manner, they are both the
biggest, fattest, and sweetest conies that are.


