The Treasury of commodious Conceits, and hidden Secrets.

Commonly called The good Huswiues Closet of provision, for the health of her
Household.

Meet and necessary for the profitable use of all estates.

Gathered out of sundry Experiments, lately practiced by men of great
knowledge: and now newly corrected, and enlarged, with diverse necessary
physic helps, not impertinent for every good Huswife to use in her house,
amongst her own famelie.

LONDON. Printed by Richard Jones, at the Rose and Crown near Holborne
bridge. 1591.

The Printer to all women, that covet the practice of good Huswiferie, as well
wives as maids.
GOod Huswifes here you have, a lewell for your joy.
A Closet meet your Huswiferie to practice and employ.
As Well the Gentles of degree, as ^ke the meaner sort,
May practice here to purchase health, their household to comfort.
and as the prouer be proves true, to remedy each grief,
amongst the rest of the Phisicks helps, the huswifes help is chief.
Therefore good Huswiues once again, I say to you, repair
unto this Closet when you need, and mark what ye find there.
which is a mean to make most things, to huswiues use pertain
^s al Conserues and Sirops sweet to comfort heart and brain.
^^r banquets to, here may you find, your dishes how to frame
^s Succad, Marmalad, Marchapane to and each thing else by name
^^ne powders eke for linen clothes and woollen, furd or faced
^o keep them sweet, and safe from Mothes, in chestes when they be placed
^ood medicines to, for present health in Closet here you have
^o maintain life, and keep ye young the chiefest thing ye crave.
^hus to conclude, I wish ye mark, the benefits of this book.
^^th Gentles state, the Farmers wife, and Crafts-mans Huswife Cook.
^^d if ye reap commodity by this my friends advice*
^^en give him thanks, and think not much, of four pence for the price.
Fare well.
To the Worshipful, Master Richard Wistow, Gentleman, one of the assistants
of the Company of the Barbors and Surgions: John Partridge, wishes increase
of knowledge by his worthy travel.
AFter that I had (worshipful Sir) taken some pain, in collecting certain
hidden secrets together, and reduced them into a necessary little book, for my
own behoof and my familiar friends: yet at the instance of a certain
Gentlewoman, being my dear and special friend, I was constrained to publish
the same, and considered with my self the saying of the wise, which is: That
good is best, which to all indifferently is of like goodness, or effect: or
which without respect of person, is good to all indifferently. The
consideration of which, and her importunacye together, instiged me to
communicate unto the view and public benefit of al men, this small book: the
contents whereof does instruct and teach all manner of persons and degrees, to
know perfectly how to make diverse and sundry sorts of new conceits, as well of
meats, conserues, and Marmalades, as also of sweet and pleasant Waters, of
woonderful Odors, Operations and Virtues: with diverse other things, that have
not hitherto been publicly known: Which fact of mine (I know) will be, not
only, disliked of some, but altogether condemned: not for that it is evil: but
that their fine heads cannot digest that any other beside themselves should
enjoy the benefit thereof, having for their Maxim, that such things are of
small price, as are common to al men: much after our English proverbs, Quainty
and Dainty, Far fetched and dear bought is good for great estates. But I
account that person foolish, and unworthy help of any Physician or Surgeon,
that will refuse to receive, or gain health by the medicine of any such
Physician or Surgeon, who by learning the same out of Galen, Auicen,
Hipocrates, or any other such like, has oftentimes cured the diseases in
sundry and many persons, for that the same has been commonly used: but rather
most willingly and courteously to embrace the same (for present remedy) as a
thing excellently well experimented and proved. I need not (Right Worshipful)
to use these words for the defense of this little Book, considering that your
Worship does very well accept such things, as universally bring with them a
public profit and utility whence consists your delight, rewarding
liberally the traueile of such, who have and do traueile therein. Wherefore,
for that I among all other persons, do think my self most beholden unto your
woship, to gratify your goodness, and to satisfy the request of my friend, I
have compiled this little book: which I have put forth under your worships
name and protection: protesting, that if I shall see this work, which with
some cost and charge I have brought to perfection, be well accepted at your
hands, I shall shortly exhibit unto your worship, a thing of greater value and
estimation. And thus committing your good worship unto God, I end: who send you
your desire of understanding and knowledge.

Your Worships to command. I. Part.
The Author to his Book, concerning his friend, whose importunate suit
procured him to publish the same.
Go little book, of profit and pleasance,
Unto thy good Mistress without delay:
And tell her I send thee for the performance
Of her earnest suit, since she would have no nay.
Let her use thy commodities, as right well shemay
To profit her friends, for healths preservation
And also to pleasure them for recreation.
Tell her, that all things in thee contained,
I have seen them put often times in ure:
And given thee to be her servant retained,
To serve her, faithfully doing thy cure:
And also say, of this let her be sure,
That she with her suit, of me has obtained
Thee, that no gold nor good could have gained
I. P.
The Closet or treasury of hidden Secrets.
To make March-paine. Chap. 1.
TAke half a pound of blanched Almonds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a
pound, of Rosewater half an ounce, and of Damask water as much: beat the
Almondes with a little of the same water, and grind them til they be small: set
them on a few coals of fire, til they wax thick, the^ beat them again with the
sugar, fine: then mix the sweet waters and them together, and so gather them
and fashion your Marchpame: Then take Wafer cakes of the broadest making, cut
them square, paste the^ together with a little liquor, and when you have made
them as broad as will serve your purpose, have ready made a hoope of a green
Dazell wand, of the thicknes of half an inch, on the inner side smooth and on
the outer side round and smooth, without any knags: lay this hoope upon your
Wafer cakes aforesaid, and then fill your hoop with the gear above named, the
same driven smooth above with the back of a silver spoone, as ye do a Tart,
and cut away all the parts of the cakes, eue^ close by the out side of the
hoop, with a sharp knife, that it may be round: then having white paper
underneath it, set it upon a warm hearth or upon an instrument of iron or
brass, made for the same purpose, or into an Oven, after the bread is taken
out, so it be not stopped, it may not bake, but only be hard and through
dried, and ye may while it is moiste, stick it full of Comfets of sundry
colors, in a comely order, ye must moist it over with Rose Water and Sugar
together: make it smooth, and so set it in the Oven, or other Instrument, the
clearer it is like a Lantern horn, so much the moreco^mended. If it be
through dried, and kept in a dry and warm air, a Marchpaine will last many
years. It is a comfortable meat, meet for weak folks, such as have lost the
taste of meats by much and long sickness. The greatest secret that is in
making of this clear, is with a little fine flower of Rice, Rosewater, and Sugar
beaten together, and laid thin over the Marchpaine, ere it go to drieng. This
will make it shine like ye, as Ladies report.

To gilde a Marchpane, or any other kind of Tart. Chap. 2.
TAke and cut your leaf of gold, as it lies upon the book, into square
pieces like Dice, and with a Conies tails end moisted a little, take the gold
up by the one corner, lay it on the place, being first made moist, and with an
other tail of a Conie dry, press the gold down close. And if ye will have
the form of an Heart, or the name of Jesus, or any other strange thing
whatsoever, cut the same through a piece of paper, and lay the paper upon your
Marchpane, or Tart: then make the void place of the Paper, through which the
Marchpane appears, moist with Rosewater, lay on your gold, press it down,
take off your Paper, and there remains behind in gold, the print cut in the
said paper.

To bake Quinces Chap. 3.
PAre them, take out the coare, perboil them in water till they be tender, let
the water run from them, till they be dry: Then put in every coffin one
Quince, in it a good quantity of Marowe. Also take Sugar, Sinamon, and a little
Ginger, and fill the Coffin therewith, close it, let it bake an hour, and so
serve it.

To keep Quinces vnpared all the year long. Chap. 4.
TAke ripe Quinces, and at the great end cut a stopple, then take out the coare
clean, and stop the hole again with the same stopple (but pare them not) and
perboile them a little, take them up, and let the water drain from them: then
put all the coares, and some of the smallest Quinces, in little pieces all to
cut, into the water wherein all the Quinces were perboiled, and let them sees
till the liquor be as thick as molten syze that Painters occupy, then take it
from the fire and let it cool: in the mean season couch your cold Quinces in
a barrel; or in an earthen pot, the great end downwarde (if the stopple be
out, it makes no matter) and one upon another. Then put the liquor in, that it
be a handful over and above them: cover them close, and after iiii. or v.
days look to them, and when you see the liquor sunk down, put in more of the
same, which ye purposely kept to cover them, as before: then lay a board upon
them, and a stone, that they rise not, and cover the vessel close with a thick
cloth folded, that it take no air, so let the^ remain. And when ye intend to
occupy some of them, uncover the vessel, and ye shall find a cream
covering the whole liquor, break it in the midst, turn it over with your
hand, then take out your fruit in order, beginning in the midst first, the^
by the sides, so that you remove nane, if it may be, but those that you take
away: and every time that ye break the cream, turn it over again into his
place, for you must know, that the Cream keeps out air, and keeps in the
strength of the Syrop therefore it makes much to the conservation of the fruit
to save it, and also to see the vessel close covered. Also, when you will bake
your Quinces, wash them well and clean in warm water, and bake them as before
is written.

To make Vinigre of Roses. Chap. 5.
IN Summer time when Roses blow, gather them, ere they be full spread or blown
out, and in dry weather: pluck the leaves, let them lie half a day upon a
fair board, then have a vessel with vinigre of one or two galo^s (if you will
make so much Roset) put therein a great quantity of the said leaves, stop the
vessell-close after that you have styred them well together: let it stand a day
and a night, then divide your Uinigre, and Rose-leaues together in two parts,
put them into two great glasses, and put in rose leaves enough: stop the
glasses close, set them upon a shelfe under a wall side, on the South side
without your house, where the Sun may come to them the most part of the day,
let them stand there all the whole summer long: and then strain the Uinigre from
the Roses, and keep the Uinigre. If you do once in ten days take and strain
out the Rose-leaues, and put in new leaves of half a days gathering, the
Uinigre will have the more odor of the Rose.

You may use in steed of vinigre, wine, that it may wax eagre, and receive the
virtue of the Roses, both at once.

Moreover, you may make your Vinegar of Wine, white, red. or claret: but the
red does most bind the belly, and the white does most loose.

Also, the Damask Rose is not so great a binder as the Red Rose, and the
white Rose loses most of all: hereof you may make Vinegar Roset.

Thus also you may make Vinegar of Violets, or of Elderne flowers: but you must
first gather and use your flowers of Elderne, as shall be showed here after,
when we speak of making Conserve of Elderne flowers.

Fine Sauce for a roasted Rabbet: used to king Henry the eight. Chap. 6.
TAke a handful of washed Parcelie, mince it small, boil it with Butter and
Verinice upon a chasingdish, season it with Sugar, and a little Pepper gross
beaten: When it is ready, put in a few crummes of of white bread amongst the
other: let it boil again, till it be thick: then lay it in a platter, like
the breadth of three fingers, lay of each side one roasted Conie, or more, and
so serve them.

To make Paste of Sugar, whereof may be made all manner of fruits and other
fine things with their form: as platters, dishes, glasses, cups, and such
like things* wherewith you may furnish a table: and when you have done, you
may eat them up. A pleasant thing for them that sit at the Table. Chap. 7.
TAke gum Dragant, as much as you will, and steep it in Rose water, until it
be mollified. And for four ounces of Sugar, take of it the bigness of a
bean: the juice of Limons, a Walnut shel full, and a little of the white of an
eg: but you must first take the gum, and beat it so much with a pestle in a
mortar of white Marble, or of brass, until it become like water, then put to
it the juice with the white of the Egg, incorporating well together. This
done, take four ounces of fine white sugar well beaten to powder, and cast it
into the mortar by little and little* until it be turned into the form of
paste: then take it out of the said Mortar, and bray it upon the powder of
Sugar, as it were meal or flower, until al be like soft paste, to the end you
may turn it, and fashion it, which way you will: when you have brought your
paste to this form, spread it abroad with Sinamo^, upon great or small leaves,
as you shall think it good, and so shall you form and make what things you will,
as is aforesaid, with such fine knackes as may serve a Table, taking heed that
there stand no hot thing nigh unto it. At the end of the banquet they may
break all, and eat the Platters, Dishes, glasses, Cups, and all such like:
for this paste is very delicate and sauourous. If you will make a thing of
more ffnenesse than this, make a Tart of Almondes, stamped with sugre and
Rose Water of like sort that Marchpanes be made of: this shall you lay between
two pastes of such vessels, or fruits, or some other thing, as you think good.

To make fine blanch powder for roasted Quinces. Chap. 8
TAke fine sugar, half a pound, beaten in a hot mortar to fine powder, of white
Ginger, pared, half an ounce, of chosen Synamo^ a quarter of an ounce, beaten
ready to fine powder: mix them well together, and if you will have it most
excellent, cast two spoonful of Rose or Damask water, in beating of the Sugar,

To conserve Quinces in sirop condict. always ready to be served, in whole or in
quarters. Chap. 9.
AFter your Quinces are coared and pared, sees them till they be tender and
soft: then lay them out til they be cold: in the mean time, take of the same
liquor two quartes or more (according to the number of your Quinces which ye
will keep) and put therein the cores and some other small pieces, sees them in
the liquor to make the sirop strong: strain them, and put into the liquor,
being two or three quartes, one pint of Rose water, and for every quart of
liquor, one half pound of Sugar: sees them again together on a soft fire of
coals, till the Sugar be incorporated with the liquor, then put in your
Quinces: let the^ sees softly, til you perceive that your sirop is as thick
as life honey, then set them to cool, and take them out, lay them in a tray or
platter till they be cold: then take one ounce of bruised Sinamon, and some
whole Cloves: put them with some of the Sinamon in the Sirop, and when it is
cold, lay a larde of Quinces in your glass (called a gestelin glass) or an
earthen pot well glased: then straw a little of your Sinamon upon your Quinces,
then power some sirop, lay on another lard of Quinces, and again of your spice
and sirope, and so forth till you have done, and cover them two fingers over
with sirop above, cover them close: and within three of four days look to
them: and when you find the sirope shrunken down, put in more, and so reserve
them. These are to be served in with sirop.

See that the Quinces be tenderly sodden, and the sirop thick and strong
enough.

Plums condict in sirop. Chap. 10.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, half a pint of Rosewater, and a pint of fair
Rainwater, or of some other distilled water, sees the Sugar, and the two
waters upon a soft fire of coals till the one half be consumed: then take it
from the fire, and when it leaves boiling, put therein half a pound of ripe
Damasins, or other plums and set it again on the Embers, and keep it in the
like heat, til the plums be soft, by the space of an hour if need be: then put
into some Cloves bruised, and when it is cold, keep it in a glass, or in an
earthen Gallipot: the stronger the sirop is with Sugar, the better it will
continue. Some put into the sirop Sinamon, Saunders, Nutmegs, Cloves, and a
little Ginger: sees them not hastily, for fear of much breaking.

To make fine Rice pottage Chap. 11.
TAke half a pound of Jorden Almondes, and half a pound of Rice, and a gallon
of running water, and a handful of Oak bark, and let the bark be boiled in
the running water, and the Almondes beaten with the hulles and all on, and so
strained to make the Rice Porredge withal.

To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap. 12,
AFfter that your Quinces are sodden, ready to be kept condict as before in the
chapter is written, the^ with some of the liquor wherein they were sodden (but
without any spice) beat them and draw them as ye would do a Tart: then put
some over the fire, and sees them softly, and in the seething, straw by little
and little, of powder of Sugar, the weight of the Quinces, or more, as your
taste shall tell you: stir it continually, put thereto some pure Rosewater, or
bamask water, let it sees on height, til it be walstanding, which thing ye may
know, by taking some of it upon a cold knife, and let it cool, if it be
stiff, then take it off, and box it while it is warm, and set it in a warm
or dry air: if you will gilde your Marmalad, do as before is spoken of a
Marchpane.

The best making of a Marmalade is when the Quinces have lain long, and are
through rupe, and very yellow, as in Lent season.

And for as much as Quinces are binding, and therefore not good for some sick
folks costiffe, it is necessary to put a good many of ripe Apples of good
verdure, as Renet, Pippin, Lording, Russeting, Pomeriall, Rex pomorum, or any
other Apple, that is pleasant raw, among them, being first drawn from a Tart,
and then soadden among the other matter of Quinces. Thus shall you make your
Marmalade somewhat souple, and also incrrase the quantity and virtue of the
same, especially if it be well dashed with sweet water.

To make Marmalad of Damsins, or Prunes. Chap 13.
TAke Damsins which are ripe, boil them on the fire with a little fair water,
until they be soft: Then draw them through a course Boulter, as ye make a
Tart, set it on the fire again, sees it on height with sufficient Sugar, as
you do your Quinces, dash it with sweet water, etc. and box it.

If you will make it of Prunes, even likewise do put some Apples also to it,
as you did to your Quinces.

This wise you may make Marmalade of Wardens, Pears, Apples and Medlars,
Service, Checkers, or Strawberies, every one by himself, or else mix it
together, as you think good

To make Succade of peeles of Oranges and Limmons. Chap. 14.
FIrst take of your peeles by quarters, and sees them in fair water, from
three quarts to three pintes: Then take them out, and put to as much more
water, and sees them likewise, and so do again, till the water wher^n they
are sodden have no bitterness at all of the peeles, then are they ready. Now
prepare a Syrop as ye do for Quinces condict in the sirop, in the 9. Chap.
before written, sees them in a glass or pot.

To make green Ginger. Chap. 15.
TAke the Rases of cased Ginger of the fairest and use them as follows: Lay a
broad lane of fair sand upon a low floor on the ground, half a foot thick,
then lay your Rases of Ginger upon the sand in order, cover the Ginger with
more sand, four or five inches thick, sprinkle the sand over with fair
water twice every day that it be moist, thus daily do, til ye shall perceive
your Rases to be soft. Then take up your Rases, wash them, and scrape them
clean, have a sirop ready made, as above is said, sees them in it till they
be well seasoned: take them up, and with some of the sirope cast them, or put
them in a pot of stone.

To make Manus Christi. Chap. 16.
TAke half a pound of white Sugar, put thereto four ounces of Rosewater,
sees them upon a soft fire of coals, till the water be consumed, and the
sugar is become hard: Then put therein a quarter of an ounce of the powder of
Pearls, stir them well together, put for every spoonefull a piece of a leaf
of gold cut of purpose, cast them upon a leaf of white paper being first
anointed with the oil of sweet Almondes, or sweet butter for cleaving too.

To make Aqua Composita. Chap. 17.
TAke four gallons of the best Ale, drawn from the yeast 24. hours after it
has stood tunned, and put it into a close vessel, wherein you shall put these
herbs following, and four ounces of Licorase scraped, and bruised in a
mortar, and so much Annise seed well garbled: then stir them together twice a
day for the space of three days, and let them stand 24. hours after: then put
them into the stilling pot, and (if you please) you may also put in the Lees of
Malmsey or Sack, or any other distilled waters, but fill not your pot too full:
then set on your Limbeck, and close it fast to the pot, and keep a soft fire
under it. These are the herbs with their quantities.

Isope, Time, Rosemarie, Sage, Parsley, Borage, Langdebeef, red fenel, Sorrel,
Hartstoong, Bay-leaues, Buglosse, Scabias, Marigolde, Costmarie, Ribwoort,
Sentorie, Liuerwoort, Fumitorie, of each a handful.

Margeram gentle, Basil, Mints, Champane, Woodbinde, Patience, Valerian,
Endive, Wormwood, Peneroyall, Camomill, of each half a handful.

To make Aqua Vitae. Chap. 18.
TAke four gallons of strong Ale or Wine-Lees, and put them in a vessel and
cover it well: then put to it three or four handful of Rosemarie, Peniroyall,
Liuerwoort, Hartestongue, or any other good herbs, and stir them together
twice or thrice a day, for the space of four days: then put them in a brass
pot, and still with a temperate fire, for else you burn your pot and loose your
Aqua Vite, which will stink and look red: also, look you keep your water in a
temper, and when it is very hot, let it out, and put in cold water again into
the upper part of the Limbecke, and so change your water as it waxes hot.

Take a spooneful from under the spoute, and light it with a paper, and if it
burn clean out, it is good, else not.

To make Ipocras. Chap. 19.
TAke of chosen Sinamon two ounces, of fine Ginger one ounce, of Grains half
an ounce, of Nutmegs half an ounce, bruise them al, and stamp them in three
or four pintes of good odifferous wine, with a pound of Sugar, by the space of
four and twenty hours: then put them into an Ipocrasse bag of woollen, and so
receive the liquor. The readiest and best way is to put the spices with the
pound of Sugar, and the wine into a bottell, or a stone pot, stopped close, and
after xxuii. hours it will be ready, then cast a thin linen cloth, and
letting so much run through as ye will occupy at once, and keep the vessel
close, for it will so well keep both the spirit, odor and virtue of the
wine, and also spices.

How to make diverse necessary Oiles of great virtue. Chap. 20.
Oleum Hiperici.
TAke the tops and flowers of S. John's woort that has red juice, three ounces,
shred the small, and lay them to steep in sweet wine, as much as needs, three
days: then boil them in a double glass, close stopped, and press out the
liquor from them, which done four times with fresh flowers, and a little more
wine, if any be wasted, if not, take the wine the fourth time strained, put to
it, Terebinthii, 3. ounces: of good Oil 6. ounces, and of Saffron a scruple,
so let the^ boil til the wine be consumed: which poured clear out from the
grounds, reserve to be used.

It is hot and dry, and binding, wherefore it heals the cuts and wounds of
the sinews, takes away the pain of the hips, thighs, and bladder, and
helps the urine.

Oil of Rue.
TAke blossoms and tops of Rue so many as you lift, which small shred, put into
some glasen vessel, and pour to so much sweet Oil as will cover them, and
close stopped, let it stand in the sun, or in some other hot place, five days:
then boil it, and being strained from the herbs, take so many fresh herbs,
and use it as before said, four or five times, and reserve it to use as aforesaid

It is hot, opening, resolving, and mittigating pain: it heateth the raines,
bladder and matrix, it takes away the pains of the^ and the Colleck, if the
belly be anointed therewith, or a glyster made therewith, it is good for the
sinews, helps the cramp, and puts away cold humors.

Oil of Dill.
TAke the flowers and leaves of Dil. etc. as before of Rue. It mitigateth pain,
opens the pores, provoke sweat, resolves vapors, impostumes, swellings and
hardness in any place, and if the back bone be anointed, it eases the
paine^s and growing of Fevers.

Oil of Elder flowers, in the same manner.
It soupleth, cleanses the skin, helps the weakness of the liver, and the
stopping of the same, and greatly asswageth the pain of the iointes.

Oil of the leaves and flowers of Camomill, as of Rue and Dill.
It is good against the pleurisy, opens the pores, resolves vapors,
corrects the evil quality of humors, and is good for the sinews, and abateth
the pain meruellously.

Oil of sweet Mints, as aforesaid.
I comfort a weak stomach, stays vomit, mooues appetite, helps
concoction, and takes away loathsomnes.

Oil of Wormwood.
It is hot, and comfort the parts that are too much cooled, chiefly the
stomach, provoke appetite, takes away obstructio^s, and kills worms.

Of Oil of Roses, and of Rose buds.
It is good against inflammations, it cools the burning and boiling of the
stomach, and fretting of the bowels, if it be given in glister, and to anoint
the teeth, it takes away the ach.

Of the oil of Violet Flowers.
It is good against all inflammations and heat.

Of the Oil of water-Lillie flowers.
It cools more than oil of Violets, it helps the heat of the raines.

To make Oil of Earth worms.
TAke of Earth-wormes half a pound, of good Oil two pound, of sweet wine two
ounces: boil all together until the wine be quite consumed, then strain it
and keep it.

This Oil is good for the sinews that are cold, and helps the pain in the
iointes

Oleum benedictum.
TAke of Oil two pound, Storax Calamite, Labdanu^, Olibanu^, Saffron,
Gumarabbick. Madder, Gum of the Iuie tree, Aloes, Succotrine, Masticke, Cloves,
Galingale, Sinamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes two ounces, Gum Elamy a pound, Mirrhe
Bdellium, half an ounce, Galbamun, six ounces, Spike, an ounce, Rosin of the
Pine tree, Armoniacke, Opoponax, two drams: beat all to powder that is to be
beaten, and mix it with the Oil, and put all into a Stillitorie of glass,
with the head and receiver so closed, that no air come out, setting your
Limbecke upon a soft fire, twelve hours, increasing your fire from six hour
to six, till al be stilled. This done, beat all the residence in the bottom
of the Still to fine powder, and with the same oil distill it the second and
the third time as before, and it shall be as it were Balm.

It is good against Cra^ps, palsies, pains of the ioints, cold Catars, green
wounds and Ulcers: it comfort the spirits, opens obstructions: one drop in
the ear helps the hearing: A Rose-Cake dipped in it and laid to the Temples,
helps the Megrim, and takes away the swimming of the head: an ounce in sweet
wine drunk three days together, cures the disease of the Lungs, and the
quarterne Fever: If you give a spoonefull with wine thirty days, with a
little powder of Piony roots: It helps the falling sickness: so that if the
coronall commissure be also anointed, it eases the pain of the French
Pockes, and is good against the stinging of any venomous beasts, and for all
diseases of the sinews.

To make Conserve of Roses, or other flowers. Chap. 21.
TAke buds of red Roses, somewhat before they be ready to spread, cut the red
part of the leaves from the white: then take the red leaves, and beat and
grind them in a stone Mortar with a pestle of wood, and to every ounce of
Roses, put three ounces of Sugar in the grinding (after the leaves are well
beaten) and grind them together till they be perfectly incorporated, then put
it in a glass made for the nonce, and of purpose, or else into an earthen pot:
stop it close, and so keep it.

Thus ye may make Conserues of all kind of flowers, used thereunto.

The virtue of Conserve of Roses.
Conserve of Roses comfort the stomach, the heart and all the bowels, it
mollisteth and softneth the belly, and is good against black Choler, and
Melancholy. Conserve of white Roses does loose the belly more than Red.

To make Conserve of Violets. Chap. 22.
TAke the flowers of Uiolets, and pick them from the stalk, beat and grind
them with Sugar, as you did your Roses: to these put double the weight of sugar
to the weight of Uiolet flowers, but to all flowers put three parts of sugar to
one part of the flowers.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Uiolet flowers is good against the heat and inflammation of
Choler, called yellow choler, it quenches thirstinesse, it makes the belly
moist and soluble.

The virtue of the Conserve of Buglosse. Chap. 23.
Conserve of Buglosse flowers comfort the heart, it is good for the
frantic, for the Lunaticke, and for the Melancholic, it is good for the
Sincop and sowning, it takes away heart-burning, and trembling of heart or
stomach, it profits against choler.

The virtue of Conserve of Borage. Chap. 24.
Conserve of Borage flowers is of like virtue: it is especially good against
black Choler, or Melancholy, it also makes one merry.

The virtue of Conserve of Rosemarie. Chap. 25.
Conserve of the flowers of Rosemarie, comfort the cold and moist brain, it
comfortes also the sinews, it is good against melancholy and flewine.

To keep Cheries condict, or Goos-beries. Chap. 26.
MAke your sirop as for Plums* then take half a pound of Cheries, and cut off
half the length of the stalk of every Chery, put the^ into the sirop, and use
them as you did the Plums, put in what spice pleases you, and so keep it as
before is written: but make your sirope strong enough of sugar, least it wax
hoar and corrupt, then must ye make a new sirop stronger of the sugar, and put
the cheries in it to keep, as before is said. Thus may ye do with Goos-beries,
to make of the^ tarts or sawces all the year long, saving that the Goose-beries
may be well sodden without breaking, because of their rough skin, so it be
softly and diligently done.

The virtue of the Conserve of Succarie. Chap. 27.
Conserve of Succary is good against yellow and black Choler, and in the
burning and heat of hot Fevers.

The virtue of Conserve Of Eldern flowers. Chap. 28.
Conserve of flowers of Elder, is good against the Morphew, it cleanses the
stomach and the whole body from scabs.

Gather the clusters or bunches whereon the flowers grow, when they are new
blown and spread, lay them upon a fair sheet abroad in a chamber a day or
two, til ye shall perceive the flower will shake off and fall away: then pick
them clean, and make thereof Conserve, as ye do of other flowers.

And whereas it is more wholesome than pleasant, therefore put some other
Conserve (such as you list) amongst it, when you will occupy it.

The virtue of the Conserve of Sorrel. Chap. 29.
Conserve of Sorrel is good against all kind of heates of the stomach, and
other principal parts of the body, and against yellow choler.

Take leaves of Sorrel, wash them clean, and shake off the water clean, or
else tarry til the water be dried clean: beat them, and grind them with
Sugar, as above, and then keep them.

The virtue of the Conserve of Maiden-haire Chap. 30.
Conserve of the leaves of Maiden-haire, is good against the sickness of the
side, called the Pleurisy, and for all the diseases of the breast, and of the
Lights, and in all maladies of Melancholy, and against red Choler.

Make it as you do Conserve of Sorrel.

To make Conserve of Elicampana Roots. Chap. 31.
TAke the roots of Elicompana, wash them clean, slice them into pieces as big
as your thumb, sees them in fair water till they be tender* take them up
and powne them, and draw them through a hair sieue: put thereto in the second
seething, the double or treble weight of Sugar, and when the Sugar is perfectly
incorporated, take it off and keep it.

The virtue of the same.
Conserve of Elicompana is a good comfort to the stomach, and the nourishing of
the members, it marueilously loses tough fleame, dissolueth, and consumes
the same, by the siege it auoideth it.

To make Conserve of Acornes, or Gladen, with the virtue of the same. Chap. 32.
TAke the roots of yellow Flowerdeluce, which grows in moist ground,
otherwise called a Flag root: wash the^ and scrape the^, sees them and order
them as ye do of Elicompana, now last before rehearsed, and so keep it. This
Conserve is good against all sickness of the brain, and Sinews, and against
all diseases of flewine. Unto women it opens natural course, and terms.

And you must generally learn, that in making Conserues, fruits and roots
are made with fire and seething. Moreover, the more Sugar or honey is put into
them, so it be not past three pound to one, the co^serue shall continue the
better

To make Conserve of Strawberies, with virtue of the same. Chap. 33.
Take Strawberies one quart, clean picked and washed, set them on the fire
till they be soft, strain them, put thereto two times as much sugar in powder
as weight of the Strawberies let them sees till the Sugar be incorporated
with the Strawberies, put it in a glass or earthen pot well glased.

The virtue of the same.
The Conserve of Strawberies is good against a hot liver, burning of the
stomach, and specialy in the fervent heat of an ague.

Thus make Conserve of Damsins and Prunes.

To make conserve of Cheries and Barbaries. Chap. 34.
LIkewise you must make Conserve of Cheries, and also of Barbaries, saving that
these require more Sugar than the other do, which are not so sour as they be.
Here is to be noted, that of Conserve of fruits may be made Marmalade: for
when your Conserve is sufficiently sodden and ready to be taken off, then sees
it more on height, and it will be Marmalad.

Moreover, some make their Conserve, Marmalade, and strops, with clean Sugar,
some with clean honey clarified, some with sugar and honey together: and after
the opinion of some great Clearks, honey is more wholesome, though it be not so
toothsome as the Sugar.

To make al kind of Sirops. Chap. 35
TAke Buglosse, Borage, white Endive, of each one handful: of Rosemarie, Time,
Hysope, winter Sauory, of each half a handful, sees them (being first
broken between your hands) in three quartes of water unto three pints, then
strein it, and put in the liquor, whole Cloves an ounce, powder of Sinamon
half an ounce, powder of Ginger, a quarter of an ounce, one Nutmeg in powder,
of Sugar half a pound or more, let them sees upon a soft fire well stirred for
burning too, until it come to thickness of life honey, then keep it Galley
pots.

If you put one pint of Malmesey in the second seething, it will be better.
When it is perfect, have six grains of fine Musk in powder, stir it amongst
your Sirope, as ye put it into your Gallipot, and cover it.

This Sirope will last many years, and is excellent against sowning and
faintness of heart: it comfort the brain and sinews, if it be used as
much as a Hasel Nut at once, at your pleasure,

A Violet Powder for woollen clothes and Furs. Chap. 36.
TAke of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus Aromaticus three quarters of an ounce, of
Cypres, of Gallingale, of Spikenall, of Roseleaues dried, of each a quarter of
an ounce, of Cloves of Spike, of Lauander flowers, of each half an ounce, of
Nigella Romana a quarter of an ounce, of Benjamin, of Storax Calamite, of each
half an ounce, let them be all finely beaten, and searced: Then take two or
three grains of Musk, dissolve it in Rose Water, and sprinkle the water upon
the powder, and turn it up and down in the sprinkling, till it have drunk up
the water: when it is dry, keep it in bags of silk.

A sweet powder for Naperie, and all Linen clothes. Chap. 37.
TAke of sweet Mariorum (that which is hory is the sweeter) when it has in him
seeds ripe, cut the branches, so that the root may spring again, when this
Mariorum is dried, then rub out the seeds and keep them to sow about Easter,
and the husks and leaves that grow about the seeds take for your purpose, rub
them small (for if you beat them to powder in a mortar, they will loose the
most part of their savor) the^ take of white Saunders, or of gray Saunders,
but look that they be new, of right sweet odor, for if they be old and have
no pleasant and quick odor, they are nothing worth: Take (I say) of these
sweet Saunders beaten into fine powder, an ounce, and put it into an ounce of
your sweet Mariorum, rubbed between your hands as before is said, and if you
put one or two grains of Musk thereunto, for your wearing linen, it is the
better: sow these up in a silk bag together and lay it among your Linen: of
such bags have a dozen or two, which will continue many years, and when you
look to your Linneu, then chafe each of the bags between your hands, that they
may yield out their sweet odor.

Moreover, in the Summer time, gather red Roses in fair weather, so soon as
they be blown and opened, lay them upon a table, a bed, or fair floor of
boords, and now and then remove the^, least they mould and wax foisty. When
they are dry, pick of the leaves, that you may have two peckes of them, then
straw them among and between the boughtes and foldings of your linen with one
handful of dry Spike flowers, to six handful of dry Roses, and lay your
sweet bags amongst them. Be sure that your linen be ever through dry, ere
ever you lay them up, or else the Roses will wax hoar, set your co^^er in a
dry air, and in the winter time or in wet weather, when ye perceive your
roses to wax moist, then put them in a pi^owhere or twain, that they fall not
out, and lay them upon your bed between the couerlet and the blanket al
night, or else before the fire, let them dry, and straw them again.

Moreover, ye must always have a bag full of dry Roses in store; kept in a
dry air: for if he loose his redness, then loses the Rose his sweetness.

Finally, you must every year put away your old Roses and occupy new, but
help your sweet bags still many years.

To make a Pomeamber. Chap. 38.
TAke Bensamin one ounce, of Storax Calamite half an ounce, of Labdanum, the
eight part of an ounce, beat them to powder, and then put them into a brazen
ladle, with a little Damask or Rose water, set them over the fire of coals til
they be dissolved, and be soft like wax: Then take them out and chase them
between your hands as you do wax: then have these powders ready, finely
Tearred: of (...), of Cloves, of sweet Saunders, gray or white, of each of
these three powders half a quarter of an ounce, mix these powders with the
other, and chase them well together, if they be too dry moisten them with some
of the Rose water left in the ladle, or other: If they wax cold, warm them
upon a knives point over a chasingdish of coals: then take of Amber Greece, of
Musk, and (...), of each three grains, dissolve the Amber Greece in a silver
spoon over hot coals, when it is cold, make it small, put it to your Musk and
Ciuet: then take your Pome that you have chased and gathered together, and by
little and little (with some sweet water if need be) gather up the Amber Musk
and Ciuet, and mix them with your ball, till they be perfectly incorporated,
then make one ball or two of the lump, as ye shall think good, for the weight
of the whole is above two ounces, make a hole in your ball, and so hang it by a
face.

If you perceive that the ball is not tough enough, but too britle, then take a
courtesy of Storax liquida, and therewith temper your Ball against the fire,
but take not too much Storax liquida, because it is too strong.

Or, the better way is to have some Gum, called Dragagouthant, ready dissolved
in sweet water, it will be dissolved in two days, and with that gather your
ball with the heat of the fire: this ball will be of like goodness within as
without, and of great price.

Some men put in the making thereof, three or four drops of the oil of Spike,
beware of too much because it is very strong.

When you will have your Ball exceed in sweetness, break it, and have two or
three grains of Musk, or Ciuet, or Amber Greece, all you delight in, or alcoge
them, dissolve them in rose or, Damask water, and with the san^^ (...) your
Balle over the fire till it be drunk^ in, then pearce a new hole, as before.

To make a fine Fumigation to cast on the coals. Chap. 39.
TAke of (...) one ounce, of Storax Calamite half an ounce; dissolve them as
soya Pomander, then have ready these woods in powders or out of them: Ginger,
or Cypres, or of white Saunders and Cloves, of either half a quarter of an
ounce, all in fine powder, mix them altogether: and with some Storax liquida
gather the^ together with the heat of fire, then make them ^ou^^, of the
bigness of a black Slo^ and with your seal print it a Cake while it is
warm and soft.

Of these cast one or two upon a chasting dish of coals, to purge all
pestiferous and corrupt aires out of your houses if you put to the other
things, the powder of Amber (...), it will be the sweeter.

Some put also Lavdanum, as before said in making the Pomeander, herein do as
the savor shall please you.

To make the same in Oselets. Chap. 40.
TAke a little of fine powder of Sallow, or willow coals, mix with it some of
your Fumigation last before named, in the making, woork them well together,
then fashion it with three or four feet like a Cloue, and when it is dry,
kindle the end of it at a quick coal, and it will yield a sweet savor to put
not too much coals, for then it will savor of them: put not too little coals,
for then it will not keep fire: put not too much Storax liquida, for then it
will be too britle and too moist, and will not lightly dry: therefore, it
shall be very well to have some Gum of the Cherie tree or Plum tree, which
they call Gum Arabic: dissolve some of it into sweet water, til it be liquid
and tough, with this gather your Oselets: or other Fumigations.

A moist Fume upon a Fuming dish. Chap. 41.
TAke a piece of Pomeamber, as big as a Hazell nutt bruise it, put it into your
Fuming dish with sweet water, put thereunto a few Bay leaves, as much of dried
Bazell leaves, a little Rosemarie, and set it over the fire, upon a Cup (...),
or else in steed of the Pomeamber, put two or three of the cakes before written,
broken small, and nine or ten whole cloves: and if you will have it (...)
fewer, then put (...) grains of Musk, and let the leaves and them stand over
the fire together, as before is said.

A Fumigation for press and clothes that no Moth shall breed therein. Chap. 42.
TAke of the mood of Cypress, or distemper, of Rosemarie dried, of Storax
Calamite, of Benjamin, of Cloves, a like weight, beaten into powder: then take
of the powder of Wormwood leaves dried, as much as all the others said them well
together, cast thereof upon a chafingdish of coals, and set in your press,
and shut it cloase: and thus do often times till you have well seasoned your
Press or coffer.

A Perstime for a Chamber. Chap. 43.
TAke Rosemarie, sweet Mariorum. Bay leaves, of each a hand full, (...) other
Cloves, vinigre and Rosewater (...)tity, boil these in your perfuming (...). A
which smell is sweet and wholesome.

A Perfume of Damask. Chap. 44.
TAke Storax Calamite (...) Benjamin, Labdanum four ounces, (...) ounce Mask
four grains, Cloves and (...) Rosewater half a pound stamp them together and
when you will occupy them, put them in your s^^^^ing pan and boil them.

An odorifferous sweet Balle against the plague Chap. 45.
TAke Storax, Labdanum, of each a dram Cloves half a dram, Camphix half a
scruple, Spiknard a scruple, Nutmegs a dram: Of all these make a pass with
Rosewater tempered with Gum Dragagant and Gum Arrabicke, stirring and bruising
them well of this paste make your balls and warm the^.

An Odorifferous white Powder. Chap. 46.
TAke Trios elect three ounces, white Sandall two ounces. Damask Roses, Lignum
Aloes, Benjamin, Ci^ri Alexand of each two ounces, Mask four grains, Ciuet,
three grains: beat and sift them by themselves, and incorporate them in the
same mortar you beat them in, and keep it in a vessel well stopped.

A sine red Powder. Chap. 47.
TAke Damask Roses two ounces, Sandilt Attrui^ one ounce, Ligai Aloes, Ligni
Alex. of each a grain, fine Musk three drams, Ciuet two drams, Amber two
drams: mix them and beat them and keep them together, as before.

A sweet Black Powder. Chap. 48.
TAke Cipri Alerand, Ligni Aloes of each half a dram, Sandali Cytrini, damask
Roses, of each an ounce, Cloves three grains, musk three grains, and as much
Ciuet, beat these together, and keep them close in a vial well stopped.

A Powder wherewith to make sweet w^ter. Chap. 49.
TAke the wood of Cypress, or the root of Galingale one quarterne, of Calamus
Aromaticus one quarterne, of Drace or Iris one quarterne, of Cloves one
quarterne, of Storax Calamite one quarterne, of Benjamin one quarterne.

Or, ye may take of each of these one ounce for a portion, let all be beaten
into powder, and when you will distill your Roses, fill your Still with Rose
leaves, and a few Spike flowers, and upon the top of some, straw some of your
powders, and so distill them.

Some put a little of the powder of Nigells, Romana, to the other powders.

These Cakes will be very sweet, put the water in a large glass, and to the
pot put twelve grains of Musk, let it hang in the midst of the water, in a
thin linen cloth with a thread, set it in the Sun twenty or thirty days,
then take the glass in, and set it in a dry air.

Conclusions and rules to be used in distilling, and the ordering of each herb
of flower before they be distilled. Chap. 50.
FIrst, a soft fire makes sweet water, and the sweetness to continue strong.
Secondly, coals (...) the best water.

Thirdly, wash nothing that you will still, but wipe it with a clean cloth.

Fourthlie, all herbs, flowers and seeds must be gathered when the dew is
off them.

Fiftlie, That which you will still, must lie at the least six hours before
you still it.

Sixtlie, Al Spices corrupt your water, except Amber Greece, Ciuet and Musske.

7. Scum your water well.

8. Keep your still very clean.

9. Wash your still, but not often, and then dry it with a dry cloth.

10. The glass Still is best, the tin next, the earth not so good as the
thine, and the leaden is the woorst of them.

11. Tender flowers, as Uiolets, Jill^flowers, and such like; would be stilled
or glass.

12. All compositions must be stopped close before, and in stilling diligently
weighed and measured.

13. Liquid waters must have greater fire than dry and light waters.

14. Still not your glass too still.

15. Put store of ashes under your still, that your Still shall not burn.

16. Wipe the upper part of the Still often, but especially the ridge.

17. Diligence in looking to all things. Borage, must be distilled: the herb
with the root chopped together.

Hysop, the leaves stripped from the stalk when it bears blew flowers.

Camomill, the herb and flower chopped together in the middell of May.

Dil, the herb in the beginning of May.

Fumitory, the whole substance chopped in the end of May.

Mint, either red or other, the herb, stalk and leaves chopped in the middle
of May.

Roses, the flowers cutting away the white ends.

Rosemarie the flowers, buds and leaves stripped from the stalk in May, in the
flowering.

Sentorie, the herb and flowers chopped in the end of June,

Uiolets, the flowers in April.

Woodbind, the flowers in the beginning of June.

To make the water of the same color of the Flowers that you distill. Chap. 50.
FIrst, distill your water in a Stillitorie: then put it in a fair glass, and
take the buds of Roses and cut away the white, and put the leaves into the
stilled water, then stop the glass, and put it into the Stillitorie to Still,
putting herbs into the Still for fear of burning. After this, strain the
water from the leaves, and scum it well.

A compound Water to perfume gloves or other things. Chap. 51.
TAke Damask water double stilled a pound, Mask ten grains. Cauet three
grains. Amber greece four grains: heat all these together to powder, and
put it into the water aforesaid, and stop it close, and use it without any more
stilling.

To make Damask water. Chap. 52.
TAke Damask Roses, and red Roses of each (...) handful, let them dry four
hours in the shadow when take two drams of Labdanum Nigellae Romanae two
peniworth, Irios half an ounces Storax, two drams, Cloves an ounce, Beniam^n
Cola^us Aromaticus Nutmegs, of each half on ounce Marioru^ and Bazel, of each
half a ha^dful: bruise the spice, and put it in Malmsey or the lees thereof the
space of four days: then distill it and scum it fourteens days.

Another manner of making of Damask water. Chap. 53.
TAke of ^race of Iris, of Spike flowers dried, of Cloves, of each an ounce,
make them in powder, put them together, with a pint of new Ale in corns, and
one pint of Rosewater in an earthen pot, put thereto a good mary of green
Roseleaues, let them soke in it a night time stopped close, in the morning when
ye shall distill, first, say other Roseleaues in the bottom of your
Stillitorie for fear of cleaving too: then take of the Roseleaues out of the
pot, and put them with other green roseleaues, in your Stillitorie sufficient,
and to the water put Musk, as above is said. This water is excellent to set
forth a Tart, an Apple Moyse, or Almond butter.

Powder of Holland against Colic, and the gnawing of the belly. Chap. 54.
TAke Sinamon, Annis seed, Fenell seed, Cominseed, of each a quarter of an
ounce, of (...) Lu^^oris three quarters of an ounce, of Gallingale one ounce
and a half, of Spikenard a quarter of an ounce, of Stene of Alexandria two
ounces: beat them all into fine powder, and serve them, whereof take a quarter
of an ounce in a mess of Pottage.

Powder to make the belly solluble, causing a gentle laske; meet for Noble
Personages. Chap. 55.
TAke S^ene of Alexandria one ounce, of fine Ginger half a quarter of an
ounce, of Annys seed a quarter of an ounce, beat them into fine powder into
your fo^de Sugar, and make ^osinges as before of the whole, the number of
sixteen, whereof dissolve two of them into a mess of pottage, or in a cup of
wine, fasting in the morning, and fast one hour after: If you do put as much
of Sugar in powder as the weight of the whole powder, ye may keep it in a
bladder, and the whole powder will serve eight times to receive: as even now is
said

A receipt to restore strength in them that are brought low with long
sickness. Chap. 56.
TAke of the brawn of a Fesant or Partridge, or of a Capon sodden or roasted, of
each a quarter of an ounce, steep them in Rosewater two hours, of the kernels
of Nuts called Pistatiorum, and of the kernel of the pine Apple, of each a
quarter of an ounce: of Sinamon in fine powder, the weight of twenty barlie
corns, of the spices of Dianthos, Diamargariton, Letificentes, Galem, of each
the weight of forty grains or Barlie corns, of the seed of Millon, Pepon,
Goord, and Cucummer, of each the weight of ten grains the skin taken off, let
them be all ground small, then take six ounces of Sugar, dissolved in Borage
water, sees it on height, as for loosings, and when it is sodden enough, then
put in all the other gear, and make loosinges thereof. Whereof one is
sufficient at once, dissolved in a mess of Pottage, or a draught of drink:
Thus do two or three times every day.

To make Loosings. Chap. 57.
TAke half a pound of Sugar, and as much Rosewater, or other distilled water,
as for Mamis (...), sees them likewise; and When you will know when it is
s^^den enough, take out some upon a knives point, and let it cool; and if it
be hard like sugar, then it is sodden inought: Then put into it powder of
Gluger, Sinamon or Nutmeg: stir them well together, lay it upon a paper oiled,
drive it as thin as you think meet Lay on it your gold leaf with a (...)
tail, cut your Losings Diamond fashion, and so keep them.

To perfume gloves. Chap. 58.
TAke the gloves and wash them in rosewater, or Damask water, till the scurffe
of the leather be gone, and then stretch thent forth softly, and keep the
water you wash them with still: thea hang them up to dry, and then lay them in
a clean linen cloth that is folded three or four times double, and when
they be dry, let them lie in Roseleaues dried a day or two, then take oil of
Ciuet Almonds, and Musk: and grind them together upon a Marble stone, stretch
them forth softly, and with your hand anoint your gloves three or four
times, and ever among stretch them fourth as they dry. Then take Sandise^
mixed with a little Amber Greece, and sta^^e the powder of it thinly upon them,
and lay them in a paper, and in a boxes or else most the Amber Greece in a
quantity of Rosewater, and mix the Sandifex in it, and so anoint the glous
with the same: then let them dry, and lay them in fair white paper.

2. To perfume gloves another way.
TAke the gloves and wash them, as aforesaid, three or four times, and wring
them every time softly: then take Gum of Dragagant and steep it in fine
Damask water one night, then strain the Water through a fine linen cloth,
and take the Gum and mix it with an ounce of Amber Greece, and a quarter of an
ounce of Musk: first grind your Amber Greece with oil of Turpentine: then
mingle all together, and roll your gloves: with the same: lay them to dry,
and lay a paper between.

3. A preparatiue for gloves.
WAsh the gloves, as aforesaid, till the sent of the Leather be gone, then
take Benjamin two ounces, of Storax Calamit one ounce, let them be very fine:
then take oil of Ciuet Almonds and mingle it with Beiamin amd Storax upon a
Marble stone. When it is well ground, put it into an earthen pot with more Dile
of Ciuet Almondes, then put in Cloves in powder, and so let it stand close
covered: and when you need, take a little Rosewater in a Spoonge, and rub the
gloves softly, and then in like manner, with the oil called Ciuet oil for the
same purpose.

4. Another way.
TAke twelve grains of Musk, six grains of Amber Greece, three grains of
Storax Calamite, six grains of Benjamin, and a few Cloves: grind all these
together with oil of Ciuet, Almondes. First, wash your gloves with Eusses,
dissolved a day in Damask water.

5. An other for gloves.
TAke your gloves and wash them in Rose water once or twice, till all the
scurffe be gone from them, and then let them dry, and stretch them well out,
fingers and all. Then plain them, and wash them once or twice: then take two
ounces of Storax and as much Benjamin made in powder, dress your gloves all
over, on a smooth board before they dry: then hang them to dry, and when they
be dry, save the powder that is left.

Then take a pint of Rosewater, and two ounces of Storax, and two ounces of
Sinamon, put all these in powder, and cast them to the Rosewater, and let them
sees in a close Posnet covered; Then take a fine brush; and brush them over.

6. An other way to perfume.
TAke Amber Greece a dram, of Musk half a dram, of Fusses a dram, of Ciuet
half an ounce, put all these together in a pince of Rosewater, or Damask water.

4. Another way.
TAke a dram of Amber Greece, a dram of Benjamin, half a dram of Fusses, a
dram of Storax, a quarter of an ounce of Labdanum, put all these in Rosewater.

A Perfume for Chestes and Cupbords, and also for Gloves. Chap. 59.
TAke Benjamin and Storax of each an ounce, Labdanum and Fusses, of each a
quarter of an ounce, half a dram of Ciuet: If you burn it for chestes or
cupboords, beat it in hot mortar: If it be for gloves boil it, and put it to
Rosewater.

To color Gloves. Chap. 60.
YOu must have hulles of green Walnuts that must lie in water all the year
long: roll them well with these hulles, and make them as deep a color as
you may.

How to color gloves yellow within.
TO color gloves yellow within, take the yolks of twenty Eggs, and put them
in a frieng pan, with a soft fire, stir them ever, and bruise them with a
ladle, and the oil that ascends of them, being anointed on the inside of
the gloves, will make them look yellow.

To make musk Soap. Chap. 61.
TAke strong lie made of Chalk and six pound of stone Chalk, four pound of
Dear Suet, and put them in the lie in an earthen pot, and mingle it well, and
keep it the space of forty days and mingle and stir it three or four times a
day till half he consumed, and to that that remains seven or eight days
after, you must put a quarter of an ounce of Musk, and when you have done so,
you must also stir it, and it will linell of Musk.

To make red sealing Wax. Chap. 62.
TAke to one pound of Wax three ounces of clear Turpentine in Summer, in
Winter take four: melt them together with a soft fire, then take it from the
fire and let it cool: then put in Uermilion very finely ground, and Sallet
oil, of each an ounce, and mix them well together, and it is perfect good.

To keep Damasins in sirop. Chap. 63.
TAke Damasins, and pick them well with a knife or a pin, then take clarifteu
Sugar, as much as you shall think will scrue, and then you must boil it till
it be as thick as birdlime. Then boil your Damasins in the clarified Sugar
til they be soft, then take them up and put them in a glass, then you must
boil the sirop, till it be as thick as the other was, before you put in the
Damasins. And as soon as it is so thick you must pour it into the Damasins,
and so cover them close.

A Water for the face, used of Gentlewomen. Chap. 52.
TAke Goats milk two pound, fine Flower half a pecke, the white of three
eggs, and make it from paste to little loaves, and take it not too much: then
take more of the said Goats milk, and crum of the crummes of your bread into
it, let it steep all night, and wipe your face with a dry cloth, and then
wash with the said milk, and in using this, it will make the face shine as
white as snow.

Another to make the face fair.
TAke the shearing of Scarlet four ounces, the whites of two new laid eggs,
white wine two pound. Rosemarie flowers, or Rosemary it self, and sees it or
still it, but if you sees it, scum it clean, and when it is cold use it, and
it will make the skin look smooth.

Another, to remove high color in the face.
LImons laid in butter-milke is an excellent means to remove high color in
the face.

A Water for heat in the face, and breaking out with Pimples. Chap. 65.
TAke Allu^ glass two pound, the juice of Plantin, Purslane, beriuice, of each
half a pound, the whites of twenty eggs, beat them and mix them and distill
them: which water destroys chaffinges, heates, pimples, wheales, and
scurffes, wheresoever they be.

To know whether a Woman shall ever conceive or no. Chap. 66.
TAke of the ruin of a Hare, and having fraied and consumed it in hot water,
give it the woman to drink in the morning at her breakfast, then let her
stand in a hot bath: And if there come a grief or pain in her belly, she
may conceive, if not, she shall never conceive.

To make a barren woman bear children. Chap. 67.
TAke of those little Sea fishes, called in Latin Polipi or Polipodes, and
roast them upon the Embers without oil, and let the woman eat of them, and it
shall profit and help very much, having in the mean time the company of a
man.

To make women haua a quick and speedy deliverance of their children, and
without pain, or at the least very little. Chap. 68.
TAke leaves of Bittanie, and stamp them, or else make powder of them, and give
the woman that labors to drink of it with a little water, and she shall be
delivered incontinent without any great pain or labor.

To stop the running of the Raines five several ways. Chap. 69.
TAke Venice Turpentine washed in red Rosewater, four ounces, a Nutmeg,
Plantine seed, a yellow Amber bead, of each a like, with like quantity of
Sinamon, and powder of Comsery roots, which being mingled, roll of the
Turpentine in the powder, and make it into fine pills as big as a bean, and
take them in a spoone with sirop of Rubarbe, three in the morning, and three,
two hours before supper, and it will help it.

Another for the running of the Raines.
TAke Nutmegs half a pound, and bruise them in a mortar, and knead them in
dough, and bake them, which bread is very healthful.

Another special way approved.
TAke Hazell nuts well pilled or blanched two handful, Sinkfield and knotted
grass, of each a handful, four Camphir leaves: stamp the herbs and strain
out the juice into two pound of Muscadell: then beat the Nut kernels as small
as you can, and put them in: also, take an Amber bead, and beat it to powder
very fine, which being put in the wine to the rest, stir them all together a
good while: then sees it until it come to a pound and a little more, and drink
the one half in the morning, and the other at night, making a very light
supper.

An other for the same.
Nip and Clarie fried with the yolks of three or four Eggs, and taken every
morning is very good.

To strengthen the seed. Chap. 70.
TAke Succorie, Endive, Plantin, Violet flowers and the leaves, Clarie, Sorrel,
of each half a handful, with a piece of Mutton, make a good broth, and to eat
it evening and morning is especial good.

For the gnawing in a Woman's Stomach. Chap. 71.
TAke a good handful of Spearemint, and a handful of Wormwood, and heat a
Tilestone, and lay these two things on it, and make a little bag, and when the
herbs be hot put the^ in the bag, and so lay them to her stomach.

To make a sweet Damask powder four manner of ways.
TAke two or three handful of dried Roseleaues two grains of Musk, half an
ounce of Cloves, and beat these all to powder.

2. Another way.
TAke six ounces of Orace, four ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Storax
Calamite, an ounce of Labdanum, with two ounces of yellow Saunders, and a little
Musk.

3. An other way.
TAke two ounces of Cloves, four ounces of Spruce, four ounces of Storax
Calamite, four ounces of Roses, three ounces of Benjamin.

4. Another way.
TAke three ounces of Cypres, four ounces of Benjamin, two ounces of Coliander
or Labdanum, three ounces of Storax Calamite, two ounces of Roses, beat all to
powder.

To make Pepper soft: with the virtue of the same.
YOu shall do this after the same manner as is showed for green Ginger, in
the 15. Chap. that is, with sand, and the like sirope, season and keep them.
Ginger and Pepper in Sirope comfort a cold stomach, and helps much to
good disgestion.

To keep Barbaries.
TAke clarified Sugar, and boil it till it be thick, which you shall
perceive, if you take a little between your fingers, it will rope like
birdlime: then put in your Barbaries, and let them boil with a soft fire,
until you perceive they be tender, then put them in a glass, and cover them,
and so keep them.

For the ague in a woman's breast. Chap. 72.
TAke Hemlock leaves, and fry them in sweet butter, and as hot as she may
suffer it lay it to her breast, and lay a warm white cotton, and it will drive
it away in short time.

For breasts that be sore with milk. Chap. 73.
TAke Linseed oil and wax, melt them, and wet a ragge therein, and lay it to
the breast warm, which will dry up the milk.

For a sore breast. Chap. 74.
TAke bean flower two handful, branne, powder of Fengricke, of each a
handful, white vinigre a pound, three spoonful of honey, and three yolks of
Eggs, sees all till they be thick, and lay it warm to the breast, which
will both break it and heal it, always crushing out the matter when you
shift it.

To keep a woman's breast from breaking. Chap. 75.
TAke Sage, Marigolds with the black seed, and the sharpest Netles, of each
half a handful, bruise them together, and lay it to, which will keep it from
breaking.

For the breasts broken or not.
TAke Oil of Roses, bean flower, and the yolk of an Egg with a little
Vinigre, set it on the fire till it be luke warm, then with a sether anoint
the place.

For the unnatural heat of the Liver. Chap. 76.
TAke Borage, Buglosse, Succorie, Violets, Fumitorie, young hop buds, Fenell
buds, of each a quarter of a handful: young Malowes, and Mercury, of each
half a handful, boil these in a pottle of whey, and strain them.

For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77.
TAke half a pint of Ale, and a sprig of Rosemarie, and sees them together,
and scum your Ale, and then put in a piece of Alum, as much as a nut, and a
spoonefull of honey, and two spoonful of Honey-suckle water.

To make the face fair, and the breath sweet. Chap. 78.
TAke the flowers of Rosemarie, and boil them in white wine, then wash your
face with it, and use it for a drink, and so shall you make your face fair,
and your breath sweet.

To make hair as yellow as gold. Chap. 79.
TAke the rine or scrapings of Rubarb, and steep it in white wine, or in
clean lie: and after you have washed your head with it, you shall wette your
hairs with a sponge or some other cloth, and let them dry by the fire, or in
the Sun. After this, wet them and dry them again: for the oftener they do it,
the fairer they will be, without hurting your head any thing at all.

To drive away all venomous beasts from your house. Chap. 10.
TAke Juniper, the seed of Agnus Castus, the shelles of the river Creuises,
Hartes-horne, the grease or suet of a Bucke, Kerse or town Cresses, Organy and
Bittanie, make of al these drugs a dough or paste. And when you will use or
occupy it, burn it, for whereas the smoke thereof goes, the beasts will void
away.

Against al poison eaten or drunken. Cap. 81.
Having knowledge that any man is poisoned, the chief remedy is to make him
vomit the poison, in giving him oil Olive luke warm to drink alone, or mixed
with warm water. And if you have no oil, give him butter with hot water, or
with the decoction of Linseed or the seed of netles, or of Semigrecu^, and al
these things purge the venom as well downward as upward. After, having made
him vomit diverse times, you must purge him with sharp glysters downward. Then
give him water mixed with honey, and also old wine enough to drink. But if you
can get good Triacle or Metrinate, they are the principal against poisons,
with Terra sigillata, Acorne shells, and give it him in good wine. Let his meat
be the fat flesh of old beasts, and fat broths, specially of hens and fat fish,
and let him not sleep: And in continuing with this means, he shall be delivered
by the help of God.

To drive away Lice. Chap. 82.
TAke encense, and the Lard of a Barrow hog, properly called Barrows grease,
boil them together in an earthen pan or pot leaded, and with this ointment rub
and anoint the place where the Lice be.

How to make a sovereign Water, that Master Doctor Steuens Physician, a man
of great knowledge and cunning, did practice, and used of long experience. And
therewith did very many cures, and kept it always secret, till of late, a
little before his death, Doctor Parker, late Archbishop of Canterbury, did get
it in writing of him. Chap. 83.
The Receipt.
TAke a gallon of good Gascoine wine, then take Ginger, Galinghale, Camomill,
Sinamon, Nutmegges, Grains, Cloves, Mace, Annisseedes, of every of them a
dram: Then take Sage, Mint, Red Roses, Time, Pelitorie of the wall, wild
Mariorum, Rosemarie, Penny mountain, otherwise called wild Time, Camamill,
Lauender, and Auens, of every of them one handful: then beat the Spices
small, and bruise the herbs and put all into the Wine, and let it stand
twelve hours, stirring it diverse tunes: Then still it in a Limbecke, and keep
the first pint of the Water, for it is the best: Then will come a second
Water, which is not so good as the first.

The sundry virtues and operations of the same, many times approved.
THe virtues of these waters be these: it comfort the spirits, and
preserves greatly the youth of man, and helps the inward diseases, coming
of cold, against shaking of Palsy: it cures the contractes of sinews, and
helps conception of women that be barren, it kills the worms in the
belly, It helps the cold Gowt, it helps the toothach, it comfort the
stomach very much, it cures the cold dropsy, it helps the stone in the
bladder, and in the reins in the back: it cures the Canker, it helps
shortly a stinking breath. And who so uses this Water ever among, and not too
often, it preserves him in good liking, and shall make one sceme young very
long. You must take one spoonefull of this water fasting, but once in seven
days, for it is very hot in operation. It preserved Doctor Steuens that he
lived lxxx. and xviii. years, whereof ten years he lived bedred.

To make a water that takes off al staining, dieng and spots from the hands
of Artificers, that get them by working, and makes them very white and fair:
It is also good for them that be Sun-burned. Chap. 84.
TAke the juice of a Lymmon, with a little bay Salt, and wash your hands with
it, and let them dry of themselves: wash the^ again, and you shall find all
the spots and staining gone. It is also very good against the scurffe or
scabbes.

To heal all manner of inflammation, and evil disposition of the air, leaperie
faces, great swollen legs, or inflamed hands. Chap. 85.
TAke flower or Amillum made of Barley, which ye shall easily find at the
Apothecacaries, and sees it half an hour in common water, then strain it
and put it into another new pot that is clean and neat, putting to it a few
Mallows, Succorie, Hoppes, Endive and Borage, and sees all these together
until it be dissolved, and ad to it an ounce of Sandall, and then strain all,
and take in a linen cloth as much Cassia extracta, as will go into two nuts,
and put it within the said linen cloth with the Cassia, while the water be
hot, pressing it so hard between your two fingers, that the substance of it
may go into the said water, then put to it Sugar or pennides, as much as you
will. Of this drink (which is of a very amiable savor) you must take from day
to day a little glass full in the morning, lieng in your bed with your breast
upward, then laieng some linen cloth upon your stomach, sleep if you can,
and take of it also after you be up, and have done your necessary: the which
doing, you shall find your self very well healed in few days. But here
note, that this must be done in the Summer and not in the Winter, and he that
has his Stomach very cold, may wear before his breast some piece of
scarlet, or other cloth, and sometime anoint his Stomach with an Oil made
for the weakness of it, the perfect composition whereof, we will put
hereafter.

A singular Ointment, which heals all burning with fire, not leaving any
^katre where it has been. Chap. 86.
TAke the white of two Eggs, two ounces of Tutina Alexandrina, two ounces of
quick Lime washed in nine waters, an ounce of new Ware, with as much Oil
Roset as shall suffice, and make thereof an ointment, which ye shall find
very good for this that we have spoken of.

To draw an arrow head, or other iron out of a wound. Chap. 87.
TAke the ^^ice of Vale^ian, in the which ye shall wet a tent, and put it into
the wound, laying the said herb stamped upon it, then make your binding or
band as it appertains, and by this means you shall draw out the iron. And
after heal the wound according as it shall require.

For him that has a bunch on his head, or that has his head swollen with a
fall. Chap. 88.
TAke an ounce of bay salt, raw honey three ounces, Cummin three ounces,
Turpentine two ounces, intermingle all this well upon the fire: then lay it
abroad upon a linen cloth and make thereof plasters, the which you shall lay
hot to his head, and it will altogether aswage the swelling, and heal him
clean and neat.

To know what time in the year herbs and flowers should be gathered in their
full strength. Chap. 89.
MEdicines are made diverse and sundry ways, some by leaves, some by seeds,
some by roots, some by herbs, some by flowers, and some by fruits. Such leaves
as are put in medicines, should be gathered when they be at their full waxing,
ere that their color be changed, or that they fade any thing,

Seeds when they be full ripe, and the moistness somewhat dried away.

Flowers should be taken when they be fully open, ere they begin to fade.

Herbs should be gathered when they be full of sap, and ere they shrink.

Roots should be gathered when the leaves fall.

Fruits should be taken when that they be at their full growth, or when they
fall, and the heavier fruit is the better, and those that be great and light in
ponderation choose not them, and those that be gathered in fair weather be
better than those that be gathered in rain.

And those herbs that grow in the fields, are better than those that grow
in Towns and Gardens, and those that grow on hills in the fields are best
for medicines, for commonly they be less, and not so fat, and have more
virtue.

Many herbs there be that have special time to be gathered in: and if they be
gathered in that time, they have their full virtue to their property, or else
not so good. Some do help whenever they be gathered, and some naught if
they be gathered out of time: therefore mark well what I teach thee.

Bettanie shall be gathered principally in Lammas month, with the seed and
the roots, and without any iron cool, and it shall be dried in the shadow:
for medicines it may be gathered other times, but evermore it is the better if
it be gotten without iron, and it must be gathered before Sunrising.

Swinsgrasse shall be gathered when it pleases you, in time of need.

Camomill shall be gathered in April.

Pelitorie shall be gathered in June, before the Sun rising.

Red Docke shall be gathered when they need daily.

Longdebeef shall be gathered in June and July,

Peniwoort shall be gathered in the beginning of Winter.

Germander shall be gathered in Lammas month.

Dragant shall be gathered in June and July.

Columbine, in Lammas month.

Addertong should be gathered in April.

Pedelion, when thou will.

Groundsell, always after midday.

Walwoorth, when it pleases you, without Iron.

Violet should be gathered in the month of March, and in this month should
Violettes be put into Sugar and to sirop.

Roses should be gathered in April and in May, and of them should be made
Sugar Rose^ in sirop of Roses, and in the same month should oil be made of
Camamill.

Rosemarie flowers should be gathered in May.

Sentorie, when he begins to flower.

Organum, in the month of June.

Solsequie should be gathered the sixteenth day of August, before the Sun
rising, without Iron.

Hartsstrong should be gathered ere day in November.

Aristologia should be gathered the same time

Garlike may be taken when you need for medicines.

Wild Garlke should be gathered when it flowreth.

Gourdes should be gathered in the end of September, when they be ripe, and
dried where the Sun may be all day.

Wild Nep beries should be gathered when they wax yellow.

Cucumbers should be gathered when the fruit is ripe, and the fruit should be
laid under vines, where the Sun may not have all his strength to him in a
moist place* that it may root, for then the seed shall be good, and full of
kernels.

Citrull when the fruit is ripe, and dried in a dry place in the Sun.

Calaminte should be gathered when it slowreth, and dry it in the shadow, and
it will last a year.

Saffron should be gathered before that the Sun arise.

Godur, that grows among flare, should be gathered when he begins to
flower, and it may be kept three year.

Drake should be gathered when it flowereth, and dry him in the shadow, and a
year it will last,

Eleber must be gatherd in Harvest time.

Fenil seeds should be gathered in the beginning of Harvest, and two year they
may be kept

The roots of Fenell should be gathered in the beginning of the year, and two
years they are good.

Baldemonie, that some men call Gentian, should be gathered in the last end of
the year, and four years he is good enough.

The root of this herb is used, and how thou shall shall know him is this,
that he be very bitter, the less bitter the worse.

Also, look that it be white, whole, and not hollow within, but sad and not
brittle, nor full of powder.

Gallingale is called in Phyisick Typus: it may be taken at all times when thou will, but best is in the end of Ver: and three days it must be laid in the
Sun, and so be dried, that the moisture rot it not, and then you must keep
it in the shadow.

Flowerdeluce should be gathered in the end of Ver, and dried in the Sun, and
it will last two year well.

Here follows the sundry virtues of Roses, for diverse medicines. Chap. 90.
ROses be cold and moist in two degrees: It has these virtues, stamp it, and
lay it to a sore that burns and aketh, and it shall cease both the burning
and aching.

Also it is good for the Fever in the stomach, and against all evils that are
gendred in hot hummors.

Also let any woman drink it with wine, and it shall forthwith testraine
bleeding, and help the marrowes of the womb.

Also make oil of Roses, and that is a principal Receipt for pricking in
sinews: and the water thereof is good for sore eien, and for hot evils, and
the oil is good for headache to anoint therewith the temples, and the root of
him is good, to draw forth iron or other things in a man's foot, and the red
Rose is much better than the white.

The sundry virtues of Lillies. Chap. 91.
LIllies are cold and dry in the third degree and so says Galen, that who so
seetheth the leaves in water, it is a noble plaster for sinews that are
shortened, and it is good for all manner of burnings and scaldings.

Also when the leaves and the roots are sodden in old wine, and tempered up
with honey, ^t is a profitable plaster for sickness that are staruen. Also
the water and the juice is good for to wash thy brissers; and to do away the
freckles on man's visage or woman's: and the root is good to ripe therewith
botches, and for to break them.

Of the sundry virtues of Milfoyle Chap. 92.
MIlfoyle is hot and dry in the second degree, it is good to stanch the bloody
flix, and the juice thereof heals the biting of a red hound: and if it be
sod in red wine, drink it, and it stays worms in the womb, and it softneth
hardness in a man's womb, and it helps the Jawndies and dropsy.

And take the herb and stamp it and temper it with vinigre, and it will do
away blood in wounds, and it will cease the toothach, when it is chewed
fasting. Also it is good for the stinging of an Adder, when it is sodden in
wine, drink it, and lay the substance thereto, and it will draw out venom of
the sore.

Of the sundry virtues of Rosemary. Chap. 93.
ROsemarie is hot and dry: take the flowers thereof, and put them in a clean
cloth and boil them in fair clean water, until half be wasted, and cool
it, and drink that water, for it is much worth against all manner of evils in
the body.

Also take the flowers and make powder thereof, and bind it to thy right arm
in a linen cloth, and it shall make thee light and merry.

Also eat the flowers with honey fasting, with sour bread, or else with other
bread, and there shall rise in thee no evil swelling.

Also, take the flowers, and put them in thy chest among thy clothes, or among
thy books, and Mothes shall not destroy them.

Also, boil the flowers in Goats milk, and then let them stand all night
under the air covered, and after that, give him to drink thereof that has
the Tisicke, and he shall be helped.

Also, if there be any man that is rammage, take the flowers and the leaves a
great quantity, and boil them together in a good quantity of clean water,
in that Paciens Bulneat, and it shall heal him.

Also, boil the leaves in White Wine, and wash thy face therewith, and thy
beard, and thy brows, and there shall no corns spring out, but thou shall have
a fair face.

Also, put the leaves under thy bed, and thou shall be delivered of all evil
dreams.

Also, break the leaves to powder, and lay them on the Canker, and it shall
slay it.

Also take the leaves, and put them into a Wine vessel, and it shall keep the
wine from all sowrenesse and evil savors, and if thou will sell thy wine, thou
shall have good speed.

Also, if thou be feeble with unkind sweat, boil the leaves in clean
water, and wash thy head therewith, and thou shall be delivered from that evil.

Also, if thou have lost appetite of eating, boil well these leaves in clean
water, and when the water is cold, put thereunto as much of white Wine, and
then make therein sops, eat thou thereof well, and thou shall restore thy
appetite again.

Also, if thou have the Flux, boil the leaves in strong Eyzill, and lay them
on a linen cloth, and bind it to thy womb, and anon thy Flux shall be
withdrawn.

Also, if thy legs be blown with the Gowte, boil the leaves in water, and
then take the leaves and bind them in a linen cloth, and wind it about thy
legs, and it shall do thee much good.

Also, take the leaves, and boil them in strong Eyzell, and bind them to thy
stomach in a cloth and it shall deliver thee of all evils.

Also, if thou have the cough, by stirring or by any other way, drink the
water of the leaves boiled in white wine, and ye shall be whole.

Make powder of the rind of Rosemarie, and drink it, and if thou be in the
pose, thou shall be delivered.

Also, take the timber thereof, and burn it to coals, and make powder thereof,
and then put it in a linen cloth, and rub thy teeth therewith and if there be
any worms therein, it shall slay them, and keep thy teeth from all evils.

Also, of the wood make a boist to smell thereto, and it shall keep thee yoongly.

Also make thereof a barrel, and drink thou of the drink that stands
therein, and thou need not dread of any evil being therein, and if thou set
it in the steld, or in thy garden, keep it honestly, and it shall bring forth
much increasing of it self.

And if a man have lost his smelling of the air, that he may not draw his
breath, make a fire of the wood, and bake his bread therewith, and eat it,
and it shall keep him well.

Also a man that has the gowt, take oil of Roses, and the yolke of an egg,
and the flowers of Rosemarie, and meddle them together, and do it to his sore,
and he shall be helped.

How to make a special sovereign water, which is of three colors, and it is
called the Mother of all waters: which is very excellent to cure the Canker,
the Pockes, or Leaprosie, or any other kind of superfluous humors, or any
sore, old or new, and it is thus made. Chap. 94.
TAke Turpentine four pound, of Frankensence, Masticke, of either two ounces,
Alloes, Epaticke, Date stones, Labdanum, Castorum, roots of Detany, roots of
C^ula Campana, of each two ounces, distill them in a Limbecke of glass, with a
soft fire. The first water is clear: the second water is yellow, and swimmeth
above the other: the third water is reddish, like Saffron, and when it
begins to be red and thick as honey, then begins the third water.

The first water burns like a candle, the second water curdeth like milk,
and if you put one drop of the third water into a cup of drink, it goes to the
bottom, and there will it lie an hour, and then mount up to the top, as true
Bawme does, and with this water, if you wash your face twice a day, and
chieftly your Nosethrils, it cures the Rewme discending from the brain, and
clarifieth the sight. And if you wette a linen cloth in this water, and lay it
to any sore leg or arm that has dead flesh, it will cleanse it, and drive
away the ach within six hours space and it consumes al Apostumes, Ulcers,
Fistules, Pustules, Emeraldes, and heals all green wounds. And if ye dip a
linen cloth therein, and make it six fold, and lay it to the noddle of your
neck, it heals the Palsy: and so likewise it cures the Gowt, or any sinew
that is drawn together therewith, has it three or four times together warm.

The water that is of the color of blood, is of such virtue, that if a
leporous man or woman use thereof fifteen days together, half a spoonful
every day, he shall be healed.

The first water is of such virtue, that if it be put in a fresh wound, it
heals it in xxiiii. hours, if he be not mortal. And it heals all kinds of
Cankers, Crepces, Noli me tangere, within fifteen days, if you wash them with
the said water every third day, and if you make rags of cloth, and dip it in
the same water, and lay it upon a plague sore, and drop one drop therein, it
mortifieth the malignitie thereof, and that shortly And if you drop one drop in
the eye that has a pearl, or is half blind, it will recover it in eight days
without any pains: and if you drink a spoonful of it with white wine, it
will recover the strangurie or dissure within six hours, and breaks the
stone within two hours, whether it be in the raines or in the bladder. The
water that has the color of blood is most precious, it comfort the weak
members, and preserves the body from all diseases, and purifieth rotten
blood, and heals all diseases of the Milte, and keeps away the Gowte, and
causes good digestion, it purges cold and rotten blood, and puts away ill
humors, and heals all agues. This water mast be used from the month of
November, to the month of April, and you must take but half a spooneful at
once, nor oftener than ounce a week.

The manner to make this water, ye must have a glass a cubit high, and fill it
with Aquavite made with wine, and stop it well, then put it in hors-dong, so
that it be not moist, nor too wet, least the glass break, and you must leave
the neck of the glass without in the air, that glass through the heat of
the dung will boil sore, so that the water will ascend to the neck of the
same, and descend again to the bottom through the air, and so let it stand
thirty days, then ta^e out the glass, and put these things following in the
water, and stop the mouth that it breathe not out, and so leave it in eight
days. Last of all, put the glass in Balneo Marie, with sand, setting on a
head with a receiver well stopped, and make a soft fire, and gather the first
water that drops clear, but when ye see the second water turn into red
color, change the Receiver, for then comes the second Water, and that will
keep well in a glass well stopped: The spices that go to this water be
these, with the herbs: Cardonum, Cloves, nutmegs, Ginger, Galingale,
Zedoaire, long Pepper, Spikenarde, Laurel berries, Smallage seeds, Mugwoort
seeds, Fenell seeds, Annis seeds, flowers of Basil, Elder flowers, red Roses
and white, lignum Aloes. Cubibes, Cardomum, Calamus Aromaticus, Maces,
Germander, Frankensence, Turme^til, Juniper, Egremonie, Sentorie, Fumitorie.
Pimpernel, Dandelion, Eufrage, Endife, seeds of Sorrel, yellow Saunders,
Fetherfoy, Aloes, Epaticke, of each two ounces, Rubarbe two drams, dry Figs,
Reasins, Dates without stones, sweet Almondes, of each two ounces, Aqua-uite to
the quantity of them all, and four times as much Sugar as they be all, that
is, for one pounds of Engredience, four pound of Sugar, two pound of honey.
This water is called the mother of all waters.

A perfect way to cure the loathsome disease of the French Pockes, pains in
the ioints, lamenesse of limbs, palenesse of color, loathsome scabbes, or any
other filthy disease proceeding of superfluous or evil humors, as also to
assuage over gross and foggie fat bellies, and that without danger Chap. 95.
FIrst, it is needful to provide for the sick body a close and clean
chamber, out of all gross air, and clean warm garments, both for body and
legs, and at rising and going to bed, a fire of Charecoales, for wood is not
wholesome, for smoking: also they must not be troubled with any thing to bring
them out of patience, for that corrupts the blood, which must be new altered:
also the sick body must eat but little meat, and that kind of meat as
shall hereafter be prescribed, and at such times as shall be appointed, and let
the sick body use plaieng on some Instruments, or hear some plaieng, or tell
merry tales, and have no company of women, for that is a most dangerous poison
for the health of any person in that case.

Secondly, you must prepare two brass pots or else iron, one being four
gallons, the other six gallons, one for strong drink, the other for small
drink: also, ye must have close couers to them of b^asse or iron, you must
also prepare good earthen vessels, with close couers to keep your drink in,
of both sorts by themselves: also, you must have a Strainer of a searce
cloth, to strain your drink after it is decoct, Instruments to take out dead
flesh, and to search a sore, and a syring to cleanse any sore being deep, with
the same drink. Also, you must have a wooden vessel to bathe the sick body
in, at such times as hereafter shall be appointed. Also, you must prepare
clean clothes to dry the sick body after a sweat, being warmed well first:
other Instruments you shall need none, but only your wood raped small, or
turned, and the bark of the wood pounded in a Mortar, and the drugs also small,
and your water which you shall decoct, the same must be of a good Conduit or
runnin brook, very clean without any kind of filth, Chalk water is good.

Thirdly, for your strong drink, ye must take your pot of four gallons, and
set it on a fire of coals, with four gallons of the fair running water, then
put into the same one pound and a half of your wood, small raped, or turned at
the Turners, but when you do buy your wood, see it be not old, and lack
moisture, this trial is best, take a little cole burning, and lay it on the
block before it be raped, and if it be good it will boil up on every side of
the coal, like Myrthe: Then put thereto one ounce or a little more of the bark
of the same wood, made in small powder, then take a quarter of a pound of
Cummin seeded put whole into the same, and one half quarter of an ounce of
Radix and Rubarbe, and then stop your pot fast, and lay paste about the cover,
and so fast that no air come out, then sees it on a soft fire, but ever keep
it boiling, and let it boil at the least eight hours, then set it by, and
unstop it not until it be cold, then take your Searce, and strain it into a
fair carthen pot, and cover it close: The sick body must drink of this
but one draughte luke warm in the morning, and one other at night.

Fourthlie, you must take your pot of six Gallons, and put in it six Gallons
of running water, and one pound of the wood raped, and a quarter of Cummin
seeds, and decoct it in all kind of thing even as the other, being close
stopped, and when it is cold, strain it into an earthen vessel or vessels:
and that must the party drink at meal, and at all other times when he list
to drink, and spare not, but draw it by.

Fifthly, the sick body must be kept very warm and not rise out of bed before
eight of the clock, and then eat a dozen or twenty Reisins of the Sun. and no
bread, but a draught of strong drink warm, and about eleven of the clock, let
the sick body eat a little meat, as may suffice nature, and what meat, it shall
be here after showed: then let the sick body walk somewhiles in his chamber,
or read some book, or play on instruments, to keep him from sleeping: then at
six of the clock at night a dozen Reisins of the Sun, and nothing else but a
draught of strong drink warmed.

Sixthly, give to the Patient to eat, these meats following, Chicken,
Partridge, Fesant, Hen, Capon, Rabbet, Conie, Veale, Mutton, and none other,
nor any salt, nor leauened bread, nor Rye bread, and very seldom roasted, but
boiled in water, and no broth nor porredge, nor any kind of sauce: if the sick
body have roste, let it be but every third meal, and no kind of fish, milk,
or fruits, Reisins excepted.

Seventhly, once in three days, for the first 9. days in the morning let the
sick body drink a good draught of the strong drink somewhat warm, and then
lay very many clothes on him, till he sweat, for the space of two hours: then
ease some of the clothes, and have warmed linen clothes, and rub all the body
dry ere he rise, if he have any sores that be deep, wash the sore with
strong drink, and with a searce, and dip a little cloth in the strong drink,
and lay it to the sore, whether it be sore or knobs.

Eightlie, after nine or ten days be past, once in three days let the sick
body be bathed on this sort. Set fair running water on the fire, and put
thereto a great deal of ground Juie leaves, and read Sage and Fennel also,
and by a good fire, when the sick body is going to bed, put the water and
herbs in a vessel of wood, and let the sick body stand upright in it, by
the fire, and take up the herbs, and rush the body of the sick. Patient
downwards, and then dry him with warm clothes: use this three weeks, and by
the grace of God the sick body shall be made whole, whatsoever he be: then
if the party be very weak, after nine or ten of the first days, let him eat
every day at four of the clock in the after noone, a new laid Egg, potched
in fair water, and as much new bread as will suffice nature, and a little
clean wine. Use this diet with good regard, as before is prescribed, and (by
the grace of God) they shall be perfectly cured of the diseases above
mentioned.

The manner to make another kind of Diet drink of stronger operation, for the
same diseases, which by the practice only of one man, has done very great
good, as well in the City of London, as in diverse parts of the Realm. Chap.
96.
TAke of the best Guaicum, most heavy, and full of Gum four pound, let it be
well rase^ with a Rape, or turned into fine chippes by a Turner, and of the
same barks two pound: of Cardus benedictus, which is called the blessed
Thistle, half a pound, of Maiden hair, Cotrach, the flowers of wild, and garden
Buglosse, Ana, one pound, sweet Tassia six ounces, Annis-seed one ounce and a
half, white Sugar six pound, cast all these unto a wine vessel, clean and
apt for the same purpose, upon which, pour of the cleanest and best white wine
that may be got, in quantity one hundred and fifty pound, cover this vessel
close three days, the^ strain it through an baire cloth: then keep it in a
clean vessel for the Pacient at dinner and supper, but not to drink it in
the morning and evening. Besides the drinking of this Guaicum at dinner and
supper, the pacient may between the times, as one bower before or after dinner
or supper, drink four or five ounces. Also, your aforesaid receipts may be put
in clean new, white or Claret wine being fiued and made in the prescribed manner.

Furthermore, the Pacient that has the Pox, Dropsy, or Gowt, may drink among,
this worthy medicine following: the dosse or quantity, is two ounces or more,
according to the age and complexion of the Patient.

Take Maiden-haire, clean fresh Hops, if Fumitorie, Sitrach, called Asplenum,
Seen of Alexand. of each three drams, great Centaurie roots, Liquorice,
Polipodie, wild and garden Buglosse, each, four ounces, Annis-seeves, Nigella
Romana, the flowers of Buglosse, the three Sanders, Cinnamon, each, five ounces,
put this into twenty four pound of the Gua^cum water, sodden after the
description in the Compoundes following: then put it in a close vessel, and
stop the mouth, and when that is done, set the said vessel in an other
seething kettle upon the fire, so let it stand and sees for twenty vowers
fair and softly, then strain it, and keep it in a clean close Vessel for
the use aforesaid: But if the Pacient be full of humors then do thus: take Seen
Alexander two pound, Succa Rosarum solatiua, six pound, white Sugar seven
pound, Rubarbe elected three ounces, finely cut, Turbit of the best one ounce,
put these in a clean stone pot with a narrow mouth: pour into this pot xxiiii.
pound of the common Guaicum water, made in manner in the compounds following:
stop pour pots mouth, sees it in the foresaid manner, upon a soft fire
xxiiii. hours, until it come to a thin sirop, called Jelup, then strain it,
and keep this precious purging drink for mornings, the dose one ounce and a
half, according to the age, complexion and strength: the Pacient must also eat
bread three ounces, well baked like Biscuit, and the flesh of Chicken, Hen,
Capon, Partridge, Fesant, small birds of the wood roasted, excel sodden meats:
and if the common drink be too strong, then the Pacient may your thereunto
some small clean Wine or Beer: Let the Patient be merry kept in a fair
clean chamber, with sweet perfumes, not much feeding, but little and fine, with
clean warm apparel, and a fire of Char-coles, eschewing Venerie, wines,
fruits, fish, gross (...) ^ottage, and white meats: care, anger, cold, much
heat: and by Gods help ye shall have present remedy, whether it be for the
pox, or to cleanse the raines, or for them that be over fat or foggie people,
full of gross humors, gotten with ease and feeding, to rebate and assuage
their fogginesse without hurt, but rather renew them (as it were) and make them
seem young. It helps also the Gowte, Dropsy, Sciatica, Canker and Cympanie,
and many other loathsome diseases, that proceed from over great abundance of
gross humors, also for extreme pain in the iointes.

The manner to choose the best Guaicum or Lignum vitae. Chap. 97.
OF this wood Guaicum, there are three kinds: the first is black within, in
the heart pale colored, having in it russet lines, very hard and heavy. The
other black within, but white without, having very small lines, is hard and
heavy, and not so great as the first. The third is all right white within and
without, having very small lines, and the heart of this wood is the best, the
arm of the tree is better than the body, the boughs neere^ the fruits have
more virtue, warmness, and dryness, than the lower parts of the tree, which
are groser and more earthly of nature, and the more vncteous the wood is, it is
the better, the sap is not so good as the heart, neither the bark as good as
the sap. But the white (...) sweet and most excellent in operation, and is
Lignum sanctum, the holy wood. The bark of the straight young branches or
boughs, being heavy and white, moist, and without lives, hard compacted, be
the best barks for the Pore. All these wooddes called Guaiac^, have a Rosin,
or matter like Benjamin, or pleasant grim within the wood, which is the spirit
or lively helping humor in decoction for the Porzin the sinews, veins,
muskles, head hands, feet and the bones: No sickness is so sharp and cruel to
nature, but this precious wood will both quickly and gently assuage the pain
and grief of the same, if it be ministered accordingly in decoction, namely,
to them whom either the Pox has tormented, or else the Gowt with intolerable
grief.

A most certain and approved remedy against all manner of pestilence or
plague be it it never so vehement. Chap. 98.
TAke an Onion, and cut him overthwart* the^ make a little hole in each piece,
the which you shall fill with fine Triacle, and set the p^eces together again,
as they were before: after this, wrap them in a wet linen cloth putting it to
roste, covered in the Embers or ashes: and when it is roasted enough, press
out all the juice of it; and give the Patient to drink thereof a spoonful,
immediately he shall feel himself better, and shall without fail be healed.

To make a sirop of Vinegre, good for many things. Chap. 99.
TAke sharp Vinigre a pound and a half Sugar two pound and a half, boil it
til it be a sirrop: It will digest choler, Melantholie* and Flewme: It will
make gross humors thin: opens obstructions, prouokes urine, expels
naughty humors, is good against all pestilent Fevers, cools and quenches
thirst, and keeps the body loose.

To comfort the heart, and take away Melancholy. Chap. 100.
TAke the juice of Borage four pound, the flowers of Borage half a pound:
let these stand infused in hot Embers fourteen hours, then being strained and
clarified, put to good Sugar two pound, and boil it to a sirop.

A sirop to cleanse the breast and the lunges, the cough and Pleurisy. Chap.
101.
TAke Liquorice small shred and bruised an ounce, Maiden hair half an ounce,
Hysope two drams, water two pound, let these lie mixed four and twenty hours,
then boil it till the third part be consumed, which strained put in of good
honey, Sugar pellet, and white Sugar of each four ounces, and Rose water three
ounces.

For spitting either of lights or lungs. Chap. 102.
TAke the juice of Purslane and Plantine, of each an ounce, red Corrall a dram,
and bloodstone half a dram fine powdered mixed together, use it.

For worms in young children. Chap. 103.
TAke dry Lupines and make flower of them, which kneaded with honey, lay it to
the stomach of the child.

For the swelling of the Cods Chap. 104.
TAke Rue stamped, lay it to the grieuen place, and thou shall have present
remedy.

For him that cannot hold his water. Chap. 105.
TAke the small end of Oken leaves and sees them in Claret wine, being well
beaten, lay it as hot as may be suffered upon the yard in a plaster fashion.

For the Headache. Chap. 106.
TAke the juice of Mariorum, and put it into the nosethrils, and it will help
you.

For grief of the stomach. Chap. 107.
TAke Masticke, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each a dram, Mace and Sinamon of each half
a dram fine powdered: then take the bottom of a brown loaf tosted and dipped in
Malmesey, strawing of the said powder upon it, lay it to the stomach, and it
is a present remedy.

For the itch. Chap. 108.
TAke unwrought wax, fresh butter, Rose Vinegre, red Rosewater, Brimstone fine
beaten, and Cloves all boiled together, make an ointment.

A Gargill for a sore throat. Chap. 109.
TAke white wine, conduit water, of each a pound, roch Alum, half an ounce,
two spoonful of honey, boil all to a pound and a half, and use it three or
four times a day.

A water for scabbes Ulcers and pushes. Chap. 110.
TAke Plantine water half a pound, water of Oranges four ounces, Sublimate
powder an ounce, put al in a double glass or some other good vessel, and let
it boil with a gentle fire, a quarter of an hour, and take it off, and keep
it in a clean vessel, which use three or or four sundry times and it shall
heal them.

To make a water to take out all spots out of cloth of gold, and velvet. Chap.
111.
TAke raw red Arsnicke, Martem Cudum, of each of them a like quantity, and
when they be well brayed, pour some fair water upon them, and putting the
herb Cinkfoyle to it, sees it unto the half, and then let it cool, and set
it in the Sun two hours: then wash your cloth in it, and let it dry in the
Sun.

To take spots of grease and oil out of all sorts of cloth, white or
other. Chap. 112.
TAke the water that Pease have been sodde in and steep your cloth where the
spot is in it, and then wash it with clean river water, and dry it in the
Sun.

To take all manner of spots out of silk. Chap. 113.
TAke the juice of great and round Mushroms of a sharp taste, wet the spots
in it the space of two hours, and then wash them with clear water, and then
let them dry.

To take spots out of cloth. Chap. 114.
TAke cold Lie, and lees of white Wine made a little hot, and mix them well
together. But you must take heed they be not too hot, and wash your cloth.

A sovereign remedy for the cough. Chap. 115.
TAke Brimstone beaten in powder half an ounce, and put it in a new laid Egg
soft roste, mingle it well together: then put to it Benjamin the bigness of a
Zich Pease, lightly stamped, and drink it in the morning at your breakfast:
Make as much again at night when you go to bed, and you shall be whole at the
second or third time. But if the cough have holden you long, you must take it
so much the oftener.

To keep Poultrie from destroying with Weisels. Chap. 116.
Rub your Poultry with the juice of Rue or Herb-grace, and the Weisels shall
do them no hurt: if they eat the lunges or lights of a Fox, the Foxes will not
eat the^.

A brief Treatise of Vrines, as well of men's vrines as of women's: to judge by
the colors, which betoken health, which sickness, and which death. Chap. 117.
IT is showed, that in four parts of the body dwells sickness and health:
that is, in the womb, in the head, in the liver, and in the bladder: In what
manner thou may know their properties, and thereof thou may learn.

If a man's Urine be white at morrow, and red before meat, and white after
meat, he is whole. And if it be fat and thick, it is not good: and if the
Urine be meanly thick, it is good to like: and if it be thick as Ass piss,
it betokens headache.

Urine that is two days red, and at the third day white, betokens very
health.

Urine that is fat, white and moiste, betokens the Fever quartaine.

Urine that is blooddie, betokens that the bladder is hurt by some rotting
that is within.

A little Urine all fleshie, betokens of the reins, who pisseth blood without
sickness, he has some vain broken in the reins.

Urine that is ponderous, betokens that the bladder is hurt.

Urine that is somewhat bloody of sickness, betokens great evil within the
body, and namely in the bladder.

Urine that falls by drops above, as it were great bolnes, betokens great
sickness and long.

Woman's Urine that is clear and shining in the Urinall as silver, if she cast
often, and if she have no talent to meat, it betokens she is with Child.

Woman's Urine that is strong and white with stinking, betokens sickness in
the reins, and in her secret receites, in her Chambers full of evil humors,
and of sickness of her self.

Woman's Urine that is bloody, and clear as water under, betokens headache.

Woman's Urine that is like to gold, clear and mighty, betokens that she
has lust to man.

Woman's Urine that has color of stable cleansing, betokens her to have the
Fever quartaine, and she to die the third day.

Woman's Urine that appears as color of lead, if she be with child,
betokens that it is dead within her.

Hereafter follow all the Vrines that betoken death, as well the Urine of the
man as of the Woman. Chap. 118.
IN a whole Axis, one part red, another black, another green, and another blew,
betokens death.

Urine in whole Axis, black and little in quantity, fattie and stinking, it
betokens death.

Urine covered over all as Lead, betokens a prolo^nging of death.

Urine that shines raw and right bright, and the skin in the bottom shine
not, it betokens death.

Urine thin in substance, having fleeting above, as it were a dark Sky,
signifies of death.

Urine derstie, stinking, and dark, with a black Sky within, betokens a
prolonging of death.

Urine that is of the color of water, if it have a dark Sky in an Axis, it
betokens death.

Urine that has drestes in the bottom meddled with blood, it betokens death.

Urine black and thick, if the sick loth^ when he goes to the Privy, and
when he speaks overtwhatt; or that he understands no aright, and if these
sicknesses got hot from him they betoken death.

FINIS.
The Table of the secrets in this book.
TO make a Marchpane. Chap. 1 To gilde a Marchpane, Tart, or such like. Chap. 2
To bake Quinces. Chap. 3 To keep Quinces vnpared a whole year. Chap. 4 To
make Rose Vinegre, Chap. 5 A fine Sauce for a roasted Rabbet. Chap. 6 Sugar
paste to make conceits for banquets. Chap. 7 Blanch powder for roasted Quinces.
Chap. 8 To conserve Quinces in sirop. Chap. 9 To conserve Plums or Damasins in
sirop. Chap. 10 Fine Rice pottage. Chap. 11 To make Marmalad of Quinces. Chap.
12 Marmalade of Damasins or Pruines. Chap. 13 Succade of peels of Oranges or
Limons. Chap. 14 To make green Ginger. Chap. 15 Manus Christi. Chap. 16 To
make Aqua composita. Chap. 17 To make Aqua vitae, Chap. 18 To make Ipocras.
Chap. 19 To make diverse necessary oiles of great virtue. Chap. 20 To make
Conserues of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Borage, Rosemarie, Succarie,
Elder-flowers, Sorrel, Maiden-haire, Elacampana roots, Acornes, Strawberies,
Cheries, and Barharies, with their several virtues. Chap. 21.22. etc. unto the
35. To make all kind of sirops. Chap. 35 To make a Violet powder for woollen
clothes etc. Chap. 36 A sweet powder for Naperie and al linen clothes. Chap.
37 To make a Pomeamher. Chap. 38 A fine Fumigation to cast on the coals. Chap.
39 To make the same in Oselets. Chap. 40 To make a moist Fume upon a fuming
dish. Chap. 41 A fumigation for a press and cloths against moths Chap. 42 A
perfume for a Chamber. Chap. 43 A Damask perfume. Chap. 44 A sweet ball
against the plague. Chap. 45 To make an odorifferous white powder. Chap. 46 A
fine red powder. Chap. 47 A sweet black powder. Chap. 48 A powder wherewith
to make sweet waters. Chap. 49 Rules to be observed in distilling of all
herbs and flowers. Chap. 50 To make the water of the color of the herb
you distill. idem. A compound water to perfume gloves etc. Chap. 51 To make
Damask water. Chap. 52.53 To make powder of Holland against the Colic. Chap.
54 A powder to cause a gentle laske. Chap. 55 A Receipt to restore strength,
being weak with sickness. Chap. 56 To make Loofings. Chap. 57 To perfume
gloves eight manner of ways. Chap. 58 A perfume for chestes and cupboords. etc.
Chap. 59 To color gloves. Chap. 60 To make musk soap. Chap. 61 To make red
sealing Wax. Chap. 62 To keep Damasins or plummes in sirop. Chap. 63 A water
for the face, used of Gentlewomen. Chap. 64 A water for heat in the face, and
for pimples. Chap. 65 To know, if a woman shall ever, conceive or no. Chap. 66
To make a barren woman bear children. Chap. 67 To make women in labor have
speedy deliue^^^^e. Chap. 68 To stop the running of the raines three or
four ways. Chap. 69 To strengthen the seed of man or woman. Chap. 70 For the
gnawing in a woman's stomach. Chap. 71 To make sweet Damask powder, four
manner of ways. Chap. 72 To make pepper soft, with the virtue of the same.
Chap. 73 To keep Barbaries. Chap. 74 For women's breasts that be sore, five
several ways. Chap. 75. etc. For the unnatural heat of the Liver. Chap. 76
For the Canker in the mouth. Chap. 77 To make the face fair, and the breath
sweet. 78 To make hair as yellow as gold. Chap. 79 To drive all venomous
beasts from your house. Chap. 80 A Remedy against all poison eaten or
dronken. Chap. 81 To drive away Lice. Chap. 82 To make Doctor Steuens water,
with the sovereign virtues of the same for many things. Chap. 83 To make a
water to take away Sunburning, spots and stainings of the face and hands.
Chap. 84 To heal leaprie faces and swollen legs. Chap. 85 A singular ointment,
for burning with fire. Chap. 86 To draw out an arrow head or other iron out of
a wound. Chap. 87 For one that has his head swollen with a fall. Chap. 88 To
know what time herbs should be gathered in their full strength and virtue.
Chap. 89 The sundry virtues of Roses. Chap. 90 The sundry virtues of Lillies.
Chap. 91 The sundry virtues of Milfoile. Chap. 92 The sundry virtues of
Rosemarie. Chap. 93 To make a sovereign water of three colors, called the
mother of all waters. Chap. 94 To make two the best and usual sorts of (...)
with the perfect manner to cure (...) Pockes, and other loathsome and (...)
diseases. Chap. 95.96 The manner to choose the best Guaicum or Lignum vitae
Chap. 97 A most certain and approved remedy against all manner of pestilence
or plague, be it never so vehement. Chap. 98 ^ things. Chap. 99 To comfort
the heart, and take away the melancholy. Chap. 100 A Sirope to cleanse the
breast and the lunges, the cough and the pleurifie. Chap. 101 For spitting
either of lights or lunges. Chap. 102 For worms in young children. Chap. 103.
For the swelling of the cods Chap. 104 For him that cannot hold his water.
Chap. 105 For the headache. Chap. 106 For grief of the stomach. Chap. 107 For
the itch. Chap. 108 A gargill for a sore throat. Chap. 109 A water for scabbes
ulcers and pushes. Chap. 110 To make a water to take out all spots: out of
cloth of gold and velvet. Chap. 111 To take spots of grease and oil out of
all sorts of cloth. Chap. 112 To take all manner of spots out of silk Chap.
113 To take spots out of cloth. Chap. 114 A remedy for the cough. Chap. 115
To keep poultrie from destroieng with Wesels. Chap. 116 A brief Treatise of
Vrines etc. Chap. 117 To know Vrines that betoken death. Chap. 118
FINIS.

