A FRVTEfull book of the common places of all S. Paul's Epistles right
necessary for all sorts of people, but especially for those of the ministerye
dyligentelye set forth by Thomas Paniell. Anno. 1562.



To the right worshipful master Thomas Argall Thomas Paynel wishes all
prosperitye and health.
Your gentleness right worshipful master Argall to me at all times and in all places most gently manifested and declared: And your sincere and unfeigned
love to the word of God most holy, and to those that truly profess the same,
with your lyberall and dailye helpinge hand to the maintetenaunce and
increase of the unfeigned professoures and studiantes there of has provoked
and enforced me to write this book of Sayncte Paul's Epi^tles thus in common
places digested unto you a lover, a diligente reader and a continual ensuer
and follower of the same. For in what other thing should a purely minded
Christian solace him self, or delight in, than in the precious word of God,
and in the clear doctrine of his most noble, and most excellent Apostle
Paul? Whose doctrine is from heaven heavenly, replenished with all spyrytuall
wisdom and ghostlye consolation, the which things to you most gentle master
Argall, and to all other of like conversation and pure myn^e, is no doubt most
precious, most beautyfull, and mos^e amyable. Let this doctrine then be
graven in your heart most stedfastlye. Take sure hold upon this Godly
learning, that is upon Jesus Christ. Let this doctrine be written wych
spiritual yncke through your Godly admo^i^ions, in the heart (as I doubt
not but it is) of your most chaste and vert^ous wife, well nurtured and
obedyen^e children, and famelye most tractable and Godly. For th^^ is the
l^arninge that shall conducte and bring them too the kingedome of God, and his
eternal fruytio^. This is it, that shall learn them to fear, and to love
God, and to follow the fotesteppes of his Godly conversation above all things.
This is it, that shall instruct them to contemp^e the world^ with the caduke
and frail pleasures, honors, ryches^ pomp and pride, thereof. This is it
that shall inflame them too be the true followeres of Christ's gospel, and the
faithful champyons and protectors of the same. This is it, that shall instruct
them too put their whole and only trust and affiaunce in the merytes of Christ
our Sauyoure, and not in their only deeds without fayeth and merytes. This
is it, that shall exalte and eleuate their earthly minds and desires to be
with Christ Jesus our savior. Drawing their affections and gredye minds
from this worldly trumpery and slydynge bagage. Now then if this be so (as
in very bid it is) receive this my gift as a thing most precious and
pleasant. And lay it up in the treasurye and and store house of your heart,
as a thing in time of need, most excellent and coumfortable. For as unto a
fayethfull and a true Christian there ^houlde be nothing delitius and more
acceptable, then the delicate and sweet word of God: so there is nothing to a
Christen reader more sweet and sauerye, than the Epis^les of Gods elect
vessel, and dearelye beloved Apostle saint Paul. Read them therefore with
all devotion and sincere judgment, and if ye intend (as I doubt not but that
ye do intend) to be blessed, follow the doctryne^ and precepts of them most
carefully, and as a prec^us margarite and pearl. When ye have perused and read
them most tenderlye and dearly observe and keep them. For it is not the only
he^rer or ^eader of Paul's Epistles, and of scripture that shall be justified,
but the reverent and fervent practi^er of the same. Thus our Lord to whom be
all honor and glory for ever, keep you and your devout and faithful yoke
fellow and most chaste wife now and ever.

The common places of all Saint Paul's Epistles.
The form of salvation Ca. 1.
Paul the servant of Jesus Chris^e called to be an Apostle, not of men nether
by man but by Jesus Christ, Gala. 1.
and by God the father. By the commaund^ment of god our sa^iour and Lord Jesus
Christ, 1. Timo. 1^
by the will of God after the promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus. 2. Timo.
1.
And after the faith of Gods elect, Titu. 1.
and the knowledge of the truth^, which is after godliness, upon the hope of
eternal life, which life god that can not lie, has p^omised before the
world began, but has openned his word at the time appointed through
preachinge, which preachinge is committed unto me by the commandment of God
our savior put a part t^ preach the gospel of God, which he promised
before by his prophets in the holy scryptures that make mension of his son,
the which was begotten of the s^de of David as pertayninge to the flesh, and
predestynate to be the son of god, with power of the holy ghost that
sanctifies sense the time that Jesus Christ our Lord rose again fr^me
death, by whom we have received grace and Apo^^leshippe^ to bring all manner
^eathen people v^too the obedyence of the ^ayeth that is in his name. To them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.
called Saynctes, with all that call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in
every place both of theirs and of ours

phi. 1.
And too all them which believe. Grace be with you, and peace from our
father, Romans 1.
and from our Lord Jesus Christ

The thanks giving of Paul the Apos^ell. For the gifts of grace given of God,
to the fay^thfull Capitu. 2.
First verily I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, Romans 1.
because your fayeth is published throughout all the world.

I thank my God always in your behalf, 1. Cor. 1.
for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ, that in all things,
ye are made rich by him, in all learning, and in all knowledge, even as the
testimonye of Jesus Christ was confyrmed in you, so that ye are behind in no
gift and wait for the appearinge of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
strength you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of of our
Lord Jesus Christ Thanks be unto God, 2. Cor^ ^.
for his unspeakable gift.

Wherefore even I (after that I Ephe. 1.
heard of the fayeth ye have in the Lord Jesus and love unto his saints)
cease not too give thanks ^or you making mention of you in my prayers.

Collo. 1.
We give thanks to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ always prayinge
for you, sense we heard of your fayeth which ye have in Christ Jesus, and of
the love which ye bear to all Sayn^tes, for the hopes sake which is laid up
in s^ore for you in heaven.

Calling to remembrance your woorcke in the ^ayeth, and labor in love, 1.
These. 1.
and perseueraunce in the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God
our father.

2. These. 1.
We are bound too thank God always for you breethren, as it is meet, because
that y^^re ^ayeth grows exceadingelye, and every one of you swimmeth in love
toward an other.

Therefore we are bound to give thanks always to God for you brethren beloved
of the Lorde^ 2. These. 2.
For because that God has from the beginning chosen you too salvation,
through sanctifyinge of the sprite, and through beleuynge the truth, where unto
he called you by our gospel, to obtain the glory that comes of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Of Paul's orations and prayers for his discyples. Capitu. 3.
GOd is my witness, who^ I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his son,
that without ceasinge I make mention of you always in my prayers beseching
that at one time or other, a prosperous journey, by the will of God, might
fortune me, to come unto you. For I long to see you that I might bestow
among^ you some spirytuall gy^te, to strength you with all, that is, that I
might have consolation together with you through the common fayeth which
both ye, and I have, to have some fruit among you as I have among other of
the gentyles.

I desire before God, that ye d^o none evil, 2. Cor. 1^.
not that we should seem commendable, but that ye should do that, which is
honest, and let us be counted as lewd persons. We wyshe also, that ye were
perfect. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the holy ghost be with you all. Amen.

Ephe. 1.
The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the father of glory, might give
unto you the spirit of wisdom and open to you the knowledge of him self,
and lyghten the eyes of your minds, that ye might know what that hope is,
where unto he has called you, and what the riches of his glorious inheritance
is upon the saints, and what is the ex^^adinge greatenes of his power to us
ward, which believe according to the workinge of that his mighty power which
he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead.

Ephe 3.
For this cause I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is father over all that is caled father in heaven and in earth, that he
would grant you acordinge to the riches of his glory, that ye may be
strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner manne, that Christ may
dwell in your hearts by fayeth, that ye being rooted and grounded in love
might be able to comprehend with all saints, what is that breadth and length,
depth^ and heyth, and too know what is the love of Christ, which love
passes knowledge that ye might be fulfilled with all manner of fulness of God.

In all my prayers for you I pray with gladness, because of the feloweshyppe
which ye have in the Gospel from the first day unto now. Phi. 1.
And this I pray, that your love may increase more and more in knoweledge,
and in all fealynge, that ye might accept things most excellent, that ye
might be pure, and such as should hurt no man's conscience, until the day
of Christ filled with the fruits of righteousenesse, which fruits come by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and laud of God.

Co^^e. 1.
Therefore we have not ceased prayinge for you, and desiringe that ye might be
fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord in all good works,
and increasinge in the knowledge of God strengthed with all might, with
ioyfulnesse geuinge thanks unto God the father.

My God fulfill al your desires tho^rowe his glorious riches in I^su Christ.
Phi. 4.
And the peace of God which passes al vnders^andinge keep your hearts and
minds in Christ Jesus.

God him self our father and our Lord Jesus Christ guide our journey unto
you, 1. These. 3.
and the Lord increase you, and make you flow over in love one toward an
other, and toward all men, even as we do toward you, to make your hearts
stable and vnblam^able, in holiness before God our father, at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.

The very God of peace sanctifye you through out, 1 These. 5.
that your whole sprit, soul and body, be fautelesse unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

We pray always for you, 2. These. 1.
that our God make you worthy of the calling, and fulfill the delectation of
goodness, and the work of faith with power: that the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be gloryfyed in you, and ye in him, through the grace of our God,
and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Our Lord Jesus Christ him self, 2. These. 2.
and God our father which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace, comfor^e your hearts, and stablishe
you in all doctrine and good doing. And gyde your hearts to the love of God,
and patience of Christ. 2. Titu. 1.
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphoros for he often refre^hed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain: but when he was come to Rome, he sought me
out very diligentelye, and found me. And in how many things he ministered
unto me at Ephesus thou know very well. The Lord grant him that he may
find mercy with the Lord at that day.

The God of peace, y^ brought again from death our Lord Jesus the great
shepeherde of the sheep, Heb. 13.
through the blood of the everlasting Testament make you perfect in all good
works to do his will workinge in you that, which is plesaunte in his syghte,
through Jesus Christ too whom be praise for ever while the world endures.
Amen.

Of fayethe. Capitu. 4.
Romans 1.
I Am not a shamed of the Gospel of Christ because it is the power of God to
all that believe namelye to the I^we, and also too the gentyle. For, by it the
righteousness which commethe of God is opened from fayeth to fay^h. As it is
written. The just shall live by fayeth.

As Abraham believed God, and it was coumpted unto him for righteousenesse, Rom
4.
which Abraham contrary to hope, believed in hope, that he should be the
father of many nations, according to that. Which was spoken unto him. So
shall thy ^eede be, as the stars in heaven, and the sand of the sea. And he
fainted not in the fayeth, nor yet considered his own body which was now
deadde, even when he was almooste an hundred year old, neither yet that Sara
was past chyldeberynge. He stack^red not at the promise of God through
unbelief, but was made strong in the fayeth, and gave honor to God, full
certifyed that what he had promised he was able too make good. And therefore
was it reckened to him for righteousness. It is not written for him only
that it was reckened to him for righteousenesse: but also for us, to whom it
shall be coumpted for righteousn^sse, so we believe on him that raised up Jesus
our Lord from death.

Romans 5.
We therefore being justified by faith, are at peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom^ we have a way in, through fayeth unto the grace of God,
wherein we stand. Romans 9.


What shall we say then? we say that the gentiles which followed not
rightoousnes have overtaken righteousness: I mean the righteousn^sse which
comes of fa^eth. But Israel which followed the law of righteousness, could not
attain unto the law of righteousness Wherefore? Because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by works of the law. For they have stombled at the
stombling stone as it is written, behold I put in Sion a stomblinge stone, and
a rock which shall make ^en fall. Esa. 8.
And non that believe in him, shall be ashamed.

For Christ is the end of the law, to iustifye all that believe. Romans 10.
Moses describes the ryghteous^nesse which commethe of the law, how that the
manne which does the things of the law, shall live therein. But the
righteousness which comes of faith speaks on this wise. Say not in thine
heart, who shall ascend in to heaven? (that is nothing else then to fetch
Christ down) Other who shall descend in to the deep? (that is nothing else
but to fetch up Christ from death) but what says the scripture? Deu. 30^
The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thine heart.

This word is the word of fayeth, which we preach. For, if thou shalt
knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and shalt believe with thine
heart that God raised him up from death thou shalt be safe. For the
belief of the heart iustieth, and to k^owledge with the mouth makes a man
^afe. For the scripture says, who so ever believes on him, shall not be a
shamed. The^e is no difference between the Jew, and the gentyle. For one is
the Lord of all, which is rich unto all that call upon him.

For who so ever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be safe. But how
shall they call on him, on whom they believe not? How shall they believe on him of
whom they have not heard? So then fayeth comes by hearing.

Romans 14.
Have thou fayeth? have it with thy self before God. For he that makes
conscience, is dampened if he eat: because he does it not of fayeth. For what
so ever is not of faith, the sam^ is sin.

Heb. 10.
The i^ste shall live by faith. And if he wythdrawe him self, my soul shall
have no plea^ure in him. We are not which wythdraw our selves unto dampnation,
but pertayne to fayeth, too the winning of the soul.

2. Cor. 1.
For, by fayeth ye stand.

Having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written: 2. Cor. 4.
I believed and t^erefore have I spoken. We also believe, Psalm. 124.
and therefore we speak.

Hearing always, 2. Cor. 5.
and knowinge that as long as we are at home in the body, we are absente from
God.

For we walk in fayeth, and see not.

Prove your selves wheth^r ye are in the fayeth or not, 2. Cor. 13.
examyn your own selves.

I maruayl that ye are so sone turned from him that called you in the grace of
Christ, Gala. 1.
unto another gospel, which is nothing else, but that there be some which
trouble you, and intend to pervert the gospel of Christ.

Nevertheless though we our selves, or an Angel from heaven, preach any
other gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you^ hold him
as accursed. As I said before, so say I now again, if any manne preach
any other thing unto you, then that ye have received, hold him accursed.
Preach I man's doctrine or gods? I certifye you brethren, that the gospel which
was preached of me, was not after the manner of men, neither receive I it of
man, neither was I taught it, but received it by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

2. Cor. 1^
For Gods son Jesus Christ, which was preached among you by us (that is to
say by me and Siluanus and Timotheus) was not ye and nay. But in him it is
ye, for all the promises of God, in him are ye, and are in him amen, unto the
glory of God through us.

Gala. ^,
That I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the son of God.

Gala. 3.
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was ascribed to him for righteousness.
Understande therefore, that they which are of fayeth, the same are the children
of Abraham. For the scripture saw before hand, that God would iustifye the
heathen through faith, and therefore showed before hand glad tydinges unto
Abraham: Gene. 25.
In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they which be of faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham. For ye are all the sons of God, by the faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

We look for, Gala. 5.
and hope in the spirit to be justified through faith, for in Jesus Christ,
neither is circumcision any thing worth, neither yet uncircumcision, but
faith which by love is mighty in operation.

By grace are ye made safe through faith, Ephe. 2.
and that not of your selves. For it is the gift of God and comes not of
works, least any man should boaste him self.

Let there be but one God, Ephe. 4.
one faith, one baptism. All men have not fayeth. 2. These. 3.


If we believe not, yet abides he faithful, 2. Timo. 2.
he can not deny him self.

Of the definition and effects of faith. Capitu. 5.
Heb. ^^.
Faith is a sure confydence of things, which are hoped for, and a certayntye of
things, which are not seen. By it the elders were well reported of. Through
faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word of God: and that
things which are seen were made of thynge^ which are not seen.

By fayeth Abell offered unto God a more ple^teous sacrifice then Cain, by
which he obtained wytnes that ^e was righteous, God testifyinge of ^is gifts.
By which also he being dead yet speaks.

By fayeth was Enoch translated, that he should not see death, neither was ^e
found, for God had taken him away^, before he was taken away, he was
reported of that he had pleased God, but without fayeth it is vnpossib^e to
please him, for be that comes to God, must believe that ^od ^s, and that he
is a rewa^der of them that seek him.

By faith Noe honored God, after that he was warned of things which were not
seen, and prepared the Arc to the sauinge of his household, through the which
Arc he condemned the world, and became h^yer of the righteousness which
comes by fayeth

By faith Abraham, when he was called, ^^eyed ^o go out in to a place, which he
^^oulde afterward receive to inheritance, and he went out, not knowinge
whether he should go.

By faith he removed i^ the land that was promised unto him, as into a
stranuge countrei, and dwelt in tabe^nacles: and so did Isaac, and Jacob heyers
with him of the same promise, for he looked for a city having a fundation, whose
builder and maker is God.

Through fayeth Sara also received s^rengthe to be with child, and was
delivered of a child when she was past age because she judged him faithful
which had promised.

And therefore sprung there of one) and of one which was as good as deadde) so
mani in multitude as ye stars of the and as the sand of the sea shore which
is innumerable.

Gene. 27.
In faith Abraham offered up Isaac, when he was tempted, and he offered him
being his only begotten son which had received the promyses, of whom it was
said. In Isaac shall thy seed be called. For he considered that God was able
to raise up again from death. Wherefore he received him for an ensample. In
faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come.

By fayeth Jacob when he was a dyinge, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and
bowed him self toward the top of his cepter.

By faith Joseph when he dyed, remembered the departinge of the children of
Israel, and gave commandment of his bones.

By fayeth Moses when he was borne, was hid three months of his father and
mother. Because they saw he was a proper child, neither feared they the
kings commandment.

By fayeth Moses when he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos
daughter, and chose rather ^o suffer aduersitye with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a ceason, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ
greater riches then the treasure of Egipte, for he had respect unto the
reward.

By fayeth he forsook Egipte, and feared not the fearcenes of the king, for he
endured even as he had seen him which is invisible.

Through fayeth he ordained the ester lamb, and the effusion of blood least
he that destroyed the first borne should touch them.

By faith they passed through the red sea, as by dry land, which when the
Egiptians had assayed to do, they were drouned.

By faith the walls of I^rico fell down, after they were compased about
seven ^ayes.

By faith the harlot Raab perished not with the unbelievers, when she had
rec^aued the spyers to lodgi^ge peaseablye.

And what shall I more say, the time would be to short for me to tell of
Gedeon, of Baruch, and of Sampson, and of Iephthae, also of David, and Samuel,
and of the prophets, which through ^ayth subdued kingdoms, wroughte
righ^eousnesse, obtained the prom^sses, s^opp^d the mouths of Lions, quenched
the violence of fy^r, ^scaped the edge of the swearde, of weak were made
strong, wa^ed val^ente in fight, turned to ^ligh^e the armies of the
alyentes, and the woman-receaued their dead, raised to life again. And th^se
all through faith obtained good report, and received not the ^romes, God
prouidinge a better thing for us, that they without us, should not be made
perfect.

Of hope. Cap. 6.
Romans 5.
HOope makes not ashamed. For we are saved by hope. But hope that is seen is
no hope. For how can a man hope for that whi^he he sees? Romans 3.
But and if we hope for that we see not, then do^ we with pacyence abide for
it.

Reioycinge in hope. Romans 12.


What soever things are wr^tten before time, Romans 15.
are written ^or our learning, that we through patience and comfort of ^he
scriptures might have hope. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
beleuinge: that y^ may be rich in hope through the power of the holy ghost.

Let us not put our trust in our selves, 2. Cor. 1.
but in God, which rayseth the dead to life again.

Such trust we have through Christ to god ward not that we are sufficyent of
our selves to think any thing as it were of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.
but our ablenes comes of God. Saying then that we have such trust, we use
great boldness.

For in Christ we have trust, and access through confydence by faith on him.
Ephe. 3.


Phi. 1.
And therefore with all confiden^^ Christ shall be magnifyed in my body,
whether it be through life, or else death. For Christ is to me life, and
death is to me a vauntage.

Collo. 1.
For the hopes sake, which is la^^ up in store for you in heaven, of which hope
ye have heard before by the true word of the gospel.

Phi. 3.
From whence we look for a savior even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
change our vile bodies that they may be fa^honed like unto hi^ glorious body,
according to the workinge whereby he is able to subdue al things to him self.

1. Cor^ 9.
For he which eareth should ear in hope, and that he which thresheth in hope
should be partaker of hy^ hope.

1. Timo. 4,
This is a sure saying and of all parties worthy to be received. For therefore
we labor and suffer rebuke because we believe and hope in the lyuinge God
which is the savior of all men, but sp^cially of thos^ that believe.

Which hope we have as an ancre of the soul both sure and steadfast, Heb. 5.
and entringe in to the things which are within the veil.

Seeing brethren that by the means of the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.
we may be bold to enter in to that holy place, by the new and lyuinge way
which he has prepared for us, through the veil, that is to say, by his
flesh, and that we have also an high priest, which is ruler over the house of
God let us draw nere with a true heart in a full faith sprinkeled in our hearts
from an evil conscience, and washed in our bodies with pure water let us
keep the profession of our hope without waueringe, for he is faithful that
promised.

We have confydence because we have a good conscience in all things and a
desire to him honestlye. Heb. 13.


Cast not away therefore your confidence, Heb. 10.
which has a great reward to recompense.

Let us therefore go boldly unto the seat of grace, Heb. 4.
that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in the time of need.

Of charity. Cap. 7.
Romans 5.
THe charity and love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy ghost
which is given unto us.

Romans 8.
For we know that all things work for the best unto them that love God, which al
are called of purpose. Then who shall separate us from the love of God? shall
tribulation? or anguish or persecution? either hunger? either nakedness?
either parell? either swearde? as it is written. Psalm. 43.
For thy sake are we killed all day long, and are coumpted as sheep appointed
too be slain. Nevertheless in all these things we overcome strongely through
his healpe that loved us, yea, and I am sure, that neither death, neither life,
neither Angels, nor rule, neither power neither things present, neither
things to come neither strength, neither heigh, neither loweth, neither any
other creature shall be able to depart us from the love of God, showed in
Christ^ Jesus our Lord.

Owe nothing to any man, Romans 1^.
but to love one an other. For he that loves an other fulfyllethe the law.
For thou shall not commytte ad^^^tery. Thou shal^e not steal, Thou shalt^ not
bear false witness, Thou shalt^ not desire, and so forth (if there be any
other commandment) they ar^ all comprehended in this saying: Love thy
neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor: Therefore is love the
fulfyllinge of the law.

Let love be without dissimulation. Romans 1^.
And be kind one to an other with brotherly love. Romans 12.


Being seruente in sprite. 1. Cor. 6.


He that is joined unto the Lord, is one sprite who so loves God, 1. Cor. ^.
the same is known of him.

Knowledge makes a man swell, 1. Cor 8.
but love edifieth.

1. Cor. 10.
Let no man s^ke his own profit, but let every manne seek an other^ wealth.

1. Cor. 12.
And yet do I show you a more excellent way. Though I speak with the tongues
of men and A^ngels^ and ^et had no charity, I were even, as ^oundynge
brass, or as ^ tinklinge cymball. And though I could prophesye, and
vnderstand^ all secrets, and all knowledge, yea, if I had all faith, so that
I could^ move mountains out of their pla^ces, and yet had no charity, I wen^
nothing. And though I bestowe^ all my goods to feed the poor, an^ though
I gave my body even tha^ I burned, and yet had no charity, i^ profits me
nothing. Charity su^fereth long and is courteous, charity enuyeth not,
charity does no^ frowardly, swells not, deals no^ dishonestlye, seeks
not her own, i^ not provoked to anger, thinks no^ evil reioyseth not in
iniquitye: bu^ reioyseth in the truth, suffers all thing, believes all
things, hops all things, endures in all things. Though the prophesyinge
fa^le other tongues shall cease, or knowledge vanyshe away, yet charity falls
never away. Now abides faith, hope and charity, even these three, but the
chief of these is charity. Labor for love. 1 Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 16


Let all your business be done in love. Great ye one an other with an holy
kiss, if any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ the same be anathe
mameranatha. My love be with all in Christ Jesus. 2. Cor. 6.


Our mouth is open unto you, our hearts is made large, ye are in no strayte in
us, but are in a strayte in your own bowelles, having like reward with me,
I speak as to my children. Set your selves therefore at large. 2. Cor. 8.


Wherefore show unto the^ in proof of your love and of the reioysinge that we
have of you, that the congregations may see it.

2. Cor. 11.
I am gelous over you with Godly^ gelousye. In love serve one an other. For all
the law is fulfylle^ in our word. Gala. 5.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,

^phe. 5.
Be ye therefore ^olowers of God, as dear children, and walk in lou^ even a^
Christ loved us, and ga^^ him self for us an offering and ^ sacrifyce of a
sweet sauer to God.

Collo. 3.
Above all these things, put o^ love, which is the ^onde of perfec^^nesse.

1. These. 4.
But as touching brotherlye lo^^ ye need not that I write unto you For ye are
taught of God to lo^^ one an other: ye and that thing v^relye ye do unto all
the brethren.

1. Tim. 1.
The end of the commaundeme^^ is charity, that comes of a pu^^ heart, and
of a good conscience, and of fayeth unfeigned, from t^^ which things some
have erred, a^^ are turned unto vain iangling^^ because they would be
doctoures (...) the scripture, and yet understand (...) what they speak,
neither where^ they affirm.

Therefore let us consider one an other to provoke unto love, Heb. 10.
and too good works, and let us not forsake the feloshippe that we have among
our selu^s, as the man^r of so^e is: but let v^ comfort one an other^ and
that so much the more, because y^ see that the day draws nigh. Heb. 13^
Phi. ^.
Let brotherli love continue with you

And let not every man look on his own things, but on the things of other
men.

Of fear Capitu. 8.
BE not hye minded, Romans 11.
but fear saying tha^ God spared not the natural branches, least happelye he
also spare not the.

Rulers are not to be fear^d for good works, Romans 13.
but for evil. Will thou be without fear of the power? Do well then: and so
shall thou be praised of the same. For he is the minyst^r of Godde for thy
wealth, but and if ^hou do evil, then fear: for he bears not the swerd for
naught, but is the minyster of God to take vengeance on them that do evil.

2. Cor. 11.
But I fear least as the serpent beguiled Eve through his suttelty, even so
your wits should be corrupt from the synglenes that is in Christ.

2. Cor. 12^
I fear least when I shall come, I shall not find you such as I would, and I
shall be found unto you such as I would not. I fear least peradventure there
be found among you debate, ^nu^inge, wrath, s^ryfe, bacbytinges,
whisperinges, swellings, and dyscorde. I fear least when I come again, God
bri^ge me low among you, and that I shall bewail many of them which have
sinned already and have not repented of the vnclenn^s, fornication, and
wa^^ann^s which they have committed.

Gala. 4.
I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

Phi. 2.
Wherefore my dearly beloved work your own salvation with fear and trembling.

For why I was among you in weakness, ^. Cor. 2.
and in fear and in much tre^bling.

Let us fear ^her^fore, least any of us forsakynge the prom^sse of entr^^ge in
to his re^^, Heb. 4.
should seem to come behind and be lacking: ^or unto you it was declar^d as
well as unto them.

For if we sin wyllingelye after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, Heb. 10.
there remains no more sacrifyce for sins, but a fearful lookinge for
judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the adu^rsaryes. He that
despises Moses law, dies without mercy under two or th^ee wy^nesses. Of
how much sorer puni^hement suppose ye shall he be coumpted worthy which
tread^^h under foot the son of God^ and ^oumpteth the blood of the
Testamente as an vnho^ye thing wherwyth he was sanctified, and does dishonor
to the spirit of grace? It is a fearful thing to fall in ^eo ^he hands of
the l^uinge God.

Ephe. 5.
Therefore let us serve God with fear and reverence, submittinge our selves one
to an other in the fear ^f God.

Of humility and against pride. Cap. 9.
Romans 12.
FOr I say (through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among you,
that no man esteem of him self more then it becomes him to esteem, but that
he discretely judge him self. In gyuinge honor, go one before an other, be
not hye minded, but make your selves equal to the^ of the lower sort, be not
wise in your own opinions. Avenge not your selves, but give rowme ^o unto
wrath.

Gala. 5.
Let us not be vain glorious, provoking one an other, and enuyinge on^ an other.

Phili. 2.
Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in meekness of mind
every man esteem other better then him self. Let the same mind be in you that
was in Christ Jesus, the which made him self of no reputation, taking upon
him the shape of a servant.

If any man seem to him self that he is somewhat, Gala. ^.
when in deed he is nothing. He deceau^th him self.

Knowledge makes a man swell. 1. Cor. 8.
If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he ought
to know. 1. Timo. 6.


If any man teach other wise, and is not content with the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the doctrine of Godliness, he is pufte up
and knows nothing, but wastes his brains about questions and strife of
words, whereo^ spring envy, strife, raylinges, evil surmysinges, and vain
disbutations of men with corrupt minds and destitute of the truth which
think that lucre is Godliness.

Some swell as though I would come no more to you, 2. Cor. 4.
but I will come to you shortelye, if God will. and will know, not the words
of them which swell, but the power, for the kingedome of God is not in words,
but in power.

Of the patience, and tribulations of the elect and just. Capi. 10.
WE rejoice in tribulation for we know that tribulation brings patience,
Romans 5.
patience brings experience, experience brings hope.

Romans 12.
Bless them which persecute you, belsse, Deu. 32.
but curse not, recompense no man ^uyll for evil. For it is written,
vengeance is mine, and I will reward, says the Lord, be not overcome of
evil but overcome evil with goodness.

1. Cor. 4.
We are reviled, and yet we bless, we are persecuted, and suffer it. We are
evil spoken of, and we pray, we are made as it were the fylthines of the world,
the of^rowringe of al things, even unto this time.

2. Cor. 4.
We are troubled on ^uery side, yet are we not without shifte. We are in
pouertye, but not utterly without somewhat. We are persecuted, but are not
forsaken, we are cast down, nevertheless we perish not. And we always bear
in our bodies the dyinge of our Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might
appear in our bodies. For we that live are always delivered unto death for
Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus, might appear in our mortal flesh.
So then death woorketh in us, and life in you.

Therefore in all things let us behave our selves as the minist^rs of God, 2.
Cor. 6.
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessitye, in anguishe, in stripes, in
prisonmente, in strife, in labor, in watchinge, in fasting, in pureness, in
knowledge, in long sufferinge, in kindness, in the holy ghost, in love
unfeigned, in the words of truth, in honor and dishonor, in evil report
and good report, as disceauers and yet true, as unknown, as dyinge, and
behold we yet ly^e, as chastened, and not killed, a^ sorowinge, and yet always
merye, as poor, and yet make many rich, as having nothing, and yet
possessinge all things.

Wherefore I desire you, ^phe. 3.
that y^ faynte not because of my tribulations for your sakes, which is your
praise.

1. These. 1.
And ye became folowers of us and of the Lord, and received the word in much
affliction and trybulation, with joy of the holy ghos^e: so that ye were an
ensample to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. For, from you sounded
out the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and in Achaia only, but in all
quar^ers.

And that of God. For unto you it is given, Phil. 1.
that not only ye should believe in Christ, but also suffer for his sake,
and have even the same fight which ye saw me have, and now hear of me.

2. Cor. 11.
For ye suffer fools gladdelye, because that ye your selves are wise. For ye
suffer eu^n if a man bring you into bondage: if a man devour: ^f a man take:
if a man exalte him self: if a man smite you on the face.

For ye your selves know brethren of our en^raunce in unto you, 1. These. 2.
how that it was not in vain, but even after that we had suffered before,
and were shamefullye entreated at Philippos (as ye well know) then were we
bold in our God to speak unto you the Gospel of God with much stryuinge.
Ye remember brethren our labor and travail. For we labored day and night,
because we would not be^ greauous unto any of you, and preached unto you,
the Gospel of God. And ye became folowers of the congrega^ion and church of
God, which in Iewrye are in Christ Jesus. For ye have suffered like things of
your kinsmen, as we our selves have suffered of the Jews, which as they
killed the Lord Iesus^ and their own prophets, even so have they persecuted us.

1. These. 3.
For when I was with you, I told you before that we should suffer tribulation,
even as it came to pass, and as ye know.

Therefore have continual pacyence toward all men, 1. These. 5.
see that none recompense evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that
which is good, both among your selves, and to all men.

2. Timo. 3,
All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecutions.

Heb. 10.
Call to remembrance the days that are passed, in the which after ye had
rec^aued light ye endured a great fight in adversities, partlye while all
men wondered and gas^d at you for the shame and tribulation that was don unto
you and partli while ye became companions of them which so passed their time.
For ye suffered also with those that were in bands, and took in worth the
spoylinge of your goods and that with gladness, knowinge in your selves how
that ye had in heaven, a better and an enduringe substance.

So that we our selves rejoice of you in the congregations of God, 2. These. 1.
over your patience and fayeth in all your persecutions and tribulations that
ye suffer, which is a token of the righteouse judgment of God, that ye are
coumpted worthy of the kingedome of God, for which ye also suffer.

For ye have need of patience, Heb. 10.
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

Other were racked, Heb. 11.
and would not be delivered, that they might receive a better resurrec^ion.
Other tasted of mockinges and scourginges, moreover of ^ondes and prisonment
were stoned, were he wen a sunder, were tempted, were slain with sweard^s
walked up and down in shepes skins, in go^es skynnes, in need,
tribulation, and veration, which the world was not worthy of, they wandered
in wilderness, in mountains, in dens, and caves of the ^arthe.

Heb. 12.
Wherefore let us also (saying that we are compased with so great a multitude
of witnesses) lay away all that presses down, and the sin that hangs
on, and let us ^enne with patience unto the battaill that is set before us,
lookinge unto Jesus the auctor and finisher of our faith, which for the joy
that was set before him abode the cross, and despised the same, and is set
down, on the right hand of the throne of God. Consider therefore how that he
endured such speaking against him of sinners least ye should be wearyed
and faynte in your minds. For ye have not yet resisted unto bloudesheddinge,
stryuinge against sin. And have forgotten the consolation, which speaks
unto you as unto ^hildren: saying, my son despise not the chasteninge of
the Lord, neither faynte that thou art rebuked of him: For whom the Lord
loves, him he chasteneth, yea and he scourges every son that he receaueth.
Continue in the dyscipline and chasteninge of the Lord, for God offerethe him
self unto you as unto sons. What son is that whom the father chasteneth
not? If ye be not under correction (whereof all ar^ partakers) then are ye
bastardes and not sons.

Let us go forth therefore out of the ^entes, Heb. 1^^
and suffer rebuke with him.

My thinks that God has set forth us, 1. Cor. 4.
which are Apostels. For the lowest of all, as it were men appointed to
death. For we are a gasinge stock unto the world, and to the Angels, and to
men. We are fools for Christ's sake, and ye are wise through Christ. We are
weak^ and ye are strong, ye are honorable, and we are despised. Even unto this
day we hunger and thyrste, and are naked, and are buffeted with fistes, and
have no certain dwelling place, and labor workinge with our own hands.

Brethren I would not have you ignorant 2. Cor. ^^
of our trouble which hapened unto us in A^^^. For we were grea^^d out of
measure passing strength, so greatly, that we despeared even of life. Also we
received an answer of death in our selves, that we should put our trust in
God.

2. Cor 7.
For when we were come in to Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were
troubled on every side. Outward was fy^ynge, inward was fear.

Of justice. Capitu. 11.
Give to every manne therefore his duty. Romans 13.
Trybute to whom tribute belongs: Cus^ome to whom custom is due: fear is
whom belongeth^ honor to whom honor pertayneth. Owe nothing to any man, but
to love one an other.

For if has pleased them of Macedonia and Ac^ai^, Romans 15.
to make a certain destribution upon the poor saints which are at
Jerusalem. It has pleased them verelye, and their dettoures are they. For if
the gentyles he made pertakers of their spiritual things, their duty is to
minyster unto them in carnal things.

Let every man abide in the same state wherein he is called. 1. Cor. 7.
Art thou called a seruaunt^ care not for it. Nevertheless if thou may be
free, use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord being a servant, is
the Lords freeman. Like wise he that you called being free, is Christ's
servant. ye are dearly boughte, be not man's servant. Let every man wherein
he is called, therein abide with God.

For none of us lives his own servant: Romans 14.
neither does any of us dye his own servant, if we live we live to be at
the Lords will. Whether we l^ue therefore, or dye^ we are the Lords. For
Christ therefore dyed and rose again, that he might be Lord both of the dead
and qu^cke. 1. Cor. 7.


Therefore as the Lord has called every person, so let him walk, and so
ordain I in all congregations, if any man be called being circumcised, let
him add nothing thereto.

If any be called vncircumcysed, let him no^ be circumcised. Circumcision is
nothing, uncircumcision is no thing but the observation of the commandments
of God.

^. Cor. 9.
My defense and answer to them that ask me is this. Have we not power to eat
and to drink? either have we not power to lead about a sister a woman as well as
other Apostles, and as the brethren of the lord and Cephas? Either only I and
Barnabas have not power this to do? Who goes a warfare any time at his own
cost? Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit? Who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk? Say I these things after the manner of
m^nne? Or says not the law the same also? For it is written in the law of
Moses^ Deu. 25.
thou shall not mossell the mouth of the ore that treads out the corn.
Does God take thought for oren? Either says he it not all together for our
sakes? For our sake^ no doubt this is written: that he which eareth should
ear^ in hope: and that he which thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his
hope. If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your carnal things? If other be partakers of this your power, wher^fore are
not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power, but suffer all
things least we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know how
that they which minister in the temple have their fyndinge of the temple? And
they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar? Even so also did
the Lord ordain, that they which preach the gospel should live of the
gospel. But I have used none of these things. Neither wrote I these things
that it should be so done in me. For it were better for me to dye, then that
any manne should take this reioysinge from me. In that I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of, for necessity, is put unto me, woe is it
unto me.

If I preach not the Gospel. If I do it with a good will. I have a reward.
But if I do it against my will, an office is committed unto me. What is my
reward then: verelye that when I preach the gospel, I make the gospel of
Christ free, that I mysuse not mine autoritye in the gospel.

2. Cor. 6.
Bear not a yoke with the unbelievers. For what feloship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? What company has light with darkness? What conuention or
record has Christ with Bel^all? Either what part has he that believes
with an infidele? How agrees the temple of God with Idols? and ye are the
temple of the lyuinge God, as said God. I will dwell among them, Leui. 26.
and walk among them, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves (says the Lord)
and touch no unclean thing, so will I receive you, and will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and my daughters says the Lord almighty.

This I say. 2. Cor. 9.
How that he which sows little shall reap little, and he that sowethe
plentuouslye shall reap plentuouslye. And let every man do according as he
has purposed in his heart, not groudgingelye or of necessitye. For God
louethe a cheerful geuer. 2. Cor. 8.


For if there be a wyllinge mind, it is accepted according too that a man
has, and not according to that a man has not. It is not my mind that
other be set at ease, Exo. 16.
and ye brought into combraunce. But that there be egalnes now at this time,
that your abundance succoure their lack, that their abundance may
supplye your lack. there may be equaletye, as it is written, he that
gathered much, had never the more abundance, and he yt gathered little, had
nevertheless.

Therefore write I these things being absente. 2. Cor. ^^.
Least when I am present, I should use sharpenes according to the power
which the lord has given me to edifye, and not to ^estroye. We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. I ^olde you before, and tell
you before as absente and now pres^nte, to them which in time pas^e have
sinned, and to all other, that if I come again, I will not spare. Seek ye
experience of Christ which speaks in me?

Gala. 6.
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have reioysinge in his
own self, and not in an other. For every manne shall ^eare is own burden.
Be not deceived, god is not mocked. For what so ever a man sows, that shall
h^ reap. He that sows in his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption.
But he that sowethe in the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
euerla^^ynge.

Ephe. ^.
Be not therefore partakers with them.

1. These. 4.
And that no man go to far, and defraude ^is broth^r in barganing^, because
the Lord is a venger of all such things, as we have told you beforetime and
^estifi^d.

He that does wrong shall receive for the wrong that he has done. Collo. 3.


If there be any that provides not for his own, 1. Tim. 5.
and namelye for them of his ^ousholde, the same denies the fayeth, and is
worsse then an infydele. No man that warreth and is given to God, 2. Tim^. ^.
entangleth him self with wordlye business, and that because he would please
him that has chos^n him to be a souldioure. And though a man strive for a
masterye, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfullye. The husband man
that labors must first receive of the fruits. It is a true saying, if we
be d^ade with him, we also shall live with him. If we be pa^iente, we shall
also raygne with him. If we deny him, he also shall deny us. Study to show
thy self laudable unto God, a workman that needs not to be a shamed,
handelinge the the word of truth iustlye.

Titu. 3.
This is a true saying. Of these things I would thou should certifye, that
they which believe in God, might be diligente to goo forward in good works. A
man that is given to heresye, after the first and the second admonition
avoid, remembringe that he that is such, is perverted, and synneth even
dampened by his own judgment.

Heb. 6.
For it is not possible that they which were once lighted, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and become partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall
should be renewed again unto repentance. For as much as they have (as
concerning them selves) crucified the son of God, a fresshe making a mock of
him. For that earth which drineketh in the rain which comes often upon it, and
brings forth erbes meet for them that dress it, receaueth blessinge of
God. But if it bring forth thorns and briars, it is reproved, and is nigh
unto cursinge, whose end is to be burned.

Strech forth therefore the hands which were let down, Heb. 12.
and the weak knees, and see that ye have streighte steps unto your ^ete,
least any ha^tinge turn you out of the way yea let it rather be healed.

Being made free from sin, ye are become the servants of righteousness.
Romans 6.
For when ye were servant of sin, ye were not under righteousenesse.

Of prudencye and of the vice of imprudencye. Capitu. 12.
THey that are carnal, are carnallye minded. Romans 8.
But they that are spyrituall, are ghostlye minded. To be carnallye minded, is
death. But to be spirituallye minded is life and peace. The wisdom of the
flesh, is enemy against God, for it is not obedien^e to the law of God,
neither can be.

^. Cor. 10.
For the natural man perceaueth not the things of the spirit of God^ For they
are but folishnes unto him. Neither can he perceive them, because he is
spirituallye examyned. But he that is spiritual, discusseth al things: yet he
him self is judged of no man.

1. Cor. 10.
Therefore let him that thinks he stands. Take heed least he fall.

I praise you brethren, that in all things ye are mindful of me.

1. Cor. 14.
And let all things be done honestly and in order among you.

Romans 12.
And that your service be acceptable unto God.

2. Cor. 13.
Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
cast away. I trust ye shall know that we are not cast awaies.

Gala. 6.
Behold how large a letter I have written unto you, with mine own hand.

Ephe. 5.
Take heed therefore that ye walk circu^spec^ly, not as fol^s, but as wise
redeminge the time, for the days ar^ evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but
vnd^rsta^d what the will of the lord is.

Beware least any man come and deceive you through philosophy and deceitful
vanitye, Collo. 2.
through the traditions of men, and ordinances after the world, and not after
Christ. Let no man deceive you, which after his own imagination walke^h in the
humblenes and holiness of Angels, things which he never saw, causeless
past up with his ^leshlye mind, and holds not the headde, whereof all the
body by joints and couples receives norishemente, and is kni^ to order, and
increases wit^ the increasinge that comes of God. Wherefore if ye be dead
with Christ from ordinaunc^s of the world, why are ye lead with traditions of
them that decerne and s^ye, Touch not, ^ast not, handell not: which all perish
with the vsinge of them, and are after the commandments and doctrine of men:
which things have the similitudes of wisdom in chosen holiness and
humblenes, and in that they spare not the body, and do the flesh^ no worship
unto his need.

Collo. 4.
Walk wiselye to them that ar^ without, and r^deme the time. Let your speech
be always well sauoured and poudered with salt, that ye may know how to
answer every man. The dear brother Ti^hicus shall tell you of al my business,
which is a faiethfull min^ster, and fellow servant in the Lord, whom I have
sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know how ye do, and might
comfort your hearts with one Onesimus, a faithful and a be^eued brother
which is one of you, They shall show you of all things, which are a doing
here. And when the Epistle is red of you, make that it be r^dde in the
congregation of the Laodicians also, and that ye likewise read the Epistle of
Laodicia. And say to Archippus, take heed to the office that thou haste
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. Remember my hands.

1. These. 3.
And we have sent Timotheus our brother and minister of God, and our labor
fellow in the gospel of Christ, to stablysh you, and to comfort you over
your faith. For this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent that I
might have knowledge of your faith, least happily the tempter had tempted
you, and that our labor had been bestowed in vain. But now latelye when
Timotheus came from you unto us, and de^alred to us your faith and your love,
and how that ye have good remembrance of us always, desiringe to see us as we
desire to see you. Therefore we had consolation in you, and in all our
adversity and necessitye, through your faith. For now are we alive if ye stand
steadfast in the Lord.

O Timothe, 1. Timo. 6.
save that which is given the to keep, and avoid vnghostly vanities of voices
and appositions of science falsely so called, which science while some
professed, they have erred as concerning the faith.

See thou have the ensample of the 2. Timo. 1.
wholesome words which thou hardest of me in faith and love which is in Jesus
Christ. That good thing which was committed to thy kepinge, keep in the holy
ghost, which dwells in us.

And what things thou haste hard of me many bearing witness, 2. Timo. 2.
the same deliver to faithful men, which are apt to teach other. Consider
what I say. The Lord give the understanding in all ^hinges.

2. Timo. 3.
But the evil men and disceauers shall wax worsse and worsse, while they
deceive and are deceived them selves. But continue thou i^ the things which
thou haste learned, which also were committed vnto^ thee, seeing thou know
of whom thou have learned them. And for as much as thou haste known holy
scripture of a child, which is able to make the wise unto salvation through
the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Heb. 3.
Wherefore holy brethren partakers of the celestial calling, co^^ider the
embasidoure and the priest of our profession Christ Jesus, which was
faiethfull to him that made him, even as was M^ses in all by ^ house. Take
heed brethren, that there be in none of you an evil heart in unbelief that he
should depart from the living God, but exhort one an other dailye, while
it is called to day, least any of you ware hard hearted through the
deceytfulnesse of sin.

Let no man deceive you with vain words. Ephe. 5.


Prouydinge before hand things Romans 12.
honest not only in the syghte of God, but also in the syghte of all men.

Of wisdom and of the fau^e of foolishenesse. Capitu. 13.
THe inuisyble things of God, Romans ^^
are understand and seen by the works from the creation of the world. So
that when they coumpted them selves wise, they became fools.

Romans 16.
I would have you wise unto that which is good, and to be innocent as
concerning evil.

For Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the gospel, 1. Cor. 1.
not with wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ should have be made
of none effect. For the preachinge of the cross is to them that peryshe
foolishenes, but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. Esa. 29.
For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away
the understanding of the prudente. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe?
Where is the searcher of the world? Has not God made the wisdom of this
world foolishnes? For when the world through wisdom knew not God, in the
wisdom of God it pleased God through foolish^es of preachinge to save them
that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom.
But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews an occasion of fallinge, and
unto the Greeks folishnesse: but unto them which are called both of the Jews
and Greeks, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. For
the fooli^hnes of God, is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men. And unto him pertain ye in Christ Jesus, which of God is made unto us
wisdom, and also righteousenesse, and sanctifyinge, and redemption. That
according as it is written, Iere. ^.
he which reioyseth, should rejoice in the Lord.

That we speak of, is wisdom among them that are perfect: 1. Cor. 2^
not the wisdom of this world, neither of the rulers of this world (which
go to naught) but we speak the wisdom of God, which is in secret and lies
hid, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory: which wisdom
none of the rulers of the world know. For had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. But God has opened it unto us by his
spirit. For the spirit searches all things yea, the bottom of Gods
secrets. For what manne knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is with in him? Even so the things of God, knows no man, but
the spirit of God. Nor we have not received the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which comes of God, for to know the things that are given us of
God, which things also we speak, not in the common words of man's
wisdom, but with the common words of the holy ghost, making spiritual
compari^ons of spiritual things, for who knows the mind of the Lord, other
who shall inform him. But we understand the mind of Christ.

1. Cor. 3.
If any man seem wise among you, let him be a fool in this world, that he
may be wise. For the wisdom of this world, is fool^shenesse wi^h God. For
it is writ^en, he com^passeth the wise in their craftiness. Psalm. 93.
And again, Job. 5.
Godde knowethe the thoughts of the wise that they be vayn^.

If any man be ignoraunte, 1. Cor. 14.
let him be ignoraunte.

But we all behold the glory of the Lord with his face open, 2. Cor. 3.
and are changed unto the same symili^ude, from glory to glory, even of the
spirit of the Lord.

For it is God that commanded the light to shine out of darkennesse, 2. Cor.
4^
which has shyned in our hearts, for to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. We have this treasure in
earthen vessels that the excellent power of it, might appear to be of God,
and not of us. Wherefore we are not wearyed, but though our outewarde manne
peryshe, yet the inward manne is renewed day by day, while we look not on
the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen. For things
which are seen, are temporal, but things which are not seen are eternal.

Co. 25.
Wherefore hence forth know we no man after the flesh. In so much though we
have known Christ after the flesh, now hence forth know we him so no more.

Ephe. 1.
For why the grace of God, is ^hed on us abundantelye in all wisdom and
perceueraunce. And has opened unto us the misterye of his will according to
his pleasure, and purposed the same in him self, to have it declared, when the
time were full come, that all things, both the things which are in heaven
and also the things which are in earth should be gathered together even in
Christ.

Ephe. 3.
For this cause I Paul am in the bonds of Jesus Christ, for your sakes which
are heathen, if ye have heard of y^ ministration of the grace of god, which is
given me to you ward. For by reuelati^n showed ^e this mystery unto me, as ye
readinge may know mine understanding in the misterye of Christ. Which
misterye to other generations was not opened, as it is now declared unto his
holy Apostels and prophets by the spirit: that the gentyles should be
inheritours also, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise that is
in Christ, by the means of the gospel, where of I am made a minister, by the
gift of the grace of God, given unto me through the working of his power. Unto
me the leas^e of all saints this grace is given that I should preach among
the gentiles the unsercheable riches of Christ, and to make all men see what
the fellowship of the mystery is, which from the beginning of the world
had been hid in God, which made all things through Jesus Christ, to the
intent that now unto the rulers and powers in heaven might be known by the
congregation, the manyfolde wisdom of God, according to the eternal
purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Y^a I thy^ke all things but lost Phi. ^.
for that excellent knowledges sake of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Collo. 1.
Whose gospel is preached among all creatures which are under heanen, whereof
I Paul am made a minister according to the ordinance of God, which was given
me vtno you ward, to fulfill the word of God, that misterye hid sense the
world began, and sense the beginning of generations, but now is opened unto
his saints ^o whom God would have known the glorious riches of this
misterye among the gentiles, which riches is Christ in you, the hope glory,
whom we preach, warninge all wenne in all wisdom and teachinge all men, to
make them perfect in Christ Jesus. Wherein I also labor and strive even as
far forth as his workinge works in me mygh^elye.

Collo. 1.
That they might be comforted, and knyt to gether in love, and in all riches of
full understanding ^or too know the mystery of God the father and of Christ,
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. This I say
least any man should beguyle you with entysing words. For though I be absent
in the flesh, yet am I present with you in the spr^^e, ioyinge and beholding
the order that ye keep, and your steadfast faith in Christ.

Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom. Collo. 3.


Unghostly and vain voices pass over, 2. Tim. 2^
for they shall e^crease unto greater ungodliness, and their words shall frete
eue^ as does a cancre, of whose number is Hymeneus and Philetos, which as
concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the resurrection is paste
already, and do destroy the faith of diverse persons. But the sure ground
of God remaynethe, and has this seal, the Lord knows them that are his,
and let every man that calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.
2. Tim^. 3^


A^ Iannes and Mambres withstode Moses, ^ue^ so do these resist the truth,
men they are of corrupt minds, and lewd as concerning the faith. but they
shall prevail no longer. For their madness shall be uttered unto all men as
theyrs was. But thou haste seen the experience of my doctrine. But continue
thou in the things which thou have learned, for all scripture given by
inspyration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to amend, and to
instruct in righteousness that the manne of God may be perfect and prepared
unto all good works.

Of Obedience. Capitu. 14.
Romans 3.
WE know that what soever the law says, he says it to them which are under
the law: that all mouths may be stopped, and all the world be subdued to God.

Romans 5.
As by the sin or inobedience of one man, condempnation came on al men, even
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.

Remember ye not how that to whom so ever ye exhibit and commit your selves as
servant to obey, Romans 6.
his servants ye are to whom ye obey: whether it b^ o^ sin unto death, or
of obedience unto righteousness? God be thanked, that though ye were once the
servant of sin, ye have yet obeyed with heart unto the form of doctrine
where unto ye were delivered.

Let every soul submit him self unto the authority of the hier powers, Romans
13.
for there is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Who
soever therefore resists power resysteth the ordinance of God. And they that
resist, shall receive to them self dampnation. Wherefore ye must needs obey,
not for fear of vengeance only, but also because of ^onscience. And even for
this cause pay ye tribute. For they are Gods ministers, seruinge for the same
purpose.

Your obedience is known in all places. Romans 16.


Brethren (ye know the house of Stephana, 1. Co^. 16.
Fortunatus, and Achaicus, how that they are the first fruits of Achaia, and
that they have appointed them selves and minyster unto the saints) I beseech
you, that ye be obediente unto such, and too all that healpe and labor.
Look^ therefore that ye know them that are such.

Titus in ward affection is now more abundaunte toward you, 1. Cor. 7.
when he remembers the obedience of every one of you, how with fear and
tremblinge ye received him.

Gala. 3.
O foolish Galathians: who has be wytched you, that ye should not believe and
obey the truth? before whose eyes Jesus Christ was described, and among you
crucified.

Ye did run well, who was a let to you, Gala. 5.
that ye should not obey the truth? Eu^n that counsel that is not of him
that called you. A little leven does fervent the whole lompe of dowe.

Phi. 2.
Wherefore my dearly beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not when I was
present only, but now much more in mine absence. Even so. etc.

For ye know and remember what commandments we gave you in our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1. These. 4.
He therefore that despyseth these, despises not manne, but God, which has
sent and given his holy spyrite among you.

Therefore brethern stand fast, 2. These. 2.
and keep the traditions and ordinances which ye have learned, whether it
were by our preachinge, or by our Epistle.

We have confidence through the Lord to you ward, 2. These. 3.
that ye both do, and will do that, which we command you. If any man obey
not our sayings, send us word of him by a letter, and have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed, and coumpt him not as an enemy, but warn
him as a brother.

This commandment commit I unto the son Timothe according 1. Timo. 1.
to the prophesies which in time past were prophes^ed of the, that thou in them
should fight a good fight, having faith and good conscience, which some
have put away from them, and as concerning faith have made shipwrake. Of whose
number is Hymeneus and Alexander which I have delivered unto Satan, that they
might be taught not to blaspheme.

1. Timo. 4.
Such things command and teach. Let no man contempne thy youth, but be unto
them that believe, an ensample, in word, in conversation, in love in spirit,
in faith, and in pureness.

Priests that rule well, are worthy of double honor, 1. Tmo. 5.
most specially they which labor in word and in teachinge. Deu. 25.
For the scripture says. Luc. 10.
Thou shall not mousell the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. And
the labourer is worthy of his reward. I testifye before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his elect Aungelles, that thou observe these things
without hasty judgment, and do nothing parciallye.

I give the charge in the sight of God, 1. Timo. 6.
which quickens all things, and before Jesus Ch^iste, which under pontius
pilate witnessed a good witnessinge, that thou keep the commandment, and be
without spotte and unrebukable, until the appearinge in our Lord Jesus Christ.

There be many disobediente, Titu. 2.
and talkers of vanitye, and dysceauers, namelye they of the cyrcumcysion,
whose mouths must be stopped, which peruerte whole houses, teachinge
things which they ought not because of filthy lucre. One being of them
selves which was a point of their own, said. The Cretaynes are always
liars, evil beasts, and slow belies. This witness is true, wherefore rebuke
them sharpelye, that they may be sound in the fayeth, and not taking heed
too Jews fables, and commandments of men that turn from the truth.

These things speak, and exhort^ and rebuke with all commaundinge. Se that no
man despise the.

Titu. 3.
Warn them that they may submit them selves to princes and power, to obey
the officers, that they be ready unto all good works, that they speak evil
of no man, that they be no syghters, but soft, showing all meakenes unto
all men.

Phili. 1.
Though I be bold in Christ to enjoin the that, which becomes thee, yet
for loves sake I rather beseech the trusting in thine obedience, I wrote unto
thee, knowinge that thou will do more then I say for.

Heb. 2.
Therefore we ought to give the more heed to the things we have heard,
l^aste we perish. For if the words which was spoken by Angels was steadfast,
so that ^u^ry transgression and disobedience received a ius^e recompense too
reward: how shall we escape if we despise so great salvation?

Heb. 5.
Although Christ were Gods son yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered, and was made perfect, and the cause of eternal salvation unto
all them that obey him.

Moreover saying we hadd^ fathers of our own flesh which corrected us, Heb.
1^.
and we gave them reverence, should not we much rather be in subjection unto
the father of spiritual gifts, that we might live? And they verelye for a
feawe days nurtered us after their own pleasure: but he learneth us unto that
which is profitable, that we might receive of his holiness. Se that ye
despise not him that speaks. For if they escaped not which refused him, that
spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven, whose voice then sh^uke the earth, and now declares
saying, yet once again will I ^^ke, not the earth only, but also heaven. And
that he sayethe yet once more, signyfyeth the remouynge away of those things
which are shaken, as of things which have ended their course, that the
things which are not shaken may remany.

1. Cor. 11.
I commend you brethren that ye keep precepts and ordinances even as I
delivered them to you.

Of pittye and mercy. Capitu. 15.
Romans 12.
BE merye with them that are merye, weep with them that weep. If thine enemy
honger, feed him. If he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing, thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head.

Romans 14
Him that is weak in the fayeth receive unto you, not in disputinge and
troubling his conscience.

Romans 15.
We which are strong, ought to bear the fraylnes of them which are weak, and
not to stand in our own consaytes. For Christ pleased not him self, but as
it is written. The rebukes of them which rebuke thee. Psalm. 67.
fell on me. Wherefore receive ye one an other as Christ received us, too the
praise of God. It has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia ^oo make a
certain destribution upon the poor saync^es which are at Jerusalem.

I commend unto you Phebe our sister (which is a minister of the congregation
of Cenchrea) that ye receive her in the Lord, Romans 16.
as it becomes sayncts, and that ye assiste her in what soever business she
neadeth of your aid. For she has succored many and mine own self.

Of the gatheringe for the saints as I have ordained in the congregation of
Galacia, 1. Cor. 16.
even so do ye, upon some sunday let every one of you put aside at home, and
lay up what so ever ^e thinks mete, that there be no gatherings when I come.
When I am come, who so ever ye shall allow by your letters, them will I send
to bring your liberalitye unto Jerusalem. And if it be mete that I go, they
shall go with me. If Timotheus come, se that he be without fear with you, for
he works the work of the Lord as I do. Let no man despise him, but conuaye
him thence in peace, that he may come unto me. I am glad of the coming of
Stephana, for^unatus, and Achaicus. For that which was lackinge on your part,
they have supplied. They have comforted my spirit and youres.

2. Cor. 2.
If any man has caused sorrow, the same has ^ot made me sory^, but partlye,
least I should grieve you all. It was sufficient unto the same man that he
was rebuked of many. So that now contrary wise ye ought to forgive him and
coumforte him, least that same person should be ^walowed up with over much^
heauynes. Wherefore I ^xhort you that love may have strength over him. For
^his cause verelye did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether
ye should be obedi^nte in all ^hinges. To whom ye forgive any thing, I
forgive also. And verelye if I forgive any thing, to whom I forgave it, for
your sakes I forgave it in the room of Christ, l^ast Satan should prevent us.
For his thoughts are not unknown unto us.

And I after the truth ^eare r^cord unto the congregation of Macedonia, 2.
Cor. ^.
that beyond their power, they were wyllinge of their own accord, and prayed
us with great instaunce, that we would receive their benefyte, and suffer
them too be partakers with other in mynys^ryng^ too the saynctes. And this they
did, not as we looked for, but gave their own selves first to the Lord, and
after unto us by the will of God, so that we could not but desire Titus ^o
accomplish the same benevolence among you also, even as he had begone. Now
therefore as ye are rich in all parties in ^ayeth, in word, in knowledge, in
all feruentnes, and in love, which ye have too us: even so see that ye be
plenteouse in this b^neuolence.

This say I not as commaundynge, but because other are so feruente, therefore
prove I your love whether it be perfect or no. And I give counsayl hereto.
For this is expediente for you, which began not to do only, but also to
will a year ago. Now therefore perform the the deed: that as there was in
you a readynes to will, even so ye may perform the deed of that which ye
have. Thanks be to God, which put in the heart of Titus the same good mind
toward you, for he of his own accord, came unto you. We have sent with him
that brother, whose land is in the gospel, through out all the
congregations: and not so only, but is also chosen of the congregations ^o be
as felow^ with us in our journey concerning^ this benevolence that is
mynistered by us unto the praise of the Lord, and after our destinate and
prompt mind, eschuinge this, tha^ any man should rebuke us in this plentuous
destribution that is ministered by us: and therefore make provision for honest
things, not in the sight of God only, but also in the sight of men. We have
^ent with him a brother of ours, whom we have often times proved diligently in
many things, but now much more dil^gente. The great confidence which I
have in you, has caused me ^his to do: partlye for Titus sake which is my
fellow, and healper as concerning you, partly because of other which are our
brethr^n and the messengers of the congr^gations, and the glory of Christ.
Wherefore show unto them proof of your love, and of ^he reioysynge that we
have of you, that the congregat^ons may se it.

Of the ministringe to the saynctes ^t is but superfluus for me to write unto
you, 2. Co. 9.
for I know your readynes of mind whereof I boast my self unto them of
Macedonia. For Achaia was prepared a year ago, and your feruentn^s has
provoked many. Nevertheless yet have I sent these brethren, least our
reioysinge over you should be in vain in this behalf, and that ye (as I have
said) prepare your selves l^aste paraduen^ure if they of Macedonia come with
me, and find you unprepared, the boast that I made in ^hys matter should be a
shame to us, I say not to you. Wherefore I thought it necessary to exhort
the brethren to come before hand unto you. For to prepare your good
blessinge promised before, that it might be ready, so that it be a blessinge,
and not a defraudinge. For the office of this ministration, not only supplieth
the neade of the saints, but also is abundaunt therein, that for this
laudable ministringe, thanks might be given to God, of many. Which praise
God for the obedience of your professinge the gospel of Christ, and for your
singlenes in disstributinge to them and to all men: and in their prayers to God
for you, long after you, for the abundaunt grace of God given unto you.

2^ Cor. 11.
Would to God, ye could suffer m^ a little in my foolishnes, yea and I pray you
forbear me^

Gala. 6.
Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Let him that
is taught in the word, minister unto him yt teaches him, in all good things.
Brethren if any man be falen by chance in to any faut, ye which are spiritual
help to amend him in the spirit of mekenes, considering thy self, l^ast thou
also be tempted.

Let him that stole steal no more, Ephe. 4.
but let him rather labor with his hands some good thing, that he may have to
give to him that needs. B^ ye courteous one too an other, and merciful,
forgeuinge one an other even as God for Christ's sake forgave you.

I supposed it necessaye to send brother Epaphroditus unto you, Phi. ^.
my companion in labor and fellow soldier, your Apostell, and my minister
at my needs. For he longed after you, and was full of heaviness, because ye
had heard say that he should be sick. And no doubt he was sick, and
that nigh unto death, but god had merci on him, not on him only, but on me also,
lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. I sent him therefore the diligent liar,
that when ye should se him, ye might rejoice again, and I might be the
less sorowefull. Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and make
much of such, because that for the work of Christ he went so far, that
he was nigh unto death, and regarded not his life, to fulfill that service
which was lackinge of your^ part toward me.

Phi. 4.
Ye and I beseech the Germane my yoke fellow, help those which labored with me
in the Gospel, and with Cl^ment also, and with other my labor fellows, whose
names are written in the book of life. I rejoice in the Lord greatelye, that
now at the last ye are revived again too care for me, in that, wherein ye
were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity. I sp^ake not because of
necessitye. For I have learned in what so ever estate I am, there with to be
content notwithstanding ye have well done that ye bare part with me in my
tribulation. Ye of Philippos know that in the beginning of the gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia, no congregation bare part with me as concerning
geuinge and receauinge but ye only. For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sent
once and afterward again unto my needs: not that I desire gifts, but I
desire aboundante fruit on your part. I received all and have plenty, I was
even filled after that I had received of Epaphroditus, that came from you an
odor that smells sweet, a sa^rifice accepted and pleasant to God.

We pray you brethren, 1. These. 5.
comfort the feeble minded, receive the weak.

For God is not vnrigh^eous that he should forget your work and labor that
proceadeth of love, Heb. 6.
which love ye show in his name, which have ministered unto the saints, and
yet minister. Yea and we desire that every one of you show the same
diligence, to the stablishing of hope: even unto the end.

Heb. 10.
For ye had pity on them that were in ^andes.

Heb. 13.
Be not forgetful to keep hospitalitye and lodge strangers, for thereby have
diverse received Angels into their houses unawares. Remember them that ^^e in
bonds, even as though ye were in bond with them. Be mindful of them which
are in aduersiti, as ye which are yet in your bodies. To do good and to
distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. I beseech you
brethren suffer the words of exhortation.

Exercise thy self vnt^o Godliness. For bodilye exercise profits little:
1. Timo. 4.
but Godliness is good unto al things, as a thing which has promises of the
life that is now, and of the life to come.

Of temperaunce and sobrietye, and of bodily castigation. Capitu. 16.
BRethren we are now debtters not too the flesh, Romans 8.
to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the flesh, ye must dye. But if
ye mortifye the deeds of the body, by the help of the spirit, ye shall live.

I beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 1^.
by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye make your bodies a quick sacrifice
holy, and accptable unto God.

And make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. Romans 13.


He which is weak eats earbes. Romans 14.


It is, good neither to eat flesh, Romans 14.
neither to drink wine.

I therefore tame and chaste my body, 1. Cor. 9.
and bring it in to subjection, lest after I have preached to other I my self
should be a castaway.

Therefore let us behave our selves as the ministers of God in fastinges, 2.
Cor. 6.
in chastitye, in watchinge.

And let us cleanse our selves from al filthiness of the flesh and sprite. 2.
Cor. 7.


I say walk in the spirite^ Gala. 5.
and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, for the flesh lus^eth contrary to
the spirit and the sprite contrary to the flesh.

These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do that which ye
would. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the appe^ies and
lusts.

Ephe. 2.
In the which in time passed ye walked according too the course of this world,
and after the governors that rules the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of unbelief, among which we also had our conversation in time
past, in the lusts of our flesh, and fulfilled the will of the flesh and of
the mind: and were naturallye the children of wrath, even as well as other.

Ephe. 4.
This I say therefore and testifye in the Lord, that ye hence forth walk
not as other gentiles walk. in vanitye of their mind, blinded in their
understanding, being strangers from the life which is in God through the
ignorauncye that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts:
which being past repentance, have given them selves unto wantannes, to work
al manner of unclennes, even with gredines. But ye have not so learned Christ
if so be ye have heard of him and are ^^ughte in him, even as the truth is in
Jesus, to lay from you that old man, which is corrupt through the deceaueable
lusts.

For many walk, Phi. 3.
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you wepinge, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is dampnation, whose God is their
belie, and whose glory is their shame, which are wordlye minded

Mortifye therefore your members which are on the earth fornication, Collo. 3.
uncleanness, unnatural lust, evil concupiscence, For which things ^ake,
the wrath of God comes on the children of unbelief, in which things ye
walked once, when ye lived in them.

For this is the will of God, 1. These. 4.
even that ye should be holy, and that ye should abstain from fornication,
that every one of you should know how to keep his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lust of concupyscence, as do the heathen which know
not God.

1. These. 5.
Therefore let us not sleep as other do, but let us watch and be sober.

1. Timo. 5.
Keep thy self pure and chaste, drinck no longer water, but use a little wine
for the stomach sake, and thine often diseases.

2. Timo. 4.
Be sober.

Heb. 12.
Let there be no fornicator or unclean person, as Esau, which for one
breakefast sold his birth right. Ye know how that afterward when he would
have inherited the blessinge, he was put by, and he found no means to come
thereby again, no though h^ desired it with tears.

Ephe. 5.
Therefore be not dr^nke with wine wherein is ^xc^sse.

Against the vices of the flesh. Capitu. 17.
Romans 1.
THey served the creatures more then the mak^r. For this cause God gave them up
unto shamfull lusts, for even their women did change their natural use unto
the unnatural. And like wise also the men left the natural use of the woman,
and burnt in their lusts one an other. And manne with manne wroughte
filthiness, and received in them selves the reward of their error as it was
according.

Let not sin ragine therefore in your Romans 6.
mortal bodies that ye should thereunto obey in the lusts of it, nether give ye
your members as instruments of vnryghteousenesse unto sin: I speak
grosselye because of the infyrmitye of your flesh. As ye have given your
members servant to uncleanness and to iniquitye, from iniquitye unto
iniquitye, even so now give your members servant unto unrighteousness that ye
may be sanctified, what fruit had ye then in those thnigs whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.

For the reward of sin is death. Romans 6.


They that are given to the flesh, Romans 8^
can not please God, But ye are not given to the flesh, but to the spirit, if
so be that the spirit of God dwell in you. Therefore we are now dettours not
to the flesh, to live after the flesh, for if ye live after the flesh, ye
must dye, but if ye mortifye the deeds of t^^ body, by the help of the
spiri^e ye shall live.

Not in eatinge and drinking, Romans 13.
neither in chamburinge, and wantannesse, but put ye on the Lord Iessus.

1. Cor. 5.
There goes a common ^ayinge, that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not once named among the gentiles, that one should have his
fathers wife. And ye swell, and have not rath^r sorowed, that he which has
done this deed, might be put from among you. For I verily as absente in
body, even so present in spirit, have determined already, as though I were
present of him that has done this deed, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, your reioysinge is not good^ know ye not that a little leven sowreth
the whole lompe of dowe? I wrote unto you in a Epistle that ye should not
company with fornitours. Nor I mente not at all of the fornicatours of this
world, either of the covetous, or of extorsioners, either of the ydolaters. For
then must ye needs have gone out of the world. But now I write unto you
that ye company not to gether.

Meats are ordained for the bellye, 1. Cor. 6.
and the bellye for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them. Let not
the body be applied unto fornication, but unto the Lord, and the Lord unto
the body. Either remember ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christ?
Shall I now take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlote? God for bydde. Do ye not understand that he which coupleth him self
with an harlot, is become one body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh.
Fle fornication. All sins that a man does are wi^houte the body, but he that
is a fornicatour synneth against his own body.

Gala. 5.
The deeds of the fl^she are manifest which are these, aduoutrye, fornica^ion,
uncleanness, wantannes, ydolatrye, witchcrafte, hatered, variaunce, z^ale,
wrath, strife, sedition, sects, enuyinge, murder, dronckennesse, gluttonye,
and such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time
past, that they which commit such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.

Ephe. 5.
Se that forni^ation, and all unclennes, or coueteousnes be not ones nam^d
among you, as it becomes saynctes: neither filthynes, neither foolish
talkinge, neither gestinge, which are not comelye, but rather geuinge of
thanks. For this ye know that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or
couetuous person, which is the worshipper of ydoles has any inheritance in
the kyngedome of Christ and God.

1. These. 4.
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. God will judge
fornicators and aduouterers. Heb. 13.


Of fortitude and stabilitye and of the constancy of the heart. Cap, 18.
THerefore my dear breethren be ye steadfast and immovable, ^. Cor. 15.
always rich and abundant in the works of the Lord, in as much as ye know how
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

And therefore let us not hence forth be no more children, Ephe. 4.
waueringe and carried with every wind of doctrine by the wilines of men and
craftines, whereby they lay awayte for us to deceive us.

Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord, Ephe. 6.
and in the power of his might, put on the armoure of God, that ye may stand
steadfast against the crafty assaults of the d^uyl. For we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against rule, against power and against worldly rulers of
the darkennes of this world, against spiritual wickedness, for heavenly
things. For this cause take unto you, the armoure of God, that ye may ^e able
to resist in the evil day, and stand perfect in all things. Stand
therefore, and your loins girde about with veri^ye, having on the breast
plate of righteousness, and shood with shows prepared by the gospel of
peace. Above all things take to you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may
quench all the fire darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and
the swearde of the spirit which is the word of God, and pray always with all
manner prayer and supplication, and that in the spirit.

Collo. 1.
Continue grounded and stablished in the fayeth: and he not moved away from
the hope of the Gospel, where of ye have heard, how that it is preached among
all creatures, which are under heaven.

Collo. 2.
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus our Lord, even so walk, roted and
built in him, and steadfast in the fayeth, as ye have learned, and there in be
plentuouse in geuynge thanks.

Armed with the breast plate of faith and love, 1. These. ^.
and with hope of ^aluation as an helmet. For God has not appointed us unto
wrath, but to obtain salvation, by the means of our^ Lord Jesus Christ,
which dyed for us: that whether we make or sleep, we should live together with
him.

We beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. These. 2.
and in that we shall assemble unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved from
your mind, and be not troubled neither by the spirit, neyher by words, nor
yet by letter, which should seem to come to us, a^thoughe the day of Christ
were at hand.

The Lord is faithful, 2. These. 3.
which shall stablishe you, and keep you from evil. Brethren be not werye in
well doing.

Then therefore my son, 2. Timo. 2.
be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

And let us hold fast the confidence and the reio^singe of that hope, Heb. 3.
unto the end. Psalm. 93.
Wherefore as the holy^ ghost says. To day if ye shall hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, after the rebellion in the day of temtation in the wilderness,
where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works fortye year
long. We are par^akers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end the first
substance, so long as it is said. To day if ye hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, as when ye rebelled.

Heb. 13.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange learning. For it is a good
thing that the heart be stablyshed with grace, and not with m^ats which have
not profyted them that have had there pastime in them.

1. Cor. 10.
Though we walked compassed with the flesh, yet we war not fleshlye, For the
weapons of our war are not carnal things. But things mighty in God, to
cast down strong holds, wherewith we overthrow imaginations, and every his
thing that exaltethe it self against ^he knowledge of God, and bring in to
captiuitye all understanding to the obedyence of Christ, and are ready to
take vengeance on all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

Against coueteousnesse, and of liberality. Capitu. 19.
SE that couetuousnesse be not once named among you, Ephe. 5.
for the coueteous person (which is the worshipper of ydolles) has no
inheritance in the kingedome of Christ and of God,

Ye I think all things but loss, Phi. 3.
for the e^cellente knowledges of Christ Jesus, and do judge them but donge,
that I might win Christ.

The destitute of the truth, think that lucre is Godliness. 1. Timo. 6.
Godliness is great riches, if a man be conten^e with that he has. For we
brought nothing in to the world, and it is a plain case, that we can carye
nothing out. When we have fode and raym^nte, let us therewith be content. For
they that will be rich, fall in to temptation and snares and in to many foolish
and noisome lusts, which droune men in perdition and destruction. For
couetuousnes is the rote of all evil. Which while some lusted after, they
erred from the fayeth, and tangled them selves with many sorrows, but thou
which art the man of God, fly such things. Charge them which are rich in
this world, that they be not exceadinge wise, and that they trust not in the
uncertain riches, but in the living God, which gives us aboundauntlye all
things to enjoy them, and that they do good and be rich in good works, and
ready to give and distribute, layinge up in store for them selves a good
^ondation against the time to come that they may obtain eternal life.

Heb. 13.
Let your conuersasion be without couetuousnesse, and be c^ntente with that ye
have already. For he verily said.

I will not fail the, Iosu. i.
neither forsake the, that we may boldlye say: The Lord is my helper, Psalm.
27.
and I will not fear what man does unto me.

For all other seek their own, Phi. 2.
and not that which is Jesus Christ's.

Of the observation of ensamples, and avoiding of offenses. Capitu. 20.
IF thou he called a Jew, and trustest in the law, Romans 2.
and reioysest in god and know his will and have experience of good and bad,
in that thou art informed by the law and beleuest that thou thy self art a
guide unto the blind, a light to them which are in darkennesse, an informer of
them which lack discresion, a teacher of unlearned, which haste the ensample
of that which ought to be known, and of the truth, in the law. But thou
which teacthest an other, teach not thy self. Thou preachest, a man
should not s^eale, and yet thou stealest. Thou say, ^ man should not
commit aduoutery^ and thou breakest wedlock. Thou abhorreste ydols^ and
robbest God of his ho^oure. Thou reioyesest in the law, and through breaking of
the law dishonourest god, for the name of god is evil spoken of among the
gentiles through you.

Let no man put a stombling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.
Romans 13.
For I know and am full certified in the lord Jesus that there is nothing
common of it self, but unto him that judges it to be common, to him it is
common. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitablye. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. Cause not your
treasure to be ^uyll spoken of. For the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteo^senesse, peace, and joy in the holy ghost. For who so
ever in these things serves Christ, pleases God well, and is commended of men.

Therefore let us follow those thin^es where with one may edifye an other.
Destroy not the work of God for a little meats sake. All things are pure,
but it is evil for that man which ^ateth with hurt of his conscience. It is
good neither to eat^ flesh, neither to drink wine, neither any thing
whereby thy brother stombleth, either falls, or is made weak.

Let every manne please his neighbor unto his wealth and edifyinge. Romans 15.


I beseech you brethren, Romans 1^.
mark them which cause division and give occasions of evil, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid the, for they that are such, serve
not the lord Jesus Christ, but their own belies. And with sweet preachinge
and flatteringe wonders, deceive the hearts of the innocents.

For some suppose that there is an ydoll until this hour, 1. Cor. 8.
and eat for as a thing offered unto the ydoll, and so their consciences
being yet weak, are defiled. Meat makes us not acceptable to God. Neither
if ^e eat, are we the better. Neither (...) we eat not, are we the worsse.
But take heed, that your lybertye cause not the weak to fall. For if some man
see the which have knowledge, sit at meat in the ydols temple, shall not the
conscience of him which is weak, be boldenned too eat those things which
are offered too the ydole? And so through thy knowledge shall the weak
brother perish for whom Christ dyed. When ye sin so against the brethren and
wound their weak cons^iences, ye sin against Christ. Wherefore if meat
hurt my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world standethe, because I
will not hurt my brother.

1. Cor. 10.
All things are lawefull unto me, but al things are not expedyent. All things
are lawefull to me, but all things edifye not. What soever is sold in the
market, that eat, and ask no questions for conscience sake. For the earth is
the Lords, and all that therein is^ Psalm. 25.
If any of them which ^ele^e not, hyd you to a feast, and if ye ^e disposed to
go, what so ever is set before you, eat: askinge no question for conscience
sake. But and if any man say unto you, this is dedicate unto ydoles, eat not
of it for his sake that showed it, and for hurtinge of conscience. Conscience I
say not thine, but the conscience of that other. For why should my liberty
be judged of an other man's conscience? For if I take my part with thanks,
why a^ I ^uyll spoken of for that thing wherefore I geeue thanks. See that
ye give none occasion of evil, neither to the Jews, nor yet to the gen^yles,
even as I please all men in all things not sekinge mine own profit, but ^he
profytte of many, that they might be saved.

Let all things be done unto edifyinge. 1. Cor. 14.


Therefore we have cast from us the clokes of vnhonestye, and walk not in
craftynesse, neither corrupt we the word of God: but walk in ^pen truth,
and report our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

2. Co. 6.
Geuinge no man occasion of evil that in our office be ^ound no faut.

^. Cor. 7.
Understande us, we have hurt no man, we have corrupt no man, we have
defrauded no man.

2. Cor. 8.
For this we eschew, that any man should rebuke us in this plenteou^
distribution that is ministered by us. And therefore make we provision for ^onest
things, not in the ^ighte of God only, but also in the sight of men.

2. Cor. 12.
For we do all things dearelye beloved, for your edifyinge.

But if ye do b^^e and devour one an other, Gala. 5.
take heed least ye be consumed one of an other.

Let no fylthy communication proceade out of your mouths, Ephe. 4.
but that which is good to edi^ye with all, that ye may have favor with the
hearers.

1, These. 4.
And that ye behave your selves honestlye toward them that are without.

Wherefore comfort your selves together, 1. These. 5.
and edifye one an other, even as ye do.

We require you breethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. These. 3.
that ye with draw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatelye,
and not after the instytution which ye received of us, ye your selves know,
how ye ought to follow us. For w^ behaved not our selves vnquyetly among
you. Neither took we bread of any man for noughte^ but wrought with labor
and tra^ayle night and day, because we would not be grievous to any of you:
not but that we had autoritye, but to make our selves an ensample unto you to
follow us.

Be unto them that believe, an ensample, 1. Timo. 4.
in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in fayeth, and pureness. These
things exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how thou
profytest in all things.

Titu. 3.
Above all things, show thy self an ensample of good works, in doctrine, in
integritye, and in gratuitye^

Ad philemo.
So that the feloshippe of thy faieth may be euydente through knowledge of all
good things in Christ Jesus.

1. Cor. 9.
For we suffer all things, least we should hinder the gospel of Christ.

Phi. 4.
Let your modesty and softness be known to all men.

An exhortation to peace, and concord, and against dissension and contention.
Capitu. 21.
Romans 14.
LEt us follow those things which make for peace.

The God of patience and consolation, Romans 13.
give unto every one of you, that ye be like minded one ^owardes an other,
after the ensample of Christ Jesus, that ye all agreinge together, may with one
mouth praise God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I beseech you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.
that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissension among you: but
be ye knyt together in one mind, and in one meaning. It is showed unto me (my
brethren) of you, by them that are of the house of Cloe, that there is strife
among you, and this is it that I mean, how that commonly among you, one
says: I hold of Paule^ an other I hold of Apollo, the third I hold of
Cephas, the fourth I hold of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified
for you? Either were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God that I
Christened non of you, but Crispus and Caius, least any should say that I had
baptized in mine own name.

And I could not speak unto you bre^theren as unto spiritual, 1. Cor. 3.
but as unto carnal, even as it were unto babes in Christ I gave you milk to
drink, and not meat. For ye are yet carnal. As long verily as there is
among you enuyinge, strife and dissension, are ye not carnal, and walk after
the manner of men? As long as one say^th, I hold of Pa^l and an ather I am
of Apollo, are ye not carnal? What is Paul^? What thing is Apollo? Only
minister^ are they, by whom ye believed, even a^ the Lord gave every manne
grace. I have planted, Apollo, watered, but God gave the increase. So then,
neither is he that ^lanteth any thing, neither he that waterethe: But God
that gave the increase. He that planteth, and he that waters are neither
better then the other. Therefore let no man rejoice in men, for all things
are youres, whether it be Paul, either Apollo, either Cephas, whether it be
the world, either life, ^yther death, whether they be present things, or
things to come: all are youres, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

1. Cor, 4.
Let men this wise esteem us, even as ^he ministers of Christ, and disposers of
the secrets of God. Furthermore it is required of the dysposers that they be
found faithful. These thing^s brethren have I described in mine own person
and Apollos for your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that no man coumpte of
him self beyond that which is above written: that one swell not against an
other for any man's cause. For who prefers the? Now ye are full: now ye are
made rich: Ye raygne a^ kings without us: and I would to God ye did reign
that we might reign with you.

God has called us in peace. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 11.


If there be any manne among you that lustethe to strive, let him know that
we have no such custom, neither the congregation of God. This I warn ye of,
and commend not, that ye come together not after a better manner, but after a
worsse. First of all when ye come to gether in the congregation, I hear that
there is dissension among you, and I partly believe it. For there must be
heresies and sects among you, that they which are perfect among you, might
be known. When y^ come together a man can^e not ^a^^ the Lords supper. For
every man begins before to eat his own supper. And one is hungrye, and an
other is dron^ken. Have ye not house^ to ea^e and to drink in? Or else
despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that have not? what shall I
say unto you? shall I prays^ you? In this praise I you not.

1. Co^. 14.
For God is not causer of sty^fe, but of peace, as I teach in all congregations
of saints.

Gala. 6.
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon Israel that partaineth to God.

Phili. 1.
Only let your conversation be, as it becomes the gospel of Christ: that
whether I come and see you, or else be absente I may yet hear of you, that
ye continue in one spirit, and in one soul, labouringe as we do, to maintain
the ^ayeth of the gospel.

Phi. 2.
Therefore if there be among you a^^e consolation in Christ, if there be any
coumfortable love, if there be any feloship of the spirit, if there be any
compassion or mercy, fulfill my joy, that ye draw one way, having one love,
being^ at one accord and of one mind.

Nevertheless in that whereunto we are come, Phi. ^.
let us proceade by one rule that we may be of one accord.

I pray Enodias, Phi. 1.
and beseech Sintyches that they be of one accord in the Lord.

And the peace of God rule in your hearts, Collo. 3.
to the which peace ye are called in one body.

Strive not about words, 2. Tim. 2^
which is to no profit, but to peruerte the hearers. Folish and unlearned
questions put from the, remembringe that they do but gender strife, but the
servant of God must not strive, but must be peaceable unto all men?

Folishe questions, Titu. 3.
and genealogies and braulinge, and strife about the law, avoid, for they are
unprofitable and superfluous^

Against temerarius and inordinate i^dgementes. Capi. 22.
Romans ^.
Therefore art thou inexcusable o manne, who so ever thou be that iudgest. For in
that same wherein thou i^dgest an other, thou condempnest thy self. For thou
that iudgest, do even the same self things. But we are sure that the
judgment of God is according to truth, against them which commytte such
thing^s. Think thou this O thou manne that iudgest them which do such
things, and yet do even the very same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God? Either ^espises^ thou the riches of his goodness, patience and
long sufferaunce? and remembrest not thou how that y^ kindne^ of God leads
the to repentance? but thou after thine hard heart y^ can not repent, heapest
together y^ tr^asure of wrath against the day of vengeance when shall be opened
the righteo^snes of God, which will reward every man according to his deeds.

One believes that he may eat all thing. Let not him that eats, Romans 14.
despise him that eats not. And let not him which eats not, judge him that
eats. For God has received him. What art thou that iudgest an other mann^s
servant? Whether he stand or fall, that pertains unto his master. Ye he
shall stand. For God is able to make him stand This man puts difference
between day and day, an other man counts all days a like. Se that no man
waver in his own meaning. He that observes one day more then the other,
does it for the Lords pleasure. And he that observes not one day more then
an other, does it to please the lord also. And he that eats, does it to
please the Lord, and gives God thanks. But why do thou then judge thy
brother? Other why do y^ despise thy brother? we shall all be brought before
the judgment seat of Christ, for it is written. Esa. 45^
As truly as I live says y^ lord al knees shall bow to me^ and al tong^ shall
give aknowledge to God. So shall every one of us give accomptes of him sele to
God. Let ^s not therefore judge one an other any more. But judge this rather,
that no man put a stombling block or an occasion to faule in his brothers
way. Happy and blessed is ^e that condempneth not him self in that thing
which he aloweth.

1. Cor. 4.
With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you, either of man's
day. No I judge not mine own self. I know naught by my self, yet am I not
thereby justified. It is the Lord that judges me. Therefore judge nothing
before the time until the Lord come, which will lighten things that are
hidden in darkennesse, and open the counsayles of the hearts. And then shall
every man have praise of God.

1. Cor. 5.
What have I to do, to judge them which are without? Do ye not judge them that
are with in? Them that are without, God shall judge.

1. Cor. 6.
How dare one of you having business with an other go to law under the wicked,
and not rather under the saints? Do ye not know that the saints shall
judge the world? if the world shall be judged by y^u: are ye not good enough
to judge small trifles? know ye not how that we shall iudg^ the Angels? How
much more may we judge things that pertayn to the life? If ye have
iudgement^^ of worldly matters, take them which are despised in the
congregation, and make them judges. This I say to your shame^ Is there
utterly no wise manne among you, what not one at all, that can judge
between brother and brother, but one brother goes to law with an other, an^
that under the vnbeleuers^ Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you,
because ye go to law one with an other. Why^ rather suffer ye not wrong? Why
rather suffer ye not your selves to be robbed? Nay, ye your selves do
wrong, and rob, and that the breethren, ^oo ye not know and remember how
that the unrighteous shall not in^eryte the kingdom of God^

If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. 2. Cor. 11.
But when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, because we should not be
damned with the world.

Of them which seem to be gre^te (what they were in ^ime passed, Gala. ^.
it makes no matter to me) God ^oketh on no man's person.

Let no man therefore judge you about meat, Collo. 2.
or drink, or for a piece of an holy day as of the new moan, or of the
saboath days, which are nothing but shadows of things to come. but the
body is in Christ.

Of spiritual furtheraunce and perf^^tion. Capitu. 23.
Perceive ye not how that they which run in a course, run all, 1. Cor. 9.
yet but one receaue^h the reward. So run, that ye may obtain^ ^uery man
that proves masteries, abstaineth from all things, and they do it to obtain
a corruptible crown: but we to obtain an incorruptible crown. I therefore so
run, not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as one that beats the
air.

C^uet after the best gifes. 1. Cor. 12.


When I was a child, I spoke a^ a child I understood as a child, 1. Cor. 13.
I ymagened as a child but as soon as I was a man, I put away chyl^yshnesse.

Even so ye (for as much as ye covet ^pirituall gyfts) 1. Cor. 14.
seek that ye may have plenty unto the edifyinge of the congregation.

We as helpers, 1. Cor. 6.
therefore erhorte you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. For he
says: I have heard the in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have
I heard thee. Behold, now is that well accepted time, Esa. 4^.
behold now is that day of saluaion.

God is able to make you rich in all grace, that ye in all things having
sufficient unto the uttermost, may be rich unto al manner good works, a^ it is
written. Psalm. 100.
He has sparsed abroad and has given too the poor? his righteousenesse
remains for ever. He that finds the sower se^de, shall minister bread for
food, and shall multiplye your seed, and en^rease the fruits of your
righteou^enesse, that on all parties ye may be made ^iche in all singleness,
which causethe through us thanks geuynge unto God.

Gala. 4.
Be fervent always in a good thing and not only when I am present with you.

Let us follow the truth in love, Ephe. 4.
and in all things grow in him which is the headde, that is to say Christ.

Ephe. 5.
Ye were once darkennes, but are now light in the Lord, walk as the children
of light. For the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness, and
truth, acceptinge that which is pleasyng to the Lord.

The fruit of the spirit is love, Gala. 5.
joy peace, long sufferinge, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, mekenes,
temperaunce, continen^e, chastitye. Against such there is no law.

Furthermore we beseech you brethren, 1. These. 4.
and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that ye increase more and more even as ye
have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God.

Wherefore let us love the doctrine pertayninge to the beginning of a
Christian man, Heb. 6.
and let us goo unto perfection, and now lay no more the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and of ^ayeth toward God, of Baptism, of
doc^rine, and of layinge on of hands, and of resurretion from death, and of
eternal judgment. And so will we do, ^f God permit. Nevertheless dear
friends we trust to see better of you, and things which accompanye
salvation, though we thus speak. Yea and we desire that every one of you
show the same diligence, to the stablishinge of hope, even unto the end, that
ye faynte not, but follow them which through fayeth and pacienc^ inherit the
promises.

Phi. 3.
Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfec^e: but I
follow, if that I may comprehend that, wherein I am comprehended of Christ
Jesus. Brethren I count not my self that I have gotten it: but one thing I
say, I forget that which is behind, and stretched my self unto that which
is before, and praise unto that mark appointed, to obtain the reward of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore as many as be perfect,
be thus wise minded, and if ye be other wise minded. I pray God open even this
unto you.

Heb. 5.
But strong meat belongs to them that are perfect, which through custom
have their wits excercysed, to judge both good and evil also.

Growinge up to full holiness in the fear of God. 2. Cor. 7.


Brethren be not children in wytie. How be it, 1. Cor. 14.
as concerning maliciousnes, be children, but in wit be perfect.

Now therefore ye are delivered from sin, Romans 6.
and made the servant of God. And have your fruit that ye should be
sanctified, and the end everlasting life. But eternal life is the grace and
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Either know ye not how that your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost,
1. Cor. ^.
which is in you, whom ye have of God, and that ye are not your own? For ye
are dearelye boughte. Therefore glorify ye God in your bodies, and in your
sprites, for they are Gods.

The first manne is of the earth, 1. Cor. 15.
earthlye, the second man from heaven heavenly. As is the earthlye, such are
they that are earthlye. And as is the heavenly, such are they that are
heavenly. Therefore as we have borne the image of the earthlye, so shall we
bear the image of the heavenly. This say I brethern that flesh and blood
can not inherit the kingedome of God. Neither shall corruption inherit
incorruption.

I am crucified with Christ. I live verelye: Gala. 2.
yet now not I. But Christ lives in me. Which loved me, and gave him self for
me. I despise not the grace of God.

Gala. 6.
From hence forth, let no man put me to business. For I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus.

Collo. 4.
Epaphras the servant of Christ, which is one of you, saluteth you, and
always labors seruently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
full in all that is the will of God.

Phi. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven.

Therefore my brethren dear lie beloved and longed for, Phi. 4.
my joy and croune, so continue in the Lord.

1. These. 2.
Ye are wytne^ses, and so is God, how holyly and justly, and vnblameablye, we
behaved our selves among you that believe, as ye know how that we exhorted,
and comforted, and besought every one of you, a^ a father his children, that
ye would walk worthy of God, which has called you unto his kingedome and
glory.

Ye are all the the children of light^ 1. These. 5.
and the children of the day.

Wherefore I warn the, 2. Timo. 1.
that thou stir up the gift of God which is in the, by the puttinge on of
my hands. For God has not given unto us the spirit of fear, but of power,
and of love, and of sobernes of mind. Therefore be not ashamed to testifye our
Lord neither be ashamed of me, which am bound for his sake: but suffer thou
aduersitye also with the Gospel, through the power of God.

Of just and charitable correption. Cap^. 24.
Have no fellowship with the vnfrutef^ll works of darckness^, Ephe. 5.
but rather rebuke them. For it is shame even too name those things, which are
done of them in secret: but all things, when they are rebuked of the light
are manife^^, for what so ever is manyfeste, that same is light. Wherefore he
says, awake thou that ^^epest, and stand up from death, and Christ shall give
the light.

1. These.
We beseech you brethren, warn and rebuke them that are unruly.

2. These. 3.
If any man obey not our saying^ count him not as an enemy, but warn him as
a brother.

1. Timo 5.
Rebuke not an elder, b^t exhort him as a father. Them that sin rebuke
openly, that other may fear.

2. Timo. 4.
I testifye before God, and Christ Jesus, which shall judge quycke and dead,
and by his coming and kingdom, be it in season or out of season, improve,
rebuke, preach the word, be ^eeuente, exhort with all long sufferinge and
doctrine. For the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine,
but after their own lusts shall they (whose ears itch) get them an help of
t^achers, and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given
unto fables.

All scripture is profitable to improve and rebuke. 2. Tim^. 3.


These things speak, Titu. 2.
exhort, and rebuke with all commaundinge.

The se^uaunte of God with modestye must reprove them that resyste the truth,
2. Timo. 2.
if that God at any time will give them repentance for too know the truth and
come again to them selves out of the snare of the devil, which are now
taken of him at his will.

For when as concerning the time, Heb. 5
ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need again that we teach you the
first principles of the word of God and are become such, as have need of
milk, and not strong meat. For ^uerye manne that is feadde with milk, is
inexperte in the word of ryghteousene^se. For he is but a babe.

What son is that whom the father chas^eneth no^? Heb. 12.


Al manner of chastning in the present time seemethe not too be ioyouse, but
greuouse: Nevertheless afterward, it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness unto them which are therein excercised.

Of temptation. Capitu. 25.
1. Cor. 10.
LEt us not tempte Christ, as some of them tempted and were destroyed of
serpents. None other temptation has taken you, but such as follows the
nature of man. But God is faithful, which shall not suffer you to be tempted
above your strength, but shall in the mids of the temptation make away to
escape out, and sustain it.

^
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly.

2. Cor. 11.
For these false Apostels are disceitful workers, and fashion them selves like
unto the Apostelles of Christ. And no maruayle, for Satan him self is
changed in to the fashion of an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great
thing, though his ministers fashion the^ selves, as though they were the
ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their deeds.

And least I should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of
revelations: 2. Cor. 12.
there was given unto me unquietness of ye flesh, the m^ssenger of Satan to
buffet me. For this thing besoughte I the Lord thryse, that it might depart
from me. And he said unto me, my grace is suffyente for thee, for my strength
is made perfect through weakness.

The flesh l^steth contrary to the spirit, Gala. 5.
and the spirit contrary to the flesh. etc. As above. Ca. 16.

Neither give place unto the devil.

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, Ephe. 4. Ephe. 6.
but against power and worldly rulers. etc. as above Capi. 18. 1. These. 2.


For as much brethren as we are kept from you for a season as concerning the
bodyly presence, but not in the heart, we enforced the more to^ see you
personablye with great desire. And therefore we would have come to you, I Paul,
but Satan withstode us.

For this cause when I could no longer forbear, 1. These. 3.
I sent, that I might have knowledge of your fayeth, least happelye the tempter
had tempte^ you, and that our labor had been bestowed in vain.

Heb. 2.
In that Christ him self suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succoure
them that are tempted.

Heb. 4.
Saying then that we have not an hye priest, which can not have compassion on
our infirmites, but in all points tempted like as we are: but yet with^ute
sin.

^. Cor. 2.
That we be not circumuented of satan. For his thoughts are not unknown unto
us.

^. Tim^. 2.
No man is crouned, except he stri^e laufullye.

Of prayer. Capitu. 26.
Likewise the spirit also helps our infyrmities. Ro^. ^.
For we know not what to pray for, or to desire as we ought: but the spirit
makethe intercession mightelye for us. And he that searches the hearts,
knowethe what is the meaning of the spirit, for he makes intercession forth
saints according to the pleasure of God. Christ makes intercession for us.

If I pray with the tongue, my spirit prays, 1. Cor. 14^
but my mind is without fruit. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit,
and will pray wi^h the mind also. I will sing with spirit, and will sing
with the mind also.

Continue in prayer, Romans ^^.


Pray always with all manner prayer and supplication, Ephe. ^.
and that in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all instance, and supplication
for all saints.

In all things show your peticion Phi. 4.
unto God in prayer and supplication with geuinge of thanks.

Continue in prayer and watch in the Collo. 4.
^ame with thanks geuinge.

1. These. 5.
Pray continuallye.

I pray you therefore, that above all things, 1. Timo. 2.
prayers supplications, intercessions, and geuinge of thanks b^ had for all
men, for kings, and for all that are in autoritye, that we may live a quiet
and a peaceable life, in all Godlynes and honestye, and chastitye. For that is
good and accepted in the syghte of God our savior. I will therefore that the
men pray every where^ liftinge up their hands without wrath or doubting.
Likewise also the women that they array them selves in comely apparel with
shamefastness and discrete behavior.

Heb. 5.
Christ in the days of his flesh did offer up prayers and supplications with
strong cryinge and tears unto him that was able to save him from death. And
was also heard, because of his Godly reuer^nce.

Therefore he is able also ever to save them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.
saying he ever lives to make intercession for us.

Christ is entered in to very heaven for to appear now in the sight of God
for us. Heb. 9.


Of spiritual gloriation, or joy, and inward consolation. And against vain
glory. Capitu. 27.
TO every man that does good, shall come praise, Romans 2.
honor, and peace, to the Jew first, and also to the gentyle.

We glory and rejoice in the hope of the children of God, Romans 5.
neither do we so only, but we rejoice in tribulations, and we rejoice and
joy in God by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received
the attenmente.

The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in beleuinge. Romans 15.


Therefore let no man glory or rejoice in me^. 1. Cor. 3.
For all things are yours whether it be Paul, either Apollo, either Cephas,
whether it be the world, either life, either death^, whether they be present
thing^s, or things to come: all are youre^, and ye are Christ's, and Christ
i^ Gods.

1. Cor. 5.
Your reioysinge is not good^ know ye not that a little leven soureth the whole
lompe of dowe?

2. Cor. 1.
God which comfort us in all our tribulation in so much that we are able to
comfort them which are troubled in what so ever tribulation it be. With the
same exhortion and comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For
as the afflictions of Christ are plentuous in us, even so is our consolation
plentuous by Christ. Whether we be troubled for your consolation and
salvation, which salvation shows her power in that ye suffer the same
afflictions which we also sufferior whether we be comforted for your
consolation and salvation, yet our hope is steadfast for you, in as much as we
know how that as we have your^ part in ^fflictions, so shall ye be par^^kers
of consolation. For our glory and reioysinge is this, the testymonye of our
conscience, that in singleness and Godly pureness, and not in the fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world,
and most of all to you wards. We write no other things too you, then that ye
read and also know. Yea, and I trust ye shall find us unto the end, even as
ye have fo^^de us partelye, for we are your reioysinge, even as ye are ours
in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore I am glad of you. Romans 1^


Saying then that we know how the lord is to be feared, 2. Cor. 5.
we persuade and fare fair with you. For we are known well enough unto God.
I trust also that we are known in your consciences, we praise not our selves
again unto you, vut we give you an occasion to glory and rejoice of us, that
ye may have some what against them, which rejoice in the face, and not in the
heart.

2. Co^ ^.
We have showed you before that ye are in our hearts to dye and live with you.
I am very bold over you, and rejoice greatelye in you. I am filled with
comfort, and am exceadinge joyous in all our tribulations. For God that
comfort the abject, comforted us at the coming of Titus. And not with his
coming only, but also with the consolation wherewith he was comforted of you.
For he told us your desire, your mourninge, your ^eruente mind to me ward,
so that I now rejoice the more. Therefore we are comforted, and exceadingly
the more ioyed we, for ye joy that Titus had because that his spirit was
refreshed of you all. I am therefore not now ashamed, though I bosted my self
to him of you, for as all things which I speak unto you are true, even so is
our bostynge, that I bosted my self to Titus with all, ^ounde true. I rejoice
that I may be bold over you in all things.

2. Cor. 8.
I do you to wit brethren, of the grace of God which is given in the^
congregations of Macedonia, how that the abundance of their rejoicing is, that
they are tried with much tribulation. And thereto though they were exceadinge
poor, yet have they given exceadinge richlye, and that in singlenes.

We will not glory above mesure, 2. Cor. 10.
but according too the measure and quantity which God has distributed unto
us, a measure that reaches even to you. For we stre^che not ou^e our selves
beyond measure although we had not reached unto you. For even unto you have
we come with the gospel of Christ, nor we boaste not our selves out of
measure in other men's labors. Ye and we hope, when your fayeth is increased
among you, to be magnifyed according to our measure more largelye, and to
preach the gospel in those regions which are beyond you, and not to rejoice
of that which is by an other man's measure prepared already. Let him that
reioyseth, reioyc^ in the Lord, for he that prayseth him self, is not allowed,
but he whom the Lord praises.

2. Cor. 11.
I say again, least any man think that I am foolish: or else even now take me
as a fool, that I may glorify and boast my self a little. That I speak, I
speak i^ not after the w^^es of the Lord, b^t as it were foolishely, while we
are come to bostinge. Saying that many rejoice after the flesh, I will
rejoice also. W^ere in so ever any man dare be bold (I speak folishelye) I
dare be bold also. They are Hebreues, so am I. They are Isra^lit^s, even so am
I. They are the seed of Abraham, even so am I. They are the ministers of of
Christ (I speak as a fool) I am more. If I muss^ needs rejoice. I will
rejoice and glory of mine infirmities.

2. Cor. 12.
Uerye gladly therefore will I rejoice of my weknes, that the strength of
Christ may dwell in me.

Gala. 6.
God forbid yt I should rejoice but in y^ cross of our lord Jesus Christ, where by
the world is crucified as touching me, and I as concerning the world.

What then? So that Christ be preached all manner ways, Phi. 1.
whether it be by occasion, or of true meaning, I therein joy, ye and will joy.
For I know that this shall chance to m^ salvation through your prayer and
ministering of y^ spirit of Jesus Christ as I look for and hope y^ in nothing I
shall be ashamed.

Yea and though I be offered up upon the offeringe and sacrifice of your
faieth, Phi. 2.
I rejoice, and reio^ce with you all. For the same cause also rejoice ye. and
rejoice ye with me.

Moreover my brethren rejoice in the Lord. Phi. 3.


Rejoice in the lord always, Phi. 4.
and again I say rejoice. The Lord is even at hand. Be not careful. I reioy^e
in the lord greatly, that now at the last ye are revived again to care for
me in that ye were also careful. etc.

What thanks can we recompense to God again for you, 1. These. 3.
over all the joy that we joy for your sakes before our God, while we night
and day pray exceadingly that we might see you presentlye, and might fulfill
that, which is lackinge in your fayeth.

1. These. 5.
Comfort your selves together, comfort the feeble minded.

1. These. 2.
What is our hope or joy or croune of reioysinge: are not ye it in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? Yes ye, are our glory and joy.

We have great joy and consolation over thy love, Ad phile.
for by the (brother) the Saynctes are coumforted. Even so brother, let me
enjoy the in the Lord, comfort my bowels in the Lord.

Against loquacitye, and ydlenes. Capitu. 28.
THe kingdom of God is not in words, 1. Cor. 4.
but in power.

Evil and malicious words, corrupt good manners. 1. Cor. 15.


^. Cor. 1.
Did I use lightenes? Or think I carnally those things, which I think that with
me should be yea yea, and nay nay. God is faithful: for our preachinge unto
you, is not ye and nay, but in him it was yea.

Wherefore put away lyinge, Ephe. 4.
and speak every manne truth unto his neighbor, for as much as we are
members one of an other.

But he ye fulfilled with the spirit speakinge unto your selves in psalms and
hymns, Ephe. 5.
and spirytuall songs.

I besought the to abide still in Ephesus when I departed in to Macedonia, 1.
Timo. 1.
even so do, that thou command some that they teach no other wise, neither
give head to fables and genealogies which are endless and bread doubts, more
then godly edifyinge which is by faith. From the which things some have
erred, and have turned unto vain iangelinge, because they would be doctoures
in the scripture, and yet understand not what they speak, neither whereof
they affirm.

And also they learn to goo from house to house, 1 Timo. 5.
idle, ye not idle only, but also tri^inge and busye bodies, speakinge things
which are not comelye.

2. These. 3.
For when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there were any which
would not work, that the same should not eat. We have heard say no doubt
that there are some which walk among you inordinatelye, and work not at all^
but are curious and busibodies. The^ that are such we command, and exhort by
the Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quie^nes and eat their own
bread.

^. Timo. 4.
Cast away vnghostlye and old^ wives fables.

Titu. 2.
With an whole some word, which can not be rebuked, y^ he which withstandeth
may be ashamed, having no thing in you that ^e may disprayse.

Of internal reformation, and thanks giving, and of certain spiritual
exercises, and of the ordinance of al things to the last end. Capi^u. 29.
FAshion not your selves like unto this world. Romans ^^.
Bu^ ^e ye changed i^ your shape, by the renuynge of yo^re wits, that ye may
fel^ what thing that good, that accep^able, and perfect will of god is.

Pourge therefore the old leu^n, 1. Cor. 5.
that ye may be new dowe, as ye are s^eat^ bread. For Christ our Est^r lamb
(...) offered v^ ^or v^. Therefore let us k^pe holy day, not with old lea^^^
neither with the leven of maliciousnes and wi^kednesse^ but with the sweet
br^nde of pureness and truth.

Therefore whether ye eat or drin^, 1. Cor. 10.
or what so ever ye do, do all to the praise of God.

For if we be ^o seruent, 2. Cor. 5.
to God we are to seruent. Y^ we keep m^asure, for your cause keep we measure,
for the love of Christ co^strayneth us.

Be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, Ephe. 4.
and put on that new man. which aft^r the image of God, is shapen of
righteousness and true holiness.

Singinge and making melodye to Ephe. 5.
the lord in your hearts giving thanks always for all things unto God the
father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Phi. 4.
Furthermore brethren, what so ever things are true, what so ever things are
honesse, what so ever thinge^ are just, what so ever things are pure, what so
ever things pertayne to love, what so ever things are of honest report, if
there be any virtuous thing, if there be any laudable thing, those have ye in
your mind, which ye have both learned and received, bearde and also seen in
me, those things do: and the God of peace shall be with you.

Collo. 3.
Let the old man with his works be put of, and the new be put on, which is
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that made him, where is another
gentyle nor Jew, circumcision nor vncir^u^^^sion, barbarous or Sithian, bound
or fre, but Christ is in all things, and see that ye ^e thankful, ^eache and
exhort your own selues^ in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, which
have favor with them, singynge in your hearts to our Lord. And all
things (what so ever ye do in word or deed) do it in the name of the Lord
Jesus, geuinge thanks to God the father by him.

In all things give thanks, 1. These. 5.
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you.

For by him offer we the sacrifice of laud always to God: Heb. 13.
that is to say, the fruit of our lyppes, which confess his name.

Which delivered us from so great perilles, 2 Co. 1.
in whom we trust, that yet here after he will deliver, by the help of your
prayer for us, that by the means of many occasions, thanks may be given of
many on our behalf, for the grace given unto us.

For I do all things for your sakes, 2. Cor. 4.
that the plentuous grace by thanks giving of many, may resounde to the
praise of God.

Of original sin, and the tra^sfusion thereof. And of the compari^on of
Christ's grace, to Adams faule. Capi. 30.
Romans 5.
WE have now by Jesus Christ received ye attonment wherfor^ as by one man's sin
entered in to the world, and death by the means of sin^e, so death went over
all men in so much that all men sinned. For death reigned from Ada^ to Moses,
even over the^ also that sinned not with like tra^sgression as did Adam: which
is the similitude of him that is to come. But the gift is not like as the
sinne^ For if through the sin of one many be deadde, much more plentuous
upon many was the grace of God, and gift of grace, which grace was given by
one man Jesus Christ. And the gift is not over one sin, as death came
through one sin of one that sinned. For dampnation came of one sin unto
condempnation: but the gift came to justify from many sins. For if by the
sin of one death raigne^ by the means of one, much more shall they which
receive abundaunce of grace, and of the gif^ of righteousness, reign in li^e by
the means of one (that is to say) Jesus Christ. Wh^rfore then as by the sin
of one, cond^mpnation came on all men, even so by the justifying of ^ne comes
the righteousness ye brings life upon all men. For as by one man's disobedience
many became sinners, so by the obedience of one^ shall many be made righteous.
And where abundance of sin was, there was more plentuousenesse of grace. That as
sin had reigned unto death, even ^o might grace reign through righteousness,
unto eternal life, by the help of Jesus Christ our Lord. We know that the law
is spiritual, Romans 7,
but I am carnal sold under sin, because I wot not what I do^ for what I
would, that do I not, but yt I hate, that do I. If I now do that which I would
not. I grant to the law that it is good. So then now it is not I that do it,
but sin that dwells in me. For I know yt in me (that is to say in my
flesh) dwells no good thing. To will is present with me, but I find no
means to perform that which is good. For I do not that good thing which I
would: but that evil do I which I would^ not, finallye if I do that I would
not, then is it not I that do it, but sin that dwells in m^ does it. I
find then by the law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.
I delight in the law of God, concerning the inner manne. But I see another law
in my members rebellinge against the law of my mind, and subduinge me unto
the law of sin which is in my members. So then I my self in my mind serve
the law of God, and in my flesh the law of sin.

Ephe. 1.
We were naturallye the children of wrath, even as well as other.

1. Cor. 15.
For by manne came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the deadde.
For as by Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be made a live.

For that the law could not do, in as much as it was weak because of the
flesh, Romans 8.
that performed God, and sent his son in the similytude of sinful flesh,
and by sin damned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness required of the
law, might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.

Of threfolde heaviness, laudable, vituperable, and indifferente. Capitu. 31.
I Say the truth in Christ, Romans 9.
and lie not in that my conscience bears me witness in the holy gho^t, that I
have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart for my brethren, which
are Israelites.

But I determined this with my self, 2. Cor. ^.
that I would not come again to you in heaviness. For if I make you sorye,
who is it, that should make me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me. And
I wrote this same to you, least if I came I should take heaviness of them, of
whom I ought to rejoice. Certainly this confidence have I in you all, that my
joy is the joy of you all. For in great affliction and anguyshe of heart, I
wrote unto you with many tears, not to make you sorye, but that ye might
perceive the love which I have most specially unto you. If any manne has
caused sorrow, the same has not made me sorry, but partly, least I should
grieve you all.

Wherefore though I made you sorry with a letter, 2. Cor. 7.
I repent not: though I did repent. For I perceive that the same pistle made
you sorry, though ye were bu^ a season. But now I rejoice, not that ye were
sorye, but that ye so sorowed that ye repented. For ye sorowed Godly: so that
in nothing ye were hurt by us. For godly sorrow causes r^pentaunce unto
salvation not to be repen^ed of: when worldly sorrow causes death. Behold
what dilygence this Godly sorrow that ye took, has wroughte in you: it caused
indignation, it caused ^^are, it caused desire, it caused a feruente mind, it
caused punyshement. For in all things ye have showed your selves that ye were
clear in that matter.

Epaphroditus was sick, and that even to death. Phi. 2.
But God had mercy on him, not on him only, but on me also, least I should
have sorrow upon sorrow.

I would not brethren have you ignorant 1. These. 4.
concerning them which are fall^n a sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do,
which have no hope.

An exhortation to labor for felicity and beatitude it self. Capitu. 32.
I suppose that the afflictions of Romans 8.
this life are not worthy of the glory which shall be ^hewed upon us. For
the feruente desire of the creatures abides lokynge when the sons of God
shall appear, because the crea^ures are subdued to vanity against their will,
but for his will which subdueth them in hope. For the very creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, in to the glorious liberty of the
sons of God.

This also I know, I mean the season, Romans 13.
how that it is the time that we should now awake out of sleep. For now is
our salvation nearer then when we ^eleue. The night is passed, and the day is
come nigh. Let us therefore cast away the deeds of dar^kenesse. And let us put
on the armoure of light. Let us walk honestlye as it were in the day light,
and put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.

For it is written. The eye has not seen, 1. Cor. 2.
and the ear has not hard, neither have entered in the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him, but God ^athe opened
them unto us, by his spiri^e.

1. Cor. 13.
Now we se in a glass, even in a dark speaking, but then shall we se face to
face. now I know vnperfectlye, but then shall I know, even as I am known.

Wherefore we are not weried. 2. Cor. 4.
For our exceadinge tribulation which is momentanye and light, prepares an
exceading and an ^ternall weight of glory unto us.

We know surely of our earthy 2. Cor. ^.
mancion wherein we now dwell were destroyed, that we have a buildinge ordained
of God, an habitation not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. Gala. 6.


Let us not be weary of well doing. For when the time is come, we shall reap
without wearynes. While we have therefore time, let us do good to all men,
and specially unto them, which are of the household of faieth.

For the things that were vantage unto me, Phi. 3.
I counted loss for Christ's sake. For whom I have counted all thing loss,
and do judge them but donge, that I might win Christ, and might be found
in him^ not having mine own righteousness which is of the law: but that which
springs of the faith which is in Christ. I mean the righteousness which
comes of God through fayeth in knowinge him, and the virtue of resurrection,
and the feloshippe of his passion, that I might be conformable unto his death,
if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection o^ the dead.

For why God the father has made us meet to be partak^rs of the inheritance
of saynctes in light, Collo. 1.
which has delivered us from the power of darckenes, and has translated us in
to the kingedome of his dear son, in whom we have redemption through ^is
blood, and forgiveness of our sins.

Therefore if ye be risen again with Christ, Collo. 3.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God. Set your affections on things that are above, and not on things which
are on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life i^ hid with Christ in God.
When Christ which is your life shall ^hewe him self, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory.

Fight the good fight of fayeth. 1. Timo. 6.
Lay hand on eternal life, whereunto thou art called, and have professed a good
profession before many witnesses.

I know whom I have believed, 2. Timo. 1.
and am sure that he is able to keep that which I have committed to his
kepinge against that day.

Suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 2. Timo. 2.
For the husbandeman that labors must first receive of the fruits.

I am now ready to be offered, 2. Timo. 4.
and the time of my departing is at hand. I have fought a good fight, and have
fulfilled my course, and have kept y^ faith. From hence forth is laid up for
me a croune of righteousness which the lord that is a righteous judge shall
give me at that day, not to me only, but unto all them that love his
coming.

For the grace of God, Titu. 2.
that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared and teaches us, that we
should deny ungodliness, and worldelye lusts, and that we should live
sober minded, righteouselye, and godly in this presentete world, lookinge for
that blessed hope and gloriouse appearinge of the mighty God Jesus Christ.

Heb. 4.
But we which have believed, do enter in to his rest, as contrary will h^ said
to the other: I have sworn^ in my wrath, they shall not enter in to my rest.
And that spoke he verily long after that the works were made, and the
foundations of the world, laid. For he spoke in a certain place of the
seventh day, o^ this wise. And God did reast the seventh day from all his
works. Gene. 2.
And in this place again. Psalm. 94.
They shall not come in to my rest. Saying therefore it follows that some must
enter the^ in to, and they to whom it was fyr^ preached, entered not therein for
vnbeleues sake. Again he appoynte^ in David a certain present day aft^^ s^
long a time, saying as it is rehearsed: this day if ye hear his ^^ice,
Psalm. 9^.
be not hard hearted. For if Iosue had given reast, then would he not
afterward have spoken of an other day. There remains therefore yet a rest
to the people of God. For he that is entered in his rest, does tras^ from his
own works as god did from his. Let us haste and study therefore to enter in
^o that rest, least any manne faule after the same ensample, in to vnbeliefe^

For when God made promise to Abraham, Heb. 6.
because he had no greater thing to swear by, he swear by him self saying.
Surely I will bless thee, and multiply thee in deed. And and so after he had
suffered and tarried a long time, Gene 23.
he enjoyed the promes^ Men verelye swear by him that is greater then them
selves, and an oath to confirm the thing, is among them an end of all
s^ryfe. So god willing very abunda^tly to show unto the heyers of promise the
stablenes of his counsayl, he added an oath that by two immutable things (^n
which it was impossible that God should lie) w^ might have perfect consolation,
which have fled. For to hold fast the hope that is s^t before us.

For here we have no continuinge city, Heb. 13.
but we seek one to come.

Of the dyssolutiue desire to be with Christ. Capitu. 33.
Romans 8.
WE know that every crea^ure grone^h wi^h us also, and trauaileth in pain even
unto this time. Not they only but even we also which have the fir^^ fruits of
the spyrite mourn in our^ selves, and wayt for the adoption, ^ look for y^
deliverance of our bodies.

Romans 7.
O wretched man that I am: wh^ shall deliver me from this body o^ death? ^he
grace of God, through I^su Christ our Lord.

1. Cor. 13.
For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesyinge is vnperfect^ But when
that, which is perfect i^ come: then that which is vnp^rfect, shall be done
away.

Herefore sigh we, 2. Cor. 5.
desiringe to be cloth^d with our mansion which is from heau^n, so yet, if we
be found clothed and not naked. For as long as we are in this tabernacle, we
sigh and are grieved. For we would not be unclothed, but wo^lde be clothed
upon, that mortality might be swalowed up of life. He that has ordained us
for this thing, is God: the which has given unto us the earnest of the
spyrite. And we hear and know well, that as long as we are in the body, we
are absent from God. For we walk in fayeth and see not. Nevertheless we are
of good coumforte, and had l^uer to be absente from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. Wherefore whether we be at home, or from home, we
endeavor our selves to please him.

For Christ is to me life, Phi. 1.
and death is to me a vauntage. If it chance me too live in the flesh, that
is too me fruitful for to work, and what t^ choose I wo^ not. I am constrained
of two things, I desire to be lowsed and to be with Christ which thing is
best of all. Never the l^sse to abide in the flesh is more n^defull for you.
And this I am sure of, that I shall abide, and with you all con^inne for the
furtheraunce and joy of your fayeth, that ye may more aboudantly rejoice in
Jesus Christ through me, by my coming to you again.

Heb. 11.
And they all dyed in faith, and re^eaued not the promis^s: but saw them a far
of, and believed them, and saluted them, and confessed them, that they were
strangers and pilgrims on the earth. They that say such thing^s, declare
that they seek a country. And if they had been mindeful of that country from
whence they came out, they had leisure to have return^d again. But now they
desire a be^ter, that is to say a heau^nlye. Wherefore God is not a shamed of
them, even to be called their God: For he has prepared for them a cy^ye.

Against ydolatrye. Capi^u. 34.
WHen the^ counted them selves Romans ^.
wise they became foles and turned the glory of the immortal God, unto the
similitude of the image of a mortal man, and of birds, and four foot^d
beasts, and of serpents. Which turned his truth unto a lie, and worshipped
and served the creatures more then the maker, which is blessed for ever.

Of such things which are dedicate unto ydols, 1. Cor. 8.
we are sure that we all have knowledge. To speak of meat dedicate unto
ydols: we are sure that there is none ydoll in the world, and that there is
none other God but one. And though there be that are called Gods, whether in
heaven, or in earth (as there be gods many, and Lords many) yet unto us is there
but one God, which is the father, of whom are al things, and we in him, and one
lord Jesus Christ, by whom are al things, and we by him. But every man has not
knowledge.

1. Cor. 10.
Neither be ye worshippers of ydols as were some of them, according as it is
written. The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up again to play.
Wherefore my dear beloved, fly from worshyppinge of ydolles. Are not they
which eat of the sacrifice, partakers of the altar? What say I then that the
ydol is any thing? or that it, which is offered to ydols is any thing? Nay,
but I say that these things which the gentiles offer, they offer to devils, and
not to God. And I would not that ye should have fellowship with the deuyls.
Ye can not drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of the deuyls. Ye
can not be partaker of the Lords table, and of the table of deuyls. Either
shall we provoke the Lord? Or are we stronger then he?

Exo. 32.
Ye know that when ye were gentyles, ye went your ways unto domme ydols,
even as ye were led.

Wherefore I declare unto you that no man speaking in the spirit of god^ 1. Cor.
12.
defyeth Jesus.

But when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them, Gala. 4.
which by nature were no Gods. But now seeing ye know God (yet rather are
known of God) how is it, that ye turn again unto the weak, and simple
ceremonies, where unto again ye desire a fr^she to be in bondage.

Against diverse vices of men. Capitu. 35.
THey are without excuse, Romans 1.
in as much as when they knew God, they gloryfyed him not as God, neither
were thankful, but waxed full of vanytyes in their ymagynations, and their
foolys^e hearts were blinded. Wherefore God likewise gave the^ up unto their
hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between them selves.
And as it seemed not good unto them to be known of God, even so god delivered
them up unto a lewd mind, that they should do the things which were not
comlye, being full of al unrighteous doing, of fornication, wickedness,
coueteousnes, maliciousnes, full of envy murder, debate, disceite, evil
condicioned, whisperers, backebyters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud
bosters bringers up of evil things, disobediente to father and mother,
without understanding, covenant breakers, vnlouinge, truce breakers, and
merciles. Which men though they knew the righteousness of God, how that they
which such things commit, are worthy of death yet not only do the same,
but also have pleasure in them that do them.

Romans 3.
We have already proved, how that both Jews and gentiles are al under sin, as
it is written: psalm. 139. psalm. 9. psalm. 13.
There is non righteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there is
non that sekeeth after God, they all are gone out of the way, they are all
made unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one: Their throat is an
open sepulcher, with their tounges they have disceaued, the poysonne of Aspes
is under their lips. Whose mouths are full of cursinge and bitterness. Their
fete ar swifte to shed blood. Destruction and wretchedness are in their ways.
And the way of peace they have notknowen. There is no fear of God before their
eyes.

If any that is called a brother among you, be a fornicator, 1. Cor. 5.
or couetuous, or a worshipper of ydols, either a rayler, either a dronckarde,
or an extortioner, with him that is such see that ye eat not. Put away from
you that evil person.

Be not deceived, for neither fornicatoures, neither worshippers of ydols, 1
Cor. 6.
neither who remongers, nether weaklynges, neither abusers of them selves with
the mankind, neither thieves, neither the couetuous, neither dron^kards,
neither cursed speakers, neither rauishers, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

1. Cor. 10.
Let us not just after evil things, as they lusted. Neither let us commit
fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and were destroyed in one
day. 33. thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, Exo. 14.
as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. Neither murmr ye
as some of the^ murmure^, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Nume. 25.
All things happened unto them for ensamples, and were written to put us in
remembrance, Nume. 21.
whom the ends of the world are come upon.

Ephe. 4.
Be angrye, but sin not, let not the sun goo down upon your anger, neither
give place unto the devil. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, fearcenes, and
wrath, roringe and cursed speakinge, be put away from^ you, with all
malicyousenesse.

Phi. ^.
Some there are which preach Christ of ennye and strife, and some of good
will. The other part of lou^, because they see that I am set to defend the
gospel. Some other preaches Christ of strife and not purely, supposinge to
add more aduersitye to my bonds.

But now put ye also away from you all things, Collo. 3.
wrath, fearcenes, maliciousenes, cursed speakinge, filt^ye speakinge out of
your mouths, lie not one to an other.

And understand this how that the law is not given unto a righteous man, 1.
Timo. 1.
but unto the unrighteous and disobediente, to the ungodly and to sinners, to
unholy and unclean, to murderers of fathers and mothers, to mans^ears, and
whoremongers, to them that defyle them selves with mankind, mens^elers, to
liars, and to perjured, and so forth, if there be any other thing that is
contrary to wholesome doctrine, according to the gospel of the glory of the
blessed god^ which is committed unto me.

The spirit speaks evidently that in 1. Timo. 4.
the later times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give head unto
spirits of erroure^ and deuilish doc^rine of them which speak false through
ypocrisye, and have their conscienc^s marked with a hot iron forbyddinge to
mary, and commaundinge to abstayn from meats, which God has created to be
receiu^d with geuinge thanks, of them which believe and know the truth. For all
the creatures of God ar^ good, and nothing is to be refused if it be received
with thanks giving. For it is sanctifi^d by the word of God and prayer.

This understand that in y^ last days shall come parilous times, 2. Timo. 3
for the me^ shall be lovers of their own selves, coueteous, lusters, proud,
cursed speakers, disobediente to father and mother, unthankful, unholy,
unkind, truce breakers, stubburne, false accusers, ri^tous, fearce, despis^rs
of them which are good, traitors, heddy, hye minded, greedye upon
voluptiousnes more then the lovers of God, having a similitude of godly
living, but have denied the power thereof, and such abhor. Of this sort are
they which enter in to houses, and bring in to bondage women laden with
sin, which women are led with diverse lu^tes, ever learning, and never
able too come unto the knowledge of the truth.

Unto the pure, Titu. ^.
are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is
nothing pure: but even the very minds and conscyences of them are defiled.
They confess that they know God: but with the deeds they deny him, and are
abhomynable, and disobedient, and unto all good works dyscommendable.

An exhortation to diverse virtues and to the acts of the same. Capitu. 36.
Give not your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans ^.
but give your selves unto God, as they that are all alive from death. Let not
sin have power over you. For ye are not under the law, but under grace, what
the^? shall we sin because we are under not the law, but under grace? God
forbydde.

^. Cor. 1.
I desire you to follow me. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus,
which is my dear son, and faithful in the Lord, which shall put you in
remembrance of my ways which I have in Christ, even as I teach every where in all co^gregations, For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ yet
have ye not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus I have be gotten you through the
gospel, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn
you.

1. Cor. 7.
This I say brethen, the time is short, it remains that they which have
wives, be as though they had non, and they that weep, us asthough they wept
not: and they that reioyce^ be as though they reioysed not^ and they that bye,
be as though they possessed not: and they that use this world, be as though
they used it not. For the fashion of this world goes away, I would have you
without care.

Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, 1. Cor. 16.
guyte you like men, and be strong. Let all your business be done in love.

In all things let us behave our selves as the ministers of God. In
fastinges, 2. Cor. 6.
in watchings, in pureness, in knowledge, in long sufferinge, in kindenes, in
the holy ghost, in love unfeigned, in the words of truth, in the power of
God^ by the armoure of righteousenes of the right hand and on the left.

Fynallye brethren be of good comfort, 2. Cor. 13.
be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace and love
shall be with you.

I therefore which am in bonds for the Lords sake exhort you, Ephe. 4.
that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called: in all humblenes
of mind, and mekenes, and long, sufferinge, forbearing one an other, through
love, and that ye be dylygent to keep the unitye of the spirit in the bond
of peace, being one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your calling.

Phi. 2.
Do all thing without murmuringe, and disputinge, that ye may be faute^sse
and pure, and the sons of God without rebuke in the mids of a crooked and
peru^rse nation: among the which se^ that ye shine as ligh^es in the world
holding fast the word of life unto my reioysinge in the day of Christ, that
I have not run in vain, neither have labored in vain.

Collo. 3.
Now therefore as elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness,
humblenes of minds, meken^s long sufferinge, forbearing one an other, and
forgeuing one an other, if any man have a quarrel to an other, even as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye.

1. These. 4.
We beseech you brethren that ye increase more and more, and that ye study to
be quiet, and to medie with your own busynes, and to work with your own
hands, as we commanded you, that ye may behave your selves hones^lye toward
them that are withoute^ and that nothing be lackinge unto you.

Rejoice ever, pray continuallye, quench not the spirit. 1. These. 5.
Despise not prophesyinge. Examyn and prove al things, and keep that which is
good. Abstain from all suspicious things. Fayethfull is he which called you,
which will also do it. Brethren pray for us. Great all the brethren with an
holy kiss. I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle be read unto all the
holy brethren.

Lusts of youth avoid, 2. Timo. 2
and follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace with them that call on the Lord
with pure heart. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
peaceable unto all men, and apt to teach, and one that can suffer the evil
in meeknes, and can inform them that resist truth.

Let ours also learn too excel in good works, Titu. 3.
as far forth as need requires, that they be not unfruitful.

1. Timo. 6.
Follow righteousness, godlin^s, love patience, and meekness.

Of the sinagoge, and of diverse gifts of grace in time past given unto it, and
of doble circumc^sion. Capi. 37.
CYrcumcision ve^elye avails, if thou keep the law. Romans 2.
But if thou break the law, ^hy circumcision is made uncircumcision.
Therefore if the uncircumcised keep right things contained in the law, shall
not his vncircumcis^on be con^ted for circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision
which is by nature (if it keep the law) judge thee, which being under the
letter and circumcision, do transgress the law? For he is not a Jew,
which is a Jew outward. Neither is that thing circumcision which is outward
in flesh. But he is a Jew, which is hyd with in, and the circumcision of the
heart, is the true circumcision which is in the spirit, and not in the letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of God.

What prefermente then has the Jew? Romans 3.
other what auauntageth circumcision? Surely very much. First, unto them was
committed the word of God. what then though some of them did not believe? Shall
their vnbeleeue make the promise of God without effect? God forbid.

Which are the Israelits, Romans 9.
to whom pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, and the couenauntes, and the
law that was given, and the promises. whose also are the fathers, and they of
whom (as concerning the flesh) Christ came, which is God over all things
blessed for ever. Amen.

I say then: Romans 11.
has God cast away his people? God forbid, for even I verily am an
Israelite, of the sede of Abraham, and of the tribe of Benjamin, god has not
cast away his people, which he knew before. Either wot ye not what the
scripture says by ye mouth of Helias how he makes intercession to god against
Israel saying?

2. regu. 16.
Lord they have killed thy prophets, and dygged down thine altares: and I am
left only, and they seek my self. But what says the answer of god to him
agan? I have reserved unto me seven thousand men, which have not bowed the knee
to Baal, eue^ so at this time, is there a remenaunt left through the election of
grace. If it be of grace, then is it not of works. For then were grace, no
more grace.

1. Cor. 10.
Brethren I would not that ye should be ignoraunte of this, how that our fathers
were all under a cloud, and al passed through the sea, and were all baptized
under Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spiritual
meat, and did all drink of one manner spiritual drink. And they drancke of
that spiritual rock^ that followed them, which rock was Christ. But in many
of them had God no delight, for they were overthrown in the wilderness. These
are ensamples to us.

Gala. 2.
We are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the gentiles.

And I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the
truth of God, Romans 15.
to confirm the promises made unto the fathers.

Behold I shall which walks carnallye. 1. Cor. 10.


For we are circumcision which worship God in the spirit and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, Phi. 3.
and have no confidence in the flesh, though I have where of I might rejoice
in the flesh. If any other man thinks that he has whereof he might trust
in the flesh, much more I circumcised the eyghte day, of the kindred of
Israel, of the trybe of Benjamin, an Hebrew borne of the Hebrews, as
concerning the law, a P^arysey, and as concerning feruentnesse, I persecuted
the congregation, and as touching the righteousenesse which is in the law, I
was unrebukable.

God in time past diversely and many ways, Heb. 1.
spoke unto the fathers by the prophets: but in these last days, he has
spoken unto us by his son.

Heb. 9.
The first tabernacle had ordinances, and seruings of God, and worldly
holiness. For there was before a tabernacle made, wherein was the candelsticke,
and the table, and the show bread which is called holy, But within the second
veil, was there a tabernacle, which is called holiest of al. Which had the
golden senser, and the Arc of the Testament, ouerlaid round about with
gold, wherein was the golden pot with Manna, and Arons rod that spronge, and
the tabl^s of the Testamente. Over the Arc were the Cherubins of glory
shadowing the seat of grace, of which things we will not now speak
particularlye.

Of the church. Capitu. 38.
Gala. 4.
THat Jerusalem, which is above is free: which is the mother of us al. For it
is written. Rejoice thou baren, Esa. 55.
that bear no children. Break forth and cry, thou that trauailest not. For
the desolate has many mo children, then she, which has an husband.

Christ is the head of the congregation, Ephe. 5,
and the same is the savior of the body: and the congregation is in
su^i^ction to Christ, the which loved the congregation, and gave him self
for it, to sanctifye it, and cleansed it in the ^ountayne of water through the
word of life, to make it unto him a glorious congregation without spo^te or
wryncle, or any such thing, but that i^ should be immaculate and holy. For no
man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and chearyseth it, even as
the Lord does the congregation: for we are m^mbers of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall
continue with his wife, and two shall be made one flesh. This is a great
secret and sacrament, but I speak be^weene Christ and the congregation.

These things write I unto thee, 1. Timo. 3.
trus^inge to ^ome shor^ly unto ^hee, but and if I tarry long, that then thou
may yet have knowledge, how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of
God, which is the congregation of the lyuinge God, thy pyller and ground of
truth.

Heb. 3.
And Moses verelye was faithful in all his house, as a minister to bear witness
of those things, which should be spoken afterward. But Christ as a son
has rule over the house, whose house are we.

1. Cor. 3.
Ye are the temple of the lyuinge God^ vt sup. Capi. 23.

Heb. 12.
For ye are not come unto the mount that can be touched, and unto burninge
fire, nor yet to mist and dar^ken^sse, and tempest of wether, neither unto the
sound of a troumpe and the voice of words. Which voice they that heard it,
wyshed away, that the communication should not be spoken too them, for they
were not able to abide that which was spoken. If a beast had touched the
mountain, it must have been stoned or thruste through with a darte: even so
terrible was the sight which appeared. Moses said. I fear I quake. But ye are
come unto the mount Sion, and too the city of the lyuinge God, the ^c^estiall
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable sight of Angels and unto the congregation, of
the first borne sons which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of
all, and to the sprites of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the mediator
of the new Testamente, and to the sprincklinge of blood that speaks better
then the blood of Abell. Wherefore if we receive a kingdom which is not moved,
we have grace, whereby we may serve God, and please him with reu^rence and
Godly fear.

Of the efficacitye and arguments of ^he preachinge of the Euang^licall law,
and of the miracles of blessed saint Paul the Apostle. Capitu. 39.
Romans 1.
I would that ye should know brethen, how that I have often times purposed
to come unto you, (but have been let hitherto) to have some fruit among you,
as I have among other of the gentiles. For I am detter both to the Greeks, and
to them that are no greeks, unto the learned, and also unto the unlearned.
Likewise as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you at Rome
also.

Romans 15.
Neuer^helesse breethren I have somewhat bol^lye written unto you, as one that
puts you in remembrance, through the grace that is given me of God, that I
should be the minister of Jesus Christ among the gen^^les, and sanctify the
glad ^idinges of God, that the gentyles might be an acceptable offering
sanctify^d by the holy ghost. I have therefore whereof I may rejoice in Christ
I^su in the things which pertayne to God. For I dare not speak of any of
these things, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the gentiles
obedieute with word and deed, in mighty signs and wonders, by the power of
the spirit of God: so that from Jerusalem and the cos^es round about unto
I^liricum, I have filled all countries with the glad tidings of Christ. So have
I enforced my self to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, least I
should ^aue built on an other man's foundation. But as it is written. Esa. 4.
To whom he was not spoken of they shall see, and they y^ hard not shall
understand. For this cause I have been often let to come unto you, but now seeing
I have no more to do in these cuntres, and also have been desirous many years
to come unto you, when I shall take my journey, in to Spain, I will come to you.
I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way, thither ward by
you, after yt I have somewhat enjoyed you now go I unto Jerusalem, and minister
unto ye saints, when I ^aue performed this, and have brought them this fruit
sealed, I will come back again by you in to Spain. And I am sure when I come,
that I shall come with abundance of the blessinge of the gospel of Christ.

And I brethren when I came to you, 1. Cor. 2.
came not in gloryousenesse of words, or of wisdom, showing unto you the
testimonye of God. Nether showed I my self that I knew any thing among
you, save Jesus Christ, even the same that was crucified. And my words, and
my preachinge was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in showing of
the spirit and of power, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God.

We are Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandrye, 1. Co. 3.
ye are Gods buyldinge, according to the grace of God given unto me, as a
wise buylder have I laid the foundation and an other builte thereon.

Am I not free? Am I not Apostle? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? 1.
Cor. ^.
Are ye not my work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto other, yet I am
unto you. For the seal of mine Apostleshippe are ye in the Lord.

Brethren as pertayninge to the gospel which I preached unto you, 1. Cor. 15.
which ye have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which also
ye are saved, I do you to wit after what manner I preached unto you, if ye
keep it except ye have believed in vain.

Thanks be unto God. Which always geuethe us the vyctorye in Christ, 2. Cor.
2.
and opened the sauer of his knowledge by us in every place. For we are unto
God the sweet sauoure of Christ, both among them that are saved, and also
among them which pearishe. To the one part are we the sauoure of death unto
death: And unto the other part are we the sauoure of life unto life. And who
is mete unto these things? For we are not as many are, which choppe and
change with the word of God: but even out of pureness, and by the power of God,
and in the syghte of God, so speak we in Christ.

Which has made us able to mynister the new Testamente, 2. Cor. 3.
not of the letter, but of the spyrite. For the letter kylleth. But the spirit
gives life.

If our gospel be yet hyd it is hyd among them that are lost, 2. Cor. 4.
in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ which is ye image of god should
shine unto them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to be the
Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

For if he that comes, preach an other Jesus then him, ^. Cor. 11.
whom^ we preached, or if ye receive an other spirit then that which ye have
re^eaued: either an other gospel then that ye have received, ye might right
well have been content. I suppose that I was not behind ye chief Apostels.
Though I be rude in speaking yet I am not so in knowledge. How be it among you
we are known to the vttermoost what we are in all things.

For in nothing was I inferior unto the chief Apostels, 2. Cor. 12.
though I be nothing, yet the tokens of an Apostell were wroughte among you
with all patience, with signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.

I would ye understood breethren, Phi. 1.
that my busynes is happened unto the fortheraunce of the gospel. So that my
bonds in Christ, are manifest through out all the judgment hall, and in all
other places: In so much that many of the brethren in the Lord, are bold
through my bonds and dare more largelye speak the word without fear.

We know brethren, beloved of God, 1. These. ^.
how that ye are elect. For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but
also in power, and in the holy ghost, and in much certaintye, as ye know,
after what manner we behaved our selves among^ you, for your sakes.

Our exhortation was not to bring you to error, nor yet to uncleanness,
neither was it with guyle, 1. These. 2.
but as we were allowed of God, that the gospel should be committed to us:
even so we speak, not as though we intended to please men, but God, which
tries our hearts. Neither was our conversation at any time with flatteringe
words, as ye well know neither in cloked couetuousnes, God is record: neither
sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor yet of any other, when we might
have been chargeable as the Apostles of Christ, but we were tender among you.

How shall we escape, if we despise so great salvation, Heb. 2.
which at the first began to be preached of the Lord him self, and
afterward was confirm^d unto us ward by them that heard it, God bearing
witness thereof both with signs and wonders also, and with diverse miracles and
gifts of the holy ghost, according to his own will.

Romans 10.
How shall they preach except they be sent? As it is written. How beautyfull
are the fete of them that bring good and glad tydinges of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things. Esa. 4^.
But they have not all obeyed to the gospel. Esa. 53.
For Esaias sa^eth. Lord who shall believe our sayings? So then fayeth comes by
heari^g, and hearing comm^th by the word of God. But I ask: have they not
heard? No doubt. Their sound went out in to all lands, psalm. 28.
and their words in to the ends of the world.

The gospel is come unto you, Collo. 1.
even as it is in to all the world, and is fruteful, and grows as it is
amo^^ you. From the first day in the which ye hard of it, and had experience
in the grace of God in the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear fellow
servant, which is for you a faithful minister of Christ, which also
declared unto us, your love, which ye have in the spirit.

Of the vocation of the gentyles, and of the exc^cation and blindness of the
Jews, and also of their final conuertyon unto Christ. Capit. 40.
Romans 9.
THe vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, which he called
not of the Jews only, but also of the gentiles. As he says in Osee^ Ose. ^.
I will call them my people, which were not my people, and her beloved, which
was not beloved. And it shall come too pass, in the place where it was said
unto them, ye are not my people, where they shall be called the children of the
lyuinge God. But Esayas cryethe concerning Israel. Esa. 10.
Though the member of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet
shall a remnaunte be saved. He finisheth the word verelye and makes it short
in righteousenes, for a short word will God make on earth. And as Esaias said
before: Esa. 1.
Except the Lord of sab^oth had left us sede, we had been made as Zodoma, and
had been lykenned too Gomorra. What shall we say then? We say that the
gentiles which followed not righteousenes, have over taken righteousness: I
mean the righteousness which comes of faith. But Israel which followed the
law of righteousness, could not attain unto the law of righteousness.

For I bear them record, Romans 10.
that they have a fervent mind to godward^ but not according to knowledge. For
they are ignoraunte of the righteousness which is allowed before God, and goo
about to stablishe their own righte^usnes, and therefore are not obedient
unto the righteousness which is of value before God. But I demand whether
Israel did know or not? First Moses says: I will provoke you for too envy
by them that are no people, Deu. 22.
and by a foolysh nation I will anger you, Esa. 65.
Esayas after that is bold, and says. I am found of them that sought me
not. And have appeared too them, that asked not after me. And to Israel he
says. All day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a people that
believes not, Deu. ^1.
but speaks against me. Esa. 6.


Romans 11.
What then? Isra^ll has not obtain^d that, that he sought. No, but yet the
election has obtayn^d it. The remnaunte are blinded, according as it is
written: God has given them the spirit of compunction: Esa. 6.
eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear even unto
this day. And David says: Psalm. 68.
Let their table be a snare too take them with all, and an occasion ^o faule,
and a reward unto them. Let their eyes be blinded, that they see not, and ^uer
bow down their backs. I say then: Have they therefore stombled that they
should but faule only? God forbid. But through their faule is salvation
happened unto the gen^yles for to provoke them wy^h all. Wherefore if the faule
of t^em, be the riches of the world, and the minys^inge of them, the riches of
the gentyles: how much more should it be so, if they all believed. I speak
to you gentyles, in as much as I am the Apostell of the gentiles. I will
magnifye mine office, that I might provoke them which are my flesh, and
might save some of them. For if the castinge away of them be the
reconcilinge of the world: what shall the receauinge of them be, but life again
from death. For if one piece are holy, the whole heap is holy. And if the
rote be holy, the branches be holy also. Though some of the branches be
broken of, and thou being a wild olyue tree, art grafte in among them, and
mad^ partaker of the rote and fa^nes of the oliu^ tree, boast not thy ^^lf
against the branches. For if thou boaste thy self, remember that thou bear^st
not the rote, but the rote thee. Thou wyl^e say then, the branches are broken
of, that I might be grafte in. Thou say well: because of unbelieve they are
broken of. an thou stand steadfast in fayeth. Be not ^ye minded, but fear,
saying that God spared not the natural branches, least happily ^e also spare
not thee. Behold the kindenes and rigorousnes of God: on them which fell,
rigorousenes, but toward thee, kyndnes, if thou continue in his kyndnes. Or
else thou shall be hewn of, and they if they ^yde not still in unbelief, shall
be grafte in again. For God is of power to graffe them in again. For if thou
wast cut out of a natural wild olyue tree, and wast graffed contrary to
nature in a true olyue tree, how much more shall the natural branches be
graffed in their own olyue tree again. I would not that this secret should be
hyd from you my brethren, lest ye should be wise in your own consaytes, that
partly blindness is happened in Israel, until the fullness of the gentyles be
come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. As it is written. Esa. 5^.
There shall come out of Syon be yt does deliver and shall turn away the
ungodliness of Jacob. And this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away
their sins. As concerning the gospel they are ennemies for your sakes. But
as touching the election they are loved for the fathers sake. For verelye the
gifts and calling of God are such, that it can not repent him of them,
for look as ye in time passed have not believed God, yet have now obtained
mercy^ through their vnbelyefe: even so now have they not believed the mercy
which is happened unto you, that they also may obtain mercy. God has
wrapped all nations in vnbelye^e, that he might have mercy on all. O the
deepenesse of the aboundaunt wisdom and knowledge of God, how vnserch^able
are his judgments?

And I say that the gentiles praise God for his mercy as it is written. Romans
^5.
For this cause I will praise the among the gentyles, Psalm. 17.2. regu. ^1.
psalm. 116.
and sing in thy name. And again he says. Esa. 11.
Rejoice ye gentiles with his people. And again^. Praise the Lord all ye
gentiles, and laud him all nations. And again Esaias says. There shall be
the rote of Iesse, and he that shall rise to raygne over the gentyles, in him
shall be the gentiles trust.

^. Cor. 3.
We do not as Moses, which put a veil over his face that the children of
Israel should not see, for what purpose that served which is put away. But
their minds were blinded. Exo. 34.
For until this day remains the same concerning untaken and way in the
old Testamente when they read it, which in Christ is put away. But even unto
this day when Moses is red, the veil hangs before their hearts. Nevertheless
when they turn to the Lord, Ephe. 2.
the veil shall be taken away.

Remember that ye being in time passed gentiles in the flesh, and were called
vncyrcumcision to them which are called circumcision in the flesh, which
circumcision is made by hands. Remember I say, that ye were at that time
without Christ, and were reputed ali^ntes from the common wealth of Israel,
and were strangers from the Testament of promise, and had no hope, and were
withou^e God in this woorlde. But now in Christ Jesus, ye which a while a goo
were far of, are made nigh by the bloudde of Christ, and he came and preached
peace to you which were a far of, and to them that were ^e. For through him we
both have an open way in, in one spirit unto the father. Ephe. 3.


As it is now declared unto his holy Apostels and prophettes by the spirit,
that the gentiles should be inheritoures also, and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise that is in Christ Jesus. etc. vt supra. eodem. ti. 1.
These. 2.


The Jews as they killed the lord Jesus, and their own prophettes, even so
have they persecuted us, and God they pleased not, and are contrary to all
men. And forbydde us too preach unto the gentiles, that they might be
saved, too fulfill their sins always. For the wrath of God is come on them, to
the v^most.

Of diverse gifts of grace given unto the church in the time of grace, under and
in time of the Euangelycall law. Capitu. 41.
Saying that we have diverse gyf^s according to the grace that is given unto
us. Romans 12.
If any man have the gift of prophesye, let him have it, that it be agreinge
unto the faith. Let him that has an office, wait on his office. Let him that
teaches, take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendaunce
to his exhortation: if any man give, let him do it with synglenesse. Let him
that rules, do it with dilygence. If any manne show mercy, let him do it
with chearefulnes. Let love be without dissimulation, hat^ that which is
evil, and cleave unto that which is good. Let not that business which ye have
in hand, be tedyous unto you. Dystribute unto the necessites of the saynctes,
and be ready to harbor, be of like affec^ion one toward an other, if it b^
possible. How be it of your part, have peace with all men. Dearelye
beloved avenge not your selves, but geeue room unto the wrath of God.

I my self am full certifyed of you my brethren, Romans 15.
that ye your selves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and are
able to exhort one an other.

For in all things ye are made rich in God, 1. Cor. ^.
in all learning, and in all knowledge, so that ye are behind in no gift.
etc. vt sup.

And ye not ware that ye are the temple of God, and how that the spirit of God
dwells in you? 1. Co. 3.
If any man defyle the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For temple the of
God is holy^ which temple ye are.

And verily ye were wicked, ^. Cor. 6.
but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are iustyfyed by the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the sp^ri^e of our god. either remember ye not, that your
bodies are the temple of the holy ghost, which is in you. Whom ye have of
God, and how that ye are not your own? For ye are dearelye boughte. Therefore
glorifye ye God in your bodies and in your spirits.

In spiritual things brethren I would not have you ignorant. 2. Cor. 12.
For no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy ghost. There
are d^uersities of gyf^es, yet but one spirit. And there are differences of
administrations, and yet but one Lord. And there are diverse manners of
opera^ions, and yet but one God, which works all things that are wroughte
in all creatures.

The gifts of the spirit are given to every manne, 1. Cor. 12.
to profyt the congregation. To one is geeuen through the spirit, the
vtteraunce of wisdom. To an other is given the vtteraunce of knowledge, by
the same spirit. To an other is given faith, by the same spirit. To an other
the gifts of healinge, by the same spirit. To an other power to do miracles.
To an other prophecye. To an other judgment of sprites. To an other diverse
tongues. To an other the interpretation of of tongues. And these al works even
the self same spirit. Diuidinge to every manne several gif^s ^u^n as he will.
For as the body is one, and has many memb^rs, and all be m^mbers of one
body, though they be many, yet are but one body: even so is Christ. For in
sue spirit ar^ we baptized to make one body, whether we be Jews or gentiles,
whether we be bond or free: and have all droncke of one syirit. For the body is
not one member but many, if the foot say. I am not the hand, therefore I am
not of the body: is he therefore not of the body? And if the ear say, I am
not the eye, therefore I am not of the body, is he therefore not of the body. If
all the body were the eye, where were then the ear? If all were hearing,
where were the smellinge? But now ^athe God desposed the members, every one of
them in the body, at his own pleasure. If they were all one member, where were
the body? now are there many members, yet but one body. And the eye can not
say unto the hand, I have no need of the, nor the head also to the fete, I
have no need of you. Ye rather a great deal, those members of the body
which seem to be most feeble, are most necessary. And upon those members of
the body, which we think least honest, put we most honestye on. And our
v^godlye parties have most beautye on. For our honest members need it not.
But god has so disposed the body, and has given most honor to that part
which lacked, least there should be any strife in the body, but that the
members should indifferentlye care one for an other. And if one member suffer,
all suffer with him, if one member be had in honor, all members be glad
also. Ye are the body of Christ, and members one of an other. And God has also
ordained in the congregation, first the Apostels, Secondaryelye prophettes.
Thirdelye teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the gifts of
healinge, helpers, gouernoures, diuersitye of tounges. Interpreters of tongues.
Are all Apostels? Are all Prophettes? Are all teachers? Are all doers of
miracles? Have all the gifts of healynge? Do all speak with tongues? Do all
interpret?

Yet of the self same matter and of the comparison of one gift to an other.
And of the use, and profytte that comes of them. Capit. 42.
Covet spiritual gifts, and most chieflye for to prophesys. 1. Cor. 14^
For he that speaks with tongues, speaks not unto men, but unto god, for no
man hears him, how be it in ye spirit he speaks mysteries, but prophesies,
speaks unto men to edifyinge, to exhortation, and to comfort. He that
speaks with tongues, profits him self: he that prophesyeth, edifyeth the
congregation. I would that ye all speak with tongs: but rather that ye
prophesyed. For greater is he, that prophesies, then he that speaks with
tongues, except be expound it also, that the congregation may have edifyinge.
Now brethren if I come to you speakinge with tongues, what shall I profytte
you, except I speak unto you other by revelation, or knowledge, or
prophesyinge or doctrine. Moreover when things without life give sound,
whether it be a pype, or an harp, except they make a destinction in the
sounds, how shall it be known what is pyped, or what is harped? And also if the
trumpe give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare him self to fight? Even so
likewise when ye speak with tongues, except ye speak words that have
signifycation, how shall it be understand what is spoken? For ye shall but
speak in the air. Many kinds of voices are in the world, and none of them
are without signification. If I know not what the voice means, I shall be
unto him that speaks an aliente, and he that speaks shall be an alient unto
me. Wherefore let him that speaks with tongues, pray that ^e may interpret
also. For elle^ if thou blessest with the spirit, how shall ^e that occupyeth
the room of the unlearned, say amen at the geuinge of thanks, saying he
understands not what thou say. Thou verelye geuest thanks well, but the
other is not edifyed. I thank my God, I speak with tounges more then ye all.
Yet I ^adde lever in the congregation to speak five words with my mind to
the information of other, rather then ten thousand words with the tongues. In
the law it is written, Esa. 28.
with other tongues, and with other lips will I speak unto this people, and
yet for all that, they will not hear me, says the Lord. Wherefore tongues
are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not.
Contrary wise, prophesyinge serves not for them that believe not, but for them
which believe. If therefore when all the church and congregation is come
together, and al speak with tongues, there come in they that are unlearned, or
they which believe not, will they not say that ye are out of your wyt^es? But
and if all prophecye, and there come in one that believe the not, or one
unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is judged of every manne: and so are
the secrets of his heart opened, and so falls he do^ne on his face, and
woorshippeth God, and says that God is with you, in deed. How is it then
brethren? when ye come together every man has his song, has his doctrine,
has his tongue, has his revelation, has his interpretation. Let all things
be done unto ^dyfinge. If any man speak with tongues, let it be two at once, or
at the most three at once, and that by course, and let an other interpret
it. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the congregation,
and let him speak to him self and to god. Let the prophets speak two at
once, or three at once and let other judge. If any revelation be made ^o an
other that sytteth by, let the first hold his peace, for ye may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may have coumfor^e. For the spyrites
of the prophettes are in the power of the prophettes. For God is not causer of
strife, but of peace, as he is in all other congregations of saints.
Wherefore breethren covet to prophecy, and forbid not ^o speak with tongues.

Thanks be to God which has 1. Cor. 1^.
given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

For it is God which s^ablished us and you in Christ, 2. Cor. 1.
and has anointed us, which has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of
the spyrite in our har^es.

Gala. 3.
If ye be Chrstes, then are ye Abraham sede, and heirs by promise.

Because ye are the sons of God, Gala. 4.
God sent the spirit of his son in to your hearts, which cries Abba
father. Wherefore now thou art not a servant, but a son, if thou be the
son, thou art also the heir of God, through Christ.

Romans 8.
As many are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of god. For ye have
not received the spyrite of bondage to fear any more, but ye have received
the spirit of adoption, where by we cry Abba father. The same spirit
cer^ifieth our spirit that we are the sons of god. If we be the sons, we are
also hei^rs, the ^eiers I mean of God, and heiers annexed with Christ: if so
be that we suffer together that we may be gloryfied together.

Therefore brethren, we are after the nature of Isaac children of promise. Gala.
4.
But as thou, he that was borne carnallye persecuted him that was borne
spiritually. Gene. 2^,
Even so it is now. Nevertheless what says the scripture, Esa. 54.
put away the bond woman, and her son. For the son of the bond woman,
shall not be heier with the son of the free woman. So then brethren, we are
not children of the bond woman, but of the free woman.

Of the exellencye of the supernall graces granted unto the faithful of
Christ, newlye in the primytiue church. Capitu. 43.
BLessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephe. ^^
which has blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly
things by Chri^te, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has
made us accepted in the beloved: by whom we have redemption through his
bloudde, even the forgiveness of sins, according to^ the riches of his
grace. In whom al^o ye (after that ye heard the word of truth, I mean the
Gospel of your salvation where in ye believed) were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, to redeem the
purchased possession, and that to the la^d of his glory.

^
But God which is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead by sin, has quickened us together in Christ (for by
grace are ye saved) and has raised up together and made us sytte together
in heavenly things through Christ Jesus, for to show in time too come the
exceadinge riches of his grace in kindenes to us ward^ in Christ Jesus. Now
therefore ye are no more strangers and ^oriners, but citysins with saints and
of the hosholde of God, and are b^ilte upon the foundation of the Apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone, in whom every buildinge
coupled together grows unto an holy temple in the Lord in whom ye also are
builte together, and made an habitation for God in the spirit.

Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Ephe. 4.
Wherefore he says: He is gone up an hye, Psalm. 17.
and has led captiuitye captive, and has given gifts unto men. And the
very same made some Apostles, some prophets, some Eua^gelistes, some
Shepeherds and some Teachers. That the saints might have all things necessary
to work and minister with all, to the edifyinge of the body of Christ, till
we every one (in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God) grow
up unto a perfect man, after the measure of age of the fullness of Christ.

Ye were an ensample to all that believe. 1. These. 1.
For your fayeth which ye have to God, sprede her self abroad in all
quarters, so greatelye, that it needs not us to speak any thing at all. For
they them selves show of you what manner of entringe in we had unto you, and
how ye turned to God from ydols, for to serve the living and true God, and
for to look for his son from heaven, whom he raised from death, I mean
Jesus, which delivers us from wrath to come.

For this cause thanks we God with out ceasinge, 1. These. 2.
because that when ye received of us the word wherewith God was preached, ye
received it not as the word of man but even as it was in deed, the word
of God, which works in you that believe.

1. Timo. 1.
The grace of our Lord was more abundant with faith and love which is in Christ
Jesus.

God saved us, and called us with an holy calling, 2. Timo. 1.
not according to our deddes, but according too his own purpose and grace,
which grace was given through Christ Jesus before the world was: but is now
declared openly by the appearinge of our savior Jesus Christ, which has
put away death, and has brought life and immortalitye unto light through the
gospel, whereunto I am appointed a preacher and Apostell, and a teacher of the
gentiles. For the which cause I also suffer these things. Nevertheless I am
not ashamed.

For Christ gave him self for us, Titu. 2.
to redeem us from all unrighteousness, and to pourge us a peculiar people
unto him self, fervently given unto good works.

For we our selves also were in times paste unwise, Titu. 3.
disobediente, deceived in danger and given to lusts, and diverse manners of
voluptiousnes, living in malitiousnes and envy, full of hate, hatynge one an
other. But after that the kindness and love of our savior to man ward
appeared, not of the deeds of righteousness which we wroughte, but of his mercy
he saved us: by the fountain of the new birth of the holy ghost, which he
shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our savior: that we once
justified by his grace, should be heyre^ of e^^r^al^ ly^e, through hope.

Heb. 13.
We have an altar, wher^of they may not ^ate which serve in the tabernacle.
For the bodies of th^se beasts, whose blood is brough^ in to the holy place,
by the pryest to pourge s^nne, are burnt w^^hout the ten^^s. Therefore Jesus, to
sanctifye the people with his own^ blood, suffer^d w^^hout the ga^e.

Of predestination, and the ^oreknowledge of God. Capit^. 44.
WE know that all things work for the best unto them that love God, Romans 8.
which are called of purpos^. For those which he knew be^or^, he also
ordained before, that they should be like fash^oned unto the shape of his son,
that ^e might be the first begotten son among many brethren. Moreover
which ^e predestined and appo^nted before, them also he called. And wh^^he
he called, them also he ^ust^^^ed, which ^e iust^f^ed, them he also ^lor^^^ed.
What shall we then say (...) these th^nges? If God be on our ^^de, who can be
against us? which ^pa^ed not hi^ own son but ga^^ ^im f^r us all: how shall
he not with him give us al things also? who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods chosen? It is God that iusti^ye^he: who then shall condemn? It is
Chr^^t wh^^h is dead, ye rather which is ri^en again, which is also on the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

I ^peake not these things asthough the word of God had take non^ effect.
Romans 9.
For they are not all Israelites which came of Israel: neither are they all
children, because they ar^ the seed of Abraham. But in ^saac shall thy sede be
called: that is to say, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the
children of God. But the children of promise are counted the seed. For this is
a word of promise, about this time will I come, and Sara shall have a
child. Neither was it so with her only: Gene. 25.
but also when Rebecca was with c^ylde by one, I mean by our father Isaac,
yet the children were borne, when they had neither done good neither badde: that
the purpose of God which is by election, mig^te stand, it was said unto
her, not by the reason of works, but by grace of the caller, the elder shall
serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob ^e loved, but Esau be hated. Mal. i.
What shall we say then? Is there any vnrighteousenesse with God? God
forbydde. For ^e says to Moses: I will show mercy to whom I show mercy:
Exo. 23.
and will have compassion on whom I have compassion. So lies it not the^ in a
man's will, or conninge, but in the mercy of God. For the scripture says unto
Pharao. Even for this same purpose have I styrred the up, Exo. 9.
to show my power on the, and that my name might be declared through out all
the world. So has he mercy on whom he will, and whom ^e will, he makes
heard hearted. Thou will say then unto me. Why then blamethe he us yet? For
who can resist his will? But o man what art thou which disputes with God?
Shall the work say to the workman, why have you made me on this fashion? Has
not the potter power over the claye, even of the same lompe too make one
vessel unto honor, and an other unto dishonor? Even so, god wylling to
show his wrath, and to make his power known suffered with long patience the
vessels of wrath ordained to damnation, that he might declare the riches of
his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had prepared unto gorye.

O the depenes of the aboundante wisdom and knowledge of God, Romans 1^.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? for who
has known the mind of the lord? Or who was his counselor? Either who has
given unto him first, that he might be recompensed again. For of him, and
through him, and for him ar^ all th^^g^s. To him be honor and glory for ever
Amen.

1. Cor. 1.
Bre^hren look on your calling, how that not many wise men aft^r the flesh,
not many mighti, not many of hye degr^e are called: but god has chosen the
folish things of the world to con^ounde the wise. And God has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound things which are mighty: And vile things of
the world, and things which are despised^ has God chosen, ye and thing^s of
no reputation, for to bring to nough^e things of reputation, that no flesh
should rejoice in his present. For God is fayethfull by whom ye are called
unto the f^lowshippe of his son Jesus Christ.

God has chosen us in Ch^iste before the foundation of the world was lay^d,
Ephe. ^.
that we should be saints and without blame before him through love. And
ordayn^d us before through Jesus Christ, to be heirs unto him self,
according to the pleasure of his will, too the praise of the glory of his
grace, wherewith he has m^de us accepted. In whom we are called, and
p^edestynate according to the purpose of him which works all things after
the purpose of his own will: that we which believed before in Christ,
should be unto the praise of his glory.

For we are his workemanshippe, Ephe^ 2,
created in Christ I^su unto good works unto the which god ordained us
before, that we should walk in them.

For it is God, Phi. ^.
which works in you both the will and also the deed of good will.

Notwithstanding in a great house are not only vessels of gold and of
silver, 2. Tim^. ^
but also o^ wood and earth, some for honor, and some unto dyshonoure. But if
a man pourge him self from such fellows, he shall be a vess^l sanctified unto
honor, mete for the Lord, and prepared unto all good works.

Of the justice of God, and of the rigor of the divine justice against
sinners. Capitu. 45.
Romans 1.
THe wrath of God appears from heaven against all vngodl^nesse and
unrighteousness of m^n, which with hold the truth of god in v^righteousnes,
seeing what may be known of God, that same is manif^st among them. For God
did show it unto them.

Romans 2.
For God will reward every man according to his deeds, that is to say,
praise, honor, and immortality, to them which continue in good doing and
seek eternal life. But unto them that are rbellious and disobey the truth,
and follow iniquity, shall come indignation, and wrath, tribulation and
anguishe, upon the soul of every man, that does evil, of the Jew first, and
also of the gentile. For there is no parcialitye with God. But who soever has
sinned without the law, shall perish without law. And as many as have sins
under the law, shall be judged by the law. For before God they are not
righteous which hear the law, but the doers of the law shall be justified.
For if the gentiles which have no law do of nature the things contained in the
law: then they having no law, are law unto them selves, which show the
deed of the law written in their hearts, while their consci^nce bears witness
unto them, and also their thoughts, accusinge one on other or excusinge, at
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to
my gosp^ll.

God is true, and all men liars, Romans 3.
as it is written. That thou might be justified in thy saying, psalm. 50.
and should ^uercome when thou art judged. If our vnrighteousenes make the
righteousenesse of God more excellent, what shall we say? is God unrighteous
which take the vengeance. I speak after the manner of men, God forbydde. For
how then shall God judge the world? If the veritye of God appear more
^xcellent through my life unto his praise, why am I hence forth judged a
si^ner? And say not rather (as men speak evil of us) let us do evil that good
may come thereof. Whose dampnation is just. What say we then? Are we better
then they? No, in no wise. For we have already proved. etc.

Every manne shall receive his reward according to his labor. ^. Cor. 3.
^s a wise builder have I laid the foundation, let every manne take h^de how
he buyldethe upon. For other ^oundation can no man lay, then that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. If any manne build on this foundation gold,
silver, precious stones, timber, hay or stoble, every man's work shall appear.
For the day shall declare it, and it shall be showed in fire. And the fire shall
try every man's work what it is. If any man's work that he has buylt
upon, bide, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work burn, he shall
suffer loss, but he shall be safe him self, nevertheless yet, as it were
through fire.

We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.
that every man may receive the works of his body according to that he
has done, whether it be good or badde.

For god looks on no man's person. Gala. ^.


It is verelye a righteous thing with God, 2. These. ^.
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you which are
troubled reast with us, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall show him self from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaminge fire, rendringe vengeance unto
them, that know not God, and too them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Which shall be punyshed with everlasting damnation from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall come to
be gloryfied in his saints, and to be made maruaylous in all them that
believe because our testimonye that we had to you, was believed even the same
day that we preached it.

Some men's sins are open before hand, 1. Timo. 5.
and goo before unto judgment. Some men's sins follow after. Likewise also
good works are manifest before hand, and they that be otherwise can not be
hid.

Heb. 3.
Wherefore I was grieved with this generation and said. They err ever in their
hearts, Psalm. 94.
they verelye have not known my ways, so yt I swear in my wrath, that they
should not enter in to my reaste. Some when they heard, rebelled^ how be it not
all that came out of Egypt under Moses. But with whom was he displeased
fortye years? was he not displeased with them that sinned, whose carkases were
overthrown in the desert? To whom swear he that they should not enter in to
his reast. But unto them, that believed not? And we see, that they could not
enter in, because of unbelieve.

A fearful lokinge for judgment and violente fire, Heb. 10.
which shall deuou^ the adversaries. For we know him that has said,
vengeance belongs unto me, and I will recompense. Deu. 32.
And again the Lord shall judge his people. For yet a v^ry^ little while, and
he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

Which will lyghten things that are hid in darckenes, 1. Cor. 4.
and open the ounsayles of the hearts. etc.

Of the unspeakable mercy of God unto mankind. And of Christ's meke
redemption of man. Ca^pit. 46.
YE are iusty^yed freelye by the grace of God, Romans ^.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has made a seat
of mercy, through fayeth in his blood, to show the righteousness which
before him is of valor, in that he forgeueth the sins that are passed which
God did suffer ^o show at this time, that he mig^te be counted just, and a
iustifiar of him which believes on Jesus.

Which was delivered for our sins, Romans 4.
and rose again for to iustifye us.

Romans 5.
For when we were yet weak according to the time, Christ dyed for us, which
were ungodly. Yet ^^ace will any manne dye for a r^ghteous man. Paraduenture
for a good man durst a man dye. But God sets out his love that he has to
us, seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us, much more then
now (saying we are justified in his blood) shall we be saved from wrath
through him. For if when we were ennemies, we were rec^nciled to god by the
death of his son, much more saying we are reconciled, we shall be preserved
by his life.

^. Cor. 5.
A^ste minge this, that if one be dead for all, then are all dead, and Christ
dyed for all, that they which live, should not hence ^oorthe live vnto^ them
selves, but unto him, which dyed for them, and rose again. Therefore if any
man he in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things are passed away. B^holde
all thing^s are be^^me n^we. Nevertheless all things are of God, which has
reconcil^d us unto him self, by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us ^he
office too preach the attonment. For god was in Christ, and made ag^e^m^nt
between the world and him self, and impu^ed not their sins unto them, and
has c^mmytted too us the off^ce of reconciliation. Now then are we
messengers in the room of Christ. Even as though God did beseech you
through us. So pray we you in Christ's stead, that ye be atone wi^^ g^^: For
he has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we by his
means should be that righteousness which b^^ore God is allowed.

Which gave him self for our sins, Gala. 1.
to deliver us from this present evil world, through the will of god our
father, to whom be praise for ever and ever Amen.

Christ has redeemed and delivered us from the curse of the law, Gala. 3.
and was made a cursed for us. For it is written. Cursed is every one that
hangs on tree, Deu. 21.
that the blessinge of Abraham might come on the gentiles through Jesus Christ,
and that we might receive the promise of the spirit through fayeth.

Christ is our peace, which made of both one, Ephe. 2.
and has broken down ye wall that was a s^op between us and has also put away
through his flesh ye cause of hatred (that is to say, the law of
commandments contained in the law written) for to make of twain one new
man in him self so making peace, and to reconcyle both unto God in one body
through his cross, and slew hatered thereby, and came and preached peace to you
which were a far of, and to them that were nigh. For through him we both hau^
an open way in, in one spirit unto the father.

For it pleased the father y^ in Christ should all fulness dwell, Collo. ^.
and by him to reconcile al thing unto him self and to set at peace by him,
through the blood of his cross, both things in heaven and things in
earth. And you (which were in times past strangers and enemies, because
your minds were set in evil works) has he now reconciled in the body of
his flesh through death to make you holy, unblameable, and without faut in his
own sight.

And ye which were dead in sin Collo. ^.
through the vncircum^ision of your flesh, has he quickened with him, and
has forgiven us al our trespases th^th put out the hand writing that was
against us, contained in the law written. 1. Timo. 1.
And y^ has he taken out of yt way, and has fastened it to his cross, ^ has
spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly, and has triumphed
over the^ in his own person.

1. Timo. 1.
This is a ^rue saying, and by all m^anes worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came in to the world to save sinners.

1. Timo. 1.
For ther^ is one God, and one mediator, betw^ne God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus, which gave him self, a ransom for all men, that it should be
testified at his time, where unto I am or^ayn^d a preacher and an Apostle. I
tell the truth in Christ and lie not, being the teacher of the gentyles in
faith and veritye.

Of diverse mysteries of Christ that is, of his incarnation, na^^ui^y, humility,
pouerty^ passion, resurrection, apparition, ascension, and glorification. And
also of the effects of his salu^iferous passion. Capitu. 47.
BUt him that was made less then the Angels, we see that it was Jesus, Heb. 2.
which is crouned with glory^, and honor for the sufferinge of death, that he
by the grace of God, should taste o^ death for all men. For it became him,
for whom are all things, after that he had brought many sons unto
glory, that he should make the Lord of their salvation perfect through
o^fering. Psalm. 21.
For he that sanctif^eth, and they which sanctified are al of one. For which
causes sake he is not a shamed to call them brethren, Esa. 8.
saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, and in the myds of the
congregation will I praise the. And again, I will put my trust in him. And
again behold hear am I, and the children which god has given me. For as much
then as the children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also him self
likewise took part with them. For to put down through death him that had
Lordeship over death, that is to say, the devil, and that he might deliver
them, which through fear of death were all their life time in danger of
bondage. For he in no place ^aketh on him the Angels: but the ^eede of Abraham
takes he on him. Wherefore in all things it became him to be made like unto
his breethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful hye priest in
things concerning God, for to pourge the peoples sins.

Heb. 9.
But Christ being an hye priest of good things too come, came by a greater
and a more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, y^ is to say, not of this
manner building, nether by the blood of gotes and calves, but by his own
bloudde, he entered in ones for all, in to the holy place and found etternall
redemption. For if the blood of oxen and of goetes, and the ashes of an heyfer,
when it was sprincled purified the unclean, as touching the purifying^ of the
flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ (whithorowe the eternal
spirit, offered him self without spot to god) pourge your consciences from
dead works for to serve the living God? And for this cause is he the mediator
of the new T^stamente, that through death which chanced for the redemption of
those transgr^ssour^s that were in the first Testamente, they which were
called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. For whersoeuer is a
Testament there must be also the death o^ him that makes ye Testament, for the
testament takes auctoritye when men are dead. For it is of no value as long
as he that made it, is alive. For which cause also, neither that first
Testamente was ordained without blood. For when all the commandments were
read of Moses to all the people, he took the blood of calves and of gotes,
with water and purple wull and ysope, and sprinckeled both the book and all the
people, saying: this is the blood of the Testament which God has appoynte^
unto you. Moreover he sprinkled the tabernacle with blood also, and all the
ministringe ^essels. And also almost all things, are by the law pourged with
blood, and without sheddinge of blood is no remission. It is then need that
the similitudes of heavenly things be purifyed with such things, but the
he^u^nly thing^s them selves are pury^ied with be^ter sacri^yces then are
those. For Ch^iste is not entered in to the holy places that are made with
hands, which are but simi^^^udes of true things: but is ent^red in to very
heaven, for too appear now^ in the sight of God for us: not to offer him
^el^e often, as the ^ygh prie^^ enters in to the ^olye place eu^rye year with
^traunge blood, for then mu^te be have often suffered sense the world^ began.
But now in the end of the world has ^e appeared once to put ly^ne to
^lighte, by the offeringe v^ of him self. And as it is appoin^ed unto men that
the^ shall once dye, and then comes the judgment, even so Christ was ones
offered to take away the sins of many, and unto them that look for him,
shall ^e appear again without sin unto salvation.

There is then no dampnation too them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans ^.
which walk not after the ^leshe. For God ^^nte his son in the simylitude
of syn^ull fle^he, and by sin dampened sin in the ^^^he. etc.

I deliu^red unto you that, which I reaceaued: 1. Cor. 15.
how that Christ dyed for our sins, agree^ge to the scriptures. And that he
was ^uri^d and that he rose again the thyr^ ^ay according too the ^criptures:
and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that, he was s^ene
of more then five hundred bre^thren at once, of which, many remain unto this
day, and many are fallen a sle^pe. After tha^, he appeared too James, then to
all the Apostels. And last of all, he was seen of me, as of one that was
borne out of due ^yme.

Therefor remember that jesus Christ being of the seed of Da^id, 2. Timo. 2.
rose again from death according to my gospel, wherein I suffer trouble as
an evil doar, but the wo^d of God is not bound.

But when the ^^me was f^ll come God sent his son borne of a woman and made
bond unto the law: Gala 4.
that to redeem the^ which were under ye law that we through election might
receive the in^erytaunce that belongs unto the natural sons.

2. Cor. ^.
Ye know the liberality of our Lord Jesus Christ, which though he were rich, yet
for your sakes became poor that ye through his pouer^ye, might be made rich.

H^b. 6.
Whether the f^re runner is for us entered in, I mean Jesus that is made an hye
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisede^h.

That he ascended, what means it, but that he also d^s^ended first in too the
lowest par^^es of the earth. Ephe. 4^
He that descended, is even the same also, that ascended up, even above all
heavens, to fulfill all things.

Phi. ^.
The which being in the shape of God, thought it no robberye to be equal
with God. Nevertheless he made him self of no reputation, and took on him the
shape of a servant, and became like unto men, and was found in his apparel
as a man. He humbled him self, and became obedient unto the death, even the
death of the cross. Wherefore God has ^xalted him, and given him a name above
all names, that in the name of Jesus should every knee ^owe, both of things
in heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that all
tongues should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the praise of God
the father.

And without nay, 1. Timo. ^.
great is that misterye of Godliness. God was showed in the flesh, was
justified in the spirit, was seen of Angels was preached unto the gentiles,
was believed on in the earth, and received up in glory.

That Christ is the head, not only of the church militant, but also of the
triumphante. And of the mystical vntitye of the church, And of the excellency
and la^d of Christ. Capitu. 48.
I Say to every man among^ you, Romans 12.
that no man esteem of him self more, then it becomes him to esteem, but
according as God has dealte ^o every man the measure of fayeth. For as we
have many m^^b^rs in one body, and all members have not one office: so we
being many, are one body in Christ, and eu^rye manne among our selves,
one an others members.

1. Cor. 1^.
For as the body is one, and has many members. etc. vt supra. Capi. 41.

Now is there no Jew neither gentyle, Gala. 3.
there is neither bond nor ^ree, there is neither man nor woman. But ye are
all one thing in Christ.

Whom God set on his right hand in heavenly ^hinges, Ephe 1.
above all rule, power, and might, and domination, and above all names that
are named, not in this world only, but also in the world to come, and has
put all things under his ^eete, and has made him above all things the headde
of the congregation, which is hi^ body, and the fullness of him, that ^ylleth
all in all things.

Which is the head, that is to say Christ, Ephe. 4.
in whom all ^he bod^e is coupled and knit together in every ioynte,
wherewith one mini^^ret^e to an other, according too the operation as every
part has his measure, and increases the body, unto the edifyinge of it
self in love.

For Christ is the head o^ the congregation, Ephe. 5.
and the same is the savior of the body.

Which is the image o^ the inuisyble God, Collo. ^.
first begotten of all creatures. For by him were all things created, things
that are in heaven, and things that are in the earth, things visyble, and
things invisible, whether they be majesty, or lordship, either rule or power.
All things are created by him, and in him, and he is before all things, and
in him all things have their beginning. And he is the head of the body,
that is to wit, of the congregation, he is the beginning and first begotten
of the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.

Collo. ^.
For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godheadde bodilye, and ye are
complete in him which is the head of all rule and power.

Heb. ^.
He has not unto the Angels put in ^ubiectyon the world too come, whereof we
speak. But one in a certain place witnesses, saying: what is man, that thou
art so myndefull of him? Psalm. 8.
and the son of man that thou visitest him? After that thou had for a
season made him low^r then the Angels, thou crounest him with ho^oure and
glory, and hast^ set him above the works of thy hands. Thou have put all
thing in subjection under his fete. In that he put all things under him, he
left nothing that is not put under him. Nevertheless we yet se not all
things to be subdued unto him.

Which was faithful to him that made him, Heb. ^.
even as was Moses in all his house. And yet was this manne counted worthy of
more glory th^n Moses: In as much as he which has prepared ^he honse, has
most honor in the house. Every house is prepared of some man. But he that
ordained at things, is God. And Moses berelye was ^aythfull in all his house,
as a minyster, to bear witness of the things, which should be spoken
afterward. But Christ as a son, has rule over the house, whose house are
we, so that we hold fast the confi^ence and the r^ioysynge of that hope, unto
the end.

Of the dyuinitye and emynence of the only begotten son of God. Capi^u. 49.
GOd has spoken unto us by his son, Heb. ^.
whom he has made heiere of all things, by whom also he made the world,
which ^onne being the brightenesse of his glory, and very image of his
substance bearinge up all things with the word of his power, has in his
own person pourged our sins, and is sytten on the right hand of his
majesty on ^ye, and is more e^cellen^e then the Aungelles, in as much as he
has by inheritance obtained an e^ellen^er name then they have. For unto which
of the Angels said he at any time. Psalm. 2.
Thou art my son, this day begat I th^e. And and again, I will be his
father, and he shall be my son. And again, when he brings in the first
begotten son in to the world, he says. And all the Angels of God shall
worship him. Psalm. 96. psalm. 103. psalm. 44.
And of the Angels he says. He makes his Angels spiri^s and his ministers
^lames of fire. But unto the son he says. God, thy seat shall be for ever and
ever. The cepter of thy kingdom is a right cepter. psalm. 101.
Thou have loved righteousenesse and ha^ed iniquity. Wherefore god which is thy
god has anointed the with the oil of gladness a^ou^ ^hy f^lowes. And thou
Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth. And the heavens
are the w^rk^s. Th^^ shall perish, but thou shall endur^. psalm. 109.
^h^^ all shall ware old as does a ga^ment, and as a ^estur^ shal^^ t^ou change
them, and they shall be changed. But thou art always, and ^hy yea^s ^^al not
^ayle. Unto wh^che of the Angels said he at any ^^me: Sy^^n my right hand,
till I make h^ne enemies thy fo^^ s^^l^? ^r^ they not all ministringe sp^^^^s
sent to ^inister for their sakes, whic^^ s^^ll be ^e^ers of salua^ion?

For the word of god is qu^cke, Heb. 4.
and m^ghtye in opera^^^n, and s^arp^r then any (...): and enfreth through,
eue^ unto the diu^di^ge a sonder of the soul and the spirit, and of the
^oyntes, and the mar^^: and iudgethe the thoughts and ^he intentes of the
heart, neither is there any creature invisible in the sight of it. For all
things are naked and bare unto the eyes of him, of whom we speaek.

Heb. 13.
For Jesus Christ yesterdaye and to day, and the same continues for ever.

Romans 9.
Which is God over all things blessed for ever.

Phi. 2.
Which being in the shape of god thought it not robberye to be equal with
God. etc.

Of the nisufficiencye and feblenesse of the law of Moses, too save manne
without faith and grace. Capi.+tu. 50.
Romans 3.
BY the deeds of the law, shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God. For
by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Now verelye is the righteousness
that comes of God declared without the fulfyllinge of the law, having
witness yet of the law and of the prophets. The righteousness no doubt which is
good before God, comes by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all
that believe.

There is no difference: for all have sinned, and lack the praise that is of
valor before God. Where is th^n, thy reioysinge? It is excluded. By what law?
By the law of works? Nay, but by the law of faith. For we suppose that a
man is justified by says without the deeds of the law. Is ^e the God of the
Jews only, is he not also the God of the gentiles? Yes, even of the gentiles
also. For it is God only which justifies circumcision which is of faith, and
uncircumcision through faith. Do we then destroy the law through faith God
forbid. But we rather maynetayne the law.

What shall we say then, that Abrahame our father as partayninge to the
flesh, Romans 4,
did find? If Abraham were justified by deeds, then has he wherein to rejoice:
but not with god. For what says the scripture. Abraham believed God, and it
was counted unto him for righteousenes. To him that works, Gene. 15.
is the reward not reckened of ^auou^e, but o^ duty. To him that wor^^t^ not,
but b^leueth on him that ius^ifieth the ungodly, is his faith co^n^^d for
right^ou^n^s Eu^n as ^auid des^rib^th the blessedfuln^ss^ of the manne unto
whom ^od ascribes righteousenesse without deeds. Bl^ss^d are they whose
vnright^ousn^ss^ are f^rgeu^n, and whose sins ar^ cou^r^d. Blessed is that
manne to whom our Lord imputes no ^ynne. Came this blessedn^sse then upon
the circumcised, or upon the uncircumcised? we say ve^elye how that fayeth
was recken^d unto Abraham for righteousness^. How was it r^ckened? In the
time of circumcision, or in the time before he was circumcised? Not in the time
of circumcision, but when he was yet uncircumcised. And he received the sign
of circumcysion, as a seal of the righteousen^s, which is by faith which
faieth he had yet being vncircumcis^d: that he should be the father of all
them that believe, t^ough they be not circumci^ed, that righ^eousnesse migh^e be
imputed to them also: and that he might be the father of the circumcis^d, not
because they are circumcis^d only, but because they walk also in the steps
of that fayeth that was in our father Abraham before the time of circumcision.
For the promise that he shul^ be the heier of the world, was not given to
Abraham, or to his seed through the law: but through the righteous^nes which
comes of faith. For if they which are of the law, be heyers, then is faith
but vain, and the prom^s of none effect. Because the law causes wrath. For
where no law is, there is no transgression. Therefore by fayeth is the
inheritance given, that it might come of favor, and the promise might be sure
to all the s^de. Not to them only which are of the law, but also to them
which are of the faith of Abraham, which is the father of us all. As it is
written.

I have made the a father to many nations, Ge^e. 17.
even before God whom thou have believed, which quickens the dead, and
calls those things which he not^ as though they were.

Romans 5.
For even unto the time of the law, was sin in the world, but sin was not
regarded, as long as there was no law. For the law in the mean time entr^d
in, that syn should increase.

Romans 7.
Rem^mber ye not br^ethren (I speak to them that know the law) how that the
law has power over a man as long as it endures, for the woman which is in
subjection to a man is bound by the law to the manne, as long as he lyu^th.
If the man be dead, she is lows^d from the law of the man. So that she is no
wedlock breaker, though she couple her self with an other man. Even so ye my
brethren are deadde concerning the law, by the body of Christ, that ye
should be coupled to an other. (I mean to him that is risen again from
death) that we should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the
flesh, the lusts of sin which were stirred up by the law, ^aygned in our
members, to bring forth fruit unto death. But now we are delivered from the
law, and dead from that, where unto we were in bondage, that we should s^rue
in a new conversation of the spirit. and not in the old conversation of the
letter What shall we say then? (...) the law sin? God forbid: but I knew not
what sin meante, but by the law. For I had not known what lust had meante
except the law had said, thou shalt not lust: but sin took an occasion
by the means of the commandment, and wroughte in me all manner of
concupiscence. For verily without the law, sin was dead. I ones lived
without law: but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I was dead.
And the very same commandment which was ordained unto life, was found to
be unto me an occasion of death. For sinn^ tok^ occasion by the the means of
the commandment, and so disceaued me, and by the self commandment slew
me. Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment ius^e and good. Was that
then which is good, made death unto me? God for bydde. But sin was death
unto me, that it might^ appear how that sin by the means of that which is
good, had wroughte death in me, that sin which is under the commandment
might be out of measure sinful.

For the law of the spirit that brings life through Jesus Christ, Romans ^.
has delivered me from the law of sin and death.

1 Cor. 6.
All things are lawefull unto me, bu^ all things are not profitable. I may^ do
all thing as, but I will be brought under no man's power.

Of the ^erfection and excellency of the e^angel^call law, above the ^aw^
w^itten. Capi^u. 51.
^. Cor. 3.
IF the minystration of death through the letters figured in ^^ones was
glorious, s^ that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses
for the glory of his countenance, which glory nevertheless is done away,
why^ shall not the ministration of the spirit be much more glorious? For i^
the ministering of condempnation b^ glorious, much more does the ministration
of righteousenes e^ceade in glory. For no doubt that which was there
glorified, is not once gloryfied in respect of this e^ceading^ glory. Then if
that which is destroyed was glorious, much more shall that which remains
be glorious.

Then the commandment that went a^^re, is disanulled, because of her
weakness and unprofitableness. Heb. 7.
For the law made nothing per^ect but was an introduction of a better hope,
by which hope, we draw ny^ unto God. And for this cause it (...) a better
hope, that it was not promised without an oath, Heb. 8.
now has Christ optayned a more excellent office, in as much as he is the
mediator of a better Testamente, which was made for better promises. For if
that first Testament had been fautelesse, then should no place have been sought
for the second. For in rebuking them he says: Behold the days will come,
says the Lord, and I will fyni^he upon the house of Israel, Iere. 3^.
and upon the house of Judah, a new Testament, not like the Testament that I
made with their fathers at that time when I took them by the hands, to lead
them out of the land of Egipte. For they continued not in my Testamente, and I
regarded them not says the Lord. For this is the Testamente that I will make
with the house of Israel. After those days says the Lord. I will p^t my
laws in their minds, and in their hearts I will write them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall not teach every manne
his neighbor, and every manne his brother, saying^, know the Lord. For they
shall know me. from the least to the most of them. For I will be merciful
over their vnrigoteousnes and on their sins, and o^ their iniquities. In that
he says a new Testamente, he has abrogate the old, now that which is
disanulled and wared old, is ready to vanyshe away.

Of the insufficiencye and reprobation of the sacrifyce of the law. And of the
efficacye of the sacryfice of the n^we law. Capitu. 52.
FOr the law which has but the shadow of good things to come, H^^. 1^^
and not the things in their own fashion, can never with the sarifices
which they offer year by year continually, make the comers there unto
perfaycte. For would not then those sacrifices have ceased to have been
offered, because that the offerers once spourged, should have had no more
conscyences of sins. Nevertheless in those sacrifices is there mention made
of sins every year. For it is impossible that the blood of oxen and of
gotes should take away sins. Wherefore coming in to the world. He says.
Sacrifice and offeringe thou would not have. Psalm. 39.
But a body have thou ordained me. In sacrifices and sin offeringe thou
haste no lust. Then I said. Lo I come. In the che^es^ of the book, it is
written of me, that I should do thy will. O God. Above when he had said
sacrifice and offeringe, ^sal. 1.
and burnte sacrifice, and sin offeringes thou would not have, neither
have allowed (which yet are offered by the law) and then said. Lo I come to
do thy will o God He takethe away the first to stablish the latter. By the
which will we are sanctified, by the offeringe of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all. And every priest is ready daily ministringe, and often times offers
one manner of offeringe which can never take away sins. But this man after
he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat him down for ever on the right
hand of god, and from hence forth ^aryeth till his foes be made his footstool. For with one offering has he made perfete for ever, them that are
sanctified. And the holy ghost also bears us record of this, even when he
told before. This is the Testamente I will make unto them, Iere^ 31.
after those days says the Lord. I will put my laws in their hearts and
in their mind I will write them, and their syns and iniquities will I remember
no more. And where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for
sin.

There was first a tabernacle made etc. vt supra. Ca. 37. Heb^ ^.


When these things were thus ordained, the priests went always in to the first
tabernacle, and executed the service of God. But in to the second went the
high priest alone, ones every year, and not without blood, which he
offered for him self. and for the ignorance of the people. Wherewith the
holy ghost this signified, that the way of the holy things was not yet
opened, while as yet the first tabernacle was standing. Which was a
similitude, for the time present, and in which were offered gifts and
sacrifices that could not make the minister perfect, as partayninge too the
conscience with only meats and drynckes and diverse wesshynges and
iustifyinges of the flesh, which were ordained until the time of reformation.

Yet again of the insufficyency and imperfection of the law and of the ceasing
and laying down of the things there of in the time of the new law. Capitu.
53.
Gala. 2.
I Went up to Jerusalem by revelation and co^mened with them of the Gospel,
which I preached among the gentiles: but be^wene our selves with them which
were counted chief, least I ^huld have been thought that I should run or had
run in vain. Also Titus which was with me, though he were a Greek, yet was
not compelled to be circumcised, and that because of incommers being false
breethren, which came in among to spy out our lyberty which we have in
Christ Ies^, that they might bring us in to bondage. To whom we gave no
room, no not for the space of an hour, as concerning to be brought in too
subjection: and that because that the truth of the Gospel might continue with
you. They which seemed to be somewhat added nothing too me. But contrary wise,
when they saw that the Gospel ever the uncircumcision was committed unto me,
as the gospel over the circumcision was unto Peter (for he that was mighty in
Peter in the Apostelshippe ^uer the circumcision, the same was mighty in me
among the gentiles) and therefore when they perceived the grace that was given
unto me, then James, Cephas, and John, which seemed to be pillars, ga^e to me
and Barnabas the right hands, and agreed with us, that we should preach among
the hea^hen, and they among the Jews, warninge only that we should remember
the poor. Which thing also I was diligente to do. And when Peter was come to
Antyoche, I wythstode him in the face. for he was worthy too be blamed. For
yer that certain came from James, he eat with the gentiles. But when they
were come, he withdrewe and separated him self, ^earing them which were of
the circumcision. And the other Jews dise^bled like wise, in so much that
Barnab^s was brought in to their simulation also. But when I saw that they
went not the rightway after the truth of the gospel. I said unto Peter before
all men, if thou being a Jew, live after the manner of the gentiles, and not
as do the Jews: why causest thou the gentiles to live as do the Jews:
knowings that a man is not i^^^ified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ. And therefore we believed on Jesus Christ, ^at we might be
ius^ified by (...) ^aith of Chris^e, and not by the deeds of the law, because
that by the d^des of the law, no flesh can be ^ustified. If then we will seek to
be made righte^^s by Christ, w^ our sel^es are found sinn^rs, is not then
Christ the minister of sin? God forbydde. For if I b^ylde again that which
I destroyed, then make I my self a trespaser, but I through the law, am
dead to the law: that I might live unto God.

O folish Galathians: Gala. 3.
who has bewitched you, that ye should not believe the truth? To whom Jesus
Christ was described before the eyes and among you crucified. This only
would I learn of you, received ye the spirit by the deeds of the law? or
else by preaching of y^ faith, ^re ye so ^nwise that after ye have begone in
the spirit, ye would now end in the flesh? So many things then ye have
suffered in vain, if that be vain, which ministered to you the spirit, and
works miracles among you, does he it through the deeds of the law, or by
preaching of the fayethe? For as many as are under the deeds of the law, are
under malediction. For it is written. Cursed is every man, Deu. 37.
that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law,
too fulfill them. That no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, is
evident. For the just shall live by faith. The law is not of faith, but the man
that fulfyllethe the things contained in the law, shall live by them.
Brethren I will speak after the manner of men. Though it be but a man's
Testamente, yet no man despises it, or adds any thing thereto, when it is
once allowed. To Abraham and his sede were the promises made. He says not in
the sede^ as in many, but in the sede as in one, which is Christ. This I say
that the law which began afterward beyond. 400. and 30. years, does not
disanull the Testamente that was confyrmed before of God unto Christ ward, to
make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritance come of the law, it
comes not of promise. But God gave it unto Abraham by promise. Wherefore then
serves the law? The law was added because of transgression (til the sede came
to which the promise was made) and it was ordianed by Angels in the hand of a
mediator. A mediator is not a mediator of one. But God is one. Is the law then
against the promise of God? God forbid. How be it, if there had been a law
given which could have given life, then no doubt righteousness should have
come by the law. But the scripture concluded all things under sin, that the
promise by the fayeth of Jesus Christ, should be given unto them that believe.
Before that faith came, we were kept and shut up under the law, unto the
faith which should afterward be declared. Wherefore the law was our
scolemaster unto the ^ime of Christ, that we might b^ made ryghteouse by
faith. But after that ^ayth is come, now are we no longer under a scolemaster.

We know that the law is goo^, if a man use it lawfullye, ^. Tim^. ^.
understanding this, how that the law is not given unto a righteous man. But
to the vnrighteous^ etc.

Of the cessation and end o^ circumcison, and other observations of the law,
in the time of the promulgation of the gospel. Capit. 54.
Stand fa^^e, therefore in ^he liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free,
Gala. 5.
and wrap not your selves again in the yoke of bondage. Behold I Paul say
unto you that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profyt^^ you nothing at all.
I testifye ag^yne to every man which is circumcised, y^ he is bound to keep the
whole law. Ye are gone q^yte from Christ as many as are iustif^^d by the
law, and are fallen from grace. Ye did runn^ well, who was a let unto you,
that ye should not obey the truth? Even that counsel, that is not of him, that
called you, I have trust toward you in the Lord, that ye will be none other
wise minded. He that troubles you shall bear his iudgement^ what so ever he be.
Brethren if I yet preach circumcision, why^ do I then yet suffer persecution?
For then had the offense which the cross gives, ceased. I would to God
they were sepera^ed from you, which trouble you. Breethren ye were called in
too lybertye, only let not your liberty^ be an occasyon unto the flesh,
but in love serve one an other.

As many as desire to please carnallye, they constrain you to be circumcised,
only because they would not suffer persecution with the cross of Christ. For
they them selves which are circum^ised, kep^ not the law, but desire too have
you circumcised, that they might rejoice in your flesh. For in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision aua^leth any th^nge at all^ nor vncyrcumcysion, but a new
creature.

If ye be led to the spirit, then are ye not under the law. Gala. 5.


And I say that the heier as long as he is a child differs not from a
servant, Gala^ 4.
though he be Lord of all, but is under tuters and gouern^rs until the time
appointed of the father. Even so we, as long as we were children, were in
bondage under the ordinances of the world. Ye observe days, and months,
and times, and years. I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed on you
labor in vain. Breethren I beseech you, be as I am, For I am as ye are^ Ye
have not hurt me at all. Ye know how through infirmitye of the fle^h. I
preached the Gospel unto you, at the first. And my temptation which I
suffered by reason of my flesh, ye despised not neither abhorred, but received
me as an Angel of God, ye, as Christ Jesus. How happy^ were ye then? For I
bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out
your own^ eyes and have given too me. Am I therefore become your ennemye^
because I tell you the truth? They are gelous over you amysse. Ye they inte^de
to exclude you, that ye should be ^eruente, to them ward. My little children
(of whom I travail in ^yrthe again until Christ be fashioned in you) I would
I were with you, and could change my voice. Gene. ^^^
For I stand in a doubt of you. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law,
have ye not heard of the law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons,
the one by a ^onde maid, the other by a free woman. But he which was of the
bond woman, was borne after the flesh. But he which was of the free woman, was
born^ by promise. Which things betoken mystery. For these women are two
Testaments^ the one from the mount Sina, which gendreth unto bondage. Which is
Agar. For mount Sina is called Agar in Arabia, and bordreth upon the city,
which is now Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children.

Romans 9.
Let none sin have power over you. For ye are not under the law, but under
grace. What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under
grace? God forbydde.

Of Christ's priesthode, and bishopric, and of the exc^llency of
Melchisedech, which was the figure of Christ. And how Abraham paid tithe unto
Leui. Capitu. 55.
SEygne then that we have a great hye priest, Heb. 4.
which is entered in to heaven (I mean Jesus the son of God) let us hold
^ure prophession.

For every hye priest, that is taken from among men, Heb. ^^
is ordained for men, in things pertaininge to God, to off^r gifts and
sacrifices for sin, which can have compassion on the ignoraunte, and on them
that are out of the way, because that he him self is compased with
in^irmityes. For the which infimities sake he is bound to offer for sins, as
w^ll for his own part, as for the peoples. And no man takes honor unto him
self, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Even so like wise, Christ
glorified not him self, 1. para. 2^
to be made the hye priest: but he that said unto him, thou art my son,
psalm. 2.
this day begat I the, glorified him. As he also in an other place speaks
Thou art a priest for ever, psalm. 1^.
after the order of Melchisedech. Whereof we have many things to say which are
hard to be uttered, because ye are ^ull of hearing.

This Melchisedech king of Salem (which being priest of the most hye God met
Abraham, Heb. 7.
as he returned again from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him: to
whom also Abraham gave tithes of al things) first is by interpretation king
of righteousness, after that he is king of Salem, that is to say, king of of
peace, without father, without mother, without kin, and has neither
beginning of his time, neither yet end of his life. But is likened unto the
son of God, and continues a priest for ever. Consider what a man this was
unto whom the Patriarch Abraham gave tithes of the spoils. And verelye those
children of Leuy, which receive the office of the priests, have a
commandment to take according to the law, tithes of the people, that is to
say, of their brethren, ye though they sprung out of the loins of Abraham.
But he whose kinnered is not counted among them received tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the promises. And without all nay saying, he which
is less, receaueth blessinge of him which is greater, And here men that die
receive tithes, but there he receives tithes of whom it is witnessed, that he
lives. And to say the truth, Leuy him self also which receaueth tithes,
paid tithes in Abraham. For he was yet in the loins of his father Abraham
when Melchisedech met him. If now therefore perfection came by the presthode of
the leuytes (for under that priesthode, the people received the law.) What
needed it furthermore that an other priest should rise after the order of
Melchisedech, and not after the order of Aaron? Now no doubt, if the
priesthode be translated, then of necessitye must the law be translated also.
For he of whom these things are spoken, pertains unto an other tribe, of
which never man served at the altar. For it is euidente that our Lord spronge
of the tribe of Judah, of which tri^e spoke Moses nothing, concerning
priesthode. And it is yet a more ^uydent thing, if after the symilytu^e of
Melchisedech, there arise an other priest, which is not made after the law of
the carnal commaundement^ but after the power of the endelesse life (for he
testy^yethe: psalm. 10^.
Thou art a priest for ^^er, after the order of Melchisedech). Those priests
were made without an oath, but this priest with an o^h^, by him that said unto
him. The Lord swear and will not repent. Tho^ art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. And for that cause was Jesus a stablisher of a
better Testame^te. And among them many were made priests, because they were
not suffered to endure by reason of death. But this man, because he endures
ever, has an everlasting pries^hode. Such an hye priest it became us to have
which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made hyar
then heaven, which needs not daily (as yonder hie priest) to offer up
sarci^ice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples sins. For
that did he at once for all, when he offered up him self. For the law
makes men priests which have infirmity, but the word of the oath that came
sense the law, makes the son priest, which is perfect for evermore.

Of the things which we have spoken, this is the pith: Heb. 8.
that we have such an hie priest that is sitten on the right hand of the
seat of majesty in heaven, and is a minister of holy things, and of the very
tabernacle which God pyghte and not man. For every high priest is ordained
to offer gifts and sacrifices. Wherefore it is of necessitye that this man have
somewhat also to offer. For he were not a pries^e if he were on the earth
where are pryestes that according to the law offer gifts, which priests
serve unto the ensample and shadow of heavenly things even as the answer of
God was given unto Moses when he was about to finishe the tabernacle. Exo. 25.
Take heed (says he) that thou make all things according to the patron
showed to thee in the mount.

With what virtuous, bishops, priests, and deacons, being within holy
orders, ought to be adorned. Capitu. 56.
1. Timo. 1.
This is a true saying: if a man covet the office of a bishop, he desires a
good work. Ye and a bishop must be fau^elesse, the husband of one wife,
sober, discrete, honestlye apparelled, harberous, apt to teach, not droncken,
no fight^r, not given to filthy lucre, but gentle, abhorringe fighting,
abhorringe couet^ousnes, and one that rules his own house honestlye having
children under obedience with all hone^ty. For if a man can not rule his own
^ouse, how shall he care for the congregation of God. He may not be a young
scoler, least he swel and faule, in to the judgment of the ^uyl speaker. He
must also be well repor^ed of among them which are with oute^, least he
fall in too rebuke and snare of the evil speaker. Likewise must the deacons be
honest, not doble tonged, not given unto much drinkinge, neither unto filthy
lucre, but having the mysterye of the faith in pure conscience. And let them
first be proved and the^ let them minister, if they be found f^utelesse. Let
the deacons be the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their children well,
and their own housholdes. For they that minister well, get them selves good
degree and great liberty in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

For this cause left I thee in Crete, Titu. 1^
that thou shouldeste perform that which was lackinge, and should ordain
priests and elders in every city, as I appointed thee. If any manne be
fautelesse, the husband of one wife, having faithful children which are not
slaundered of riot, neither are disobedi^nt. For a bishop must be fautelesse,
as it becomes the minister of God, not proud, not angrye, no dronkarde, no
fighter, not given to filthy lucre: but harberus, one that loves goodness,
sober minded, righteous, holy, temperate, and such as cleaves unto the true
word of docrine, that he may be able to exhort with wholesome learning, and
to improve them that say against it.

^. Timo. 5.
Against an elder or a priest receive non occasion: but under two or three
witnesses.

Of the institution of the communion, and how damnable a thing it is to
receive it vnwoorthelye. Capitu. 57.
^. Cor. 10.
I Speak as unto them which have discretion, judge ye what I say. Is not the
cup of blessinge which we bless, partakinge of the blood of Christ? Is
not the br^adde which we break part taking of the body of Christ? because
that we (though we be many) yet are one bread, and one body, in as much as
we all are partakers of one bread and of one cup.

That which I delivered unto you I received of the Lord. 1. Cor. 1^.
For the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and
thanked, and brake, and said. Take ye ^ eat ye, this is my body, which shall be
betrayed for you. This do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner he
took the cup when supper was done, saying. This cup is the new Testament
in my blood. This do as often as ye drink it in the remembrance of me. For as
often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show the
Lords death, till he come. Therefore^ who so ever shall eat of thy^ bread,
or drink of the cup unworthily, shall be gil^y of the body and blood of the
lord. Let a man therefore e^amin him self, a^^ so let him eat of the bread
and (...) the cupe For he that eats or drincketh unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, because he makes no di^ference of the Lords body.
For this cause many are w^ake and sick among you, and many sleep. Wherefore my
breethren when ye come to gether to eat, tarry one for an other. If any man
honger, let him eat at home, that ye come not to gether unto condempnation.
Other things shall I set in order, when I come.

How that they which be married ought to behave them selves. And of the
contynence of vyrgynes and wydowes. Capitu. 58.
^. Cor. 7.
AS concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me, it is good for a man, not to
touch a woman. Nevertheless to auo^d fornication, let every man have his
wife: and let every wyf^ have her husband. Let the man ge^^ unto the wife due
^en^uolence. Likewise also the wife unto the man. The wife has no power over
her own body, but the husband. And likewise the man has no power over his
own body, but the wife. Withdraw not your selves one from an other, except
it be wit^ consent for a time, for to give your selves too fasting and
prayer. And afterward come again to the same thing, least Satan tempte you
for your incontinencye. This I say of favor, for I would that all men were
as I am my self: but every man has his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, an other after that. I say unto the unmarried men and wydowes: it is
good for them that they abide even as I do. But and if they can not abstain,
let them mary. For it is better too marye then to burn. Unto the married
command not I but the Lord: that the wife separate not her self from the
man. If she separate her self, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto
her husband again. And let not the husband put away his wife from him. To
the remnaunte say I and not the Lord. If any brother have a wife that
believes not. If she be content to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
And the woman which has to her husband an infidel, if he consent to dwell
with her, let her not put him away. For the unbelieving husband, is
sanctified by the wife: and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband.
Or else were your children unclean, but now are they pure. But and if the
unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not in
subjection to such. God has called us in peace. For how know thou o woman,
whether thou shall save that man or no? Other how know thou o man, whether
thou shall save that woman or no? But even as God has distrybuted to every
man. As concerning virgynes, I have no commandment of the Lord: yet give I
counsel, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be fayethfull. I
suppose that it is good for the present necessity. For it is good for a man so
to be. Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not too be lowsed. Art thou lowsed
from a wife? seek not a wife. But and if thou take a wife, thou synnest not.
Likewise if a virgyne marye, she sins not. Nevertheless such shall have
truble in their flesh, but I favor you. The single manne cares for the
things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord. But he that has married,
cares for the things of the world, how he may please his wife, and is
divided, The syngle woman carethe for the things of the Lord, that she may
be pure both in body, and also in spirit, but she that is married, cares for
the things of the world, how she may please her husband. This speak I for your
profytte, not to tangle you in a snare: but for that which is honest and
comely unto you, and that ye may quietly cleave unto the Lord without
separation. If any man think that it is uncomely for his virgyne. If she pass
the time of marriage, and so if need require, let him do what he lusts, he
sins not, if she be married. Nevertheless he that purposes surely in his
heart, having no need, but has power over his own will, and has so
decreed in his heart, that ^e will keep his virgy^e, does well. So then ^e that
^oyneth his virgin in marriage, does well. But he that joins not his virgin
in marriage does better. The wife is bound to the law as long as her husband
lives. If her husband s^epe, she is at liberty, to marye with whom she
will, only in the Lord. But she is happiar if she do abide in my judgment.
And I think verelye that I have the spirit of God.

Women submytte your selves unto your own husbands, Ephe. 5.
as unto the Lord. For the husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the
head of the congregation. Therefore as the congregation is in subjection unto
Christ, likewise let the wives be in subjection to their husbands in all
things. Husbands love your wives ^^en as Christ loved the congrega^^^n, and
gave him self for it. So ought men^e to love their wives, as their own bodies.
He that louethe his wife, loves him self. Nevertheless (...) y^ so that
every one of you love his wife ^ruly even as him self. And let the wife s^e,
that she fear her ^usbande.

Wives, submit your selves unto your own husban^es, Collo. 3.
as it is comelye in the Lord. Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter
unto them.

Let wedlock be had in price in all points, Heb. ^.
and let ^he chamber be vndefy^ed.

Of Certain documentes generally partayning to men, women, and widows. Capitu.
59.
I Would ye knew that Christ is the head of every man, 1. Co^. ^.
and that the manne is the woman's head. And God is Christ's headde. Every man
prayinge or prophesyinge having any thing on his head, shameth his h^adde.
Every woman that prays or prophesies bare headed, dishonesteth her headde.
For it is even all one, and the very same thing, even as though she were
shaven. If the woman be no^ covered, let her also be shorn. If it be a shame
for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her cover her head. A man ought not to
cover his head. For as much as he is the image and glory of God. The woman is
the glory of the man. For the man is not of the woman, but the w^man of the
man. Neither was the man creat^d for the woman's sake, but the woman for the
man's sake. For this cause ought the woman to have a veil on her h^adde, for
the Angels sakes. Neuertheles^e neither is the man without the woman nether
the woman without the man in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, even so
is the man by the woman, but al is of god. Judge in your selves, whether it be
comely y^ a woman pray unto god bare headed? O^ it is does not nature teach you
that it is ^ ^hame for a man if he have long hear: and a praise to a woman if
she have a long hear? For her hear is geu^n her to cover her with all.

Let women keep silence in the congregations. 1. Cor. 10.
For it is not permytted unto them too speak, but let them be under obedience,
as says the law. If they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home. For it is a shame for wemenne too speak in the
congregation. Sprung the word of God from you? Either came it unto you only?
If any man think him self a prophet either sp^rituall, let him understand
what things I write unto you. For they are commandments of the Lord.

Likewise that the women array them selves in comely apparel with shamfastnes
and discrete behavior, 1. Tim^. ^^
not with broided hear other gold, or pearls, or costly array: but with such
as becomes women that profess the woorshippinge of God through good works.
Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection. I suffer not a woman to
teach, neither to^ have authority over the man: but for to be in silence. For
Adam was first formed, and then ^ue. Also Adam was not deceived, but the woman
wa^ deceived, and was in transgression. Notwithstanding^ through bearing of
children they shall be saved so they continue in faith, love, and holiness with
discretion.

Honor widows which are true wydowes. 1. Timo. 5.
If any wydow have childr^n or nephes, let the^ learn first to rule their own
houses Godly, and to recompense their elders. For that is good and exceptable
before god. She that is a very widow and friendless puts her trust in god:
and continues in supplication and prayer night and day. But she that lives in
pleasure is deadde even yet alive. And these things command that they may
be without fault. Let no widow be chosen under three score year old, and such
a one as was the wife of one man, and w^ll reported of in good works: if ^he
have nourished children, if she have been liberal too strangers, if she have
washed the saynctes fete, if she have mini^stred unto them which were in
adversity, if she were continuallye given unto all manner good works. The
younger widows refuse. For when they have begone to we^e wanton, to the
dishonor of Christ, then will they marye, having damnation because they
have broken ^h^ir first faieth. I will therefore that the younger women marye
and bear children, and ^u^d their ho^ses, and give none occasion to the
aduersarye to speak evil. For many of them are already turned back^, and are
gone after Satan. And if any manne or woman that beleuethe have wydowes, let
them minister unto them, and let not the congregation be charged: that ye may
have s^ffici^nte for them, that are widows in deed.

How parents ought to use them selves unto their children. And masters to
their servant And contrary wise how children and servants must use them
selves to their parents and masters. Capit. 60.
Ephe. 6.
Children obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord. For so it is right. Honor
thy father and mother, that is the first commandment that has any promise,
that thou may be in good estate, and live long on the earth. And ye fathers
move not your children to wrath: but bring them up with the nurture and
information of the Lord.

^^llo. 3.
Children obey your fathers and mothers in all things. For that is well
pleasinge unto the Lord. Fathers, rate not your children, least they be of a
desperate mind.

The children ought not to lay up for the fathers and mothers, 2. Cor. 1^.
but the fathers and mothers for the children.

Servants be obedyente unto your carnal masters, Ephe. 6.
with fear and trembling in synglenesse of your hearts, as unto Christ:
not with service in the eye syghte, as men pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, dooinge the will of God from the heart with good will serving the
Lord, and not men. And remember that whatsoever good thing any manne does,
that shall be receive again of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. And ye
masters, do even the same things unto them, puttinge away threatenynges, and
remember that even your master also is in heaven, neither is there any
respect of person with him.

Servant, Collo. 3.
be obedient unto your boddily masters in all things in singlenes of heart
fearinge God. And what so ever ye do, do it heartily, for as much as ye know
that of the Lord, ye shall receive the reward of inheritance Ye masters do
unto your servant that which is just and equal, seeing ye know that ye also
have a master in heaven.

Let as many serua^ntes as are under y^ke, ^^ Timo. 6.
count their masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and his
doctrine be not ^uyll spoken of. See that they which have believing masters,
despise them not, because they are breethren, but so much the rather, do
service. For as much as they are beleueinge, and beloved, and partakers of the
benefyte.

Tim. 2.
The servants e^horte to be ^b^diente unto their own masters, and to please
in all things, not aunsweringe again, neither be pyckers, but that they show
all good ^ayth^ulnes, that they may do worship to the doctrine of our
savior God in all things.

How superiors should use them selves to their subjects, and contrary wise.
And of certain documentes partayninge unto prelates. And how they should
diversely instruct diverse. Capit. 61.
WE beseech you breethren, 1. These. ^^
that ye know them which labor among you, and have the over sight of you in
the lord and geeue you exhortacyon that ye have them the more in love for their
works sake, and be at peace with them.

He therefore that despises this, 1. These. 4.
despises not man, but God.

The priests and elders that rule well, 1. Tim^. ^
are worthy of double honor, most specially they, which labor in the word,
and in teaching.

Remember them which have the oversight of you, (...)
which have declared unto you, the word of God, the end of whose conversation
se that ye look upon and follow their fayeth. Obey them that have the oversight
of you, and submit your selves to them. For they watch for your souls, even as
they that must give accomptes for your souls: that they may do it with
joy, and not with grefe, for that is a profitable thing for you.

Phi. 2.
And receive such a one with honor and all gladness.

1. Timo. 4.
Till I come, give attendaunce to readinge, to exhortation, too doctrine.
Despise not that gift that is in thee, which was given the through prophesye,
and with the layinge on of hands of an elder. Take heed unto thy self, and
unto learning and continue ^herein. For if thou shall so do, thou shall save
thy self, and them that hear the.

1. Timo. 5.
Lay hands suddenly on no man. Nether be partaker of other men's sins.

2. Timo. 4.
Watch thou in all things, and suffer aduersitye, and do the work of an
evangelist, fulfill thine office unto the uttermost. Be sober.

Of these things put them in remembrance, and testifye before the ^. Timo. 2.
Lord.

For thou haste seen the experience of my doctrince, fashion of living, 2.
Timo. 3.
purpose, fayth^ long sufferinge, love, paciene, persecutions, afflictions,
which happened unto me at Antyoche, at Iconium, and at Lystra. Which
persecutions I suffered patiently. And from them al, the lord delivered me.

Preach the word, be fervent, 2. Timo. 4.
be it in season or out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort.

Be unto them that believe, an ensample, in word, in conversation, 1. Timo. 4.
in love, in spirit, in charity.

An elder exhort as a father, young me^ as brethren, the elder women, 1. Timo. ^.
as mothers y^ yo^ger as sisters in all chastity.

But speak thou that, which becomes wholesome learning y^ the elder men be
sober, honest, discrete, sound in the fayeth, in love, and in pacyence. And the
elder women likewise that they be in such raiment as becomes holiness, not
false accusers not given to much drynckinge, but teachers of honest things. to
make the young wemenne sober minded, to love their husbands, to love their
children, to be discrete, chaste, huswy^^ye, good and obedient unto their own
husbands, that the word of God be not evil spoken of.

1. Timo. 4.
If thou shall put the breethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be
a good minyster of Jesus Christ, which have been nourished up in the words of
faith and good doctrine, which doctrine thou have continually followed.

Of the spiritual generation of baptime. And why that from hence forth, we
ought to depart from sin. Cap^u. 62.
^o^. 5.
WHere abundaunce of syn^e was, there was more plentuousenesse of grace. etc. vt
^upr^.

What shall we say then? Romans 6.
Shall we continue in sin, that there may abundaunce of grace? God forbydde. How
shall we that are dead as touching sin live any longer therein? Remember ye
not, that al we which are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ are baptized to
dye with him? We are buried with him by baptysme, for too dye, that likewise as
Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father, even so we also
should walk in a new life. For i^ we graffe in death like unto him, eue^ so
must we be in the resurrection. This we must remember, that our old man is
crucified with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be destroyed,
that hence forth we should not be servant of sin. For he that is dead, is
^ustified from sin. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall
live with him: remembringe that Christ once rayseh from death, dies no more.
Death has no more power over him for as touching that he dyed, he dyed
concerning sin, once. And as touching that he lives, he lives unto God.
Likewise imagine ye also^ that ye are dead concerning sin, but are ali^e
unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Tim. 2.
For all ye that are baptized in Christ Jesus, have put on Christ.

Gala. 3.
In whom ye are circumcised with circumcision made without hands by puttinge
of the sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision that is in Christ,
in that ye are buried with him through baptime, in whom ye are also risen
again through faith y^ is wroughte by the operation of God which raised him
from death. Collo. 2.


Of the coming of the most wicked and most falsest Antichrist and of the day
of judgment. Capitu. 6^.
2. These. 2
BE not suddenly moved, a^though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man
deceive you by any m^anes. For the Lord comes not except there come a
departinge first and that the sinful man ^e opened, the son of perdition,
which is an aduersarye and is exalted above all that is called God, or that is
woorshipped: so that he shall sytte as God in the temple of God and show him
self as God. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told^ you these
things? And now ye know what wythholdethe: even that ^e might ^ee uttered,
at hy^ time. For the mysterye of the iniquytye does already work: till he
which now only lets, be ta^en out of the way. And then shall that
wicked be uttered, who^ the lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy it with appearaunce of his cominge, even him whose cominge
is by the working of Satan, with all lying power, signs and wonders: and in all
d^ceiueablenes of vnrightuousenes, among them that perish, because they
received not the love of ye truth, that they might have been saved. And
therefore God shall ^end them strong delusion, that they should believe ly^s that
all they might be dampened whyth believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
vnrighte^usnes.

1. These. 5.
Of the times and ceasons brethren ye have no need that I write unto you: for
ye your selves know parfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come ^uen as a
thee^e in the night. When they shall say peace and no d^unger, then comes
on the^ soden destruction, as the trauaylinge of a woman with child, and they
shall not escape. But ye brethern are not in darkness, that that day should
come on you as it were a the^e.

Of the general resurrection that is too come. Capitu. 64
IF so be that any man have not the spirit of Christ the same is none of his.
Romans 8.
But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from ^^athe, dwell in you, even
he that ^aysed up Christ from death, shall ^uycken your mortal bodies,
because that his spirit dwells in you.

God has raised up the Lord, 1. Cor.^.
and shall raise us up by his pwer.

For we know that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, 2. Cor. 4.
shall raise up v^ also, by the means of Jesus, and shall set us with you.

Christ among you is not weak, but is mighty in you. 2. Cor. 13.
For though it came of weakness that he was crucified, yet lives he through
the power of God, And we no doubt are weak in him, but we shall live with
him, by the might of God among you.

If we believe that Jesus dyed and and rose again, 1. These. ^.
even so them also which sleep by Jesus, will God bring again with him. And
this say we unto you, in the word of the Lord, that we which live and are
remayninge, in the coming of the Lord, shall not come yerre they which sleep.
For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven with a shute, and the voice
of Archaungell, and trompe of God. And the dead in Christ shall aris^ first,
then shall we, which live and remain, be caughte up with them also in the
clouds too mete the Lord in the air. And so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wherefore comfort your selves one an other with these words.

Of fayethfull probation, and and diversity of the resurrection that is to
come, and of the gifts of the glorified bodies. Capitu. 65.
1. Cor. 15.
IF Christ be preached, how that he rose from the dead. How say some that are
among you, that there is no resurrec^ion of the dead? If there be no risinge
again, then is Christ not risen. If Christ be not risen, then is our
preachinge vain, and your faith also in vain. Ye and we are found false
witnesses of God. For we have testified of god, how that he raised up Christ,
whom he rays^d not vpp^, if it be so that the ^eade rise not again. For if the
dead rise not again, then is Christ not risen again. Y^ it be so that Christ
rose not, then is your fayeth in vain, and yet are ye in your sins. And
thereto they which are fallen a sleep in Christ, are pearished, if in this
life only we believe in Christ, then are we of all men, the miserabliest. But
now is Christ risen from the dead, and is become the first fruits of them
that slepte. For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection
of the deadde. For as by Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be made a
live, and every man in his own order. The first is Christ, then they that
are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end, when he has delivered up
the kingdom to god the father, when he has put down al rule, a^ctority, and
power. For he must reign til he have put all his enemies under his feet. The
last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. For he has put al things under
his fete. But when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that
he is excepted, which did put all things under him. When all things are
subdued unto him, then shall the son also him self b^ subject unto him,
that put all things under him, that God may be all in all things. Either else
what do they which are baptized over the dead, if the dead rise not at all?
Why are they then baptized over the dead? yea, and why stand we in ieopardye
every hour? By our reioysinge which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye
daily. That I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men,
what a^auntageth it me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat and drink, to
morrow we shall dye. Be not deceived, malycius speaking corrupt good manners.
Awake ye just, and sin not. For some have not the knowledge of God. I speak
this to your rebuke. But some man will say: how arise the deadde: with what
bodies come they in^ Thou ^ole, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except
it ^y. And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that body that shall be: but bare
corn, (I mean either of wheat, or of some other) and God gives it a body at
his pleasure, to every seed a several body. All flesh is not one manner of
flesh, but there is one manner of flesh of men, an other manner of flesh of
beasts, an other manner of flesh of fyshes, and an other of byrds. There are
celes^iall bodies, and there are bodies terrestriall^ But the glory of the
cele^^yall is one, and the glory^ of the terestryall is an other. There is one
manner glo^ye of the sun, and an other glory of the moon, and an other glory
of the stars: for one star differs from an other in glory. So is the
resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, and rises in
incorruption. It is sown in dishonor, it rises in honor. It is sown in
weakness, and rises in power. It is sown a natural body, and rysethe a
spirytuall body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. As
it is written. The first man Adam was made a lyuinge soul, Gene. 2.
and the last Adam was made a quickening^ spirit How be it, that is not first
which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is
spiritual. Behold I show you a misterye. We shall not all sleep, but we
shall be all changed, and that in a momente, and in a twinkling of an eye, at
the sound of the last trompe. For the trompe shall blow and the deadde shall
rise in corruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put
on incorruptibilitye, and this mortal must put on immortalitye. When this
corruptible has put on incorruptibility, and this mortal has put on
immortalitye, then shall be brought to pass the saying y^ is written. Death is
consumed in to victory. Death where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory? The
stinge of death is sin and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be
unto God, which has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the feruente charity of saint Paul the Apostell. Capitu. 66.
I Have wyshed my self too becursed from Christ, Romans 6.
for my br^ethren and my kynsmen as partaininge to the flesh.

My hearts desire and prayer to god for Israel, Romans 1^.
is that they might be saved.

For though I be free from all men yet have I made my self servant unto all
men, 1. Cor. 9.
that I might win the moo. Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, too win the
Jews. To them that were under the law, was I made as though I had been
under the law, to win them that were under the law. To them that were
without law, became I as though I had been without law (when I was not without
law, as pertaining to God, but under a law as concerning Christ) too win
them that were without law. To the weak became I as weak, too win the
weak. In all things I fashoned my self to all men, to save at the least way
some. And this I do for the gospels sake, that I might have my part thereof.

^ Cor. 1.
And in this confidence was I minded the other time to have come too you, that
ye might have had yet one pleasure more, and to have passed by you in to
Macedonia, and too have come again out of Macedonia unto you, and to have been
lead forth to Iewry ward of you.

When I was come to Troada for Christ's Gospells sake, ^. Cor. 2.
and a great door was opened unto me of the lord I had no rest in my spirit,
because I found not Titus my brother but took my leave of them, and went away
in to Macedonia. For in great affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you
with many tears, not to make you sorye, but that ye might perceive the love
which I have most specially unto you.

Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, 2. Cor. 3.
which is understand and reed of all men, in that ye are known, how that ye
are the Epistle of Christ^ ministered by us and writ^en, not with yncke, but
with the spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshely
tables of the heart.

For the love and charity of Christ constrained us. vt su. 2. Cor. 5.


Behold, now I am ready to come the third time unto you, 2. Cor. ^.
and yet I will not be grievous unto you. For I seek not youres but you. I will
very gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls, though the more I
love you, the less I am loved again.

I am surely certyfied of this, that be which began a good work in you,
Phi. 1.
shall goo forth with it until the day of Jesus Christ, as it becomes me so
too judge of you all, because I have you in my heart, and in my bonds, and in
the defense and stablishmente of the gospel. For god bears me witness, how
greatly I long after you all from the very heart rote in Jesus Christ.

Phi. 2.
I trust in the Lord Jesus for too send Timothe shortelye unto you, that I
also may be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand in. For I have no
man that is so liuelye minded to me, which with so pure affection cares for
your matters, for all other seek their own, and not that which is Jesus
Christ's. Ye know the prose of him, how that as a son with the father, so
with me he bestowed his labor upon the gospel. Him I hope to send as soont
as I know how it will go with me. I trust in the Lord that I also my self
shall come shortly.

Phi. 3.
It greueth me not to write all one thing unto you. For unto you it is
necessary,

I would ye knew what solicitude and care I have for your sakes, Collo. 2.
and for them of Laodicia, and for as many as have not s^ene my person in
the flesh, that they might be comforted.

Although I wrote unto you, I did i^ not for his caus^ that did hurt, 2. Cor.
7.
nether for his cause that was hurt, but that our good mind which we have
toward you, in the sight of God, might appear unto you.

Even as a nourse cherysheth her children, Collo. 2.
so was our affection toward you, our good will was to have dealte unto you
not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear
unto us.

I thank God whom I serve from mine elders with pure conscience, 2. Timo. 1.
that without ceasinge I make mention of the in my prayers night and day,
desiringe to see the, myndefull of thy tears, so that I am filled with joy,
when I call too remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in the, which dwelte
first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Animica, and I am sure that it
dwells in the also.

Bring Zenas the lawear, and Apollos on their journey dilygentelye, Tit^. 3.
that no^hinge be lackinge unto them.

I for charities sake beseech the, saying thou art as I am even Paul aged, Ad
phil^.
and now in bonds for Jesus Christ sake. I beseech the for my son
Onesymus, whom I begatte in my bonds, which in time passed was to the
unprofitable, but now profitable both to the and also to me, whom I have
sent ^ome again. Thou therefore receive him, that is to say, mine own
bowels, whom I would feign have retained with me, that in thy stead he might
have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel. Nevertheless, without thy
mind, I would do nothing, that the good which springs of the, should not be
as it were of necessity, but wyllingely. Happily he therefore departed for a
season that thou should receive him for ever, not now as a servant, but
above a servant, I mean a brother beloved specially to me: but how much
more unto the, both in the flesh, and also in the Lord? If thou count me ^
fellow, receive him as my self. If he have hurt thee, or owethe thee ought,
that lay to my charge. I Paul have written it with mine ^ande, I will
recompense it. So that I do not say to thee, how that thou ^west unto me even
thine own self. Even so brother, let me enjoy thee in the Lord. Comfort my
bowels in Christ. Moreover prepare me lodging, for I trust through the
help of your prayers, I shall be given unto you.

Of the humilitye, patience and persecutions of blessed Paul the Apostell.
Capitu. 67.
ANd last of all, Christ was seen of me, 1. Cor. 1^
as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the least of all the
Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecutee
the congregation of God. But by the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace
which is in me, was not in vain: but I labour^d more abundantlye then they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Whether it were I or
they, so we preach: and so have ye believed.

I Paul my self beseech you by the mekenes and so^ten^s of Christ which when
I am pr^sente among you am of no reputa^ion, 2. Cor. 10.
but am bold toward you being absente. I beseech you that I n^de not to be
bold when I am present (with the same confidence, wherewith I am supposed to
be bold) against some which repute us as though we walk^d carnallye. For we dare
not make our selves of y^ number of them, or compare our selves too them,
which land them selves. Neuerthel^sse while they measure them selves with
them s^lues, and compare them selves with them selves, they understand naught

Gala. 1.
Other goo I about^ to please men?

If I studied to please men I were not the servant of Christ.

Nor we were not as though we intended to please men. etc. vt supra. 1. These. 2
Capitu. 39.

This is a true saying, that Christ Jesus came in to this world to save
sinners, 1. Timo. ^.
of whom I am chief. etc.

For this cause have I delectation in infirmities, 2. Cor. 12.
in rebukes, in need, in persecutions, in anguyshe, for Christ's sake. For when
I am weak, ^hen am I strong.

They are the ministers of Christ (I speak like a fool) I am more. 2. Cor.
11.
In labors more abundaunte. In strypes above measure: In prysonne
plentuouslye. In death o^^e. Of the Jews five times received I every time
fourtye strypes save one. Thryse was I beaten with rods. I was once stoned. I
su^fered thryse shipwrake. N^ghte and day have I been in the deep of the sea.
In ^orneing often. In parele of waters. In parelles of robbers. In ieoperdyes
of mine own nation. In ieoperdyes among the heathen. I have been in parels in
cities, in parels in wilderness, in parels in the sea, in parels among false
breethren, in labor and travail, in watchinge often, in hunger and thirst,
in fastinges often, in cold and in nakedness. And besides the things which
outwardelye happen unto me, I am combred dailye, and do care for all
congregations. Who is sick, and I am not sick? Who is hurt in the fayeth, and
my heart burns not? The God, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
blessed for ever, knowethe that I lie not. The gouerner of the people of
Damasco under king Aretas, laid watch in the city of Damasco, and would have
caughte me, and at the window was I let down in a basket through the wall, and
so escaped his hands.

Collo. 1.
Now joy I in my sufferings which I suffer for you, and fulfill that which is
behind of the passions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the
church.

1. Timo. 2,
Herefore I suffer all things for the electes sakes, that they might also
obtain that salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glorys.

Therefore let no man be moved in these afflictions, 1. These. 3,
for ye your selves know that we are even appointed thereunto.

This thou know how that all they which are in Asia, 2. Cor. ^.
be turned from me, of which sort are Philetus and Hermogenes.

Alexander the copper smith did me much evil, 2. Timo. ^
the Lord reward him according to his dedees, of whom be thou ware also,
for he withstode our preachinge sore. At my first answeringe and defense, no
man assisted me, but all forsook me. I pray God, that it may not be laid too
their charges. Notwithstanding the Lord assisted me, and strengthed me, that by
me the preachinge should be fulfilled to the vttermoste, and that all the
gentiles should hear. And I was deliuerede out of the mouth of the Lion. And
the Lord has delivered me from all evil doing, and shall keep me unto his
heavenly kingdom, to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the excellencye of Paul the Apostels rectitude and sinceritye. Capit. 68.
What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, 1. Cor. 4.
or else in love and in the spirit of meekness?

Out of sincerity and pureness, and by the power of god, 2. Cor. 2.
and in the sight of God, so speak we in Christ.

1. Cor. 3.
Begin we to praise our selves again? Need we as some other, of Epistels of
recomendation unto you? or letters of recomendation from you?

2. Cor. 10.
If any man trust in him self that he is Christ's, let the same also consider
of him self, that as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. And though I
should boast my self somewhat more of our authority which the lord has g^ne^ us
to edifye and not t^ destroy you, if should not be to my ^^ame. This say I
least I should seem as though I went about to make you afraid with
letters. For the Epistles (says he) are sore and strong. But his bodilye
presence is weak, and his speech is rude. Let him that is such think on
this wise that as we are in words by letters when we are absente, such are
we in d^des when we are present.

Did I there in sin, because I submitted my self, 2. Cor. 1^.
that ye might be exalted, and because I preached to you the Gospel of God
free? I robbed other congregations and took wages of them, to do you service
with all. And when I was present with you, and had need. I was grievous to no
man. For that which was lackinge unto me, the breethren which came from
Macedonia supplied: and in all things I kept my self that I should not be
greauous to you, and so will I keep my self. If the truth of Christ be in
me, this reioysinge shall not be taken from me in the regions of Achaia.
Wherefore? Because I love you not? God knows. Nevertheless, what I do, that
will I do to cut away occasion from them, which desire occasion, that they
may be found like unto us in that wherein they rejoice.

For what is it wherein ye were inferiors to other congregations, 2. Cor. 12.
except it ^e therein that I was not gr^uous vnt^o you, forgive me this wrong
done unto you. But be it that I greaued you not. Nevertheless I was crafty,
and took you with gu^le. Did I pyl you by any of them which I sent unto you? I
desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus defraude you of any
thing? Walked we not in one spirit? Walked we not in like steps? Again
think ye that we ^xcuse our selves? We speak in Christ in the sight of God.
Behold now come I the third time unto you. In the mouth of ^wo or three
witnesses shall every thing stand.

Our exhortation was not to bring you too error, 1. These. 2.
neither was it in guile, not as though we intended ^o please men. etc. vt
supra. Capitu. 39.

Of the taking up, and visions of the blessed Apostell saint Paul, and of
his perfection in all virtue. Capitu. 69.
I Will come to the visions and revelations of the lord, I know a man in
Christ, 2. Cor. 12.
above. 14. years agone. Whether he were in the body, I can not tell, or
whether he were out of the body I can not tell. (God knows) which was
taken up in to the third heaven. And I know the same man, (whether in the
body or out of the body I can not tell God knows) how that he was taken
up in to paradise, and heard words not to be spoken, which no man can
utter. Of this manne will I rejoice, of my self will I not rejoice, except it
be of mine infir^yties. And yet though I would rejoice, I should not be a
fool: for I would say the truth. Nevertheless I spare, lest any man should think
of me about that he sees me to be, or hears of me, I am made a fool in
boasting^ my self, ye have compelled me: I ought too have been commend^d of
you.

Phi. 4.
I have learned in what so ever estate I am therewith to be content. I can
both humble and cast down my self, I can also exceade. Every where and in
all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungrye, to have
plentye, and to suffer need I can do all things through the help of Christ,
which strengthens me.

Of the multitude of gods mercies unto the Apostle. And of the acts of the
beginning of his conversion. Capitu. 70.
I Thank Christ Jesus our lord which ha^h made me strong, 1 Timo. ^.
for he counted me true, and put me in office, when before I was a ^lasphemer,
and a persecuter, and contumelius. But I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorauntlye through unbelief. Notwythstan^inge for this cause was mercy
given unto me, that Jesus Christ should first show on me all long
patience, unto the ensample of them which shall in time to come believe on him
unto eternal life.

For why ye hard of my conversation in time past, Gala. 1.
in the Jews ways, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church and
congregation of god and spoiled it, and prevailed in the Jews law, abo^e many
of my companyons, which were of mine own nations, and was a much more feruente
mayntayner of the traditions of the elders. But when it pleased Godde (which
separated m^e from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, for to
declare his son by me) that I should preach him among the h^athen,
imm^diatly I comened not of the matter wi^h flesh and blood, neither returned
to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me, but went my ways in to
Arabia, and came again unto Damasco. Then after three year, I returned to
Jerusalem to see Peter and abode with him. 15. days, none other of the
Apostles saw I, but James the Lords brother. The things which I write,
behold, God knows I lie not. After that, I went in to the costs of Siria,
and Cilicia, and was unknown as touching my person, unto the congregation of
Iewrye which were in Christ. But they heard only, that he which persecuted
us in time past, now preaches the fayeth, which before he destroyed. And
they glorified God on my behalf. Then.14. years after I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas and ^ooke with me Titus also.

How humblye the Apostell desires him self and his disciples to be prayed
for. And of certain other his acts. Capitu. 71.
I Beseech you brethren for our Lodre Jesus Christ's sake, Romans 15.
and for the love of the spirit, that ye help me in my business with your
prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from them which believe not in
Iewrye, and that this my service, which I have to Jerusalem, may be accepted
of the saints, that I may come unto you with joy, by the will of God, and
may with you be refreshed.

Prayinge for me, Ephe. 6.
that vtteraunce may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to
utter the secrets of the gospel, where of I am a messenger in bonds, that
therein I may speak freely, as it becomes me to speak.

Pray ye for us, Collo. 2.
that God open unto us the door of vtteraunce, that we may speak the mystery
of Christ. (Wherefore I am also in bonds) that I may utter it, as it becomes
me to speak.

2. These. 3.
Furthermore breethren pray for us, that the word of God, may have free
passage and be glorified, as it is with you: and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and evil men.

Heb. 13.
I desire you therefore somewhat the more abundauntely, that ye so do that I may
be restored to you quickelye. Know the brother Timothe, whom we have sent
from us, with whom (if he come shortelye) I will see you.

1. Cor. 16.
I will come unto you, after I have gone over Macedonia. For I will go through
out Macedonia. With you pe^aduenture I will a bide a while, or else winter,
that ye may bring me on my way whether so ever I goo. I will not see you
now in my passage: but I trust to abide a while with you, if God shall suffer
me. I will tarry at Ephesus until whytsontyde. For a great door and a
fruitful is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. To speak of
brother Apollo, I certifye you, that I greatelye desired him to come unto you
with the brethren, but his mind was not at all to come at this time. How be
it, he will come when he shall have conueniente time and leisure

I call God for a record unto my soul, that for to favor you all, 2. Cor. ^.
I came not any more unto Corinthum. Not that we be Lords over your faith:
but helpers of your joy.

Make speed to come to me at once. 2. Timo. 4.
For Demas has left me, and loves this present world, and is departed unto
Thesselonica. Cressensis gone too Galacia, and Titus unto Damatia. Only Lucas
is with me. Take Mark and bring him with the. For he is necssary unto me, for
to minister. And Lithicus have I setto Ephesus. The cloak y^ I left at Troada
with Carpus when thou come bring with thee, and the books but specially the
partchement. Erascus abode at Corinthum. Trophimos I left at Myletum sick.
Make speed to come before winter.

Titu. 3.
When I shall send Artemas unto the, or Tithicus be diligente to come to me
unto Nichopolis.

Of such persons which in his Epistles he saluted, and were saluted. Capitu.
72.
Romans 16.
Greet Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus, which have for my life
laid down their own necks. Unto which not I only gave thanks, but also
the congregation of the Gentiles. Likewise greet the congregation that is in
their house. Salute my well-beloved Epenetes^ which is the first fruit among
them of Achaia. Greet Marye which bestowed much labor on us. Salute
Andronicus and Iunia my cosyns, which were prysonners with me also, which are
well taken among the Apostelles, and were in Christ before me. Timotheus my
work fellow and Lucius, and Jason, and Sopater my kinsmen, salute you. Caius
mine host and the host of all the congregations saluteth you^ Graseus saluteth
you. etc.

The congregations of Asia salute you, ^. Cor. 16.
Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, and so does all the
congregatyon that is in their house: with whom I am lodged. All the brethren
great you. The salutation of me Paul, with mine own hand. etc.

All the saints salute you. 2. Cor. 13.


Epap^ra^ saluteth you, I bear him record that he has a feruente mind
toward you, Collo. 4.
and toward them of Laodicia, and them of Ierapolis. Dear Lucas the Physician
greeteth you, and Demas. Salute the ^reethren which are of Laodicia, and
salute Nimphas, and the congregation which is in her house.

Epaphras my fellow presoner in Phi. 1.
Christ Jesus, salutethe thee, and Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas my helpers.

^ri^^arcus my prison fellow saluteth you, Collo. 4
and Marcus Barnabas sisters son: touching whom, y^ received
commandments. If he come unto you, receive him, and Jesus which is called
iustus, which are of the circumcision. These only are my work fellows unto the
kingdom of God, which were unto my consolation.

Salute all the saints.

Heb. 13.
Phi. 4.
The brethren which are in Italye salute you. All the saints salute you, and
most of all they which are of the Emperoures household.

The salutation of me Paul, with mine own hand. This is the token in all
epistels. 2. These. 3
So I write. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

The praise and glorification o^ the omnipotent Lord and god. Capitu. 73.
TO him that is of power to stablyshe you according to my Romans 16.
gospel and preaching of Jesus Christ, in vtteringe of the mysterye which
was kept secret sense the world began, but now is opened by the scriptures
of prophesye, at the commandment of the everlasting God, to stir up
obedience to the faith, published among all nations. To the same God which
alone is wise, be praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

God is fayethfull. By whom ye are called. 1. Cor. ^.


Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercy, and
the God of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.
the Lord no doubt is a spirit. And where the spirit of the Lord is, 2. Cor.
3.
there is liberty.

Unto him that is able to do exceadinge abundaundauntelye above all that we
ask or think, Ephe. 3.
according to the power tha^ woorcketh in us, be praise in the congregation by
Jesus Christ through out all generations from time to time. Amen.

Phi. 4.
Unto God and our father be praise for evermore.

Unto God, king everlasting, immortal, invisible, 1. Timo. ^.
and wise only, be honor and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Which will have all men saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth in
Christ. 1. Timo. 2.


Whom when the time is come, he shall show that is blessed, 1. Timo. 6
and mighty only, king of kings, and lord of Lords, which only has
immortalitye, and dwells in light that no man can attain, whom never man
saw, nether can see, unto whom ^e honor and rule everlasting. Amen

One Lord, one fayeth, one baptyme, Ephe. 4.
one God and father of all. Which is above all, through all, and in you all.

FINIS.
Here begynnethe the table, whereby ye may find spedelye all the principal
ma^ters contained in this book.
The tytles.
THe form of salvation. capitu. 1. The thanks geuinge of Paul the Apostle,
for the gifts of grace geeuen of God, to the faiethfull. capi. ^. Of Paul's
orations and prayers for his disciples. ca. 3. Of faith. ca. 4. Of the
defynition, and effects of faith. capi. 5. Of hope. capitu. 6. Of charity and
love. cap. 7. Of fear. capitu. 8. Of humility and against pride. ca. 9. Of the
patience, and tribulations of the elect and ^u^t. capi. 10. Of justice.
capitu. 11 Of prudencye, and of the vice of imprudency. cap. 12 Of wise^ome,
and of the fault of folyshnes. capi. 13 Of obedience. ca. 14 Of pity, and
mercy. cap. 15 Of temperaunce, and sobrietye, and of bodily castigation capi.
19 Agains^e the vices of the flesh. ca. 17 Of fortitude and stability, and of
the constancye of the heart cap. 18 Against couetuousnes, and of liberal^^ye.
ca. 19 Of the obserua^ions of ensamples, and auoydinge of offenses capi. 20 An
exhortation to peace and concord and against dissension and contention. capi.
21 Against teme^arius and inordrdinate judgments capitu. 22 Of spiritual
furtheraunce, and perfection ca. 23 Of just and charitable correption. ca. 24
Of temptation capi. 25 Of prayer ca. 26 Of spiritual gloriation or joy, and
inward consolation. And against vain glory capi. 27 Against loqua^ity and
ydlenes. capi. 28 Of internal reformation, and thanks ^euing, and of certain
spiritual ^xerci^^s, and of the ordinances of al thin^es to the las^e end.
cap. 29 Of original sin, and the transfu^^on th^rof, and of the comparison
of Christ's grace to Adams faule. ca. 30 Of threfolde heuines, laudable,
vi^^perable and indifferente cap. 31 ^n exhortotion to labor for felicity and
beatitude it self capi. 32 Of the dissolutiue desire too be with Christ. cap.
33 ^gaynst ydolatrye. capi. 34 Against diverse vices of men. ca. 35 ^n
exhortation too diverse virtues, and to the acts and deeds of the same ^apitu.
36 Of the Sinagoge, and of diverse gif^^s of grace in time paste given unto it,
and of double cyrcumcysion, ^apitu. 37 Of the church ca. 38 Of the efficacity
and arguments of the ^reachinge of the evangelical law. And of the miracles of
blessed saint Paul the Apostle. Capi. 39. Of the vocation of the gentiles,
and of the exce^ation and blindenes of the Jews, and also of their small
conversion unto Christ. Cap. 40. Of diverse gifts and graces given unto the
church in the time of grace, under and in the time of the evangelical law.
Ca. 41. Yet of the self same matter. And of the comparison of one gift to an
other, and of the use of them, and of the profytte that comes of them.
Capitu. 47. Of the excell^ncye of the supernall graces granted unto the
fayth^ul of Christ, namelye in the prymityue church. Ca. 43. Of
predestynation and the foreknowledge of God Ca. 44. Of the justice of God, and
of the rigor of the divine justice against sinners. Capi. 45. Of the
vnspea^eable m^rcye of God unto mankind, and of Christ's meke redemtion of man.
Ca. 46. Of diverse mysteries of Christ, that is ^f his incarnation, nativity,
humili^ye, pouertye, passion, resurrection, ^pparition, ascension, and
glorifica^ion, and also of the effects of his sa^^tiferus passion. Capi. 47.
That Christ is the head, not only ^f the church militaunt^, but also of ^he
triumphant. And of the mystical ^nitye of the church. And of the ex^ellencye,
and laud of Christ. ca. 48. Of the diuinitye and eminence of the ^nly begotten
son of god. Cap. 49 Of the insufficencye and feebleness of ^he law of Moses,
to save man with (...) faith and grace. cap. 50. Of the perfection and
excellencye of ^he evangelical law above the law written. Capit. 51. Of the
insufficendy and reprobation of the sacrifices of the law. And of the ^fficacye
of the sacryfice of the new law. capi. 52. Yet again of the insufficiencye
and i^perfection of the law. And the cea^inge and layinge down of the things
thereof, in the time of the new law. capi. 53 Of the cessation and end of
circumcision, and other observations of the law, in the time of the
promulgation of the gospel. ca. 54 Of Christ's priesthode, and bishopprike. And
of the excellencye of Melchisedech, which was a figure of Christ, and how
Abraham paid tithes unto Leuy. ca. 55 With what virtues bishops, pries^es and
deacons being within holy ord^rs, ought to be adorned ca. 56 Of the
institution of the communion and how damnable a thing it is too receive it
unworthily cap. 57 How that the which be married, ought to behave them
selves. And of continence of virgins and widows capitu. 58 Of certain
documentes generallye pertayninge to men, women, and wydowes capi. 59 How
paren^es ought to use them selves unto their children, and masters to their
servants. And contrary wise how children and servants must use them
selves to their parents and masters ca. 60 How superioures should use them
selves to their subiec^es. And contrary wise, and of certain documentes
partayninge unto prela^es. And how they should dyuersly instruct diverse cap.
61 Of the spiritual generation of baptime, and that from hence forth, we
ought too depart from sin. capitu. 62 Of the coming of the most wicked
and most falsest Antichrist. And of the day of judgment capi. 63 Of the
general r^surrection that is to come cap. 64 Of faithful probration, and the
diuersiti of resurrection that is to come and of the gifts of the glorified
bodies. ca. 65 Of the feruente charity of S. Paull the Apostle ca, 66 Of the
humilitye, patience, and persecutions of blessed Paul the Apostle cap^u. 67 Of
the exellencye of Paul the Apostles rectitude, and sincerity. cap. 68 Of the
taking up, and visions of the blessed Apostle saint Paul, and of his perfection
in all virtue. cap. 69. Of the multitude of Gods mercies unto the Apostle.
And of the acts of the beginnynge of his conversion. capitu. 70 How humblye
the Apostle desires him self and his disciples to be prayed for. And of
certain other his acts. capitu. 71. Of such persons which in his Epistles
saluted, and were saluted. ca. 72 The praise and gloryfication of the
omnipotente Lord and God. ca. 73.
The Table.
A.
Abraham contrary to hope believed in hope. capi. 4. Abraham dwelt in
tabernacles. ca. 4 Abraham gave tithes to Melchise^ech. capi. 55. Abraham's
belefe was imputed unto him for righteousenes. cap. 4 Abraham's children. cap.
4. Abba father. cap. 42. Abide in the estate that thou art called. cap^. 1^.
Adam was not deceived. cap. 59. the Afflictions of this life, are not to be
compared to the glory that is too come. ca. 32. All things work well unto
them that love God. capi. 7. All sins saving fornycation are without the
body. capi. 17. All things are pure. cap. 20. ca. 35. All things are not
expedient. ca. 20. All things edifye not. ca. 20. All are under sin. cap.
35. All voices have signification. ca. 42. All things work for the best unto
them that love God. ca. 44. All men are liars. ca. 45 All things are become
new. ca. 46 All things are good ^^ap. 46 All things in the law was pourged
with blood. cap. 47. All fulness dwells in Christ. ca. 46. All have sinned.
ca. 50 All things are lawful, but not profitable capi. 50 Alexander the
copper smith ca. 67 A little leven sowrethe the whole lompe of dowe ca. 27 A
new Testamente does abrogate the old. ca. 51 Among who^ the gospel is hidden
ca. 36 Angels are ministering spirits. ca. 49 Antichriste shall sy^te as God in
the temple cap. 63 Antichrist shall be consumed by the spirit of Christ's mouth
ca. 63 Al things are naked unto God ca. 49 the Apostles labor with their own
hands ca. 10 the Apostles were agasing ^tocke unto the world ca. 10 Apply not
the body unto fornication capitu 17^ An oath is an end of all strife ca. 3^
Arm your selves with faith and love ca. ^8 As long as we are in the body, we
are absente from God cap. 4 A ^^ombling ^tone capitu. 4 A servant is the lords
fre man^ ca. 11 A venge not your selves ca. 9 Avoid an here^ike cap. 11 Avoid
vnghostly vanytyes ca. 12 Au^yde folyshe questions ca. 21 Avoid lusts of
youth ca. 36 A willinge mind is accepted recordinge to that a man has ca, 11
B.
Bear the frailnes of the weak. ca. ^5 Bear one an others burden cap. 15 Be
always fervent in a good thing capi. 23 Be a fool in this world ca. 13 Be
rych in hope ca. 6 Be not hie minded ca. 8.9.40 Be not wise in your own eyes
ca. 9 Be not wise in your own opinions capitu. 9. Be not vain gloryus ca. 9
Be not overcome of evil ca. 10 Be innocent as concerning evil. ca. 13 Be
ready to al good works ca. 14 Be merciful one to an other ca. 15 Be not
forgetful to keep hospitality^ capitu. 15. Behave your selves as the ministers
of God ca. 16.36 Be not drunk with wine ca. ^6 Be rich in the works of ye
lord. ca. 18 Be angry but sin not ca. 35 Be not carried with every wind of
doctrine. cap. 18 Be not weary in well doing. ca. 18.32 Be not carried about
with strange learning^. capit. 18 Be content with raimente and fode. capitu.
19. Be rich in good works. ca. 19 Be ready to give. capi. 19 Be not children
in wit but in maliciousnes. capit. 23 Be not ashamed to testifye our Lord
capitu. 23. Be not careful. ca. 27 Be thanefull. capitu. 29 Be not a
worshipper of ydols. ca. 34 Be not wise in your own conceytes. capitu. 40 Be
ready to harbo^r. ca. 41. Beware least any man dec^aue you through
philosophye. ca. 12 By grace we are saved. capi. 43 By the law comes the
knowledge of sin. capi. 50 Bodily exercise profitteth little. ca. 15 a Bishop
and what manner of man he ought to be. cap. 56
C.
Carnal men are carnallye minded. capitu. 12. Cast away the ded^s of darkness,
ca. 32 the Children of wrath. ca. 16.30 the Children of faith are Abraham's
children. ca. 4. Children obey and honor your parents. capiu. 59. Christ came
of the sede of David. ca. 1 Christ rose from death. ca. 1.47 Christ's gospel
is the power of God capitu. 4. Christ is the end of the law. ca. 4 Christ is
to me life. ca. 6 Christ shall fashion our vile bodies like unto his glorious
body. ca. 6 Christ made him self of n^ reputation. cap^t. 9.47 Christ took
upon him the shape of a servant. ca. 9.47 Christ died and rose again, to
be Lord both of the dead and the quick. capitu. 11. Christ speaks in Paul.
ca. 11. Christ the embassidoure and priest of our profession. ca. 12 Christ
is the power and wisdom of God capi. 13 Christ's riches are unsearchable, ca^
1^ Christ was tempted in all points like as we are cap. 25 Christ makes
intercession for us. capi, 26.44 Christ prayed with strong cryinge and tear^s
ca. 26 Christ is in all things ca. 29 Christ damned sin by syn. ca. 30
Christ is our life cap. 32 Christ is preached of diverse diversely capitu. 35
Christ was a minister of the circumcision cap. 37 Christ is the headde of the
church capitu 38.48.58 Christ gave him self for the congregation ca. 38
Christ's blood speaks better then the blood of Abell cap. 38 Christ through
his blood redeemed us capitu. 43 Christ is the head corner stone^ ca, 43 Christ
did put away death ca. eod Christ shall show him self from heaven in flamynge
fire capi^ 4^ Christ rose ^o justify us cap. 46 Christ reconciled us to God
being enemies cap. 46 Christ which knew no sin, has made him self to be
sin for us. ca. eode^ Christ was made a cursed for us. eod Christ has broken
down ye wall. eod. Christ has put out the hand wry^inge that was against us
ca. eo. Christ came in to this word to save sinners ca. eo Christ is the hye
priest of good things to come cap. 47 Christ is the mediatoure of the new
Testament ca. 47 Christ apeared and put sin to flight^ eod^ Christ is a
priest after the order of Melchisedech ca. eod Christ descended and ascended
to fulfill all things ca. eod Christ is above al rule and power. ca. 48 Christ
is the image of the invisible God. ca. 48, 49 Christ is before all things ca,
48 Christ offered him self once for all^ capitu^ 52^ 55 Christ spronge of the
tribe of Judah. capitu. 55 Christ is our hye priest. cap. 55 Christ's descention
from heaven. ca. 64 Christ that in man begins a good thing, shall end the
same. cap. 66 Children of the flesh are not the children of God. ca. 44
Circumcision is nothing. ca. 11. Circumcision and how it avails. ca. ^7
Covetous persons have no inheritance in heaven. ca. 19 Coueteousnes is the
rote of all evil capitu, 19. Coueteousenes is not too be named. capitu. 17.19.
Covetous persons are worshippers of ydols. ca. 17 Comfort the feeble minded. ca.
15 Company not with fornicatours. ca. 17 Continue in prayer. cap. 26 Covet
spiritual. gifts. cap. 42 Cretaines are liars. cap 14 The creatures of god
are good. ca. 25 Crucifye the flesh with the apetites thereof. capitu. 16 A
crown of righteousness. capi. 3^ Cut away occasions. capi. 68
D.
Death is to me a^auntage. ca. 6.33 Death works in us, and life in you
capitu. 10 Death entered by sin ca. 30 Death has no more power over Christ
capit. 62 Death is the last that shall be destroyed. ca. 65. Defraud not thy
brother in barganninnge. ca. 11 Despysers of Moses law were put to death ca. 8
Despise not the chasteninge. ca. 10 Despise the superioures commandments,
and despise God ca. 14 Deacons, and what manner of men they should be capi. 56
Depart from iniquitye. ca. 13 Deny God, and he shall deny the. ca. 11 the Deeds
of the flesh. ca. 17. the Deeds of the law justify no man. capitu. 50.
Diuersyties of bodies ca. 65 Do all your business in love. ca. 7.36 Do nothing
groudgingly, or of nece^^itye. ca. 11 Do all things, honestly ca. 12 Do
nothing parcially ca. 14 Do all things to the praise of god capitu. 29. Do
all things in the name of the Lord Jesus ca. eo Do good to all men ca. 32 Do
all things without murmuring capitu. 36 Do all things unto edifyinge ca. 42
Doers not hearers of the law be iusti^^ed ca. 45 Domes day shall not come
until Antichriste be come capi. 63. Domes day shall come like a thee^e capi.
eodem, Deny all ungodliness capit. 32 Devour not one an other ca. 10 Draw all
one way ca. 21
E.
Ea^e not with couetus men. ca. 35 Enoche was translated cap. ^ y^ Earth that
brings forth thorns must be burnie cap. 11 Esau sold his byrthrighte for
one breakefast capi. 16 ^ternall life is the grace and gift of god ca. 23
Esteem not thy self more then it be^ommeth the ca. 9.48 Esteem other better
then thy self. ^apitu 9. Every manne shall bear his own ^urthen capit. 1^
Every man shall give accomptes of ^im self cap. 22 Every man has not
knowledge ca, 34 Every man shall receive his reward ^ccordinge to his labor
cap. 45 Evil words corrupt good manners ^^pitu. 28 Experience brings hope
ca^ 10 Exhort one an other daily ca. 12 Examyn thy self, and so eat of that
^reade. ca. 57
F.
Fayeth is the way unto grace. ca. 4 Faith and belefe of the hear^e iusti^yeth
capi. eod Faith comes by hearing ca, 4.39 Fayeth by love is m^gh^ye in
opera^ion cap. 4 Faith is the gift of god ca. eod Faith comes not of works
ca. 4 Faith is asure confidence of things which are hoped for ca. 5 the
Faithful are blessed with faithful Abraham ca. 4 Fashion not your selves
like unto the world ca. 29. Fathers move not your children to wrath cap. 60
Fathers ra^e not your children. ca. 60 Fathers must lay up for their children
ca. eodem the Faule of the Jews is unto the gentiles salvation ca. 40 the
Fashion of this world goes away capitu. 36 Feed thine enemy. ca. 15 False
Apostles the ministers of Sa^han ca. 25 Fear to faule in to the hands of god
capitu. 8 Filthy communication ca. 20 Fight the good fight of faith ca. 32
Fire shall try every ma^s work. ca^ 45 the Flesh lus^eth contrary to the
spirit. ca. 16.25 Flesh and bloudde shall not inherit ^he kingdom of God cap.
23 Flee from worshipping of ydols. ca. 34 Fleshly men can no^ please god ca. 17
Follow that which is good ca. 10 Follow the truth in love. ca. 23 Forget not to
do good capitu. 15 Follow ye thou ma^st comprehend. ca. 23 Fornicatours do sin
against their ^wne bodies. ca. 17 Folish questions do ge^der strife. ca. 21 ^he
Fruits of the spirit ca. 23 Fulfill not the lusts of ye flesh ca. 16
G.
Give room unto wrath ca. 9 Give to every man his duty ca. 11 Give your
members servants vnrighteousenes ca. 17 Give no occasion of evil. ca. 20
Give no place unto the devil. ca. 25.35 Give no head to fables ca. 28 Give your
selves unto God ca. 36 Give with singlenes cap. 41 Gentiles offer to devils ca.
34 (...) Gifts of the spirit ca. 41 Gifts of the spirit are diverse. ca. 41
^od cannot lie. ca. 1 God promised eternal life before the world began. cap.
(...) God from the beginning has chose^ us to salvation cap. 2 God has
called us unto hope. ca. 3 God brought our Lord Jesus from death cap. 3.4 God
is rich unto all that call upon him capi. 4 God justifies the heathen
through faith cap. eod God can not deny him self ca. ^o God rewards them
y^ seek him. ca. 5 God raises y^ dead to life again. ca. 6 God is able to
subdue all things to him self ca. eo God is the savior of all that believe
capitu. eodem God loves a cheerful geuer. ca. 11 God gives power to edifye
and not to destroy. ca. ^od God compasses the wise in their folyshenes ca. 13
God quickens all thing ca. 14^ God forgettethe not the work that comes of
love capitu. 1^ God will judge adulterers ca. 17 God gives the increase ca. ^^
God is causer of peace, ca. e^ God shall reward every man occordinge to his
deeds ca. 22 God looks on no man's person, ca. eo God shall suffer no man to be
tempted above his str^ngth ca. 25.45. God has delivered us from the power of
darkness cap. 32 God swear by him self ca. eo God is not ashamed to be calde
our god ca. 33 God has prepared a citi for us ca. eo God g^ueth up sinners to
their hearts lusts ca. 35 God tries the harie cap. 39 God will make a short
word in earth capitu 40 God has wrapped al nations in unbelief. ca^ eo God
woorkethe all things that are wroughte in all creatures ca. 14 God is not
causer of strife ca. 42 God in his church has ordained diverse rulers ca.
41.43 God has anointed us and sealed us capitu. 42 God is rych in mercy ca. 43
God loved us when we were dead in sin ca. eod God raised Christ from death.
ca. 43.63 God called us not according to our deeds, but according too his
grace. capi. 43 God has chosen the foolyshe of the world to confound the
wise. ca. 44 God is faithful ca. eo. God ordained us too walk in good works
ca. eod God works both the deed and the will ca. eo God is not parciall ca.
45 God looks on no man's person. capit. 45.60 God of his righteousenes
recompenseth tribulation to those that trouble us c^pi^. 45 God has made
Christ a seat of mercy cap. 46 God only does iustifye man. ca. 50 God
calls those things that be not as though they were ca. eod God is a spirit
ca. 73 God is able to do exceadinglye above that we ask ca. eod God will have
all men saved ca. eo Gods kindness ledeth to repentance capitu. 22^ Gods word
was committed to the Jew ca. 37 Gods house is the congregation. ca. 38 Gods
husbandrye ca. 39. Gods judgment is according to truth ca. 2^ Godly
livers suffer persecutions. ca. 10 Godlynes has promises of the life that is
now and to come. ca. 15 Godli sorrow causes repentance ca. 31 Godlynes is
great riches ca. 19 Godly edifyinge is by faith. ca. 28 Go forewarde in good
works. ca. 10 Go not too law one with an other. capitu. 22 Glorify god in
body and spirit. ca. 23.41 Glory in infirmyties ca. 27 Grace is more plentuous
then sin capitu. 30 Grace is no grace where works avail ca. 37
H.
Handle the word of truth justly. ca. 11 Halte not out of the way ca. eod Hate
that is evil ca^. 41 Have no fellowship with devils ca. 34 Have peace with all
men ca. 41 Have them in honor that have the ouersig^te of you cap. 60 Heaven
has an enduring substance capitu. 10. He that suffers tribulation is counted
worthy of the kingedome of god capitu. 10 He that provides not for his
household is worse then an infidele. cap. 11 He that resists power resists
god capitu 14 He that praises him self is not allowed ca. 27 He that will not
work should not eat ca. 28 Heretics are to be auoided^ ca. 11 Heresies must
ned^^ be ca. 21 Help those that by any chance are fallen in to any ^aute ca.
15 His servant thou art to whom thou obey^^ cap. 14 Hinder not the gospel ca.
20 Hold fast the word of god ca. 36 Hope is laid up for us in ^^ore in
heaven ca, 2 Hope puts no man to shame^ ca, 6 Hope saves a man ca, eode^
Hope that is seen is no hope ca. eo How the ministers of god should behave them
selves ca. 10 Honor true widows ca. 59 the Husband is the wives head. ca. 58
Husbands love your wyu^s. ca. eo Husbands be not bitter unto your wives ca.
eode^
I.
Jesus the great shepehearde ca. 3 Jesus the a^ctour and finisher of our
faieth ca. 4 Jesus the mediator of the new Te^tament cap. 38 Jesus suffered
without the gate ca, 43 Jesus continues for ever ca. 49 If thou may be free
use it cap. 11 If thou stand take heed thou faule not capi^ 12 If thou be y^
son, thou art heire^ ca. 43. If the rote be holy, the branches are holy ca. 40
If god be on our side, who can be against us. ca. 44. I desire to be with
Christ cap. 33 In man dwells no good thing. ca. 30 In man are two laws cap.
eodem In a great man's house are vessels of gold and wood capit. 44 In the
latter days some shall geeue head to deuilyshe doctrine ca. 25 In Christ
dwells all the fulness of the godheade capi. 48 In two and three witnesses all
things do stand cap. 68 Inobedience brought condempnation on all men ca.
14 It becomes a preacher too speak freelye ca. 70 It became Christ to be
made like unto his breethren capi. 47 It is appointed that men shall once dye
ca. eod It is good for a man not to touch a woman capitu. 57 It is better to
marye then to burn capitu. 58 It is dampnable to break the first says ca.
59 Judge not hastly^ capi. 14 Judge not one an other ca. 22 Judge nothing
until the lord come capitu. eodem Justification comes not by the deeds of the
law but by faith ca. 53
K.
Keep holy day with pureness and truth cap. 29 the Kingedome of god is not
in words but in power ca. 9.28 Kingedome of god is not meat and drink but
righteousness ca. 20 Knowledge makes a man too swell capitu. 7.9, Know not
Christ after the flesh. ca. 13 Know ye not that a little l^uen sowreth the
whole l^mpe of dow ca. 17
L.
Labor with thy hands cap 15 Lay from you that old man capi. 16 Lay hand on
eternal life. ca 32 Lay suddenly hands on no man. ca. 61 Laws are given to the
unrighteous capitu. 35. the Law made nothing perfect. ca. 51 the Law has but
the shadow of good things to come cap. 52 the Law is good if it be used
lawefullye cap. 53. Learn to be content in what so ever estate ye ^e ca. 15.
Let your words be well sauoured with salt capitu. 12 Let not sin reign
in your mortal bodies ca^ ^7 Let not sin have power over you. capitu. 35.
Let us do evil that good may come thereof capi. 45 Let every man have his
wife to avoid fornication ca. 58 Let us eat and drink tomorow we shall dye
ca. 65. Lie not one to an other ca. 35. the Let^er kills ca. 39 Leave father
and mother, and continue with thy wife capi. 38 Live after the flesh and die
ca. 16.17 the Love of Christ passes knowledge capitu. ^, Love fulfylleth the
law. ca. 7 Love thy neighbor as thy self. ca^ 7 Love hurts not ca. ^od Love
without diss^mulation. ca. eode^ Love god and he will know the. ca. eode^ Love
edifieth ca. eo. Love falls never away ca. eode^ Love and his properties ca,
eode^ ^he Lord knows them that are his capitu. 13 Lust not after evil
things. ca. 35. Lust had not ben known but by the law co^ 50.
M.
^ake your bodies a quick sacrifice unto god. cap. 16 Make not provision for
ye flesh. ca. eo. Manne does not what he would but what he would not ca. 30
Man is justified by faith ca. 50. Man when he prays must be bare ^eade
capitu. 59. Man is the image of god ca. eodem Man never saw god ca. 73 Man's
conscience accuses, or excuses capi. 45. Masters threaten not your servant
^api. 60. Malitius and evil speaking corrup^eth good manners capi. 65. Meat
makes us not acceptable to god. cap. ^0 Meat is to be received with thanks
geuinge capitu. 51. a Mediator is not a mediator of one. capitu. 53. Meddle with
your own business ca. 36 Men's sins go to judgment before hand cap. 45 Men
seek their own, and not that whic^e is Jesus Christ's. cap. 66 Melchisedech
king of Salem. ca. 55 Minysters of the altar, are partakers of the alter ca.
^^ Mortif^e the deeds of the flesh and live cap. 16.17 Mortifye your members
which are on the earth ca. 16 Moses was a proper child ca. 5 Moses esteemed
the rebuke of Christ greater riches, then the treasure of Egypt cap. eode
Mount Syna. ca. ^4
N.
Natural men perceive not the things of the spirit ca. 12. Noe through the
arc condemned the world ca. 7 No man knows any thing as he ought to
know ca. 9 No man that is given to God entangleth him self with worldly
business capitu. 11. No man speakinge in the spirit of God defyeth Jesus. ca
34 No man hates his own flesh. ca. 38 No man despises an allowed Testamente
ca. 53 No man but he that is called takes honor upon him capi. 55 Nothing
can depart a man from the love of God capi. 7 Now we se in a glass cap. 32
Nothing is commen of it self. ca. 20
O.
Obey not for fear, but because of conscience cap. 14 Obey them that have the
ouersyght of you capit. 61 Old things are passed away. ca. 46 Old women's
duty and office. ca. 61 One mediator between god and man capitu. 46. O the
abundaunte wisdom of god O the depenesse of the aboundaun^e knowledge of God
ca. 44 Our ablen^s comes of god ca. 6 Our knowledge is imperfect ca. 33 Our
fathers were all baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the sea. ca. 37 Our
reioysinge is the testimonye of conscience capi. 17 Owe nothing to any man but
love capitu. 7.11. Overcome evil with goodness. ca. 10
P.
Patience brings experience. ca. 10 Pass over vain voices cap. 13 Paul was
called too be an Apostle be god ca. 1 Paul was appointed to preach by the
commandment of god ca. 1.43 Paul is not ashamed of the Gospel capitu. 4.
Paul received not the gospel of man but of Christ ca. 4 Paul because he would
not be grievous to any man labourd day and night capi^u. 10.20 Paul a
minister of the gospel. ca. 13. Paul delivered Alexander to Satan capitu. ^4
Paul christened but two ca. 21 Paul was unquieted in ye flesh. ca, 25. Paul
prays night and day. ca. 27 Paul counts all thing as doung^ to win
Christ ca. 3^ Paul was of the tribe of Benjamin capitu. 37 Paul as concerning
the law was a Pharisee. ca. eodem Paul persecuted the congregation capitu
37.70 Paul is in debte to all men. ca. 39 Paul came not to the people in
gloriousnes of words ca. eode Paul preached not with entisinge words ca. eod
Paul saw Jesus Christ ca. 39.47 Paul was no chopper of the word of god cap.
39 Paul was not behind the chief Apostles ca. eo Paul was not r^de in
knowledge. eo Paul exhorted not with gu^le. ca. eod Paul was no flatterer ca
eod Paul cloked no couetuousnes. ca. eo Paul sought not to please men. ca. eo
Paul was diligent to remember the poor ca. 53 Paul withstode Peter. cap. eo
Paul for his brethren wyshed him ^^lfe to be cursed from Christ ca. 66 Paul
made him self servant vnall men cap. eo Paul delited in infirmities. ca.
67.69 Paul was let down in a basket. ca. 67 Paul fulfylleth that is behind of
the passions of Christ ca. 67 Paul was taken up in to the third heaven cap.
69 Paul could do all things through the help of Christ ca. ^ode Paul was
learned to be content both with wealth and woe ca. eo Paul's cloak and his
parchements. ca. 71 Paul's token in all his Epistles. ca. 72 Peace of God passes
all understanding ca. 3 Please thy neighbor unto his edi^yinge c^pitu. 20
Potter has power over the claye capitu. 44. Pray in the spirit capi. 18
Preach the Gospel and live of the gospel capi. 1^. the Preachinge of the
cross capi. 13 Preach the word be it in season or out of season ca. 24.61
Preachers must be sent cap. 39 Priests that rule well are worthy of double
honor. cap. 61.14 Pray with the spirit and with the mind ca. 26 Pray
continually ca. 26.36 Pray lifting up your hands without wrath ca. 26 Pray for
kings and for all that are in auctoritye cap. eo Power comes of god ca. 14.
Provide for honest things cap. 12 Put on the Lord Jesus ca. 17.32 Put on the
armur of light ca. 18.32 Put not a stomblynge block in thy brothers way cap.
20.22 Put away childishnes ca. 23 Put away lyinge and speak the truth cap. ^8
Put on the new man cap, 29 Put of the old man with his works capi. eod. Put
away all maliciousnes ca. 35 Put away ^ilthye communication. capitu. 35. Put
on ^^nder mercy ca. 36 Put not thy wyf^ from the. ca. 38
R.
Raab the harlote ca. 5 Rebuke the works of darkness. ca. 24 Rebuke not an elder
ca. ^od Rebuke the sinful openly. ca. eo Rec^aue the weak ca. 15. Receive not
the grace of god in vain capitu 23. Recompense not evil for evil. ca. 10
Redeem the time ca. 12 Rejoice not in men ca. 20.27 Rejoice in tribulation ca.
27 R^ioyce in God cap. 27.13 Rejoice in the cross of Christ. ca. 27 Remember
them that are in bonds capitu 15. the R^ward of sin is death ca, 17 Reward
to him that works is recken^d of du^ye ca. 50. Repr^ue t^em with modes^y that
resys^e the truth cap. ^4 Righteousness is opened by says capitu 4.50. Rich
men saul in to many noisome lusts cap. 19 the Rote of Ie^^e ca. 40.
S.
Sacrifices which please god ca. 15. Sacrifice of law is the ^rute of ou^e
lips ca. 29 Satan fashioneth him self in to an Angel of ligh^e ca. 25.
Sara through fayeth was delivered of a child ca. 23 Seek not thine own
profyt^e ca. 7 Seek an other man's wealth ca. eo^ Seek the profitie of many ca.
20 Seek not for a wife cap. 58. Seek the things which are above capitu. 32.
Servants of sin are not under righteousenes ca. 11 the Servant of the
Lord must inform them that resyste the truth^ capitu. 36 the Servant of
the Lord must not strive ca. eo Servants obey your masters. capitu. 60.
Servants must^ count they^ mas^ers worthy of all honor ca. eo^ Ser^auntes
ought not to answer again. ca. eod Scripture is able too make a man wise
unto salvation ca. 12 Scripture given by the inspiration of God is profitable
to teach, to improve ca. 13 Show mercy with cherfulnes. ca. 41 Sinners have
pleasure in them that sin capi. 35 Sin was not regarded as long as there
was no law cap. 50 Sow spiritual things and reap carnal cap. 11 Sow
little and reap little. ca. eod Sorrow not for the deadde without hope capi.
31 Spiritual men discuss all things capitu. 12 Speak evil of no man ca. 14
Speak all one thing ca. 21 Stir up the gift^ of God which is in the ca. 23
Study to be quiet ca. 36 Strive not about words ca. 21 S^and not in thy own
consaite. ca. ^5 Swell not one against another. ca. 21 Submit your selves to
the auctority of the hier powers ca. 14. Submit your selves one to an other in
the fear of god capi. 8 Suffer affliction ca. 32 Suffer to gether and be
glorified together ca. 42
T.
the Tabernacle, and what was contained in it cap. 37 Take heed to thy office
ca. 12 Tame and bring the body in to sub^ection. capi. 15 Teach and take heed
to thy doctrine capitu. 41. Tempte not Christ cap. 25 The feblest members are
most necessary cap^ 41 The earnest of our inheritance. ca. 43 The word of
the preacher is the word of God ca. eod The wrath of God against ungodliness
cap. 45 The word of god is not bound ca 47 They that faule can not be renewed
unto repentance ca. ^^ There be that rejoice in the face and not in the heart
cap. 27 The things which god has prepared for them that love are unspeakable
cap. 3^ There is but one God in the world capitu. ca. 34 There is not one that
does good ca. 35 They confess God and in deeds deny him. ca. eo They shall be
damned that believe not the truth capi^ 63 They that study to please men are
not the servants of Christ ca. 67 Things written are written for our
learning ca. 6 Things seen and not seen, ca^ 13 the Time goes away ca. 36
a Testament takes auctor^^y by the death of men cap. 47. To Abraham and his
seed were the promyses made ca. ^3 Translate the priesthode, and translate the
law ca. 55. Transgression receaueth a just reward^ ca. 14 Treasure in ear^hen
vessels ca. 13 Tribulation brings patience ca. 10 Trust not in uncertain
riches. ca^ 19 Tribulation preparethe for us an eternal waygie of glory cap.
3^ To the defiled nothing is pure, ca^ 35 Trust not in your selves, but in god
capitu. 6. True circumcision capi. 37
U. W.
Walk worthy of our Lord in all good works ca. ^ Walk circumspe^tlye ca.
12 Walk not in vanitye of the mynd^ ^apitu. 16 Walk as children of light ca.
23 Walk honestlye cap. 3^ Walk worthy of God ca. 23 Walk worthy of your
vocation capitu. 36. Walk in a new life ca. 63 Wast not thy brains about
questions ca. 9 Warn the unruly. ca. ^4 Watch and be sober ca. 16 Wait on
thy office^ ca. 41 Want^n widows cap. 59 We should swym in love one to an
other ca. 2 We are justified by faith cap. 4 We preach not ye and ^ay ca. eod
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing cap. 6 We are made
the of scouring of all things ca. 10 We wrestle not against flesh and
blood ca. 18 We brought nothing in too the world cap. 19 We know not what
to pray for as we ought ca. 26 We seek for a city y^ is to come. ca. 32 We
look for the deliverance of our bodies capi. 33. We are members of Christ's
bodi. ca. 38 We are of the household of God. ca. 43 We must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ cap. 54 We are all one in Christ ca. 48 We are
buried with Christ by baptym^ ca. 62 We shall be changed in the twin^kel^nge
of an eye ca. 65 Women through ^ayeth received their dead raised to life
again. ca. 5 Women array your selves in comelye apparel ca. 26 Women must pray
covered ca. 59 Women were created for man's saks capi 59 Wemens hear is given
them to cover them with all ca. ^odem Women must keep silence cap. eo Women
must be under obedience. eod Women must learn of their husbands. ca eode
Women may not teach men ca. eo^ Women through bearinge of children shall be
saved cap. eodem a Woman is bound to the man as long as he lives ca. 50 the
Woman was deceived not Adam capitu. 59 What so ever is not of faith is sin
capitu. 4. the walls of Ierico cap. 5 What company has light with
darkness? ca. 1^ What so ever a man sows that shall he reap ca. ^od What
Godly^ sorrow causes. ca. 31 When they counted the^ selves wise, they became
fools. ca. 34 Where the spirit of God is, there is liberty ca. 73 Who is
sick and I am not sick. ca. 67 Without fayeth it is impossible too please god
ca. 5 Who shall separate us from the love of god ca. 7 Who goes a warfare at
his own cost. cap. 11 Who knows the mind of the lord capitu 13.44 Who
shall deliver me from this body of death ca. 33 Wylt thou be without feare^ do
well capitu. 8. Wylful sinners have ^o sacrifice for sin ca. 8 Whom the Lord
loves him he chasteneth ca 10 Woe to me if I preach not. ca. 11 Work pour
own salvation ca. 8 the Wisdom of the flesh is Gods ^nemye ca. 12 be wise
unto that which is good ca. 13 the Wisdom of this world is but foolishenes
c^. ^o the Will of god is that ye should be holy ca. 16 Wives love and fear
your husbands ca. 58. Wydowes that live in pleasure are dead ca. 59. Works of
good wydowes ca. eod Wordlye sorrow causes death ca. 31 Wrappe not your selves
in the yoke of bondage ca. 54 the Word of god is quick and sharp capitu. 49.
Wythdrawe your selves from those that work inordinately ca. 20
U.
Uessels of mercy ca. 40 Uessels of wrat^ prepared to damnation ca. 44 Uessels
of mercy prepared unto glory cap. eod the Uisible things of God are known by
the invisible ca. 13
Y.
Ye are the temple of the living god capitu. 11.41. Ye are dearelye boughte.
23.41. Ye ye, nay nay capi. 28. Ye are not yonr own cap. 41 Ye have not
received the spirit of bondage, but of adoption ca. 24 Y^ are justified
freelye by the grace of God. capitu. 46.
Here ends the Table.
FINIS.
IMPRYNTED at London, by John Tisdale, and are to be sold at his shop in the
upper end of Lombarde s^rete in All. hallowes chuchyarde nere unto grace
church. 1562.


