THE POPES COMPLAINT TO HIS MINION CARDINALS, AGAINST THE GOOD success of the
BOHEMIANS and their general Proceedings.

()

Non pacem petimus superi,
Date gentibus iras:
Nunc vrbes excite feras,
Coniuret in arma mundus.
Lucan: Lib. 2. Pharsal: The Speakers Names:
Pope PAVLVS QVINTVS, A Burghesian: BVRGHESIVS CAESARIO ROMANO
Cardinals. A Dominican FRIAR: PASQVILL.
Strangulat inclusus dolor atque exaestuat intus:

Ovid. tristib: Lib. 5.
THE POPES COMPLAINT to his Cardinals against BOHEMIA.
POPE. O My Caesario! what shall we do now?
Since men dare thus our Proiects disalow:
Deride our Cursses, and make slight our Power,
Scoff at Religion, as if now the hour
Were come indeed to pull down Babylon,
For so our City Rome they rail upon.
They will no more our Indulgences have,
Nor Trentals, Dirges, Masses, do they crave:
They laugh at Purgatoryes flames and fire,
Deny our Merits, only do desire
Salvation from the Passion of our Lord,
And all Our Canons are by them abhord:
To hear the Aue Bell is made a sport,
Unto Confession none will scarce resort,
So that I fear, of Christian libertines
We Atheists shall become, by outward signs:

Caesario. Your Holiness has told a grievous tale,
Made faint my heart, my bloodles cheeks look pale,
I quake to have You thus affrighted be;
And yet there is no cause, for ought I see.

Pope. No cause Caesario, why? I then begin
To tell the cause: what care I for their sin?
Or whether men in world live ill, or well:
Or whether dying, go to Heaven or Hell?
Whether that Princes swell with heat of pride,
Or do make hateful wars on every side?
Whether whole Countries subjugate each other?
Deny the Faith, and all their vices smother?
So we do hold Supremacy secure,
Have certain ways our Annuals to assure,
Keep them in awe, that dare withstand our Curse,
Blessing the means which do enrich our Pursse:
So we our Glory and delights maintain,
Or else, what has been done is all in vain.

Caesario. Why so ye do: who dare oppose your Plea?
Who sends not for Blessings to your Sea?
Who is not correspondent to your Will,
Seeking your Holy pleasure to fulfill?
Except some scatterd Lutherans of late,
As Malcontents for their deboist Estate,
Some scambling Scismaticks, penurious fools,
A few of Heretics in wrangling Schools,
A common trick of Satan's for contention,
As in all times the Church has had dissension:

Pope. Some few! Aye me, how can you say some few?
When that whole Kingdoms (as it is too true)
Have thriued in reuolts from our designs,
And packing sent our Legates and Assigns:
Who cares in England for our threats or hate?
Scotland is worsse in matters of debate,
In Ireland our Priests are made a pray,
The other Northern Kingdoms keep away:
France is our eldest Son, but what can France
Do against him self, our Power to advance?
The Netherlands Triumph for Their rejection,
And from their native Princes seek annection
To other Sovereignty, and never again
Will once obey, or Austria or Spain:
But of all others, Cursed be that proud Town,
Proud of a Fennish Lake to bear Us down:
And as they think, impregnable to stand, Geneua.

Scorn all the Forces that may come by Land:
These led the Dance, and these do boast of Time
Three hundred years ago, that all their Clime,
The Zwitzers, Cantons, and the Grisons have
Sought our Religious Orgies to deprave:
And so by them was Wicklife taught to stray,
And the Waldenses took the wronger way:
Then followed Hierome, and Bohemian Husse,
And other Satanists, who did discuss
Against our good Discipline, and made a breach
By German Factions, as their Church did teach:
So that a Province I can scarce now name,
Who as Aposta^t incur not defame:
But never had the Devil such a trick,
That struck it home, and touched us to the quick:
To raise a Friar to withstand a Prince!
O God how Luther dared not long since
Our mighty Charles affront unto his face,
And against our Sea proclaimed all disgrace?
But more then these? the Grecian Church complains,
That they are poor, and we have all the gains.
They live deprest, we do usurp their pride,
They were the first, we triumph on each side.
So they had rather live in servitude,
Then for the Latins any way conclude.

Caesario. If it be so, rowse up your Holiness,
And be the same you do your self profess,
Peter's successor, both to bind and loose,
Open the Churches Treasure, and out-choose
Your Bulls, your Cursses, Fulminations,
With all those Maledicting Relations,
That have in former times kept Kings in awe,
And made the Empire subject to your Law.

Dominicke. With Reverence unto the Papacy,
(And awful care to Peter's Legacy)
Let a poor Friar open now his mind,
For well I see there much remains behind:
Alas, alas, what now will Cursses do?
Or Bulls, or Threatenings? If they all put to
Their helping hand, more then in former times,
To make a scoff at our poor Friars Rimes?
Not long ago, we did begin with Spain,
Both Son and Father we thought to restrain: Charles. 5.

But for the Father, Burbon sacked our City,
Teaching the Cloistred Nuns to cry for pity,
The Matrons, Virgins, wrung their hands for ruth,
To see such rauishments of chastest Youth,
Yea, all both sorts and sexes did lament
Those foul outragies, to their discontent:
And for the Son durst Aluas Duke control,
The Conclaue and the Pope him self, whose soul Phillip. 2.

He baited, hunted with strong inference
Of Pastoral duties, and more consequence
Of humane clemency, religious Zeal,
Humbled regard, and after did appeal
To Jesus Christ himself against that Curse,
That made the Armies, and the Cause the worsse:
And this was all we got by our fine skill;
Which they call Tyranny, as others will
Disclaim the like: For when our Father had
That Prince of Princes, so reputed bad,
That great Elizaheth out of the Church
With Menaces cast, we fell in the Lurch:
She as a Rock immovable did stand,
And all our Priests were hated in her Land:
Yea, other Princes from their strong Alliance,
Prepared to withstand our strange defiance.
Come nearer home! what did our Threatening work,
But rowse the sleeping Lion, who did lurk
Cowchant before, and by St. Mark his Charm
Resolved was to do us no great harm:
But when we would not so appeased stand,
He Panther-like opened his stronger hand,
And showed his Tallents, when within his reach,
The Prey was come: so Venice made a breach
Against our Walls: Yea, hilly Sauoy dare
To counterchecke our Discipline not spare,
And therefore sure when we are thus withstood,
These Bulls and Fulminations do no good:

Burghesius. Then do as Peter's vision bids us,
Both kill and eat, what need we more discuss?
If mansuetude cannot confirm our Sat,
Let slaughters on each side quench the debate:
Some, either love or money will persuade;
Or hope of Bliss, such Tyrants to invade:

Dominick. O say not so; this makes us odious,
And is against Religion dangerous:
Look into holy Writ, and you shall find,
How Regicides have still been cast behind,
The Captains, that killed Ishbosheth, were slain,
And he which fell on Saul, lied all in vain:
Thus of the rest: But come to later times,
Was not stout Nassaus murders counted Crimes? Prince of Orange.

Revenged with punishment, abhorred with hate,
And made a cause of malice, and debate?

What got we by those Henry's of France,
Killed by our Iacobines, whom to advance
With Saint-like honor, Rome did nothing spare?
But then alas, the Princes did declare
Upon the same, our enemies professed:
The Hugonites grew strong, and did detest
Such cruelty, yea with Inuectiues durst
For that foul Sin; hold Rome herself accursed.
And as for England, as of late was seen,
The strange Attempts against that peerless Queen
(For so I needs must say, how e're we know
She was seduced another way to go:)
Affected with Remorse, such as so wrought,
That Catholics themselves, e'ill of Us thought.
But when I once the Powder Treason name,
I do protest, I tremble at the same,
And must confess the Devil disappointed,
By such a Stratagem against Gods anointed.
For how so ere Kings in Religion fail;
Yet Cyrus is Gods servant to prevail
In his designs, and they Vicegerents are
For good or bad, to manage all his war:
Nay come to Friar Paul of Venice State,
Whose Life so many ways was sought of late:
It makes me think upon the stubborn Jews,
Who Paul's good Doctrine did so much refuse,
That Vows were made to kill him in the way,
But he prevented them: Thus, thus I say
To kill will do no good, but cause the Foe
More stronger with an armed Guard to go,
And raise a Scandal on your Fatherhood,
Tearming the Cardinals the Serpents brood,
That have no better means the Truth to teach,
But Lessons of foul Murder still do Preach:
Romano. Then let us do as Machabans did,
When the poor Jews were in the Mountains hid,
For fear of proud Antiochas: take Arms,
Rowse up our Courages with warlike charms,
Summon our Friends, open our Treasures store:
Advance the Churches Standard, and before
The Armies Catholic with Blessings go,
These Caitiffe Heretics to overthrow.

Dominick. This sauors better then the former twain,
For this is Manly, Princely: Yet again
How shall we thus preuailingly proceed,
When our own Countries are not well agreed?
It is not now, as when our Innocent
Did tread upon the Dragon, and was bent
To sommon Frederick to Romes high Throne,
Where that that his Holiness as on a Stone,
Did set his Foot upon the Emperors neck,
The proudest Monarchies to counterchecke!
It is not now, as when three Days together,
Henry the Third (though Caesar) in foul weather
Did Bare-leg wait with his Empress and Son,
Even at your Palace Gate: Men then begun
To reverence the Church, and durst not stray,
From true Religion the wronger way:
It is not now, as when our Pandulph came
To Englands John, and taught him a strange Game
Of poor Submission, least French Lewis might,
Dismiss him of his Dignity, and Right!
It is not now, as when Henry the Fifth.
That Germane Prince, his Father durst out Lift
From the Imperial Seat at your behest,
And raisd such Armies, when you did request!
It is not now, as when that you Deuisde
For Millaine, Naples, and great State premisde
For Charles of France, so dear to Peter's Chair,
So Loving, Careful, True, and Debonaire;
That he brought down his Troops to Us amain,
And surely meant the Empire to regaine,
When of Constantinople he was Crowned
Chief Emperor, and so most Warlike found
Against your then supposed Foe: Until
That Pauies Battle wrought a fatal ill!
It is not now, as when the Priests and Friars,
Stuck to their Beads with limited Desires,
And went no further then a motion,
To stir up men to true Devotion,
Were not transcendent in their Practices,
Nor past themselves in Foreign extacies:
For on my Soul, If ever Rome had cross,
Or Subject must be unto greater loss:
It is the stirring Jesuits that wrought it,
And they as Clergy polliticks have sought it.
Good GOD what has Religion to do
But with Religion, men to stir and woo
To Holy duties, Sanctity of Life,
Penance for sin, to Cure debates and strife,
To save the Souls of such as go astray
Like silly Ignorants the wronger way.
So that I know not, as the Case now stands,
But Mischief is on foot in Christian Lands:
And to my fear I speak when you make trial,
The end will be our Scorn, or worse Denial.
You send to Albert, as a Grandsires Son,
Not doubting but an Uncles name has won
Much of regard: An answer soon is made,
He Lives and Dies under the Austrian shade,
But alas for him! These Flemmish Burgers range
As far as Cleue, and stand in every Grange,
Strong in their Courts of Guard, and will not yield
To give him way in any Town, or Field.
You send to France, why France is scarce her own,
The Protestants then Catholics are grown
More strong, and such are their Great Princes Power,
That no man knows against them at this hour
Who may prevail: but only this is plain,
They cannot spare a man to go in vain:
You send to Phillip Catholic, and Son,
Who has so many Crowns, and Countries won,
But how shall they be kept on Head secure
Without great force? and how shall he endure
To raise a foreign Army for your sake,
That was compeld a sudden Peace to make
With your worst friends? Expect not aid from thence
Sufficiently to further your pretense:
You send to Pole, has Pole no Wars in hand
With Turks, with Swenes, or with the neighbor Land?
And are you sure the Passages are free,
Silesia's Gates, and Countries opened be?
Is not Lusatia shut, Morania gone,
And how can Poles relief be hoped on?
Except some straggling Cosacks here and there,
As of all Nations you the like may hear:
As for the Cantons, Swisse, and Grisans stout,
It is but folly for to go about
Their succor's more then Mercenary pay,
And so to either side they make their way:
I need not name your Principates about ye,
Nor other Provinces that are without ye,
Of whom some watch the Turk, some are at jarre
Amongst themselves, some for to raise a War
Have little means, less men, and lesser mind,
And so must prove unto your Sea unkind.
But in a word, the Princes are so strong
Of this last Union, that the meanest Wrong
Done unto one, is done unto another,
A Brother cannot better love a Brother.

Pope. Then it should seem, we shall let all alone,
And sigh, and weep, and cry, lament and groan:
Pule at this outrage, kiss the scourging Rod,
And only like a Child, cry out O GOD!
Give way to Rumor, and with Patience,
Bear the report of Shame with feeling sense.
One day does bring us news, that Bohem Dare
Against their Emperor themselves declare;
Rejecting Austria, as it were in scorn,
Forsaking Us, as if we were forlorn:
Another Day reports, the Palatine,
With other Lutherans a League combine
That traytorlike have Crowned him a King
Against his Sovereign, and Encomions sing
For many good successes, as they thrive
In warlike Stratagems, and do contriue
To raise more Forces, send abroad to Friends,
Proposing stranger things for stranger ends.
Bohemia has a Prince borne in the Town,
The Wars prevail, their Foes are beaten down,
Our Ferdinand does Droope, Vienna stands
As in a maze, folding their Arms and hands.
The people throng in heaps and flock a pace,
In every Town, to hearken our Disgrace:
Bucquoy is beaten, and Dampire is fled,
the Polish Cossacks they are slain and Dead:
The Troops are overcome, and in the Field
Two thousand lost, Four hundred they did yield,
Anholt and Mansfuld, had a glorious Day,
Besides reuolters, who still run away,
And leave their Prince to serve a Strangers turn,
Oh that consuming Fire might them burn!
But here is not all: for now to Vex us more,
Then either they, or We thought of before,
They look for Aid from Britain, Horse and Foot,
With vnbeleeued Sommes of Gold to boot:
Which London Heretics of their free Gift,
For to disburse with Largenes have made shift:
Nay when they hear Religion is the Cause,
They flock amain without or stop or pause:
But when they talk of Romes great overthrow?
They clap their hands for Joy, and so do show
Their Hate to Us, wishing no other War
Nor recompense for all their Coin: Thus far,
These heavy headed Dutch have wrought their ends,
And do increase, as we decay in Friends.

Caesario. Then I perceive it needs must end with blows,
And if success attend: Our Lady knows
To what a mountain of foul Prodegies,
Their Pride may rise to with their Victories.
But are you sure the Emperor has sent
For succor into Spain, as it was meant,
Rather to break off Peace and Leagues with all,
Then see the Austrian Diadem to fall,
And this me thinks your Holiness might move
By special Embassy, and so reprove
Their great retardance, which has given them leave
Refractary to grow, as I conceive:

Dominicke. Then you conceive amiss, nor are you wise,
To make your Passion author of advise,
Greatest Designs attend on Circumstance,
And sauerie Policy must them Advance:
For if he start from England, as it stands,
Or break the League with Hollands Netherlands,
How can He all these turns supply together,
Or keep his Navy safe, from raging weather?
Whereas to temporise and to renew
A stronger League by Peace, this may ensue,
That all those Forces, which he well can spare
With so much Treasure, as his Princely care
May husband for this purpose, shall be sent
Unto the Imperial Towns incontinent:
Then with some more Security they may
From Naples, Millaine, Sicell, March away
Those trained Garrisons, filling their rooms
With other Spaniards, and new come Grooms:
Yet take you heed, this can but once be done,
And that is well ended, which is well begun:
But mark their Passages so hard to find,
As Swisse and Grisons prove to them unkind:
(For if your Holiness wish for a Brother,
No way but this: You cannot name another)
From Millaine to Vienna must they go,
Over five Mountains full of Ice and Snow,
And in the Summer, which is strange to tell,
It is not for their Marches half so well:
Yet in extremes there is no remedy,
Patience bears out the greatest extacy.
Well let them go, health and good Spirits guide them,
And all the Saints of Heaven go beside them:
For I am sure, whether they March or Troop,
The third man in the Travail needs must Droope.

Burghesius. Then holy Sir your Legate send to France,
Who cannot but this Cause as much Advance,
Or rather more: For France is eldest Son
Unto our Rome, and should with ease be won.

Dominick. Are you a Conclauist, and know no more,
Of France her State? you might have heard before
That Condyes Prince, and others of esteem,
Would with their bloods Religion redeem;
And stand against all Edicts upon their Guard,
Hoping at last to have a good award:
Yet for all this has Ferdinando Writ,
(How ever Bolloigne did mislike of it:)
That some Commander might him Forces bring,
With love and liking of the youthful King,
Nor did he thus, as barely, without charge:
But in good Terms declare his mind at Large.
Most Noble Prince remember Charles the Great
Supported Rome, and got the Imperial Seat:
As of the Church only Protector called,
Which was by Goths and Saraceus enthralled,
And thereupon is France the eldest Son,
And for true valor has such honor won:
Then be not now to Catholics unkind,
But let us your Relief as Princely find.
A second Inference he had from Blood,
Which seemed amongst the Statists near as good:
The Emperor was Uncle to the Queen,
As may within the Records well be seen:
This he enforst from bond of Amity,
Arising out of Consanguinitie.
A third was Moral, from protection
Of other Princes in rejection,
Oh for to help distressed, is a glory,
As you may read in many an ancient Story.
The fourth had ground upon good Policy,
Of just revenge to scourge iniquity:
Reuolts I mean, and disobedience
To lawful Kings, from a strong inference
Of Treason in their soul enormous Crimes,
As has appeared in all modern Times:
The fifth was taken from a Holy fear,
Turk might of these troubles hear,
And so the youth of Othoman awake,
Advantages of our Distress to take,
And then no doubt they might repent too late,
That e're they durst the Austrian house amate.

Burghesius. And was not this well Urged? nay was it not
A president for Princes to have got,
Of excitation against so great a Foe,
That sure will work more mischief and more woe?
If Poland heard of this, or Russis,
If Denmark, Pomeran, and Persia,
If Triple Crowned Britain knew it sure,
He would the same as forcible endure:
If Venice, Sauoy, Florence, and the rest
Were taught this Lesson, they would count it best:
Yea even the Cantons and the Snowy Vales,
Could not repute it as some old wives Tales:
But for the Good of Christian Nations,
The League make strong by Combinations.

Dominick. I do confess it has some outward show
Of a preualent Reason: But on to go
The dogged Duke of Bolloigne, as I hear
To Burbon and the rest a Dangerous Peer,
Has answered all: Retorting Argument
To Austria, thus of greater Consequent.
Touching the First: Religion is no Plea!
Nor Ferdinand, did so affect our Sea:
But even the Catholics of best esteem,
Were still enforst their Freedoms to redeem*
Affrighted were with Cruelties, and Pride
Of Austrias house extended on each side,
Found Great Mathias stern, this man too heady,
Unconstant, Cruel, and in Truth unsteady:
And now they live under this Nouelist
More quiet far, as doing what they list.
The second with like reason Answer had:
The greatest Monarchies (though never so bad)
Were Fathers of their Kingdoms, and to look
Unto their Subjects Peace, which they forsook
As Tyrants, if they brought them to a War
Against their wills, of peril, or too far:
And how could France dilacerate her State;
Empty her Treasure at so great a rate,
Send Forces to a Foreign Prince, and leave
Her Native children? This were to bereave
Them of their dearest Lives: For why at home,
Mischief enough in every Town did rome.
Besides, unto Bohemias King there is
So great Alliance, if I do not miss,
That never Prince in any Age had more,
Nor could Catalogue such a Role before:
Great Britain by his Daughter calls him Son,
Denmark and Norway on his side are won:
The one an Uncle, as is Brunswicke known,
The other as a Friend with Sweden grown:
The Prince of Orange is so near in Blood,
That I am sure he will do him any good.
His other Kindred come from Brandenburgh,
With many a Count and Duke of Wittenburgh,
I name not Bolloigne, nor Confederates
With many Princes in their best estates,
Nor do I twenty Provinces recite,
With all their Lords of full sufficient might,
Who are his own: so that (if Reason yield)
They must be drawn into the bloody Field.
As for the third, the matter that does drive
The Mill, does drown it: For if you contriue
The Argument from former charity,
Or Laws of Nations loving amity,
To aid distressed Princes: then has France
Far less to do the Austrians to advance,
Then help the Palatine: For who knows not,
When they had news of both our Henry's got
And of their murders, they did laugh out right,
As if they meant remonstrance of despite:
And when Duke Neuers to Mathias went,
They with a scornful Answer home him sent,
Bidding young Lewis look himself about him,
And no way meddle with the things without him:
For why, the Message had relation
Unto the concord of each Nation?
As for the Palatine, he friendly stood,
And with great sommes of Money did them good:
Therefore if that the succourlesse have aid,
To help Bohemia they are well appaide.
The fourth did no way fasten well together,
For Treason or reuolts (even choose you whether)
Were different in States Elective, and
Such as by Claim of Heritance did stand,
Nor was the Austrian house enfeoft so sure
Unto the Empire, but it might endure
Fraction of nombers: As for President,
They have example of great consequent:
First France the Western Monarchy possessed,
How e're the Germans could it not digest:
Then they contrived a strong Election
Conditional in the reiection:
Nor is it News an Emperor to have,
From other German Princes laid in Grave,
And so has Hungar and Bohemia
Had Kings at once, though not of Austria,
And therefore this had poorest Inference,
As having to that Crown a reference;
So that to name Reuolts in such a case
Upon the scanning would the cause Disgrace.
As for an Interceding, which they bring,
That Ferdinand was chosen once their King,
Compulsion they do Answer is no Law,
And then the Faction kept them all in awe:
So that it was not orderly contrived,
But soon Reuersde by such, as now suruiu'd.
The last was weakest of them all: The Turk
Would by this means all Europe set on work:
Nay said the Bolloigne Duke, if it be so,
There is no sense against the King to go.
For then the Wars must needs protracted be,
And greater troubles we shall daily see:
The only way our strength for to Increase,
Is for the Emperor to ask a Peace,
And with the King of Boheme to Combine
A League of amity, or else resign,
As from the First, unto Election
Of the Seven Princes, whose connection
May well, if all State matters so dispose,
As perfect Friends be made of greatest Foes:
Thus writ the Duke, and savor how it list,
How er'e your Holiness may think he mist,
As not acquainting Rome with these events,
Yet wrought it to the People great contents.

Romano. Rather then thus: even I my self will go
To Turk and Tartars for their farther woe:
What, shall our Father and the Church submit
To Traitorous Heretics? We Will none of it:
But raise up Strangers to defend our cause,
To understand our Canons and our Laws,
To break the neck of contumacious pride,
And whip these drunken Scismaticks beside:
And if the Goths were called The Scourge of God,
We Will bruise them with a Mahumetan Rod.

Dominick. Come, this is frency and no policy,
No Zeal, religion, nor morallity:
Because a finger aches, we therefore cut
The whole hand off, and so still foolish, put
The body unto cauterising pain,
As having greater cause still to complain:
For thus have Kingdoms lost their siberty,
And subject been unto captivity.
Britain for succor sundry Nations called,
Who in their several times their freedoms thral'd,
The barbarous Irish went for Dermonds Rape
To Englands King, and so they did not escape*
The Grecian Empire called Strangers in,
Who presently did all their Countries win:
Yea Spain has felt the like, when Julian Count,
In recconing up disgraces, did surmount
In his revenge about his Daughters cross,
When by the Mores it had so great a loss.
And this will be the end of Turkish aid,
Nay, in my soul I further am affraide*
That Rome shall feel their tyranny far worsse
Then any War, or Heretics foul curse.

Pope. Yet something must be done; shall we give way
To all these Treasons, and not once assay
To add a Cataplasme unto this wound,
Which will the body of the Church confound?
Shall we let Ferdinand be thus abused,
And Spain dispis'd, when Austria is refused?
No sure, if God help not, the Devil must,
If ever man, or skill, or Art did trust.

Dominicke. O say not so, your Holiness may take
A calmer course, and all extremes forsake:
Dismiss the bloody Iesaits from hence,
With all strange Projects do your self dispense,
Abstain from murders, cruelties and rage,
Do not the Church exotickly engage,
But send abroad some holy Priests of Name,
Who may with quietness discourse their blame,
Dispute with reason, and religious care,
Teach them, of foul Damnation to beware,
Plead out for Conscience, and true love of God,
Who else will whip them with a scourging Rod:
Urge their obedience unto Kings of worth,
Whose Government such proffit brings forth
Of Peace and Plenty, that what e're befall,
They do Religious Zeal profess in all:
O it is a comfort, When that men be wrought
By gentleness to God, and so are taught
To yield by Love, and not for slavish fear,
Which makes but temporising, and does bear
Two faces in one hood: Therefore dear Sir
Be ruled by me, and work no further stir.

Pope. Come Pasquill I will talk with thee: For these
Do not my humor nor my fancy please;
What Council do thou give, what shall be done
To work the good of this Imperial Son?

Pasquill. Who I? of all the world you wrong me more
To ask Advise of me: Why? I have store
Of stranger News! I must proclaim a troth,
Which Vncompeld I would be very loath.
I am to tell you Wonders, Prodegies,
Inuectiues, Satyrs, Rimes, and prophesies,
There Is not a Word of mine, but must affright
Ill tuned Songs by day, slumbers by night,
Affrighting Stars, and Apparitions,
The burning Element with Visions:
All tending still unto a further matter,
Then either Priest, or Cardinal dare clatter.

Pope. Nay, like enough: even Speak and spit thy gall,
I am resolved, and mean to hear it all:
When that the worst is past then better sure
Shall be proposde for Patience to endure.

Pasquil. Why this it is to stir a sleeping Dog:
I all this time lay like a senseless Logge,
But seeing now I utter must my mind,
Blame me not Sir, though I do prove unkind,
For sure the hand upon Belshazers wall,
Did not so much, as my Tale must appall:
That only knokt the knees, and struck amaze:
This sunders heart and life! Nay do not gaze,
For though I sing a Song of uncouth ruth,
Yet I do vow to answer naught but Truth.
They are with Popes and Cardinals so bold,
That all at Rome is now for Money sold:
They talk of Tales in their mad Bedlam fit,
That Nauclerus and Platina has writ
Against Two and twenty Popes of several names,
Who sold to Satan unto all their shames
Their very souls for Necromanticke spells,
Had diverse Magic skils from sundry Hels,
Working affrighting terrors in the Land,
Even in that place, where Rome it self does stand.
They talk of Incest, Murder, acts of Treason,
Of Sodomitry, and without all reason
Name forty six Delinquents in these kinds,
Bishops Apostolickes to please their minds.
They Catalogue against Cardinals, with store
Of foul Inuectiues: what would you have more?
There Is not a sin the Devil ever bred,
But has the Cardinals stood in some sted:
Nay, they go further, and a semblance make
From Affricks monsters, As you there do take
Notice of stranger Beasts, then are elsewhere:
So Rome begets such sins, as All do fear
A worse revenge, then Sodom at the first
Felt, when in wrath the God of Hosts them cursed.
They talk of Antichrist, of lies, and wonders,
Of Plagues and pestilence, of storms and thunders,
Of miracles, which Costrus does recite,
With other Authors, who long since did write
What strange events in Pontificean Sea
Passed for current, as a formal Plea.
They talk of irreligion by the way,
Of falsifying Scripture, Nay they say
There Is nothing there but devilish Heresy:
And filthy Scismes, sauering Apostacy:
Adding withal, a Friars deadly hate
To burn up Magunee, though it was too late:
Only because Printing was there invented,
Which All the World so much has since contented.
They leave not so, but raise the dead to speak,
With thundering terrors hardened hearts to break.
They from the Sybils Tales portentous tell
Of Antichrists damnation into Hell,
That Rome shall be deuasted, set on fire,
Pulled down to rubbish, by those that desire*
Her utter ruin, wish her pride abated:
And this amongst them all is often related.
They forward do proceed to holy Writ,
Which they auerre only to aim at it
With Character of whorish Babylon
The filthy Strumpet: Thus they cast upon
Her beauteous face foulest aspersions,
Naming her Iesabel by false inuersions.
The Pope himself they call that man of sin,
And when so er'e to murmr they begin
Against our Churches flourishing, they say
A fatting Beast is kept for slaughter day.
They roue at Brimstone, Sulphur, fire and flames,
At Sword and Famine, and at stranger names,
And all for Romes demolishing: O God!
The very naming is a scourging rod.
From John's Apocalips they forward go
To strange Predictions, and a hundred show
Of our own Saints and Writers, against your Seat,
And with our own rods do the Carkas beat.
Some talk of one Baptista Nazarus,
And of a Monk surnamed Lazarus:
Some of an Abbot Ioachimus tell,
Who of these things does write exceeding well.
Some Paracelsus name, Laurentius,
Theodricke, Merlin, and Hieronimus,
Some of John Wolfius and Grebnerus speak,
Whose Prophesies with terrors out do break.
Some Nostradamus, Gallus, Reymer, name,
With diverse others, who long since defame
The glory of our Rome and holy Popes,
Seeking to blot out all religious hopes.
Not thus content, they come to Hildegard,
A Saint and Nun, who sentence did award
To this effect, that Rome should purged be
By sword and fire, as some Age shall see.
They cite Matilda a professed Nun,
Who for her holiness such credit won
She plainly says, that Rome must be destroyed,
Because her filth has all the world annoyed.
Elizabeth another Saint is brought,
Who by a stranger Prophecy so wrought,
That very Boys the Day and time durst name
Of deuastation, to your utter shame.
Saint Bridgtt was a fourth, of fearful noate,
Who in her time cried out with open throat
Against Popes and Popes, against Rome and all her glory,
And of her Prophesies made a whole Story.
The last Saint Katherine of Siena was,
Who brought as much discomfort: For alas
She talked of nothing, but repent, or die,
For Babylon must fall: The God on high
Had so disposde; and Rome was Babylon:
I dare no more: and think, that what is done
You raisde it up, as if a darkning Cloud
Should threaten rain, when that the winds belowde.

Pope. Now out upon thy foul wide mouth, thy tongue
Out-rooted shall be, cause it is too long:
A Mine of Powder shall thy body blow
Into the Air, and all thy ashes throw
Into the Sea, that no more memory
Be made of this thy rauing extacy:

Pasquil. And that were wisely done, but Sir, take heed,
From Hidras cut off head seven other breed.

Pope. And dare thou speak again? then let us away:
I will not for a greater mischief stay:
For sure I see, that all the world's delighted
To have Us thus abused, and despighted.

FINIS.
Terruerant satis haec pauidam praesagia plebem, Sed maiora premunt:

Lucan. lib: 1.
