THE ART OF DRAVVING WITH THE PEN, AND LIMMING IN WATER COLOVRS, MORE EXACTLIE
THEN HERETOFORE TAVGHT and enlarged: with the true manner of Painting upon
glass, the order of making your furnace, Annealing, etc.

Published, For the behoof of all young Gentlemen, or any else that are
desirous for to become practicioners in this excellent, and most ingenious Art,
By H. PECHAM, Gent.



At London, Printed by Richard Braddock, for William Jones, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the Gun. near Holburn Conduit. 1606.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR Robert Cotton Knight.
SIr, it has bin usual as well among Heathen in erecting their profane
monuments, as Christians in dedicating their churches, to affect and choose
among many, some one saint tanqua^ numen tutelare above the rest: in whose
honor when they had finished the maine work, yet they thought not all well,
except his picture stood enshrined over the porch, or some other more eminent
place. (Though with a number more of my time I never dremt of any thing less
the^ building churches) I imitate them so far, (if it be not superstition,) to
choose my Patron whose name in the depth of an honest zeal, I carue in operis
vestibulo, as Lipsius says; although in this case devotion be liable to none
account, I confess though I had never bin obliged unto you for some particular
favors; yet the love you bear to the arts above any other I know, should have
enforced my Genius to have awaked, and sought you out wheresoever:not that I
think so weak a present either worthy of your view, or so untoward a tourney,
but (as it falls out among pilgrims) while others of far better merit, in
zeal of your name hang up their gowns or bracelets, I might sliely escape
with my candle: and in truth I bring no better; for imparting to many what I
have, not hindering my self, I do but accendere lumen de lumine as one says.

How necessary a skill drawing or painting is; and how many ways the use
thereof is required, none knows better then your self: how rare the
perfection of it amongst us, every man may perceive, when scarce England can
afford us a perfect penman orgood cutter, (I speak not of the pencil wherein
our Masters may compare with any else in Europe) in respect of the dutchmen and
other strangers: for which cause (as well to encorage as instruct any young
practitioner that bears good will to this art) I have collected as familiarly
as I could, the chief and most easy grounds of drawing, annexing hereto the
manner of limming in water colors, also certain rules for Annealing and
painting upon glass: which with my self, and my hereafter more serious
endeauours, I offer to the censure of your worship, of whom J humbly take my
leave.

From my study in Kimbalton this eighth of November. Who is sincerely devoted
unto you. HENRY PECHAM.

To the Reader.
GENTLEMEN,
you have here a few principles of mine art, which as franckly I impart unto
you, as the heavens freely bestowed them upon my self: I call it mine, because
it was borne with me, nor ever used I the benefit of any instructor save mine
own practice and experience. I have (it is true) bestowed many idle hours in
it, which perhaps might have been worse spent, yet in my judgment I was never
so wedded unto it, as to hold it any part of my profession, but rather allotted
it the place inter splendidas nugas, and those things of accomplement required
in a Scholar or Gentleman. I speak not any whit to disgrace so worthy a skill,
or to discommend the true and necessary use thereof, but to give my scholar a
watch word, that like a simple wooer he should never cast off the mistres to
court the maid: but esteem himself a great deal better graced by propounding
at the table aliquid cedro dignum, (as K. Alphonsus was merrily wont to say,) or
maintaining an argument in Philosophy or divinity, the^ by intimating his skill
with the pencil, or insight in the Chords of music, which perhaps he that
holds a trencher at his back ca^ excel him in Q. Fabius could paint, yet he
was a great Fidibus praeclare cecinisse dicitur. Tuse. Q. li. 1
counselor. Epaminondas could play or sing excellently to the Harp or
violls, but Iustine to his true glory adds, that he was a man endued with
such learning, and so great experience in military affairs, that it was a
wonder how he could attain to so absolute an height in both: in whom alone,
and at once Xenoph. lib. vlt. Rer. graec.
sprang up and died the glory of the Thebanes, Socrates being above three score
years of age, spent one howr in a day with Conus a musician in playing upon
the organes: Ifhe had spent above, I think we had not known him by the name of
Philosophorum parens: Politic. 8.
And whereas Aristotle deseigning 4 principal exercises, wherein he would
have all children in a well tuned city or commonwealth brought up and taught,
(which are Grammatice, or Grammar: Gymnastice or exercising the body by
wrestling, running, swimming tossing the pike, etc. Graphice, or well handling
the pen in drawing, writing fair, etc: and lastly Musice or Music) his
meaning is, vt adseriamagis studia capessenda idonei reddantur: the same use
and none other I wish to be made of drawing.

Concerning these directions I have given, they are such as I thought in
respect of their breuity and plainness, fit for the capacity of the young
learner, for whom they were first and principally intended: they are mine own,
not borrowed out of the shops, but the very same, Nature acquainted me
withal; and such as ever in practice I found most easy and true. I may
perhaps be snarled at by some obscure fellows that affect their own private
gain before a general commodity: but if (Reader) thou shall find any thing
herein worthy thy practice or liking, I care not what the other say; the worst
hurt they can do me, is to draw my picture ilfauoredly, and sell it: And
perhaps Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5.
I could requite them again as Hipponax the Satirist did, who wrote so
bitterly against certain painters that sold his picture up and down in a
mockery to be laughed at (because he was hardfauoured,) that many ofthem for
grief hanged themselves. I had purposed to have annexed hereunto a discourse of
Armory: the manner of painting with virgin wax, and with feathers, not
altogether impertinent to our purpose; but I have reserved it (being a while
employed in some important business) till some other time, entreating thee in
the mean while, to take what I have begun as affectionately as I offer it.

The most assured friend to all that love or learn this art of drawing or
painting. H. Pecham.
Ad Zoilum Authoris Epigramma.
Zoile vicatim dum Criticus omnia lustras,
blattaque liuenti dente alien^ vor as:
Usque licet nostrum ieiunus rode libellum
qui tibi (ni fallor) mill venena dabit.
1. The excellency of painting. 2. The antiquity. 3. Much esteemed in times
past. 4. The manifold uses thereof. 5. Necessary to be taught.
CHAP. 1.
PICTVRA, or painting in general, is an art which either by draughte of bare
lines, lively colors, cutting out or embossing, expresses any thing the like
by the same: which we may find in the holy Scripture both allowed, and highly
commended by the mouth of God himself; where he calls Bezaleel and Aholiab,
Men whom he has filled with the spirit of God in wisdom Exodus 31.
and understanding, and in knowledge, and in all workmanship, to find out
curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, also in the art
to set stones, and to carue in timber etc. There plainly showing, as all other
good arts, so caruing or drawing to be an especial gift of Gods spirit. In
another place he goes farther, and as it were challenges to himself the
Mastership of the company in that his Maiestique Erotema in lov in these words:
Have thou given the pleasant wings unto the Peacocks? and Job: 39: 16
wings and feathers unto the Ostrich? whereas disabling the wit of man by his
own excellency: he gives us to admire that admirable wisdom in disposing so
many beautiful colors, from the wings of the proud Peacock and Ostrich unto
the poor Butterfly, that astonished I may say with Aristotle, even in these
little painted Creatures there is (...) and in the very border of one of their
wings, and evident taste of the divine Omnipotency. But as Picture has been
allowed of God, so it has as well among Christians, as the Heathen bin honored
from all antiquity, and always sound favor with the greatest wits and
mightiest Monarchs of the world; Polit. 8.
insomuch as Aristotle in his Politiques accounts it among those liberalia
Paedeumata, and counsels it as an especial thing to be taught unto
children: and not long after by the authority and labor of Eupompus a learned
Geometrician and painter, it was taught in all Grammar schools throughout
Greece. But some will tell me; Mechanical arts, and those wrought with the
hand are for the most part base, and unworthy the practice of Gentlemen and
great personages. I confess the Lord of Bartas has said: L'eur esprit se'n
fuit au bout des 1 Sem: Exam: de ingenios.
doigts. But forasmuch as their ends are honest, and themselves but the
exercises of praegnant, and the finest wits: I see no reason (as one says) why
nature should be so much wronged in her inte^tion, as not so^time to produce
into action that whereto she is well inclined: And no more disgrace to a Lord to
draw a fair picture, then to cut his Hawks meat, or play at footeball with his
men. Achilles thought no scorn to be so cunning in cookery, that when certain
ambassadors came unto him, his own hands dressed them a great and roial supper:
and Homer to no small commendation of his Ulysses (under whose person he shapeth
Rutilius in vita Q. Fabii pictoris Iuriscon. In vita Pom
an absolute wisema^) says he could make his ships himself. Quintus Fabius
(whose stock was one of the noblest in Rome, after called Pictore,) with his
own hands painted the walls of the temple of Salus, and wrote his name
underneath. Pomponius Atticus (a man of singular wisdom, and so loved of
Tully) after he had composed a Poem of sundry devises, beutified it with
picturs ofhis own drawing. The Emperor Constantin gat his living a long time by
painting. Sigebert in Chron.
And in Plinies time certain festival days were yearly appointed at Corintth
for exercise of picture for great prizes and wagers. Since painting then has
been so well esteemed, and of it own nature so linked with other arts, as many
of them can hardly stand without it: I think, not for pleasure only, but of
necessity most needful to be exercised, of all such that either study the
Mathematics, mean to follow the wars, or travel into sorreine countries. I
have heard many and excellent men of these several qualities lament so great a
want in themselves, otherwise most absolute. My scholar then I would make
choice of, I would have a young Gentleman, if it might be, who were inclined to
drawing by nature, at the least a welwiller and lover of it; and as Tully would
have in his Orator, so I require de Oratore,
in him aliquid redundans and ampu^andu^, a pretty fantastical head and
something (as chips of the sound timber, which commonly the best wits are
subject unto) to be pared of; with all daily and continual practice, were it
but Apelles his vna linea, without which it is impossible forhim to attain to
ready draught, and les to excellecy in general

1. The most excellent painters of old time. 2. The great value and prizes of
pictures. 3. Of certain women that have excelled herein. 4. Of Statuary or
caruing.
CHAP. 2.
PAinters at the first (says Aelian) were such bu^glers and so rude, that they
were Aelian de varia H^st. lib. 10:
fayn to write over a Cow or a Hog, what beast it was: otherwise the behoulder
could not tell what to make of it; but in a short time they grew to that
perfection, that they were honored well nigh as Gods, as Metrodorus the
Athenian: of whom, as of the rest that were famous in their times (as well for
the dignity of this art as for the Readers recreation) I will make mention, as
I find in Pliny, Pausanias, and others.

Apollodorus among the Athenians was the first that Apollodorus
did express the life with colors, and that was famous for his pencill.

Euphranor a painter of Isthmos, was the first deviser ofEmblems, and heroical
Impresa's for shieldes, and Euphranor.
the first that observed Symmetry, or proportion, whereof he wrote many volumes.

Parrhasius above all others excelled in black and white, Parrhasias.
and had the principal commendation for his Art in casting and curling the
hair.

Pyreicus (as Volaterane says) was only famous for counterfeiting all base
things, as earthen pitchers, Barbers Pyreicus.
shops, a scullery, Rogues together by the ears, swine sleeping in the my^e
etc: Whereupon he was surnamed Rupographus, that is, a painter of base things.

Aristides was the first that expressed sense and passion, Aristides.
as in that piece of his, where he painted a mother deadly wounded, with her
child in her arms, striving for the Teat; she weeping in extreme passion,
loath to deny it her breast, and loath to let it suck, for fear of killing it
with her own blood, which in great abundance issued forth with her milk.
This table Alexander carried with him to Pella.

Nicophanes had attributed unto him the statelines of Nicophanes
Invention.

Protogenes was the first that could lay his colors so Protogenes.
artificially, that one being worn off, another succeeded fresh, to the number
of fowr or five: it is said when he undertook any excellent piece, he would
observe a strict diet; eating only pease, lupines and such like, to the intent
his wit and invention might become the more sharp and fine: Amongst his other
works his Lalysus or Bacchus has the principal praise, which table (when
Demetrius Poliorcetes besieged the Rhodes) being in the Island, he refused to
enter where he heard it was kept, least by the rudenes of his soldiers it
might receive harm: protesting as Plutarch says, that he had rather burn all
his fathers Images: which occasion at that in Demetr.
time being ouerslipt, his enterprise came to no effect. Aelian says this
table was seven years in making.

Apelles who lived in the 1012 Olympiade excelled all Apelles.
the others, yet for action and disposition, he gave place to Amphion: many
times he would sail over to the Rhodes to see Protogenes and his work: among
his pieces the picture of Alexander at Ephesus, and his Venus which he left at
his death unfinished in Chios were the most notable.

Galaton surpassed all others of his time, for witty conceit Galaton.
and Invention: amongst other his devises, he drew Homer vomiting, and a number
of pety Poets gathering it up.

Claudius Pulcher painted Tiles so artificially, that Ravens lighted upon them.
C. Pulcher.


I will pass over the artificial pieces of Zeuxis, L: Manlius, Pacuvius a
Tragedian Poet, Metrodorus a most cunning painter and a great Philosopher; who,
when L: de quo Cicero. I de Oratore
Paulus wrote unto the university of Athens to provide him a grave and learned
Schoolmaster for his sons, was chosen by general consent, and sent to Rome,
as the fittest man both to teach his children, and to adorn his triumphs.

Nor will I make mention of others of later times, as Hercole di Ferrara, and
his notable workmanship seen this Herocle di Ferrara. Bellino.
day in Bononie. Bellino the venetian, whose fame caused the Turk to send for
him, from whom he returned roially rewarded. Vnicio, and his admirable piece of
the twelve Apostles in the church of our Lady of grace in Millan: Vnicio.
Pisanello that so beautified the Church of Laterane in Pisanello.
Rome, which the world may scarce match for rarenes and tenuity of shadowing:
Petro de Burgo, that so excelled in perspectiue. Zoto the Florentine with many
others. Nor Petro de Burgo. Zoto. Mi. Angelo Alberdure. Stradane. M. Hilliard
M. Isaac.
of those of nearer and our own times, as Michael Angelo and his brother,
Alberdure, Stradane, M. Hilliard and M. Isaac our own countrymen; because their
works are yet scarce dry in the world. Now least you should esteem but basely of
this art, and disdain your pictur because you may have it for a trifle (which I
acou^t a fault in many of our good workmen) I will tell you the prizes of some
pieces of note as well in ancient time, as of late days. Caesar the dictator The
excee. ding value of pictures. de quibus Cic. Act. 6. in Verrem.
redeemed the tables of Ajax and Medea for 80. tal. which amounts to 24000
french crowns, I speak with the least, because I take minus talentum alt: cum
(sor generally where you find talentum in any Latin author, as in Tully pro C:
Rabirio Posthumo and in his Epistles ad Attic. and some other places where you
have it oftnest: you must understand the Athenian talent, except you have the
addition of Aegineum, Sirium, Babiloniu^, etc) the greater was bigger (as
Budaeus says) by a third part: K: Altalus paid for B. in Ass,
one of Aristides pieces an hundred talents. Hortensius the Orator gave for a
table of the Argonatae 144 talents, Mnason paid to Asclepiadorus for the 12
Gods, after 300 pound sterling a piece. Candaules K: of Lydia gave to Bularchus
for a piece of his the weight of the same in gold. Pope Innocent the 8 a worthy
fauorer of all good arts, bestowed upon Andrea Mantega his painter in the
Beluedere in Rome, 2000 ducats for a months pains. The Genoans paid unto two
Germane painters for the battle of Patras fought between don John of Austria,
and Hali Bassa 187 ducats. And what a round sum was once offered by strangers
for S: Magnus altar cloth in London: many other examples might be alleged, but
I have said enough to show that arts have alwais bin well paid their hire, and
the professors bin had in esteem with the worthiest men. Neither has picture
bin peculiar to men only, but also women hauebin excellent herin. Timarete the
daughter of Micon, a famous paintres drew Diana, which at Ephesus was counted
among the best and ancient pictures.

Olimpias taught Ant^bulus the art of shadowing, there were other very famous
herein, which for breuity I omit: as Irene, Calipso, Lala, Aristorete. But we
end with those famous Artists leaving them to their graves, and their works to
the admiration of all posterity, and speak of Statuary or Caruing, which thus
far differs from painting; this does express her image in the plain or
smooth superficies imaginarily; the other in the hollow and uneven superficies,
really. It has been I confess in as great account as painting; yet it
deserves not altogether to well, because it is more rude and rough in
exercise, and works not with so fine a judgment: for painting is tied to
counterfeite all shadows, express the life, sense and passion, whereas in
caruing they fall in with the chissell, and nothing else required but an even
proportion.

A painter not privileged to draw what he list. 2 Great abuses may arise of
Painting or drawing. 3 How and when to use it.
CHAP. 3.
AS I would have my scholar take his pleasure, so would I not have him buy it
at too deeer a rate, either with loss of overmuch time in neglecting the maine
profession, or of his ears for a libeller, defaming honest men by ill-favored
pictures: as drawing them with Asses ears, huge noses, horns or such like,
neither to think with Horace that he may quidlibet audere: for there be some
things that ought to be free from the pencill, as the picture of God the
father: or (as I have seen) the whole Trinity painted in a glass window:
which he cannot do without artificial blasphemy, and reviving from hell the
old heresy of the Anthropomorphites who supposed God to be in the shape of an
old man, sitting upon his throne in a white Robe, with a triple crown on his
head. I know what diverse have in this behalf alleged, Ezech. eh. 1, verse 27.
one special place they have in Ezechiel in the vision of the throne, but
howsoever, it is misliked by many good Catholics, and none of the worst
deuines in their own Catechismes and confessions, though especially and in
plainest terms by Lorichius Catholic. Institut. in praecept. 1.
in these words. Est praeterea abusus imaginum quod sanctam Trinitatem
praesumpsimus exprimere, quod haeresis est pestilentissima, quid enim magis S:
Trinitati aduersum, atque Patrem effingere senis silicernij effigy, filium
iuuenis formam habentem, spiritum sanctum alitis speciem volitantis referentem:
Quid I diotae ex tali libro didicisse poterint? errorem sane and haeresim.
Secondly he must abstain with Christian modesty from drawing arts of
filthiness, and laying open those parts which Nature would have kept secret:
what hurt has that abominable Aretine done by his book and baudy pictures?
and what lewd art is ordinarily showen in the naked pictures of wax sold up
and down as libidinis fomenta? Surely I must commend art in them, though
detest their wicked makers and abominable ends. For the time of drawing, I
would have my Scholar take it when he is wearied at his book, forced to keep
home by reason of foul weather, or solicited by idleness to some wors
business: having chosen such a convenient time, let him make or buy him a
fair paper book for the nonce, to begin to practice in, and keep very
carefully that he has done, by which he shall see how he profits daily,
avoid scribbling in loose papers and (keeping his hand from walls or wainscot)
to deal plainly the babble: For Il muro bianco carta di matto passes current
through Italy.

Instruments necessary for drawing. CHAP. 4.
I Am not ignorant of sundry ways that have been devised to teach draught, as
namely by crossing the pattern, then your own paper with equal spaces,
filling the same as you find in your example: also drawing upon a lantern
horn, with a paper blackt with a torch, and such, like: neither do I mislike
any such convenient help to a young learners furtherance; but if you will learn
to the purpose, and grow cunning in short time, you should rather fall to it
only by your own conceit and Judgment, and let those Black lead in quils.
toys go, you must first get you black lead sharpened finely: and put fast
into quils, for your rude and first draught, some ten or twelve.

Moreover you must not be without as many Sallow Sallow coal es.
coals, sharpened at the ends: you shall choose them thus, they are more blew
and finer grained then the other coals, smooth (being broken) like fatten: you
shall sharpen them upon one of your fingers, as also your black lead; otherwise
they will quickly break and point sharp.

Get you also a small pair of brazen compasses Rule and compass.
and Brasill rule, for taking the distance, if you follow a printe; and be
not without the crumbs Manchet or fine white bread.
of fine manchet or whitebreade, to rub out your lead or coal, when you have
done amiss, or finished your work.

Scriueners and Schoolemasters in the Country that teach to write have diverse
small pensills of broom, with which they shadow great letters in Broom
pencils.
copy books very pretily: they are made in this manner, take a broom stalk
about the bigness of a spoone handle, and cut it even at the end, when when you
have done, chewe it between your teeth till it be fine and grow heary at the
end like a pensill, but I care not how little you use them, because your pen
shall do better and show more art.

For your drawing pens, never be without twenty or thirty at a time, made of
Ravens and goose quills; your Ravens quills are the best of all other, to write
fair, or shadow fine, your goose quils serve for the bigger or ruder lines.

The first practice. CHAP. 5.
Having these in a readiness, you shall practice for the space of a week or
there abouts, to draw Circles, Squares of all sorts, a Cylinder, the ouall
form, with other such like solid and plain Geometrical figures, till you can
do them indifferent well, using the help of your rule and Compass: the
reason of exercising you first in these is, when as Symmetry or proportion is
the very soul ofpicture, it is impossible that you should be ready in the
bodies, before you can draw their abstract and general sormes, and have
woonted and made your hand ready, in proportions of all sorts, which are
compounded of the same, as for example, your Circle will teach you, to draw
even and truly all sphaericall bodies which are, (...) of like parts and
forms, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. The most flowers as the Rose, Marigold,
Heliotropium, Daisie, etc: the most vessels as cups, Basins, Bowls, Bottles,
etc. The square will make you ready for all manner of compartments, bases,
perystiles, plots, buildings, etc: your Cylinder for vaulted turrets and round
buildings; your Orthogonium and Pyramid, for sharp steeples, turrets and all
things, in mucronem fastigiata, your Ouall form will help you in drawing the
face, a shield, or such like: so that you may reduce many thousand bodies to
these few general figures, as unto their principal heads and fountains.

After you are cunning in these figures (beginning with the Circle and) imitate
some thing of Circular form, what you shall think good, in which as in all the
other aforenamed proportions you shall work and help your self by the
Diameter (which is a strait line, drawn long ways just in the midst of your
circle or square) and which will guide you marueilously in your work: for
example if I would draw the Sun, so soon as I have made a fair Circle I draw
(with cole or lead that I may rub it out again) my Diameter, or line down the
midst, ou^r which if you will again, you may draw a cross line, both which
divide your Circle equally into 4 parts as you see.



Which Diameter with the cross line, are not only your directors for the
equal placing of the greater and lesser beams, on the side as you may
perceive: but also for the drawing of the nose, mouth and eyes even, in the
midst of the face.

I will give you another example of a goblet, first I make a half or
semicircle for the bowl, down the midst of which (as low as I would have the
foot to come) I draw my Diameter or straight line, which being done, the worst
is past: you must now mark, I am not tied to make my bowl as round as the
circle, but long or what fashion I list, no other use has the Circle there
then to guide me even on either side, whether I make it broad or narrow, long
or short, embosse it or howsoever, the other part of the line causes me to
make the foct even as you see.



which line and circle (as I said before) you may with your white bread rub
out, when you have done.

In these and such like you may at your pleasure find infinite variety to set
your self a work with, till you ar able, Sine cortice natare, to fall to work
by your own judgment; which you shall do in your next and second practice.

The second practice. CHAP. 6.
YOu shall, next after your hand is grown ready in the aforesaid proportions,
practice to draw small and easy things, coming as near your former examples as
may be, by your conceit only: as a cherry with the leaf, the shaft of a
steeple, a single or canker Rose, etc. wherein you shall begin to take some
delight, and find no great difficulty.

But in drawing these and whatsoever else, I must not forget to tell you; that
you must be perfect and quick in the general or outward lines, and give them a
reasonable good proportion, ere you fall to shadowing or tricking your work
within: wherefore I would have you make an essay 6 or 7 times at the least for
the general proportion only: if at the first it be not to your mind, as for
example in drawing of a rose, be sure that the compass of it be not faulty,
ere you cast out the leaves by 5 equal lines, or in making a woman's ruff, that
you skore it out first narrow in the neck, then wider from the cheeks, and
narrow again under the chin very truly, ere you add the lace or seting, al
which is don with I line which I call the general or extreme. For those sorms
that are mixed and uncertain, and where your circle and square ca^ do you no
good (being left only to your Idea) as in a Lion, a Horse or such like: you
must work altogether by your own judgment, and win the proportion by daily
practice, which will seem very harsh and strange unto you at the first, but to
help your self herein you shall do thus: having the general notion or shape of
the thing in your mind you mean to draw (which I doubt not but you may conceive
and remember as well as the best painter in the world though not express
according to the rules of art) draw it with your lead or coal after your own
fashion How to help you in your Idea.
though never so badly, and lay it from you for a day: the next day peruse it
well, bethink your self where you have erred, and mend it according to that
Idea you carry in your mind, in the general proportion: when you have thus
done, lay it by again til the next day, and so continue for 5 or 6 days
together, correcting by degrees the other parts even to small vains as your
discretion will serve you, this may you do with 40 papers at once, of several
things, having done what you can (though not to your liking) confer it by the
like, some excellent print or pattern of the same, using no rule or compass
at all but your own judgment in mending every fault lightly, and with a quick
hand, giving every place his due; whereby you shall of all sides meet with your
errors and find an incredible furtherance to your practice: though hereunto is
required I must confess, a strong imagination and a good memory, which are the
midwiues to this art and practice as in all things else the nurse that bringes
it to the full growth and perfection.

Of drawing the face or countenance of a man. CHAP. 7.
SInce man is the worthiest of al creatures, and such pleasing variety in
countenances so disposed of by the divine providence, that among ten thousand
you shall not see one like another (as well for breeding delight, as for
observing a method after you have practiced according to your former
directions in other things) you shall begin to draw a man's face, in which as in all other creatures you must take your beginning at the forehead, and so draw
downward till you have finished.

The visage or countenance is (for the most part) The full face.
drawn but three manner of ways, the first is full faced, as commonly we see
King Henry the 8 drawn: The second is 3 quarter faced, as our Flanders and
ordinary pictures are, that is when one part of the The 3 quarter face.
face is hid by a quarter as thus: The third is only half faced, as you see
the pictures of Philip and Mary upon a twelve pence. Half face.


For draught of a full face you must bear in memory and narrowly observe the
breadth of the fore head, and the compass of both the cheeks, all which are
composed of two lines as thus: And be careful to give as precise an euenesse
to one side as to the other; causing both your lines to meet at the tip of the
chin: your diameter guides you for the eue^ placing (as I said) of nose and
mouth, your other line for the just oppositio^ of the eyes between which in
distance for the nose, always leave the space of an ey

The end of the nose in ordinary proportion must be brought no lower then the
middle of the cheek, The space of an other eye to be left between the eyes.
from whence to the chin is for the most part as far, as from thence upward to
the eye brows.

The nose of a full face must not be expressed with apparent lines, but with a
very fine shadow on each side as you see.

An eye is commonly drawn in this manner.

To make an angry or stern countenance let your brow bend so, that it may
almost seem to touch the ball of the eye; at what time you must also give the
forehead a fine wrincle or two, and withal the upper part of the nose between
the eyes.

A great conceit is required in making the eye great difficulty in the eye.
which either by the dulnes or lively quicknes thereof gives a great taste of
the spirit and disposition of the mind, (which many times I will not deny may
be as well perceived by the mouth, and motion of the body,) as in drawing a
fool or idiot, by making his eyes narrow, and his temples wrinkled with
laughter, wide mouthd, or showing his teeth etc. A grave or reverend father by
giving him a demisse and lowly countenauce, his eye beholding you with a sober
cast which is caused by the upper eielid, covering a great part of the ball,
and is an especial mark of a sober and stayed brain within, Nazianzen when
he beheld Nicephor. lib 10 cap. 3 7.
Julian (long time before he was Emperor of Athens, at the very first sight
of his countenance, (Praesaging his future disposition) burst forth into these
words; Deus bone, quantum malum fouet romanum imperium: Nazianz. in 2. inuect.
contra Iulianum.
for (as he witnesses himself) there was not any sign of goodness or
towardness in him, his eyes rolled in his head, wandering and turning
fearfully now this, now that way; sparkling with fury and anger, his nose
was grown wrinckled with scoffing and deriding the rest of his countenance
tending to mockery, his laughter so immoderate that his whole body would shake
therewith, his shoulders shrinking to and fro, to his neck: his legs and feet
seldom standing still; his questions and answeares suspicious, rash, and often
interrupted by short fetching his breath: by which signs the good man foresawe
his inbred tyranny and vile disposition, which after burst forth into an
horrible persecution and open rebellion against God and his church. A Grecian
Brusonius lib; 7. cap. 20
Captain in like manner noting very often the cast of the eye and countenance
of Scylla, together with his gesture and motion of body, used these words: it
is impossible but this gentleman one day should prove a great commander, and
I marvel that he is not advanced all this while: by which examples and the
like, I prove that there is a certain iudicium, or notice of the minds
disposition inly imprinted by nature even in the countenance, and many times
in the the eye or mouth, which (as I have said) you must be careful, as you
shall have occasion, warily to observe.

Now for the mouth (though least of all other any The mouth.
general rule may be given for it,) it consists principally of two lines
whereof one expresses the mouth it self, the other the nether lip: the
ouerlipp is best showen by a shadow cast over the cross line as you see: which
shadow and cross line if you draw by the life must be hit at an heirs
breadth, and if your picture be little, you cannot think so small a thing as
gives or quite takes away the tutch and resemblance of the mouth: and to
say truly it will be the hardest piece of cunning that ever you shall meet
withal: therefore you had need cause the party whom you will draw to sit as
we say, Vultu composito, without stirring or altering the mouth were it never
so little: wherefore you shall I believe find (a ma^s face) above all other
creaturs the most troubleso^e unto you: for either they will smile, be
ouerlooking your hand, or setting their countenances to seem gracious and
comely, give you choice of twenty several faces.

The proper and ordinary shadows of the full face.
IT is true that some do affirm, there can be no general rule given for
shadowing the face; the reason is, every several countenance has his proper
shadow as it falls, fat, lean, swollen, wrinckled with age, or deformed by
some other accident: but their argument is much at one with that I remember a
Welshman urged in good sadness in the schools when I was Sophister in
Cambridge: Wales was full of hills and dales, Ergo the world was not round: but
to our purpose, The shadows that fall naturally in this face are these, first
a single shadow in the temples, then a double shadow in the corner of the
eyes, a circular shadow down the cheek, under the nether lip, a little under
the nosethril, from the side of the nose to the corner of the mouth, what these
several shadows and there uses are, you shall know anon.

Of the three quarter face.
The three quarter face, as I have said, is diminished by a fourth part, where
some part of the eye and cheek are taken away by the nose and made less: so
that the cheek in full sight must not only have his due proportion allowed
him, but as much of the head and neck as was taken away from the other side.

In this face both the eyes ought not to be made of equal bigness, because the
eye is lessened with the cheek, as likewise a corner of the mouth; the shadows
in a manner are all one with the full face, save in this the neck and cheek are
commonly deeply shadowed.

Of the half face.
The half face of all other is most easy, insomuch that if you will, you may
draw it only with one line never remoouing your hand; in this you are to show
but half an eye, and the ear at full, as you see.



In making a true ear there is some difficulty, wherefore I have given an
example by it self.

Of the whole body. CHAP. 8.
WHen you are grown something perfect in the face, and can draw the head
indifferent well, you must be careful to proportion the body thereafter, then
the error of which, no one falt is more common with most painters: for you
shall scarce see one among twenty but will draw the head too big, which if you
observe, you shall find in Making the head too big, a common fault.
most pictures: help your self herein by setting a boie before you, causing
him to stand which way you list, and so to wont your judgment to the
proportion by little and little: having finished the head, draw the The neck.
neck, beginning it with one line from about the tip of the ear; then draw the
other down from the ball of the cheek (which is lessened on the other side)
as far as you think good to the shoulder, where stay, till you have shadowed
it: the shadows of the neck in a child or young woman are very fine, rare and
scarcely seen, but in a man the sinews must be expressed, with the veins, by
shadowing the rest of the neck, and leaving them white. For the proportion of
the other parts (because Master Haddocke has prevented me, whose book in
any case I would have you to buie, after you are well entered) I will omit and
show you only such eminences which by shadow must be necessarily expressed:
after you have don the neck, you are to expres the wing or upper part of the
shoulder The sholder. The arm. The wrist.
by shadowing it underneath, the brawne of the arm must appear full, shadowed
on one side, then show the wrist bone thereof and the meeting of the veins in
that place, the veins of the back of the hand, and the knuckles, are made with
2 or 3 hear strokes with The knuckles The paps. The Ribs.
a fine touch of your pen: the paps of a man are shown by two or three fine
strokes given underneath, in a woman, with a circular shadow well deepened,
the ribs are so to be shadowd, as you doubt whether they appear or no; except
your man were starued, or you should draw death himself: the belly shall be
emine^t Thebelly.
by shadowing the flank, and under the breast bone: the brawn of the thigh
shall appear, by drawing small The thigh.
hear strokes from the hip to the knee, shadowed again ouerthwartlie: the knee
pan must be shown with the knitting thereof by a fine shadow underneath the
joint; the sh nbone from the knee to the insteppe, is The knee.
made by shadowing one half of the leg with a single The leg.
shadow, the ankle bone will show it self by a shadow given underneath, as the
knee; the sinews must seem to take their beginning from the midst of the foot:
and to grow bigger the nearer they are to the toes.

There is a great art in making the foot wherein your shadows must take place
as occasion serves, and to say the truth, so they must in the other parts,
The foot.
but naturally they fall as I have said; for teaching you the true shadowing
of a naked body; Goltzius is one of the best whom above any other I wish you
to ^mitate.

Of Shadowing.
That you might better understand what I mean in this last chapter by so many
kinds of shadows, I will ere I go farther show you what they be, with their
several uses.

The first is a single shadow, and the least of all other, and is proper to the
plain Superficies where it is not wholelie possessed of the light; as for
example: I draw a fowr square plate thus, that shaddowe, because there is no
hol low, but all plain (as nearest participatinge with the light) is most
natural and agreeable to that body.

The second is the double shadow, and it is used when The double shadow.
the Superficies begins once to forsake your eyes as you may perceive best in a
column as thus: where it being darkened double, it presents to your eye (as
it were) the backside, leaving that vnshaddowed to the light. Your treble
shaddowe is made by crossing over your double shadow again, which darkeneth
by a third part in this manner, as follows.

It is used for the inmoste shadow and farthest from the light, as in gulffes,
chinks of the earth, wells, caves within houses (as when you imagine to look in
at a door, or window) under the bellies and flanks of beasts to show the thik
nesor darkness of a mighty wood, that it may seem nulli penetrabilis astro:
consequently in all places where the light is beaten forth, as your reason will
teach you.

General rules for shadowing.
You must always cast you shadow one way, that is, on which side of the body
you begin your shadow, you must continue it till your work be done: as if I
would draw a man, I begin to shadow his left cheek, the left part of his neck,
the left side of the left arm, the left side of the left thigh, etc: leaving
the other to the light, except the light side be darkened by the opposition of
an other body, as if three bowls should stand together, that in the midst must
receive a shadow on both sides.

2. All circular and round bodies that receive a concentration of the light, as
the light of a burning glass, when it does gather it self into a small
center, must be shadowed in circular manner as thus: All perfect lights do
receive no shadow at all, 3.
therefore he did absurdly, that in the tra^sfiguration of our Savior in the
mount not gave his garments a deep shadow, but also thinking to show great
Art, he gave the beams of the light it self a deeper, both which ought to
have been most glorious, and all means used for their luster and brightness;
which has been excellently well observed of Stradane, and Goltzius. Where
contrary shadows concur and strive (as 4.
those cross winds about Aeneas his ship) for superiority, let the nearest and
most solid body be first served. In the double and treble shadows, let your
first strokes be very dry for fear of blotting, ere you cross them.

It will seem a hard matter to shadow a gemm 5.
or well pointed Diamond, that has many side^ and squares, and to give the
luster, where it ought but if you remember and observe the right use o^ your
shadows giving the light to the lightwarde which I have taught you, you shall
easily do it of you^ self.

A merry jest of two Painters.
VVHilest I lay in Huntingdon, there grew a qua^rel between two painters, the
one a stranger and a Soiourner, the other dwelling in t^^ town, the ground of
which quarrel was a secret aemulation between them (as commonly falls out
among tradesmen of one profession) which burst out so far, that at length one
challenged to paint with the other for a wager of 20 nobles; the picture which
should be drawn (because the stranger had already made and sold many) was the
picture of Christ, and my self chosen judge of the workma^ship: great advice
and deliberation was taken on both sides (Now the painter of the town to show
(as he thought) extraordinary art in shadowing, had laid with charcoale in a
deep blew the cheeks and eyes of his picture) at the last, the work being
finished, and both ready to hear my verdict; Newman the stranger who was the
better workman so soon as he saw his adversaries work, God forgive me (quoth
he) heers a picture with a witness, it looks as if it had been beaten black and
blew: and I pray you (quoth the other) was not Christ buffeted, whereat certain
gentlemen present, and my self took so good an oceasion of laughter (he
speaking it in an honest simplicity to save himself) that we could do no
less then make them both frinds giving them their money again; and thus much of
shadowing.

Offore-shortning. CHAP. 9
FOreshortning is when by art the whole is concluded into one part, which only
appears to the sight: as if I should paint a ship upon the sea, yet there
should appear unto you but her fore part, the rest imagined hid, or likewise
an horse with his breast and head looking full in my face, I must of necessity
foreshorten him behind because his sides and flanks appear not unto me: this
kind of draught is willingly ouerslipt by ordinary painters for want of cunning
and skill to perform it; and you shall see not one thing among an hundred
among them drawn in this manner, but after the ordinary fashion side ways, and
that but lamely neither: I never beheld more absolute skill in his kind then in
some of the Pageantes at the coronation of his Majesty; but I would not have
you meddle with it till you were grown very cunning in pour plain Draught.

The use of foreshortning.
THe use of foreshortning is to express all manner of action in man or beast,
to represent many things in a little room, to give or show sundry sides of
Cities, castles, forts, etc, at one time.

Of Landt-skip. CHAP. 10.
LAndtskip is a Dutch word, and it is as much as we should say in English
landship, or expressing of the land by hills, woods, Castles, seas, valleys,
ruins, hanging rocks, Cities, Towns, etc. as far as may be showed within
our Horizon. Seldom it is drawn by it self, but in respect and for the sake
of some thing else: wherefore it falls out among those thing which we call
Parerga, which are additions or adjuncts rather of ornament, the^ otherwise
necessary: as for example I should Draw the city of London, I would beside the
city it selse, show in vacant places (as far as my table or Horizon would give
me leave) the Country round about, as Shooters hill, and the high way winding
up there between the woods, the Thames to grow less and less, and appearing
as it were a dozen mile of, here and there scattered with ships and boats:
Greenwitch with the tower there and such like, all which are beside my purpose,
because I was tied to nothing but the city itself: this kind of all other is
most pleasing, because it feeds the eye with variety. Before you make your
Landskp, you must have perfected all your other work, and let that be the last:
you may draw it at your discretion (except you be tied to the contrary, and
make it either plain, hilly, all sea, etc: as for your superficies I mean of
rising or declining of the ground with hills or Dales, let it fall out how it
will, because you cannot draw it so rough with hills, or with so even a
plainnes but the earth has the like in on place or other.

General rules for Landtskip.
YOu shall always in your Landtskip show a fair Horizon, and express the
heaven more or less either ouercast by clouds, or with a clear sky, showing
the sun rising or setting over some hill or other: you shall seldom, except
upon necessity, show the moon or stars, because we imagine al things to be
seen by day.

2. If you show the Sun, let all the light of your trees, hills, Rocks,
building etc be given thitherward: shadow also your clouds from the sun: and
you must be very dainty in lessening your bodies by their distance and have a
regard, the farther your Landsskip goes to those vniuersalia which as
Aristotle says ( Poster. 1.
in respect of their particulars concealed from our senses) are notiora: as in
discerning a building 10 or 12 miles off, I cannot tell whether it be Church,
Castle, gentleman's house, or the like: So that in drawing of it I must express
no particular sign as bell, portculleis etc, but show it as weakly and as
faintly as mine eye judges of it,, because all those particulars are taken
away by the greatness ofthe distance. I have seen a man painted coming down a
hill some mile and a half from me, as I judged by the Landtskip, yet might
you have told all the buttons ofhis dublet: whether the painter had a subtle
invention, or the fellows buttons were as big as those in fashion when Mounseir
came into England, I will leave it (friendly reader) to thy judgment.

If you lay your Landtskip in colors, the farther you go, the more you must
lighten it with a thin and aerie blew, to make it seem far off, beginning
it first with a dark green, so driving it by degrees into a blew, which the
densitie of the air between our sight and that place does (only imaginarily)
effect: your eye may easily be deceived in remote things, that is when the
bodies appear to your sight far by gger then indeed they are, by the
corruption (as we say) of the Medium: as for example, the Sun and Moon at
their rising or Setting, you see, seem far bigger then when they are mounted
over our heads in the Zenith: the reason is the thickness or corruption, as I
said, of the air or Medium; which (being morning and Evening subject to
vapors) does participate and multiply the quality of the object: the same
reason is given of a Seamew or stake that (being four or five miles from you,
near the Sea) will seem as big as a Swanne, or great Snowball: or of a
tweluepence, or apple cast into a clear river: to take thereof just and true
Landtskip, never go forth in a morning or evening, (but in the midst of the
day:) for doubtless you will be deceived. An honest yeoman and a friend of
mine was in this manner notablely coesoned in buiyng a bargain of Timber by the
great in a mystie or rimie morning, (the trees seeming bigger then they were)
in a manner to his undoing: but I fear me, within these few years the
mistes will be so thick, we shall see no wood at all.

Of Draperie. CHAP. 11.
DRapery (so called of the French word Drap, which is cloth) principally
consists in the true making and folding your garment, giving to every fold
his proper natural doubling and shadow; which is a great skill and scarce
attained unto by any of our country and ordinary painters: insomuch that if I
would make trial of a good workman; I would find him quickly by the folding
of a garment, or the shadowing of a gown, sheet, or such like: but to avoid
folding, you shall see our common painters set forth their men and women, with
lace, fringe, pinckings, etc. which makes as fair a show as the best. The
Method now to be observed in Draperie, is to draw first the outmost or
extreme lines of your garment, as you will, full or narrow, and leave wide and
spare places, where you think you shall have need of folds; draw your greater
foldes always first, not letting any line touch, or directly cross another,
for then shall you bring an irrecouerable confusion into your work: when you
have so done, break your greater folds unto less, which shall be contained
within them: I would give you an example, but every print will show you the
like; all your folds consist of two lines and no more, which you may turn with
the garment at your pleasure: begin your maine and greatest folds, from the
skirt up ward, and the closer the garments sit, the narrower you must make
them: for the shadowing of every several fold, observe the first rule I gave
you in the Chapter of shadowing, and spare not to shaddowe your foldes, (be
they never so curiously contrived) if they fall inward from the light, with
the double or treble shadow; as you shall see occasion: for the shadow take his
place in one and the same manner as well in folding as without: some have used
to draw the body naked first, and after to have put on the apparel, but I
hold it as an idle conceipte, and to small purpose.

General observations and rules for Draperie.
Your greater folds must be continued thoroughout the whole garment, the lesser
you may break and shorten at your pleasure.

The shadows of all manner of silks, and fine linen are very thick, and
fine, so that your foldes must not only be little, but their shadow or
deepning very light, and rare, which commonly at the most is but a double
shadow given with a new, and the finest pen.

You must not use much folding where the garments ought to sit close or any
eminency appear, as commonly there does in the breasts of a woman, the arms,
belly, thighs, legs, etc: but to show Art, you shall leave the form of
the breast, leg, etc to appear thorough, which you may do by shadowing the
breast or leg, (after you draw it) on one or either side, leaving it white.

As I told before of the light, fo must you in your draperie have a care of
the wind and motion of the air, for driving your loose apparel all one way,
which I have seen well observed in many excellent pieces.

Of Diapering. CHAP. 12.
DIapering is derived (as I take it of the Greek verb (...) which is,
iraijcio or transeo, in English to pass or cast over, and it is nothing else
but a light tracing or running over with your pen (in Damask branches, and
such like) your other work when you have quite done (I mean foldes, shadowing
and all) it chiefly serves to counterfeite cloth of gold, Silver, Damask
brancht, velvet, chamlet, etc: with what branche and in what fashion you list.

If you diaper upon folds, let your work be broken, and taken as it were by
the half: for reason tells you that your fold must cover so mewhat unseen,
which being drawn forth at length and laid plain shows all fair and
perfect: as Ovid says of Tapistry.

Sic vbi tolluntur festis aulaea theatris,
Surgere Signa Solent, primumque oste^dere vultus:
Caetera paulatim placidoque educta tenore, Metam. 3.

Tota patent
You must moreover in drapering, let your work fall out so, that there may be
an affinity one part with the other, maintaining one branche or the same work
throughout, setting the fairest in the most eminent place, and causing it to
run upward: otherwise one might imagine some foolish Tailor had cut out his
Ladies gown the wrong way.

To make a chamlet you shall draw but five lines waued overthwart, if your
drapering consist of a double line; you may either shadow the ground, and leave
it white, or shadow your work and leave the ground white: as you shall think
good, in this kind your filling may be with small pricks of your pens end, which
will show fair.

Of Antique. CHAP. 13.
ANTIQVE so called ab antiquitate, because the invention and use thereof above
all other kinds among the Graecians especially was most ancient and in
greatest request, the Italian calls it L'antica: it has the principal use
in plate, clocks, armor, all manner of compartmentes, curious Architecture,
borders of maps, etc: Though you shall seldom have any great use of it, yet I
would have you know what it is, and what to observe in it: The form of it is
a general, and (as I may say) an unnatural or unorderly composition for
delight sake, of me^, beasts, birds, fishes, flowers, etc without (as we say)
Rhyme or reason, for the greater variety you show in your invention, the more
you please, but remembering to observe a method or continuation of one and the
same thing throughout your whole work without change or altering.

You may, if you list, draw naked boys riding and playing with their
paper-mills or bubble-shels upon Goats, Eagles, Dolphins etc: the bones of a
Rams head hung with strings of beads and Ribands, Satyrs, Tritons, apes,
Cornu-copia's, Dogs yoackt etc drawing cowcu^mers, cherries and any kind of
wild trail or vinet after your own invention, with a thousand more such idle
toys, so that herein you cannot be too fantastical. The late dutch peers in
this kind excel all others, and certainly I know not by what destiny the
Germans have won unto them (above other nations) the glory of invention,
generally in picture: for except it be a dutch piece, you shall have it either
lame, ill cut, false shadowed or subject to some such gross error. Wherefore,
not without reason, Bodine calls The country officinam hominum a shop of
men, as from whence a man might be had for all turns, either Divine,
Physician, Soldier painter, etc. Though much I confess may be imputed to the
industry of that Nation: (for none in the world are more painful then they)
yet without question the people of themselves, as they are in genious and
capable of all other arts, so naturally they are inclined to this of Painting:
Since the greatest persons among them as Dukes, Earls, and in a manner all the
Gentlemen do bear an inbred love to drawing, and of themselves by their own
practice grow many times wonderful expert herein: yet none at this day who
favors a good picture, or any excellency in that kind, more then Rodulph the
Emperor now living.

Of Drawing beasts, birds, flowers, etc, CHAP. 14.
YOU shall find among beasts some more harder to be drawn then others for
two respects, one is for a clean making and shape, together with a finenes of
the cote or skin: the other for their nimblenes and much action, both which you
may for example see to fall out in a horse, whose lineamentes are both passing
curious, and coat so fine, that many sinews yea and the smallest veins must
be showen in him, besides whose action is so diverse, that for hardness of
draughte I know not any one beast may be compared to the horse; for sometime
you must draw him in his carreer with his manage, and turn, doing the
Coruetto, leaping, etc. which you shall not find in the Elephant, Cow, Bear,
or hogg as being beasts heavy and sloathfull by nature: moreover wanting that
finenes of coat or hide, so that you shall escape a great trouble in showing
vains, knitting of Ioints, with the eminency almost of every bone in them,
which you have in a horse and greyhound. Now for the manner of drawing these or
any other beast whatsoever: begin with your lead or coal (as before I told you
and gave you a general rule) at the forehead, drawing downward the nose,
mouth, upper and nether chap, ending your line at the throat, then learching it
again where you began, from the forehead over the head, ears, and neck:
continuing it till you have given the full compass of the buttock, but I will
give you an example.



I Begin in this Lion my first stroke at A, bringing it down to B, making the
nose, mouth, and nether chap with one line, as you se; there I rest: then fetch
I that line forward behind by S: making the compass ofhis mane by pricks with my
pen (because if I should make a line, I could not make it iagged) then bring
I the back down to the tail or D, leaving a little space for it, I continue my
line from thence to E, or the heel, where I rest: then begin I again at B, and
making the breast with the eminency thereof I stay at F, bringing out his near
fore foot, which I finish: then begin I at G not stirring my hand till I come
to the foot or paw at H; where I finish it quite at E, or the heel. I next draw
from his belly two strokes at I and K: I make the other leg behind, the^ the
right fore foot issuing from the breast: the^ I finish the tail, claws, tongue,
teeth, beard, and last of all the shadowing: which method you shall observe in
all beasts howsoever they stand.

Observations of the shadowing.
YOU see him shadowed on the back side from CD, unto E, the reason is the light
beats on his fore part, wherefore os necessity the shadow must be in every
part behind, ear mane, back, hinder leg, etc.

But you may say, how happens it then, that his nether chap and some part of
his throat and belly are shadowed being both with the light? I answer the
light of it own nature ca^ never fall under, but take the place above or in the
upper part, which place is here praepossessed by the upper and nether chap,
which as you see fall in between as likewise the forfoot to the belly, which
cause a shadow in either of those places.

The treble shadow as it ought is given to the most in ward places: It your
beast be not in charge, that is not in arms, and you are to show the ground
under his feet; you must make his farther feet on the other side somewhat
shorter then those next you: the reason is, that distance of earth between
them deceives the sight, causing the nearer to seem longest: as you may see by
opening or stretching your fore and middle finger like a pair of compasses
long ways from you, upon a board or table, drawing them with your pen as they
stand, and observing the space between.

Beasts more hard to be drawn for their shape and action.
The Lion. The Horse. The Rhinoceros. The Unicorn. The Stagge. The Lucerne.
The Greyhound. The Hiena. The Leopard. The Ownce. The Tiger. The Panther. The
Ape, etc.
Others more easy.
The Elephant. The Dromedary. The Camel. The Bear. The Ass. The Hog. The
Sheep. The Badger. The Porc-espine. The Wolf. The Fox. The Cow. The Otter.
The Hare. The Coney. The All manner rough The and shag hair dogs
In drawing these and all other beasts, the better you observe their shape and
action, the better shall you please, and your judgment be commended, wherefore
a painter had need to be well seen in Natural Philosophy. The meanest
workman can draw the ordinary shape of a Lion, when scarce the best of them
all know, that his hinder parts are so small, that there is in a manner a
disproportion between his forepart and them: so that if I should draw him in
this manner among our ordinary painters, my work would be condemned as lame,
when I deserved most commendation.

Moreover if you ask a Country painter whether he could draw a Crocodile or
no, he will make noe question of it, when as except he travailed through
Egypt, or met with Aristotle in English, all the wit he had could not so much
as set the chaps right, or give the future truly in the head to, show the
motion of his vpper-chap, which no creature in the world moves, save only he.

If you draw your beast in an Emblem or such like, A lantskip must be given to
every beast according to his Country
you shall sometime show a lant-skip (as it is ordinarily observed by Judicious
workmen) of the country natural to that beast, as to the Rhinoceros an
East-indian Lantskip, the Crocodile an Egyptian, by laying the ground low
without hills, many woods of palme-tres, here and there the ruin of a
Pyramid, and so forth of the rest.

Of birds.
There is les difficulty in drawing birds the^ beasts, and least of all in
flowers, yet art and needful directions to be observed in all of them: begin
your draught in a bird, as I said, at the head, and beware of making it too
big: Van Londerseel's pieces are much to blame for this fault, for in most of
them the heads of all his birds are to great by a third part, neither is that
fault proper to him alone, but to many good workmen else. You shall best remedy
that by causing a bird to be held or tied in a cloven stick before you, where
you shall take with your compasses a true proportion, which afterward you may
conclude into as small a form as you list: there is not the same reason of
proportion (it is true) in the heads and bodies of all birds alike, but hereby
you shall ever after be acquainted with a reasonable proportion, which though
you hit not justly, you shall come very near: having drawn the head, bring
from under the throat, the breast line, down to the legs; there stay: and begin
at the pineon to make the wing, which being joined with the back line is
presently finished: the eye, legs, and train must be the last, and (as I told
you before in beasts) let the farther leg ever be shortest. the feathers as the
hair in beasts, must take their beginning ^t the head very small, and in fine
ranks fall backward greater and greater, as this your example shows.



Of flowers, flies, etc.
For flowers, flies and such like, I will leave them (being things of small
moment) to your own discretion, counselling you at your leisure when you walk
abroad into the fields, to gather and-keep them in little boxes until you
shall have occasion to use them. To draw a flower begin it ab vmbone, or the
bosse in the midst: as in a Rose, there is a yealowe tuft, which being first
made, draw your lines equally divided, from thence to the line of your compass,
which you are first to give, and then the worst is past.

You may show your flower, either open and fair in the bud, laden with deawe
and wette, wormeaten, the leaves dropped away with ouerripenes etc: and as your
flower, so first draw rudely your leaves, making them plain with your coal or
lead, before you give them their veins or Iaggednesse.

For Butterflies, Brees, wasps, grasshoppers, and such like, which we call
Insecta, most of them are easy to be drawn, and not hard to be laid in
colors: because the colors of many of them are simple, and without
composition, as perfect red, black, blew, yellow, etc: which every ordinary
painter may lay, who if they should be put (by mixture of many colors) to
make that purple of a pigeons neck, or give the perfect color but of a Daw or
Iay, you should see them at their wits end.

In the months of June and July, you may gather of all manner of flies, which
you may preserve all the year, either in close boxes, or sticking them with a
pin severally upon small papers: Butterflies are where store of Thistles and
Lauender is, your Brees by ponds and Rivers sides

Notable absurdities to be auotded in draught. CHAP. XV.
THE first absurdity is of proportion Natural, commonly called lamenesse, that
is when any 1 Of lamenes
part or member is disproportionable to the whole body, or seems thorough the
Ignorance of the painter to be wrested from his natural place and motion: As
in the roof of the Quire in Peter-borough Minster, you may see Saint Peter
painted, his head very near or altogether as big as his middle: and it is
ordinary in country houses to see horsemen painted, and the rider a great deal
bigger then his horse.

The second is of Landtskippe, or Local distance, 2 Of local distance.
as I have seen painted a Church, and some half a mile beyond it the
vicaredge; yet the Vicars chimney drawn bigger then the steeple by a third
part, which being less of it self, ought also to be much more abated by the
distance.

The third absurdity is of accident of time, that is when we fashion or
attribute the proprieties of ancient 3 Accident of Time. Iud. 7.
times to those of ours, or ours to theirs: As not long since I found painted
in an Inn Bethulia besieged by Holophernes, where the painter, as if it had
been at Ostend, made his East and West batteries, with great ordinance and
small shot playing from the walls, when you know that ordinance was not
invented of two thousand years after.

The fourth is in expressing passion or the disposition 4 In expressing the
passion or disposition of the mind. Qualisequos Threissa fatigat Harpalice.
Aeneid. 1. 5 Of drapery
of the mind, as to draw Mars like young Hippolitus with an amiable or
effeminate countenance, or Venus like an Amazon, or that same hotspurd
Harpalice in Virgil, this proceeds of too senseless and ouercold a judgment.

The fifth is of Draperie or attire, in not observing a decorum in garments
proper to every several condition and calling, as not giving to a King his
Robes of Estate, with their proper furs and linings: To Religious persons an
habit fitting with humility and contempt of the world; A notable example of
this kind I found in a Gentleman's hall, which was King Solomon sitting in his
throne with a deep laced gentlewomans Ruff, and a Rebatoe about his neck,
upon his head a black velvet Cap with a white feather; the Queen of Sheba
kneeling before him in a loose bodied gown, and a Frenchhood.

The sixth and last of shadowing, as I have seen painted 6 Of shadowing.
the flame of a candle, and the light thereof on one side shadowed 3 parts: when
there ought to have bin none at all, because there is vndequaque lumen, which
may cause a shadow but take none.

THE Second book entreating of the true ordering of all manner of water colors
and painting upon glass.
CHAP. 1.
HAVING hitherto as plainly, as I could, given you those directions I have
thought most necessary for drawing with the pen: I will show you next the
right mingling and ordering of your colors, that after you can draw indiffernt
well (for before I would not have you know what colors means) you may with
more delighte apparel your work with the lively and natural beauty: and
first of the choice of your grinding stone and pencills.

I like best the porphyrie, white or green Marble, The choice of your grinding
stone and mullar.
with a muller or upper stone of the same, cut very even without flawes or
holes: you may buy them in London, of those that make toombs, they will last
you your life time, wearing very little or nothing: some use glass, but many
times they gather up their colors on the ground: others slates, but they with
wearing (though never so hard at first) will kill all colors: you may also
make you a mullar of a flat pibble, by grinding it smooth at a grindstone if
you do it handsomely, it is as good as the best: your great muscle shells
commonly called horse muscles are the best for keeping colors, you may gather
them in July about river sides, the next to these are the small muscle shells
washed and kept very clean.

Choose your pencils by their fastnes in the quils, and their sharp points,
after you have drawn and wetted them in your mouth; you shall buy them one
after another for eight or ten pence a dozen at the Apothecaries.

Of the Several Gummes that are used in grinding of water colors. CHAP. 2.
Gum Arabic.
THE first and principal is gum Arabic, choose it by the whitenes,
clearenes, and the britlenes of it being broken between your teeth: for then
it is good, take it and lay it in very fair water until it be quite
resolved, and with it grind your colors: you may make it thin or thick as all
other gummes, at your pleasure, by adding and taking away the water you put to
it.

2 Gumma Hederae, or of the luie.
There is an other very excellent gum that proceeds from the Iuie which
you shall get in this manner: find out first an O ache, or house that has a
great branch of Iuie climing up by it, and with an axe cut it asunder in the
midst, and then with your axe head bruise both the ends, and let it stand a
month or there abouts, at what time you shall take from it a pure and fine gum
like an oil, which issues out of the ends: take it off handsomely with a knife
or spoon, and keep it in a vial; it is good to put into your gold size and
other colors for threee respects, first it alaies the smell osthe size,
secondly it takes away the bubbles that arise upon your gold size, and other
colors, lastly it takes away the clammines, and fatnes from your other
colors: there is moreover great use of it in the confection of pommander.

3. Gum lake.
Gum lake is made with the glaire of eggs, strained often and very short,
about March or April: to which about the quantity of a pint you must put two
spoonful of honey, and as much of Gumma Hederae as a hasell nut, and four good
spoonefuls of the strongest woort you can come by: then strain the^ again with
a spoong, or piece of wool, so fine as you can, and so long til that you see
them run like a fine and clear oil, keep it then in a clean glass, it
will grow hard, but you may resolve it again with a little clean water, as you
do gum Arabeck: it is moreover an excellent vernish for any picture.

4 Gum Armoniack.
Take Gum Armoniack, and grind it with the juice of Garlic so fine as may
be, to which put 2. or three drops of weak Gum Arabeck water, and temper it
so that it be not too thick, but that it may run well out of your pen, and
write therewith what you will, and let it dry, and when you mean to guild upon
it, cut your gold, or silver according to the bigness of the size you have laid;
and then set it with a piece of wool in this manner: first breath upon the
size, and then lay on your gold upon it gently taken up, which press down
hard with your piece of wool, and then let it well dry, being dried, with a
fine linen cloth strike off finely the loose gold: then shall you find all that
you drew very fair gold, and as clean as you have drawn it, though it were as
small as any hear: it is called gold Armoniack, and is taken many times for
liquid gold.

Of guilding or the ordering of gold and silver in water colors. CHAP. 3.
YOu may guild only with gum water, as I will show you, make your water good
and stiff, and lay it on with your pencil where you would guild, then take a
cushion that has smooth leather, and turn the bottom upward, upon that cut
your gold with a sharp knife; in what quantity you will, and to take it up draw
the edge of your knife finely upon your tongue, that it may be only wet: with
which, do but toutch the very edge of your gold, it will come up and you may
lay it as you list; but before you lay it on, let you gum be almost dry,
otherwise it will drown your gold: and being laid, press it down hard with
the skut of an hare, afterward burnish it with a dogs tooth, or bores tush.

I call burnisht gold, that manner of guilding which we ordinarily see in old
parchment and Mass books, (done by monks and priests who were very expert
heerin, as also in laying of colors, that in books of an hundred or two
hundred years old you may see the colors as beautiful and as fresh as if they
were done but yesterday,) it lies commonly Embossed that you may feel it, by
reason of the thicknes of the ground or size, which size is made in this manner.

Take 3 parts of Bole Armoniack, and 4 of fine chalk, grind them together as
small as you can with clean water, 3 or 4 times, and every time let it dry,
and see it be clean without grauil or grit, and then let it be throwghly Dry,
then take the glaire of eggs and strain it as short as water; grind then your
bole and chalk therewith, and in the grinding put to a little gum Haederae, and
a little ear wax, to the quantity of a fitch, and 5 or 6 chiues of saffro^,
which grind to gether as small as you can possible, and then put it into an ox
horn, and covered close let it rot in hot horse dung, or in the earth, for the
space of 5 or 6 weeks, then take it up and lay it in the air, (for it will
have an ill savor) and use it at your pleasure.

To set gold or silver.
TAKE a piece of your Gu^me and resolve it into a stiff water, then grind a
shiue of saffron there with, and you shall have a fair gold: when you have set
it, and you see that it is throroughly dry, rub or burnish it with a dogs
toothe.

To make liquid gold or silver.
TAke 5 or 6 leaves of gold or silver, and lay it up on a clean Porphiry,
marble stone, or pane of glass, and grind it with strong water of gum Lake
and a pretty quantity of great salt, as small as you can, and then put it
into a clean vessel, or vial that is well glazed: and put thereto as much
fair water as will fill the glass or vessel, to the end it may dissolve the
stiff water you ground with it, and that the gold may have room to go to the
bottom let it stand so three or four hours, then power out that water, and
put in more, until you see the gold clean washed: after that take clean water,
which put thereto with a little Sal Armoniack and great salt, so let it stand
three or four days in some close place: the^ must you distill it in this
manner, take a piece of glouers leather, that is very thin, and pick away the
skinny side, and put your gold therein binding it close, the^ ha^ging it up,
the Sal Armoniack will fret away, and the gold remain behind, which take, and
when you will use it, have a little glaire water in a shell by you, wherein dip
your pensill, taking up no more gold then you shall use.

Of all sorts of Reds, and their Tempering. CHAP. IIII.
Of Vermilion.
YOur fairest and most principal Red is Vermilion, called in Latin Minium, it
is a poison, and found where great store of quicksiluer is: you must grind it
with the glayre of an egg, and in the grinding put too a little clarified
honey, to make his color brighte and perfect.

Sinaper Lake.
Sinaper (in Latin called Cinnabaris, or Synopis of the City Synope in Pontus,
where it was first invented) makes a deep and beautiful red or rather
purple, almost like unto a red Rose: the best was wont to be made, as
Dioscorides says, in Libia of Brimstone and quicksiluer burnt a long time to a
small quantity: and not of the blood of the Elephant and Dragon as Pliny
supposed: you shall grind it with Gum Lake and Lib. 33. cap; 7.
Turnsoile water, if you will have it light, put to a little Ceruse, and it
will make a bright crimson, if to diaper A bright Crimson.
put to only Turnsoile water.

Synaper Top's.
Grind your Tops after the same manner you do your lake, they are both of one
nature.

Red Lead.
Red lead, in Latin is called Syricum, it was wont to be made of Ceruse
burnt; which grind with a quantity of Saffron, and stiff gum lake: for your
saffron will make it orient and of a Marigolde color. Marigold color.


Turnesoile.
Turnsoile is made of old linen rags died, you shall use it after this
manner: lay it in a saucer of vinegar, and set it over a chafing dish of coals
and let it boil, then take it of and wring it into a shell, and put unto it a
little gum Arabeck, letting it stand 3 or 4 howrs, till it be dissolved: it is
good to shadow carnations, and all yeallowes.

Roset.
You shall grind your Roset with Brasill water, and it will make you a deep
and a fair purple, if you A purple. A fair violet.
put Ceruse to it, it makes a lighter, if you grind it with Litmose, it
makes a fair violet.

Brown of Spain.
Grind your Brown of Spain with Brasill water, and if you mingle it with
Ceruse it makes an horse Horseflesh color.
flesh color.

Bole Armoniack.
Bole Armoniack is but a faint color, the chiefest use of it, is, as I have
said in making a size for burnisht gold.

Of Greenes and their tempering. CHAP. V.
Green Bice.
TAke green Bice, and order it as you do your blew bice, and in the self same
manner: when it is moiste and not thorough dry, you may diaper upon it with
the water of deep green.

Vert-greace.
Vertgreace is nothing else but the rust of brass, which in time being consumed
and eaten with Tallow turns into green, as you may see many times upon foul
candlestickes that have not been often made clean, wherefore it has the name
in latin Aerugo, in French Vert de gris, or the hoary green: to te^per it as
you ought, you must grind it with the juice of Rue, and a little weak gum
water, and you shall have the purest green that is; if you will diaper with
it, grind it with the lie of Rue, (that is, the water wherein you have sod your
Rue or Herbgrace) and you shall have an hoary green: you shall diaper or
Damask upon your vertgreace green, with the water of sapgreene.

Verditure.
Take your verditure, and grind it with a weak gum Arabeck water, it is the
faintest and palest green that is, but it is good to velvet upon black in any
manner of drapery.

Sap green.
Take Sapp green and lay it in sharp vinegar all night, put to it a little
Alom, to raise his color, and you shall have a good green to diaper upon all
other greenes.

Of Whites and their tempering.
Venice Ceruse.
Your principal white is Ceruse, called in Latin Cerussa, by the Italian
Biacea. Vitruuius teaches the making of it, which is in this manner. The
Rhodians (says he) use to take the parings of vines or any other chips, and
lay them in the bottoms of pipes or hogsheads, upon which they power great store
of vinegar, and then lay above many sheets of lead, and so still one above
another by ranks till the hogsheads are full, then stop they up again the
hogsheads close, that no air may enter: which again after a certain time
being opened, they find between the lead and chips great store of Ceruse: it
has been much used (as, it is also now adays) by women in painting their
faces, at whom Martial in his merry vain skoffeth, Epigram, lib. 2.
saying; Cerussata timet Sabella Solemn. Actius says it being thoroughly burnt,
it turns into a fair Red, which he calls Syricum, grind it with the glair
of eggs, that has lien rotting a month or two under the ground, and it will
make a most perfect white.

White Lead.
White Lead is in a manner the same that Ceruse is, save that the Ceruse is
refined and made more pure, you shall grind it with a weak water of gum Lake,
and let it stand 3 or 4 days, Roset and Vermilion makes A fair Carnation.
it a fair Carnation.

Spanish white,
There is an other white called Spanish white, which you may make your self in
this manner; take fine chalk and grind it with the third part of Alome in fair
water, till it be thick like pap, then roll it up into balls, letting it lie
til it be dry, when it is dry, put it into the fire, and let it remain till
it be red whot like a burning coal, and then take it out and let it cool: it
is the best white of al others to lace or garnish being ground with a weak
Gum water.

of all manner of blewes and their ordering. CHAP. 7.
Blew Bice.
TAke fine Bice and grind it upon a clean stone, first with clean water as
small as you can, then put it into an horn and wash it on this manner: put unto
it as much fair water as will fill up your horn, and stir it well, then let
it stand the space of an hour, and all the bice shall fall to the bottom, and
the corruption will fleet above the water, then power away the corrupt water,
and put in more clean water, and so use it four or five times, at the last
power away all the water, and put in clean water of gum Arabeck not to stiff,
but so^what weak, that the bice may fall to the botto^, the^ power away the Gum
water clean from the bice; and put to another clean water and so wash it up,
and if you would have it rise of the same color it is of, when it is dry
temper it with a weak gum water, which also will cause it to rise and swell in
the driing, if a most perfect blew, and of the same color it is being wet,
temper it with a stiff water of gum lake, if you would have it light, grind
it with a little ceruse, or the muting of an hawk that is white, if you will
have it a most deep blew, put thereto the water of litmose.

Litmose blew
Take fine litmose and grind it with ceruse, and if you put to overmuch Litmos,
it makes a deep blew: if overmuch ceruse and less litmos, it makes a light
blew: you must grind it with weak water of gum Arabeck.

Indebaudias.
Take Indebaudias and grind it with the water of Litmose, if you will have it
deep; but if light, grind it with fine ceruse, and with a weak water of
gum Arabeck, you shall also grind your English Indebaudias, after the same
manner, which is not fully so good a color as your indebaudias isyou must:
Diaper light and deep upon it, with a good litmose water.

Florey blew.
Take Florey blew, and grind it with a little fine Roset, and it will make a
deep violet, and by putting in a quantity of Ceruse it will make a light violet:
with 2 parts of Ceruse, and one of red lead, it makes a perfect Crane color.

Korck or Orchal.
Take fine Orchal and grind it with vnsleckt lime and urine, it makes a pure
violet: by putting to more or less lime, you may make your violet light, or
deep as you will.

To make a blew water to Diaper upon all other blews.
Take fine Litmus and cut it in pieces, when you have done, lay it in weak
water of Gum Lake, and let it ly 24 howrs therein; and you shall have a water
of a most perfect azure, with which water you may diaper and damask upon all
other blews, and sanguines to make them show more fair and beautiful: if it
begin to dry in your shell, moisten it with a little more water, and it will be
as good as at the first.

OfYealowes and their mingling. CHAP. VIII.
Orpiment.
ORpiment called in Latin Arsenicum, or Auripigmentum, (because being broken
it resembles Gold for shining and color) is best ground with a stiff water
of Gumm Lake, and with nothing else: because it is the best color of it self,
it will ly upon no green: for all greenes, white lead, Red lead, and Ceruse
stain it: wherefore you must deepen your colors so, that the Orpiment may be
the highest, in which manner it may agree with all colors: it is said that
Caius a certain covetous Prince caused great store of it to be burned, and
tried for gold, of which he found some, and that very good; but so small a
quantity, that it would not quite the cost in refining.

Masticot or General.
Grind your Masticot with a small quantity of Saffron in Gum water, and never
make it lighter then it is; it will endure and ly upon all colors and metals.

Pinke yealow.
You must grind your Pinke, if you will have it sad colored, with saffron; if
light, with Ceruse: temper it with weak gum water and so use it.

Oker de Luke.
Take fine Oker de Luke, or Luce, and grind it with a pure brasil water: it
makes a passing hayr-colour, and is a natural shadow for gold.

Vmber.
Vmber is a more sad color, you may grind it with Gum water or Gum Lake:
and lighten it at your pleasure with a little Ceruse, and a chiue of saffron.

Of blacks and their ordering. CHAP. 9.
Hearts horn.
THe best black to make your Sattens and veluets, in water colors, is the
Hearts horn burnt to a coal: you may buy it at every Apothecaries (for it has
many uses in medicines) buy the blackest, and if there be (as commonly there
is) any white, or ouerburnt pieces it it, pick them out clean, for they will
infect the rest: for a shift you may burn an old comb, fan handle, or knife
haft, or any thing else that is iuory, they will make a very good black in water,
but in oil the best of all others; or you may burn a manchet to a coal,
which will serve for a need.

Ordinary lamp black.
Take a torch ora link, and hold it under the bottom of a latten basen, and as
it grows to be furd and black within, strike it with a feather into some
shell or other, and grind it with gum water.

To work with metals.
Tinglas.
Grind Tinglas with weak gum water as small as you can, and when it is dry,
and you have wroughte it, burnish it with a Dogs tooth, and it will be like
Metal.

Antemonie.
Grind your Antemony as your Tinglasse, and burnish it in the same manner.

Eler-glasse.
Grind your Elerglas with stiff water of Gum Arabeck: for it is so brittle
that otherwise it will not abide, and order it as you do your other Metals;
it will agree with all colors saving Orpiment.

Of making inkes of sundry colors.
Green ink.
Take vertgrease and grind it with the juice of a rotten apple with a little
saffron, when you have done put it into a clean Horn and let it stand a good
while, until the best fleet above, which take and put into a shell, until you
have occasion to use it.

The best red ink.
Grind vermilion with the glaire of an egg, or stiff gum Arabeck water,
putting hereto a little saffron, and so write with it out of a shell, if it be
dry, you may soften it by adding a little more water.

yealow ink.
Take saffron rust, or the seeds, and grind it on your painters stone, half
an hour, with the yolke of an egg: if you will have it a light yealow, add
thereto a little Ceruse.

Blew Ink.
Take Indico and grind it with gum water, and put thereto blanck-bloome, as
much as will quicken and and perfect his cullor.

White Ink.
Grind ceruse on a stone with Gum water, and you have done.

Sanguine Ink.
Take turn soil and steep it in gum water, and after a while wring it into
a shel, and so write with it.

To keep inkes from freezing.
Put into any of them Camphire about the quantity of a fitch, and stir it
well about,

To make a golden water.
Take green vitriol, Sal Gemma, and Sal Armoniack, and put them together: so
that their be the quantity of an ownce; and sees them in a quart of white
wine, until it be half wasted away, and when it is cool work withal:

To make an excellent green water.
Take red vinegar and the Urine of a Ram, the filing of brass and an ownce
of vert-greace, with the gall of a Bull, and boil them together the space of
going half a mile: and then put thereto a pretty quantity of Alome, and let it
stand. 7. or 8. days, and so work with it.

Thus briefly have I taught you your colors, and the manner of ordering or
tempering the same: for the mixtnre of some one cullor of many, (as a bay or
Sorrel in a horse) you must have some time to do it by your own discretion
and observation: for it would be too tedious a piece of work to give
directions all, when as a man may of one color alone, make above a thousand
species, or kinds: wherefore when you come to a compounded color, (like the
aforesaid) which you can very hardly make, mingle those colors which you know
come nearest unto it, confer and lay them to the life, adding or taking away
as you see cause.

The manner of Annealing and painting upon glass. CHAP. I.
AS there have been of late years many arts invented, and others, that in a
manner lay rude and unregarded, through the industry of our times grown to
full perfection: So I make no question on the other side, but diverse by our
Idleness and negligence are utterly lost and forgotten; that I may allege one
in stead of the rest, I would know what Lapidarie, or any else could show me
the art of casting that marble, where of we see many fair and beautiful
pillars in Westminster, Lincoln, Peterborough; etc, and in many places whole
pauements, as in Saint Albanes Abbey, Gormanchester, etc; surely I think not
any: And what has been in greater request then good workmanship in glass,
when scarce now any may be found (except some few in London, and they
perhaps dutchmen to) that have but the ordinary skill of annealing and laying
their colors: verily I am persuaded, if our forefat hers had known, how
little we regarded either their devotion or cost in painting glass windows,
they would have spared their money, to some better purpose; nay if we would in
many places imitate them so far, as but to allow our Churches and Chapels
glass, it were well; where many times you shall see whole panes (whereof some
have carried the names of their devout and religious founders; others the royal
coats either of our ancient kings of this land, their Allies, or of the
benefactors and Lords of that place, monuments many times of great importance,)
for want of repair partly been beaten down by the weather, partly by over
precise parso^s and vicars, (as one in Northamptonshire did in his chauncel,
the arms of King Edward the 3. and the dukes of York and Clarence, taking
them for images,) and the windows stopped up with straw and sedge, or damd up
quite, a regard I confess has been had of these abuses, but I fear me a great
deal too late.

The best workmanship that may be seen in England at this day in glass, is
in K. College Chapel in Cambridge, containing (as they say) the whole history
both of the old and new testament, the next to that in Henry the seuenths
Chapel at Westminster the one finished, the other wholly builte by the said
religious King. There are many good pieces else in diverse other places, as
Canterbury, Lincoln, etc: unto which being drawn by their own antiquitye, and
love of art, I have in a manner gone in pilgrimage, neither, as I thought,
loosing my labor, since I can show almost 8 hundred several ancient coats,
which out of old and decayed windows, I have entertained from the injury of
rude hands, and foul weather.

CHAP. 2.
THere be six principal colors in glass; which are Or, or yealow Argent, or
white, Sables, Azure, Gules, and Vert, black, blew, red, and green.

How to makeyour Or, or yealow upon glass.
Your yealow is made in this manner, take an old groate: or other piece of the
purest and best refmed filuer that you can get, then take a good quantity of
Brimstone, and melt it, when ye have done, put your silver into the Brimstone
melted; and take it forth again with a pair of pliers or small tongues, and
light it at the fire, holding it in your tongues until it leave burning: then
beat your silver in a brazen Mortar to dust, which dust take out of the
mortar, and laying it on your Marble stone grind it (adding unto it a small
quantity of yelow Oker) with gum Arabeck water and when you have drawn with
your pencill what you will, let it of it self thoroughly dry upon the glass.

Another fair Gold or yealow upon Glass.
Take a quantity of good silver, and cut it in small pieces: Antemonium beaten
to powder, and put them together in a crucible or melting cruse, and set them
on the fire, well covered round about, with coals for the space of an hour:
then take it out of the fire, and cast it into the bottom of a candle stick,
after that beat it small into powder, and so grind it.

Note when as you take your silver as much as you mean to burn, remember to
way against it six times as much yealow oaker as it waieth, and seven times
as much of the old earth, that has been scraped of the annealed work, as your
silver waieth: which after it is well ground, put altogether into a pot and
stir it well, and so use it, this is the best yealow.

Argent or white.
Argent or silver, is the glass it self, and needs no other color, yet you
may diaper upon it with other glass or Crystal, beaten to powder and ground.

Sables.
Take Iet, and the scales of Iron, and with a wet fether when the smith has
taken an heat, take up the scales that fly from the Iron; which you may do by
laying the feather on them, and those scales that come up with the feather, you
shall grind upon your painters stone, with the Iet and Gum me water, so use it
as your gold above written.

Azure, Gules, and Ver^.
These three colors are to be used after one manner you m ay buy or speak unto
some merchant you are acquainted withal, to po cure you what colored beads
you will, as for example, the most and perfectest red beads, that can be come
by, to make you a fair red, beat the^ into powder, in a braze^ Mortar, then
buy the gold smithes red Ammell, which in any case let be very transparent and
through-shining, take of the beads two pearls, and of the Ammel one part, and
gtind them together as you did your filuer, in the like sort may you use all the
other colors.

Another saire red upon glass.
Take a quantity of Dragons blood, called in Latin Sanguis Draconis, beat it
into fine powder in a mortar, and put it in a linen cloth, and put thereto
strong Aquauitae, and strain them to gether in a pot, and use them when you
need.

An other excellent green upon glass.
Take a quantity of vertgrease and grind it very well with Turpentine, when
you have done put it into a pot, and as often as you use it warm it on the
fire.

To make a fair carnation upon a glass.
Take an ownce of Tinne-glas, one quarter of gum ofIet three ownces, ofRed oker
five ownces, and grind them together.

Another black
Take a quantity of iron scales, and so many copper scales and way them one
against an other, and half as much Iet, and mix them well together.

Before you occupy your scales, let them be stamped small, and put them into a
clean fire shouel, and set them upon the fire till they be red whot, and they
will be the better.

Another Carnation.
Take a quantity of let, and half as much silver scum, or glass tin, and
half as much of Iron scales, a quarter as much of gum, and as much red chalk
as all these do way, and grind it.

The manner of annealing your glass, after you have laid on your colors.
Take brickes, and therewith make an oven four square, one foot and a half
high in this manner: and raise it a foot and a half high, when you have done,
lay little bars of Iron overthwart it thus, three or fowr, or as many as
will serve, then raise it above the bars one foot and a half more, then is
it high enough: when you purpose to anneale, Take a plate of Iron made fit for
the aforesaid oven, or for want thereof, take a blew stone, such as they make
hauer or oaten cakes upon which being made fit for the aforesaid oven, lay it
upon the cross bars of Iron: that done, take sleekt lime and sift it through
a fine sieve, into the oven, open the plate or stone, and make a bed of lime,
then lay your glass which you have wrought and drawn before, upon the said
bed of lime; then sift upon the said glass: another bed of lime, and upon that
bed lay other glass, and so by beds you may lay as much glass as the oven will
contain: providing always that one glass touch not another. Then make a
soft fire under your glass, and let it burn til it be sufficiently annealed:
it may have (you must note) too much or too little of the fire, but to provide
that it shall be well, you shall do as follows.

To know when your glass is well annealed.
Take so many pieces of glass, as you purpose to lay beds of glass in your
oven, or furnace, and draw in colors what you will upon the said pieces, or if
you wipe them over with some color, with your finger only it is enough: and
lay with every bed of your wrought and drawn glass one of the said pieces of
glass, which are called watches, and when you think that they are sufficiently
annealed with a pair of pliers or tongs, take out the first watch which is the
lowest, and next to the fire, and lay it upon a board until it be cold: then
scrape it good and hard with a knife, and if the color goes off; it has not
enough of the fire, and if it hold it is well annealed.

When you would occupy any oiled color in glass, you shall once grind it with
gum water, and then temper it with spanish Turpentine, and let it dry as
near the fire as may be, then is it perfect.

Other notes worthy of the practice and observation.
Colors for a table work.
Take Indie blew, and grind it upon your stone, or glass, and gum it well:
and lay it upon your table work as you think good, striking your blew over
with linseed oylvpon which after it has dried a little, lay on less gold or
silver, and it will be fair.

For a fair Red.
Take fair black adding thereto a small quantity of Sanguis Draconis, and
grind it upon a stone with the fattest oil you can get, afterward grind it as
dry as you can, and put it into a shell: after you have laid it let your color
dry, and strike it over with linseed oil, after that lay on you silver.

For green.
Take spanish green, and grind it as you ground your black, and lay it: you
may first shadow it with blew, and so lay your green upon it: and after
letting it Dry in the sun, lay on the green or silver as is beforementioned.

For a gold cloth.
Take your carnation and deep it is as you would deep with black, and strike
it thin with oil, and after lay your gold on, and it will be fair.

To write upon iron.
Take vertgrease, green copperaes, vinegar, and roch Alome: and temper them
together: and melte wax upon your sword or knife, upon which draw or write what
you will.

Having thus (friendly reader) for thy behoof played both the Painter and
Glasier at once, I crave pardon if in so deep a skill I have not satisfied
thee in all things: what I have omitted it is not through Ignorance, but
because I would not trouble thee a learner (as I imagine) with over busy or
tedious conclusions; having long since learned that lesson of Horace. Quicquid
praecipies breuis esto. etc. And thus not doubting of thy good will for my
pains, such as they are, I throw away my Apron, and bid thee heartily adieu.

This example wants page 22. lin. 2. refer it thither.

FINIS.

