A JUST APOLOGY FOR THE GESTVRE OF KNEELING IN THE ACT OF RECEIVING THE LORDS
SVPPER.

Against the manifold exceptions of all opposers in the Churches of ENGLAND,
and SCOTLAND.

Wherein this Controversy is handled,

Fully Soundly. Plainly. Methodically.
By T. (...)

How forcible are right words? But what does your arguing reprove?

Job. 6. 25. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES, dwelling in Red-crosse-streete.
1629.

TO THE RIGHT WORppfull. SIR Thomas Grantham, and Sr. Thomas Hutchinson,
Knights, all prosperity and Happiness.
AMong the controversies of this time, Most worthy Knights, it is not of the
least importance, which some of the brethren of our Church have made about the
gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper. For as it
universally concerns all, and every Christian must of conscience hold himself
engaged therein the one way: so the manner and effect of opposing is such, as
to him who considers the same in good earnest is admirable, and who considers
not is incredible. To those cannot be unknown with what confidence,
bitterness, and resolution this quarrel has been maintained, and (though a
spark) has kindled such combustion amongst men, as God only knows how it is
possible to be quenched. I remember what Solomon says: A brother offended
(defectione provocatus, as Tremel us reader it) is harder to be won^e then a
strong City, and their contentions are like the bar of a Castle. I know it is
much more to be lamented, that the beams of the heavenly truth seem to be
clouded unto us by the obfuscation of worse errors then this. Alas! the lusts
which war in our own members at home have made such war in all the members
of humane society, that the Edomites seem to be heard again, Down with it,
down with it, even to the very foundation. And what e^se can we look for in
this disioynting of the parts and tenants of our building, but woeful ruins
in the end; without the timely and effectual repair of such, to whom this
weighty care especially apperteineth. Truly the thunderbolts of Romes
cursing, the bloody attempts of foreign Princes, the divelish machinations
and underminings of our Traitors at home, or what else has happened to this
Land, (since the Gospel has been established) of most dangerous consequence,
have not (any one of them) by the mercy of God, given such a wound to the
Church of England, as the uncivil dissentions of her own children, whose
doctrine (like that of Hymeneus and Philetus) eats like a Gangrone into the
bowels of their dearest Mother. The thing is so plain and public, that as it
cannot be dissembled: So there is cause therefore, that we should turn our
mirth into mourning, and our instruments of music into the voice of them that
weep. For my part I say with the Apostle, Vtinam abscindantur; or with the
Prophet, Let them be ashamed o Lord, that have evil will at Sion. But whiles
such as I can only wish and pray for Ierusalems peace, blessed shall He be, to
the uttermost purts of the Earth, and all descents of posterity, by whose
means it shall come to pass, that our eyes may see Jerusalem a quiet dwelling
place, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down, one Isai. 33. 20.
stake whereof shall not be removed, nor one cord broken. We cease not to pray
for your honorable Assembly, that, that vnguentum optimum, the choicest
ointment of true peace, being powered upon the head, may fall unto the beard,
not staying till it have descended, vsque ad oram vestimenti Ecclesiae.

Concerning the controversy of this boooke, sorry I am, that it is my hap to
seem to be an adversary to them, whom I have ever had, and yet have in great
estimation, and (I speak sincerely) so great, that if the singular evidence of
the truth, and continual supply of divine assistance, (beyond expectation) had
not supported my mind in all the skirmishes of this war^ fare, I confess I
should have laid down the buckler long since, and given over the cause, which
I saw to be pressed with a world of preiudices. But now I must say of them as
Aristotle of his friends, Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica
veritas. God has taught me to be content to pass through good and ill report
for witnesse-bearing to his truth revealed. Nor am I discouraged with the
common imputation of being a defendour of Popish Ceremonies; for besides that
they unjustly call kneeling a Ceremony, more then standing or sitting; they do
unworthily disgrace it by putting it into that rank, which God himself has
never warranted to his service, neither did I judge it enough to keep me back,
that I am conscious to my self of so much infirmity, learned men being also so
many; for as their worthier parts and abilities are fitter for undertakings of
greater weight, wherein the Church has need of them all* so for my self I
have had more occasion perhaps then many others to be versed in this
controversy, and considering our brethren teach, that every Abridg.
lawful Minister has a voice for determining of Church orders, I cannot
fairly be denied to tender my service, (such as it is) to God and his Church,
for the defense of the public order established. Especially when I owe the
fruits of my some what more-mature understanding, for a due compensation of the
error of my younger time, too flexible to the resolutions of well-meaning
ignorance, worthy, which I should repent of. I know it had been a quieter way
for me to have reserved my thoughts to my self, and gone in a more private
course of serving God, for how hard measure I shall find of some that are
contrary-minded, I do plainly foresee; but God will never cease to vindicate
his glory and worship from the injuries which even his own servants shall
offer thereunto with what pretext soever they labor to bear it down. And
this advantage we have, that their opposing of kneeling to the Lord in his own
ordinance, seems to be a great indecorum in them, which make profession of the
greatest devotion and mortification. What would they say to blessed Bradford,
of whom it is reported, that his continual study was upon his knees.

Now (most noble Gentlemen) that I presume to present my thoughts to the world
in the countenance of your worthy names, I had reason good enough: for besides
some more private respects inducing, and that such Patrons I had need of who
are able to judge of the cause which: I handle, and themselves plentifully
defend it; (as in truth the countenance of learning and judgment is beyond the
countenance of an eminent place) This in special I have desired, both to give
some testimony to the world of mine honorable esteem of You, as likewise to
congratulate those Countries you live in, for their happiness in You both; who
are, (and let me speak it without the envy of any man) most worthy ornaments
to Religion, Learning, and Justice among them in these wretched times. Go on
(ever honored Knights) in seeking the glory of Almighty God, the good of the
Church, the welfare of your Country: and grow (which is not ordinary in great
men) in the exemplary practice of a godly life; the comfort whereof will be
your own, both in your consciences at that day; and in your names, which shall
be sweet and honorable by this means, as in other monuments of time, so in
your noble posterity: Fox which shall ever pray*

Your VVorpps humble servant according to his profession, THOMAS PAYBODY.

To the Christian Reader.
GEntle Reader. I pray thee be advertized of the Books I have undertaken to
answer, they are these. Abridgm. of Linc. Minist. Dispus. ag. kneeling, Perth
assembly, written by some Scotchmen. Survey of the Books of Com. Pr. a
certain Manuscript, which I light on, without the name of the Author (which
because it is in the hands of many, and much esteemed of, I thought needful to
be answered amongst the rest.) Ce^ta^ne books of Mr. W. Bradsh. Reply to the
defense of the three inn^cent ceremonues. In all which (with some others) I
have answered that which they say, concerning the gesture of the Lords Supper,
and further I meddle not with them. Therefore I let thee know, that I take not
upon me to be the defender of the Reverend and learned Bp of Cov* and Lichfi^l,
nor will my wrighting prevent the labor of any one; to whom his Lordship may
perhaps have committed that task; if yet that Reply can be judged worth
answering which is so scornfu^^ written. Only by the Evidence of his Lordships
book I could not well forbear to defend him against the greevous imputation
of mainteining idolatry, wherein I hope I shall not seem to be arrogant.

I will not trouble thee with the cause of my writing or publishing, since I
have witnesses enough for my justifiable proceedings in both. And for the
latter it is known, how I have bin urged with pressing reasons (some of which
I have to show) from such as are of good place: and of great judgment and
learning.

For my sincerity in answering I have thus much to testify. 1. that I have
used no carnal shifts or colorable evasions, but wholly grounded on the good
word of God. 2. my method will testify, which wholly tends to the credit and
advantage of our brethrens cause. 3 my fidelity will testify in producing all
which they wr^t^, and making the best of all their arguments, whereby they
shall see more put together against kneeling then (I suppose) any of them have
seen. 4. the learned will testify, to whose judgment and correction I have
already submitted my self. 5. my brethren may testify, in some part, whose
conferences and disputations I have been so far from declining, that (upon
their own appointments and offers) I have waited for them in vain. 6. the
Lord will testify, to whom I have been careful, in all the proceedings
which I have made, in some comfortable measure to approve my conscience.

For my plainness I need not much excuse my self. I deal with men who write
in the plainest manner; also the Argument (being of humble kneeling) is
Argumentum humile. Besides I thought it needful, partly by reason of the
ignorance, partly the disposition of the common sort, (despising any thing that
is not within their own understanding, calling it braine-knowledge) to deal
with them, as it were, by familiar communication.

If any man think I have not written mildly enough, I say with Mr. Cart^r.
They must not think much to be stricken with the back, who have stricken
others with the edge. I say further, sometimes they deliver such silly or
unchristian points, (as the Disp. about coheires, etc.) that it was needful to
answer with some rebuke. Yet protesting, for our brethren, who are otherwise
wise and godly men, I love them in the bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Of my Reader I heartily request, that he would cover my oversights and
infirmities with the mantle of love; and if he be scrupulous that he would not
suffer himself to be forestalled: that he would please to take the pains to
read through, not being discouraged with the rude and hasty generals in the
first part: that he would set himself to consider what I reason or answer, and
how the force of objections is taken away: that if he can be satified, he would
not be ashamed of men, or afraid of disesteeme of the world; but give God his
glory, the Church her due, and gain unto himself the sweet advantage of
frequent communicating, and finally make up the breach, to the end we may more
sweetly join against the common Adversaries of the Gospel.

The practice of two sorts of men I utterly abhor: 1. of them which being
themselves vile and profane, should hence take occasion to reproach our
brethren for professing to make conscience of their ways. I will be no
encourager of such wretches whose case is miserable and damnable, whiles the
infirmities (such as the best men have) of them which strive sincerely to know
the truth, and walk according to their knowledge, shall never be imputed to
their condemnation. 2. Of them who will be censurers though no readers,
speaking evil of the things they know not; or if they read, read but to
scoff and cavil, having not a spark of good judgment, discretion, or
charity: I look for many such, but we must all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ.

Lastly, to those persons that can be contented to take it at my hands I would
give this counsel. 1. To think as they would be thought of, to speak as they
would be spoken of. to do as they would be done to. 2. To consider, that it is
not known that any Christian since the world was created, has suffered
trouble in confession against kneeling to God in his holy ordinance.

ERRATA.
The first word notes the error, the second the correction:

The first number the page, the second the line.

PIsculi Pisciculi 15. 3. Lawful, Unlawful. 15. 8) Gesture. No Gesture. 24.
12) Aims. Agrees 33 4) Thing Kinle. 38. 8) Orderly Ordered 39. 7) Not all. Not
at all. 42. 30) Your order. Our order 48. 23) Not one But one. 50. 28. It is to
be. It is to be. 50. 37) Which are assured. They then which are assured. 53. 14
Deem Deny. 53. 17) Clear that discubimus. It as clear that discumbimus. 63
26) In a matter. in a manner. 64. 1. Purposed Proposed. 64. 15) Against
another. One against another. 76. 36) Necessary Not necessary. 102. 9) Are you
admitted. Are you not admitted. 149. 25) Methodical* Am^thotical. 158. 24) New.
Word. 175. 10) Request. Regest. 228. 20. and 40 c. 19) Either O^h^r. 231. 10)
Cannot Can. 233. 1) Adoration. Veneration. 302. 10. Deserve. Do serve. 302 24)
Receiving. Reciting 349. 23) Answer Easy Answer 377. 31) Your Our. 391. 2)
Teachers. Hearers. 489. 18) These Thirdly these: 91: 32.

Margin. Opposite: Apposite: 2) Josephus: Joseph's. 64 Another in Repl^ Another
in a manner Repl. 143.

It is true, the gesture. And where as you mention the Papists gesture. 412: 37.

Some man has dishonestly added a Q in marg of 215, 281. against the text;
that p. 215. demands, as if our superiors were not to be obeyed in things
otherwise indifferent. Let others look to that, in p. 281.

Courteous Reader, other faults in poyntings, parentheses, letters, figures, or
what else thou find, I entreat thee to bear, and correct, for I could not
attend the Press, and I hope thou may find my meaning.

A Table of my order in this Book.
In PART. 1.
I have explained certain general prin^s concerning gestures, a^ their nature
and use, chap. 1. and manner how the word directs in them, chap. 2. and then
of things indifferent and Gods worship, chap. 3.
In PART. 2.
I come to the Controverses itself and first I answer the Arguments against
kneeling at Sacrament as it as considered in it self: and therein 1. The
general Argument, that kneeling i^ a will worship, answered, chap. 1. 2. The
particular Arguments that, 1. It is against Gods express commandment,
answered, chap. 2. 2. That it is against the example of Christ, answered, chap.
3. 3. That it is against nature. 1. More generally, that it is ind^ce^s,
answered, chap. 4. 2. More specially, that it is against a Table Gesture,
answered, chap. 5.
4. That it is against the collections of holy Scripture, ^^ 1. Against the
degnity of Christian Communicants, answered, chap. 6. 2. Against the duty of
the Communicants, answered, chap. 7. 3. As a private worship during the
public, answered, chap. 8.



In PART. 3.
I answer the Arguments against kneeling taken from certain accidental
respects, for kneeling is said to be 1. Against Christian liberty, answered,
chap. 1. 2. Against piety. 1. Because it is impiously enjoined in our own
Church, namely, 1. As a significant gesture, answered, chapter 2. 2. To be used
idolatrously, answered, chapter 3.
2. It is devised and polluted by Idolatrous Papists, answered, chap. 4.
3. Against charity, ^^ 1. Being a scandalous gesture, answered, chap. 5. 2.
Condemning all other Churches since the Apostles, answered, chap. 6.


A JUST APOLOGY FOR THE GESTVRE OF of kneeling in the act of receiving the
Lords Supper.
CHAPTER 1.


Of Gestures in general.
and part thereof, is externally situate, that self same behavior and
positure of the body, we call a bodily gesture. Gestures be of two sorts,
namely principal and inferior. I call those principal, which be independent
of other gestures, and they be four: first, standing: secondly; sitting:
thirdly, kneeling: fourthly, lying along. Every one of which does well consist,
and is commonly used by it self, without the help either of inferior
gestures, or else one of another. Yet it is to be observed, that kneeling and
lying along have oftentimes in use one and the same consideration: That which
falling upon the face was amongst the Jews, the same is kneeling now-adayes
amongst us Christians: Thus the disputer very expressly determines, Disp. page
156.
and further infers thereupon in this manner: Therefore (says he) what
places of Scripture speak of prostrating our selves, or of other forms of
personal adoration, (which he also adds) those I interpret a^ meant also by
the Holy Ghost of the forms and fashions of corporal worship, ^nterteined
amongst us in this climate of the world, and so to conclude with as much
pertinency and strength, for or against ours, as they do for or against those
of the Jews. Herein I think the disputer has said very well; and if the
Ministers and himself will stand to this learning, then is there greater
liberty of proofs and testimonies of Scripture to the purpose of this Treatise
ensuing: so that in effect we shall have but three contradistinct principal
gestures; standing, sitting, and prostration, comprehending both kneeling and
falling down.

: And of this sort there be many gestures sometimes belonging to one member, as
when the hands be lift up, spread forth, and smitten upon the breast; the eyes
look upwards, or downwards, and such like, none of all which can be used, but
either in the gesture of standing, or in the gesture of sitting, or in the
gestures of prostration: and therefore are they not unfitly termed gestures of
an inferior alloy; (having indeed a reserved use sometimes of their own, but)
yet are always expressed under one of the great gestures, wherein the bulk of
the whole body is situate, like the several colors of the rainbow without
one fashion of an arch; or the particular situations of towns and places under
one Horizon. Now of the use of all gestures in common, I lay down the three
following rules grounded upon holy Scripture.

The first rule of Gestures.
consider not; that kneeling it self is a civil gesture, as well as standing
and sitting, if it be applied to civil occasions: and so, standing and sitting
be religious gestures as well as kneeling, if they be Though sitting be in it
(...) civil, yet a (...) to an holy use, as in the Sacrament, it is not so
Disput page 50.
applied to religious exercises. And this is also true of the lesser gestures,
so far as they be intended, and referred to the worship of God; as lifting up
of the hand, or eye, etc. when notwithstanding they be plainly civil, in a
civil business.

: sitting in the exercise of the word is such: for look what gesture is by us
at any time conveniently applied to the due celebration of holy duties, the
same is doubtless a bodily worshipping; inasmuch as thereby the body joins
with the soul in religious performance. It is true that the word [worship] in
Scripture is frequently restrained unto prayer and thanksgiving; but that no
more denies sitting or standing in the exercise of the word to be
worship-gestures, then the exercise of the word it self to be a
worship-ordinance. But, secondly, some gestures again be called gestures of
worship in a more special respect of adoring; as by baring or bowing of the
head; by bowing of the body; either by inclination or prostration, etc. And
where the Scripture makes mention of worship, it commonly means some such
humble gesture, (as also the original signifles, which afterward I will
show.) Yea the Scripture sometimes expressly contradistin guisheth the word
[worshipping] to the exercise of the word; as, one fourth part of the day they
read and heard the word of the Lord; another fourth part of the day they
confessed and worshipped, Nehemiah. 9. 3. Now adoring gestures be more
specially gestures of worship, both because they be distincter and deeper
expressions of worshipping, and because God is more directly and Not that any
gesture o^ action respects not God immediately, as it is worshipping, for even
sitting in the exercise of the word, as (wo^sh^^^^^^) respects God
immediately: but then also it has an immediate respect: but that is no
worshipping to the word, for the commodious receiving whereof it is purposely
chosen and used. Now adoring gestures are first chosen and serviceable to
worship Gods Majesty, without any such immediate respect of being made
opposite to the one receiving of the sensible matter of rel^gious or
Ec^lesiasticall businesses.
immediately served by them: therefore for distinctionsake I will call such
humble gestures in Gods worship, (as they be usually called amongst Drumes and
others) by the term of [adoring] gestures; holding it certain (in a general
sense) notwithstanding that other gestures of purpose chosen and used for
performing of religious duties and exercises, are also expressions of outward
worship.

Sect. 6. Furthermore, we must know that gestures be either voluntary used, or
upon constraint and necessity. They which lie in prison under locks and bolts,
are sick upon their beds, have infirmities in their bodies, are let by the
company and place, etc. cannot choose that gesture which they may deem to be
the fittest for them; but whiles their inward intents and desires be right in
such case, the unfittest gesture countervailes such worship, as they would
express, if they had the liberty of choosing the best, which is denied unto
them. And so much of the first rule.

The second rule of Gestures,
Job was; or ravished with the wonderful experience of Gods mercies, as was
that Samaritane, casts himself down at the feet of his blessed God and
Savior, as both Job and the Samaritane did, Job. 1. 20. Luke 17. 15, 16. So in
all ordinary occasions of laying open our vileness, of acknowledging of Gods
undeserved love unto us, or of soing and begging for pardon of sin, and
relief in our necessities; prostration upon the knees is a sitting and
beseeming gesture. Standing is a gesture fit for confession of our faith.
Lastly, sitting is a gesture sitting to Gods worship for meditation. And this
discretion I find (says Disp. Page 2.
the disputer) observed by the Church of England, as may appear by the
directions to this purpose in the Communion book. Thus in several services of
God, there is a convenient use of some gestures before other, as it is on both
sides confessed. Yea, I will add one point more, that it seems not so fit,
that occasional worship should command the kind of gesture from the maine
worship in hand, but rather that the maine worship have a gesture answerable to
it self. And this is the second rule.

The third, and last rule of Gestures.


Instance of Prayer.
Mark. 11. 25. So Abraham, and Solomon, and the Publican, etc. stood before the
Lord in prayer, Genesis 18. 22, 23. 1 Kings 8. 55. Luke 18. 13. Secondly, It is
allowed with sitting: King David went in, and sat before the Lord, and prayed,
2 Samuel 7. 18. Elijah sat down under a ^uniper tree, and prayed. Christ made
the people to sit down, and then prayed for a blessing upon the creatures,
Mark. 6. 39, 40, 41. So Luke. 24. 30. Thirdly, it is allowed with prostration,
both upon the face and knees. Jesus fell on his face, and prayed, Mat. 26. 39.
Jesus kneeled down, and prayed, Luke. 22. 41. So Abraham fell upon his face,
and prayed, Genesis 17. 3. Daniel and Stephen kneeled down, and prayed, Daniel.
6. 10. Acts. 7. 60. Thus prayer is allowed in all the absolute gestures.

Of Thanksgiving, and singing of Psalms.
Levites were to stand every morning to thank and praise the Lord, and
likewise at even, 1 Chronicles. 23. 30. Psalm. 134. 1. 135. 2. Great multitudes stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms
in their hands, cried with a loud voice, saying; Salvation to our God, etc.
Revel. 7. 9, 10. Secondly, it is allowed with sitting: when Jesus and his
Disciples had sung a Psalm, they went out into the Mount of Olives, Mat. 26.
30. Our brethren at least will not deny (I suppose) this Psalm to have been
sung in the gesture of sitting. Moreover Jesus gave thanks, when the company
was set down, John. 6. 10. Matthew. 15. 35, 36. Thirdly, it is allowed with
prostration both upon the face, and knees. The four Beasts, and four and
twenty Elders, fell down before the Lamb, and they sung a new song, saying;
thou art worthy, etc. Revel. 5. 8, 9. O come, let us sing with
thanksgiving-with Psalms, let us worship and bow down, and kneel before the
Lord our Maker, Psalm. 95. verse 1, 2, 6. Thus Thanksgiving even in singing of
Psalms is allowed in all the absolute gestures.

Of the exercise of the word.
Deuteronomy. 29. 10. Ezra opening the book to read in it, (together with other
Levites,) distinctly; to give the sense and meaning of it unto the people; all
the people stood, Nehemiah. 8. 5, 7, 8. Ehud said, I have a message from God
unto thee; then Eglon rose up out of his seat, Judge. 3. 20. Secondly, it is
allowed with sitting: they sit before thee as my people, and hear thy words,
but they will not do them, Ezechiel. 33. 31. whiles some of the Prophets be
speaking; others that hear, sit by, 1 Cor. 14. 30.

Cor. 14. 25. but also that the word it self may be lawfully received with an
adoring gesture. First the nature of the business does in sound reason
justify this, how can it be impiety to receive upon our knees a message from
the God of heaven? And though God speak not immediately; yet he speaks, as if
he spoke immediately, and is altogether as much present. Secondly Scripture is
clear for bowing both of the head, and body, in hearing of Gods word. Aaron
spoke the word of the Lord to the children of Israel, and when they heard it,
they bowed their heads and worshipped, Exodus 4. 30, 31. Moses called the Elders
of Israel, and taught them the word of the Lord, then the people bowed the
head, and worshipped, Exodus 12. 21, 27. Iehaziel spoke the word of the Lord to
Iehesaphat, and all Judah, then Iehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the
ground, and all Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the Lord
worshipping, 2 Chronicles. 20. 14. 18. When the Apostles heard that voice, (this is
my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him) they fell upon their
faces, Mat: 17. 6. One came unto Christ, and kneeled upon his knees, whom
Christ instructed (as it appears) in that gesture, Mark. 10. 17. But
Objections are made against these examples, as follows.

extraordinary. I answer, (besides that there is only that of the Apostles,
which can to our case be justly called extraordinary) if they be such, yet they
will prove as much as I desire; namely, that it is not in it self unlawful to
hear God speaking unto us in the gesture of kneeling: but then Abraham's
extraordinary example shall allow us for killing our-children. I answer,
extraordinary examples be either contrary to the rule expressed, or according
to it; from those to these it is absurd to reason: And you can show no
expressed commandment, or absolute rule for the gesture of hearing, whereunto
these examples be contrary. Secondly, again it is objected, that the adoration
mentioned in these examples was performed when the word was spoken, not in the
act of speaking. I answer, if it were so, yet so long as it was done by
occasion of the word, it is enough for my purpose, if adoration may be used
when the word is delivered in the end of the action for the words sake, why may
it not (out of the case of scandal) be used in the beginning, or middle also?
But except it be given you, it cannot be prooved, that the bowing and
worshipping was used in these examples, after the word was heard, and not also
in some time of hearing it. And some of you confess on this manner, When they
received the law of the Passever, they bowed the head, and worshipped, Exodus
12. 27. yet they did not so in the eating of it; they were more reverent and
devout in hearing the law of it out of the mouth of Moses, then in the
participation of ^^. Perth. Assemb. page 45.
In which words do you not compare the act of hearing, with the act of
receiving, in that allowing there was adoration, in this denying? Now of
adoration denied in the Passover it is to be spoken in due time; here it is
confessed in the exercise of the word, and I seek no further in this place.
Thirdly, it is objected, that all adoration mentioned in these examples is not
kneeling. I answer, the Ruler at our Saviors instruction was upon his knees:
the Apostles, and Ieboshaphat with his company fell upon their faces: The
Israelites, which heard first Aaron, and then Moses, are said only to bow
their heads, worshipping: but so long as they adored, it serves my turn; for
who will grant adoration lawful in the time of hearing, and yet contend about
the degree? especially, when from any one form of personal adoration, used
among the Jews, we may conclude with equal pertinency, and strength to any
one used amongst us, so we must remember the true rule of the disputer
mentioned before, Sect. 2. and so much for testimonies.

they kneel for their Will you allow them to kneel at Sacrament for their
case-sake also?
case-sake only: I answer, if you speak of a needful and lawful case, (and
not of ^azinesse, and mere satisfaction of the flesh; which surely you cannot
always accuse our women of, when they kneel in Sermon time) it is sufficient to
quit the gesture of kneeling in the exercise of the word from being damnable in
it self: for out of doubt that gesture wherein a man or woman (without
offense) can most comfortably In this case kneeling is a gesture of general
worship only.
serve God, is a fit gesture of the worship in hand; because it is nor used by
godly persons merely for case, but respectively to the worship; that God (the
body being eased) may be served of them the better. And this liberty was never
condemned in any age, that I can tell of from the beginning. But let me ask
you a question; suppose In this case kneeling is a gesture of special worship
or adoration.
that women (who may kneel in our assemblies without offense) do by their
kneeling secretly in themselves intend (according as the word working in their
hearts gives them occasion) to adore; will you say, that this adoration of
theirs is unlawful: I am persuaded you will not say so, whiles the Lord is
God, worthy to be worshipped, when he utters his voice and will to us in his
Sanctuary. Then hence, and our of that which has been said before, it
follows, that the gesture of kneeling, or other manner of adoration, is
lawful in it self, in the act of hearing Gods word read or preached. And thus
hearing of the word is allowed in all the absolute gestures.

Of Sacrifice.
Heb. 10. 11. Aaron offering incense, stood between the living and the dead,
Numb 16. 47, 48. The Priests could not stand to minister by season of the
cloud, 2 Chronicles. 5. 14. Their office was to stand before the Lord, and the
congregation to minister both to the Lord, and to them, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. Numb. 16
9. But to be plain, I do confess, that the Priests employments and
businesses did often require of them standing and walking. But was it lawful
for the people to stand in the time of sacrificing? It was so: When the Priests
and people were ministering, and offering, the gesture of all the congregation
of Israel was standing, 2 Chronicles. 5. 14. chap. 6. 3. Also a Chron. 7. 4, 5, 6.
You burn incense to Baal, offer meate-offerings to the Queen of heaven, and
power out drinke-offerings unto other gods, and will you then come, and stand
before me in this house, (namely to offer sacrifice unto me?) Jeremy. 7. 9, 10,
18, 21. Secondly, 1 Samuel 9, 11, 22 Nehem. 8. 17. speaks not of sitting in the
act of offering, which is the point in hand, but of eating only.
Offering of sacrifice was allowed with sitting: all the children of Israel
came into the house of God, and sat before the Lord, and offered
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, Judge. 20* 26. Thirdly, offering of
sacrifice was allowed with the humble gestures of the body, both of inclination
and falling down: Abraham going to offer his son said unto his servants, Abide
you here with the Ass, and I and the ^ad will go yonder, and bow down, Genesis
22. 5. Thou shall set thy offering before the Lord thy God, and bow down
before the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 10. Elkanah went yearly to bow down, and
to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh, 1 Samuel 1. 3. Bring an offering,
and come before the Lord, bow down to him in the beauty of holiness, 1 Chronicles.
16. 29. In these four first places our translation reads worship, for to bow
down; but it is well known that the Hebrew word H^shtachvah signifies an
express humble adoring worship of the body, and is, if not the only, yet the
principal word which the Jews had ^o signify prostration upon the face:
(plura apud Habreos ho^o^ is exhibendi verba sum, hoc vero totius cerporis
prostrationem in terram significat, ex more ^^lentalium: Euxiorf lex Heb in
Shachah) I or better evidence of this, see the translations of the Septu^gint,
Tremel^us, and Moutanus. The Septuagint, is Proskune^^, which word in the new
Testament is evidently used for kneeling or falling down, (and so granted by
the Replyer, Repl. tar^ic. to Bp Mort. page 46.) he that pleases may see,
(Mat 2. 11. 8. 29 18. 14. 13. 15. 25. 18. 26. 20. 20. 28 9. Mark: 5. 6. 15 19.
Luke. 4. 7. John 9. 38. Acts. 10. 25. 1 C^r 14 25 Hebr. 11. 21. Revel. 3. 9. 4.
10. 5. 14. 7. 11. 11. 16. 19. verse 4, 10 21. 8.) Tremelius and Montanus do
commonly translate the word by the Latin, In^urvare, and Montanus of purpose
often puts Pagnines, Adorare, into his margin, and In^urvare into the place of
it And if at any time this word be put procultu divi^no, more largely, then it
is by a Synechdeche: so Iun. in Zechar. 14. 16. Therefore the proper
signification hereof is bowing down or prostrating the body. Neither do these
translatours allow any figure in the Scriptures which I have quoted: (Gen 22
Deuteronomy. 26. 1 Samuel 1. 1 Chronicles. 16.) Nor is there good reason thereof, so long as
with worshipping or adoring, the particular service of sacrificing is
mentioned. And moreover, that we may see the force of the Hebrew word, let us
further observe the same in the ordinary use of Scripture, even as it is
rendered in our translation. Abraham bowed himself toward the ground. Gen 18.
2. Lot bowed himself with his sae^e to the ground, Gen 19. 1. Abraham bowed
down himself before the people of the Land, Genesis 23 12. Abraham's servant
worsh^pped the Lord to the earth, Genesis 24. 52. Let Nations bow down to thee,
let thy Mothers sons bow down to thee, Genesis 27. 29. When Esa^ met him Jacob
bowed himself to the ground seven times, so the women and child en bowed
themselves, Gen 33 3. 6: 7. Joseph's brethren bowed down themselves before him
with their faces to the earth, Genesis 42 6. 43. 26. And (for it is superfluous to
mention any more places) thus the word is commonly used in the old Testament.
Wherefore I dare say that my former quotations do prove, that adoring
gestures were allowed in sacrificing.


I will add 2 Chronicles. 29. where Hezechiah and the congregation are said to bow
themselves down three several times, when they were offering sacrifices:
verse. 28, 29, 30. Also Mica. 6. where the Prophet thus speaks: Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I
come before him with burnt offerings, etc? verse 6. The Kings of Tarshish, and
of the Isles shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts, yea all Kings shall fall down before him, Psalm. 72. 10, 11. When the
fire consumed the burnt offering, (which was the principal instant in the
circumstance of time, about all the business of the offering) all the people
fell upon their faces, Levit. 9 24. The Prince shall stand by the post of the
gate, and the Priests shall prepare his offerings, then he shall worship or bow
down at the thresholde of the gate, Ezech. 46. 2. The wise men fell down
before the child Jesus, and worshipped him, and presented unto him gifts,
gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Matthew. 2. 11. The four Beasts, and four and
twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having golden Vialls, full of odours
or incense, Revel. 5. 8. And thus much of humble adoration in sacrificing and
offering. And thus then offering of sacrifice was allowed in all the absolute
gestures.

Of Circumcision.
Abraham of it, Genesis 17. both when Circumcision was instituted, as also when it
was first of all to be received by men of years, especially, when the thing it
self (for ought I conceive) might be performed in standing, sitting, or
prostration: whether they kneeled or no, as it cannot be affirmed, so neither
can it be denied. But this is the only certain thing concerning the gesture
of Circumcision, that God spoke nothing in his word at all to his people of it;
and therefore could not any gesture in that Sacrament in it self be unlawful
and sinful unto them.

Of Baptism.
They went into the water, and then being baptized came up out of the water
again: whereof may be gathered, that it is a thousand to one, they did not sit
in the time of Baptism; and inasmuch as they were immersed, head and body
within the water, [where of Tertullian, nos pisculi secundum ikthun nostrum
Jesus Christumin aqua nascimur: lib. de Baptism. it is most likely they kneeled
down: for standing would not be so fit for immersion of the body, except they
went deep into the water, which is not to be imagined: howsoever it was not
lawful to kneel in the act of baptizing; the same being joined with
confession of sins, (as Matthew. 3 6.) and calling on the name of the Lord,
Acts. 22. 16. Nay because Baptism is a real homage done unto our Lord, a
yielding up our selves to become his subjects, servants, soldiers; not only
humble adoration at that time may very well beseem us, but also in this
respect it is truly said, that Baptismus est mayor adoratione, (Athanas. Sermon.
prim. Dialogist. contra Macedonianum:) for what adoration can be so great, as
that same homage, worship, and subjection, which the only receiving of
Baptism professes, the due receiving performs? But what need I make this
remonstrance; there is nothing more certain, then that the gesture of the
Scripture-examples of Baptism is altogether uncertain. Therefore whiles God
commands no gesture, commends no gesture, dispraiseth no gesture in the act of
baptizing, there cannot be either necessity, or impiety, in standing, sitting,
or kneeling; in themselves I mean, as if the nature of Baptism did simply
either require, or refuse, either the one or the other. And now I will pass to
the Passover.

Of the Passover.
Chron. 30. 16. 35. 5, 10. Secondly, there is a strong probability of standing
implied in that law. Thus shall ye eat it, with your loins girded, your
shoes on your feet, your staff in your hand, and ye shall eat it in have;
It is the Lords Passover, Exodus 12. 11. Secondly, for sitting: Jesus and his
Disciples sat down at the Passover, Mat. 26. 19, 20. Our brethren at least
will take this for a certain example of sitting. Thirdly, for humble adoring,
and prostrating of the body, that perhaps may be referred hither, in John. 12.
20. and which is showed before in offering of sacrifice. But because I am
resolved to rest in no uncertainties, or half proofs, I will take another
view of the gestures of the Passover again, and of the proofs which we have
mentioned unto them severally. First, for standing at the Passover, the
practice of the Priests was no pattern for the children of Israel; for their
standing was occasionally necessary for their attendance, and ministry about
the Passover it self, and the Passeover-offerings. And for that commandment,
Exodus 12. 11. besides that no gesture is expressed, it is only meant of the
Passover in Egypt, before the people were gotten out thence, and not of their
Passeovers in the land of Canaan. And I think herein there will be no great
controversy with See Trem in Exodus 12 11 Bez in Mat. 26. Seal. de emendat temp
lib. 6 page 534. Park. of the Cross, chap. 1. Sect. 20. Perth. Assemb. page 35.
you. Secondly, for sitting, let it be, that our Savior, and his Disciples
sat at the Passover, what was that to the direction of any Jew for the
gesture of sitting, for the space of above fifteen hundred years together
before that time? nay Christ's sitting was not useful unto the Jews at all,
who is never said to sit at the Passover, till that time when he did quite and
for ever abolish the use of it: So to them it was unlawful to eat a Passover
any more after this, which our Savior is said to have celebrated in sitting.
Thirdly, for prostration let it be, that the Scripture yields no particular
instance of it, in the act of eating the Lamb; what follows of all this?
verily thus much; that the Jews from the time that the Passover was
instituted, to the time that it was abolished, had no commandment, no example,
no mention of any gesture in the Passover but that of their Priests, which
concerned them not, but was proper only to themselves, because of their office
of Priesthood. Therefore if a Jew had kneeled at Passover, should he have
sinned, (out of the case of scandal?) what commandment had he broken? what
example could he have been reproved, or checked by? what place in all the old
Testament did ever commend or condemn standing, or sitting, or prostration at
the Passover, either simply or comparatively? Nay, look upon the Law or
ordinance of the Passover, Exodus. 12. 43. etc. and you find not one word of
the gesture. And in Numbers, 9. thus the LORD speaks. The Passe-ouer shall
be kept according to the Ordinance of it, and according to the manner of it,
and according to all the Rites of it, and according to all the Ceremonies of
it, Verse. 3. 14. And yet behold neither in that place, nor in any other, is
there any thing appointed about the gesture. And so much of the Passover; and
of the Sacraments. And thus appears, that Circumcision, Baptism, and the
Passover, be not disallowed in any absolute gesture.

An Observation added of all Divine worship under the Gospel.
under the Gospel. Namely, that GOD in the holy Scripture sometimes puts
kneeling for all the worship of the Gospel, Psalm. 72 9. 11. 86. 9. Isa. 66.
23. 45. 23. Now it is true it does not follow, that kneeling is the only
gesture of Evangelical worship therefore, but because kneeling is put (by a
Synecdoche) for all expressions of outward worship, it seems strange, that any
worship under the Gospel should abhor (in it very nature) from it, as if
that gesture could not without impiety be thereunto applied. And this passage
seems not unworthy consideration. Thus much of the liberty of Kneeling and of
all other absolute gestures in the solemn, and public ordinances of Religion.



CHAP. 2. Of the manner how the Word directs in gestures.
Example is no opposite member but subordinate here, as I show after Sect. 6;
only I take to this method, for better ordening my brethrens arguments in the
is example.
express example. Implied also is twofold; 1. The light of Nature, which the
word establishes. Secondly, sour'd collections or inferences of good reason
grounded upon the Scripture of truth. particular controversy of kneeling at
Sacrament, one principal whereof

Abridg page 44.
; that [That is condemned by the Word, not only, which is done against the
warrant thereof, but that also which is done besides it.] Now by [warrant] the
Ministers understand both the warrant of commandment, and the warrant of good
example, and the warrant of nature, and also the warrant of collection, and
consequence out of general grounds and rules.

This last appears in the place of the abridgement, where the proposition is
laid down; for the Ministers intent in bringing in such a proposition there,
is to show, that no Ceremonies should be imposed and used, but which are
according to the general rules of the Word. What then shall be said to the
Proposition? Surely it is either very senseless, or very false, as thus
appears.

to Gods word, at least in respect of general grounds, and rules (as who can
doubt this?) then are not the members of this distinction [Against, and
besides] opposite; for that which is called [besides] is always either
according to, or contrary.

If neither commandment, example, nature, nor sound deduction does make an
action warrantable unto us, is not every such action forbidden by the word of
faith undoubtedly, though it be not forbidden expressly? then this [besides] is
just contrary. If neither commandment, example, nature, nor sound deduction
does condemn, and reprove an action unto us, is not every such action allowed
by the word of grace undoubtedly, though it be not required expressly? and then
[besides] the word is just according unto it.

but that is a liberty of actions in vtramque partem; when of several things
proposed I may lawfully do either one or other. And this I assume by inference
of the word either in respect of its silence in such things, or speech without
peremptory commandment; (nature and reason also, simply not prohibiting, or
enjoining.) But that I may not relinquish my purpose, let us see, how Gods will
is to be conceived of us for the bodily gestures.

Of Gods Commandment in Gestures.
As is to be see no before chapter 1 of the third rule of gestures.
upon occasion. I will give an instance; if any gesture be commanded in any
worship, in all the holy Scripture, it is kneeling in prayer. The Abridg. says
kneeling is commanded of God in prayer. Page 42.
The only general commandment of it (I suppose) is Psalm. 95. 6. Which yet
indeed is rather an exhortation, then a commandment; but let it be a plain
commandment, as it has the force of one, and seems to be an universal
direction for solemn acts of prayer and thanksgiving; will any body say now,
that it absolutely binds the conscience, so as in public solemn
thankesgivings it is a sin not to kneel always therefore? the Ministers be
far from this mind, who Abridgem. Page 67.
say, That it is evident by Scripture, that kneeling is not the fittest gesture
to be used in thanksgi^ing. Wherefore commandments of gestures in prayer, and
other services much more, be limited to occasion; for like occasion ever
happens not, and the judgment of such occasion is varied according to
circumstances of ability, company, time, place, edification. Well there is no
express and absolute commandment of any one gesture.

Of good examples of Gestures.
express commandment, or light of nature, or certain inference of good
reason, of literal evidence, or unchangeable equity, whereupon they be
grounded. In these cases they bind to a necessity of imitation: yet in truth,
not they so much, as the other infallible directions, which they serve but to
illustrate; and when the Scripture stirs us up to follow the steps of good
men; it is but either that we might be drawn to the rule by them, as Augustine
was by the Church; or else that their lives should be as real and visible
commentaries of the law, for help of our ignorance; or lastly, that they might
work upon our affections only, and so to be not rules, but motives for
instigation of our dullness.





who stood in the same worship sometimes, sat sometimes, kneeled sometimes,
and so forth indifferently. And if you read of our Savior sitting at
Passover but once, David sitting at prayer but once, etc. that takes not away
the mixed use of gestures, but only shows, what one man did one time, another
man another time upon occasion. So Historians must mention singular passages
and occurrences, as the history (which they describe) leads them unto it.

Hezechiah being sick, turned to the wall, wept and prayed; must not dejected
people look up to heaven now in confession, and prayer? Must they of necessity
smite upon their breasts in confession, and prayer? are sick people bound to
turn toward a wall in weeping and praying? Contradiction; for if one gesture
be necessary, then cannot another be necessary in the same case. Add unto
these, a miserable bondage inferred in all exemplary circumstances; wherein yet
if our brethren grant unto us, and take to themselves liberty at pleasure, as
in time, place, all gestures in some cases; can they plead prescription, in
some singular example only, as they list themselves? Especially when the
Scripture enjoining imitation of good men, speaks always of substantial
duties, and not circumstances. Only they include some circumstances, and
gestures, when they think good, secluding, and excepting others again at
their own pleasure. And yet there is no sound reason betwixt that which is
included, and excluded; but that the law of imitation should press all
special gestures in Gods solemn worship or none. So much for example, and for
Gods will expressed concerning gestures.

Of Natural light in Gestures.
Cor. 11. 14. sometimes reason it self conuinceth. First, Nature has no doubt
respect in gestures, because they be natural gestures. Hereof I propose three
points.

Treatise of Diu. worcester. page 13.
as nature has fitted them. But how ridiculous is it to say, that Nature has
not fitted kneeling to worship God in any of his Ordinances, as the Author of
Ibid.
the Treatise of Divine worship affirms. When indeed Nature speaks for
gesture so much, as for kneeling in this case of worshipping; but the nature
that he speaks of, is not the created aptness and fitness of the gesture it
self, but a certain decorum only grounded upon the fashions and manners of
men in civil matters. We shall speak thereof particularly afterward.

To this purpose, Treat. of Diu. worcester pa. 30
Not to be esteemed human inventions, but Gods ordinances, because they be
Natural circumstances of worship. I pray let this truth be remembered full
well.

Mat^ob. salut. lib. 3. cap. 16.
was commonly used at the Sacrifices of Hercules.

Lastly, of good Collections, or inferences for direction in gestures.
1. Cor. 14. 40
not out of order. Secondly, they must be decent, Ibid.
not unbeseeming the worship, or worshipper. Thirdly, they must stand with
peace, Verse. 33.
and not Schismatically make a rent in the Churches. Fourthly and lastly, they
must serve for edification Verse 26.
and not be scandalous, to hurt another man's conscience.



when the gesture for it own nature is commendably applied; besides in some
measure is orderly, and decent; and finally the offense taken thereat hurts
no man's soul in the sundamentall respects of its welfare.

CHAP. 3. Of things indifferent, and of Divine worship.


Christ Reply general to Bishop Mort chap. 1. Sect. 5.
has left unto his Church to dispose of such circumstances, as in their kind
are necessary, but in particular determination do vn^^, as time, plaece,
appointing of what Psalms to be sung, and such like circumstances of order,
and comelynes, equally necessary, in civil and religious actions. And that it
may appear, this replyer does not deny gestures to be in the nature of such
circumstances, he speaks this by occasion of interpreting of Calvin, and
allows his saying and meaning to be only good; and yet if Calu. In^t^t. lib.
4. cap. 10. Sect. 30.
Calvin be looked into, it will be found, that he gives instance in
geniculation, or kneeling in prayer. Again, another says, Treatise of Diu.
worship. page 12.
In natural ceremonies, that is in gestures, there must be concurrence both of
nature and will in the framing and use of them, and therefore are such, as may
upon some special or particular occasion be omitted or suppressed. And this
speech he intends and applies to Gods worship, as will appear by that
which goes before and after to him which compares. Especially, it being a rule
among them, that natural and civil things, being used to Gods worship, loose
not their natural or civil properties. Again, Manuscrip. chap. 2.
one gesture may be left in the Sacrament, and likewise in prayer, and another
used instead of it, because sitting at Sacrament, and kneeling at prayer be
but of an indifferent nature. Again, another says, Disp. page 47.
There be circumstances in our actions of an arbitrary, and indifferent nature
(in Gods worship he means) such as for use or disuse are left to discretion.
So there be some personal, which determine in the person which uses them?
some national, which are not common to all countries and times, but proper to
the several nations and ages; wherein they received their birth, or allowance:
and he speaks this of gesture purposely, as in the place quoted it will
appear.

by their sitting, or standing at Table-blessing; by their standing or kneeling
at prayer; by lifting, or, not lifting up their hands or eyes, and such like;
it plainly appears. Will not outward gestures now be one sort of their
variable circumstances? and so consequently in themselves, actions indifferent.

ceremonies. First, (they say) They be necessary in their kind, but according
to particular determination they may be varied. Well. And is this note truer of
any thing then of gestures, which be simply necessary to Gods public worship,
but the kind of gesture may be determined diversely, as them selves (out of the
point of controversy) acknowledge as much as we?

They be equally necessary (say they) in civil and religious actions; And
such themselves do confess Treat. of diu. worcester. 15.
the gesture even of kneeling to be. And this thing indeed is plainer, then
that it stands in need of their testimony.

Lawful circumstances must be ordered by man (say they) not invented. But who
was ever heard to say, that gestures were man's inventions, who had any spark
of common light in him? B Mort. Def. general, Chapter 4 Sect. 21.
When Bishop Morton had charged upon the Ministers, that by their own reason
against the ceremonies; they condemned their own circumstances of order and
decency; for what act is there of gesture (says he) or any circumstance of
worship: which may not be accused in like manner? The Replyer Reply general
to B. Mort. Chapter 4. Sect. 21.
answers, that he does all, to reason from Ceremonies devised by man, and of
no necessary use, to those circumstances which are necessary in their kind,
neither are mere inventions of man. Giving the gestures (whereof the instance
was made) evidently to be such.

Another note they make is order, decency, etc. Such, as gestures most
certainly have, or else there is no order* decency, etc. to be sound in Gods
solemn worship which cannot be performed without them. And if there be any
other note besides, I assure my self the circumstance of gesture is capable
thereof, which I refer to consideration. As for the Treat^se Printed 1605. by
M. B
which is written Of things indifferent, there is nothing in it of any force
against the gestures, more then against eating, and drink^ng: so that, in a
word, it cannot be denied, that gestures be acts indifferent in regard of our
liberty for determining upon the election of them, as stands with convenience,
and edification.



2. Of Divine Worship.
: but honor done unto another. Divine worship is when Gods honor is done
either to God himself, to whom, it should be done; or to some other thing;
to which it should not. True worship of God is either largely taken, or with
restraint. In the largest exception of it, whatsoever is done with respect to
God according to his will we may call his true worship; but in stricter sense
(and that also which is more common) the word is referred only to acts and
exercises of religion. Thus it is restrained and used altogether in this
present discourse.

Man 4 10.
both to distinguish from unlawful Image Worship; (...), 42. 8.
and besides, from the lawful reverence of holy things, Leu 19. 30.
which is not called worship, but veneration. And it worship be only and
immediately to be performed to the Lord, it is most undoubted, Mica. 6. verse.
^. 7. 8.
that he only can teach, and authorize, the due, and lawful both matter and
manner.

See Chap. 1. Sect. 5. before.
special sense, is termed Adoration. And this bodily adoration, is either
implicit, or expressed. Implicit I mean, when the body, guided by the soul
attends to Gods service; although there be intended no special sign of
worshipping by the site or positure of it. Expressed adoration is, when some
such special gesture is used, which (according to the nature of the service of
God in hand) betokens worshipping more distinctly. And that again, is either
total, or partial. Total. when the whole body is laid along before the Lord.
Partial, when some one part, or member by it self adoreth, as when the body
is bended, the knee bowed, the hands, or eyes lifted up, etc.



[I speak not this, as if originally, we, and all we have and do that good
is, were not of God, I only call that our doing in Gods worship, which
proceeds and passes from us, by the Lords enabling: our duty to him (by
reason of his commandment) also engaging us.] Of the first sort of all, is the
exercise of the Word, which (though it be Gods excellent ordinance, yet) is a
worship no otherwise, but as we readily submit our selves to receive the same,
in obedience to him, whose word it is, and who reueales, and imparts it unto
us. Of the second sort be Prayers, See Perth. Assemb. p. 57.
Vows, Sacrifices, singing of Psalms, etc. wherein we do not only offer
our selves to God, but the very matter also, wherein every one of the said
Ordinances consists. Of the last sort be the Sacraments, the matter whereof
is partly yielded, and presented by us, partly received, and dispensed from
God, in the very act and instant of participation.



3. Of things indifferent and Divine worship joyntlie.
be both a personal worship, and a mutable I take (Circumstance) in a
general sense, as if I said Ceremony. I make no advantage (of the tea^me*)
call it what you will, it is mutable.
circumstance. And to make this plain we must know, that there be three
sorts of things belonging to the service of God. First, some things which be
merely and immutably worshipping; and such are the internal acts of the
soul. Secondly, Of these Circumstances, which are merely for decency, it is
true which the Replyer s^eaketh. There is no judicious Divine that uses to
call circumstances of mere order and decency, Worship. Repl. general to B.
Mort. chap. 2. Sect. 6. p. 19.
some which be merely matters of order, and decency; And such be many civil
things needful in Gods worship; as Pulpit, Seats, Table-cloath, etc. Thirdly,
some be middle things Media participationis.
partaking of both the other, as gestures be; for, knit unto the inward
actions of the soul, they be personal worshippings; yet notwithstanding
being mutable, and expressions of comeliness, they may be called matters of
order, and circumstance.

And because there is Controversy in this thing, let us further consider of it:

Reply general to B. Mort. chapter 2. Sect. 6. p. 20.
Worship is a necessary tribute of the Creature to the Creator, therefore is
not in man's choice whether it shall be paid or no. I answer it is so.
Personal worship in Prayer is necessary, personal worship in all holy
Ordinances of God is necessary; but yet kneeling in prayer is not necessary,
kneeling in all holy ordinances is not necessary therefore. And this is a
clear case. But then you will say, if we can be satisfied with the necessity
of worship, and our selves choose the manner how to perform it, any indifferent
thing may be brought into Gods worship: I answer, by no means, because
gestures be simple necessary for Gods outward worship in their kind, yea and
some particular gesture necessary upon occasion. So gestures are not used by us
in Gods worship because they be indifferent, but because they be necessary in
their kind, necessary upon occasion, though indifferent for the determining of
them.

Object. 2. Reply general to Bp. Morton, chapter 2. Sect. 6. p. 19
Worship does not vary according to man^ opinion, but consists in the nature
of the action is self. And what then? The nature of all natural gestures is
such, as well aiimes with the nature of every religious worship of God, as I
have proved before: so though worship in its spiritual nature, do never vary;
yet the expression never is upon occasion not lawfully variable.

Object. 3. All worship which is the invention of man is unlawful. I answer,
as if gestures were humane inventions, and not Gods ordinances. There is
nothing in all your books, that proves this; no not in the third Argument of
the Abridgement. Nay I will not be so idle to think you would apply These be
the proofs of the proposition of the third arg. in the Abridg.
[Exod. 204 Deuteronomy. 1232. Isai. 1. 1. 12. Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 23] against
gestures. Perhaps you will say, that gestures be Gods ordinances, and his
worship consists them. but the varying of them may be man's invention. But, this
would be objected to no purpose; for God who has appointed his outward worship
to stand in gestures, has in like manner appointed the variable use of them,
as I have sufficiently proved Chap. 1. at the th^rd rule of gestures.
already. Indeed men, may sometime choose a gesture, that may be scandalous, and
ill; and so such a particular variation may be unlawful by accident, as a good
work may be; but neither gesture, nor variation of gesture does the word or
God simply disallow, but rather the contrary.

Sect 4. etc.
before. And for worshipping, gestures cannot be denied: for they be personal
worships, or else God has no outward worship performed.

of their bodies; and behold there is no where to be found an absolute
restr^in^ of gestures, though outword worship necessarily stand in them:
whereby appears, that the law of worshipping gives liberty for the expression
of worship, (asoccasion is,) so long as Gods necessary worship be performed by
the body, and bodily gesture. And let my third rule of gestures (Chap. 1.)
serve to satisfy in this point; for if outward worship stand in gestures, it
is clear as the Sun shines, that outward worship may be variously expressed
as occasion requires.

Treat of div. worcester. page 6, 7, 8
outward worship is expression of inward, by signs, and vetes, which you call
Ceremonies, and natural Ceremonies (you say) be gesturest And these gestures
being personal outward worship (you Ibid page 11.
say) must needs be varied. Again, You Ibid page 16.
say, that Comeliness and decency may be safely reputed parts of divine
worship. And can you then offirme, that worship gesture may not be changed and
varyed? Are you content to say that the comeliness and decency, although of
mere circumstances, then which nothing is more variable, be parts of worship,
and yet can deny that personal worship is variable in gestures, which are
sarre more then mere circumstances? Perhaps you will say, decency and
comeliness is one, and never varieth. I answer, so personal worship is one in
diverse gestures: but as although comeliness becomelinesse still, yet the
circumstances may be changed, from which, applied to holy duties, comeliness
does arise: so worship is worship still, though the gestures be varyed, whereby
it is expressed.

Calvin give his sentence in this question: Kneeling (says Calv. Instit. lib.
4 cap 10. Sect. 30.
he) in prayer, (which is Gods special worship) is a part of the Apostles
decency: so that gestures (according to this testimony) may be called matters
of order and decency, as well as gestures of worship.

this point? Do not you use several gestures at several times in the very
same ordinance of set, and solemn prayer? who knows it not? well, and is one
of your gestures a personal worship, and not the other? so you might bring us
into a maze, and turn all reasoning into Quodlibets: better is the judgment
of the author of the Manuser. who speaks in this Manuseriag. kneel. chapter 2.
manner: The gesture of kneeling in prayer, though it be the best and fittest
gesture of all other, yet (when it pnooueth inconnenient) may be lawfully
changed into standing: because standing is a gesture of the same kind, and fit
to express our reverence and hamiligy toward God. Well then, it kneeling be a
personal worship, so is standing also. And so personal worship may be
expressed in gestures, though they be variable circumstances But what do I
spend so many words in such an easy case? let the judgment be now unto the
godly Reader.

And so much for the first part of this treatise, which shall serve for a
general introduction to that which follows. Now therefore (by Gods gracious
assistance) let us come to treat of the special gesture, in the act of
receiving the Lords Supper, which is the gesture in controversy.

WHAT GESTVRE IS LAWFVLL IN THE ACT OF receiving the Sacramental Bread, and
Wine.
CHAPTER 1.
Disp page 13.
the committing of a sin, and a transgression against the Lord; and he
indeanours to conclude it. Such in the most of his arguments expressly. Mr. W,
B. In the begin o^ this 8, arg.
says, it is unlawful in it self; (so he speaks generally of it, and of
other ceremonies.) Especially the Abridgement affirms, that kneeling is
Abridg p. 61.
contrary to the word every where* and at all times. And they say, i^ is
contrary to the institution, contrary to the second commandment, and use an
heap of Arguments to prove it in it self unwarrantable; which Arguments
therefore come now in place to be considered.

Whether kneeling be will worship?


Manuscrip against kneeling Chapter 1. Arg. 1.
We are expressly forbidden to do any thing as a worship unto God, which he
has not appointed and commanded:

But in this kneeling we shall do a worship, which he has not appointed and
commanded: 1 arg. ag. kneeling.
Therefore.

To the first Proposition I heartily yield, only explaining it by
distinguishing upon worship: worship is either substantial, and spiritual, or
ceremonial, and corporal. Substantial I mean, that of the heart:
Ceremonial I mean in a large sense, Treat. of di^. worsh. page 6, 7 warrant
me so to speak.
whatsoever is performed in bodily expression. Now the inward worship of God
must be appointed and commanded in every particularity; because it is
unchangeable, and stands in one self same manner absolutely. The bodily
expression must be commanded also; but this is done, either generally, when God
commands the whole body to do him service; or specially, when he prescribes
and allows in his worship inter changeable gestures, of standing, kneeling,
or falling down.

Supper. And this I declare by these evidences.

As Psalm. 95. 6
exercises of worship, or that it does not except and forbid it in any of them,
and particularly in the Lords Supper: and the force of this one answer you are
not able to refell, if it had no other fellows to back and second it.

Treat. of div. wors^. page 30.
say) that nature stands in stead of a direction. And so undoubtedly it does,
although both divine law, and humane, had therein been altogether silent.

[Isai. 45. 23.] We see ^ere (says he) Disp. page 157.
that the Lord makes the bowing of the knee a particular worship, and under the
name thereof, signifies the whole worship of the Gospel, whereunto the
Gentiles should be called. Is it possible now, that this Sacramental worship
of the Supper should be incompatible with bowing of the knee?

Baptism, Passover: for a bodily rite being necessary, and God not
determining man upon any one, leaves him at plain liberty. Such allowance must
by proportion be carried in the rite of the Lords Supper: (nay it cannot be
said suddenly, how many things God has left arbitrary in Sacraments, greater
things then the gestures, which are orderly only by general rules.)
Especially, look what allowance the Jews had for any gesture in Circumcision,
and Passover, and we have now for Baptism, the like have we for our kneeling
at the Lords Supper.

The proper nature of worship (says Reply general cap. 2. Sect 6.
one) ^^ not in holiness, and justice; but i^ honoring of God; and all
external ceremonies, whose proper use is the honoring of God, are external
worship, as all divinity shows. Now if the proper use of your standing at
Sacrament be for the honoring of Christ, a^ least as proper as of such
ceremonies as you oppugn, then behold the same is an external worshipping by
your own testimony. Again says another, Treat. of div. worsh. page 25.
All religious Ceremonies, or Ceremonies of religion are spiritual, that is,
are ordained for spiritual uses, and ends and not for civil, or temporal;
and therefore are outward notes and testimonies of th^se things that make us
spiritual men; and they are parts of spiritual honor, due unto him, that
instituteth the Sacrament. Now there is nothing more plain then that your
standing is a ceremony, or rite of religion, that is ordained for spiritual
uses, and ends, and not for civil or temporal; and so it is a part of
spiritual honor due unto God; and consequently it is an outward worship.
Again says the same man, Treat of div. worsh. page 5.
All special things done in Gods worship, are worship. Now if standing or
sitting at the Lords Supper, for which as for a matter of life and death, you
so earnestly strive, be not a special thing. I am far deceived: but that
(say you) i^ a special thing in Gods worship, which has no use out of his
worship. What and not that also which has use out of his worship? That is a
strange rule ^ for thereof it follows, that no gesture is a special thing in
Gods worship; because all gestures have use out of his worship: that speaking
in prayer is no special thing in Gods worship, because we speak in civil use
out of his worship: wherefore if standing be a special thing done in the
Supper, as kneeling is a special thing done in prayer, it is according to your
teaching to be, esteemed a bodily worship. Further more says the Abridgement,
Abridg. page 40
All Ceremnies ordained to teach by their mystical signification, are made
parts of God outward worship. This is your Proposition; and your selves also
make the assumption unto it; namely, that standing or Repl. partic. chap. 36.
sitting is a signifying part in the Lords Supper: and signifies many things
mystically, which in due place I will show. Therefore I will make the
conclusion that the Sacramental gesture, which your selves do stand on, is a
part of Gods outward worship.

And unto these your saying, I add an argument of mine own.

That maine carriage of the body, which i^ of purpose, and conscience, selected
to voyne with the inward devotion of the soul i^ Gods religious; or worship
ordinance, is a worship gesture, or a bodily worship.

But such is your sitting, such is your standing in the Lords Supper.

Therefore either of them is an outward worship.

There is no question in this reason, if the Proposition be sound: but let
them, which can, add aliquid amplius to make up a bodily worship.

Object. Why, there is no adoration in your sitting and standing? I answer,
that there is virtually adoration; and suppose there were none, is there no
worship, where adoration is not? That is a (...) unto me: for so long ^s there
is a worship-ordinance, and a worshipping soul^, there also the body
worshippeth, if the body (as in Sacramental service) be employed and required.
You will say, this is worshipping in a larger sense. I answer, it is not so
large a sense, but your argument takes hold of it as well as of
worship-gestures, which be expressly adoring: for (I pray) is it not true, that
we are forbidden to do any thing (in this Let the Reader mark this well, and
I wish my brethren to consider.
sense) as a worship unto God, which he has not appointed and commanded? But
now God never appointed or commanded standing at Sacrament.



Further will you stand upon the mentioning of the gesture of kneeling, when
you account the most excellent gesture in the world to be but indifferent? Must
indifferent things be prescribed, not only in their kind, but in their
application particularly? for thus you speak: Disp. page 2.
In prayer we kneel if we may conveniently, and in the sacrament of the Lords
Supper, as the custom of the Country* or necessity requires, standing or
sitting is fittest. Manuscrip. Chap. 2.
The gesture of sitting being being but a ^^^ter of circumstance, and not
expressly commanded, but of an indifferent nature, may lawfully be left, (as
all other indifferent things may) and an other gesture used in stead of it,
that will better serve in the convenience and edification of the Church, and
that by warrant of the Apostles rule, let all things be done unto edifying, 1
Cor. 14. 26. Mr. T. C. Repl. page 131, 132. Admonit. to the Parliam.
It is not of necessity to receive the Communion sitting: Nay in the name of
the rest T. C. speaks thus; I admonish the Reader, that sitting at the
Communion is not bolden to be necessary: so that this witness is instar
omnium, if there were no more.

Object. But these men do not say, that kneeling is indifferent at Communion,
as are standing, and sitting? I answer, if it be not indifferent, it is not,
because it is unmentioned in the new Testament, nor for any difference your
assumption puts betwixt it and other gestures, so that your selves dull your
own argument, which this exception will never sharpen again. And you must
mark the force of my answer. If the best gesture at the Sacrament, (such as
you say sitting is) be but indifferent, how may you condemn another gesture in
comparison with sitting, in this respect, that it wants a particular warrant?
Why should ye expect of a thing in it kind indifferent, an express direction,
or samplar for every manner, or way, wherein it may lawfully be applied?

to God, as it is in prayer, therefore it is a fashion, or expression of
worship; but God no where appoints it in his word in the act of receiving.
Thirdly, In Baptism, what say you to the lawfulness of aspersion? the
examples of the new Testament are all of immersion in Baptism; as (you say)
they be all of sitting only in the Communion. By what law can you be allowed
to sprinkle, when Scripture-examples expound the commandment of Baptism of
immersing only? Specially immersing signifying to be buried to Christ, to be
sanctified in the whole man, which significations are imported by the Apostle.
And who doubts immersion in Baptism, in many material respects to over-weigh
sitting at the Communion? If kneeling then in the Supper be damnable, because
not mentioned in the new Testament, then aspersion in Baptism is much more
damnable; especially when kneeling is instituted and sanctified expressly to
other parts of divine worship in many places of holy Scripture; sprinkling is
not heard of in the Scripture, but in the Ceremonial law, which I am sure, you
would not be brought under the yoke of; yea also when kneeling is a natural
gesture, but such is not sprinkling of water.



Levit. 10. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 3. Col. 2. 18. where in you reason most loosely from
those things, whereunto Gods commandment was punctually contrary, to that
which his commandment, not only contradicts not, but plainly warranteth.
You argue from strange fit, which was unchangeable in those times, to a
circumstance, which your selves change at pleasure: from idolatrous worshipping
of the host of heaven, and Angels, to worshipping of the true God in the
gesture of kneeling; which nature, and the word both, do allow in his worship,
as may not be denied. But it is the negative you bind upon. And I answer, that
the negative is only of unchangeable and moral things, and so of them
carries an irresistable force with it; (though the commandment be not always
express, as of baptising infants, of keeping our Sabbath, of morning and
evening prayer in families, etc) but you are not able to bring out a negative
for a changeable circumstance, I dare say. If you could, all comes to one for
my purpose; for the Lord commands gesture in kind, though it be sundrily
determinable, Again, God commands kneeling in particular, though it be
variously applicable, as convenience, and edification permits.

Deuteronomy. 12. 32. I readily answer, this cannot be meant of gestures, which the
Israelites must needs use in Gods worship, and yet of them God gave no
commandment by Moses. If it should be meant of gestures, kneeling is Gods
general commandment: kneeling at the Sacrament cannot be said to add to, or
diminish from Gods commandment of the gesture, when there is no particular
commandment given: If there were a commandment to sit upon occasion, kneeling
adds or diminishes no more then standing, or no more then another gesture
adds to, or diminishes from the commandment of kneeling in prayer.

Romans 14. 23. Indeed this is a Scripture in every man's mouth, and urged with
more vehemence, then reason in this case: for faith in bodily circumstau^^^,
and gestures, is built safely upon general grounds, as well as in moral, and
unchangeable points, it is for the most part built upon plain and particular
testimony. Fiath has its assurance in Phil. 4. 8:
general rules as well as particular come mands; so long as the selfsame
author of truth speaks in both. Mar. 7. and Popish fastings; which be
condemned (you say) in their manner of using, though else washings and fastings
be Gods ordinances. I answer, that their washings and fastings were, and are
damnable, for no such respects, as condemn kneeling in the Supper; for they
destroyed the very nature of Gods ordinances, and set up (I may say) new
washings and fastings in their stead; in which they placed nec^ssity,
holiness, and merit. Neither is there any variable circumstance (like the
gesture) therein taxed in these; but only hypothetically, as the very washings
and fastings themselves be supposed and condemned for abominable. But these
comparisons you bring in only for illustration, and not for proof of any
thing; and (x) I wonder what mood M. W. B. wa^^n, when he said, that kneeling
has not so much as a show of holiness in the use of ^^, i^ treat of div. (...).
^3, O he^^ of h^s side are con^^n^ to give it a ^^ew of piety (...) at (...)
applying Colos, 2. 2^. against it But be^ike Mr. W. B. could ^rooue many things
by logic, which his brethren (^^^er men then himself) durst no^ s^^nd upon.
therefore I leave them as plain impertinencies. And so much for answer to the
general argument against kneeling at the Communion. Only for further answer
read and observe my general introduction in the former part: which it self
well considered, I hope will satisfy the doubtful conscience in this point.

To mingle profane things with divine is sin, (says Arg. 7.
M. W. B. and to use our ceremonies is so to mingle. But if he mean the gesture
of kneeling at the Sacrament, I deny, that ^he use of it is mingling that which
is profane with divine. Contrarily, I affirm that kneeling is an holy gesture,
joined with an holy ordinance. And against this (that I trouble not my self
and others about dumb shows) Mr. W. B. says just nothing, nor any body else
for him. Only let it be observed, that this reason assuming the gesture not
to be holy, contradicts the former maine argument which assumes it to be so
holy, that it is no less then a part of divine worship.

because (says (w) it,) the same is not necessary; Abridg: page 56. whereto
agrees propos. 2. of the modest oste^ of conference.
Ibid page 44.
for no rites ought to be used in the Church, but such as are necessary things,
by direction of that place, Act. 15. 28. I answer, that this place speaks of
necessity, nor which is absolute of the things Saving fornication, which is
mortal.
themselves; but which was occasional only from that time, such as kneeling
is to us under authority at this day. Else it is idle to say, that the Church
can appoint no rites, but such as are necessary; that is, it can appoint
nothing at all, or that kneeling or any other gesture is unlawful, except it
be necessary, for so much) our selves hold not even of kneeling in prayer. But
if you mean [necessary) that, which in kind is such, but in particular
determination may be varied; then kneeling at Sacrament is still safe, and your
exception hurts it not. And to this purpose, see the maine argument refuted
before.

CHAP. 2.
Part 1. Cha. 2. Sect. 1.
before; first, we must speak of Gods commandment: secondly, of example:
thirdly, of light of nature: fourthly, of deductions or inferences out of holy
Scripture.

[commandemem] is generally taken there, for any manner of appointment, or
warrant; but now I speak of express commandment for the very gesture. I will
not trouble the Reader therefore, to show him that there is no absolute
commandment of any gesture in any worship of God at all; but for the gesture
of sitting, I will tell him, It is so far, that God expressly commands the use
of it in any part of his worship [absolutely,] that he expressly commands not
the use of it, in any part of his worship [vpon occasion.] It never came into
the mind of the Lord, to bid his people expressly to worship him in the
gesture of sitting, since the day, that he created man upon earth; where for
other gestures he does plainly, and expressly enjoyne them upon occasion. It
is false therefore that the Abridgement Abridg. page 56.
would insinuate, that there is precept for receiving of some Sacrament
sitting. But more to our purpose for sitting at the Communion, the matter is
plain enough that there is no commandment: Christ bids his Church in the
institution, to eat bread, and drink wine, in remembrance of his death, but
not to receive those elements in the gesture of sitting.

Perth. Assem. page 39.
impudency, that are bold to defend sitting by that commandment, Do this: as
if Christ in so saying, did not institute a new thing, where sitting (you say)
was used before in the Passover: as if we can interpret the commandment to
do, of that gesture which Christ is See the next chap paragr 1.
not* said historically to do, in the institution of the Supper, ^^ if any
Grammatical concordance, any rhetorical figure can admit of this fancy. Thus
are the words: Jesus took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
them, saying; This is my body, which is given for you, this do in remembrance
of me, Luke 22. 19. But Paul cleares the point sufficiently, 1 Cor. 11. for
besides, that he remembers this commandment without mentioning of any gesture,
he does precisely restrain the commandment in this manner. First, Jesus took
bread, and said; Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you: This do
in remembrance of me, verse. 24. In like manner he took the cup, and said, This
cup is the new Testament in my blood, this do (as often as ye drink in
remembrance of me, verse 25. Whereby appears, that the commandment [this
doe] is restreined to the bread, and the proper actions belonging to that; then
again to the wine, and the proper actions belonging to that; and this is a
clear case. Further, what an absurdity were it to extend this commandment to
circumstan^es? for by the same license, the time, place, receiving after
Supper, etc. were enjoined omnes ^d vnum. But if Christ said, [hoc facite] that
is sit; (which must be as full a mandamus, and as absolute, as for receiving
the elements themselves:) how dare they change Christ's gesture into standing?
they might as well turn the bread into jannocks, and the wine into Ale, or
Beer, or Aqua-vitae, as presume to do so. But I am contented that wise^ men
be not charged for the rashness of those scots men. Let one speak who
deserves to be heard the foremost. Manuser. chapter 2.
The gesture of sitting is but a matter of circumstance, and not expressly
commanded. Let this be considered, and so I pass from it.

CHAP. 3.
merits. Be pleased therefore to judge of us, if we err, as offending of
ignorance, who desire with you, to give our names for the testimony of JESUS,
To come to the business it self; You say, Christ sat at Supper, and Christ's
example is to be followed. For better order I will unfold this Controversy in
three Paragraphs.

The first Paragraph.


viz. The Paschall a Common, and the Eucharisticall Supper? Of the Paschall,
and Eucharisticall supper there is no doubt to be made; but all the doubt is,
whether they did also eat of a common Supper betwixt the Paschall and
Eucharisticall. They which think that they did eat a common supper do ground
I see other grounds they have, but I think they are not worth answering.
principally upon Ioh. 13. as I take it. Where it is said, (...), John, 13. 2.
Christ rose from Supper, Verse. 4. washed his Disciples feet; Verse. 5, etc. and
after sat down again, Verse. 12. -- And after all this was the eating of the
soppe, Verse. 26. compared with Math. 26. verse. 21, 22, 23. So they would make
that eating of the soppe, to be the common Supper, the Eucharist not being yet
instituted. To speak my mind in this thing; I suppose a supper in our use of
the word, is a competent meal, and to call them three Suppers to the common
people, makes them to muse and marvel what should be the matter. I despise
not what the Learned deliver out of the Jews writings for instruction in this
case; yet for understanding of the sop I cast mine eye rather to the
institution of the Passover, which was commanded to be eaten Exodus 12. 8.
with bitter herbs, which this soppe or sauce, or whatsoever it was, was
probably made of. I do persuade my self, that our Savior CHRIST and the
Apostles did eat of this sop, before he rose from the Table to wash his
Disciples feet, (though it be not mentioned before, nor had been at all, but
by the occasion of Judas dipping) and that this eating after was but a
continuation of the Paschall supper in eating both of the flesh and herbs;
which stands with much better reason, then for the mention of a mere sop or
sauce (which might very well be made (partly at least) of the instituted
herbs) to set up another common supper. Some call the latter a second
service, but they might as well call it a distinct supper, for no second service
belonged to the Paschall supper. wherein the flesh, and the herbs were to be
eaten together. I but what shall be said to John, 13. 2. Supper being done* he
rose, and sat, and eat afterward again. I would I know there is other
answer made by some, but this seems fairest and soundest to me.
think it better to use a mitigation of the phrase, then a middle, or common
supper; in this manner; [supper being ended] that is, [supper being in a manner
ended.] According to like manner of speaking in the story. As they were eating,
JESUS took bread etc. that is, when they had done eating, as Luke and Paul
expound it. Luke, 22. 20. 1. Cor. 11. 25. Besides it is said he took the cup
after supper; then it seems, the foregoing supper was but one; and indeed Luke
in the quoted chapter mentions no more, and then adds, he took the cup after
supper. Also I see not the conceit of common suppers in the old testament so
much as intimated; nay, the Paschal lamb was appointed to be supper enough of
it self, for if it were too much for one family, neighbor houses might join,
and if notwithstanding, any of it were left till morning, it was to be burned
with fire, Exodus 12. verse. 4. 10. This order does exclude a common Supper ex*
suppositione. Moreover, it is to be thought, that a whole Lamb with bread and
herbs enough might not suffice twelve, or thirteen men; especially, when
they were to let nothing of it remain until morning? I add, that a just
collation of the Evangelists will euince that there was but one Supper. And
lastly, it was most like* that the Eucharisticall supper was eaten next the
Paschall, into whose room it immediately took place. And surely the
distinction by a common Supper would darken to the Apostles the cleerenesse of
the succession of it. This obiter of this point, which I deliver (under
correction of Learned men) to make my discourse following some what easier to
be conceived, and not to advantage my self in the Controversy; wherein (I
think) it does neither help, nor hinder. And now I will show by the story of
the Evangelists, that Christ and his Apostles are not said at any time to use
the gesture of sitting in the Eucharisticall Supper,



Math chapter 26 Mark. chapter 14 Luke. chapter 22 John. chapter 13 Verse Verse Verse Verse The
Discip. did as Jesus had appointed them and they made ready the Passover, 19
16 13 And when the even or hour was come, he Mark.
comes with the twelve, and Math. Luke.
sat down with them, 20 17 14 And he said unto them I have desired to eat
this Passover with you before I suffer, 15 For I say unto you, I will not any
more eat thereof till it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. 16 And he took
the This Cup I doubt not to be long to the Passover.
Cup, and gave thanks, and said, take this, and divide it among your selves,
17 For I say to you, I will not drink of the fruit of All this seems to be
occasioned by their strife, which of them should be greatest mentioned in Luke,
22. verse. 24. etc though i^ be s^t after the institution of the Eucharisticall
supper. So is Christ's speech of the traitor which wa^ used in the latter end of
the Passover. verse. 21, 23.
the vine, until the kingd, of God shall come. 18 Then Supper being ended
(that is) [In a manner ended] 1 Jesus rises from supper, laid aside his
garments, took a to^ell, and girded himself. 4 After that he took water and
washed his Disciples feet (using some conference thereupon) 5 11 Then he took
his garment, and when he was set down again [hee persuades them to
humilitie] 12 17 Now as they sat, and did cate, he said. Verily I say to you,
one of you shall betray me, etc. 21 2^ 18 12 21 23 18 29 So Judas having
received the sop went immediately out, and it was night. They are said to sit
only in Mark. at ver. 18. 30 Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said. Now
is the Son of man glorified [with other heavenly sayings.] 31 35 Lastly, [after
Luke 22. verse. 20. 1. Cor. 11. 25.
Supper] Jesus took b^ead, and blessed, etc. 26 etc ^^ etc 19 20

But the Evangelists (you Perth. Assembl. page 39.
say) mention not the supper gesture, because they write as of a thing known.
Notably helped out! The Communion-gesture was a thing more known, then the
Communion it self was kowne I besides, was not the Passeouer-gesture known?
Yet the Evangelists do make mention of that, and if you will have a common
supper; they make mention also of the gesture of it; and yet the only
Communion-gesture might be known by imagination. Yea, but say you, a
Table Gesture is undoubtedly employed. But this defense supposes the country
Table Gesture necessary to the supper, which I do forever See (...)
Ta^le-gesture, (...) chapter 5.
deny. But you deal somewhat roundly with us. For first you prove, that
Christ sat, because sitting was a Table Gesture. After you will prove, that a
Table Gesture is necessary, be use Christ sat. But I tell you, that you can
infallibly assure no man's conscience, that Christ and his Apostles sat at the
last supper. But you urge that the Evangelists say, as they did eat, Jesus
took bread, etc. Perth. Assembl. page 36. Survey 185.
If whiles they did eat, then whiles they did sit; sitting and eating being
conjoined. Mark. 14. 18. I answer, that this manner of pleading shuts the
Scripture out from expounding it self. For, [as they did eate] is plainly
expounded by Luke 22. ^0.
Luke and 1. Cor. 11. 25
Paul [after they had done eating] and are you of mind that the suppers were
mingled together? I do not think that in good earnest you are. Well then if
you will read [whilest they did eat Jesus took bread etc,] thus [after they
had done eating Jesus took bread etc.] Then your sequel may be proportioned
in like manner: for in stead of saying [if whiles they did eat, then whiles
they did sit] you might say as truly [if after they had done eating, then after
they had Namely, that sitting, which was used to the Passover.
done sitting] and sure you would take no great content in the fruit of this
reasoning. But you say learned men do grant they sat at the last supper. But
I think they grant no otherwise then any body will grant; namely, that it is a
probable thing they sat. It any do grant further I would not be discouraged
by the name of learned men; let reason moderate amongst us all. In a word,
durst you be sworn, (if you had a lawful calling to swear) that Christ and
his Apostles sat, as if you had been an eye witness? Durst you lay down
your life upon it? Can you give us any other proof, then your persuasion of
his abiding in the gesture of the Passover? It is good, not to be too
resolved, except you had a word to build on: And I will back mine advice with
some considerations, which I propose unto you.

Joh. 21. 25. Nay many of the signs that Jesus did, are not written. John. 20.
30. Partly it was impossible, partly unnecessary that they should be written.
Might not now the gesture of the Sacrament be ommitted much more, of purpose
omitted by the wisdom of the Spirit? Possible and easy was it for the
historians to have expressed the gesture, but God did not appoint, it should
be necessary to his Church? Who otherwise (if it had pleased him) could have
dictated to his Amanuenses or Penmen, this passage of the gesture in the
Communion, as well as in other services so many times in the Bible. Yet he did
not, he would not do it.

Nehemiah, 8. The Priests stood, verse 4. and the people stood in their place,
verse. 5. 7, so there was reading in the Book of the law distinctly, verse. 8.
Can you now affirm that the Priests and people stood thus therefore, when
immediately after, they read in the law day by day, verse. 18. It were (I
think) no great wisdom so to determine. Again, all the congregation made
boothes, and sat under the boothes, so as since the days of Joshua the Son
of Nun, had not the children of Israel done so, and there was very great
gladness. Nehem. 8. 17. Are you able to say now, that the people out of doubt
changed not the gesture of sitting, whiles they were under the booths, any time
of the day, I mean upon Homogeneall occasions; because it is said; at that
feast of Tabernacles, they sat under the Boothes. Again, Paul and the
Christians sat down, and Paul preached unto the women, amongst whom Lydia.
was one, who (as appears) at that preaching was converted, and Baptized. Acts.
16. Verse. 13, 14, 15. Now I ask, if you can make good, that this Company sat
still after this preaching was broken off, also in the administration of
Baptism? Perhaps I could give you many like examples, which I take to be
parallel, and pertinent (namely in the maine matter which I desire) to this our
case of the two Suppers.

Math. 26. 20. Then after washing of the disoiples feet sitting down again.
John 13. 12. Lastly upon occasion of Christ's speech of Judas treason. Mark. 14.
18. [as they sat, and did eat, Jesus said; verily, I say unto you, one of
you, etc.] and yet it is not so much as once mentioned in the last Supper. If
you say the Evangelists needed not to mention it in this. Much less (would one
think) needed Mark to mention it in that, a third time. Let not the good
providence of God be slighted in this passage, which works nothing in vain.

intervalium, or distance of time betwixt the Passover and the Supper. As may
appear, Ioh. 13. 31. etc. Where our Savior is said to preach an heavenly
Sermon unto the Disciples, before the institution took place. And surely that
which is written therefore is but an The Disp. says Christ made a Sermon
betwixt the consecration of the Elements and distribution. Disp. Page 116. he
means only, because Christ sa^es. Take, eat, this is my body; which is given
for ye, this do in remembrance of me. And yet thereupon he says more to
show, what information, instruction, injunction, prediction, Christ used in
that Sermon.
abridgement of that, which was spoken by Christ himself. And let the history
of the Evangelists be considered in other places, who do remember many things,
which at first sight one would think fell out together, which were yet far
sundred from one another in time; as exact comparing of them does witness. And
howbeit I will never deny that I think it likely our Savior, next after the
Passover deseended to the institution of the Supper; yet I cannot be
certain; that he so immediately descended thereto, as that he did not change
his gesture in the mean while; except the Holy Ghost had expressly declared so
much, and had not on the other hand expressly showed a great space of time spent
in the interim, which might occasion greater changes (though unwritten) then of
the gesture.

Calu. in Mat. 26.
no doubt solemn Thanksgiving used after the manner, though it be not
mentioned. And then after, a new blessing of a newordinance was to begin. And
this note wants not it use, especially if we do mind that the bodies of
Christ and his company were satisfied with the legal Supper; and therefore,
the latter banquet of Bread and Wine required not a common and formal sitting,
feeding, and filling, not being thereunto ordained; but rather to be used by
the beholding of the Elements, taking, and tasting of them, for commemoration,
and representation of Christ's death.

Exodus 12. 11. as of the Apostles sitting at the Communion. Yet learned men
deny, that, that can be proved certainly, because it is not expressed; therefore,
why should there not be as much liberty in this case? Or if the gesture of the
Passover was first standing, surely Christ who varied from the Old gesture in
Yea in the very Passover there (some part I read of it) Christ is said to
seemo not to sit. Luke 22. Psalm. 27.
the same ordinance, might as well do it (I suppose) in the celebration of a
diverse. Or, if we might admit the judgment of some men, whom your selves do
Perth. Assembl. page 36. Survey, p. 184.
mention, (which yet indeed is contrary to the plain text) that Christ stood
at the Passeoner, and afterward sat down at the Communion: then the matter
were clear enough, that the gesture was varied. But though I believe not, that
Christ stood at Passover, because it cannot be said without offering of
violence to the text, yet the gesture of the last Supper might be varyed;
because, it may be said and thought without offering of any such violence. At
least you see, it is no new conceit of mine, that the gesture might be changed
in the Suppers.

John make this to appear? He mentions the gesture of the Passover as much
as any Evangelist; and yet speaks not so much as a word of the Communion it
self. Is it likely now, that his intent was by expressing the gesture in the
Passover, to notify the gesture of the Communion? Again, go to St. Matthew,
St. Mark, and St. Luke, they set down the gesture in the Passover also, and
then they come to the Communion, but then they omit our Saviors rising from
Table, even as a thing which was not. I pray you they which say Christ sat at
Passover, and so pass to the Communion, is it their purpose to import the
gesture of the Communion when they purposely omit how the gesture was so long
changed between?

Repl. partic. to B. Mort. pa. 36.
does. Fare fall John of Rochester, who dares insinuate to his Reader, that for
ought appears in the text, the Apostles might kneel. Truly, they may easier
help themselves before the common people, or forestalled minds by jesting,
then by sound reason. I am not ashamed to say as much as the R^plyer fiouteth
at, that whereas all the Evangelists do of purpose, and as it were by common
consent pass over the gesture in deep silence, and that the same cannot be
determined by any supposall infallibly, which I do know, it might be either
standing, or sitting, or kneeling. The Apostles might as lawfully fall down at
this time, as it is no absurdity to say they worshipped Christ another time,
when he made himself known unto them by breaking of bread. Luke, 24 30, 31.
But I am far from going about to prove they kneeled, only my meaning is to
show, that no man by force of the story is able to disprove it. And so I say
for the gesture of standing; I will say no less for sitting (which I deem
most probable) and the Repliers charge of Page 34.
audaciousnesse does move me nothing at all. And because the Replier calls
this audaciousnesse, I do challenge him for Gods cause, and the instruction of
many, who desire uprightly to learn; to bring us forth some demonstratiue
evidence, if he can tell what, that never heard of any to this hour, else he
must give me leave to tell him, that he is the more audacious in so penurious a
case, to give his tongue so much liberty. And so much for my first Paragraph,
that it cannot be infallibly showed that Christ, and his Apostles sat in the
Eucharisticall supper.

Leuit. 18. 23. Where standing and lying down be confounded together. So be
standing, and kneeling also, 2. Chron. 6. Solomon stood before the Altar, and
spread forth his hands, Verse. 12. Upon the scaffold he stood, and kneeled
down upon his knees, and spread forth his hands, Verse. 13. So Mary stood at
Christ's feet, whiles he sat upon a bed at Supper, Luke, 7. 38. Yet it is not
incredible that the^ she was upon her knees, or sitting upon the outer side of
the bed, specially if the bed (which is uncertain) were low, (whatsoever some
Perth. Assembl. page ^8
say to the contrary) for besides kissing, and anointing of Christ's feet, she
washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. So
sitting in ashes, which is said of Tire, and Sidon (affirmed also of Job. Job,
2. 8. and Nineueh. Ion. 3. 6.) Calvin interprets to be no other then
prostration or lying along; Verbum sedendi (says Calu. in Luk 10. Psalm. 13.
he) (and note it is sedendi, and not discumbendi; for if sedendi, then
discumbendi much more.) Significat prostratos humi jacere, quod miseris ad
luctum suum testandum convenit, sicuti ex compluribus Prophetarum locis patet.
Also, when I Page 1 cap. 1. Sect. 9.
allege David's sitting before the Lord in prayer, a reverend Minister Mr. Nic.
tells me, that was no sitting, but only notes his presenting himself before
the Lord. So if, sitting had been mentioned at the Communion, I might say, it
might be used either for presenting, or settling themselves at the table; as
we say an Army sits down in such a place, that is, there it pitcheth and
rests. Or else, for some other gesture of the same kind, or like such a
gesture as unto which used more or less it was only adjoined. But for my part
I would not make the Scripture uncertain, in speaking of gestures, otherwise
then as we must expound it, Quoad fidem historiae. And indeed I do not need to
expound what Christ and his Apostles sitting might mean, because they are not
said to sit at all at the Communion, as I have showed in this Paragraph.

The second Paragraph.
even unto this day. Yet it pleases you to determine that Manise. chapter 2
it was not a lying along, but a sitting, though leaningly. As if that leaning
positure was not a kind of lying along; but the matter is not great whether you
call it this or that; for the thing it self will appear to him that well
considers, that there was more lying in it then sitting; though the Jews
called it sitting, as they were wont for the most part to call such gestures as
they used when they were eating at Table. Howsoever, to prove they sat but
somewhat leaningly, you reason in this manner, For else (say you) what use
could they have of Tables, yea of Tables of some height from the ground? I
answer, the height of their Tables does not deny their lying along, so long as
their beds were also of some height equal unto them. Nay what if their beds
were higher then their tables, sure then they might very well lie along. Let
the Scotchmen speak what they have read, and observed. The beds (say Perth
Assembl. Page 38
they) of the rich and wealthy were so high, that is behooued them to ascend by
steps; whereby appears, if you will not call it lying along, it was much
inclined to lying along. And I dare say, that the same gesture called fitting,
among them, when they were eating at tables, was called no less among them
then lying, if it were used, and applied to resting and sleeping; nay, it was
called lying among them sometimes, when they were eating at tables. And for our
parts we would call it lying without question in the use and opinion of our
country-language and gestures. Which will better appear if we consider.

1 The Greek words which be used of the gesture of our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles at the Passover. The first is, (...). Math. 26. 20. Mark. 14. 18. The
second is, (...), Luke 22. 14. Ioh. 13. 12. Now ^o pass the radical
signification thereof, (which yet (...) known to be lying or falling down)
let us see how these words be expounded in the new testament it self. And one
speech, whereunto both words be referred may suffice for this. One of the
Disciples whom Jesus loved [was (...), Ioh. 13. 23. (...), Ioh. 21. 20.] in
Iesusbosome. You cannot translate, he sat in Jesus bosom. And in John, 13.
25. the meaning is declared plainly by [(...),] John was [lying on] the breast
of Jesus. And in several for (...), there is an instance in Mark 5. 40. to
show its signification to be some manner of lying, where is said, that Jesus
entered in ((...)) where the Damsel was lying. And thereis great likelihood
she sat nothing at all, (as we call sitting) for she was then dead.

Amos 2. 8. They lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every
Altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.
That is, they eat and drink at, and before their Altars, as they lie down
upon beds pawned unto them. So Chap. 6. 4. they lie upon beds of I^orie, and
stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock,
and the calves out of the midst of the stall. And ver. 7. The banquet of them
that stretched themselves shall be removed. I pray you look upon these places
with an impartial eye, perhaps you will observe, that they were wont to say in
those times, they lie at meat, as well as they sit at meat, though this
latter be most used in Scripture.

As for the law of eating with their shoes on their feet, Ex. 12. 11. that was
only forthat Passover in Egypt which must be eaten in have by the children of
Israel, and as ready to depart.
Christ, and his Apost les did so, as appears, Ioh. 13. 5. Now this was done
to keep their beds fair, which they laid their feet on, according to the
fashion of those Countries, so Calvin in Joh. 13.

fashion round about the table subordinately. This to be so appears, first,
by your own Perth. Assembl. page 38.
confession full enough. Secondly, by the harmony of Calvin and Bez. in Ioh. 15.
learned men's judgment. Thirdly, by the testimony of of Scriptures; Mary is
said to stand at Christ's fe^t behind him, as he sat or lay upon a bed at
meat. Luks. 7. 38. Lastly; Reason helps also in this matter. For, Psalm. 128.
3. Incircuitu mensae tuae.
confidering the roundnes and circular winding of their tables and beds, and
lying in one another bosom, it was commodious both for room and ease to sit
with their feet behind the backs of their fellows.

Perth. Assembl. page 35.
cite Scaliger producing it out of their rituals. The Jews were wont to speak
in this manner. Quam diversa haec nex a caeteris noctibus! quod in alijs
noctibus semel tantum lavamus, in hac autem his. Quod in reliquis noctibus
comedimus, sine, fermentum, sine Azimum, in hac autem omnino azima. Quod in
reliquis noctibus vescimur oleribus omne genus, in hac autem intybis. Quod in
reliquis noctibus tam edentes, quam bibentes vel sedemus, vel discumbimus, in
hac autem omnes discumbimus. How far different is this night from other
nights? other nights we wash only once; but this night twice; other nights
as well eating, as drinking. we either sit [vpright] or sit [leaningly, or lying
along] but this night, we all (only) lean or lie alongby which words clear
that discubimus can note no less then a great measure of leaning, or leaning
in a manifest degree; being differenced from sedemus; and which they chose, as
a distinct gesture, of purpose, yea of conscience it seems, and of greater
fitnes to an holy ordinance; and of purpose, conscience, opinion of unfitness
avoided, and rejected the other.

body bearing or resting upon one side in a matter, and not according as
sitting has its denomination with us. And consequently I dare infer and
avouch that our Savior Jesus Christ intended not that his, and his Apostles
example in their Eastern country (discubitus) should be imitated of us, or
become to us an example to rule our gesture.

Discubitus was proper to some countries, but an upright sitting was and is
common to all countries, even the Jews themselves used it In Ioseph^s time.
Perth: Assembl. Page 38.
anciently altogether. And for later times, Scaligers speech out of their
rituals before shows; that in their feasts, or meals, they did use sometime
discumbere, sometime to sit upright. If therefore Christ would have purposed an
exemplary sitting, he would have used common sitting (which also the Jews
sometimes used) and not a special gesture of some Countries.



Calvin in Ioh. 13.
indecent amongst us; nay which is worse at this time, then other gestures (as
your selves determine) of our own choosing. To what purpose is this wast of a
pattern then? Nay, I suppose you would think it a sin to use the precise
gesture of our Savior Christ, if you did thoroughly know it; verily such a
pattern is little beholden to you: shall a counterfeit adumbration carry the
praise away from the prototype? And if you were lawmakers you would not allow
by act the precise gesture of Christ; that were but Perth ass. p 38.
apish imitation as the Scotsmen teach; and against common sense as Disp. page
47
the disputer teaches. Surely then why do you talk of Christ's example, the
precise examplarship whereof your own mouth, and action destroys.

^o nomine, kneeling would thrust in. Is it to be followed as the Jews
table gesture? no simply; for then it should be precis^ly retained. Is it to be
followed as a gestur^ fit for divine worship, as the Jews seemed to use it,
which would not [sedere] but [discumbere] in eating the Passover? No, no, no.
Then kneeling runs in amain: what then? Why, poor, this is all; Disp. page
47, 48.
as a Prince is only tied to the equity of the laws judicial, so are we tied
to imitate Christ out of regard to equity, not always for outward form, and
circumstance. And what is that equity, I desire to know? I think they mean
this, that as discubitus was a gesture used then at meat? so respectively such
a gesture imitates it, which is used with us in eating of meat. But first, if
equity be all, then the gesture it self is really void, as are the temporary
judicialls. Secondly, the equity of a table gesture is not so great, as the
equity of eating according to peace, eating for edification; which is the
chafe of a Country table-fashion to this wheat. Thirdly, by this learning,
standing may be an imitation of sitting, and lying; and so mutually each of
every one in some case. Yea I grant it may be so, but so our kneeling will also
be an imitation of Christ's sitting.

Christ's example precisely in every point of the gesture, as much as you do
understand it. You tell us, we have liberty to use a table gesture: but I hear
you to say nothing for proof of taking this As for that of the Replyer, that
this is, as if we should strive whether the bread and cup are to be taken with
two fingers or more (R pl. partic to Bp. Mort. page 35.) I answer, if necessity
of imitation were urged for the manner of the Apostles using their hands, then
why should not the number and use of their fingers be urged also as necessary?
but the truth is, that as taking with the hand is necessary, but it is not
necessary which hand, or how many fingers we use: so maine gesture is
necessary, but it is not necessary which gesture, or what circumstances of the
same gesture we use.
liberty. You allege against us: Be followers of Christ, and of good men.
Well, and do these commandments (extending as you say to the gesture) reach
but to the one half of it? Show (if you can) why ye are not commanded to
follow the^ in ipsissimo discubitu? You cannot show it but upon our grounds,
and destroying the whole force of building upon his example. What? can a
Country fashion pick the lock of a good example, and let the gesture loose
out of Christ's teather? then why should not all go (I pray) as w^ll as any
part? do not pull a p^ore gesture in pieces, let the head have his
appurtenances. But methinks you might plainly ee, that by this shift of a
Country ^a^hion, overweighing Christ's example, you make his ge^ture but a
poor circumstance.

the argument of a table gesture. So according to the tenor of this Paragraph,
it appears, that never a man in England does imitate the precise example of
Christ in the gesture of the Supper, neither was it his meaning to propose unto
us, such his gesture, for an example to rule the Sacramental gesture unto
posterity.

The third and last Paragraph.


: or a contrariety, when two men by practicing of the same service with
incompatible circumstances, do affront one the other, by contrary
determinations, which yet (like the M^des and Persians laws) may not be
altered. If therefore the gesture was ever a mutable ceremony in Gods service
in general; and sitting in the Supper I mean not in regard of Christ's
sovereignty, but upon common reason.
mutable unto Christ, and his Apostles; then behold it remains still a mutable
ceremony even to this day, they leaving it no otherwise unto us, but as they
found it. Let no man be so vain, to object here the Sacraments which Christ
instituted, for they be necessaries, and substantialls; the gesture is only a
necessary mean in its kind, but variously determinable, for the fitting
celebration of them.

Matthew. 26. 55.
teaching, yet the Preacher is not bound to sit in preaching at any time, by
Christ's manner of preaching; much less are we bound, when it is storyed of
Christ, that he sat at Supper but once. If he had continued upon earth to
receive this Sacrament among his Disciples, by it self, without the
conjunction of any other meal, it is hard to say then, what gesture he might
have used: he might have kneeled, or stood, as well as sat, for ought I know.
No other gesture is storyed but sitting, (supposing that in this Paragraph)
because our Savior received the Sacrament no other time but once. Verily if
sitting were never so variable, no other maine gesture could be practiced with
it at the same time. He must either stand, or sit, or kneel, or lie down. You
will confess, in process of time he might have taught his Apostles and others
to stand, and I will say likewise, he might have taught them to kneel. Well,
this is all, I would propose to your thoughes, that our Savior instituting the
Sacrament could use but one gesture that time, but this excludes not other
gestures, which had been mutually and interchangeably variable from the
beginning. And mark this well, that no doubt our Savior would have put a note
of immutability upon his gesture, if he mean to put upon us the strict
imitation of it; considering no gesture was obligatory in the Church by
example, nay I say, not so much as (absolutely) by commandment from the
creation of the world, that is for the space of 4000 years (plus minus)
together.

Manuscrip. chapter 2.
plead for your standing; that the Church in using it, does not swerue from the
example of Christ and his Apostles: for though it be not the same gesture (you
say) that they used, yet it is well known to be of the same kind theirs was
[that is] for equity; and that equity, (as I noted before) is fitness to use a
table gesture.] But then if our equity be as good as yours (which must be tried
in it own place) you will take us into your company of not swerving from the
example of Christ, and his Apostles. And so kneeling is not a contrarying of
their practice (as you Ibid.
accuse) but a conformity unto it.

Ibid.
kneeling is enjoined for the most part upon this ground, that the Sacrament
should not be profaned, and could not else be received reverently. I answer,
upon what ground the gesture is enjoined in this Church, I will show In the
third part of this Treatise.
in due time (God willing;) but it seems you confess that kneeling it self
simply argues not Christ's sitting of sin, (that is comfor^ enough in this
place) only you find fault with the ill tenor of their injunction, which
press it upon you. I will interpret their injunction here in a word, as the
place requires, which you cannot reasonably gainsay. Kneeling is not enjoined,
lest the S^crament should be profaned by sitting; but lest it should be
profaned by the profane and weak hearts of men in the gesture of fi^^ing. The
profanation lies not simply in the gesture, (which in it self is lawful and
innocent,) but in evil hearts, that accidentally might abuse it. For assuredly
many people in the Church would be too subject to take from thence occasion to
slight sacred ordinances, whereof was yet no danger in our Savior, and his
inspired Apostles. And as they which kneel may receive too reverently, not
because they kneel, but because their minds be superstitious and vain: so
they which sit may receive too vnreverently, not because they sit, but because
their minds are not sufficiently possessed with Gods fear, in his holy worship.
Well, let this touch now suffice: so you may be pleased to see, that we be
far from condemning the doing of our Lord Jesus Christ.



Arguments of our brethren pressing the imitation of Christ's gesture.


Arg. 1. Abridg. page 56. Perth. Assem. page 37. Manuscrip. chapter 2.
We are bound to imitate Christ and the commended example of his Apostles in
all things, wherein it is not evident that they had special reasons mooving
them thereto, which do not concern us. Prove. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 1 Cor. 11.
16. 1 Cor. 14. 33. Ephesians. 5. 1. Phil. 3. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 14. But no special reason can be imagined, why they should administer
and receive the Sacrament sitting, rather then we, or why is should be decent
and fit for us to receive it kneeling, rather then for them. I give ye three
principal answers: first, your proposition or rule is vain: for inasmuch as
you cannot deny, but some things be mo^alls and essentialls, some again be
circumstantialls and mutables, and that in those we be bound simply to imitate
good examples, it follows that in respect of them your caution is extremely
superfluous.



Mat. 14. 19. 15. 35, 36. 26. 26. Luke. 24. 30. I ask you therefore what
special reason you have, which mooues you to stand in blessing? If you say, we
stand for reverence-sake, then must not your special reason sway at all times
upon like convenience? But then you be worse, for if your special reason be
for reverence in prayer, then also you may kneel; here I know not what you
will say for leaving Christ's example either without special reason, or such a
special reason as holds you bound equally to two gestures; or lastly, such a
special reason, as shall not bind to either, but you will forsake your
special reason at your own pleasure.

Disp. page 43.
It is an offense to refuse the following of Christ, and his Apostles, when we
may conveniently do it, and with good allowance from all circumstance. If this
be all your special reason, verily your caution (whereby you back so
importants proposition, whereabout you make so great a do) will prove to very
little purpose. And thus you have one principal answer.

proofs, which has any force to bind us to the imitation of Christ; and good
men's gesture: let them be considered apart. Prove. 2. 20. Take heed of the
whore, that thou may walk in the way of good men. Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye kind,
tender hearted, forgiving one mother, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven
you; be ye therefore followers of God as dear children. (I hope you will
follow God in no gestures.) 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Ye became followers of us, and of
the Lord, having received the word with much affliction, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 7.
Withdraw your selves from every one that walks disorderly, and not after the
tradition, which ye received of us; for you know how you ought to follow us,
for we behaved not our selves disorderly amongst you. All these Scriptures are
specially restreined to moral matters. So 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be followers of me, as
I am of Christ; that is in the ordinances which I have delivered unto you:
verse. 2. So Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be followers together of me, that is walking
with not by the same rule: verse. 16. So 2 Timothy 3. 14. Continue thou in the
things which thou have learned, knowing of whom thou have learned them; that is
in all divine truths of Scripture, notwithstanding persecutions;
notwithstanding false (...), and heresies: (compare the whole Chapter
together.) As for 1 Cor. 11. 16. 14 33. they make against you, and not for you:
for of covering or uncovering the head in holy assemblies of the Prophets;
speaking orderly, one by one; the Apostle alleges the custom used in the
Churches of God, against men contentious in such things: If you say these
orders are prooved by the Apostle natural, and necessary; and then he presses
the Chruches example; I am content: and so these two places are just like their
fellows before. Thus your proofs meddle not with the authority of See back
p. 1 ch 2 sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
examples for matter of gesture, but only in things which the word shows to
be necessary, if the examples had not been mentioned. And as for your caution,
they do not give the least glaunce unto ^t, because the matters they speak
of, shall ever concern us, as well as the Apostles.

Luke 24. 30. as Jesus sat at meat, with them, he took* bread, etc. Of the
latter we have special reason in a Circumstance, or else I know not what
special reason means: As, first, the minds of m^n are prophanelier given
now, then the minds of the Apostles were. Secondly, to us at this time, this
is special reason, that sitting has been disused in our Church, and kneeling
used beyond, or almost beyond man's remembrance. Thirdly, the authority of the
Magistrate is a special reason in a circumstance, which is variable in Gods
worship. Fourthly, it is a special reason that resistance of kneeling makes
such a wonderful stir amongst us, to the hindrance of public men of their
Ministers, and private men of the sweet liberty of the Communion. Lastly, what
special reason you are able to allege, why the Apostles sat covered in
receiving, and we fit b^re; I entreat you to give it leave to be referred
hither if it will be. Thus much for the first, and principal argument.

Arg. 2. Perth. ass. p. 44.
Whatsoever action is enclosed within the institution may not lawfully be
broken. Page 45.
Institution is ^n stead of a command, wherein nothing should be added nothing
diminished, nothing altered, in matter, form, or order, because the
institution is the rule, whereby to reform abuses; and Page 39.
Christ's example seconded with the practice of the Apostles is equivalent to a
precept of institution. I answer, This objection (page 45.) speaks upon the
Institution recited by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 23. and of that affirms;
nothing should be added, nothing diminished, nothing altered, etc. And yet S.
Paul says not one word of the gestures. And I also largely, and evidently (I
hope) prove afterward in this chapter, that the institution cannot comprehend
the gesture. If therefore [inclosed within the institution] you mean every
action used in the Supper when it was instituted; then it is false that every
such action was therefore instituted, because it was used in See my reasons at
the latter end of this cha. against the necessity of imitating Christ's example
in the gesture.
the instituted Supper: then walking, standing, uncovering of the head, and
sundry like, be altogether unlawful, as being breaches of the institution; nay
then there would be left no ^ot of liberty in any circumstance whatsoever;
where you say, that Christ and the Apostles example was equivalent to a
precept, it is a palpable untruth: No example is equivalent to a precept in a
variable point, ex^ept it were of a moral, and unchangeable matter; at the
first institution of all Sacraments, there must have been some gesture used,
yet you will not say surely, that the first example thereof was equivalent to a
precept of institution. But let the Institution in the story be searched, and
behold you shall find no gesture enclosed within the Institution according to
the first paragraph, and so you cannot reform the abuse of the gesture by the
historical tenor of the institution. Finally, he that says much, and does
not establish by proof any part of it, shall seem to say something to
himself and his own scholars; but you might have left this usurpation to our
masters of Paris, or some other magnificoes, that have an ancient charter for
saying, and proouing nothing.

Arg. 3. Survey page 18.
Our Savior sat of purpose. Answer, if we grant, he sat; we distinguish of
sitting of purpose; for either he sat of purpose, that is voluntarily; or he
sat of purpose, that is exemplarily. Sure in the former sense, there is no
circumstance, but a man may use it of purpose. So our Savior sat down of
purpose, when he did preach: but that he used his sitting to be exemplary, you
can say nothing to prove, neither must we stumble at the Evangelists setting
down the gesture of the Passover, as saying they set it down of purpose, for
(beside that I might say they omitted the gesture then in the Communion of
purpose) it is well known that the Evangelists, as all Historians, do usually
describe ever and anon many confessed circumstances.

Arg. 4. Abridg. p. 56.
We have no example for receiving of any Sacrament in all the Scripture, in the
gesture of kneeling.

Ans. Will you reason in matters of sact, negatiuely from Scripture, specially
about a mutable circumstance? Again, suppose there had never been example yet
really given, so that none could be set down, yet might kneeling be vied in
the Sacrament, so long as the rule does allow it. There is no example for a
chilce to be baptized; there is no example for a prayer before and after the
Sermon; and these be greater matters then the gesture. Lastly, there is no
example of gesture in all the Sacraments of the holy Scripture at all, but one
Mat 26, 20.
[discumbebat] at our Saviors Passover; and therefore this exception wants
teeth.

Arg. 5. Disp page 43. etc.
It is unlawful to leave Christ's imitable gesture, and in li^u thereof to
observe a worse. Ans. 1. This proposition is false, partly in variable
circumstances, partly when (in comparison) the worsenesse stands not, in a
respect which is sinful, but which is accidentally, in convenient: But the
disputer for got standing at Sacrament, that it is confessed to be worse then
sitting.

Confideratis confiderandis. To that which you say for preferring of a
table gesture, before a personal worship, I answer (besides that it falls into
the argument of a Capable-gesture, as a great part of your disputing discourse
does, and that if you prefer a table gesture, because of the civil custom of
eating) you prefer it unlawfully: this is to be specially minded, that a
table gesture in divine worship and a worship-gesture be all one: as I have
prooved and you have confessed Chap. 1.
before: therefore you oppose them against another, against reason. Certes, you
can call our Saviors sitting at table (supposing it such) no more a
table gesture, then a worship-gesture: for the gesture is to be esteemed
according to the business, whereunto it is applied: at least it was a
worship-gesture in the act of receiving, as much as in the act of blessing,
giving of thanks, and singing of Psalms; for you must observe that Christ
passed not from divine worship to an earthly business, but only from one part
of divine worship unto another. If you say, that this is but worshipping in a
general sense, and so still kneeling which is adoration is worse then it; you
trifle in a serious business: for the betternesse and precedence of gestures
depends for the most part upon circumstances, that may be better to us which
was not to the Apostles? Besid^s, if that which is not always the best
gesture, be sometime used, it is not therefore impious, but inconvenient. In a
word so long as God allow, kneeling in the Sacrament (though it be not always
the better gesture) ^t is sufficient for us. Neither do we therefore condemn
Christ's doing in the mean time, but only vary that which by his own
direction has been in all ages, and times lawfully variable. Against this the
Disputer only tells us of the second commandment, and that God is the only
Lawgiver in his Church, both which (rightly declared) make that good, which
even I say. But for such general proofs so childishly applied. I refer you
to the answer of the general argument, Page 2. Chap* 1. Sect. 2.

Arg. 6. Abridg. page 56. urged in the Repl partic. to Bp. Morton, page 44.
It is gross hypocrisy for us to pretend more holiness, reverence, and
divotion, in receiving of the Sacrament, then was in Christ and his Apostles. I
answer, first, we acknowledge (I think I may speak in the names of all godly
men that kneel at Sacrament throughout the Kingdom) that we be far short in
all personal qualifications or actual performance, (not to mention our Lord)
even of the inspired Apostles.

down in long prayers before and after Sermons, and Sacraments? are you more
holy and devout then the Apostles were? why do you give thanks after meat in
ordinary meals besides the blessing of the table? are you more thankful, and
devout, then Christ, and his Apostles were? why do you receive uncovered? and
you Repl. party. page 70.
say you do it for reverence sake; and what are you more reverent and devout
then the Apostles were?

: first, in the measure of substantialls: secondly, in circumstantiall manner:
thirdly, in some particular intention and end of either. For the first, one
good man may pray long^r, or shorter then another; and so of other parts of
Gods worship; for what bond is there of the precise measure? For the second,
David and Elijah sat in prayer, others fell down upon their face: you will
stand, or sit in table-blessing; and why may you not also kneel, if you be
alone? for what absolute bond of the manner is thereof? For the third, one man
may have some reserved and peculiar end to himself in holy worship, which
another has not; inward, in respect of particular disposition of heart,
through the apprehension of some mercy received, some want vnsupplyed, some
lust unmortified; and outward, for edification of others, in regard of their
persons; in regard also of times, and places; and other circumstances
occurring. Do you look for an harmony of the Apostles themselves in these
things? verily you shall not find it. It is enough, that we all consent in the
substantialls, which are expressly manifested: as for measure, and outward
manner, and some particular end, which to some man specially occurreth, you
shall be forced to general rules in plain despite of you: now to apply this,
the difference of circumstances is occasioned either from the state of the
soul, (which like a seal makes (as it will) impression upon our bodies;) or
from the state of the Church whereof we be members; the Cot. 11. v. 14.
custom whereof has not a little force to draw us to the conformity of it.
For like as our Savior and his Apostles framed themselves to the fashion of
the Jews, so we do frame our gesture to the custom of this Church, wherein
godly men led the way unto us before we were borne. And are we more holy,
reverent, and devout then they were therefore? By no means, no more then you
may set all Gods Saints in Scripture together by the ears, by odious
comparisons for diverse using of bodily gestures in holy ordinances. It is not
necessary that the holiness, reverence, and devotion of the heart be always a
like declared.

(ipso facto) so pretends? The former (I suppose) you will not take to; you
will be so good as to leave us to the gracious judgment of Christ himself;
else we might justly think, you see and complain of our hypocrisy; as
Diogenes did the pride of Plato; fastum fastu; or rather that our innocence
(like a wall) would beat back this ball of stande^ upon them, which do band
it against us. If you should accuse us of hypocrisy, and want of inward truth
in the use of this gesture, your accusation would not touch the cause; and yet
for our persons we need not be much dismayed, being charged by them which
cannot look far into a millstone. As for kneeling it self to pretend more
holiness etc. then the Apostles had, I understand not well what it might
mean; the gesture it self is simple, and stands not in comparison. If you
mean that others take offense, who can compare gestures together, (howbeit
your assertion will not well admit of this commentary) then do you speak to
your own disgrace: for as none do think there is o^^entation thereby, but
such as do refuse, to use it, so it is strange, that their construction in
this case can fasten gross hypocrisy upon us. But what if you mean, that
kneeling is a devised gesture besides the gesture of Christ, and so is a
Pharisaicall will worship? If you do so mean, then your answer is to be had
in its own Chap. 1.
place. I will not trifle with you about the word [grosse] which Divines are
wont to contradistinguish to [formall] but take, that you understand a gross
degree in formal hypocrisy: but whether you mean gross or formal I hope my
former answer will suffice.

Arg. 7. (or rather amplification of the former) (i)if ever kneeling had been
fit in the act of receiving, then verily it had been such to the Apostles. How
so? First, Abridg p 56. Manuscrip. chapter 2.
because Christ himself was present in person, when they received: and
secondly, Manuscrip. only.
because kneeling was not thou polluted with idolatry as it has been since. I
will make you a threefold answer. First, If I take unto it, that kneeling was
fit in it self to the Apostles, it will be my gain and your loss in the
Controversy: for what if I borrow these helps of you, and transfer them
over to my first Paragraph, to show it is no ridiculous thing to say, that the
Apostles might kneel.

Jews in the gesture of the Passover: for the custom of the Jews did not
seldom sway with him, and them, even in changeable circumstances: as in
closing the book, and giving it to the minister according as they say it was
the manner of the Scribes, when they had read their text, Luke 4. 20. Sitting
to teach, Mat. 23. 21. putting off their shoes before they went to eat meat,
as the Jews manner was, having a sop in the Passover, and many more.

opinion of them; nay I am of opinion, that kneeling may be much more
convenient to us, then it was to the Apostles notwistanding them. And let best
reason determine in the consideration of them distinctly.

Mat. 20. 28.
not to be ministered unto but to minister. And the Apostle speaks plainly,
Phil. 2. 7. he made himself of no reputation, took upon him the form of a
servant, the fashion of a man, and humbled himself, etc. Verse. 9. 10.
wherefore (now) God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, that all knees should bow unto him, whereby is showed most evidently,
that to prove adoration to be done unto him, his presence in the flesh has no
such force of concluding a^ has his glorious presence. Much less it is so
much as probable, that that should be preferred.

Reply parties to B Mort, sect. 14.
abuses Heb. 1. 6. when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he
says, and let all the Angels of God worship him, there is not a letter in it,
which advantageth his defense of the Abridgement; for either the worship is to
be referred to his See Mr. (...).
glorification, (for you may not expound, when the first begotten comes into
the world, then let the Angels worship: but then he says, let the Angels
worship:) or else to the time of his being upon earth; and so as the Angels be
spiritual, so they should worship Christ in the contemplation of his invisible
excellency: and if you could affirm upon good ground, that the Angels were to
worship his invisible body upon earth, yet you cannot reason from Angels to
men: because whereas he was revealed unto the Angels, yet to men he was not,
he would not be; no nor to his dearest Apostles; rather serving them, during
his abode upon earth, then expecting to be served and worshipped by any of
them: but now his body is invested with all honor, and now he commands all
creatures to bow unto him, and worship him.

Perth. Assemb. page 37.
you do) that in the days of his flesh they were wont to fall down before
him and worship him. I answer, first, you say Ibid.
your selves it was but upon extraordinary occasions; that is, when some
miracle was either wrought or sought; as appears by all your places quoted:
Matthew. 8. 2. 9. 18. 14. 33. 20. 20. Ioh. 9. 38. Now there was no such matter
either wrought or sought in the Lords Supper: and it is questionable also
whether the worship which they performed was divine or civil. Secondly, this
is undoubtedly certain, that he was never worshipped in any solemn worship or
public ordinance, when he dwelt upon earth, as a common object of joint
adoration, that the holy Scripture mentions. Thirdly, nay his Disciples, that
were as his servants and followers, never so much as kneeled down to him in
prayer, whiles he remained alive: they worshipped him, confessing him to be the
Son of God, when they were astonished at a miracle, Matthew. 14. 33. So Simon
Peter fell down at Jesus knees, being astonished at the draught of fishes,
which they had taken, Luke. 5. 8, 9. But they never in their lives (for ought
we can tell) fell down or kneeled unto Christ in their ordinary prayers: you
will show now the difference betwixt these two sequells if you can: if ever any
should have kneeled to Christ, in the act of receiving, then surely the
Apostles should; for they received in Christ's presence: (this is yours:) if
ever any should have kneeled to Christ in the act of praying, then surely the
Apostles should, for they they prayed full often in his presence: (this is ours:)
if therefore though they kneeled not unto Christ in prayer, you will say, yet
we may kneel unto Christ in prayer: so though they kneeled not unto Christ in
receiving, we will say, yet we may kneel to Christ in receiving. Thus I do
assert, that there is far greater reason for us to kneel in the act of
receiving, then was for the Apostles, they having only Christ's presence of
humility, we his presence of glory; not to trouble you with other disparisons
in this place.

kneeling was not then polluted with idolatry, as it has been since; you
mean with the Popish artolatry, or bread-worship. I answer, first, it is
untrue, that kneeling at Sacrament (qua tale) can be polluted as you say, a
natural gesture which God in it self allows in his worship is incapable of
pollution; and can be defiled no more then sitting, standing, and kneeling, in
other cases, which have been abused to idolatrous use, shamefully and
villanously from the beginning of the world: if you regest, that kneeling has
been polluted even in this same Sacrament by idolatours, which makes it worse:
I answer, first, that it is no worse to you, which hold the Papists Sacrament
of the Altar no Sacrament of Christ, but a carnal device or nul^ity: the
worship of the popish idol is no more (in your opinion) to your Sacrament,
(setting aside the usurpation of names) then the sacrifices of Bacchus.
Secondly, let it be that this idolatry is worse to your case, because the
Popish Sacrament is esteemed to be the true Eucharist; yet shall our kneeling
be no more defiled thereby, then the sitting which the Pope has a privilege
to use at the Sacrament of the Altar, does defile your gesture of sitting. (But
this matter belongs to See the third part of this Treatise.
another place to be opened more accurately.) This is my first answer then that
idolatours are in a damnable case, which turn their eyes or hands or knees or
feet etc. ^o any idolatrous service; but there is no gesture of these parts
defiled unto godly men, from whom the idolatry is removed: what? shall we not
lift up our hands or eyes, smite upon our breasts, kneel upon our knees in
Gods true worship, because the Papists did so in false worship? far be this
learning from me and you too.

: so that as the case stands, no more can be gathered from their practice,
but this, that where all gestures were clear and free unto them, they used
only that gesture as most fit (above other respects of fitness) whereby they
might conform themselves to the Church of Israel. But suppose they might
kneel better than we, in one only respect, because they knew not of the
Popish bread-worship; sure we may kneel better then they again in many maine
respects, as the long custom of the Church since the reformation, the command
of a Christian King in a variable circumstance, and lastly in Mr. Sprints case,
which is indeed a case of wonderful importance God knows. So much for
answer to the arguments, pressing the example of Christ and his Apostles.

Grounds whereby it may appear, that the imitation of Christ's gesture is not
necessary.
Repl. partic to B. Mort. p. 36.
says, he allows, that there were some acts of Christ in the Sacrament
essential, some accidental: now that the gesture of Christ which he used was
but accidental, and so variable, and by no means binding to imitation, I
declare in this manner.

The gesture is to be considered, as it respects the preceding history of the
Passover, as it respects the institution; as it respects other things in
the Sacrament; lastly, as it respects all other Ecclesiastical ordinances.

Met. 26. 26. Mark. 14. ^^.
Evangelists, [as they were eating Jesus took bread, etc.] if it show any
thing in the world, as touching the connection, (for the gesture as you say;) it
is, that the gesture of the Communion was occasional from the gesture of the
Passover. It pleases the Replyer Page supradict.
to say, he pitied the defendant, that he could show no occasion of the
gesture of the Eucharisticall Supper. Surely the defendant needed not to be
pitied in that thing: sembled professions of pity are righter objects both of
pity, and indignation. But I request the Replier to tell me, whether (inasmuch
as he will have these words, [as they were eating Jesus took bread etc.] to
import the continuance of the gesture;) he can historically relate an
occasional act by plainer words, if he would bond himself to do it, so that
he use not the word [occasionall?] Let other places of Scripture, (partly in
the story of the Pass^over, and partly other where) and common reason, med^rate
this disputation. In Mark. 14. 18. It is said, [as they sat and did eat,
Jesus said, Verily one of you shall betray me:] I ask now, whether Christ's
gesture of sitting, when he spoke thus, was not occasional from the Passover?
so Ezech. 8. 1. As I sat in mine house, and the elders of Israel sat before
me, the hand of the Lord fell upon me there says the Prophet. Will you say
that the Prophets sitting was purposed and required there, wherein the hand of
the Lord should come upon him, or that it was merely occasional? So 1 King.
13. As the two Prophets sat together (at meat) at the table, the word of the
Lord came to the Prophet that brought him back, verse. 20. was not the gesture
here unto the coming of the Prophecy merely occasional? so, as Christ
(after his resurrection) sat at meat with the Disciples, he took bread, etc.
Hereupon (I think) together with the institution it self aftersupper were
grounded the loue-feasts, by continued occasion whereof the Disciples might
possibly (for a time) use sitting in the act of receiving
Luke. 24. 30. who can imagine, but this sitting at breaking bread (which is
like to be Sacramental) was only occasional from the gesture of common
eating? but what should I spend Scripture upon a point, which common reason of
the phrase [as they were eating the Passover, Jesus took bread, etc.]
evidently convinces? especially if we consider two things: first, that if the
Passover had not then been needful to precede the Eucharisticall Supper, I
can upon as good reason think, that the Apostles might have stood or kneeled,
as well as sit down, (if they sat) in receiving; no formal table gesture
seeming needful for eating one bit of bread, supping one taste of wine, and
that also in spiritual use. 2. that the gesture of the Passover it self was
but occasional, and all your proof of the Supper-gesture is but probability
of the Passeouer-gesture continued) and therefore the Supper-gesture could be no
more: and that the Passeouer-gesture was but occasional, manifestly appears;
for (be sides that Perth. assem. page 38.
you say, Their manner of sitting was received among the Jews, either from the
Romans or Persians,) this is to be minded, that some gesture being needful to
eat their meat in, God had neither prescribed nor prohibited any one unto
them: and so they were left to their own choice, and they did choose the
gesture used among them in ordinary meals: whereof also there was much more
reason, then is now to us in the Sacrament as there was more use of tables: on
which were set in the Passover many dishes to make up a full and formal
bodily meal; but with us, they be only used to set our bread and wine on, as
decency does require. Now if you be so pitiful to me as you are wont to be, I
pray you de^lare your pity by kind and faithful instruction in these things,
if you can reprove them: for else (rebus sic sta^tibus) it is as clear as the
Sun shines, that the gesture of our Savior was only occasional, and so
binds us not.

Reply part. to B Mort. page ^6. See also the Survey. p. 181.
as the Replyer would have it, and note that the Repliers meaning is according
to the words of Ioh. Alasco, that sitting at the table of the Lord (est pars
signi Canae Dominicae, that is) is a part of the very Sacram. sign. Against
this opinion I reason thus. First, that which is instituted for a Sacramental
part, is within the commandment, [do this in remembrance of me] else, where
must this fancy be grounded? but that commandment includes not the gesture, as
I have plainly showed Chapter 2 sect. 3.
before.

pars signi, and so (you say) signifies our Communion, then you have some word
that says as much, that gives you warrant so to believe and teach; but such a
word has not all the new Testament, which teaches that sitting signifies our
Communion with Christ, or with one another, partaking of the elements only
signifies that unto us, according to the warrant of the Apostle: The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the
bread which we break is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.
16. for we being many are o^^ bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of
that one bread, verse 17.



ad esse Sacramenti, or ad been esse. The former you do disclaim; the latter
we will affirm of very circumstances, which tend to the well being of public
and private duties of Gods worship, and yet be variable.

Part. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 4, 5, 6, 7.
first part of this treatise I have observed, do belong most plainly to the
gesture. If therefore it be essential, essentialls will become circumstances,
and circumstances will become essentialls, and so all other mutual accidents
in the Supper of Christ shall be essentials as well as the gesture.

: But where did reason tell you that sitting is essential to any feast? much
more it is a senseless conceit, to think, that sitting at the Sacrament is,
pars signi: when all men know it is but a mean, (medium apprehendendi signum)
whereby the sign may be apprehended of us.

Part. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 2.
before; where in effect he acknowledges, that gestures be not of institution:
the writer of the Manuscr. saying, that sitting may be left, as all other
indifferent things may, gives (I hope) that sitting it self was not of
institution and essentially, and sacramentally necessary. As for I have quoted
him before p. 2. c. 1. Sect. 9.
Mr. T. C. he admonishes all men, that sitting is not holden to be necessary,
and therefore he is far from thinking that gesture to be essential, and of
institution.

Paul is silent, when he sets down the essentials of the Lords Supper. 1. Cor.
11. 23, etc. But here Manuscrip. chap. 2. Disp says, Paul did acquaint the
Corinthians, that Christ sat page ^54. this is an unwritten verity.
it is answered, that Paul calls it the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 11. 20. and the
Lords Table: 1. Cor. 10. 21. by those very names, though not expressing, yet
intimating a Table, and Supper-gesture.

they used to sit; you offend first, Petitione principij, you cannot proouee
they sat in those times: then you offend in the Colliars logic; they sat
because there is mention of suppers and tables, and suppers and tables be
mentioned, because they used to sit.



Thirdly, to what purpose do you tell us of Paul's intimations Cor. 11. 23. etc.

But to this place there be three exceptions laid First, the Apostle omits
the gesture, Perth. Ass. page 39.
because he writes as of a thing known. Ans. This is a strange exception, was
the gesture better known, then the institution of bread, wine, blessing,
breaking, taking, eating, drinking, etc. so you said before, it was supposed in
the Evangelists; but when did you ever hear of essentials supposed altogether?
this exception is of no value, for you might allege that to any Scripture of
any matter, and furnish us with Roman learning, as if essentials were left
unwritten to posterity, because those times well knew of them.

Object. 2. Manuscrip. c^ 2.
Paul says not, verse 23. I deliver all that I have received, but I deliver
nothing else but what I have received. Ans. You restrain Paul too much, for he
says both; namely, that which he delivered he had received; and also that
which he had received he did deliver, that is concerning the institution: and
the rather is this so, if it may be thought, that Paul received this of the
Lord, by miraculous revelation, immediately; as See Parens in 1 Cor. 11.
wise men do judge; and again Beza in 1 Cor 11. verse 23.
if Beza do call this institution the Liturgy of the Apostles, well; no doubt
all essentialls which bound both Jews and Gentiles, even in remote parts of
the world, may be expected from it, or else, how could all corruptions in the
supper, whatsoever they be, be tried by this institution as a rule; whereas
that it is such a rule the Perth-assembly Page 45.
avoucheth? Wherefore this exception can gain you nothing.

Object. 3. Paul omits many material things besides, as well as the gesture in
1 Cor. 1. 23. Answ. If you mean, by material, essential, and instituted
things, then I deny: first, you Manuscr. chapter 2.
say he omits the blessing of the cup. It is not so: for thus he writeth-tooke
bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, etc. verse 24.
after the same manner also he took the cup, etc. verse 25. so the blessing of
the cup is mentioned in those words [he gave thankes] two ways; either by
referring the same to both elements, and to the whole action, as we do And as
we do at the sacrament, I believe not that you think blessing of the cup after
the bread to be essential.
at tables; or else by the plain word of assimilation, (...), verse 25.
whereby the former blessing, or thanksgiving is evidently applied (by a
serverall accommodation) unto the cup also; he took the bread and gave
thanks, etc. after the same manner, he took the cup. Secondly, says the
disputer, Disp. page 154.
the giving of the bread and cup is unmentioned. Ans. still you will be a In
the same place he says, Paul omits the pouring out of the wine Alas good man,
he had not searched the Evangelists, for they make no mention of any pouring
out of wine.
ridiculous disput^r, giving is not words to be repeated, but an action to be
done, and that the said action is to be done, can you not prove out of this
place: pray you look again; thus says the Apostle: he brake it, and said,
take, eat, this do, verse 24. this do as often as ye drink it, verse 25. Can
not you prove from hence, that the bread and wine was undoubtedly distributed
and communicated? other men can (I am sure) most infallibly: these words are
omitted (you Manuscrip.
say) drink ye all of this, and again, which was shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Poor exceptions I must confess; for they are not
omitted, except you go by the count of silables at your fingers ends; for thus
the Apostle rehearses them, verse 25. This cup is the new testament (or
covenant) in my blood; This do ye etc. if you mean the word [All] is left
our, I may say your [All] is nothing, as if the sounding of that word [All]
were The word (all) is of singular use in the doctrine of the Sacrament,
against the Papists, who take away the cup from the people, but it is not
necessary to name it in the Sacramental administration Christ teaching rather
what the people should do, then what the minister should say.
essential to the administration of the Communion. Fourthly, you Manuscr. chapter
2.
say, these words be omitted: I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine,
till I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom: also the singing of a
Psalm when the whole action is finished, is omitted by Saint Paul. Ans. It is
true, and why did you not add also, that speech omitted, which Christ uses,
John. 14. 31. Arise let us go hence: who does not presently see, that neither
those words, nor that Psalm are essentialls, and of institution, but
occasional only; nay those words may no man use, they belong not to us; and
for the Psalm you deny not, but it may be omitted; and your self say enough,
that it was used, when the whole action was finished: I conclude therefore that
Paul mentions all essentialls of the instution of the Supper in 1 Cor. 11. 23.
etc. and therefore that the gesture is an accident only, and so may be varied.

Thirdly consider the gesture, as it respects other matters in the Sacrament,
of like force with it self* and it; what quantity of bread and wine they did
receive; and how long they did in this action tarry together; and I might add
the consideration of the kiss of charity, (specially if the speech be now of
Apostolical example, as well at other communions, as at the first institution)
for Calvin 1 Cor. 16. 20. facile ere diderim iam ab atate Apostolorum, (...)
administrationi coniunctum osculum fuisse.
Calvin judges, that same osculum sanctum to have been joined to the supper
from the Apostles time. Thirdly for things, as what kind of bread both for
matter and form was used, what kind of wine, what manner of cup, what manner
of table, what covering for the table, are points not impertinent to our
occasion. Fourthly for other circumstances; as the time was in the evening, and
also after another supper, which had been a full meal. The place was a
private chamber in a private house. Lastly for the gesture, though I grant the
maine position of their bodies to be such sitting, as is said was at the
Passover; yet there be some things concerning the same very remarkable for our
purpose. They sat with their heads covered; they sat all that communicated at
one time together at one table; the dearest friends sat next one another, as
appears by the Disciples sitting in Jesus bosom, whom Jesus loved in more
especial manner: They used the same gesture in blessing and giving thanks,
that they did in receiving; he that administered or delivered the elements sat
in the act of administering and delivering, as well as the Disciples sat in the
act of receiving. In all which considerations, if liberty do remain unto us,
that we are not bound to the example of Christ and his Apostles, would not a
man wonder, that so many otherwise godly minded men should for so many years
together strive so vehemently (that I say not bitterly) about the example of
the gesture?

I have found in their writngs for answer to some of I will pass the foolish
answer of the disp. that says the Church has changed none of the circumstances
which Christ used* Disp. 122, 123. for what should be said to him who denies,
that the Sun changes shadow in the dial*
things. First (they Manuscrip. chapter 2. Disp. page 121.
say) some of these things were altered from the first institution by the
Apostles themselves, as they administered the Communion to the Act. 2. 42.
whole multitude of believers, and so it was not to be received only by
twelve, men, ministers. Also the time was altered by the Apostle, Acts 20. 7.
11. who administered the Communion early in the morning. Answ. To pass the
partial alleging of Acts 20. to prove the Communion administered in the
morning, when as the text says about midnight. Entichus fell down from a lof,
and was taken up dead, whom when Paul had recovered, he broke bread among
them, Ver. 7. 11. and after this he talked a long while, even until break of
day, verse. 11 so that Paul administered in one part of the night, as our Savior
Christ did in another; and this helps you not. To pass also, that you speak
of a confessed circumstance, that it was [altered] somewhat ca^achristically:
for such a thing howsoever men may vary in the diverse use thereof, according as
Christian liberty does allow, yet in it self still and ever remains statu
quo prius. To pass these things, I answer.

First they did not of purpose vary the circumstances of pro ratione temperum:
this is nothing against the gesture of sitting, whereof perhaps they had no
occasion given to change.

Secondly, they might vary many other circumstances

Thirdly, many things the Apostles did not change, (which adds much strength to
their continuance,) yet receivers communicating bread and cup one with another,
etc. whereby appears, that if the gesture was never changed by the Apostles,
yet that respect does not take away the mutability of it unto us. Your answer
imports, that actions are made mutable, or immutable unto us, by the mere
example of the Apostles, which is most untrue; for in moralls their example
supposes a law; in mutables it only declares Christian liberty, and
asserteth no more. Now if I assume, that the gesture is circumstantiall to the
Sacrament, and so of the nature of other circumstances, which you grant be
variable, I hope, I do not beg it of you. If I take it not, ex concesso; yet
I take it, ex probate; as judge you: so that whiles you do tell us, that some
circumstances were varied by the Apostles, what does that hurt us concerning
the gesture? Does that make any thing dogmatically against the change of the
gesture? you can tell us that the time etc. may be changed, because the
Apostles changed it: but you cannot infer, that the gesture if it was not
changed by them, is not changeable therefore.

Lastly, In a word, mark how well you wipe away [those circumstances were
changed by the Apostles.] We know they were, and that is our advantage: why do
you make a part of our proof, the whole of your answer? This is not very well
carried, only it serves for an answer to them, which either will not, or can
not examine it.

Secondly, (they Disp. page 48.
say) they do follow Christ in so does the Church use, according to Christ's
example, such bread and wine, as fitteth best, (for the time present.) Answer
notably defended against the gesture! I will reason in like manner, that we do
follow Christ's example by kneeling, as well as they do those circumstances.
For as Christ used that gesture which the time then presented and allowed for
fittest: so do we use according to Christ's example, the gesture of kneeling,
which the time present presents and allows for fittest. It is enough for me
to set together (because they forget) things paralellable.

Thirdly, (they Abridg p 56. Repl. partic to B. Mort. p. 35. ^ Manuscri. chapter 2.
Disp. page 49.
say) our Savior had special reasons,

Secondly, If our Savior had special reasons, by the necessity of the time,
yet it concludes not that without that necessity, he would have done
otherwise: a man may be necessituted to do it some time, which also he will
do, if he were at liberty; and so might our Savior have done, for ought you
can say to the contrary.

Thirdly, in those things you mention special reason I mean not by his
soverainty, but upon such respects as were i^^is (...).
might have done otherwise at that time. As first you Manuscr. chapter ^.
say, by the law every family was to celebrate the Passover apart; therefore
there might be but our Saviors twelve with him. Now I should rather infer
contrarily, that because our Sacrament was not to be like the Passover in the
celebration of it, by severed families, there might have bin thereat many
twelues with him as well as one. I say might, both lawfully, and by
fore-appoyntment out of Jerusalem very possibly at that time, so though there
might be but his own company with him at Passover, yet at the Communion others
also might have bin present, any order (which himself has before or since
given in the word,) or difficulties of getting other^ to join at that festiual
time notwithstanding, true, Christ pleased to have with him no more company at
that time, but (what I pray) was the cause of that? Verily because the number
of his Disciples was sufficient at any time, and not expressly and merely for
the necessity of the Passeouer-occasion. You Ibid.
add, that the Apostles were public persons, and so in receiving,
represented the whole Church of Christ; wherein you seem to me to speak
unfitly, for do you think they received the Sacrament, quatenus they were
public Ministers of the Gospel? I know they represented the whole Church of
Christ, but in no other respect, but as they were members of Christ, and
believers in his name, called to the first celebration of that ordinance,
wherein even private men and women too (if such had bin present) would have
represented the Church of Christ, full as much as they.

Next Ibid.
you give special reason of their unleavened bread, because there was no other
to be had at that time. I Quall (...) communicatione vs^ si^^ non exponitur. S^
^lac. Il^ius etc Ecclesiast. histor. Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap 6.
perhaps used (sometime^) bread, in the Supper unleavened, when they might have
used other. Consider how the Apostle alludeth; Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the feast, not with the leaue^ of
malice, and wicked^^^, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 1.
Cor. 5. 7. 8. Secondly. Howsoever your special reason will come to nothing: if
our Savior might indifferently take either the one or the other, which you
cannot gainesay; nay Disp page 49.
your selves do say, you regard not greatly for your wine, whether it be
Gasc^ing, or Rhemists, or Judea, or Candy, white or red, so it be the fruit of
the vine: and so you say likewise for the bread in question, namely, whether it
be leauened or unleavened, so it be the bread of the country. Wherefore then
would you tie our Savior to use the unleavened bread, upon reason of
necessity, because there was none other; when perhaps he would, I am sure, he
might have used it, although there had been leavened bread at hand.

Next you Manuscrip. chapter 2. Disp. page supradict.
give special reason for the time, namely As that of Paul and the Christians
receiving in the night was, Act. 20.
of convenience and fitness; and if all the three points which you name, were
done upon special reason, the same answer suffices: nay, suppose they were
plainly done upon special reason of necessity, yet you must be persuaded, that
that can do no scathe to the mutability of the gesture more then of all the
rest of the circumstances? and thus you have a particular, and just answer to
your special reasons of some particular circumstance^* I might give you one
general answer to them altogether, and say, these were no reasons, because
Christ might have disposed otherwise for number of communicants, bread, and
wine, without doing a miracle. I confess, I should borrow this answer of the
wisdom of the Scotsmen; Some circumstances (say Perth Assemb. page 36, 37
they) could not conveniently have been changed; but as for the gesture of
sitting, Christ might have changed it in Note that standing is in as ill case
as kneeling.
standing or kneeling, if it had been his mind we should have left it, without
working any miracle. But I disclaim the help of this answer, because it is
some what absurd and ridiculous.

Fourthly, I answer, let it be that all your circumstances

Fourthly, (they Disp page 50. Hither may be referred, that which you say, page
^21, 122. that such circumstances as the Church has now lawfully changed from
those which Christ v^ed, are ordained by God, and so is not kneeling.
say) we cannot reason from circumstantiall things, and such as are of
temporary use, to that which is substantial, and of perpetual use. I answer
(to pass the fault of petition of the principle, which custom with the
disputer makes ordinary) although I have said reasonable much to prove the
gesture but a circumstance; yet because I will show the force of our reasoning
from those circumstances of the first supper, which are undoubtedly mutable; I
will prove that the gesture and they be (for our purpose) of equal
consideration. First, those things which agree together, (I say not in alique
tert^^, but) in the point of Adiaphorisme, have in that respect a force of
inferring one upon another. This proposition is clear enough: but I assume,
that the gestu^e and those circumstances do agree together in the point of
Adiaphorisme: for proof whereof not to speak of the efficient, or general
matter of things indifferent, which are bodily actions, things, ceremonies,
etc. let us make the trial by the form and end of them. The form is ipsa
(...), or ind^ff^rency it self, as I may so speak: and this in gestures you
cannot deny: of our Saviors gesture of sitting you do openly Manuser. chapter ^.
confess, that it was but a matter of circumstance, and of an indifferent
nature, and may be lawfully left upon occasion, as all other indifferent things
may, and another gesture used in stead of it. And thus you be enforced to say,
partly by the liberty of all gestures in other ordinances, and partly by the
liberty which you take your selves of the gesture of standing in this
Sacrament. Well, formadat esse. As for the end of things indifferent, which is
order, decency, and edification, let Mr. disputer Disp. page 37. ^^^lib^.
bear witness, who condemns kneeling at Sacrament for want of decency and
order, and avoweth the same of the gesture which was used by Christ and his
Apostles. Then it follows by one proof, that the gesture in the supper is no
more substantial then the recited circumstances.

Secondly, there was never people, time, service, from P. 1. c 1. at the third
rule of gestures.
prooved sufficiently, and shall (by Gods grace) ever be able to defend, as a
clear doctrine of truth. Is it not then an hard case, that one only gesture,
in one only ordinance, under one only time, (the time of the Gospel,)
without also any special instruction given, should become damnable, and be no
companion to its natural fellow-gestures, or any other circumstances? Surely it
is incredible; if therefore gesture hold its hold, which it has had in all
services divine, in all Churches and times, it will still remain unto us a
free denizon in the corporation of circumstances.

Thirdly, that the gesture may be concluded changeable,

Sixthly, and lastly, perpend diligently some circumstances: (now Mr. disputer
will cry out presently, a table gesture for a feast:] but give me leave (Sir)
you reason out of an imagined rule, I will reason out of the express tenor of
the institution:) Take three mutables for example. First, what say you to the
breaker of the bread? Do you imagine, that our Savior divided the bread into
twelve pieces, or that he only led the way for breaking unto his communicants?
You Perth. Assemb. page 4^.
allow the first book of discipline, penned. 1560. which ordeines that the
Minister break the bread, and distribute the same to those that be next him,
comm^nding the rest every one with reverence, and sobriety, to break with
other, because it is nearest to Christ's action. Now is not the respect of the
person breaking more to be noted then the gesture? yet is it not absolutely
necessary that the people should break the bread. Secondly. what say you to
pouring out of the wine, (if our Savior used it, which is ind^ed uncertain,)
is it not nearer the sacramental business, then the positure of the
communicants bodies, yet is it necessary to be done. Thirdly, finally what say
you to the administration of the supper? Is not the man of administration
nearer to the institution, then the gesture of administration? yet is it not
necessary that the same man administer the bread and wine both, as our Savior
Christ did: by all which disparisons it appears (I hope) that the gesture is
inferior to many other circumstances in the supper; not to speak of the
equality of the gesture and other circumstances, which I could show much more
(I suppose) if need did require. Now I trust you will please to permit me to
take the benefit of my third general respect of the gesture, namely, that we
are no more bound to follow the example of Christ and his Apostles therein,
then we be bound in other mutable circumstances. Fourthly, consider the gesture
as it respects: for let any man pick out of the bible one example of gesture
in prayer, thanksgiving, singing of Psalms, exercises of the word, offering of
sacrifice, in circumcision, in the passover, and Here Christ's example is this,
he was immersed, in a River, at thirty: three great points not to be imitated,
much less an unknown gesture.
baptism, that ever absolutely bound the Church to the imitation thereof, and I
will yield that Christ's example may bind us here: But if none such were ever
heard of, then my brethren must show reason, why example binds rather in this
worship, then in all other worships of God; rather in this Sacrament, then in
all other Sacraments of either Law or Gospel. But I am of mind that he which
looks into these things in good earnest, and with an impartial eye, will
easily languish in his opinion, of the necessity of imitating Christ, and the
Apostles bodily gesture.

Thus I have showed that their gesture binds us not to imitation,

What remains now, but that I shut up this chapter Sect. 75 to the end of
Sect. 89.
answered; or else that in many of th^se things, Christ has not left direction
and information unto us, which might be answered also as easily: for we know as
well what wine, what fashioned cup, etc. Christ used; as we know his gesture,
the story being indifferently silent both in this and them. But I will urge
your practice against you in these particulars following.

First, you swerue from Christ's example, who it alone. I say well, if it were
necessary to follow Christ's example.

Secondly, you swerue from the example of our Savior Christ, by giving the
bread, and wine, singularly to Luke 2^. 17.
bid his communicants divide it among them, you cannot say that you bid them to
do in like manner, when you can and may, for sometimes you do otherwise, and if
it were an absolute duty, Can must be laid aside for the Pitcher.

Thirdly, you swerue from Christ's example in cutting

Fourthly, you swerue from Christ's example by sitting John's. separat. Christian
plea. treat. 3. cha. 10.
Mr. Johnson charge you, yea, thus you charge your own selves, Perth. Assem.
page 48.
by yielding that the Jews covered their heads in divine worship, as Drusins
affirms and proves.

Fifthly, you swerue from Christ's example in being content

Sixthly, why do you not pray, bless, and give thanks

Seventhly, Christ who administered sat as well as they which received, where
you be content to do otherwise.

Eighthly, You stand often in receiving, so (you confess) Luke 22. 27.
Whether is greater he that sits at meat, or he that (stands and) serves?
But here we Repl. partic to B. Mort. p. 46.
telling us being pressed with Christ's example, that standing is better then
kneeling, but sitting is simply the best of all. Truly a very childish answer.
First, then it follows that here is the the positive degree, comparatiue and
superlatiue, that is, good, better, and best. Kneeling is good, standing is
better, sitting is best. Here kneeling is undermined dangerously: if therefore
standing is to be borne with, rather then kneeling; kneeling also may be borne,
though the degree of inconvenience be greater. Secondly, if you say standing is
better then kneeling, that is, an inconvenience is better then a sin, what is
that to the Bishops dilemma: [if standing be admitted, why do you press
Christ's example of sitting? if Christ's sitting be necessary, why do you use
standing?] where that kneeling is a sin must needs be begged in comparison
with standing, when Christ's gesture was no more standing then kneeling:
therefore this salve heales not your sore (common with us) of swerving from
Christ's example: especially first, when you do commonly stand in many places,
when you might sit, and in Geneva they stand altogether: this is strange
magnifying of Christ's example. Secondly, when (you Perth. Assemb. page 35.
say) kneeling breaks the institution by taking away the very gesture of
sitting, used by Christ and his Apostles: then standing must needs break the
institution also.

Ninthly, what will you say to At Geneua the elders reach the cup to the people
so they do oftentimes with you*
walking up and So they do at Genera: so they do often with you.
act of eating? is not this a breaking of Christ's example, yea a palpable
breaking of it? but let Mr. Replier Repl partic to Bp. Merion, page 36.
help you at a dead lift: first, (says he) walking is more agreeable to a
supper then kneeling: but what does he speak of kneeling without cause, he
should defend that walking breaks not Christ's example of sitting: he only
makes comparison with kneeling for an evasion: for what if walking be afar
off agreeable to a supper, what is that to Christ's example, except that your
sin of breaking his example may perhaps be lessened? and yet that is nothing
to the very point. Now how agreeable walking is to a supper, that shall we show
in its own Afterward chap 5.
place.

Secondly, says the Replier, walking was never abused to idolatry, as
kneeling. Answer, still he evades by comparison: we may leave Christ's example
for any gesture that is not idolatrous: and this is the true application of
your comparatiue answer. You have brought the plea of Christ's example to a
worthy good pass; for so kneeling it self is lawful you confess for all
Christ's example in it self, if idolatry had not (as you say) polluted it.
These two answers then serve only for filling up. Thirdly, the principal
answer is to come,: howsoever you cast off the defense of Genevaes fashion it
seems. Secondly, beggarly: first, begging that walking is as near Christ's
example as you can come. Secondly, but shamefully begging, that walking is no
sin, is against Christ's example which was objected unto you. The Bishop B.
Mort. defense partic. chap 3. sect 7.
charge you with offending against Christ's example (if it be a sin not to
follow it in gesture) by your walking up and down: you answer, forsooth, that
you are forced to walk indeed, but you abstain in the mean time from that
which is evil, that you do not sin in it. But I pray why did you not show and
prove, that you sin not against Christ's example by walking, houlding of the
gesture of kneeling as you do. Lo, Sir, (pray you look again) that was the
point, (and yet is) to be answered: as for your saying, you come as near
Christ's example as you can, that satisfies nothing at all, if your gesture be a
sweruing from Christ's example; and so be a sin in it self unto you: your
coming as near as you can, may excuse perhaps a tanto, but it does not excuse
and release (a tot^) from all blame of sinful, and so damnable aberration.
When I scanned these answers of the replyer, as I was forced to think, he
wanted either judgment, or eandour, (that I say not conscience) so I was sorry
for poor people and Ministers too, led with prejudice, whose turn the name of
a reply, and the numerous tale of perticulars, in the handling of this
controversy suffices.

I offer these nine points of your practice to be better considered of: in the
mean time Iavow, that you have

This then is your judgment of Christ's example. The question is not, (says
Disp page 144
the disputer) whether the Church may forbear to use Christ's table gesture,
but whether in leaving Christ's example it may observe such a gesture as is no
table gesture. Examples of gestures both in the supper and prayer (says*
Manuscrip. chapter 2.
Manuscrip.) which otherwise we are bound to follow, when they prove
inconvenient, and an hindrance to edification, may be lawfully changed into
some other. I will name no more, having your actions so sufficiently to speak
your mind, being the best expression of your inward thoughts that possibly can
be.

Thus (by Gods gracious assistance) I have fairly considered

An appendice to the argument of Christ's example.
YEt I am enforced to speak in this place a word or two further to the
importunity of the Scotsmen: for they do bear us in hand, that Christ's
example in the institution is broken diverse ways by kneeling, besides taking
away the gesture of sitting.

First say Perth. Assemb page 39.
they, kneeling takes away the use of a table from us: I answer three things:
First, a formal table is not essential unto the Communion, neither know you
what a one Christ and his Apostles did use. Secondly, if tables were made
lower, and longer then ordinary, communi^ants might kneel before them; (nay
they many as they are, as the minister is wont to do with us) and so come, and
go, as you are wont to do in sitting and standing: so the use of the table
would not be taken away, but only of forms and benches. Thirdly, tables have
a proper and honorable use with us, for setting the bread and wine on, whence
as in civil use a piece of bread and a cup of wine may be fitly brought unto
then which be present. But see the next maine argument of a table gesture.

Secondly (say Page 40.
they) kneeling takes away breaking of the bread: how so? because our
service-booke makes no mention of breaking of bread? I answer, first, that the
service book expressing it in the words of institution does certainly import
it. Secondly, is kneeling (I pray you) in cause that breaking of the bread is
not mentioned? or is not bread broken in practice where kneeling is? or if it
be not, is kneeling the cause it is not broken? This is new, strange, and
ridiculous learning. Thirdly, if kneeling only take away breaking of bread for
the respect of the service-booke, then in it self it can be charged with no
such matter.

Thirdly, (say Page 41.
they) ^^^^ling takes away the distribution, that ought to be among the
communicants. I answer, First, distribution by communicants one unto another is
not proved essential to the Sacrament; I see what you say to it, and it is
not of force enough. You tell us, this is a rite whereby the communicants
should enterteine communion amongst themselves. But behold there is great
communion (including that) in the act of communicating together; else you say
nothing, but what you crave impudently. Secondly, there may be distribution (in
my understanding) by them which kneel together, as well as by them which sit
or stand, if it be intended. Thirdly, you still err in putting non causam pro
causa: kneeling was not the cause, that such distribution ceased at the first,
or took not place with us in the Church of England.

Fourthly, and fifthly, (say they) Page 41.
kneeling alters the en^^^^atiue words of Christ, [This is my body which is
broken for you] also it Page 40.
restresnes the commandment [eate ye, drink yee] to *eat thou, drink
thou.] Oh miserable exceptions! what will no prejudice make an argument for it
self? as if the true meaning were not retained with us; or as if there were a
fault, kneeling (forsooth) were to be charged with it: as if those speeches
have not been applied also to them which have fit and stood; in a word, as if
those speeches were not in former time so used, before (you say) that kneeling
was used in the Church. I marv^ile you do not say that kneeling has been the
cause of all the sins at the Sacrament that ever were known, since it was
used: you discredit your cause with such impertinencies, falsehoods,
deliraments, as if you were not ministers of the truth.

Sixthly, (say Page 44.
they) kneeling divides communions, that so many cannot receive together.
Answer, it is unreasonably false; nay it is truer of sitting about a table,
where many cannot receive together at one time, except with tossing to and fro,
with coming and going, that they much disturb (many times tread upon) one
another.

CHAP. 4.
THirdly, our order brings us now to the consideration Authority in another
begets reverence in me, this reverence possessing and affecting my soul,
breeds in me a desire to manifest it to the party reverenced: but I cannot
possibly do it, by any other means, but by some bodily shadow and sign;
whereupon nature teaches me to bow the body: Treat. of div. worsh. page 9.
nature ministers for the just defense of kneeling in the worship of God: yet
it is said, that kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacramental elements, is
contrary to the order of nature. Now nature has three ways whereby she
manifests her self: first, those natural principles, and notions of the
mind, which arise, e dictamine rationis. Secondly, the natural inclination
and propensitie of things, whereby they are constantly moved and carried after
some special manner. Thirdly, the necessity, and civil exigence of things
themselves, whereby they are administered, and applied, as harmony, propriety,
and lastly, sensible commodiousnesse and fitness do require. I am content
that nature by these ways be moderatrix betwixt us. First, you cannot deny,
that there is a principle in nature for worshipping God, and that a natural
expression of worship is bowing or falling down. Secondly, you cannot deny
that man is prone by nature to adore before the majesty of God in his
ordinance, whose face he apprehends to be both present and glorious. Thirdly,
for the necessary administration of Gods worship, kneeling will be least
condemned by nature among the gestures: for this I must admonish you of, that
when we ask what gesture nature requires in the Sacrament, it is not as if we
asked what gesture nature requires in eating and drinking: for thus you
consider no more of the Sacrament, then of a civil supper at some. Therefore
because nature knows not Evangelicall Sacraments in the particular
accommodation of them, we can inquire no better then what gesture does nature
require, either in a Sacrament (which is a seal of a covenant betwixt our
Creator and us) or more generally what gesture requires it in divine worship.
So then first, Harmony allows the gesture of kneeling in the Sacrament well;
posito, that nature does simply and universally allow it in worshipping.
Secondly Preprietatum de^etio natura negatio est.
propriety (I mean that which belongs to the Sacrament in the formal and
essential consideration of it) does by no means exclude or condemn kneeling
in the act of receiving, more then the same is excluded or condemned in
Circumcision, Passover, and Baptism. Thirdly, all the matter you stand on, is
the least of all: and that is the commodiousnesse and fitness of sitting in
the time of receiving, and the incommodiousnesse and unfitness of kneeling at
that time: but it will prove (I hope) upon just trial, that kneeling is
commodious and fit as well as are sitting and standing. That reason may sway,
let your arguments be now examined; which I find to be two in number; one
general, one special: though the general be nothing of it self, but either
vanishes into the special, or into other arguments. The general argument
assumeth kneeling to be against the order of nature, because it is against
Decency. Wherefore of decency we must say something.

Of decency of the gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving.
ANd first we must needs take notice of a loose distinction Decency (say
Demand. p. 1 40.
they) is either divine, for allowance whereof plain and evident testimonies
may be found in holy writ, that the same decency pleases God: or humane, for
the which we have no other warrant then tradition or commandment of man, and
so is only pleasing to man. For the divine allowance of the decency of
kneeling I shall justify it by and by: for the commandment of man to make
decency (besides that the speech is harsh and improper, I will take an order
for you, that the case shall be tried between us, as if there were no
magistrate in the Church. But perhaps you might have better distinguished thus.
[There is a towfold decency, either that which you call decency, or that which
we call decency] and this would have been somewhat more to the ^ery purpose.
But two points I will not stick to yield you: first, that the gesture used in
the Sacrament ought to be decent, for who is sovoyd of honesty to deny that
Scripture, (1 Cor. 14. 40.) as well as nature, expressly imposing the
necessity of ^t upon us? Secondly, that all gestures be decent in the
Sacrament, perse, I mean standing, sitting, and kneeling; the decency of
sitting does not exclude the decency of starding, nor does the decency of both
exclude the decency of kneeling, no the decency of kneeling exclude the decency
of the o^^er. This (I am assured) will be current divinity with you, if I show
that there is a decency in kneeling, which is the only gesture denied; for of
that you Perth. Assemb. Page 56.
say, comeliness will not suffer it in the Sacrament; and every one of you is
of the same mind, for ought I can see to the contrary: but if I shall prove
kneeling decent in the supp^r, then you cannot but confess, that any of the
principal gestures may be decently applied unto it upon occasion. Your
arguments against the decency of kneeling shall be brought forth first, and
after ours produced, which tend to justify and maintain it.

Arguments against the decency of kneeling.
REason 1. Repl. general cap. 1. s. 16.
Nothing is left to our liberty perteining to Answer. But (passing whether
order will not stand with the usage of a new thing) it is false, that you say,
that kneeling at Sacrament is a new thing, and so that the Sacrament cannot be
rightly ordered and disposed thereby. Is not the gesture necessary in its kind,
and may not the particular determination thereof be varyed? and why then do
you tell us of a new thing instituted, which in its kind is absolutely
necessary? and if this be not a good answer, how will standing at Sacrament be
acquitted from being a new thing, and many things more, which I could name,
that be variable, and yet necessary in their kind? would you have matters of
order to be particularly mentioned? you would and also must have it so, if by
this reasoning kneeling can possibly be condemned: but if by new thing you
cannot mean any such thing whose kind is necessary to the Sacrament, it
follows, that this reason against kneeling is not worth a straw. And here I
cannot but observe the simplicity of the demaunders,, who because the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord are required to be done decently by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 40. do thereupon imagine that kneeling cannot come
within the compass of the Apostles decency, because it is not the commandment
of the Lord, reasoning in effect in Demand. page 38.
this manner: [All the Lords commandments must be used decently: kneeling in
the act of receiving is not the Lords commandment: therefore kneeling cannot
be used decently.] Oh simplicity and want of judgment! you should have
concluded in this manner: [All the Lords commandments must be used decently:
the Sacrament is the Lords commandment, therefore the Sacrament is to be used
decently:] scilicet in respect of circumstances, as place, gesture, and many
more such like, whereof the Lord has not given any commandment, but has left
the same to be ordered by man, as convenience, and edification require.
Furthermore, whereas the Replyer says, our Divines giving instances of order,
are wont to instance in time, place, and such like circumstances; what does he
reprove the gesture of kneeling thereby, being one of these circumstances? So
Mr. Calvin says, Calv. instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 3^
that kneeling in prayer is a part of the Apostles decency; and the Replier
Repl. general cap. 1. sect. 5.
affirms, that he speaks in that place only of circumstances of order. How
then (I pray) can you condemn the gesture of kneeling for want of order, which
tends to the right disposing of the Sacrament formerly instituted? But the
truth is, this matter belongs properly to your general argument, Before^h. 1.
of this part.
where it is fully answered; and not to this place, where you should have
better prooved kneeling to be indecent, a proprijs requisitis decori, and not
to roue, a genere ad genus, prooving kneeling indecent, because it is
instituted by man merely, which yet is begged most unreasonably.

Reason. 2. Christ knew Abridg. page 49.
what was most decent and fit, and yet neither he nor his Apostles did kneel:
and D 43. emand. pa.
why should we be diss^yssed of the decency of our Savior Christ and his
Apostles, and choose in stead thereof a decency of our own; Page 42.
The decency of the Church then could not be but divine, whereunto other
decency should give place; and Abridg. a^ before.
no good reason can be given, why kneeling should be more decent now, then it
was to Christ and his Apostles. Answer. This reason supposes there can be
decency but in one gesture, where all gestures in themselves (for ought you can
disprove) be capable of it. Secondly. This reason condemns your selves in
many particulars, as in standing, walking, uncovering, etc. in the act of
receiving. What? do you leave Christ's decency, and take to a decency of your
own? Thirdly, You are certain that the Apostles did not kneel in the act of
receiving, or else you cannot tell? And verily it is but unprofitable learning,
to tell us of the decency of Christ, and his Apostles gesture, and yet know not
his gesture it self. Fourthly, Suppose k^eeling was as decent to Christ and
his Apostles as to us, and yet he sat, and they also sat, what follows of
that? sure nothing, but they chose a more decent gesture, we a less decent, so
some decency to kneeling still remains. Fifthly. But all the force of this
reason is fully answered before in Christ's example, which (though it was
undoubtedly decent, for who dare or can think otherwise) yet binds us not
absolutely to imitation; except in the matter of equity, that our gesture
should be a decent gesture as his was, and such kneeling to be I shall show by
and by: much less may Abridg p. 50.
you charge other Reformed Churches upon us, whom our example may teach
decency, as well as theirs may teach it us.

Reason. 3. It is indecent to kneel, Disp page 36. at the 4. arg.
in the receiving of the Lords Supper, because it is against the nature of a
table-fashion. I answer, that kneeling is not against the nature of a
spiritual feast, and though there be material bread and wine, yet is not
formal sitting more necessary, then filling of the body is necessary. It is
enough to answer words with words, for proof there is none of this argument,
but Christ's example of a table gesture, which divides it self partly into the
argument of Christ's exampl^, and partly into the argument of a table gesture.
So then, Master Disputer made this one of his distinct maine arguments, he was
in a dream, or overwaked, or vain. And thus you have their stout arguments
against the decency of kneeling; now remains our considerations for the
defense of it.

Proof, that kneeling is a decent gesture.
THat must needs be a decent gesture in the Sacrament, whereunto all the notes
of decency do agree.

But all those notes do truly agree unto the gesture of kneeling.

Therefore kneeling is a decent gesture.

Those notes I have observed to be five: three of them Calv. instit. lib. 4 cap
10. sect. 2^, 19.
Mr. Calvin gives to my hand; and I will add a fourth; and you add a fifth
unto them.

First, says M. Calvin, that shall seem most comely to us, which shall be fit
for procuring of reverence to the holy mysteries. I hope I shall not need to
prove, that kneeling serves to procure reverence, it being (as your selves
allege) the reason of our Churches enioyning it, that the Sacrament might be
received reverently.

Secondly, says M. Calvin, that shall seem most comely to us, which shall be
an exercise apt to show p^ety, apt to stir it up. Let the world in^g^,
whether kneeling in the Sacrament, or sitting (backed only by the pretense of
a civil fashion at tables) do more show piety and stir it up. They have I
think small skill and experience in worshipping, that will deny this note of
comelines to belong to the most humb^e gesture.

Thirdly, says M. Calvin, that shall seem most comely to us, which is an
ornament to the action in hand. And why should it be denied, that kneeling is
an ornament to the Sacrament; which both imports the excellent importance of
it, and preserues it also from such contempt, as more familiar usage (though
lawful otherwise) through men's wonderful weakness would certainly put upon it?
when you shall show us what is an ornament, better, perhaps I shall give you
better satisfaction.

Fourthly, I add, that shall seem most comely to us, And now (set will and
prejudice a side) what I beseech you is a civill-fashion for defense of
sitting, to these respects of kneeling, which be truly spiritual? How shall
not kneeling be suitable to the Sacrament, which accords to such things in which
the same is even it mysticall-selfe?

Fifthly, Your selves do add; That shall seem most comely to us which is
most natural. Comelines (say Treat. of div. worsh page 9.
you) especially consists in bodily expressions; and Page 10.
bodily expressions the more natural, the more decent. That this note may be
applied to the gesture of kneeling; let us see what you treat further in the
said Treatise, because (say Page 11.
you) bodily gestures have their original, from the natural conceptions and
motions of the mind and heart, (there being such diversity of natures, and
dispositions, such diverse degrees of the same inclinations, such a diverse
composition and mingling of affections) it cannot be, but nature must needs
vary and be diverse in them. Well, I am content out of your own dogmatizing to
learn three notable lessons of bodily expressions or gestures. First, if it be
more natural to kneel in divine worship (as I have proved it to be Sect 1.
before) them sit, then kneeling is the more decent gesture; (I make this
inference only out of your own principle.) Secondly, if kneeling be less
natural then other gestures in the act of receiving, yet it is but less
decent, so it is not simply indecent therefore. Thirdly, That the soul
(according to nature) does vary bodily expressions, and gestures, and is
diverse in them; insomuch that both all gestures may be interchanged to the
same man as his soul may be diversely affected at several times, and and also
that diverse men (diversely disposed) may use diversity of bodily gestures. [in
all salv^ decentia] To my knowledge I do not wrest or abuse your own words
against you, but transcribe them truly, and conclude from them, as they do
evidently bear out. Now let all our notes be tried by the judicious Reader.

But give me leave, Mr. Disputer, to tell you, that you are not a fit judge of
the indecency of kneeling at the communion, who do ^ffirme plainly of sitting
in prayer, (though David sat, Eliab sat, etc. your selves sit sometimes in
prayer) that Disp. page 12.
sitting in prayer is an indecent and vnreverent gesture, if we may
conveniently kneel. For (that I may make some criticismes upon this learning,)
first, have you so good opinion of sitting, when you come to God in prayer,
that you count it vnreverence, and rudenes; and can you be so hot for defense
of it (as if there were none to it) when you come to God in some other divine
ordinance? This seems not to cotton. Secondly, will you use a gesture that is
indecent and vnreuerent in prayer, when you want (but ordinary) convenience to
use a better? and will you not kneel though it were indecent and vnreverent,
in receiving, when you cannot conveniently, (and perhaps sometimes possibly)
use a better? I suppose your answer will be to seek, (Sir.) Nay do you not by
your speech quite destroy the force of your argument against kneeling, drawn
from the indecency of it, in as much as an indecent gesture may be used
sometimes, when convenience serves not to use some other and better?

Thus much I only annexe for a postscript to show that if kneeling in the
Sacrament (which indeed is a natural gesture, and a gesture from the beginning
sanctifies to divine worship) were in decent and vnreverent in the act of
receiving, yet ought it not to be refused by the judgment of Mr. Disputer. But
I need not that help, having proved (I suppose) before, that kneeling in the
very act of receiving is a decent and a comely gesture. Thus much of their
general argument drawn from nature, now follows the special argument, which
is that of the table gesture, in handling whereof I beseech the Lord to lead me
by his holy Spirit, that I may faithfully and impartially answer the very truth.

CHAP. 5. Of the argument of a Table Gesture.
NOw for the more full and evident declaration Disp page 26.
that the Lords supper does fully and in all accomplished sort represent, and
exhibit, whatsoever may serve out of the nature of a banquet, to testify his
lo^^ to the guests and his society with them. Again Page 27.
whatsoever liberty or prerogative a table of repast has, for those that
partake thereof, the same have communicants at the Lords table. And Page* 28.
of the same things belonging to a table of repast in general, there is no
exception at the Lords table. Again, Page 31.
Christ aims to communicate with us, not a part only, but the whole
enterteinment, that the proper nature, intendment and carriage of a feast does
yield. Again, Page 37.
kneeling is repugnant to the proper employment of a table of repast, and so
consequently is repugnant to the law of nature. And wherefore need I to cite
more places to show the meaning of the disputer, when he is ^hammering upon a
table gesture, in a great part of his book? and especially his four first
arguments, and sixth have no footing but in a table gesture. 1 Arg. Kneeling
(says he) suites not to us hearing the person of guests table. 2 Arg. Kneeling
(says he) hinders assurance of our coheirship with Christ, because it crosses
that which is a worthy mean to feed in us that assurance; now that worthy
mean is the carrying of our selves in the person of guests and coheires with
Christ at his table. 3 Arg. Kneeling (says he) debarrs us from the liberties
and prerogatives of a table. 4 Arg. Kneeling (says he) is against decency,
because it is repugnant to the carriage of guests at a table of repast. 6 Arg.
Kneeling (says he) is worse then sitting, because a personal worship in the
act of receiving is worse then a table gesture. (Fr^stra fit per plura, etc.)
Whereby appears not only, what a learned, and logical disputer this is, but
also what a mind he has of a table gesture. My desire is therefore in this
place, to show that a table gesture is no such necessary thing: as he idly
imagines. As for his vain collections and conclusions from thence, I shall
take them into consideration as their turn comes.

But first I look you should yield me some unanswerable: you that stand so
much upon a table gesture, that make many of your arguments to depend upon it;
leave Christ's precise example, (if it was the discubitus of the Passover. nay
if it were ass^ssio, qualis apud nostrates) for the equity and reason of it;
you that have taught all your disciples or scholars this plea (of all others)
at their very fingers ends; should have methinkes some demonstratiue reasons to
make it good, whereby gain sayers might be convinced to justify you. Who would
not expect such reasons at your hands, that sees your books, that hears your
discourse, specially if the profession which you make of conscience and
Scripture (which is a worthy profession) be considered? but what is to be found
now for prooving of a table gesture necessary? surely what I find I will show,
and let wise men judge who are not partially led either one way or other.

Reas. 1. Disp. page 28, 32, 37, 148.
You tell us, that our Savior Christ and his Apostles gave example of a
table gesture. To which I answer: first, and is it true, that when you sent us
before, from the argument of Christ's example, to the argument of a
table gesture, you will now send us back from the argument of a table gesture
to the example of Christ? In what argument is it possible to make you stay?
This dealing is an argument (I think) of some uncertainty in your grounds; for
if Christ's example be a distinct argument of force, and this argument of the
table gesture be such likewise, why do you confound them together? why do you
fly from the one of them to the other? if both make but one argument betwixt
them, why do you then abuse the world to handle them as diverse? Secondly, you
say, Christ used a table gesture: and yet you Chap. 3. Pararr. 1.
cannot tell certainly what gesture Christ used. See back
Is the argument of a table gesture built upon Christ's example, and yet you
know not what that example was? There is never a disputer in the world ^n
prove, that Christ used, (as you understand) a table gesture in the
celebration of the Communion. Let every Christian man and woman therefore see,
what an imagined thing they trust on, wherein they can never get full assurance
of faith. Thirdly, let it be granted, that Christ and his Apostles did sit at
the last supper, I think yet, that I have truly, and Chap. 3. Paragr. 3.
soundly showed, that Christ and his Apostles gesture (whether it was a
table gesture or a worship-gesture, let it have been what you will) binds us
not to imitation; and when you have fairly answered that place, you may have
more cause to stand upon this example, In the mean time it is to be thought,
you will hardly avoid, that which is said there, to prove the same example
mutable and variable. Fourthly, where fame which was before in the Passover)
so long as it was but As I have proved, c. ^. sect. 46
occasional from the Passover, where were diverse joints of meat and feeding
of a full meal? Thirdly, how can you make appear, that our Saviors gesture
was rather to carry an equity for a civil fashion, then for the point of
worship? This question perhaps will puzzle any man but the disputer, who is so
lost in his conceits of a table gesture, that it is hard to pull him off them.
But this matter will be some what better cleared in the answer to the next
reason.

Reason 2. Another reason many pages of the dispute The Sacrament is a supper,
a feast, a banquet, and therefore requires a supper, a feast, a
banquet-gesture. And the Abridgement speaks in this manner. Abridg. page 61.
In no Nation was it ever held comely to kneel at their banquets, or to
receive their food kneeling. Now to this grand objection, I will make a double
answer as follows.

First I answer, that you do ill to press a table gesture supper, feast,
banquet. For is it to be thought that a borrowed respect has authority to
command the gesture from that which is proper? For the Sacrament is improperly
called by us, either a supper, or a feast, or a banquet. I know it is wont to
be so called, for some little resemblance of bread and wine, to a supper,
feast, or banquet; and for that little resemblance sake, I condemn not the
liberty of alluding unto them: but to build the necessity of a table gesture
thereupon, I can by no means see reasonable, more then upon a similitude, or
parobolicall manner of speaking: now that the Sacrament is called a supper, a
feast, or banquet improperly, it seems easy to me to make appear. For, first,
in all the new testament the sacrament is not at any time called by the name of
feast, or banquet; but they be terms which be thereunto given merely by the
pleasure of men. N^y where there be feasts of charity recorded of the Apostles
and Christians, the same be evidently distinguished from the Sacrament by that
name: and yet if the Sacrament were properly to be called a feast, why might it
not be called a feast of charity? Let Mr. Disputer know then that he did not
find his terms o^ feast and banquet in Gods word, and therefore he can prove,
or persuade unto us, no manner of gesture by them. As for that the Sacrament is
called the Lords supper (and it is so called only but once, 1 Cor. 11 20.) how
can you dream, that it is called a supper properly therefore? For when our
Savior did eat a full supper, before he celebrated it, and is said to
celebrate it after supper: how could it be a supper properly taken? I would
rather It is called a supper, because it was instituted at Christ's last supper,
(that is the Passover) and because it represents a supper. So latter confess.
of Hel^etia.
believe, that it was called a supper, for (...) reasemblance sake only,
because there was eating and drinking in it, and that at evening: or because it
was ^dj^yned in a manner, and annexed to the Passover, which indeed was
properly the Lords Supper. For hereupon the Sacrament among the Corinthians
(after Christ's ascension) was called the Lords Supper, though they did
celebrate it in the morning and that term is still retained in the Church unto
this day; for the due remembrance of the time and occasion, when and whereupon
it was at first instituted by Christ. But if it was pr^perly a supper to the
Apostles, and so was properly called the Supper of the Lord, then no doubt it
is properly a dinner to us, (receiving it in the morning or midday,) and so may
be properly called the dinner of the Lord. But this kind of speaking who would
not esch^w, ^^ not only improper, but withal vnfavory and carnal? So that I
suppose the terms of supper, feast, banquet, are improperly used, and can
therefore have no sufficient force to conclude for a table gesture.

Secondly, Let us in good eat^est look upon the tenor can be fetched from
thence, to prove the Sacrament a feast or banquet. It is true, Christ
instituted the corporal elements of bread and wine, and the actions perteining
unto them, but for what purpose I pray you? to make us a feast thereby? I say
no: The end is specified in Matthew. Mark. Luke, Paul, and none other.
but for showing forth his death, and remembrance of his sufferings till he
come, now his death is showed forth, and his sufferings remembered by the
Sacramental breaking of bread, (whereof it is, that the whole action is called
breaking of bread) whereas taking and eating be only appointed to signify the
communicants faith, and interest in the virtue and merit thereof.

Thirdly, If any supper or feast can be imagined here, Jonathan feasted and
banquetted, when 1 Samuel 14. 23.
he did but taste a little honey, with the end of the rod, that was in his hand?
Who would ev^r say, that eating so much bread (as we be wont to ea^e in the
Sacrament) in civil use, made a supper or banquet? and for the signification
thereof, I need not troub^e my self, the same being raised out of the elements
and actions, which be visible to the eye, if therefore the receiving of bread
and wine be improperly called a feasting, receiving of Christ spiritually (in
the Sacramental course) must needs be improperly so called. And verily the
actions of bare eating a piece of bread, and drinking a little wine, can
properly conclude no dinner, or supper, no feasting, or banqueting; especially
if it be observed, that this eating, and drinking, is not ordained to satisfy
hunger and thirst, as the Apostle t^acheth: 1 Cor. 11. 34.
If any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come not together to
condemnation. Thus I am persuaded that the Sacrament is no supper, or banquet
properly taken, and therefore it is a weak reason for sitting, to tell us of a
feast or banquet, when I might tell you of many metaphorical names, which are,
and might be lawfully applied unto the Sacrament, and coming at near both
Christ's institution of it, and the spiritual nature of it, and yet the gesture
depends net upon them: much more may I avoid your metaphorical names by the
authority of names properly given, of both sorts, what would you say to
worship, Communion, Testament, Eucharist, Sacrament, Sacrifice, etc. why should
you not strive for a gesture, which these names allow, as well as for that alone
which the name of supper allows? since some of these names be proper simply,
others as proper as this of Supper to Christ's ordinance, yea, and some of them
named in Scripture, both more, and more I mean by Christ himself in the
institution, Mat. 26. 26.
honorably? But five things are, and may be objected to prove the Sacrament a
Supper or feast properly taken.

Object. 1. The first objection I will make my self; and Answer. The reason is
at hand, for our Lord Jesus has taken away the ecclesiastical feasting of the
body, (properly so called) which was commanded in the law, both in the
Passover, and all other sacrifices, that the Church might enjoy sacramental
rites of more simplicity, and less corporal importment; as it is evident in
the aspersion, or sprinkling of water, in stead of the cutting off the
p^^puti^^m pudendi: and so is clear in our Saviors order in this Sacrament;
for whereas in the Passover they had bread, wine, and a lamb, that is, a full
meal, (for they were commanded to leave none of the lamb, and they were left
at liberty to eat freely of the bread and wine as need did require) behold
our Savior takes away the lamb, takes away the liberty of eating and
drinking of their bread and wine for satisfying of hunger and thirst; and
instituteth bread and wine only for Evangelicall rites of commemoration.

Object. 2. Next let Mr. Replyer speak. It is false (says Rep. partic. to B.
Mort. p. 37.
he) whosoever says, there is no corporal banquet in the Lords Supper. For as
there is a bodily washing in baptism, so also a corporal banquet in the Lords
Supper. I answer, he should have showed three things. First that eating, and
drinking of bread and wine is a banquet; then we would easily grant him it is
corporal. Secondly, that sprinckling of water in Baptism is properly called
washing and not by a trope. Thirdly, he should have showed some certain
proof, whereby the case might be made alike betwixt washing and feasting in
these two Sacraments, or else ipse dixit as good as nothing.

Object. 3. Though the Sacrament be not a corporal feast, yet it is a
spiritual. Ans. I grant it in two senses, 1. in respect of some resemblance
which the outward elements have to feasting, for according to the same
resemblance, the soul may be said to feast So Christ's flesh and blood be
called meat and drink, Ioh. 6. 48. etc.
spiritually: so this is feasting still, but by translation. 2. in a larger
sense, according as God communicates his graces (like so many spiritual dishes
and dainties) unto the soul: So wisdom speaks, Come, eat of my bread, and
drink of the wine which I have mingled, Prove. 9. 5. A certain man made a
great supper, and bade many, etc. Luke. 14. 16. Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 27.
If any man open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me, Revel. 3. 20. Thus I freely confess, that Christ is an heavenly
banquet to the soul of a communicant; but what will that do more or less for
the bodily gesture?

Object. 4 A table is necessary, and that implies feasting and banqueting.
Disp page 24 etc.
That which is requisite to decency, commodionsnesse, solemnity, representation
of society, and kind enterteinment, that is of a necessary use in the Lords
Supper: But, etc. Ergo. If I deny both your propositions, what proof is there
to be found of them? Ne verbum quidem, that it may be thought, your assertions
are not such to need proof. But I answer, first, when (as in asetled Church)
a table may conveniently be had; who would not ever most desirously use the
same? yet in days of ex^reme affliction of the Church, the very ground is
decent, and commodious, in the want of a formal table; and I am of mind, if
you were banished from Church and house, and forced to serve God retiredly in
woods, and Can he furnish a table in the wilderness, P^ 78 19. table here
seems to be put met^nymically.
wildernesses, you would be glad (I should) to communicate upon the ground
without an artificers table, so much you in a manner yield unto without urging,
when in effect you Disp page 25.
say, that all Apostolical Churches observed the use of a table, if the nature
of the people, and times, would bear it; as for Christ's sitting (if he sat)
at table, both it was occasional from the Passover, as I have showed, and at
other times he allowed eating and drinking without a formal table, Mat. 14.
19. 15. 35. Job. 21. 12. and so would allow it in the Sacrament upon occasion
likewise, as you cannot well deny, because your best defense of the necessity
of a table is the fashion of civil eating and drinking at it: and therefore
you might please to let this satisfy you. As for that, solemnity,
representation of society, and kind enterteinment, should require the use of a
table, I deem not to much behoof, except you had prooved the Sacrament a
feast properly taken first, yea if you had proved it such a feast properly
taken, yet our Savior Christ and his company (as in the places quoted) dined,
feasted without such solemnity, representation of society, and kind
enterteinment, more then the immovable, and inartificiall table of Gods earth
ministered to them.

Secondly, I answer, granting a table necessary, that is Exodus 25. verse. 23.
etc.
God commanded Moses to make, which was appointed merely for the Shewbread,
with Spoones, Dishes, Bow^es, etc. to be continually set on? Also what will you
say to the table, whereof the Lord Ezekiel. 23. v. 41*
thus speaks. Thou have a table prepared before thee, whereupon thou have set
mine incense and mine oil? Here a table is said to be prepared or furnished
with very oil and incense, which were not (I suppose) appointed for a feast or
banquet; but you say if it were not appointed for a table of repast to sit at,
then it would not have been called a table, but rather an altar. I answer,
that I would not explode the name of altar so far, and in what sense the
Sacramental service may be called a sacrifice. And this would take away the
name and use of table never a whit more, insomuch as altars in the law be also
Ezekiel 40. verse. 39. 40, 41, 42, 43 Chap. 41. verse. 22.
called tables. But because I observe, that though altars (whereon sacrifice
was wont to be offered) be called tables, yet tables, (whereon sacrifice was
never offered) are not properly called altars, the Sacrament being called a
sacrifice but improperly; I would rather abstain from the ordinary term of
altar, and call it a table: but then you say: Disp. page 32.
why should it not be rather called a Courteupboard, or dresser, then a table?
Answer, and why do not you find fault that the table whereupon oil and
incense were set is called a table, and not a courtcupboard or dresser? Why do
you not find fault, that the table of shewbread was called a table, and not a
courtcupboard or dresser? and why I beseech you, is it not a table as fit a
name for that which we use to set any thing upon, as for that which in eating
and drinking we sit down at? I will tell you reason, why the name of table is
better, because such Elements are set upon it as resemble a supper or meal,
because a courtcupboard is wont to stand to a side, the table of Sacramental
use, being fitter in the middle of the communicants, because a court-cupboard
is subordinate and serviceable to the table, there being no superior table in
the Sacramental service, whereunto this (which the elements be set on) can be
subordinated. Lastly, because a court-cupboard is an (...) which better, and
richer houses be only adorned withal, so as many of the vulgar know neither
the name, nor the use, whereas tables be of universal both name and use to the
poorest rusticks and Cottiers. So that it does appear out of all this plainly,
Cottagers
that the commodiousnes, and decency of a table, do not necessarily infer
feasting and banqueting properly taken.

Object. 5 The common prayer book calls the Sacrament a banquet, a feast, and
such like. I answer, that it only speaks so by a metaphor or allusion (as
learned men do likewise speak in their wrightings.) This may appear by that
passage, whereby refusers to communicate are reproved of unthankfulness; it is
an unthankful part (says In the first exhortation.
the book) for guests invited to refuse to come, when a man has prepared a
rich feast, and decked his table for them with all kind of provision. Well, I
commend to your consideration my first maine answer to your second reason for
the proof of a table gesture, drawn from the nature of a supper, feast, or
banquet. How I will pass to another principal ^^swere.

Secondly, I answer, take your desire (for disputation

Consideration 1.
First connider, whether it is to be thought a sin if of recreation) have had
great feasts upon the very ground; or that they have used no table at all, as
amongst women especially, not seldom comes to pass upon occasion. I imagine
no man will say that kneeling is a sin in such eases as they will be loath to
say, that those nine thousand and seven hundred Israelites sinned, Judge. 7. 6.
who bowed down upon their knees to drink water. Therefore I would learn how
kneeling in eating and drinking can be condemned from civil use, when civil
use does allow it in some case. I, but says Mr. Disp page 2.
Disputer; such a gesture must be used as stands with the custom of the
Country.

I answer you; that the custom of the Country allows Reply partic. to B
Mort. p. 37
replyer says, that the table gesture reason is brought in against kneeling
because it agrees to no feast ordinary or extraordi^ary. If therefore kneeling
is and has been used in our Country in some case from time to time, behold
then the custom of the Country allows it in the Lords Supper.

Secondly, suppose custom did not usually allow it in

Thirdly, but I desire to know whether a Country Disp. page 47.
there be some national circumstances. And again Page 2.
that the t^ble gesture is to be such, as the custom of the Country requires;
what does he else but yield, that several Countries may have several
table-gestures? (And indeed the thing is undoubted enough) but whence then
comes the custom of a Country, but from the conceit, and will of the
inhabitants? now what would you say, if our Countrymen did fall into a custom
of ordinary eating upon their knees? then the argument of a table gesture
against sacramental kneeling, would be quite nonsuited, and it seems by that
method you might be brought on to allow of it well enough. I hope you will
consider, what a rotten foundation a Country custom is to build your faith
upon. Is it possible that if the inhabitants of the land did use to kneel in
ordinary eating, I might lawfully kneel at the Sacrament; and yet may not now
lawfully kneel at it as well, because the custom has not made it yet actually
warrantable to me? Do not you pin your faith upon men in this thing? But
perhaps you will say, that I put a case of If it never was nor will be it is
not because Kneeling is a gesture of adoration: but because it is not naturally
so easy and commodious for eating a full meal at other gestures: for if had
been so, do you think, some nation would not have ^^ken it ap? certainly.
such a thing as never was nor will be: give me leave therefore to come nearer
to you in a more special case: suppose the King, or any one in whose power you
were, should not permit you to eat meat, except (for satisfying of his pleasure
in making trial of your subjection in a civil action) you would kneel down
in receiving of it, would you be contented rather to famish to death, then to
kneel down at the Kings commandment for civil use merely? If your divinity
and conscience would not serve you to perish so, but would allow that the
table gesture of civil suppers might be changed into kneeling in this case:
why then should kneeling at Sacrament be held unlawful in a case of much
greater importances: wherefore if the custom of the Country either by the
mind of the inhabitants, or else by authority of an earthly power may be turned
into kneeling, as we may lawfully yield, surely it sinks not into my head, how
kneeling in the Lords Supper is unlawful in it self, that is in all cases; by
force (I mean) of the table gesture reason, for if you will stand precisely to
the force thereof, do not you see, that as much liberty and indulgence must be
given to ecclesiastical eating as is given to civil? (But Mr. Disputer seems
to Disp. page 66.
reply here: the Lords Supper is a feast of the greatest solemnity, and not a
cursory eating and drinking, such as is used but occasionally. I answer, that
I have propounded the case before of set and solemn feasts and meals; and so
if kneeling may be lawful sometime at them, namely, at any dinners or
suppers, it is sufficient for me. For such eating and drinking (pray you
observe) is not occasional, but the gesture is only occasional: so the Lords
Supper is a set and solemn supper, say, but the gesture may be occasional
likewise. And if occasion may happen such as men may lawfully kneel in civil
meals, how can you deny (according to the argument of a table gesture) that
any occasion can betide that men may lawfully kneel in this spiritual? Thus I
refer to you thoughts this my first consideration.

Consideration. 2.
SEcondly, consider if it were unfit in civil eating to kneel, yet how
unreasonable it is to conclude absolutely No substance (says Disp. Page 27
he) set apart to a spiritual use loses his common or civil nature or
properties for then it should be transubstantiated. (And one of these
properties he means is the prerogative of sitting.) This is wonderful
learning; I deny your enthymeme Sir: a table may loose such properties, and yet
not be transubstantiated. I must needs tell you in this place, you are a
ridiculous disputer; and that is my answer. Secondly, you (g) say, that Christ's
table of repast (at Passover and Communion) ^^teined still the properties, and
prerogatives of a civil table, whereu^to I have answered in the third sect.
before, and in the three paragraphs of Chap. 3.

Thirdly, you Ibidem.
would prove by a similitude that

Fourthly, you Page 149.
say, for I would give the reader all: we take that liberty which God has
given, we cannot take that liberty (it is no liberty) which God has not
given. You might as well have said, if we alter the gesture of spiritual
refection from civil, why should we not alter the body too, and bring new
bodies with us, leaving the ^^uld to meat at ho^e? you spoke a little ^ore
wisely, when you said, we may as well have a different hand in receiving, as a
different gesture^ for as there is a liberty of either hand, so there is a
liberty (in it self) of any gesture: likewise you say not far amiss; Ibidem.
the Lord has no more appointed different gest^r^, then he has different
tables, different cups, different bread and wine. For the Lord has left all
these at liberty. It is (k) likewise true, (if it be rightly understood) that
if spiritual, and civil communicants may vary gesture in eating, then
spiritual and civil suitors may vary gesture in petitioning: for petition may
be made (upon occasion in all gestures both spiritually, and civilly. But the
point of error, whereabout you trifle in all these instances is this, that
whereas we say* the gesture of spiritual and civil refection may be diverse,
you perver^ our meaning therein, (either dishonestly, or indeed very
ignorantly) as if we said, the gesture of spiritual and civil refections,
must (absolutely must) be diverse, nay as if all civility in religious actions,
and exercises were utterly exploded by us: thereupon you argue in this manner*
(k) ^^ the diversity of things (being some civil, some spiritual) should
[impose] upon us a different carriage and g^sture, why should a Minister be
allowed to use the same tongue and gesture in any spiritual exercise, that he
does in civil? Where by your word [impose* you would imponere lectori. For we
do not think or say, that the respect o^ spiritualty in the Lords Supper does
impose kneeling upon us necessarily; but that the same is not therefore
unlawful in spiritual eating, because it differs from the gesture of civil
refections. And so much (with reverence be it spoken to learned logicians) of
this tr^^h. But the author of the treatise of divine worship has given an
excellent rule to direct us in this matter. That (says Treat. of div. worsh.
page 36.
he) is indecent and unfit i^ Gods worship, which is indecent and unfit out of
his worship, [if the same reason of indecency and unfitness remaine] hereupon I
give you 3 reasons to prove that the indecency of kneeling at civil meat
remains not in the Lords Supper.

First, In the act of civil eating there is no divine worship,

Secondly, I set the custom of the Church for sacramental

Thirdly, it is not impertinent to look in this case upon the present times;
these be those last days, which 2 Timothy chapter 3. verse. 1. etc.
foretells should be so perilous and mischievous: if ever it was true, now
adays it is, that the wickedness of men is bent (c^^l^ terram, tertae coelum,
s^cra profanis misc^re) to mix and confound heavenly and earthly things
together: whereof I do judge, it is so far from deserving blame and censure,
to kneel in sacramental eating, that I do think (as the times are) it is
convenient and commendable to kneel, to distingursh that holy ordinance from
common and civil refections. so by this respect the unfitness of kneeling at
civil tables is also taken away in the Lords Supper. Thus I show, if it be an
unfit thing to kneel in civil ^a^ing, yet you cannot absolutely conclude from
civil to spirirituall: and so I refer to your thoughts this my second
consideration.

Consideration. 3.
THirdly, confider, if you might conclude from civil

First, if you compare spiritual with spiritual, it can

Again, the respect of worshipping is not less in this See more before ^h. 3.
sect.


Secondly, suppose Christ used a table gesture, which answers to one respect
of the Sacrament, we a worship-gesture Ez^a. ^. 12.
some wept with a loud voice* some shouted aloud for joy, when they saw the
^ound ^o^ of Gods house laid, as the same presented unto them diversity of
consideration.

Thirdly, the gesture which answers to one respect hinders and hurts not
the work and interest of the John's Disciples fasted, and Christ's Disciples
fasted not, and both Mat. ^. 18.
lawfully: yet no doubt the inward work of humiliation and mortification was
performed by both of them. And cannot our souls feed as liberally, if they be
duly prepared, in the gesture of kneeling, as in any other? verily if kneeling
were against our spiritual profit and benefit, reason would that we should
disclaim it; but even in civil feasting, who does not know that a man may
satisfy nature abundantly by feeding in any gesture? if I use no other proof
in this place, then what the similitude administreth.

Secondly, if you compare spiritual respects with civil, what then (trow you)
with reasonable men shall become Jerusalem be preferred (as it Psalm. 137. 6.
ought) above our chiefest joy, how can we endure to set the peace thereof in
contestation with a worldly custom? b^t 1 Cor. 14. verse. 32, 33.
the spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the Prophets (in such things)
because God is the author not of unquietness but of peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints. So speaks the Apostle. I am resolved it is better to
rent a civil custom from the whole Church, then to rent the members of the
Church one from another.

Second^y, what is a civil custom to the loss of your Ministries? do you
prize them at no greater price then 1 Cor. 9. 22
said [I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some]
would not for the liberty and benefit of his Ministry foregoe a civil
custom? He made himsel^e as a Jew to the Jews, as a Gentile to the Gentiles,
as weak to the weak, and this he did for the Gospels sake; yea he disclaimed
the liberty of a civil custom, namely of wages for work, for the same cause
as he testifies in that place. I protest it is a plain doctrine of Satan,
that a man had better foregoe his Ministry, then foregoe to stand upon a
civil custom. If you say, you lose your Ministries for greater matters,
wholly, or principally. I answer, except you would likewise suffer your selves
to be silenced for the gesture, merely, why do you make sembl^nce of it so
long, so inflexibly? But the truth is you have declared your resolution (as on
the house top) that you may lawfully suffer your selves to be silenced rather
then yield to the gesture of kneeling; and that upon the ground of the
necessity of a table civil fashion: illic credul^^a^, illic ^en^erarius error.

Thirdly, what is a civil custom to the liberty of the Sacrament it se^fe?
will you be contented never to eat, B^^h^^hem deserves to be fetched through
an army of the Philistines, and will you refuse it, when you come where it is,
because you will not stoop down? I will not say Gideoni soldiers, but Genesis
24. 11.
even Abraham's camells, may condemn you for so doing. But further put case (and
it is no case of impossibility) that you might never be suffered to receive the
Sacrament without kneeling all your life long, would you spend and end your
days in the continual refusal of it? would that stand with the peace of your
consciences on your deathbeds? Shall this be a good plea before the throne of
Christ at that day; (Lord) I never are of thy Supper, because I would not
kneel upon my knees at it: true (Lord) kneeling is a natural gesture, thou
have also instituted it (...) worship, but in this worship, because it was not
according to the Country fashion of eating, I ^^d account it abominable; and
rather would have had thy death never remembered in breaking of bread, then that
it should be remembered, without keeping of the civil custom. To whom Christ
may answer as to the Pharisees concerning the Sabbath, Mark. 2. 27.
my supper was made for man, and not man for it. Again Sam 15. 22.
as Samuel to Saul: has the Lord as great delight in civil fashions and
customs, as in obeying the voice and ordinance of the Lord? here what could
you be able to answer? yea what will you answer to the Lord speaking in those
Scriptures at this time? Well, I can but thus refer to your thoughts these
things belonging to my third consideration.

Consideration. 4.
FOurthly, consider lastly whether if the respect of a

First, I offer to your judgment and censure whether There is no feast of
great solemnity (as you Disp. page 26.
speak) celebrated without it. There be no guests of quality such as we be as
the Lords supper, (as you page 8.
say) that may b^e civilly enterteined without it. It is not to be respected,
(as you page 26.
teach) what mean people do in this case, their manners being more barbarous
and uncivil: but amongst person^ of principal worth, i^ would be challenged
for a mockery, (as Page 32.
you speak) to be invited to a supper or feast without it. I apply your
speeches to a table-cloth, whereby you press the necessity of a table gesture,
whereof you have great store, which will puzzle your defenders, I doubt: for if
a table gesture must be used (needs) because of the solemnity of the feast, the
worthiness of the guests, and the necessity of honorable enterteinment, how
shall not you be bound to leave your ministries and the Sacrament, rather then
eat without a table-cloth; which, solemnity of the feast, worthiness of the
guests, and honorable enterteinment do full as much require: salve this if
you can, nay your grounds would prove the necessity of trenchers, and many
small appurtenances of feasts, which I spare to name.

Secondly, I offer to your judgment and censure whether Sect 12.
before; and yet there is as much necessity of a table, as of a table gesture;
and rather more manifest necessity, because you prove this Disp. page 24. etc.
by that; not only as the more known; but for whose sake this is in a manner
only used and urged.

Thirdly, I offer to your judgment and consure whether

Fourthly, I offer to your judgment and censure do stand with the civil
custom of feasting, which you press so importunately.

Fifthly, I offer to your judgment and censure, whether Reaching to, and
taking the cup of one another, is, drinkking to, and pledging of one another in
Repl. patric. to Bp. Mort. p. 38. then the Lords Supper is a feast, but in a
manner: then if a man merely pass by another, he salutes him in a manner:
then kneeling may be a table gesture in a manner.
as in civil feasts. Does it not stand with courtesy in the invitant and
courtesy in the guests? your grounds must bring in that fashion also for ought
I see. But perhaps you would have it so, as the Scotsmen do plead your cause,
who like to take that fashion, which (say Perth. Assem. page 43.
they) agrees best with the nature of a feast, where signs and tokens of
amity are interchanged.

Sixthly, I offer to your judgment and censure, whether The Lords Supper (you
Disp. page 26.
say) does fully, and in all accomplished sort, exhibits whatsoever may serve
to testify the love of the invitant to his guests, out of the nature of a
banquet. Behold, is this a testimony of love to feast a noble guest, or a
Cottier either with a morsel of bread? is this full and most accomplished
exhibition of loue-tokens? what is the nature of a feast, if meat be not I
pray? and what ^an be imagined more necessary for solemnity of a feast*
worthiness of the guests, kind and noble enterteinment, then to have meat
enough? do you contend for the ge^ture of a supper or feast, and toward the
feast it self are contented with a little piece of bread? here I must needs
say. M. Disputers logic is senseless, and worthy to be h^ss^d out of the
schools.

Sevently, I offer to your judgment and censure, whether, it be not lawful in
the Sacrament, to eat wont to be done in civil feasts and meals, else there
is small solemnity, pinching and miserable enterteinment.

Eighthly, I offer to your judgment, and censure, 1 Cor. 11. 34
says, if any man hunger let him eat at home.

Ninthly, I offer to your judgment and censure, whether it agree not with a
civil feast to confer one with Repl. party. Bp. Mort. page 38.
that talking in the time of communicating is good, and exemplifieth only in
the Ministers saying some what to the communicants, is idle. For that speaking
resembles table talk no more, then the ministers speaking in his sermon, or in
ministration of baptism: nay, how strange a carriage would it be at a civil
feast or supper; if when one man speaks, none of all his friends should
answer him one word from the beginning of the feast till it be finished.

In this place I will bring in certain answers made by The reason of a feast
or banquet is not used, (says the Page 37.
Replyer) to infer all the fashions of a banquet, but to remove those
fashions, which agree not to any banquet. I reply two things. First, if you
infer a banquet-gesture from the respect of a banquet affirmatively, you must
infer other fashions of banqueting likewise; especially which are of as much
force and use to a banquet as is the gesture. for else how will you make a
sillogisme for ^he proof of sitting? What mean will you make your conclusion
out off? you cannot make an argument taken from feasts, which will conclude for
sitting, and exclude such fashions of feasting as I have named before: As for
Mr. Disputers [accomplished interteinment] solemnity of the feast [worthines of
the guests] [honourable interteinment] courtesy of the invitant as much as the
nature of feasting requireth] and I know not how many more such like] what can
Mr. Replyer say unto them? how shall not other fashions of feasts as well as
sitting be enforced from them? Secondly, if you would remove all fashions
which agree not to a banquet, why do you, (or will you, if necessity should
require) accept of such fashions as I have noted before, which would be counted
shameful and vile, even in an ordinary supper? I pray you look back again
unto them: whereby appears, (that I say no more) your answer is altogether
void of judgment.

Secondly, Mr. Disputer would answer perhaps, that Disp. page 27, etc.
[personall] liberties, whereby he would seem perhaps to import, that though
the liberties and fashions of a feast (as it were proper to the feast
separately considered) do not bind us: yet the distinct liberties and fashions
of his person who feasteth, and eats, do. I am almost of opinion that he
hammered at some such matter, when he speaks so often, and so confidently of
[personall] liberties. Well, if he will make us such an answer, I reply
three things: first, it is a devised shift, which has no footing in the book
of God: where will you make appear, that civil fashions are to be retained,
not which belong to the feast properly, but which belong to the man feasting?
Secondly, it is an unreasonable shift, which will bide no trial: for if the
Lords Supper be a feast properly so called, and that the liberties and fashions
of civil feasts are therein to be stood upon; shall the fashions of the person
be teteined (propter convivium) for the feast sake; and shall not the fashions
of the feast it self be retained much more? Thirdly, consider of those
fashions which I have observed before, and you shall find it is a fruitless
answer. For as in the Lords Supper you like and take unto some liberty of
civil [feasts themselves,] so again your selves do refuse or omit some such
liberty, which are [personall] as it seems good unto you: and therefore why
would you blind our eyes by the name and pretense of personal liberties of
civil feasts at the Lords table? These things I note against the flourish of
[personall liberties] if you meant by [personall] to distinguish from other
liberties of the supper it self. If you meant no such matter, to what purpose
served that Epithete? good men should not use terms to import, or carry
semblance before ignorant Readers of that which is not.

Thirdly, both Mr. Replier and Mr. Disputer answer, Reply partic. to B. Mort.
p. 37 Disp. page 148.
Though all fashions of a banquet may not here be used, yet those which may be
justified by Christ's own example, ought not to be excluded. I answer, first,
now you quite disclaim the proper force of the table gesture reason, and
only betake you to Christ's example; for such and such fashions must be used
not which the nature of a feast warranteth, but which Christ's example only
warranteth, let reasonable men judge what dealing and daubing this is.
Secondly, the defense of Christ's example we have seen before feign to fly
hither for refuge, I mean to the reason of a table gesture: and how then shall
that minister enterteinment to this, when it seeks to be enterteined and
sheltered under the authority of it? I hope this has been found true in its
own place. Thirdly, why have you abused us all this while, to reason from a
Country custom immediately, have you spent many sheets of paper about
solemnity of the feast, worthiness of the guests, accomplished and honorable
enterteinment, courtesy of the in vitant, etc. and will you cast off the
reason of civil eating and drinking now? nay moreover (you Disp. page 28.
say) that Christ was Good Reader mark this divinity, I pray.
tied to the fashions of feasts by three things: first, by a just expectancy
thereof on the part of the invited. Secondly, by the proper nature and
intendment of a feast. Thirdly, by a direct intimation and profession from
himself to perform them, in that he undertakes the solemnizing of a feast.
And will you shake off this deep divinity now when you be put to shift for
answer. Fourthlie, where you fly to Christ's example for table-fashions, be
mindful of this advertisement, that both you use some fashions of eating which
Christ used not, and some which Christ used you be contented to let pass. This
you cannot deny: and therefore to what purpose (because of Christ's example) do
you strive about the necessity of a table gesture.

Thus I have satisfied (I suppose) such answers or shifts

Tenthly, (or first) I offer to your judgment and censure, plainly by
Christ's example? and thus far I apply further reply to your former answers.

Eleventhly, (or secondly) I offer to your judgment At a civil banquet (says
Disp. says it is a mockery to sit from the table, page 32.
he) usage or carriage wou^d be challenged from a mockerit. Again (says
Ibidem.
he) if we sit from the table some distance off, there to be ^ed as servants
and strangers, shall we not think our selves used without respect? is that
usage according to the rule of common civility? Nay a Christian Communicant
(says Page 16.
he) must not eat like a servant attending the reach of a morsel from the
table. Is that honorable enterteinment, accomplished enterteinment, courtesy
of the invitant? does that stand with the worthiness of the guests, with the
solemnity of the feast? Behold, I say again behold, nothing less. Oh
absurdity and senselessness! will you needs have a table gesture, and yet will
you sit from the table; did ever man set his gu^sts on that fashion? here the
Replier triflingly Repl. partic. Bp. Mort. page 36
answers, that since you cannot sir at the table as you desire, you come as
near it as you can: nay Disp. page 32.
the very Disputer is Sir, can you be content to forsake all that you said of
the unlawfulness of sitting from table, so casily?
contented to plead, that you sit as near the table as conveniently you may.
But (not to except against you, that if you cannot sit at the table it self,
private feats and retired pewes are commonly desired more, then neerenesse to
the table) this I reply, that neither can you avoid the force of your own
urging of table-fashions so fleightly, which makes this your sitting from table
a sin in you; nor if that be lawful to be done, because you come as near your
desire as you can, shall kneeling be condemned in case we use it, when we can
use no other: so this is but frivolous and childish trifling. Now consider,
first, this fashion agrees not to any banquet, and cherfore you should by your
own learning exclude it. Secondly, sitting at the table is a personal liberty
of the table, and therefore you should hold your selves bound to maintain it.
Thirdly, Christ and his company sat at the table, and not from it; why then do
you exclude that fashion which you will yield is justified plainly by Christ's
example. Thus I apply as before.

12. (Or thirdly) I offer to your judgment and censure, whether uncovering of
the head be not a fashion Disp. page 146, 147.
like a Skillful man, that there is great difference betwixt sitting at a feast
and uncovering: and what is that difference betwixt them? By sitting we are
admited really to the table says he. It is false you are not admitted simply
by sitting; for if you carre to it by standing or any other gesture: you are
admitted to the table; only by sitting you are admited with more credit and
conuenience; So are you also by being covered. Again (says he) by sitting we
be socially admitted to the table, and oh Sir, are you admitted socially by
being covered? who but the Disputer would have put that for a difference?
Again (says he) by sitting we may feed at and on the table. But that
exception cannot put difference betwixt sitting, and covering as concerns our
purpose, inasmuch as by very kneeling it self we may feed at and on the table
if you say no more. Again (says he) by sitting we give and receive
interteinment at the table: and are you so vncivilly fashioned, or so
unacquainted with the Country manner, that you do not know we do give, and
receive interteinment at the table by the opportunity and commodity of our
ha^^? Again (says he) by sitting we may carry our selves sutably to the
person of guests, though we rest uncovered. Can you so? does sitting bare at
table stand with the solemnity of a feast; with honorable interteinment, with
worthiness of fellowlike guests, with courtesy of the invitant? Surely the
Disputer has forgotten himself. Again (says he) our society with Christ in
glory is noted in Scripture by sitting at a table, so is it not by covering of
the head: as if the Holy Ghost is ^bound to note our society with Christ by
all equal fashions of civil tables because he notes the same by one; as if
your selves did not stand upon some civil fashion of feasts in the Lords
Supper beside sitting, which yet are never used to set forth our society with
Christ in glory, more then covering of the head: as if those things which the
fashion of being covered in feasts signifies, might not metaphorically also be
applied to the society of Christ and his Saints in glory, Again (says he)
some nations have a custom, that the servants waiting at table be covered
as well as their Masters: you instance in the French. I answer, first, if there
be such a custom among them, what is that to us? we must be ruled by our own
Country custom, not by theirs in our gestures at Sacrament, for so you say
often enough, and if you will give leave to try the controversy by the
liberty of all Country customs as well as our own, I could show that your
opinion is yet more fantastical. Secondly, but suppose our own Country
fashion were, that waiters were covered as well as those they waited upon, what is
that to the point? It is enough that such as sit at table be covered, (which is
only to the matter i^ hand) I care not what they do, which wait upon them:
yea but (says he) the gesture of sitting puts a difference betwixt the guests
and the servitours, so does not the gesture of covering always. But I pray you
Sir. Must you needs have a gesture to difference guests from waiters? Then
(besides that it is on idle divice of your own heart) what will you say to the
gesture of standing, which you use in receiving sometimes, which is the
notorious guesture of such as wait at table? nay how foolish is it to stand
upon the difference, when at the Sacrament there be no waiters (properly so
called from civil use) for they be all guests which be present? Lastly (says
he) in our Savior Christ's time, there was no ornament for the head in use;
that is strange when the Apostle 1 Cor. 114. See Dan. 3. 21.
forbids men to be covered in the Church of Corinth so earnestly: but suppose
there was not, yet so long as if it had been the fashion of the Jews at meat
(you will say) Christ would not then have refused it, it serves enough for our
turn. Besides, if Christ were uncovered it was occasional, and ^eerely
civil; your uncovering is used of purpose and choice: and (as yourselues do
say) for religious reverence. And yet there is no doubt but in those times they
used coverings unto the head, even our Savior, and his Apostles did which the
necessity of shelter from injuries both of cold and heat did bring into use
from the beginning. Thus then I may still apply my three former points, for
reply to your threefould general answer as before.

Thirteenthly (or fourthly) I offer to your judgment and censure, whether
standing (to speak of it distinctly) ought not to be refused also at the Lords
Supper as well as any of the former. Consider, first, this fashion does not
agree to set and solemn As for running bankets both the Disp. excepts against
them page 26. also they are not always at a table when they might be; and
howsoever are but a complementall and appendicall eating.
feasting. Object. But some men do stand at meat sometimes. I answer, so
some do kneel also sometime at meat too. But why do they stand I pray?
either for want of seats; or through infirmity that they cannot sit; or that
have and business will not permit settling to sit; or for some other respect
which is upon the by. But shall I therefore call this atacticall gesturing a
proper table gesture, in civil and solemn eating? Secondly, consider that
sitting is a personal liberty of guests at table, yea such a liberty, as that
you Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 36.
say, it is a sacramental and essential part of the institution. And
therefore you should hold your selves bound to maintain it, to the refusing of
the Sacrament, to the loss of your liberty and life; specially against
standing, which Christ Luke 22 v. 27
makes a note of a waiter at table, and contradistinguisheth that carriage, to
the gesture of them which eat meat: yea when the Disputer Disp. page 17, 30.
says, It is unlawful to receive the Sacrament in attending manner, and as a
servant. Thirdly, consider that you avow Christ, and his com^any did sit down:
why then do you exclude that fashion which you will yield is justified
plainly by Christ's example; specia^ly when you Disp. page 148.
say, you enterteine not the custom of the Country simply; but as it is
according to the example of Christ and his Apostles. Thus I apply as before.

Fourteenthly (or fifthly) I offer to your judgment and censure, whether
walking up and down ought not to be refused for unlawful, as well as
kneeling. Consider first, this fashion agrees not to feasts of solemnity as
Mr. Disputer knows, and therefore you should by your own teaching exclude
it. But the Replier Reply partic. to B Mort. p. 36
says, walking is more agreeable to a supper then kneeling. I See further
answer before chap. 3. sect.
answer, if it be so, then thus it follows, that it kneeling be a sin,
because it swerveth from the custom of civil suppers, walking shall be a
sin in a lesser degree, and that is all which can be gotten by that answer.
But (I pray) in what respect is walking agreeable to a supper? because the body
is higher in the air? or because it is good for digestion of meat? or because
we come to supper by walking? or lastly, because the drudges of an house be
wont to eat sometimes perhaps, whiles they go up and down a sweeping: or
some servitours at table eat sometimes, as they go up and down, when they
have changed a trencher? other agreeableness besides of walking to a feast or
supper I know none. Secondly, consider, sitting at the table is a personal
liberty of the table, and therefore you should hold your selves bound to
maintain it. Thirdly, consider, Christ and his Apostles (as you say) sat
certainly at table, and in the eating of the eucharisticall supper walked not:
why then do you exclude that fashion which you will yield is justified
plainly by Christ's example? Thus I apply as before.

Fifteenthly, (or sixthly) I offer to your judgment and censure, whether it be
not a sin simply for the Carver, (as I may so speak) or server in the
eucharisticall supper to stand and walk, and carry every ones part of the
feast unto them from person to person, as well as kneeling. Consider, first,
this fashion is a mockery at a civil feast. and therefore you should by your
See Disp. p. 3^
own learning explode it. Secondly, sitting together at the table is a
personal liberty of the table both to carver and guests: and therefore you
should hold your selves bound to maintain it. Thirdly, Christ at the table
gave unto his communicants bread and wine, they being there present: why then
do you still exclude that fashion which you will yield is justified plainly
by Christ's example? Thus I apply as before.

And thus I have put together (omitting some other) these 15 points, entreating
you to judge of them indifferently, and either let the pretense of a
table gesture be taken away for defense of sitting, or let all other fashions
of suppers and feasts, and specially of Christ's, come in by it as absolutely
necessary to the Lords Supper: and then your selves must turn over a new
leaf, repenting (according to the former points) of all your errors in
doctrine, exorbita^cies in practice. I hope you will not be still so idle now
to ^ell us, that you are to be excused in your practice in many of the said
points because you can do no better at this time: for look what force your
argument of a table gesture has in kneeling against us; the same it h^th in
these particulars against your selves. What if you be urged in many things,
that does not alter the case, so long as you may lawfully yield unto them? And
so I refer all these things to your thoughts belonging to my fourth and last
consideration.

Arguments against the necessity of a Table Gesture.
NOw (besides the former discourse whereby in answer

First, God stood not upon a table gesture in the institution of the very
Passover, nay he plainly pulls his people off from the fashions of solemn
feasts by express commandment: for first, he requires they should eat with a
staff in their hands. Secondly, that they should eat in have. Thirdly, as
many of you have written, that they should eat in the gesture of standing: and
though this fashion was appointed only for the first Passover, yet it is of
excellent use, to show, that the respect of a table gesture had no necessary
stroke in the Passover: especially, forasmuch as the Lord never gave other
direction afterward for a table gesture, and the change of the gesture that
was made among the Jews was plainly arbitrarie, not necessary. Therefore
here was no order given, ^o necessary respect had, to the Country fashion and
gesture of civil tables.

Secondly, there is no place in the new Testament,: show this and I yield; I
say there is not one place. Wherefore I wonder at good men so much the more,
that they dare presume to ob^rude upon us the authority of their own fancies,
specially when none ever pretended the sole authority of the word more then
they.

Thirdly, the Sea Treat. of div. worsh. p. 44
Apostle sa^es, the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink Romans 14.
17. And the same Apostle reprooues the Coloss^ans, for placing religion in not
touching, not tasting, not handling, Colos. 2. 21. I desire my brethren to
consider whether the Apostle by these places do not condeme the placing of
religion in civil fashions and customs as they do in the sacramental supper.
I doubt not but such as are both judicious and ingenious will cast off the
reason of a table-g^sture, when they have well considered what the Apostle
means.

Fourthly, the Sacrament is a spiritual and heavenly ordinance

Fifthly, if the Lords Supper must needs have such a gesture, hoc nomine, that
they be built unlike our chambers, or parlours, or halls, or any other room
which we civilly use to eat our meat in? Again what needed Moses a pattern
to make many vessels of the Tabernacle by, when he might have made them
according to the choycest fashion at that time of such do nesticall or civil
vtensills? Again, why should not that osculum pacis, (which also the new
Testament allows, and commends) be retained in ecclesiastical communion,
as well as in civil: In a word if there be such a necessity, that civil
things (applied to holy use) must be used still after the civil fashion, and
manner, then there is an easy principle laid of divinity not readier to
determine doubts, then dangerous to produce errors.

Sixthly, it is not out of the way to cast a thought upon

Seventhly, I ask you whether civil fashion is to be I mean by spiritual,
that which is contra distinguished to civil, not to corporal.
spiritual, yea civility it self should have no place there, if all could be
spiritual, as divinity teaches: why do you then contend for civilitie in
Gods worship, when your civilitie stands against spiritual worshipping, not
against profaneness, you may not set civility in opposition against worship
(in Gods solemn ordinances) but only against that, where by both worship and
civilitie be destroyed.

Eigthly, and lastly, I wish to be considered the uncertainty of your
reasoning in this argument of a table gesture; urges a table gesture, that I
wonder at his impudency! The gesture of the supper must be as the solemnity
of a feast, courtesy, and dignity of enterteinment, etc. requires forsooth!
at last (being put to his shifts in answering) he Disp. page 148
says in this manner: sitting is not enterteined with us simply upon this
ground, in that sitting at meat is the received custom of our Country, but
because it is such a custom; that is, (says he) it is a gesture of necessary
and worthy use, and there is Christ's example for it. Verily if the usefulness
of the gesture in it self be the matter you stand on, quorsum est profusio
hac? to what purpose is this argument taken from civi^l tables? And thus you
have my reasons such as they are) against the necessity of a table gesture;
besides those which I used before in my answer to your reasons for the defense
of it.

A Recapitulation of my reasons against the necessity of a Table Gesture.
NOw for conclusion, I will recapitulate all my principal Twelve points
recapitulated.
may lawfully kneel at civil eating upon occasion; if it cannot be concluded
from civil to spiritual; if there be as great respects in the Lords Supper as
feasting, and greater too, which may with as much reason and more sway the
gesture; if there be a great many fashions of feasting which will be equally
inferred with the gesture; if at the institution of the Passover there was no
respect to a table gesture; if a table gesture at the eucharisticall Supper be
no where required in the new Testament; if the Kingdom of God, namely his
religion and ordinances stand not in civil fashions and customs; if kneeling
hinder not the partaking of the duty or comfort of this feast; if it be a
false assertion, that civil things applied to religious use must always be^
used according to the civil manner; if there be as much reason to kneel in
religious eating for worship-sake, as to sit at table in prayer for civil
eating sake; if civilitie may not be defended in Gods service against gestures
of religion and worship, but only opposed to carriages of unseemliness and
profaneness: lastly, (passing many points which I have observed upon the by) if
there be nothing but miserable uncertainty in this argument; then I dare
conclude that the said argument of a table gesture, though it stand among your
arguments like a noble star, is indeed no better then a foggie meteour; I
mean the froth of inconsideration, and (in the Disp.) of precipitancy: so by
the help of Christ I have finished the arguments against kneeling drawn from
the light of nature.

Arguments collected out of Scripture against kneeling, answered. CHAP. 6.
FOurthly and lastly, our order brings us now to

The first proof of this first Argument.
FIrst (you say) kneeling is contrary to the dignity of the Communicants,
because it is contrary to our

Of the first Proposition.
FOr the first, that we all act the person of coheires: but it will be good to
explicate that speech, [we act the person of coheires with Christ at his table]
before we come unto them: and the phrase has three senses. First, From a mayor
in the third sen^e, and an assumption in the first s^nse, the vnlaw^u^ln^ss^
(...) i^ infe^^ed i^ that (...) which (...) be seen This (...).
we act the person o^ coheires at the Sacrament: that is, we receive the
Sacrament being coheires, but this is nothing to the present purpose: for in
this sense we act the person of coheires not only in the Sacrament, but in
every act (whatsoever it be) either of civility, or religion, which we do well,
whiles we live upon earth. Secondly, we a^t the part of coheires, that is, we
carry our selves as becomes them which are heirs together with Christ, of his
heavenly Kingdom. But this is no more to purpose then the former; for this is
but according as the Apostle generally exhorts us, that (in all things) we
should walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, Coloss. 1. 10. worthy of the
calling wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4. 1. worthy of God, who has called
us to his kingdom of glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Thirdly, (a) we act the person of
coheires: that is, we personate and act in gesture the representation of our
inheritance: and this meaning only tends to your purpurpose. Now I observe in
your dispute, that according to these three senses, you give us three
considerations for confirming of your proposition.

First, (say Disp. page 4.
you) that we bear the person of coheires with Christ at his table, is a truth
evident, and agreeable to the Scripture. Luke 22. 29, 30. For our repair unto
this holy feast does presuppose thus much; that we are already coheires with
him. And Page 5.
again, we are presumptiue and presupposed coheires, when we come to the holy
Sacrament. And Page 3.
our common prayer book supposes us to be such. Answer, it is The reason
(says the disputer) why we refuse kneeling at the Lords table, is not, because
we are coheires with Christ, page 10. so that he is plainly against himself.
true, or else it were a miserable case. Even in prayer when we use the
humblest gesture in all the world, we are presumed, and supposed for such: but
what need I to speak of prayer? Who knows not that the children of God stand
heirs to heaven all their life long, and are to be considered such in every
employment, which they perform well? You show your self a very wise man by
this consideration as it appears. And this is to be referred to my first
sense given before.

Secondly, (say Page 5, etc.
you) we should carry our selves at the Lords table as becomes his brethren
and coheires. Answer,

Thirdly, (say Page 4, 5, etc.
you) the elements of bread and

For the antecedent you can never prove that the Sacrament is a proper, and
direct resemblance of heavenly glory; for in such a type or resemblance there
be three points concurring. First, it must be immediate and not drawn in by
dependence of one thing upon another. Secondly, it must be special and not
general, for even every civil meal which we eat may hold some analogy with
our feasting in heaven, as well as the Sacrament. Thirdly, it must be
instituted, for no man may devise unto Gods substantial ordinance, a typeship
or signification, without warrant from himself. Now how well you will prove
the bread and wine to resemble the glory of heaven, let us hear and consider.

First, (says the Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p* 39.
Replier) it is very probable, that

Secondly, (says Ibidem.
the Replyer) our Savior lead Mat. 26. 29. Answer, is it therefore a type of
the heavenly? our Savior lead the woman of Samaria. John. 4. verse. 9. 13.
From the water of Jacobs well, to the water of life. Was Jacobs well therefore
a proper type of grace? is this the way rightly to find out, and judge of
proper types? from my rising out of bed, I take occasion to think of the
final resurrection of all flesh out of their graves. Is my rising therefore a
proper type of the resurrection? If this reason can make a type, then any thing
upon earth may be made a type, of some heavenly thing, if thence we can but
raise our thoughts to the contemplation of some such thing which is heavenly.

Thirdly, says Page 40.
the Replyer, (for I am content to put his conceits together) the whole
communion which me have and hope to have with Christ is represented in this
supper; and unto this communion belongs or pertains celestial joy. Answer,
it is true that joy belongs to the communion of Christ, and his Church; but
that is personal joy of the heart, enjoyed in this present life in good
measure: but the joy or happiness which concerns your purpose in hand, is that
matter of joy or glory, wherewith (as with a feast or dainties) we shall be
comforted and delighted in Gods kingdom. The comfort of our communion with
Christ, stands in the mutual imbracings and reflections of love and grace, at
Christ Revel. 3. 20.
speaks. If any man open the door I will come into him, and will sup with
him, and he with me. Glory is no more perceining to this communion, then is a
rich dowry to the communion of man and wife. Besides by this learning of yours
you do plainly jumble together the signification of all types: therefore the
same concludes not the Sacrament to be a type of heaven, either immediate, or
special, or institued.

Fourthlie (says Page as before.
the Replier) In other Sacramen^^ as Circumcision, Passover, Baptism, there
is a signification of something which is to come; and why should there not be
likewise in the Lords Supper? Answer. I answer, first for the Passover, and
then jointly for Circumcision and Baptism. And for that I say, that the two
significations therein of [past] and [to come] do in our Sacrament meet
together in one; which is a remembrance of the Lamb already slain for our
deliverance. Therefore if you would make any just analogy betwixt the
Passover, (concerning its signifying something to come) and the Eucharisticall
supper, you should compare the same in this manner: that as the Passover
signified the Lamb to be slain, our Supper signifies the Lamb already
slain: and how is it possible, that the Supper must needs now signify
something to come, because the Passover signified Christ to come. Verily you
do not reply with judgment, if you please to give me leave so to admonish you:
nay because you can not show any glory to come, which the Passover was a
type of, it follows that the Supper is type of no glory to come; for there is
as much reason, that, that should signify glory to come to the Jews, as this
should now unto us: yet I will give you that some thing to come is respected in
both these Sacraments, whereby the receiver might and may (long after receiving
take benefit, and comfort thereby, but this is still communion, which may be
renewed, confirmed, increased, virtually from the Sacraments, having been used
in an heavenly manner) but this will avail your cause nothing at all.

Next for Baptism and Circumcision, how may it appear, Oh (says Page 41.
he) how should not Paptisme signify our perfect washing, which is the state
of a glorious Church as well as our new birth? I answer, we need not be
persuaded by interrogations, except the same included some effectual
consideration to work upon our understanding. But suppose that Baptism
signifies something to come, it is certainly nothing else but perfecting of our
sanctification, or perfect sanctification. And this I may yield you without
trouble to my self in the matter controverted: for as Baptism, which is the
first sacrament, resembles our perfect sanctification, whereby we be fitted for
perfect communion with Christ; so the Supper, which is the second Sacrament may
represent that our perfect communion being perfectly sanctified. Here it you
see fit and answerable significations of something to come in both these
Evangelicall sacraments; but all this while here is nothing, which makes for
proof, that any sacraments signify properly, and be types of glory, which
is but an accessorie both to sanctification, and communion; and yet belike the
Replier would insinuate, that Baptism signifies glory, by saying, that the
perfect clensing, (which Baptism represents) is the state of a glorious
Church: as if this predication were tolerable. A gracious state is a glorious
state, that is, grace is glory: for though they go together, yet they be
diverse things, and that which signifies ye on, does not therefore properly
signify the other. But what now if I grant that all the sacramen^s do
signify the glory of heaven in some sort, yet are they not types thereof;
either special (for the representation which you would have is made from them
all in common; where, as they be special types, they have each their peculiar
accommodation. And what thing that is pleasant to us and good; may not in this
manner signify heavenly glory?) or immediate, (for how many consequences
must you bring this signification about by?) or lastly instituted; for the Lord
never spoke a word, to give any man to wit of such a sacramental
signification. Wherefore it was out a trick of outfacing that the Replier
cries ou^. This is a strange page 40.
humor to think thus; for to think otherwise is a strange humor in
himself. And indeed when all comes to all, he condemns his own opinion
manifestly; for thus he conclude^; page 41.
All parts, degrees, and circumstances of our communion with Christ, which may
be shadowed out by those outward elements and actions used in the Sacrament
are by the same represented: for glory is no part or degree of our communion
with Christ, but a consectarie thereof. As for circumstances thereof to be
represented by the sacrament is learning which I do not understand. But note
if glory were a part, or degree, or circumstance of our communion with Christ,
he says those parts, degrees, and circumstances, are shadowed out by the
outward elements, which can be shadowed by them; implying, that some are
incapable of being shadowed by them; for what else may that clause or exception
mean? nay he goes on, and speaks more plainly then all this: All
consectaries, says he, or things that do follow upon communion with Christ,
are not, neither can be properly represented in the sacrament of the Communion,
though they be all sealed up to the faithful: now if it be most true, that
glory in heaven is a consectarie of our communion with Christ, then he has
been pleased to yield his cause, for which he contended so much in the
conclusion without bidding; so much to your Antecedent.

Next I have denied your inference, [The Supper represents heavenly glory, and
therefore we must act the person of coheires in gesture] for is it to be
thought that one remote and general representation (for at the best it is no
more) has the sole stroke to put upon us, what gesture we are to use? are
there not many things more concerning the nature of the sacrament, which would
command the gesture before it? sounder it were to say that the manifest
employment, which the principal intent of the institution requires puts upon
the Communicants the person to be justeined: else mark how your reason will be
retorted on you. He (say Disp. page 4.
you) that takes bread and wine as representations and pledges of his future
inheritance with Christ, be in that respect acts the part of a coheire with
him to the said inheritance. So (say I) he that receives the sacrament to do
his homage and worship to Christ, he in that respect acts the part of a
bondsman or worshipper. The truth is, if the analogy should be extended to the
gesture, to bind the conscience to the end of the world, the supper had need
to have been not only an immediate, special, and instituted type, of gloris
(none of which it is) but also to have had no representation so great as that
is, in its whole institution and nature. And hitherto of the first Proposition,
that we must act the person of coheires with Christ at his table.

Of the second Proposition.
NOw (supposing that we act the person of coheires in receiving the Supper) let
us proceed to your kneeling is contrary to the person of coheires. Thus then
you endeavor to prove the same. Kneeling (say Disput. Arg. 1 page 6, etc.
you) imports our disfellowship with Christ, indignity, incongruity,
inferiority, extraordinary abasement, and gross disparagement, therefore it is
contrary to the person of coheires. So Sir, now you have spoken, and I am
doub^full, whether I should give this reason any answer, but contempt: yet
peradventure it will be thought fit, that both they which are more weak and
ignorant, and others, who have not much considered of this matter, should have
some light and help, (I hope by our poor endeavor some little shall be)
affoorded unto the^. Wherefore I deny this Enthime^e: (Kneeling imports
inferiority, therefore it is contrary to the person of coheires:) for do you
dream of a coheirship whereby you stand not in inferioritie to Christ? Oh
proud ignorance! (I hope my brethren will pardon my zeal, I speak but to this
arrogant Disputer.) Is there any promise which God ever made to sinful man, is
there any reason can be imagined, was ever any example heard of, whereby it
does appear, that believing Communicants in respect of their coheirship, are
preferred to be equals with Jesus Christ? And the vileness of this conceit
will better appear if these things following be considered.

First, that you not only press this equality, in respect of interest
hereditarie to heaven, but also in regard of Or else you would no^ (...) for a
sociable gesture.
all familiar and sociable expressions of brothers: so as (for ought I
understand, and let it be judged by wiser men then I) thereof strange and
miserable consectaries arise, to be detested of every godly heart. As namely,
if that which imports inferiority be contrary to the person of coheires, then
is it not at that time, when you take upon you the person of coheires, lawful
to call or esteem Christ, your Lord or Superior. Consider what I say. Again
it is not lawful at such a time for a Christian to cast up such an ^ja^ulation
as this is; oh my sweet Savior, I am not worthy so much as to gather crumm^
under thy table (perh^ps you will say, oh we are unworthy of our selves; yet
that serves not the turn, for at the sacrament we lay away the respect of our
miserable estate and condition, which was, and only must consider the person,
which we have taken upon us; which person admits no speech importing
inferioritie ^^ you say.) Again says must have no working at sacrament
because it imports inferioritie and dep^ndance. Again, it is unlawful to be
uncovered at that time, because it imports inferiority and disfellowship.
Furthermore how may you stand at sacrament, that is, use a waiters carriage,
(as our Savior calls it, the Disputer affirms of it) and yet act the person
of coheires? In a word ^^ you will press sitting, because Christ and you be
equa^ll, then may you carry your self like Christ's equal in all points; now
^f this be not learning of the bottomless pit I cannot judge.

Secondly, your doctrine is the worse, because even at Ioh. 13. ver. 1.
tell them; ye call me master and lord, and ye say well, for so I am? wherefore
though ye sit as coheires, it does not follow that ye sit as equals.

Thirdly, your doctrine is yet worse because the sacrment You say, we solemnize
the Supper in remembrance of Christ's death, and prerogatives Royal, purchased
for us thereby, Disp. p 13. Again, you say, if knee-worship were to be used
in the sacrament, it ought rather to be tendered to the second person in the
Trinity distinctly, then to God the Father in several, or jointly to the whole
Trinity, pa. 15. Now to say so does import, that Christ is considered in the
sacrament as our superior. As superior, say I? Yea as God, who is only to be
worshipped, Matthew. 4. v. 10.
Kingly office. It is the folly of the votaries of Rome in their chamber of
meditation, that they look upon Christ's sufferings barely in themselves,
laboring to requite them with pity: the Lords Supper would be no honorable
feast, as you speak, and as it is; not yet comfortable feast; except faith
might respect in the act of eating, and drinking, Christ, as once crucified, so
now conquering and glorious. Does not Christ as our Lord, and King, invite us
therefore to banqueting? must we not then needs carry our selves like
underlings, (though gracious with him) like subjects, like redeemed ones, to
our Lord and King, and Captain? Is Matt. 28. 18.
all power given to him in heaven and earth: and is there no administration of
it to his coheires? shall every Philip. 2 10.
knee bow to him, and shall not the knees of his coheires bow to him? I mean
as coheires; for as coheires does not Christ exercise government (that is
superiority) toward them? else how is it that their coheirship is procured,
maintained, and possessed unto them? Certainly if the sacrament consider not
Christ's Kingly office, then must you cease to talk of coheirship at the
participation of it: but if Christ be considered in his Kingly office there,
then I pray will not a carriage of inferioritie very well become you?

Fourthly, let it be supposed, that in the act of receiving yet therefore
subjection is not to be denied to the sovereign Lord of all. If two brothers
and coheires go hand in hand, expressing in the kindest manner, all
restimonies of mutual equality and good will, is it at such time contrary to
their coheirship, if both, or one, upon occasion expresses himself in
dutiful reverence to their common father? surely inferior relations are not
destroyed by the duties of superior, unto which heaven and earth require they
should give place. But Mr. Disputer has here to say something: first, (says
Disp page 13.
he) the carriage of a Communicant is the carriage of a coheire, but kneeling
(though it be performed to God) can never be made the carriage of a coheire.
This is worthy stuff, so (say I) the carriage of a Communicant is the carriage
of one that worshippeth God, but a table gesture is not the carriage (as you
You distinguish betwixt a table gesture and a personal worship, Disp. page 45.
say your self) of one that worshippeth God. And Sir, this exception takes not
away the force of my answer, because the carriage, which the relation of
coheirs requires may yield unto the carriage which the relation requires
betwixt God and us. Besides, that kneeling may be made also the carriage of a
coheire, I partly have, and further also shall endeavor to show you by and by.

Secondly, (says Page 13, 14.
he) kneeling diverts our hearts from being employed in the meditation of the
point of our coheirship, (nay mark the wickedness of this answer, as it is
further pressed as follows.) Can we at the same time act two several and
incompatible parts? Can we banquet with the second person in Trinity, and yet
enterteine an holy important negotiation with the first? If herein there be not
a distraction of our hearts, I know not what can distract them? Sure I am, if
we perform meditation of Christ as we ought, our hearts will rest so
absolutely possessed therewith, as they cannot bestow, and enterteine
themselves for that time in other service; (he means in service to God the
Father.) Oh that the zeal of your own opinions should make you fall into such
foul and ungodly sayings I two intolerable errors you teach here. First,
that God the Father in Trinity or unity of person is by no means to be
served [expresly in] the Lords Supper; neither ought the heart to enterteine
one poor cogitation of God our Father, but only of Christ our Savior. Oh
abominable assert^on! as if God in Christ were not the object of all religious
duties and ordinances; as if there were any thing in the world more necessary
in the Sacrament, then the consideration of Gods love, who gave his Son to
death for us, as if it were not impossible for a Christian heart during the
whole Sacramental, action to meditate of Christ, without having any thing to
do with the father of all mercy and comfort. But you give us to understand
with what a heart you come, and teach others to come to the Lords table, namely
God our eternal and merciful Father, is not in all your thoughts. Secondly,
you ^each us, that the service of God the Father, and the due mediation of God
the Son be incompatible ^ctions. Oh bold Disputer incompatible? Behold they
(...) for ever inseparable, as the Christin religion mainteineth, But I will
pass from these follies, partly because they be but the froth of your own
heart, without all pr^o^e; partly because they must be further answered in
their In the next chapter.
own place again; (for here they come in but upon the by) and lastly, because
they touch not the force of my former answer; for say the service of God and
the meditation of Christ could not both be done at once, yet they may be
performed successively, and the heart may still be free from being diverted
from the sacrament all employment. Especially when the point of coheirship must
needs respect the bestower of the inheritance: for must you use a gesture as a
coheire and not as an heir much more? I should think there is more reason to
use a gesture of resp^ct to our heavenly Father, which bestows the inheritance
upon us, then unto out brother, who is but I say (but copartner) because in
this argument of coheires, you consider no more then the precise point of
coheirship o^ copartnership.
copartner in that inheritance with us.

Thirdly, (says Disp. page 14.
he) if kneeling ^e performed to God, yet it is not suitable to the corriage of
a communicant, so, long as God calls us to a feast, I answer. First, you should
have said, it is not suitable to the carriage of a coheire; you say it is not
suitable to the carriage of a coheire; you say it is not suitable to the carriage
of a cofeaster or guest; so yo^ answer not to the purpose, and in a manner
yield the weakness of your argument of coheires. Secondly, to that kneeling is
unsuitable to the carriage of spiritual guests at Christ table, I have spent
Chap. 5. before.
answer enough.

Fifthly, let it be supposed that there is no respect in that Christ and we
have this common and equal, that we be both heirs. Answer, a worthy defenced
as if we must (forsooth) nearly consider Christ's coheireship in the abstract
or appellation only, and not the quality of his person who is coheire with us.
This were ridiculous, for except we consider the quality of his person
expressly, we turn the Sacrament into a mockery, and have no more respect of
Christ, then of the poorest Christian in all the world. Wherefore if you
consider Christ-man your coheire, still you be inferior unto him: Inferior
say I? Alas infinitely. There is unspeakably more difference betwixt him, and
other coheires with him, then betwixt a King and the meanest of his subjects:
you therefore which say, we be coheires, therefore equals, might say as well
that worms be equal to Angels, because they be both creatures; that a noble
Roman commander and the baggage of his army were equal, because they were,
either in the field, or in triumph both together.

Sixthly, and lastly, I entreat godly people to consider, Martyrolog. in the
story of Austin.
as the Monks of Banger did Austin) as too proud to teach them the good way.
But if humility be not contrary to the person of coheires, assuredly kneeling
is not contrary. Oh humble Christian, tell me then, will thou not kneel
because it will be gross disparagement, extraordinary abasement: I know thou
would be ashamed, and afraid, that such language should come out of thy
mouth. Wretched man, (will thou say) disparagement to kneel; abasement to
kneel? gross disparagement? extraordinary abasement? woe is me, has God
bestowed his graces upon me, that I should at any time think much to humble my
self? does he who gives grace only to such as are humble, mean, that the
possession of grace should drive away that for whose sake it entered? when is
the^e a fitter time to humble my self to God, then when I have most cause to
fasten mine eye upon the benefits I have received of him?

But (oh Disputer) tell me what is the cause that you Ruth in the sense of B^az
his great kindness, in giving her come and meal; as ravished therewithal,
Ruth 2. 10.
fell upon her face before him. So Mephibosheth, when David professed
kindness unto him, even to eat bread at his table continually, bowed
himself, 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8.
saying, what is thy servant, that thou should look upon such a dead d^gg
a^ I am. And think you, that Ruth and Mephibosheth, would not have bowed
themselves to B^az and David, upon occasion, in the very act of eating, and
drinking also* would not you put off your ha^, declare some reverence, bow your
body at table to an honorable invitant, upon the gracious profession and
expression of his ex^raordinarie kindness to you? And w^y then may not coheires
in receiving the Sacramental bread and wine, cast themselves down at the
feet of their Savior, in contemplation of his infinite kindness unto them?
Again, is kneeling baseness because it is an effect of sin? Verily, if it had
been simply such, your exception had been less grievous. But is it not a
natural gesture? Was not man made to use it in time of innocence? Was it
honorable to innocent Adam; and is it baseness and disparagement unto you?
Again, is kneeling baseness, because it looks back unto your former state, and
remembers you of your baseness? Then I pray cast your eyes up to the Passover,
in receiving whereof the Jews (you will acknowledge) acted the person of
coheires, as well as we do in the Communion. Yet God Exodus 12. 8.
commanded them to eat the same with bitter herbs, for remembrance of the
Egyptian bondage, where by there liu^s had been Exodus 1. 14
made bitter unto them, wherefore if kneeling at communion do remember us of
our former baseness (which yet it does not of it self) it is not therefore
unlawful, more then an herb of bitterness was unto the Jews, that being
allowed to us, as a natural gesture, and a gesture of worship by general
rules; as this was, by particular commandment. And indeed whether kneeling do
remember us of our old estate yea or no, yet the remembrance thereof is
altogether necessary in a worthy receiver. Again, think you, that it is
disparagement and baseness, for coheires to kneel to Christ because they be
heirs together with him of the dignity and glory of heaven? Then look upon
the four and twenty Elders, coheires with him of glory, nay possessed (in
part at least) of there inheritance; yet in the sense and contemplation of his
infinite love, fell down before him, Revel. 5. 8. 9
saving; thou have redeemed us, thou have made us Kings and Priests. M^rke that
when they were made Kings, and possessed of their inheritance, then they fell
down before Christ, as it were casting their crowns at his feet, of whom they
did receive them. Oh mark the speech they used; thou have redeemed us, thou
have made us Kings and Priests; as if it were the speech of communicants at the
Lords table. And yet they fell down before Jesus Christ

In a word, if kneeling be a disparagment unto you, in respect of whom is it
such a disparagement? What? is it a Did Christ wash their feet as a coheire? He
did it in Supper time. Ioh. 13 ver. 4, 12, 17.
wash the feet of his own servants, and that in supper-time, to teach them
humility to one another, which also then was but a by-action: would he reproach
them for kneeling, a direct action of the sacramental employment, (for gesture
is necessary in its kind,) in supper time; to declare their humility to
himself, will he that Mat. 11. 29.
says, learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, vpbraid us for using a gesture
of lowlines? Sure I am, Christ will vpbraid men of pride, and stiffnes, who
has Isa. 45. 231
sworn by himself, that every knee shall bow down unto him. What then? Is
the disparagement, which kneeling occasioneth in respect of men? But besides
that, if it were, it condemns not an humble action. Nay we should labor to be
more humble 2 Samuel 6. 12.
with David, then less, more vile and base as he speaks, then be discouraged
by the imputation of men. Besides this I say, I do not see or hear, that any
body talks of baseness in kneeling but your selves: touching the Disputer, I
doubt not to say, (without malice, as God is my witness) that he has used many
speeches arguing much more pride then the action of kneeling, would do baseness.
So that in conclusion, when we consider aright in respect of whom kneeling is
disparagement as you say, it will be found such in respect of none but your
own hearts: which looking upon your great privileges by Christ (perhaps by
reason of the greatness and sweetness thereof some what forgetting yourselues) do
thereupon dream that an expression of humility will not stand with the
Sacramental meditation of them.

Finally, I cannot but think these bould-speeches about coheires, dangerous,
and durst not use them without Reply partic. to B. Mort. p. 38
Replyer trifleth, telling us, that there is a lawful famili^rity with Christ,
what is that for the Disputer. Indeed the Scripture knows not the new
[familiarity] therefore you must expound your meaning, if you mean by
familiarity, sweet and delightful communion of the soul with Christ, who will
say to the contrary? If you mean such familiarity as men had with him upon
earth, or as the wife has with her husband? Then I partly deny, partly
distinguish; I deny that such familiarity is lawful more, which men had with
him upon earth, that is, which one man has with another. For therein partly it
is evident manifestation who he is, and partly his glorification makes
difference enough. And as for the familiarity of man and wife, though Christ
and and his Church be described as husband and wife in Scripture allegorically,
yet it is only to be applied in spiritual things, and stands not in
corporal gestures. And besides such familiarity as is between Christ and his
Church is common in all ordinances, especially in the word of grace, wherein he
speaks to her, and in prayer wherein she speaks unto him again. And for
prayer let me add a word more, does ever Christian soul converse more
familiarly with Christ, then when she communes with him in prayer? She enters
into his chamber to him, solaceth her self in his love; Cantic. 2. 14.
her voice is sweet unto his ear; her countenance comely in his eyes: words
cannot be used to note greater familiarity of the soul with Christ, that is
spiritual communion, then she has with him in prayer. Therefore Mr. Replyer,
what familiarity do you think upon? What? Such as kneeling upon the knees will
not accord withal, are you of opinion that Christ, and the Church be never
familiar in their mutual conferences? Verily (Sir) you are deceived if you
think to salve the Disputers extravagancies with this plaster. I hope, it is
large in our desires, partly in our experience and sense, through the grace of
our bl^ssed Savior, to solace our souls with his loves. Cantic. 1. 2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is better then
wine. Yet far be it from us, be it ever far from us to thrust out duty by
love: wives must be in subjection to their own husbands, as Sarah obeyed
Abraham calling him Lord, (and I think there is far greater subjection of
the Church or soul to her Lord and husband, 1. Pet. 3. 5. 6.
then of Sarah to Abraham.) What then shall become of the Disputers equality,
which will not allow the wives subjection (as a wife) in carriage and gesture?
As for that it is against the person of coheires to kneel, because kneeling is
an act of indignity abasement, disparagement, yea, extraordinary and gross
abasement, and disparagement; I wish the Disputer (if he be alive) to judge
himself, and warn good people to beware of such leaven. And now I will note
some further grounds to discover the vanity of this reason against kneeling
drawn from our coheirship.

Reasons that Kneeling at Sacrament is not contrary to the person of a coheire.
FIrst, it is a feigned device of man, that our coheirship should be declared
by the gesture of sitting; if Christ

2ly, there is no ordinance in the Church, but the same Psa. 81. 8. 10
opening his mouth 28 it were, hungerly, and needily, that God may fill it. In
receiving likewise he may act the part of a confessor, of a remembrancer, of
an homager, of a feeder, of one that renders thanks, etc. and in all these
ordinances, he acts the part of a worshipper: therefore to say kneeling is
contrary to the person of a coheire, is to say, kneeling is contrary, and it is
not contrary; it is lawful, and it is not lawful. For kneeling is no more
contrary to our coheireship, then confession, homage, thanksgiving,
worshipping, etc. (which do agree to kneeling, as is manifest in prayer) be
contrary to our coheireship: therefore also it is untrue to say, that a
Christian acts no part in the Sacrament, except he act it in outward gesture.
Sure you think all Christian acting must be visible to the eye, like that of
the Stage Players.

Thirdly, if kneeling be contrary to our coheireship, then man's duty, and Gods
graces be contrary; for let

Fourthly, In the Sacrament, God gives Jesus Christ would personate and act the
carriage of a receiver, then it is contrary to the person of a receiver to take
a noble gift from the hands of an earthly Prince with bowing of the knee; or a
ma^efactour to receive the grant of his life in the humble gesture.

Fifthly, though a man act (namely by bodily gesture) Disp page 2. 3
you say, we act the person of a coheire in the Sacrament by sitting; in prayer
the person of sutters by kneeling, in confession of our faith, the person of
confessors by standing. Well, but in prayer, and confession, you will easily
grant, that we may change the gesture of kneeling and standing, into any other
gesture upon occasion; and why then not in receiving also? Secondly, page 8. 9
you illustrate the necessity of answering our carriage to the person we bear
by, 1. Cor. 11. Where is required that they which did bear the person of men
must be uncovered; of women must be c^xered: uncovering of the head in those
times being a badge of superiority, and pre-eminence: covering of inferiority,
and subjection. Now it is not necessary that they which do bear the person of
men be uncovered in our public assemblies; this you will yield unto, therefore
in Gods ordinance, and in the Sacrament, a man may act by gesture one person
one time upon occasion, which at some other time he is not bound likewise to
do.

Sixthly, in prayer, we act the person of coheires to co^^s Lord Jesus, come
quickly? But the Disputer would say of all these, (as he says of Page 11.
one of them, namely believing) that they be common, and general
considerations, that fall out in all good actions at all times. I answer, if
they do, then in all such good actions, where these considerations have due
place, we in these respects act the part of coheires, though we do not act it
in gesture; and why do you make such an exception at this? As if when you
speak of acting the person of coheires in the Sacrament, you speak of acting
such a part, as is to be acted in no other business, or service in his Church,
or in private: truly if you had spoke only of acting the part of such as
remember Christ's death by consecrated elements of bread and wine; then you had
spoken of such a part as is common to no other service, or business in the
world, (and yet that part might be acted in any outward gesture) but when you
speak of acting the part of coheires, you speak of a part which may be common
to all good service or businesses (spiritually considered) in the world. But
what high streines and ^aptures the Disputer had, when he penned down his
opinions, I cannot tell.

Seventhly, kneeling agrees with the proper spiritual Page 17.
Meditation of the Lords death, and of the blessings purchased for us thereby;
weighing the anal^gy betwixt the signs, and the thing signified. But this is
not all, (Sir) I will help you out; for you name nothing but meditation, which
a reprobate is capable of. This therefore is more, the soul opens it self
wider to receive the blessed beams and rays of Christ love, gains strength
of mortification by the contemplation of his death, grows more confirmed and
established by the power of faith, which comes to him more confidently, sticks
to him more closely then it did before. What now? Can you imagine that kneeling
is contr^rie to these? ^s if all these fall not our in prayer. I say, in prayer;
not as helped by sacramental ^ites, (for as they stand in relation to these,
so they are peculiar to the Lords Supper) but absolutely considered, for the
things themselves [meditation, assurance, mortification, confirmation;] are to
be found and enjoyed in prayer: wherefore kneeling agreeing with the spiritual
employment of a Communicant, is not contrary to the person of a coheire.

Eighthly, be it true, we receive the Sacrament as coheires Gal. 4. 1.
that if the Apostle might admonish us better. The hair before he come to his
inberitance differs nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all: Truly,
there is not a little force to move us to use carriage of humility, in this,
that we be yet in a state of humility, unglorified, for as our Lord Jesus was
pleased to make himself, as it were equal, with sinfulle man, whiles himself
was in the state of humility with him; so much more (now Christ is ascended to
glory) it may well become us to stay the time of assuming equality with him,
(if it should ever be) till we also be made glorious? Make you no difference in
this thing betwixt the diverse estate of humiliation and glorification? vereiy
here is some cause you should.

Ninthly, when Adam was in Paradise, acting the person Kings, said Philip. 2.
10 Revel. 5. etc.
yet to fall down before Jesus Christ? Is falling down against their
comheriting with him? Is the same contrary to it? For my part I say, if
kneeling were not contrary to the person of an happy man in time of
innocence, if not contrary to the person of an inheritour in future glory, I
dare not think, (miserable worm that I am!) that kneeling is against my
dignity of coheirship in the Communion. And suppose that on the sitting were
mentioned to be used in heaven, yet so long as it signifies nothing else but
enjoying, and possessing of glory there, it follows, that so long as the
excellent benefits of the Supper be partaked of, it forces not for the
circumstance of the gesture.

Tenthly, who bestows our excellent privilege of coheirship

Eleventhly, put case, it stands not with your dignity: Kneeling is against
the dignity of a Communicant, because it is against the person of coheires
with Christ.

The second proof of the first Argument.
SEcondly, kneeling is against the dignity of a Communi^cant, because it
debarrs him of the personal prerogatives of the Lords table: and those
prerogatives (you Disp. 3. Arg. page 22, etc.
say) be sociall admittance, and sociall enterteinment at the Lords table. Now
a^l that you dispute of this matter confusedly, I may reduce to four
propositions: first, that a table of repast is necessary in the Lords Supper.
Secondly, that it is unlawful not to partake with Christ in the prerogat^ues
of his table. Thirdly, that sociall admittance, and enterteinment, are
personal liberties and prerogatives of the Lords table. Fourthly, that
kneeling debarrs us of this sociall admittance and interteinment.

For the first, that a table of repast is necessary, you endeavor

For the second, that it is unlawful not to partake with Christ in the
prerogatives of his table, I grant; speaking of such prerogatives, as himself
has appointed for us, and speaking of such prerogatives, as we can come by:
for if we be let from some of our liberties, and prerogatives, it is better
to enjoy those which we may, then willingly yield to lose all of them together.

For the third, that sociall admittance and enterteinment are personal
liberties and prerogatives of the Lords table, yea when a great feast is
prepared; partly also because where be many together, many times it is, that
every man sits at the table of his own charge; as in Colleges, in the Innes
of Court, and Chancery, etc. So in that there wants society, in this wants
enterteinment. [Wherfore you should have called sociall admittance and
enterteinment the prerogatives of invited guests, not of tables in general.]
Secondly, but let it be so, that sociall admittance and enterteinment are
prerogatives of civil tables, are they therefore prerogatives of the Lords
table? how do you prove that? Namely, Page 27.
by a principle in reason, that what agrees to the general as it is such, the
same agrees to each special comprehended under it: so you apply what agrees
to a table of repast in general, that is to all civil tables, the same agrees
to the table of the Lord. I answer, hereby you bewray your self; you discover
some ignorance. That which agrees to all civil tables, does it agree to tables
in general? Surely the general comprehends both sacred and civil tables,
which are the two kinds or specials of tables in general. Therefore when you
say so often, that sociall admission and enterteinment agree to all tables in
general, (and you show this only by their ordination in civil use) you do
forget or not consider that. Sacred tables are one sort comprehended under the
general. This is weak pleading your cause. Again you tell us, that the
civil table is not changed in the properties of it. To that I have answered in
sit place, namely Chap. 5. Consideration 2. And for answer to your co^ce^te of
the necessity of civil liberties at the Lords table, the whole 5. chap,
properly, and ple^tifully serves.

For the fourth and last, that kneeling debarrs us of this sociall admittance,
and enterteinment I answer, first, such sociall admittance and interteinment as
is used at civil tables, is but a fantasy of your own, and it is con^u^ed
manifestly there whither ^ven now I^ent you. Secondly, yet there is an
honorable enterteinment of Communicants at the Lords table; but that stands
not in earthly fashions and comple^ents. In what then? Beho^d^, first, it
stands in coming to the Lord; Supper at his own kind Mat. 22. 9. Revel. 19 9.
invitation; he is pleased to send for them and call them. Secondly, in feeding
upon his own delicacies, even Ioh 6.
on himself; oh merciful Jesus that give thy self to be ^aren of us!
greater honor can not be had. Thirdly, in eating and drinking Luke 13. 26.
in Christ's presence. Fourthly, lastly, in feasting with his Cantic. 5. 1.
own most pleasant, and honorable welcome: and these be spiri^uall
privileges, and excellenci^s, which kneeling does not debar us of. So I
pass^ to the last proof of your first argument of collect^on.

The third and last proof of the first Argument.
THirdly, kneeling is against the dignity of a Commu^^ca^t, because it is
against the p^rpose of Christ; for his intention was to dignifie us by sitting
at table with him. This I find you endeavoring to prove two ways: first,
you Disp. page 23, 24.
say, that if Christ did not intend us to sit with him like brothers there
wo^ld follow many absurdities and inconveniences.

1 Absurd. Then it follows, that he shewe^ not the affection of a brother
a^cording to the nature of an honorable feast; for by the law and purpose of a
feast, the persons invited are to eni^y the righ^s and privileges of a feast.
Answer, the sacramental feast is spiritual, and needs not the complements of
a civil feast, to approve Christ's love to the Communic^nts: this absurdity
is begged without proof.

2 Absurd. Then it follows, that our Savior sh^wes less respect to his
brethren and coheires, then a civil symposiar^^ to his ordinari^ gu^st^.
Answer, truly so he does, (as you mean respect in external fashions of
^easting,) in twenty things, more material for the most part then the gesture:
but i^ you speak properly, Christ shows not less respect to his guests,
because he enterteines them not with ou^ward fashions, which neither suite to
the spiritu^ll nature of his feast, nor to himself, who is invisible to us and
glorious. The respect is unspeakable great and sweet, which he pleases
spiritually to enterteine us withal, standing in the points named before,
sect. 40.

3 Absurd. Then it follows, that ^e makes offer of the accompl^shed
interteinment of a feast, and in the issue affoords us but a part thereof.
Answer, you speak of such intertein^ent as is outward at civil feasts, and so
it is idle beggerie, that Christ ever made any such offer.

4 Absurd. Then it follows, that ^e prepares a table, and does not use it to
the whol^ service whereunto it is prep^red. Answer, still it is begged, that
sitting at the table is a service, whereunto the table necessarily serves:
besides why then do you fit from the table to p^t an absurdity upon Christ?

5 Absurd. Page 2^.
Then it follows, that ^e would cross the expectation of such, whom ^e
in^iteth contrary to the part of a fri^ndly i^vitant, and therefore he would
not do it: for the invitant i^ tied to answer the first expecta^ce of the
invited. Answer, It is begged after your manner, that expectation of ou^ward
en^erteinment in sitting at the Lord table is a just expectation as of a thing
due unto them which be guests, and Communicants: except the thing it self be
first prooved due, the expectation thereof cannot be justified: you ^^ke a
strange course to prove it is Christ's will, you should be dignified by sitting
at table, because it pleases you to look for it.

6. Absurd. Then it follows, that Page 24.
he would fail to use a ready means to ass^re us of our co^eirship with him.
Answer, but this (if it dese^ue any answer) is to be answered in the next
chapter.

Now I would request the reader to refer the first five

Again, you show in this manner: Christ Manuscrip. chapter 6.
aimed at this as a maine end in the institution of this Sacrament, to express
the high dignity, and favor he vouchsafes us, in admitting us to be guests
at his table, and even to sit at table with him, Luke. 22. 27, 30. I answer the
place quored is impertinently alleged. Christ speaking therein Calvin mak^
Luke 22. ver. 24, 27 the same history with Mat. 20, 24. Mark. 10. 41: and
handles it not in that place, the Evangelist does record it. Therefore Calvin
is far from your mind.
not upon the occasion of his sitting with his Disciples at Supper; (though
then they were together as it is likely at the Sea my table, chapter 3. sect
Passover) but upon occasion of their strife, which of them should be
greatest: he persuades them to humility, that they should not clime one above
another; but rather that they should be as servants to one another, as
servitors at the table. This he persuades unto them by two arguments. First, by
h^s own exampl^, for he though their master and lord, yet was pleased as it
were to wait upon them, Verse. 27. Secondly, by the common glory which he did
in heaven appoint unto them. They that were here as servitors and underlings,
should sit at table with him in his kingdom. verse, 28. 29. 30. I think
either Christ does not speak of sitting, as it is contradistinguished to other
gestures, but only of the place of sitting that the cheifest and uppermost
seats should not be affected; or if Christ do speak of sitting as
contradistinguished to other gestures, it is for the forbearing of it rather
then using; as if he should say, It is enough for you to be as attenders and
waiters, when I your master am such. Again, you may well be content to release
this outw^rd honor of sitting here, since it is enough for you, that you shall
^^it in heavenly glory hereafter. Whereby we may observe that in supper time
(and for supper-sake, according to the force of your reasoning) he presses,
and prefers gestures of humility, and attendance, before sitting.

And that it may better appear, that it was not the: Luk 22. 26.
he that is ch^^fe among you, let him be as he that does serve: I Verse 27.
my self (...) among you as he that serves.

Secondly, if the positure of the body be intended an

Thirdly, if external honor be intended us in Gods Disput. is (...) exte^nall
honor from men, when he says, Do the elements deserve such regard, as to be
set upon a table, and do not the guest^ deserve to be set at table. p. 29 The
(desert) of ^o^^ guests to sit, is much ind^ede! but surely, because the
elements be set on a table-cloth, you would not press the necessity in
standing of a foot-cloth, or in sitting of cushions.
plainly, if I do not misinterp^et, and then may we seek for honor from men,
contrary to our Savior Christ, John 8. 50. Moreover the Scripture forbidding
us to seek honor to our selves, forbids such seeking as either excludes Gods
honor, or at least is not altogether referred, and subordinated thereto: but
your ex^erna^l honor as coheires, (I speak to the Disputer) is incompatible
with express seeking Gods glory: because you have said, the service of God
the Father, and behavior as a guest to Christ at his table, be actions
incompatible: but you should remember the 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Apostle, whether you eat or drink (yea i^ civilly, much more sacramentally,)
do all to the glory of God.

Fourthly, when Christ speaks of honorable sitting, Mat. 8. 11. ^uk 22. 30.
^phes. 2. 6. Revel 3. 21.
in the Scripture) and never speaks of the honor of bodily sitting in
religious ordi^ances in all the new Testament.

Fifthly, when Christ admits us to the throne of grace in our poor prayers, is
it not his intent to express his Mary Magdalens Luke 7. 37.
practice in washing, wiping, kissing, anointing the very feet of Christ, her
glory, and crown? how then can kn^eling cross the purpose of Christ in doing
us honor, when one main end of the institution of prayer (whereunto you
grant, kneeling well agrees) is to express the high dignity and favor he
vouchsafes us, in admitting us to be suitors at his mercie-^eate; yea to
confer with him most sweetly and (in some sort) familiarly vouchsafing both
to hold our the golden scepter of admit^ance to us and also ^o commune with us
spiritually as a man talks with his friend face to face.

Sixthly, and lastly, suppose Christ intended to

CHAP. 7.
SEcondly, we proceed to another argument of That kneeling accords not with the
disposition of heart, which is requir^d in the act of receiving. Now this is
declared by three things: first, kne^ling distracts our thoughts in receiving,
and hinders meditation. Secondly, It is contrary to faith, and thankfulness,
which be required in the act of receiving. Thirdly, it is an h^nderance of
assurance and joy, most ^it, and necessary at that time. I will examine them
all apart by themselves, with as much indifferency, and integrity as I can, and
leave the judgment to the ^^ader.

Object. 1. Kneeling in the act of receiving is said to distract our thoughts,
and hinder meditation, and so cannot accord with the disposition of heart
required.
FIrst, kneeling (^aith the Disputer) distracts, and hinders the meditation of
the Communicants; but how a D^^p. page 1^. and 10.
affirmations without ground of the word, according to the conceip^s of his
own understanding: but let him speak his mind; kneeling (says he) if it can
be performed with the meditation of Christ's death in t^^ Sacrament, i^ either
performed as a worship to God, or else as a venera^^on of the elements. And
whether of these ways it b^e considered, if it can be performed with
meditation, that must be done either joyn^ly, or apart, and successiu^ly. But
(says he) kneeling either as a worship of God, or as veneration of the
elements cannot be ioy^^ea with meditation of Christ's death in the Sacrament;
and it may not be used apart or success^uely without distraction, and sin. To
this purpose you speak, now we expect you should teach us the truth of these
things particularly.

First, I say, that kneeling in the Sacrament is used as Forsooth, worship to
God, and receiving Christ preached to us in the elements, are two such opposite
employments, that the one cannot but fi^strate the other. Can we without
distraction employ our selves upon different objects at the same time? Can we
banquet with the second person, and yet interteiue holy important You use very
learned and reverend terms!
negotiation with the first? are not these incompatible? Answer, surely no; for
like as you cannot rightly look up to God the Father in worshipping without
relation to Christ: so you cannot rightly look upon Christ you Rede^mer in
receiving, without relation of God the Father: neither is it true, that they be
as diverse objects unto us; for like as we discern the light of the Sun upon
the body of the Moon, when the Sun it self is not i^mediatly seen: so we
behold God the Father, by the beams of his mercy, by the light of his glory in
the 2. Cor. 4: 6:
face of Christ, when else we cannot immediately look up unto him; and like as
in beholding the body of the Moon, we may praise and magnify the excellent
Sun, from which its light shin^ng in the midst of darkness does originally
desc^nd upon us: so in the face and person of Christ in whom our minds and
senses be delighted, we worship God the Father of lights, from whom every Ia^.
1. 17:
good and perfect gift (even in the Sacrament tendered) comes down unto us:
but let it be that they be diverse objects, can not the eye look upon diverse
objects together? any thing which is transparent betwixt us and the Sun we
see, and also the Sun it self; nay many things situated one off from another
in respect of us we can behold, (as namely several stars) vno intu^tu: but
faith the eye of the soul can much more look upon God and Christ together in
one act, considering that Christ is the medium, or mean, Ioh. 1: 18:
by whom our sight passes unto God himself; yea Chap. 14. ver: 11.
that Christ is in the Father, and the Father is also in him. Nay I will go
further; we may be employed in several corporal actions (as at feasts in
eating and talking) at the same time; and why then should it be impossible by
spiritual eating we feed on Christ, and by prayer to confer with him at the
same time? Meditation of Christ, A certain reformed common praierbook requires
reading of scripture in the time of receiving according ly your selves often
use.
and hearing of the word will stand together, that is meditation will stand
with Gods speaking unto us, and why then should not meditation of Christ stand
with our speaking unto him again? especially (which must be observed) when the
self same matter of meditation is also the very matter of prayer.

And for worship without prayer, it is still more evident,

Secondly, I say, that kneeling in the Sacrament is used as a worship of God
successi^ely unto the I mean bare or mere meditation else worship or kneeling
excluds not the thoughts of Christ; death, as is showed in the former section.
meditation that by this mean^s we shall be^ pulled off from the business,
which Christ inioynes us in these words, do this in remembrance of me; we
shall not bestow the whole strength of our thoughts on that whereupon they
ought to be employed, whereas we ought to be so absolutely possessed herewith,
as we should not bestow and enterteine our selves for the present in any thing
else. Answer, indeed if we went about to bring an action into the Sacrament,
that was severed from the Sacramental employment, that which here you say were
more likely to fasten upon us: but you might know, that all the worship which
kneeling (as we teach) imports in the Sacrament, is used for the
Sacrament-sake; partly to further our comfort and happiness in receiving; and
partly to express some part of duty to our heavenly father, when he pleases
(as it were) to seal and deliver the charter of our redemption unto us: we
speak of no worship but only that shall be used in reference to the Supper,
the thoughts of the Communicant being ever kept close to that matter, which the
said Supper directly presents unto him to consider.

Thirdly, what if I say, (for disputation sake to dispute with the Disputer)
that kneeling in the Sacrament (Alas, say you) how can we think on Christ's
death, and yet entert^ine thoughts of the reverent estimation of the visible
elements? Answer, I perceive you allow no thoughts of reverence toward the
consecrated creatures in the Supper, toward water in baptism; toward the
audible word in the exercises thereof; you can think no thoughts of reverence
toward these without distracting your thoughts of insensiol^ and spiritual
things to be meditated in those ordinances. I must tell you that this Divinity
is gross, and not to be controverted in the Church of Christ: worthy it is
which all men should explode, and conculcate for the reverence of holy things.
Are these outward elements set apart to bolie use by Christ's ordinance? have
they a sacramental virtue to do us a world of behoof, if they be rightly
used? are they the ground and occasion of heavenly thoughts and joys? are
they the matter wherein the very worship of the God of heaven to the end of the
world in his Church partly consists? and ought you not (in the time of their
use) to bear thoughts of reverence and estimation unto them? verily without
such thoughts you shall never be able to make a comfortable use of them. Does
God who Levit. 19, 30,
bids us to reverence his Sanctuary, mean, that we must not reverence it at
any time, when we be employed in holy duties within it, lest our thoughts
should be pulled off from the care of them? that were as much as to esteem our
friend always, but when we use him, lest our minds should be taken from the
business wherein he is useful to us: but I would be loath by reasons and
arguments to refute such an idle and witles conceit, and yet I will not say,
that kneeling is used in the Sacrament directly for ven^ration of the elements:
if I did say so, or any body else, lo, how worthily this Disputer would
reprove that opinion! I wish every good cause better defended. And so much for
the first way, whereby is showed, that kneeling accords not with the
disposition of heart required in the act of receiving.

Object. 2. Kneeling accords not with that disposition of heart, required in
the act of receiving, which is of duty, namely, faith, and thankfulness.
SEcondly, (says the Abridg. page 61.
Abridgement) the disposition of heart, required in receiving is specially
faith and thankfulness, and these are much better expressed by standing, then
by kneeling, I answer, first by this speech, you contradict your own selves
in another place; for whereas here you except against kneeling, because it
agrees not with the sacramental employment, which is an act or disposition of
thankfulness: elsewhere (to avoid an objection for kneeling) you Abridg. page
66, 67 Manuscrip. chapter 2. arg. 4.
say, the said employment is not properly an act of thanksgiving, but of faith.
If you can reconcile these things, it is because you see more then I do.
Again in this speech of yours, you use two terms, which are of a doubtful
understanding, namely, [Better, and standing] but except by [better] expressed
by standing, you mean [onely well] expressed by standing, excluding kneeling
from expressing faith and thankfulness^ well a^ all; you speak not to purpose:
for what if faith and thankfulness be expressed by standing better then by
kneeling, it hurts not the cause of kneeling, so long as by kneeling they may
be expressed positiu^ly well. In like manner why do you say, fa^^h* and
thank^fulnesse ^e expressed by standing Repl. finds fault that Bp. Most.
turned standing (which word the Abridg. uses) into ^itting. R^pl. parti^ page
42.
rather then by sitting? Is it your purpose to ^xclude sitting, or at least,
(for expression of faith and thankfulness) to prefer standing before it?
There is a mystery in your arguments, whereof one sometimes magnifies sitting,
and standing co^es in upon ba^e nec^ssitie; another magnifies standing, and
sitting comes in upon bare necessity, like a lame man not able to stir
without a crutch.

Secondly, but to pass these things, and taking your ^ait^ ^^d thankfulness
are well expr^ss^d by standing, or sitting, and ^^t by kneeling. I an^wer to
the m^tt^r it self. And it is strange to me, that faith and thankfulness
should be so expressed by standing and sitting, and so excluded or hindered by
kneeling. But the Repli^r further t^a^heth us what is your meaning. Kneeling,
(says Repl partic. page 42, 43.
he) being an a^t solemn expression of humility in particular, does for that
m^ment ^inder, or excl^de an apt solemn expressio^ of ^aith, and
thankfulness; as w^rds sole^nly, and profess^dly expressing humility, do for
that moment hinder the same ^an from expressing by words his faithful, and
cheerful thanksgiving. Now I will a^atomize the s^crets of this learning as I
am able.

First, you take for granted, that an apt and solemn many things you would
make him and his Apostles to express by sitting. They sat (you say) to
express their coheireship, they sat to express their faith and
thankfulness, and many things more, which will afterward further appear: but
the same are ^vidently devised of your selves, and there is no proof of them
to be found in the new Testament. I know not but the purpose of the Sacrament
is for expression of humility as well as faith and thanfulnesse; it having
outward resemblance of the most lamentable object, that ever man set his eyes
on, the Lord of glory his ignominious and cruel putting to death, specially
when the receivers wickedness was the cause of it. In the Passover they Exodus
12 8.
had bitter herbs; and 2 Chronicles. 30. 22.
made confession of their sins, and it is Ze^ha 12. 10. Rev^l. ^7. according
to Mr. B^ight.
foretold that the people of God should Where is it poss^ble to look upon
Christ pierced, more ^iuely, then in the Lords Supper?
^^oke upon Christ whom they pierced, and mour^^ for him. Yea Christ himself
expressed and taught ^o express much humility, even at Supper-time: therefore
I find no necessity of an apt solemn expression of ^aith and thankfulness
severed from an expression of humility, in the time and act of receiving. But
what do we contest about the opposing of thankfulness and humility, when
indeed ^n expression of humility in this case is an expression of
thankfulness, as I shall show by and by: and if it were not, yet all
dispositions, (I speak in your Repl. partic. to Bp. Most. pa. 69.
own words) which are required unto ^i^ht receiving, cannot distinctly and
solemnly be expressed at the same time, by outward gestures, except we could
use diverse gestures together: therefore this variety of inward dispositions
gives an outward liberty of the gesture, so it accord unto any principal one
of them.

Secondly, two things you assume: first, that standing and ^itting be apt,
solemns expressions of faith and thankefulness^. S^condly, that kneeling* is
not such an expression. For the former, how prove you, that sitting is an
expression of ^aith and thankfulness: behold you say not o^e word. It seems
upon the fifth of November. and like extraordinary days, and times of
thanksgiving, you do judge sitting to be the fittest gesture to express faith
and thankfulness: but one proof for sitting would have done well. Let us
pass to standing; how do you prove that standing is the fittest gesture to
express faith and thankfulness? You deliver Abridg p. 67.
only one place of Scripture, namely, 1 Kings. 8. 54. and to that place, as if
it were unanswerable, you Repl. partic. to B* Mort. p. 43.
stand upon it, that you are not answered. And I answer you thus, that the
reason of Solomon's standing was to bless the congregation of Israel; which
blessing is divided into thanksgiving, verse 56. petition, verse. 57, 58, 59,
60. and exhortation, verse 61. and he stood up in this blessing, that all the
people might hear him, to whom he spoke (as he had need) with a loud voice,
verse 55. Now I commend to your consideration: first, that standing was not
used by Solomon, because of thanksgiving unto God, but because of audible
speaking to the people, and blessing of them. Secondly, this place will not
commend standing in thanksgiving as the fittest gesture, but then also that it
is much more fit in petition, (far fitter then kneeling even in petition)
four to one.

Thirdly, in Solomon's long prayer which he made upon his knees, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.
he used more words of thanksgiving, then he did at this time; as 1 Kings. 8.
23, 24. and yet I say he kneeled upon his knees: and more examples I shall
add to it by and by. Verily this is poor doing, when all your strength lies
wholly on such a place. But what needs all this? I am content to help you to
better proofs for the fitness of standing, to express faith and
thankfulness, upon occasion, as is likewise for the fitness of other
gestures. Such as you may see, (Page 1. Cap. 1. Sect. 10.) But that standing in
its fitnes for expressing of faith and thankfulness should be opposed to a
gesture of humility and reverence, I see no reason at all. Certain it is,
that standing at meat is as well a gesture of humility as of faith, and
thankfulness, yea, and out of mea^e is a gesture, and ever has been of
attendance, and duty, yea, in worship and prayer it in also such; for so you
Manuscrip. c^^ 2.
say, that standing is a gesture of the s^^^ kind with kneeling, fit to
express reverence, and h^^^ility toward God: and therefore standing is not,
sitting is not the only ap^est expression of faith and thankfulness.

For the latter, that kneeling is not a fit sodemne expression (...) aptly, and
solemly, expresle his faith, and thankfulness, when being healed of his
leprosy, Luk* v.
he fell down on his face at the feet of Christ, giving him thanks? Did not
the C^^turion aptly, and solemnly, express his faith and thankfulness by his
humble acknowledgement Mat. 8. verse. 8, 10.
of his unworthiness? Surely Christ does testify that he expressed by that
humble carriage an abundance of faith, when he says upon occasion of that
expression be found not so great says in Israel. (I will not allege, Apoc.
7. 11. 11. 16. Because there is Repl. partic. to B Mort p. 43.
opposed, Apoc. 7, 9. In this the glorified creatures are said to stand in
thanksgiving? as in the other they are said to f^ll down: yet by your favor
those places do teach v^ that both standing and kneeling are lawful gestures,
and fit to express faith and thanksgiving. But) I will add. Psa. 95 Where we
be provoked to kneel down before the Lord our maker, thereby to express
faith and thanksgiving: look upon the Psalm and judge. Nay the illustration
which you use condemns you in this point: for who does not know that the same
word may be an expression of hum^litie, and thanksgiving See Harmo. conf.
Bohem. sect. 14. there the godly confess themselves to kneel and yet profess
^aith and thankfulness.
both? An^ f^ra^much as your selves confess humility of the soul Why then do
the S^otchmen say, that kneeling is no more then a show and color of humility,
Per^^. Assemb. page 56^
will stan^ with faith and thankfulness; why should not also humility of the
body? specially when with God there is no respect of inward and outward, as
there is with us. All is outward to him, as the carriage of the souls of
others is inward to us, because we be not able to look into them.

But the Replyer as before.
speaks again: ^e deny not humil^ation in prayer, neither in petition, nor
thanksgiving; but the outward acting of thankefullnesse, in such a business,
whether prayer, for that moment has no place is of another nature.

Answer, this shift you might very ill make, if you consider, that your only
Scripture 1 K. 8. 54.
quoted for proof, that standing is the fittest gesture for expression of
faith and thankfulness, is of an example, describing not a bare outward
acting of thankfulness, but thanksgiving by voice in prayer. Secondly, this
shift satisfies not, for the question is this, whether kneeling be a fit
gesture solemnly to express faith and thankfulness? Not whether kneeling be
a fit gesture in prayer? For if it be fit to express faith and thankfulness,
in serves my turn, whether there be prayer, or no prayer. And ye^ in that
respect if you except against my former proofs, (which notwithstanding are
full to the purpose) I will bring you forth dumb shows of bowing the body,
where was no prayer to express faith and thankfulness: when Exodus 33. 10.
all the people saw the cloudie pi^lar, Whether they bowed the body, or bended
the knee, makes no matter in our case, so long as bowing of the body is an apt
solemn expression of humility.
they worshipped every man in his ten^^dor^; expressing their faith and
thankfulness. Israel (worshipped, Heb. 11. 21. or) bowed himself upon the
bed^ head, Genesis 47. 31. expressing his faith, and thankfulness. And in these
examples there was no prayer: so that if you would in receiving have an outward
acting of thankfulness, is it possible you should exclude an humble gesture?
Notwithstanding, it can by no means be liked, that in the act of eating the
Supper, you say, there is no place for prayer. What? Not in the midst of so
many sweet thoughts of Gods love, meditation of our both unworthiness and
wellfarre? Is there no place for any branch of asking or thanking to be
allowed? No room for one poor ejacula^ion? It is far otherwise, with your
good leave, prayer intermixeth it self with every ordinance whatsoever, and
consequently with the Lords Supper. You shall undertake a task too hard for
you to prove the contrary, either in this, or in the rest. And for this ve^^ly
sometimes it will have place, which I say not in respect of the weak only,
whose hearts will be carried up to God in desire, when sense is wanting to
them, but of the most faithful communican^^, who by this occasion of the
Supper, will be sweetly raised with the ravishment of Christ love, according to
that ^enour: Com^ Lord Jesus. I cannot therefore find in my heart to refuse
kneeling for this cause alleged, as if it were not a fit gesture to express
the duty of faith or of thankfullnes. And so much for the second way, whereby is
showed, that kneeling ^ccords not with the disposition of heart required in the
act of receiving.

Object. 3. Kneeling accords not with that disposition of heart required in the
act of receiving, which is of comfort, namely assu^ance, and ioyfullnesse.
THirdly, (say you) kneeling accords not with that comfort which ought to
possess the hearts of Communicants at the Lords table. That comfort stands
partly in assurance, and partly in (...) effect thereof, which is rejoicing.
First for assurance, and thereof the Disputer most ^oolishly argues, for to
prove that kneeling crosses the assuring unto us of our coheirship with
Christ, he gives us three ^edium^ or reasons.

First, Disp. page 1^, 19.
It directs our (...) to a^ appr^hension of disfellowship with Christ in our
future ^state of glory, represented at the Lords table. Therefore i^ crosses
and (...) our assurance.

First I deny the antecedent, and thus you endeavor to prove it: kneeling say
you, is an act of inferioritie, subjection, extraordinary abasement, and
therefore it cannot but direct the heart to an apprehension of disfellowship
with Christ: as if there were not an holy Communion and fellowship with Christ
in case of inferiority; it is your gross mistaking to think, that felloship
and society necessarily imports equality: who knows not that the King and a
me^ne man may be fellowlike and sociable, and yet remain (...) vnequalled
But, secondly, since you place disfellowship in inferioritie and subjection I
deny your ill^tion, that because kneeling directs our hearts to an
apprehensio^ of our inferiority to Christ, therefore it cr^sseth the assuring
unto us of ^^^^^^ship: this is an argument of weak learning, faith it self
directs our hearts to an apprehension of our subjection to Christ, therefore
belike faith hinders our assurance unto us: prayer directs our hearts to an
apprehension of our subjection to Christ, therefore belike prays hinders our
assurance unto us. The glorified Saints profess by falling down their
subjection to Christ, therefore belike their falling down before him hinders
the assurance of their coheirship unto them. But this conceit is not worth of
answering* yet it pleases you by a similitude to set a little counterfeit
luster upon it. As that (say you) which (...) to conceive that I am sick, will
not suffer any persuasion to gr^^^ in me, of my being in health, for the
present: so what directs me to apprehend, that (...) from (...) with Christ
in glori^, the same will not suffer me to be persuaded that I am (...) with him
of the said glory. Which comparison makes kneeling (needs) ^o mind us of our
spiritual sickness: whereas that gesture was Gods ordinance to be used,
before sickness came in to the world whereas a Christian is never moved to
conceive, he is in better health, then when he does most of all rightly and
religiously use it, whereas the glorified Saints are never moved by using of it
to conceive, that they are not both in present and perfect health. You presume
therefore in the Apo^^o^is or latter part of your comparison, a most palpab^e
untruth and error; namely that kneeling directs us to apprehend debarrement
from socie^ie with Christ, that is, to apprehend we be for the present using of
it, in the state of damnation: for what else is it to be barred from communion
with Christ? But because you mean by society, society of equality, (for
such is your spirit, that there is no other society with you) I certify you
that so your comparison hangs not together: for to apprehend I am debarred of
such society, is not like as to apprehend my self to be sick, nether does my
being debarred of such society hinder me of being persuaded, that I am co^^eire
with Christ. And this is your first reason, that kneeling is against assurance.

Secondly, Page 19, 20.
Kneeling diverts our hearts from being employed on that subject, the
meditation whereof is enjoined v^ for the nourishing of our faith, therefore it
crosses assurance of our coheireship. The Antecedent is false, and
sufficiently refu^ed before, Sect. 3.

Thirdly, Kneeling Page 21, 22.
crosses that, which is a (...) mean to feed in us the assurance of our
coheireship; and what is that I pray? why forsooth it crosses the carrying of
our selves in the person of guests and coheires with Christ (...) his table. O,
by no means Sir: for the person of guests I have spoken enough, Chap. 5. and
for the person of coheires enough is said, Chap. 6. and thither I refer you,
lest I should offend in answering such childish trifling about the same things
again, as o^t as you give occasion.

Fourthly, I may add to these reasons another of the Page 24.
else where (...) disputes: T^^ Supp^^ of the Lord is instituted (...) feale
unto us (...) evidence of our coheireship: now the personal liberties of a
^^^le be a^ so many branches, and clea^ses of our said evidence; therefore take
away the liberty of a table gesture, and our evidence will be shortened and
mai^ed. But it is false and idle to say that the personal liberties of a
civil table are as branches and clauses of our evidence, in the Sacrament
seal^d unto us. And this folly has been discovered fully in its own place,
namely in the argument of a tablegesture, Chap. 5. And these are the worthy
reasons, which are used to prove, that kneeling crol^eth our assurance in the
act of receiving. Now to answer them all together more perfectly, let us hear
the Replier speaking. It is true (says Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. page 42.
he) that neither humiliti^, (nor an This also in effect he yields. See the
place.
expression of humility) does hinder the assurance of faith. And this is a
truth so clear and evident, that it needs not to fear a wiser adversary
then the Dispu^r.

Now I will pass from the matter of assurance to the The heart (says the
Abridg p. 61.
Abridgement) ought to be affected with theerefulnesse, which is not so well
expressed by kneeling, a^ by other gestures. Also the Disputer in effect Disp.
page 78.
says, that kneeling i^ repugnant to the rejoicing required in the Lords
Supper. Now that I may handle this controversy both in few words: and for best
instruction of the Reader. It is to be confessed as a truth, which I think
never any good man denied, that joy does well accord with the Supper, and is a
fit and sweet disposition of the heart of every godly Communicant, and this
^oy our lei^urgie (as you Manuscrip. chapter 6.
truly say) requires of the^ which come to the Lords table, by appointing the
Minister to raise up their hearts in comfort and joy, by reading Mat. 11. 28.
Ioh. 3 16. 1 Timothy 1. 15. 1 Ioh. 2. 1. 2.
certain comfortable places of Scripture, before they do receive: so this
inward joy is no controversy betwixt us: but the difference stands in two
points: first, whether the inward joy is ^o be expressed outwardly in the
gesture. Secondly, if it must be so, whether standing and sitting be fitting
gestures for expression of joy, and not kneeling.

For the former, that joy is outwardly to be expressed Manuscrip. chap 6. You
allege also Levit. 10. 19, 20. saying, that Aaron excused himself for not
eating of the sin-offering, because he could not eat it with joy: but it
seems to be rather (paece tuae) because he had already polluted himself with
mourning, by his Apology: Such things have befallen me. And if he complained
that he could not rejoice in the act of eating, yet you cannot show it was
outward joy, which he meant, but only inward cheerfulness of heart. Also you
allege 1 Samuel 1. 7. Answ. Hannah wept, and ate not, because she wept of
unbelief and coffeehouse: besides depth of grief would not suffer her to
taste of meat, (as often it happens) else grief should not have kept her
back: also her expressing grieving and vexing argued her heart void of all
inward joy at that time, therefore she did not eat. Lastly, from her outward
weeping you can inserte the necessity of no contrary carriage outwardly, (for
then you would infer laughin) only a middle composed countenance was
needful, which might stand within the inward joy of her heart: and such a
countenance will agree to all maine gestures of the body, as every one knows.
Also you allege Deutr. 27. 7. which cannot be showed to be meant of outward
joy. If it be, the same answer serves unto it, which is made unto 2 Chronicles. 30.
endeavor to prove by 2. Chron. 30. 21. 23, 25, 26. where the people of
Israel are said to rejoice in ^ating the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, and
this place you mention for proving outward joy requisite in the Sacrament, or
else it is quoted to small purpose; and besides indeed it does speak of
outward joy, as evidently appears. I answer unto it thus. The Israelites joy
in eating the Passover was either showed in the act of eating and drinking, or
in the solemnity of the festival time: if it was showed in the solemnity of
their feast time, it serves nothing to the prooving of outward joy in the act
of oureating and drinking: and that it was so, appears by the story (me
thinks) plainly enough in 2 Chronicles. 30. the phrases whereof be these: They
kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness, verse 21.
They kept also other seven days with gladness, verse 23. All the congregation
of Judah, with the Priests, Levites, and all that ^^me out of Israel, rejoiced,
verse 25. So there was great joy in Jerusalem, verse 26. And so in other
places, where the Lord requires the people to rejoice, (as in the feast of
weeks. Deuteronomy. 16. 11. Feast of T^bernacles; verse. 14, 15, etc.) it is plainly
meant of outward joy in the solemnizing of the feasts, and not so much of the
time and instant of their eating, and drinking. But let it be, that there
outward joy was showed in the act of eating and drinkin^: what follows
thereof? out of doubt it follows, that those speeches of great gladness,
verse 21. great joy, verse 26. could not be used, except they both talked and
laughed together: for who could say that sees a company of men eat together,
that there is joy and gladn^sse among them, if they neither ta^ke nor laugh,
but only eat and drink. And if I should grant, that they talked and laughed
together in the act of eating their Passover, and other sacrifices, yet
kneeling (if it be no gesture of joy) in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
would be now no more condemned thereby, then a demure countenance joined with
silence. And I think their outward joy in holy worship, or in relation thereto
might be permitted, yea commanded unto them, as was other pomp of their
outward ceremonies, being indeed ^ypicall of our spiritual joy in this
Sacrament, and some other services of the Gospel: but he that therefore would
go about to maintain an outward joy, in Gods worship now, answerable to their
outward joy in their sacrifices and feasts will set on foo^e many liberties
much more troublesome then he is aware of: but in this thing I suppose you will
not strive, only I will add this note, that the new Testament (which teaches
that God will now be served in spirit and truth, and consequently with inward
joy) does in no place require, that joy should be expressed by the bodily
gesture: and so much for the general.

Now supposing that a certain rejoicing is required to

First, make it appear unto us, that our Savior Christ sitting is a fit
expression of joy, then good reason we should yield the cause: but if this can
never be showed, you must give us leave to rest unbound, when Christ himself
does not bind us.

Secondly, how can it be showed in reason that sitting

Thirdly, sitting and standing be used as much as kneeling Judge. 20. 26. Nehem.
1. 49. 4. Est^. 4. 1. Luke 19. 41. 23. 28. etc.

Fourthly, consider aright of kneeling, that it is not: now humility and joy
do very well stand together: you may not divide the^ in your heart, and then no
doubt they be not incompatible in the outward expression.

Fifthly, suppose there were some little resemblance of 2 Chronicles 30. verse. 21,
22.
made confess^on of their sins, and rejoiced both. So that though they made
themselves merry, yet their mirth excluded not the sense and meditation of
their sins, which were matter of spiritual sorrow and bitterness; as their
herbs were matter of outward bitterness as it were some sour sa^ce with
their meat, yea our Savior himself (by telling his Apostles, one of you shall
b^ray me) of purpose in the Supper-time, wherein yet they were bound to
rejoice, proposed and ministered matter of grief, and great grief unto them.
So that in the Sacrament there is no doubt a lawful use of sorrowful sense of
our sins: but that is not to take joy away, or to exceed it in measure, but
to make it more, being indeed a singular mean to amplify and enlarge it.

Sixthly, if you will stand upon an expression of joy, Perhaps the (...) would
have it so, for they would have the guests to make merri^. Per^^, Assemb. page
40.
upon mirth making in talk, and laughter; especially since the same do agree
so well and requisitely to an excellent and comfortable feast.

Seventhly, is there more joy to a Christian in receiceiving the Supper in the
gesture of sitting, then in prai^r: and there is no doubt but ^our own
experience will stand in stead of other proof in this matter? for el^e to this
purpose restimonies of Scripture be oddious enough, you know, if it were
n^edfull to allege the^: yea in the Sacrament such as have kne^led (I deem
through the grace of Christ) have not come short sometimes of others who fit in
spiritual comfort and joy. Su^e I another Churches profess no less for
themselves in receiving upon their knees: we fall down on our knees (say
Harmon confess. sect. 14. Bo^^^.
they) receiving the Sacrament with thanksgiving and gladness.

Eighthly, lastly, let it be that kneeling is not, sitting is and lamentable
affliction, especially when our inward comfort, and joy (I trust) shall not be
by kneeling abated in the Lord. And hitherto of the second maine argument of
collection.

CHAP. 8.
THirdly, another of your arguments against

It is unlawful (say Disp. page 38. his 5. arg.
you) in perform a private worship, during (...) and act of the public.

But kneeling ^^ the Sacrament is such a private worship, during the public.

Therefore it is unlawful.

Answ. For due understanding of this learned argument, we must in enquire what
worship is a private worship, and what is not. Private worship is taken in two
senses: first, that is called private, which is unseen and secret. Secondly,
that is called private, which is severed, and distinguished from that which is
general and common. Now your proposition cannot be understood of the formere
for secret, and unseen worship is, and must be performed in the public, and
that is the worship of the heart; which though it be invisible to man^ eye, yet
is both absolutely necessary, and principally excellent in all the public
worship of God. And indeed you your self do only mean your proposition in
the latter sense, as appears by the reasons whereby you would justify and
maintain it. For Page 39.
thus you reason: It is unlawful to perform a private worship, during the
public, both because it is against the Lords commandment, which requires us
to join with his people in his public ordinances; and because it is against
our own profession, which by our presence make se^blance of joining, and yet
forbear to (...) with them. Truly I do willing lie yield that all private
worship is unlawful which pulls us off from our duty in the public
ordinance; but yet all private or severed worship does not so; and I can name
you ^t the least four cases, wherein this will evidently appea^e: therefore
your proposition must be expounded with four exceptions or limitations at the
least.

First, the first limitation is of heart-worship of dependence;

The second limitation is of bodily worship of liberty, for may not one man
stand in prayer, upon occasion, not know that in the substance of worship they
do well agree with the rest of the assembly, only they differ in circumstances
of gesture? Which difference frequently occurreth among your selves, and these
exemplifications are so plain that the Disputer can say nothing to the
contrary.

Thirdly, the third limitation is of private worship of

Fourthly, the forth limitation is of private worship of

Now I descend to your assumption [that kneeling at the Sacrament is a private
worship during the time and Page 40.
you) the kneeler discovers not his concepti^ns, and how can the rest partake
in that which they do not kn^w? Answer, do you mean, that he should ^ell the
congregation by audible voice the thoughts of his heart? Surely if the nature
of the service it self and of the gesture thereunto applied can discover, what
ought to be the conceptions of the communicant, he does discover his
conceptions unto the rest: and (I pray) wherein does the hearer of the word,
the beholder of Baptism, the kneeler in praier-time discover the conceptions
of your hearts by sitting or standing, yea by sitting and standing bar^headed?
How did all the Israelit^^ discover the conceptions of their hearts, when they
bowed Exodus 33. v. 10.
and worshipped, and ye^ said nothing ^ It is the nature of the Sacrament (Sir)
and the nature of the gesture which do discover what are (that is, what ought
to be) the conception of the communicant. In good-sooth otherwise to discover
the same is neither need: ^ll to the congregation, nor possible. It is enough
that we join together in the pvblick duties of worshipping Therefore i^ it but
ampli^ied by the Disputer no more, that is, childishly, that the kneeling of
our Communicants, is like the meeting of several men accidentally in S. Paul's
of Lo^d. and kneeling at the same time at several pil^ars to pray, page 41
Whereas godly receivers do come together to the Sacrament, with foreintent,
and join together with express consent; in the pu^lick ordinance (...).
with common consent. Consent, I s^y, declared and disc^^ned by the bodily
presence and carriage.

Secondly, say Ibidem.
you, the minister diverteth his speech from the congregation in general, and
directs it to each kneeler particularly, and privately. Also the rest of the
congregation (you say) are not bound to attend to the ministers voice, or to
take notice what be does; but are l^^t at liberti^ to employ themselves i^ the
singing of a Psalm, or other spiritual^ exercise. Also the rest (you say) are
not appointed to kneel^, when the receiver kne^l^th. Answ. All this objection
has no force if there be in public ordinances a liberty both of succession
and of approp^iation. And in succession I will show you the fondness of it by
these considerations: first, what can you say to the manner of your own eating
of the bread; drinking of the cup successively? do not you in giving the same
to some singular p^^son, divert your self from the congregation in general,
direct your self to one particular man o^ woman privately? are the rest bound
to take notice, what the minister does to one? alas, what poor exceptions are
these?

Secondly, what can you say to the fashion which you

Thirdly, what can you say to your singing of a Psalm, and reading of a
chapter, which your selves have sometimes

Fourthly, I add, that succession is necessary to be used How vainly do you
the^ tell us, that the Communicant kneeling cannot be the principal presenter
of outward worship, and the rest his assistants: ergo, his worship is private,
Disp. page 4: when all Communicants be co-kneelers, as they be co-receivers,
that is, according to the respect of succession.
succession of the gesture, wherein the same actions be performed? there is no
doubt thereof to any body, but this Disputer, as I suppose.

But besides the respect of succ^ssion, what can you not a particular man be
comforted, in structed, exhorted in some particular case, publicly, by the
(...) of the speaker, by the construction of the party himself, and of the
congregation? But you will say perhaps, this application con^^^nes all in some
sort, and all are to make use of it^ and so say I in some sort the actions of
all Comm^nkants at the Lords table concern every one present as the Apostle
teaches: w^ being many are (...) bread, and one body, for we be all partakers
of one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. But yet the giving and receiving of bread and wine
to this and that singular person is truly severed, and proper to th^^ one
notwithstanding; as likewise it is in the application of the word of (...). The
swee^e comforts of the Gospel in the mouth of the minister belong not to an
unregenerated company of hypocrites; (such as perhaps sometimes an auditorie
for the most part consist of;) but rather singularly to an humbled and broken
spirit: and on the other hand the grievous terrors and comminations of Gods
wrath, belong not to an assembly of gracious people, but rather to some
graceless person or other, sitting in the midst of them. And yet in Baptism
the case i^ more ^^^^re; for does not the minister apply himself wholly to the
child which is to be baptized? ^ay is not application to that singular person
the present-publick-ordinance of the assembly? besides b^ptisme, even prayer
and thanksgiving be used in the public assembly for some particular persons
either afflicted or else di^^ver^d: these you cannot deny to be used most
lawfully; and yet there is special appr^priation of the public worship to
such particular persons for a certain season. But what need I to speak of
other ordinances? necessity, institution, and your own practice in the
Communion it self do warrant the appropriation o^ proper bread and wine unto
the several Communicants. So that in a word that which you call a
private-worship, (by reason of succession, and appropr^^ion) is in effect the
public worship of God, for the present time.

THE THIRD PART OF THIS TREATISE, IN WHICH are answered the objections against
kneeling, which are drawn from Christian liberty, piety, and charity.
CHAP. 1.
NOw that by the goodness of God I have answered my brethrens order, I will
reduce to three principal heads: namely, that kneeling at the Sacrament is
unlawful, as the case stands at this day; because it is against Christian
liberty; because it is against pi^ti^; and because it is against cha^itis; the
first being our own due; the second the Lords; and the third our neighbors.
Before I enter into them, I desire, and hope o^ all the godly, that they will
weigh, that which is said, by the balance of upright judgment, and not by the
false and partial rule of affection and prejudice. Verily my prayer and trust
to Almighty God, is, that he will vouchsafe of his infinite goodness and
mercy, to teach, and lead me by his holi^ hand, in every part of mine answer.

Argum of Christian liberty.
FIrst you teach, though kneeling be lawful in it self, yet This argument may
be formed to this purpose.

That which deprives men of their Christian liberti^ is unlawful: Abridg p. 46.
1 Cor. 7. 23. Gal. 5 1. Coloss. 2. verse. 8, 18, 20. Repl. gener. to Bp. More.
chapter ^. sect. 5.
Gal. 4. 10.

Kneeling at the Sacrament as it is enjoined in our land depri^es men of their
Christian liberty.

Therefore it is unlawful.

Our first answer.
I answer: first by showing wherein Christian liberty persuasion: this you
will not deny. Secondly, that he use the liberty which God has given him,
not upon mere will, and at random, but for the glory of God, and for the
good of others, both superiors and neighbors, and herein liberty it self is
bound, as the Scripture shows; for Gods glory, the Apostle Paul sufficiently
teaches, for discoursing of single life and marriage, he persuades the
Corinthians, (such as had the liberty) to choose to live single rather in those
times upon this ground, 1 Cor. 7. 35. (...)
that they might attend upon the Lord without distraction. For our sup^riours,
(whether they be Magistrates, Parents, Masters, etc.) the Apostle Peter also
declares; for exhorting all men to be obedient to Magistrates, he 1 Pet. 2. 16.
warnes them not to use their liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, ^ide Be^.
A^^^^. in bu^^ l^cu^.
in casting off the bridle of government. For our neighbors there is a plain
direction, Gal. 5. 13. Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, only use
not your liberty for a^ occasion to the flesh, but by ^oue serve one another.
Thirdly, Christian liberty stands either in doing that which is indifferent,
or in restreining our selves: in both there is the example of the blessed
Apostle: 1 Cor. 9. 20.
he made himself as a ^^w to the Jews; ^^ under the law to them which were
under the law, that he might gain them to Christ. And again, we have not
used our power, (says Verse 12.
he) but suffer all things, le^t we should ^inder the Gospel of Christ.

Out of the former points it appears. First, the sea Bp Mort. p gener. ch 6.
sect 12. and the Replyers yielding.
not taken away by the necessity of doing a thing indifferent, or not doing;
but only by that necessity, which takes away the opinion, or persuasion of
its indiff^rency. Secondly, when the Magistrate commands something which is
indifferent, it is not the part, or honor of a Christian to refuse to do it,
because in himself he had liberty to do otherwise: but rather it is an
excellent privilege which he has, that having liberty of many things, he can
make use thereof even in that one, to please, and satisfy him (unto whose
authority, and government God himself has subiectted him) without offense to
his conscience. Thirdly, that a Christian is not absolutely bound by God to
act, or suspend an indifferent action so much, or so much; (then it could not
be indifferent in it self) but to do it alwaye^ or refuse it always, to do
it sometimes, or refuse it sometimes interchangeably, as occasion requires.
Thus I have showed you wherein Christian liberty consists in things
indifferent, and this may stand for one answer to your argument, if you please
to apply.

Our second answer.
SEcondly, I answer, that all the places of Scripture, Cor. 7 23.) forbids us
to be servants of men, that is in vide Calv. in hunc locum. i^ So B^^ cited by
the Repl general to B. M^r chapter 6. sect. 5.
wicked, or (^) superstitious actions, according to their perverse
commandments, or desires. There is no reason in the context to mean it of the
practice of indifferent things, nay there is good reason on the contrary part.
For (I pray) must not servants obey their Masters in things indifferent, then
verily they may refuse to obey them at all, in as much as there is hardly any
action in the calling of a servant, but therein be sundry respects of liberty
and indifferency, rising from the nature of the employment, and other
circumstances belonging.

The other Scriptures, Gal. 4. 10. 5. 1. Col 2 v. 8, 18 20. do declare, the
liberty which Christians have from the bondage of Jewish Ceremonies: of which
I would ask you two questions. First, whether those Jewish Ceremonies, which
the Apostle means, were indifferent; not only in their nature, but in their
use also, being applied to Evangelicall worship? If they were not, then the
proofs are not ad idem, because the gesture of kneeling i^ indifferent in its
use in the Sacrament. But Secondly, if they were indifferent in their nature
and use (as indeed they were, for Paul himself used many of them, and others
in those times without sin) I ask you whether therefore it be not a clear
^ase, that he condemns them, because they were urged and used, not as things
indifferent, but as necessary for the doctrine, and opinion which they had of
them? Look upon the places, and judge, and among other evidences enough, this
consideration may be of use, that those Ceremonies were not prescribed by a
civil Magistrate, but only by seducing teachers in the Church, who had no
power of bringing a necessity in the outward practice, but by persuading, and
possessing men's minds with an opinion of the necessity of such practice.

Now let the Replyer object, First (says Reply to B^sh. Mort. chapter 6. sec. 5
he) Bellar mine will say as much. I answer, if he say so, so far he
Bellarmine, or any other Papist has acknowledged the truth of any part of
them, yet it is your ordinary wont in the want o^ reason of weight, to refute
us by, to shape us this unprofitable answer. Bellarmine will say so. Why (Sir)
I can pick a thousand points or sa^ings out of Bellarmine, wherein he speaks
most truely^: which ^ say not for any mind I have to magnify Bellarmine; for
what false teacher, or heretic, that has written many volumes does not
deliver many truths, e^ther in dogmaticall tenants, or in expounding of many
places of Scripture? Secondly, says he; The Apostle Paul speaks generally, of
all Ceremonies of man's appoynting, when the conscience is brought in
subjection, and bondage unto them. I answer, this is true, if you mean by
subjection of the conscience, as I have expounded before: for doubtless, the
Apostles words may be applied generally, to such Ceremonies, as against which
he applies them himself particularly, that is such, whereby the consciences of
men in the Doctrine, and opinion thereof are subjected, and bondaged. But does
this alter the case, and cross our interpretation of Paul? What are you the
better for such answering? if you mean by subjecting the conscience, to
ceremonies, subjecting only of the outward man, the conscience being free to
judge them, (and for any spiritual necessity) to use them as things
indifferent, (supposing them to be such both in their nature, and use) then
besides that you use such phrases, as no man uses it but your own dr^ame,
that I say not do^age, that the Apostle can possibly mean any such matter: so
indeed you might shift to thrust out of holy worship all your own variable
circumstances, if the Magistrate but commanded the use of them, for the zeal
of your Christian liberty.

Hitherto is to be referred ^f you will, that which you: for, first, the
Papists have a company of ceremonies, which you will deny can be indifferent
in their use in Gods worship. I am certain you will deny this, and yet you
cannot justly deny it of the Jewish ceremonies in the time of the ^postle,
because he judged it lawful to use them himself to win the Jews by his
conformity unto them.

Secondly, besides the Papists put in the opinion and doctrine of them a
bondage upon men's consciences, and take away the respect of their
indifferency. Now this is a sure ground of truth, that whatsoever action or
thing indifferent may be used in Gods worship lawfully, and no opinion be put
upon the conscience, which takes away the full respect of its indifferency,
the same may be enjoined, our Christian liberty notwithstanding: but from such
a one to infer to the Popish ceremonies, is as much, as from a good work to
inf^rre either to bad works, or to good with respects of justification, and
merit. And so you have a second answer to your argument, namely, an answer to
the places of Scripture, which it wholly relies on.

Our third answer.
THirdly, now I will show that the gesture of kneeling Calvin Calv instit. lib.
4 cap. 10. sect.
speaks) left to man's choice and liberty: and so there is no necessity of
conceit, or opinion put upon it, for enthralling any their consciences. This I
declare in this manner. First, there is a profession in the book of Common
prayer, that makes this good. Kneeling (says The book speaks of ceremonies
in general.
it) is not so required by us, but that upon just cause it may be changed.
Again, we condemn not other Churches, where they do otherwise; for we
think it meet, that each Country should use such a (n) gesture, as they think
best for Gods glory, and the common good without superstition. But the Replier
speaks here: So also (says Repl genesis to Bp. Mort. chapter 2. sect. 15.
he) the Church of Rome can change her ceremonies if she will. I answer, the
Church of Rome can change, and establish, place, and displace even
substantialls at her own pleasure, as not only her definitive learning of her
strange authority, but experience also has evidently made to appear: her
profession or practice therefore for changing her ordinances can fasten no ill
dealing upon that Church, which in Gods necessary worship houlds her self
bound wholly to the commandment of the word: but if you will speak to the
matter, you must tell us, that the Church of Rome in lawful^ circumstances,
professes that upon just cause they may be changed. Verily, if she said no
more, if she ^aught no worse concerning such circumstances, she were in so
professing to be justified, as not infringing the liberty of the conscience,
to be justified I say precisely in that thing, though not ex hypothesi, as the
maine worship, which she appoints is such: and this seems a sufficient
answer. Wherefore our Church declaring the gesture of kne^ling to be changeable
upon occasion, and not condemning standing, or sitting in other Churches, does
give every man to be assured, that kneeling is enjoined, as a thing
indifferent, without depriving us of our Christian liberty.

Secondly, in K. Edw. 6. his time, before command of Edw. 6. Anno 2. These are
the words: Kneeling may be used, or left, as every man's devotion serves,
without blame. First, thus your selves Perth. Assem. page 48. Survey 173.
confess, that the gesture in the first reformation was left free: so that
this Church has admitted of variety of gestures successively; and howbeit
kneeling has been imposed last, and longest, the reason is not, (whatsoever
it is, or was, which I shall speak of hereafter) because the Church does or
did condemn her self for judging aforetime other gestures indifferent, for
she professes, not to condemn the same as unlawful in other Churches at this
present; Survey at the Quer. of kn. toward the end
and you stand upon it, that the State in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign meant not to condemn, or exclude the liberty of other gestures:
behold then an other evidence, that kneeling is commanded with us, without any
opinion of the necessity of it, but as it is, in its own nature and use, a
thing, or gesture indifferent.

Thirdly, all our learned and judicious writers in this Church, that have
propugned this gesture with the Churches authority, have determined with one
consent, that it is, in its nature and use indifferent, and variable, and that
the Church does press it for none other. To this purpose you may consider if
you please, Survey 198. Disp. 131.
what you affirm of Archbishop Parker, how he administered the Communion at
C^^terburi^ to the people standing, and that her Majesty's Commissioners in
causes Ecclesiastical did (now) above threescore years ago, establish in
Coventry, standing in the act of receiving. What Bishop Jewel says, that Art
1. div. ^. ag Hard.
standing, sitting, or kneeling, be indifferent circumstances. What Bishop
Mor^on says, then whom no man can utter words, that shall more expressly
avouch kneeling indifferent in many places of his book, what your selves You
speak of our Cerem. in general: Abridg page 53.
do say at once, of our chiefest defendours, that they do judge, the Church
might well be without the bond of kneeling, as they do hold, that the Church
may well also be with it. In a word, Disp. page 155
you say, that ^he defense of the gesture of kneeling by this reason, that the
same i^ indifferent is almost in every man's mouth.

But this profession of the laws and governors of our Abridg. page 43.
because the Papists profess as much concerning their ceremonies; namely, that
they ^olde their ceremonies n^cessarie in no other respect, but because they be
ord^ined by their superiors. I answer, as if you should not consider of their
Ceremonies, both what they are in themselue^, and with what opinions, and
superstitions their Superiors do command them: for suppose their Church
required nothing but lawful circumstances in divine worship, and those also
without ^vill opinion (of any so^^) put upon them, do ye think she were to
be condemned therefore? Take notice I pray you then of this inconsiderate
reasoning of yours. To prove our Ceremonies we imposed more then as things
indifferent, notwithstanding our Churches profession to the con^^ary; you ^ell
us of the Romish Church, which imposes her Ceremonies, with plain profession
of evil opinions, and superstitions annexed. This is not a Mathematical
parallel, it wants rule. I show you wherein the Papists do differ from us,
wherein if they did not differ, I show you, that we are well contented to be
like unto them. I expected, that the Abridgement should have presented us, with
answer of reason, to satisfy conference. This silly answering [the Papists
will say as much] might have remained to the superficial Replyer, who uses
it, I would be loath to count, how often. Secondly, that the Profession of our
Church suffices not in this case, another shows Mr. Bradsh in his arg. 11.
lat^^r (...).
by a comparison. What (says he) if the Church should decree that the King
should hold the Archbishops stirrup, withal protesting, that they do not
require this, as a thing necessary, and with any evil, and superstitious
opinion, but for decency, were not this a shameful sh^ft? I answer most
shameful, because there is no decency in the thing it self; there would be
injustice in the decree, God requiring that Caesar should haueth at which is
Cesars. Besides, the King is above all his subjects, and (he being the only
agent whereof this comparison puts case) is not bound to the Decree of his
subjects, but as he pleases to be a law to himself in arbitrary occasions,
wherefore as this Rhetoric of yours, whilst i^ speaks of decency has none;
for ill it does become you: so there is more distance betwixt it, and our
matter in hand, then is betwixt the two poles of the world.

But you object further, that the Church does not (...) kneeling as a thing
ind^ffere^e, but as necessary to s^lv^^^^, as may appear (you ^ay) by many
considerations. Which (...) they I pray?

Object. 1. King Edw. Abridg. 42.
Common Prayer bo^^ke says, kneeling is enjoined to avoid the pr^^anati^^ of
the Sacr^ment, importing, that el^e the Sacrament would be necessarily
profaned; and so it makes an opinion, that kneeling is necessary. I answer,
your gloss corrupts the (...), you force an evil meaning from those words
of the book, and need not: the Church did not mean, that such profanation, as
she provideth against by kneeling, arises from the nature of other gestures;
but from carnal, and careless Christians, who by occasion thereof might fall
to slight and disesteeme the holy Sacrament; so there is no doctrinall
necessity of kneeling at Sacrament in it self, or opposed to other gestures
to avoid profanation; but provision made against an accidental and probable
inconvenience: and it is plain, that the Church in commanding to kneel at
Sacrament, for avoiding of profanation, did not intend to infer spiritual
necessity; for then she would condemn other Churches (using other gestures)
of profaning the Sacrament; which she disclaimeth to do; neither would she
profess to require the gesture, (as she does) as a circumstance, which ^ay be
changed upon due consideration. It is true, she requires all to kneel, that
the Sacrament might not be profaned; but it follows not therefore she judges
all would profane the Sacrament, that kneel not. It is enough in laws which
be made of things indifferent, that the benefit thereof be felt or needed
generally, albeit no^ universally. And to make the causecleerer, consider, that
mu^able circumstances, (which you judge) of order an^ decency may be appointed
to any ordinance or public worship of God for celebration thereof in such a
manner, that it be not profaned. Deny this if you can: if you cannot, you may
learn to interpret here in like manner.

Object. 2. Bradsh. arg. 11
All divine constitutions binding conscience are necessary to salvation.

But kneeling at Sacrament is a divine constitution, (being commanded by the
Church) and ^^ndeth conscience.

Therefore as it is ^^ged it is necessary to salvation.

I answer, constitutions are divine, either simply, or respectively; simply,
when God immediately stamps them with his holy authority: respectively, when
man ^et^ that authority upon them, which God has bestowed upon him, in things
of liberty, and indifferency: (...) this sense all constitutions may be
called divine, wherein the general rules of the word be kept, whether they be
of Ecclesiastical things, or civil^. Now such constitutions do^ bind the
consciences of men to a necessity of obedience, as the lawful ordinances of a
man in his own house do bind the consciences of s^i^ domestics; and such
obedience as is is a course which pleases God, is the way to life and
salvation; and yet here is no necessity to salvation, but what the most
mutable circumstance, and thing indifferent in all the world is capable of: you
might as ^ell say. when a man imployes ^i^ son or servant in an errand, or
any other business, that such employment is enjoined as necessary to
salvation.

Object. 3. Bradsh. ibid.
It is necessary to salvation, that men should worship God in a d^^ent ^^d
orderly manner.

But by our doctrine the dece^^i^ (...) order of the Sacrame^^ stands in the
gesture of kneel^^g.

Therefore it is held as necessary to salvation.

I answer; you reason as he that would prove the way to Cales to be necessary
by D^ver, because Dover is our ready way that leads unto Cal^s. But as the
saying is, there be more ways to the wood then one. Decency of the Sacrament
partly stands in kneeling, when that gesture is used; as it may in like manner
stand with standing or sitting, when they be used, as I have showed, part. 2.
chap. 3.

Object. 4. Ab^idg. p. 40.
Kneeling is an external act of religion, and Page 42.
the laws, and governors of our Church urge it as a weighty part of Gods
w^rship: Yea Ibid.
it is by all ^en confessed to be a chief part of religious adoration, and
needs i^ Disp. page 156 etc.
must be so.

Therefore it follows that it is imposed as necessary to salvation, and not
as a thing indifferent.

I answer, as if it may not be both a thing in different, and yet a part of
Gods worship: kneeling at prayer is a thing indifferent, in it self, that is
may be done, o^ left undone as there is occasion, yet is kneeling at prayer a
part of Gods outward worship. You should remember that in as much as we call a
gesture indifferent, it is for the liberty of chosing: as we call it a worship
it is for the accepted use thereof, when it is chosen and applied, this i^ so
easy a case that I wonder any man of judgment did ever call it into question,
only at the Disputer I do not wonder, that takes this for an impregnable
proposition. Disp. p. 155.
[No action that is a part of the Lords worship is a matter indifferent.] This
Proposition (says he) will find no encounter true, no action is a part of the
Lords worship, as it is a matter indifferent: but the said action may have more
considerations then one. But see back of this matter page 1. chapter 4. Sect. 6,
etc. Note here, that whenever I call kneeling at Sacrament an indifferent
thing, I must be taken to mean according to the foresaid distinction, which
cannot be refused with reason.

Object. 5. Bradsh. arg. 1^.
The Lord Bishops be the pillars of the Church, and kneeling at the Sacrament
is one of the supporters of them,

Therefore if the pillars of the Church be necessary, then this Ceremony is
also necessary.

Answ. Be it so, that they be Pillars, which you affirm but ironically, how
can it be, that kneeling at Sacrament can be an vpholder of them for ought I am
able to consider, they are no more vpheld by kneeling at Sacrament, then by
standing at confession, kneeling at prayer, receiving bare-headed, all which
you do well allow of. And if these be supporters of them, then is there so
much said to their commendation; for it is an honor to be supported by lawful
things. And yet these pillars might stand as fast in the judgment of wise men,
if standing or sitting were generally used at the Lords Supper. But you have a
desire to except poor exceptions, rather then you will be shut ou^.

Object. 6. Abridg: p: 39
Such as kneel not at Sacrament are accounted schismatics and Puritanes
Bradsh. arg: 11
worse then Idolatrous Papists,

Therefore kneeling is accounted a thing most necessary to salvation.

Answ. That for omission of kneeling you be counted worse then the Papists no
good Protestant will say, if any man did ever so charge you, we need not
regard, nether need you: men specially in flamed in these public contestations
betwixt us will be sometimes speaking extravegantly. I am assured there be
among your selves, that will not stick to speak as bitterly against others.
As for the imputations of Puritans and Schismariks, so far forth as the same
be cast upon you for refusing to kneel, it is because you refuse and oppose
the Church in a matter indifferent. For to strive against a National Church,
and break the peace of it unjustly, (as to break it about such mutable
gestures in Gods worship as are truly indifferent both in nature, and use is
to break them unjustly) was ever held for a Schi^maticall course. Whether it
be or no, who knows not, that the imputation of Schismatiques may be given,
for contending about such things, and that takes away the force of in^erring,
that kneeling is esteemed therefore as necessary to salvation. In the Primitive
Church it was no less then a Schismatic action with public offense,
against the Apostolical Decr^^. Acts 15. to ^ate blood, and yet no body could
therefore conclude, that non-eating of blood was held by that Church necessary
to salvation.

Object. 7. Abridg. 42:
Very many of the people in all parts of the Land hold this opinion of
kneeling, that the Sacrament cannot reverently, or wor^^ily be received with
any other gesture. Answer: as if (for sooth) I must interpret the Church by
the fond opinion of some of our people, as if their concei^s put upon me a
necessi^ie, that I must so conceive in like manner; as if there were not a
greater number of people better informed to set against them: as if there were
not many ignorant people over all the land, that hold evil opinions of maine
points of religion, that are ignorant, and will be ignorant still. What? whiles
the Church enjoynes kneeling as a thing indifferent in it self; the governors
of the Church do so urge it; all our writers do so defend it; informed
Christians do so use it; shall I think it has an opinion of necessity
sticking to it for the surmises of certain ignorant people? If I should so
think, I know not, whether their opinion, or mine, were to be blamed for the
more ignorant, and ridi^ulous.

Object. 8. Omission of kneeling is punished with Abridg. 43. Repl. to Bp.
Mort. general, ch 6. sect. 4. Bradsh. arg. 1.
suspension, Abridg. 39. Bradsh. arg. 11. Repl. as before.
excommunication, and Abridg. 42. Repl. as before.
less of the Sacrament it self, yea in comparision it is more sharply
punished, then either Bradsh. arg. 11.
omission of preaching, and other substantial duties, yea then Abridg. 42. To
this exception of omission of kneeling in prayer, I will answer with the words
of him that made the Queries, who speaks in this manner: The 1^ Canon sets
down particular directions for all due reverence to be used in every part of
divine service; yea expressly directs all manner of persons reverently to
k^eele, when the general con^ession, Le^anie, and other Prayers are read, and
yet does not require the people to kneel in the act of rece^ving. Survey, page
169. I suppose you will be better content to hear one of your own side give
you a reasonable answer.
omission of kne^ling in prayer; or then Abridg. 39.
commission of notorious, and scand^l^us sins committed against the law of
God:

Therefore it is urged as a thing of very great necessity, ^ven to salvation.

Answer. This objection though it make a show of concluding effectually, yet
performs it not, as will appear if it be sob^^ly weighed. You say the reason,
that such as kneel not at Sacrament are suspended, excommunicated, and
debarred of the Sacrament is merely for omission of the gesture: (the
Abridgement says also Ibidem.
though the same omission be made out of the case of scandal and contempt:)
and that is most untruly said; for although the law do require the use of
kneeling at all times, yet the true intent thereof is to See Park. of the
Cross, chapter ^. sect. 17.
punish REFVSALL, when a man professes against the Church, and the general
order of it, denying to use at all the gesture, which it enjoyneth. But that I
may show the error of your objection, I will reduce it into form as follows.

That the refusal whereof is punished with suspension, excommunication, etc.
is urged as necessary to salvation.

Refusal of kneeling at Sacrament is so punished.

Therefore kneeling is so urged.

The Major is false: for suppose a man, though otherwise allowing well of our
assemblies, should refuse to join with them, because he will not worship God
in our temples, would not suspension, (if he were a minister) and
excommunication fasten upon him in this Church, trow you? you cannot make a
question thereof: but should therefore the Church be charged for enjoining such
or such particular temples as necessary to salvation? By no means; for the
Church esteems place a circumstance which may be changed, as need and
edification require. You will request peradventure, that these punishments be
excessive: I answer, excess of punishment does not infer opinion of
spiritual necessity. It is a plain non sequitur. Refusal to kneel is
punished with excess: therefore kneeling is enjoined for necessary to
salvation. For all the world knows, that offenses about indifferent things
may be punished with excess, though the opinion of their indifferency do
remain: yea for Ecclesiastical censures it is certain, that they have been
wont from time to time to be inflicted for breaking of Ecclesiastical orders,
although the Church imposing has judged the same to be such as might be varied
upon occasion. Wherefore it should not be regarded in the case of kneeling at
the Sacrament what punishment is pronounced against them which refuse it. A man
bids his servant to do such or such a business (say it be of no great moment)
adding if he d^ it not, he will turn him out of his service, may not the
servant now lawfully, and safely perform his Masters commandment, because he
backed it with a commination of greater severitie, then he needed to have done,
for any thing he sees or knows? so if the Church be more severe in pressing
her orders, and punishing the breach of them, then you can allow, that is
nothing to the purpose, if the said orders may be obeyed. Saul 1 Samuel 14. 24
forbade the people to eat meat upon pain of unreasonable extremity; could
the excess of punishment threatened make abstinence unlawful to them, or put
upon it opinion of necessity to salvation? This no body will affirm, except
such as be led by a spirit of nothing but contradiction. I but, that which is
commanded and pressed more then obedience to Gods laws is held more necessary
then it, and so held necessary to salvation. This is true, if the necessity
of both looked the same way: if kneeling at Sacrament were pressed and urged by
law, because it is necessary to salvation, and greater matters truly so
necessary not so urged, then I confess this exception might seem to be just
enough: but the reason why kneeling is urged in this Church, is known to be
respect of Ecclesiastical policy, and not as if it were necessary to
salvation: and for greater matters I make no doubt to say, that you do wrong
to this Church and state in accusing the laws which (and that strictly) do
serve for the punishment of gross and capital mischiefs: but now if all this
while you have spoken only de fact^, I will be no defendour of men's remissnes
to execute the laws of God: I do heartily wish, and all good hearts do
likewise wish and desire, that all our governors would see performed, qu^ sunt
gravi^ra legis, i^dicium, et miseric ordiam, et fidem, haec op^rtuit facere,
and yet kneeling not le^t undone.

Thus then I have showed that this Church takes not may serve for testimony to
this purpose. First, you Bradsh. arg. 12
say, that the first appointers of kneeling appointed only a toleration of it,
and that Abridg. 42.
you be only bound by law to that which was appointed by them. Verily if this
be true as you say, then kneeling is not enjoined with necessity to be done,
much less with opinion of such necessity. Secondly, you Manuscrip. chapter 4.
say, no law binds us to the necessity of kneeling; if this be true as you
say, then the same conclusion still follows, that much less any opinion of
necessity can by law be annexed unto it. Thirdly, you Bradsh. arg 11
say, that the Church urges not kneeling at the Sacrament at all, but only
three or ^oure Church Governors. If this be true as you say, why do you
challenge this Church for urging it as necessary to salvation? Fourthly, you
Disp p. 33.
say, the Common prayer book allows of sitting at the Communion. And again,
Demand p. 45 ^urvey p. 70.
It allows the minister to stand up. If this be true as you say, nothing can
more acquit the Church of enjoining kneeling as necessary. For what I pray can
acquit her better, then this, that (as you affirm) she allows of all
gestures. These things I but mention to note your own repugnancies, and
contradictions to your selves, that whiles one while you say, the Church and
laws thereof makes kneeling so necessary as infringeth Christian liberty,
that is by necessity of opinion; another while you deni^ that it requires
kneeling, with any manner of necessity, so much as necessity of obedience. I
would to God the consideration of your own uncertainties might admonish you to
fly unto the immovable pillar of truth. So I conclude my third general
answer, whereby I have vindicated this Church from infringing of Christian
liberty in imposing the practice of kneeling upon Communicants at the Lords
table.

Our fourth, and last answer.
FOurthly, and lastly, whereas you use the argument Repl. gener. to Bp. Mort.
chapter 6, ans. to sect. 3.
Replier shows: The received state of this question (says he) is of liberty
from ceremonies, which are appointed unlawfully. (Indeed the Replier proves
this out of the Abridgement by a silly reason, because the said Abridgement
does every where deny the ceremonies to be in their own nature indifferent: a
reason without a spark of judgment; for it is not material in this question
at all, that the Abridgement denies kneeling to be indifferent in other
arguments: but upon what hypothesis it presses this argument of liberty: but
let this pass, let the Replier have the state of the question to be of
liberty from kneeling, as it is supposed for a gesture which is commanded
unlawfully) but let me entreat him to consider whether ever man used an
argument more vainly and childishly, then he uses this of Christian liberty
from a wicked action: You might as well use it to prove, that it is not
lawful to swear, lie, steal, and commit adultery: for who of us was ever so
void of understanding, to deny that Christians have a liberty from sin
purchased to them by Christ. Therefore besides your begging in this point you
have bestowed your pains most superfluously: for inasmuch as your reason must
(as you say) implie that kneeling at Sacrament is a sin in its own nature,
where is any new force, which it adds and brings of its owner you may
behold it in this Tenor: Every sinful action is against Christian liberti^.
Kneeling at Sacrament is a sinful action. Therefore it is against Christian
liberty. And thus your argument of Christian liberty is evidently of no use.

But secondly, will you be content to suppose kneeling First, if kneeling
(says Disp. p. 165.
the Disputer) at Sacrament can be proved to be a matter indifferent for the
nature, and use of it, etc. I doubt not but such as now oppos^ against it, will
with all readiness obey his Majesty's commandment, and the Churches direction
in this behalf. Also the Abridgement Abridg. p. 44. ^o also Manuscrip, chapter 4.
teaches in effect, that if the gesture be indifferent in its nature and use,
(for to be such is to be according to the rules of the word) that then the
Magistrate is to be obeyed. If it can^^^ be proved (says Remove of certain
imputations, etc. p. 5
another) that kneeling may be lawfully used, or not used in the Sacrament,
considered without command of authority, then by the grace of Christ we will
not be found to refuse it. If kneeling (say Demand. p 6^
the Demaunders) be indifferent in its own nature, and use, then it may be
used by them which be strong in ^aith, and have knowledge of its indifferency.
Mr. Bradshaw Treat of div. worsh page 19.
allows the ordinance of the gesture if it be not imp^ty, and wickedness to use
the same, without the Magistrates ordeining. Lastly, the Replyer is in many
Sections willing to join with the rest; I will send the Reader to one or two.
In one place Repl. gener. to Bp Mort. chapter 6. sect, 12.
he says, that the liberty which Christ has left unto us is from these bodily
rites, which have not his own stamp upon them. Granting that the doing of
such things commanded, as are authorized by Christ himself (and allowance of
general rules in things indifferent is Christ's stamp, as well as more
particular direction) is by no means against our Christian liberty.) Again,
when Bp. Morton had declared the profession of this Church, namely, that her
Ceremonies are imposed as things indifferent: (and so Christian liberty shall
not be infringed thereby) the Replyer Repl gener. chapter 6. sect. 13.
answers, that no profession can make human^-significant, (that is in his
meaning as much as to say sinful) Ceremonies in Gods worship agree with
Christian liberty. So that both this Replyer, and the rest do yield, that
kneeling at Sacrament is not to be refused upon the reason of Christian
liberty, provided, that the same kneeling be but presumed for warrantable in
it self.

And yet I will not dissemble, that notwithstanding the the same at this time.
I will do you the courtesy to present them to view in this, (which seems to
be the fittest) place, and I suppose an easy answer will suffice to satisfy
the strongest of them. Now as far as I can gather out of your books they
will not exceed the number of three.

First Manuscrip. chapter 1. arg. 7. with whom agrees also Mr. Bradsh. arg. 1. and
arg 3. where he says, that, that which God leaves indifferent being imposed by
man, is imposed Only by man's pleasure: which is not true; for the liberty of
man in determining is authorized by Gods will.
you say, we may not do in Gods worship any thing (which So Manuscrip. means,
as appears by answering of an object. in the end of that arg. and besides else
is indifferent) upon the mere will of man, and so make the will of man the
rule of our conscience. Answer. I grant it is unlawful to do in Gods worship
any thing upon the mere pleasure of man, but that which God makes indifferent,
that is lawful to be done, before man's will or commandment meddles with it,
is not done upon the mere will of man: your selves say of mutable
circumstances, which Gods will in general allows, that man's will in
particular determination may vary them. I, but say you again, the Magistrate
in commanding, and others in obeying, even in things indifferent, are bound to
the rules of the word. True they are so, why did you mention no rules for
instance, and apply them to the point of kneeling? If you mean the rule which
forbids scandal, besides that one rule, to them specially which be subject,
must be compared with another, I shall examine (God willing) that matter in its
own place. Therefore it is a mee^e slander, that we kneel at Sacrament upon
the mere will of man, when the thing is lawful, and sometime, or always, (as
occasion should be) fit, if the Magistrate appointed it not. that arg is the
same with its arg. 1. which I have answered, part. ^. chapter 1.

But others help in this matter. If (says Mr. Bradsh.) Treat of div. worsh p.
28. also arg. 8. Remove. p 6.
the Magistrate can bring one indifferent thing into Gods worship, then he may
bring in any indifferent thing: then he may bring in flesh, br^th, butter and
cheese into the Lords Supper; for these be indifferent things, and so be
avoiding of the superfluities of nature; due benevolence between man and wife,
spinning and carding, killing of oxen, and sheep, etc. I answer: You do ill
to conclude from such things as are indifferent in nature and use by Gods own
direction and allowance, to such things as are indifferent only in nature;
whereas kneeling is indifferent, not only in nature, but also in Sacramental
use; which difference you did (it seems) never consider. Belike such mu^able
circumstances as your selves allow have no more right to religious worship,
then have the natural actions you name, or then spinning and carding. This is
learned logic which some wise men would have been ashamed of.

But you further urge our liberty in things indifferent. God (say Manuscrip.
chapter 4.
you) can only change the nature of things, and make that necessary which was
before indifferent: it is he alone that can give laws to lay a necessity upon
the conscience. Answ. I will answer you with your own words following, which
be these: It cannot be denied, that the Magistrate, and the Church have power
to make laws, to command or restrain the use of indifferent things, which no
Christian without heinous sin against God may despise; only the power which
those laws have to bind the conscience lies in this, that they be made
according to the rules of Gods word. O^t of which words it is evident, that
indifferent things may be commanded or restreined, that is, in outward
performance or obedience made necessary for a time, (which is as much as we
do maintain:) now this kind of necessity (not ensnaring the conscience) is
warranted unto us by Gods own authority: where you speak of the rules of the
word again, and neither apply them against kneeling at Sacrament, no^ so much
as name them at all, I know not to what purpose it serves: such rules as in
any of your books you give me occasion to examine, I shall not balke by the
grace of God one jot, when due place requires.

But what shall be said to Mr. Bradsh. who affirms, Treat. of div. worsh.
page 19.
That the Magistrate can only ordeine such ceremonies, as without his
ordinance were impiety not to observe. I answer, that Mr. Bradsh. may say what
he will, but hardly ever man said more absurdly, except he mean by such
ceremonies, only ceremonies of order, decency, edification, allowed under
those general notions without determination of specialls; as if he should have
said, the Magistrate can ordeine no ceremony except it serve for order,
comeliness, etc. for it is impiety not to observe order, comeliness, etc. Now
if he understand in this sense, I have plentifully answered otherwhere:
otherwise it is undoubted enough, that the Magistrate can appoint lawfully such
special circumstances, as without his appointment, may without impiety be
omitted: for else there is no liberty left unto us of one mutable circumstance
in the world. Besides kneeling at the Sacrament is not ordained of the
Magistrate oppositely unto God, but subordinately. Therein he does not
institute a new, but apply a gesture already by God himself instituted to
divine worship.

But against this the Disputer says something: If (says Disp. p. 163. ^
he) applying to the Sacrament of a thing already instituted to Gods worship
make the same thing therefore warrantably applied, then the Church may command
us lawfully to read in the act of receiving, and to pray for the good estate
of Christian Princes, and such like; because reading and praying to such
purposes are already instituted and commanded by the Lord. Answer: There is not
the like reason betwixt the matter of religious employment and personal
gestures: by that one ordinance is distinguished from another, and so it is not
by gestures, which are in their kind not only useful, but necessary in all
ordinances. Besides the force of this exception of the Disputers, (as himself
Page 164.
also further declares) stands in this, that (as Gods institution of one
thing in one part of his worship, does not warrant the same in another, because
it may be unsuitable thereunto: so) kneeling at Sacrament is not warrantable by
Gods institution of kneeling in his worship otherwise, because it suits not to
the nature of the Supper, as it is suitable to prayer and thanksgiving. Thus
here is nothing said, but upon begging, that kneeling is unsuitable to the
Supper, which I have handled before in the second part of this Treatise. And
hitherto of your first reason, whereby you would show, that though kneeling at
Sacrament be indifferent, yet are not Christians bound to obey the Magistrate
in commanding it.

Secondly, you Manuscript. chapter 4. Surv. at large p. 168.
say, That Christians are at liberty in this Land, and may lawfully refuse the
gesture of kneeling, because there is no law of this land (whereunto they are
bound to be subject) that does by commandment impose the same upon them. Answ.
This is a consideration, which men skillful in the Law be sitter to deal
withal then I: but because I see nothing of it in your writings of such
weight, but which it seems an easy matter to satisfy, I have thought good
not to let it pass. I say then, there be four bonds, which impose upon us
the practice of kneeling when we receive. First an Act of Parliament. Secondly
our Ecclesiastical Canons. Thirdly, his Majesty's Sovereign authority.
Fourthly and lastly those rules of the word, which require, that in things
indifferent, we study to seek and further both the common peace, and
edification of the Church. In these points let us confer together a little.

Of the bond of kneeling by Act of Parliament.
FOr the first, that we be bound to kneel by Act of Parliament appears by
the Statute of Eliz. 1. cap. 2. Edw. 6. is established. In which book before
the words of distribution there is this Rubrique, which in manner remains in
force unto this day. Then shall the Minister first receive the Communion in
both kinds himself, and after deliver it to the people in their hands
Kneeling. All that can be excepted in this case, is about the construction of
the words; now that construction you would have to be both doubtful in
Grammatical syntax; and probable, for the liberty of other gestures in the
intent of the book, and of them which compiled it. For the Grammatical
construction you say, Survey p. 169
It is altogether doubtful, whether kneeling be referred to the Minister
delivering, or the people receiving. Answer. This is to stumble at a straw;
reason it self takes away the danger of all doubting in that thing; for who
will be so forsaken of wit and sense, as ever to decree, that the Rubric
should require the Minister to kneel, whiles he distributes to the people
standing, or sitting: therefore the word kneeling must needs at least be
referred to the Communicants. But then you proceed, saying; Page 170.
Suppose the word [kneeling] be immediately to be joined to the word [people]
yet the Rubric may be expounded as showing indulgence to kneelers, rather then
commanding them for to kneel, in this manner [and after deliver it to the
people in their hands [kneeling] that is, though he find^ them [kneeling.] I
answer. This interpretation crosses all the Rubricks, directing the
Congregation for gesture, in the Book of Common Prayer; which no otherwise
prescribe or commend the same, but as here by a participle. I will present you
with some examples.

A general confession to be said of the whole Congregation This is in the
beginning of morn. prayer
after the Minister kneeling.

Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and Before the Creed of morn.
prayer.
people standing.

After that these prayers following shall be said all devoutly Next the Creed
aforesaid.
kneeling.

Then the minister shall rehearse distinctly all the ten In the beginning of
the order for administration of the Communion
commandments, and the people after every commandment shall ask God
mercy, for their transgression of the same kneeling.

Then shall this general confession be made in the name In the aforesaid order
for administration of the Communion.
of all those, that are minded to receive the Communion, all kneeling upon
their knees.

Verily while^ I compare these places with the Rubric in controversy, and
find no Rubric in the whole book that may admit of your sense, I am plainly
resolved, that the words of this Rubric are a direction to kneel; direction I
say according to the manner of the book; and you that please to expound it for
toleration, might expound^s much of all the former examples. Besides the book
takes notice of no other gesture at all in the act of receiving, but of
kneeling. Also kneeling is prescribed (in the order of the Communion) unto all
the people which do communicate, as the gesture to be used for a good space
before, and till the distribution take place; therefore by that order the
Minister should find them all kneeling upon their knees; for then they are not
(as you Page 174.
confess) suddenly to alter their gesture. Lastly, i^tellectus currit cum
praxi, a law is to be expounded according to the general practice; and albeit
certain men have made a stir against kneeling from time to time, yet
kneeling is known to have been the settled gesture of this Church well near
as far as any man alive can remember.

But you have much to say about the intent of the book it self, and the
establishers thereof, after many P. 171, 17^.
presumptions that the State would not in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign
directly and plainly command the people to kneel. Secondly Certain P. 17^,
etc.
d^fferences betwixt the former, and the latter books of Common prayer, which
may seem to induce us to believe, that the latter book made better and
fitter, then the former did not directly, and plainly command to kneel.
Thirdly, cert^ine reasons drawn^ from the ^ooke it self, whose intendment may
seem to be P. 179, etc.
to draw the people more nearly to follow Christ's example: and page 185. etc.
secondly more lively, and Sacramentally to set forth the death of Christ. If I
have not rightly divided your matter, you may do well to lay the fault upon
your self, that presents it to v^ something confusedly. For your presumpt^ons,
how the State in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign was minded, I leave them
to your self, as being the birth of your own brain. For your differences let
the Reader note one which I will name to the very purpose, ^one of all yours
being able to counterpoise it. You say the latter book was more reformed, and
it is true Page 173.
yet in the former book, there was a note of explination, which says of
kneeling, that it might be used or left, as every man's denotion served without
blame; and besides in that book there was no mention of kneeling in the
Rubique next before the distribution of the Elements; whereas in the latter
book of Edw. 6. the note of explanation was taken away (mark that) and the
word [kneeling] added to the Rubric next before the distribution of the
elements. Now how unprofitably do you tell us of many other matters upon the
By, when this in the midst of them all evidently confuteth your purpose. For
the intendment of the book to follow Christ's example, and lively to set forth
his sufferings I grant; but does that infer that it does not therefore
command the people to kneel: if you persuade any man, that such consequence
soundly follows, it must be one, that is not one of the wisest. In short all
in a manner that you say is either impertinent, or but conjecturall, or begged,
or miserably inconsequent. But to end this strife, let me request Mr. Surveyer
to survey the writers of his own side, and see whether they do not confess
plainly, that you be bound to kneel at the Lords Supper by act of Parliament,
the Authors of the Abridgement speak in this manner: Abridg. p. 4^. So
Manuscrip. ^^ap. 1. Arg. 4.
King Edwards Comm^n Prayer Book is the (only) law, whereby we are bound to
use the gesture of kneeling, (that book being established by Parliament.)
Again they Abridg. p. 37.
speak in these words in another place, that kneeling in the act of receiving
the bread and wine in the Lords Supper is enjoined (as a significant ceremony)
appears plainly by the Book of Common Prayer, authorized by act of
Parliament, Anno 5. Edw. ^. [to the which book we are (in this point)
precisely bound by the statu^e, 1. Eliz. fol. 97 a.] where it is said, that
this gesture is commanded (for signification.) By what Queries and inducements
now can you reconcile your self with the Authors of the Abridgement? And thus
it appears that an act of Parliament binds us to kneel in the act of
receiving the Lords Supper.

Of the bond of kneeling by the Canon.
NExt we be bound to kneel by order of an Ecclesiastical that Manuscrip. chapter
4 Survey 202.
the Canons have not the force of a law, being never confirmed by act of
Parliament. Answer. It is enough that the Canon which ord^reth for kneeling be
contrary to no statute enact^d by Parliament: for it is but begged which you
say, that the Book of Common Prayer confirmed by Statute leaves kneeling at
liberty, as in the former section I have showed: and then being contrary to no
law of God, or Statute Law of this land, why should you speak thereof (as you
be wont to do) so unworthily and contemp^uo^sly? Was there ever any Church
since the times of the Apostles, but Synods have been thought to have
authority in Ecclesiastical orders? And what may you mean, when you
Manuscrip. chapter ^.
say: It cannot be denied, but the Church has power to ^ake laws, and
constitutions, to comma^nd or restr^ine the use of indifferent things? Can the
Church make laws and constitutions, except certain chosen men meet together?
and has not every Minister inducted a voice in choosing a Clerk, by whom he
consents to the constitutions, which the Synod makes? If you object, that
the elections, or constitutions be partially swayed, I have not to defend
persona^l delinquencies, (as I am utterly unacquainted with them) but therefore
it follows not, that in a thing indifferent in nature and use those Synodall
constitutions are disanulled, more then laws of the Parliament house in
lawful things are disanulled in such case.

Secondly, you except, that Survey. 168.
though the Canon (forbidding the Minister to give the Communion to any but
such as kneel) do bind the Minister as being perhaps subi^ct to the
constitution of the convocation, because by his ch^sen Clerk he is supposed to
give consent, yet what is this to the people, who by no pr^curators, or
substitutes, gave any consent to those Canons? Answer. A strange exception! is
not as much to be referred by a congreg^tion to their Pastor in choosing a
Clerk for them as is referred by all the Pastors to the Clerk chosen in
making laws for them. Also is it true that the people are bound to no
constitutions of order, made without their consent? give us one example of a
Council or Synod (in any age of the Church of Christ) to make this good by?
Certain it is, that the Apostles ordained certain things to be observed by
the Churches, Acts 15. without their knowledge and consent, and th^n certified
the same unto them by letters. Furthermo^e if ^this be true, that the people be
bound to no order, but what themselves were parties (by their substitution at
least) in the decreeing of, then is all authority of Pastors and Governors
in mutable and yet necessary circumstances in Gods worship quite taken away;
(which as it cannot be affirmed without many absurdities) so is plainly
contrary to your own opinion and doctrine of Ecclesiastical power in
indifferent things, partly confessed (as I have showed) to this Church, partly
defended for your Presbyteries.

Thirdly, you B^^^sh. a^g. 10. Treat. of div. worsh p. 24, 25 26, 27.
except, that by observing of this gesture, you shall yield obedi^nce and
homage to spiritual Lords, whose authority is usurped. Answer. I bring this
objection in here, because I know no manner of pretense for the likelihood of
your saying; that by kneeling we do homage to the reverend Bishops, but only
in respect of the Canon, either for the making or executing. But for the
former, neither did they by their sole authority make the Canons, nor if they
did, is therefore the authority of lawful constitutions to be despised. And
for the latter, it is not only lawful, but needful, that for the preserving
of uniformity and peace amongst us a lawful order should be performed, and
executed. In both if the authorit^e of the Bishops were usurped as you say, yet
the answer which you make for justification of your callings received from
them, will serve much more to justi^e the use of a warra^table g^sture
commanded by them. Namely, that we must rever^nce the Princes power, and the
Churches power, which be of God, though it be committed unto, and exer^ised by
men that by the law of God are not capable of it. Now (say you) the Prince, and
the Church of England by act of Parliament in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign have committed that power unto the Bishops, which they do
rule by; and therefore we ought not to look so much at the men, as regarding
with reverence the law, established by the Prince, and the Church assembled out
of all parts of the Realm in Parliament, whereby their authority comes unto
them. What now will M^. Bradsh. answer to Manuscrip. and what will Manuscrip.
answer to itself in this case? and what will become of the homage, which Mr.
Bradsh. speaks of? you might as w^ll say that to do any thing by Canon, at
least in mutable orders, and place, and other circumstances of divine worship,
especially to use the gestures prescribed, as to stand at Cree^e, to kneel at
prayer, etc. is unlawful, because to do the same is to do homage to the
Bishops: and this is a notable ground, where upon to build a Brownist, or
Seperatist. Beside, I ask Mr. Bradshaw, whether that which he says will not
be applied against any Church Governors in Europe, say in Geneua, or in your
own framed Presbytery? Is there any Church, where t^^ Governors have not
limited certain orders for their Assemblies, and worshipping? undoubtedly your
doctrine takes hold upon them, which teaches in this manner. All mere
Ecclesiastical and Religious actions enjoined by an Ecclesiastical and
spiritual authority, must needs be signs of spiritual homage to the same
authority. Wherefore in that sense wherein you will justify other Churches,
and Governors, be not so unkind as to condemn only your own. Especially if
you consider, that though for disputation sake we put the case, of our
Governors, as you would have it, for satisfiyng some men if it be possible,
that they may kneel at Sacrament; yet that their authority and place, is not
Antichristian as you traduce, but manifestly intending, and effecting by Gods
goodness in plentiful experience the building of the Church of Christ. But it
is an hard task, that a Christian cannot satisfy his conscience, whether it
be lawful to kneel at Sacrament, until he have tried, whether the place and
authority of the Bishops be warrantable. I must tell you, that this is a proof
not only tedious, and far about the bush, but unprofitable and to no
purpose, if you possibly could evince the truth thereof as you do desire. Now
I suppose it remains true, that an Ecclesiastical Canon of an
Ecclesiastical circumstance (lawful to be used howsoever) has force to bind
upon us obedience, and so that we be bound to kneel at Sacrament by the Canon
And the rather is this to be yielded, by that which you Protest. of the K
Supremacy. Sect 14.
say of the authority royal, that the King has power to ratify, and give
life and strength to Ecclesiastical Canons, and Constitutions. For behold
this authority Royal has ratified those Canons, and so this of kneeling in
controversy.

Of the bond of the Kings sole, and Sovereign authority.
THirdly, suppose there were neither Act of Parliament, Protest. sect. 8
profess, We hold that Kings by virtue of their Supremacy ha^s power, yea also
that they stand bound by the law of God to make Laws Ecclesiastical such as
shall tend to the good ordering of the Churches in their Dominions.

And again, Sect 27.
The Suprea^^ Magistrate ought by his Authority, not only to prescribe Canons
of vn^formity, and consent, in Religion and worship of God, unto all the
Congregations in his Dominions; but also to p^^^ish the offenses of any of
them, that they shall commit against the Laws of God, the Policy of the
Realm, and the Ecclesiastical Constitutions enacted by his Authority.
Wherefore (to say no more) kneeling at Sacrament b^ing lawful in it self, it
follows, that we ought to observe it, by the bond of his Majesty's
commandment.

Of the bond of kneeling taken from the necessity of seeking the peace and
edification of the Church.
LAstly we are bound to kneel at Sacrament, for the in the society of the
Church, then peace, and quietness, nothing which a good heart will study more
to advance then it. Psalm. 133.
Oh how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! It
is like the sweet and fragrant ointment on the head of Aaron, like the
heave^ly and fruite-begeting dew, that falls upon the mountains. Psalm. 122.
Peace should be sought within the Churches walls, and prosperity within her
Palaces. For your brethrens and companions sakes, you should now say, peace be
within the Church of England. Why do you not harken to the rule of the
Apostle: 1 Cor. 11. 16.
If any man seem to be contentions, (in a variable circumstance, in a thing
indifferent (we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. I would to
God, you did seriously think what a sin it is to make needless strife in
the Church, and what miserable effects it produces; and how your selves be the
offenders in this case. But what (I pray) shall be said for leaving of your
ministries, forsaking of your flocks, which God has called you to be overseers
of, casting off the Communion of Gods people and ordinances, and all this, for
refusing to kneel at Sacrament; that is, to use a gesture plainly indifferent
in nature and use? Alas, this is not only to streine at a gnat, and swallow a
camel; but behold it is a kind of contempt, and shameful reproach of the
Church and worship of Christ. I hope every godly mind will be provoked
accordingly to consider. Thus I have showed, how many ways we be tied to use
the gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacramental elements in
this Church of England. So much for your second exception.

Thirdly, you Manuscrip. ^h. 1. arg. 8.
say, we are expressly forbidden in Gods word to go backward, I^. 1. 4. and
straightly charged not so much as to stand at a stay, but to be led for ward to
perfection, Heb. 6. 1. and to propound to our selves, and labor to imitate the
purest and best examples, Phil. 3. 17. Answer. But shall we go backward in
religion by kneeling at Sacrament? How prove you that? First, say you, we
shall leave the manner of receiving, which we have long used. A worthy reason!
then it was a going backward in religion for the ancient Church to kneel at
prayer upon the Sundays on which they used to stand, for above (as the
Disputer Disp page 86.
affirms) the space of a thousand years together: then it is a going
backward in religion, for this Church to betake unto standing or sitting at
Sacrament, because she shall leave that manner of receiving which has been
long used. But secondly, say you, standing or sitting is better then kneeling.
If it be, it is only better as one mu^able circumstance is better then
another, and this betternesse stands only in respect of concomitant
circumstances: and so this reason takes away the lawful liberty of changing
gestures and circumstances. Kneeling in prayer is the best gesture of prayer,
and is it a going back^ in religion therefore to sit or stand in prayer upon
occasion? But why is kneeling the worst of all gestures in receiving? because
the other be more agreeable to the example of Christ and his Apostles, and all
the best reformed Churches; whereby appears that if kneeling be not simply
v^lawfull, yet is worse then they. I answer, first, here is contradiction, for
you yield, and suppose kneeling to be otherwise lawful, and yet you say it is
a going back in religion. Secondly, your examples cannot satisfy; that of
Christ and his Apostles is not certainly known; if it were, it proves sitting
better then kneeling no more, then his ^itting to preach from time to time
proves standing wor^e then sitting in the act of preaching, or that standing in
that act is a going backward in religion. As for other reformed Churches, let
them look at our example as well as we at theirs: their examples will be a
poor satisfaction to a man's conscience merely as it is opposed to the example
of our own Churches. If this be all the proof of your betternesse, you have
said as much as comes to nothing. Thirdly, compare those Scriptures, which you
quote immediately, with the gesture of kneeling, that is, with an allowed, and
natural gesture in Gods worship, and you may well conceive, how impertinently
you allege them, how unreasonably you abuse the^, which evidently speak of
falling back from the substan^iall ^^uth and worship of God.

And thus I have (by Gods goodness) answered all your three considerations, or
reasons, tending to prove, that if kneeling at Sacrament be indifferent in its
nature and use, and so also urged in this Church, yet are not Christians bound
therefore to use it. And so much for your general argument, tha^ kn^^ling at
Sacrament in our Church depriues men of their Christian liberty.

Reasons, or Considerations, to show further that Kneeling at Sacrament
enjoined in this Church, is not against Christian liberty.
Unto all which I have said for defending the lawfulness of kneeling in this
Church, notwithstanding

I^ 1. Acts. 15. There was a Council held by the Apostles and Elders, wherein
they decr^^ that the Churches of the Gentiles should abstain from meat
offered to idols, from blood, and from things strangled. This abstinence they
imposed upon the^, (though it was a burden) as a necessary thing, which to
observe accordingly they should do well: verse. 28, 29. Behold here is
obedience, and necessity of obedience required of the Churches in things
indifferent, though it was burdensome unto them. Run through all your
Scriptures, and reasons, which I have answered before, and see if almost every
one of them might not be used against this Council held at Jerusalem, as
infringing the liberty of the Churches, as well as the same have been used
against the present order of the Church of England.

Secondly, I ask you whether you allow of none of Geneva it self not
excepted? is your liberty greater then the liberty of all other Christians in
the world, or do you better understand the matter, and tenor of it then they?
I request you to think upon this point, which will be of special use in this
disputation of liberty.

Thirdly, in looking upon your own liberty, you in that which is good for
their edification, Romans 15. 1, ^.

Fourthly, I would you did seriously take knowledge, and call to mind the
unspeakable comfort, which God but concerning the ordering of Gods worship
within your own doors; for the times, places, and many other circumstances
thereunto belonging: Is not the King Pater Patriae, et nutricius Eccle^iae, the
father of his Country, and foster father of the Church? Isa. 49. 13.
Is he not a sovereign Lord, and are not you his servants, and incomparably
more bound then any domestic servant can be to his Master? What unkindness is
this therefore in you not to yield so much power to the King in the
circumstances of Gods worship in public, as you assume, (and will assume) to
your selves in the circumstances of his worship in private? you may do well to
think upon these things in good earnest.

Fifthly, what good reason are you able to give, why the Disp. p. 2,
allows:) why their direction for the times and places of divine worship, and
appointment by you allowed of sundry matters more, (which being necessary in
their kind are variable in particular determination) should not deprive us of
Christian liberty, as well as the direction of kneeling at the Lords Supper? In
those things you never complain, that I can hear of, that your liberty is
wronged; only (for^ooth) it is abridged, and abused in this one only gesture!
If you must needs keep your old wont, and tell us that kneeling at Sacrament
is unlawful in other respects, I have to entreat you to consider of mine
answer to those respects in such arguments, where you will point us unto them.
In this place you must stick to the sole respect of Christian liberty,
wherein if I saw not the ignorance of some of your side, the childish trifling
of you the defendours also, I should not need so often to call upon you. I
press you therefore to keep close to the present point, and in good sooth
ask your consciences, if Christian liberty block not up the way against the
Magistrate, and Churches ordering in some gestures, and circumstances of divine
worship; why it, (I say again Christian liberty) should block up the way
against this gesture, and circumstance in the Lords Supper? Why should you not
either give the Magistrate and Church power in all things of indifferent
nature, and use, or else in all these utterly take it away?

Sixthly, One thing further I will urge against you, which will trouble you in
this Argument of your liberty, Luke 6. 31.
as ye would that men should d^^ unto you, do ye also to the^ likewise.

Seventhly and ^astly, you talk of Christian liberty, and for that you
earnestly strive, now you know that stand at some other times, as it were, to
show and use your liberty which you have, it would have something more
concerned the pretense of Christian liberty; but to oppose altogether against
the order of Governors (upon opinion that you have liberty to do otherwise)
is a perverse abusing of liberty, and a contempt both of the Magistrate, and
Church. Truly, if you kneeled for the most part, and upon occasion varyed your
gesture but sometime, I am assured you would find some indulgence in so doing.
But never to kneel, not one time, and yet make a noise about your Christian
liberty, is very stubborn learning, as if Christ had given us this liberty in
indifferent things to be a skonse against the commandments of authority. So
much of the Argument of Christian liberty, and of all the limbs and parts
thereof, which the cause in hand requires us to consider. Now the judgment be
to the understanding Reader.

Objections against kneeling drawn from Piety, answered. CHAP. 2.
IN the next place we are to come to those Arguments, against Piety, as well
as it was said before against liberty) but (setting a side personal faults,
which are not material to the question, whether it be lawful for me to kneel
or not) so much as is objected pertinent to this place, together with the
answer, may be noted and borrowed from the former Chapter: so that no more
need to be said of that matter. Secondly, kneeling is made in this Church a
significant gesture, and therefore you say it is impious. Thirdly, kneeling is
appoi^ted for adoration of the elements of bread and wine, and so must needs
be idolatrous. Now these two latter (by Gods gracious help) must be severally
examined.

Of the Argument of Kneeling drawn from the signification which the Church
puts upon it.
THis then is one of your exceptions against kneeling Treat. of div. worsh.
page 10. Natural gestures have such light, that any of ordinary conceit may in
the sign see the thing signified.
nature of the gesture applied to holy worship, as it signifies in prayer and
thanksgiving; that is, that it signifies the inward humility, thankfulness,
and devotion of the Communicants. And was there ever special gesture in Gods
worship, which was not significant? was not the Publicanes smiting upon the
breast an evident sign of an afflicted and dejected spirit? But what should I
speak of one singular gesture? is not all outward worshipping a sign of
inward devotion? or else all outward worshipping is Pharisaicall; neither can
we at any time judge men to be truly serving the Lord, except that outward
expressions be tokens and testimonies of inward worship.

But that I may faithfully unfold the difficulties of Nata, data.
do naturally signify something; and some again be instituted to signify:
now of instituted signs you hold, that they be unlawful in Gods worship, if
their signification be put upon them by man. For you take for granted, that
kneeling at the Sacrament is a sign instituted by man, and not natural. But
both these propositions be false, either that kneeling, in this part of Gods
worship, signifying according to the general nature of it, is not natural; or
if the signification were instituted by man, that therefore it were presently
to be held abominable. Now let us examine by the rule of truth the maine
argument which you use for j^stification of this; for to the other you speak
not a word: I suppose you did not think it needful. But this the Reader must
be admonished, that whereas your reason is set down against all the The
Replier can tell you that you call the gesture, abusi^ely a Ceremony. Repl.
gener. against Bp. M^rt. p. 48.
ceremonies together, it only now concerns me to try what force it has
particularly, against the gesture; and that I justly may do, ^ because out of
your general ground you assume against the gesture, expressly, as well as
against any other ceremony which is opposed. Thus then you reason.

Abridg. ^. arg ag. Cerem.
All humane ceremonies appropriated to Gods service, if they be ordained to
teach any spiritual duty by their mystical signification are unlawful.

But kneeling at the Sacrament is such a ceremony, so appropriated, so
orde^ned.

Ergo.

The Major Proposition must be explaned for the unto us. First, what mean you
by ceremonies humane? mean you such as the wit of man disposes upon the
grounds of the written word, and of nature, or such as wherein [humane] stands
in opposition to [divine.] In the latter sense, you must only mean it, if you
will speak to any purpose, and in that sense it will avail you nothing at
all, as it will appear. Secondly, what may be meant by [appropriated to Gods
service?] what? appropriated necessarily and ^bsolutely, or only appropriated
upon occasion? for herein there is distinction to be made. Thirdly, what mean
you by teaching by mystical signification? It is needful you teach us the
meaning, lest you entangle us in a mystery. Sure you mean no other thing by
[teaching] but what is carried in the word [signifying.] Now signifying is
taken, either from the natural aptness of things to signify such or such
matters to the representation whereof they be applied: or else it is merely
taken from the mind of man, that feigneth such a signification, where the
analogy of the things themselves does not afford it. And the benefit of this
distinction, as also the truth, will better appear by and by. Now prove your
proposition.

Reasons of your Proposition.
This reason says nothing to the limitation of your proposition, (appropriated
to Gods service.)
REas. 1. Abridg. ibid.
The second commandment forbids all images, and Repl. genesis to Bp. Mort. p. 4^.
so all religious similitudes, which are homogeneall unto them. Significant
ceremonies are external acts of religious worship, invented of m^n, and so are
of the nature of images, so that such significant ceremonies which are by
institution, must of necessity belong unto the second commandment, and an
accurate distinction of the commandment will easily show this. Answer. It is
pity we want such an accurate distinction of the second commandeto this day:
to how small purpose do you still tell us of the second commandment, when you
childishly beg the sense and interpretation of it? Is it possible that any
man's conscience should be resolved with such presumptions of your own? It is
true the second commandment forbids some significant ceremonies, not because
they are significant, (for there is no lawful ceremony which can be Calvin
requires to such in significatione, dignitatem, Instit. lib. 4 c 10. ^. 14.
without a signification) but because either the things themselves be ill
applied to Gods worship, or because the signification suits not to the worship
in hand, or else is forced and improper. Now that kneeling is not forbidden in
the Sacrament, I have prooved in its own Part. 2. ch 1.
place: how then can the signification be forbidden, when a more suitable and
proper cannot be imagined. And because you pretend so much the second
commandment, let me pose you a little in bodily fashion^, and gestures; (for
unto them according to my purpose I will confine my self:) only first I will
name such mutable circumstance, as your selves allow in Gods worship, (yet I
mean such as are special) and ask you, forasmuch as they are significant,
for whereunto can they serve, if there be no sense or signification to be made
of them?) whether they be forbidden by the second commandment? Next I pass to
the gestures of other Sacraments, as Circumcision, Baptism, etc. which were
you cannot tell what, yet which soever the people of God used of old, the same
was significant of something in those ordinances. Was all signification of
those gestures then forbidden by the second commandment? Thirdly, renting of
the garment which has been aunciently used in humiliation, and prayer, E^ra.
9. 5. 2 King 22. 19. Jerem. 3^. 24
had a manifest signification; and was that forbidden by the second
commandment? Fourthly, lifting up Calv. instit. lib. 3. c. 20 sect. 5.
of the hands, Treat. of div. worsh. p. 15.
kneeling upon the knees, are significant in worshipping; is their
signification forbidden by the second commandment? Fifthly, uncovering of the
head in the Sacrament is significant, as cannot be denied; and is the
signification of that forbidden in the second commandment? Sixthly, standing
and sitting at Sacrament you make significant many ways, as I shall
particularly show by and by; and is the signification of these then forbidden
by the second commandment? Alas, it cannot be, that the second commandment
should forbid the signification of gestures; that it should forbid the
signification of kneeling in all Sacraments, or in any part of Gods worship,
whereunto it may lawfully be applied. And in these circumstances and gestures
whereof I have given instance, you must note, that the signification was and is
instituted and of choice as much as in the gesture of the Lords Supper, yea and
the things themselves are as humane ceremonies as the gesture of kneeling in
the Sacrament, and as much appointed to Gods service. But if you be put to your
answer, I imagine you mean that significant kneeling is forbidden, because
kneeling it self is not appointed of God, and then you reason confusedly; for
in that respect kneeling it self should be forbidden, but not (if kneeling
otherwise were lawful) the signification which is made of it. So, that
objection (as I said even now) belongs to another place, where it is fully
answered.

Reas. 2. This reason says nothing to the limitation of your proposition,
Appropr^ated to Gods service. Abridg. ibid.
Christ is the teacher of his Church, and appointer of all means, whereby we
should be taught of any holy duty. Answer. First Christ has taught us the
lawfullnesse of kneeling upon occasion in the Sacrament, as I have showed: and
he has taught us in his word, and in nature, that kneeling in Gods worship
signifies reverence, humility, devotion toward God: therefore Christ himself
is the teacher of this significant gesture. Secondly, since you condemn such
admonishing as signification of kneeling ministers, why do you plead for
sitting by that respect, because it Disp. p. 22.
does remember and admonish us of our dati^? Thirdly, but in truth you do
mistake, when you think our kneeling to be appointed to teach and admonish the
soul, when it is rather (that I may so speak) taught of the soul, which
makes upon the body, like a seal upon the wax, an impression answerable to
it self: for the signification of kneeling is not of some thing inwardly to be
done, but an expression of something inwardly, and now actually done, that
inward worship, wherein the body is now serviceable to the soul, being
thereby only signified and testified, as it is in prayer and thanksgiving. As
for Mark. 7. 4. 7. which the Abridgement alleges for proof of this reason,
what is there for condemning of significant gestures in Gods worship? verily if
you can make an argument from thence against them, I must confess you can see
light at a smaller hole then other wise men can: but still your signification
condemned there is built upon the supposall that kneeling is an humane precept,
(as humane is opposed to divine) and that is but to show, that you can make the
proofs of one of your arguments serve indifferently to any other. But the
Replier would not Repl to Bp. Mort. general, chapter 3. p 33.
have us here to make a stand upon this text, because for substance it has
been handled before. I wonder then that he himself made such an unprofitable
stand at it, as to first, and second, and third about it, and yet give no
reply to the maine and plain matter.

Reas. 3. Abridg. ibid. This reason says nothing to your limitations, (humane
ordinances) and (appropriated to Gods service.)
This gives unto ceremonies a chief part of the nature of Sacraments, when
they be appointed to teach by their signification. Answer. There be three
significations of a Sacrament: first, signification of duty from us: secondly,
signification of grace from God: thirdly, signification of assurance to us in
both the former. Note also that the signification of du^ie in a Sacrament,
first, flows from the signification of grace, as it were by reflection: and
secondly, is both operative, and obligatorie, tht is, both stirs us up, and
helps us to do our d^^ie, and also binds us to the universal, and
continual performance of it. Now I think this Divinity will not be refelled;
but then the least of all these specifications cannot truly be applied unto
the gesture of kneeling: who then would except against kneeling, because it is
too Sacramental, that would thus consider? It is not bare signification, that
makes a thing to participate of the Sacraments nature, but [such] a
signification, as is Sacramental, both in [what is signified] and [how] for if
you take away these necessary restraints, you may make many things too
Sacramental, not only in several parts of Gods worship, but also in civil
matters. Verily if every thing must be condemned as too Sacramental, that has
bare, and simple signification, then we shall lay^ ground of condemning we
cannot tell how many lawful things, for not only gestures, kneeling,
uncovering, renting of garments, etc. but many other things signifiyng
something unto us (yea of choice) should have the nature of Sacraments too much
given unto them. Nay I am belief, we shall put you upon a troublesome defense,
for your Sacramental sitting you are bold to affirm, that sitting signifies
your coheireship and many things more, nay that it is (pars signican^ Dominic^)
a very part of the sign in the Lords Supper. Behold then sitting has a chief
part of the Sacrament given to it, even to signif^e, both (ide^^, and ^ode^^
^ode) the same thing and after the same manner, that the Sacrament does, which
is more then any man (I think) did ever say of the signification of kneeling
to this day. I do wish that you would please among your thoughts, to make room
for this consideration, as it deserves.

And against this which I have said, the Replyer has not written any thing
Repl gen to Bp Mort. chap. 3. sect. 5.
in that place, where yet he would seem to defend the Abridgement, for that
which he says is either not intended by himself against the gesture o^
kneeling, but other ceremonies; or else it builds upon supposalls, both that
kneeling is an humane invention and also that it signifies (because it is
granted to signify) as the Sacraments do; so I am content to let him As I shall
do almost in all he writes in 3. ch as saying no thing against the gesture.
alone, because I would neither wast paper, nor time.

But what shall be said to Mr. Bradshaw, who Bradsh. arg. 9.
says outright, that kneeling at the Sacrament, is a Sacrament, rite, it
edifies the soul in Christ, and because we say with one consent, that kneeling
edifieth. And by this reason I should think the reasoner, better at making a
Syllogism in form, then to conclude demonstratiuely. Nay here he^d^th not so
much as conclude probably. I cannot think what deep matter was in his mind,
sure I am, the expression is shallow, and absurd, who would think that men
durst commit such Arguments to the worlds censure? What (Sir) is every outward
rite which edifies a Sacrament? Then the word and prayer be Sacraments, then
all matters of Or^er be Sacraments, then all things are Sacraments, for all
things ought to be done unto edifiyng. 1. Cor. 14. 26. I pro^esse, if I did
conceive Mr. Bradshaws meaning, whereby this absurdity might be avoided, I
would gladly take such his meaning, and frame mine answer accordingly; but now
I can do no less then reject such an Argument, the folly whereof is as soon
confuted as reported by every man.

Reas. 4. This Reason says nothing to your limitation (appropriated to Gods
service) Abridg ibidem.
In the time of the Law, no significant Ceremonies might be received in the
worship of God, but such only as the Lord did institute. Answer. Dare you
turn the word [Ceremonies] into [gestures?] You know God did ^^st^tu^e no
gestures to any Sacraments of the Law express^ly, and particularly. So by this
reason significant kneeling is as much allowed, as any significant gesture was
in the Sacraments of the Law. This is (me thinks) presently against ^ou.

Reas. 5. Abridg. ibid. This Reason says nothing to your limitation
(appropriated to Gods service.)
God has abrogated his own significant Ceremonies, much less may man use
such now, as himself has devised. Answer. It is a plain case, both that
gestures are not of man's devising, and Christ did abrogate no gestures by his
death, to bring new ones into their place. Therefore the gestures used in Gods
worship under the Law, do still remain in equal force under the Gospel: and
this reason also is vehemently against you.

Reas. 6. Abridg. ibid. This reason says nothing to your limitation,
(appropriated to Gods service) truly your limitation was to poor purpose.
To allow significant Ceremonies, would open a gap to all other Ceremonies, if
they shall be judged to teach as fitly by their signification as the other.
Answer. For kneeling I say proportion it and them equally, in all things, and
infer from it to them and spare not. First, let them be as lawful in
themselves as kneeling is in worship, and sacramental worship. Secondly, let
their signification be as fitly raised from them, as kneeling (which all the
world knows) in Gods worship fitly signifies humility and reverence: but if
you take these two points along with you, what gap will be opened to other
ceremonies? verily no gapp, but what ought not to be shut against them, and it
is a most unreasonable saying, that a gap should be opened to oil, images,
cream, spittle, etc. by a significant gesture, when from it you can only
reason to mutable circumstances, which be necessary in their kind, but in
particular determination be variable, and of them specially to other maine
positions of the body in Gods worship.

Thus I have touched the grounds of the Abridgement, Mort. would make a great
noise about [sixe reasons guileful^y passed over:] which yet in truth do not
so much as look at the gesture of the Sacrament: but this is to be observed,
that in laying down general grounds against ceremonies, which do not like
you, kneeling is condemned among other for company, only, as here appears.
And so much for your proposition.

Now your assumption has three things to be made that kneeling is an humane
ceremony, a^ humane is opposed to divine. And this you take for an undoubted
truth; but Part. ^. chapter 1.
I have sufficiently showed that kneeling is a natural gesture which God
himself has in his word hallowed and sanctified to his worship. But how do
you prove it an humane ordinance? Abridg. p. 35.
Because the use which it has in the Sacrament is derived from the well of
man. I answer, if this be a good reason, then kneeling in prayer is an humane
ordinance, because it is in the choice of man's will to use it or no, so
standing at prayer is an humane ordinance for the same reason; for man is not
absolutely bound to stand or to kneel, but has liberty of choice, as there
is occasion: you should consider, that gesture by Gods ordinance, is necessary
in its kind, (in which respect it is divine) and is derived of man's will only
for particular accommodation thereof; so the variation is man's, (and yet but
after a sort neither, because it is according to the rule of the word) but the
gesture it self let it be which you will in it self is Gods own blessed
ordinance. But you deliver your minds further in the negative, saying, that is
an humane ordinance, that is neither derived from nature, nor from the civil
custom of our Nation. I answer, that kneeling in Gods worship is derived from
nature, who can have the face to deny: and for a civil custom it is
ridiculous to say, that derivation from an humane custom, makes a divine
ordinance, that kneeling is not a divine ordinance, because it is not derived
from a civil and humane custom: and yet in truth kneeling is according to the
civil custom of our Country, as in your next point is to be tried.

Secondly, you must make good, that kneeling is appropriated it may be civilly
so used without sin against God, without offense unto the Church; and therefore
the Church by ordeining of kneeling in the Sacrament does not appropriate
kneeling unto Sacramental eating. And for worshipping, what should I t^ll men
how kneeling is used in civil honoring, in petitioning, in receiving gifts,
in tendering service, and such like, which they know generally as well, or
better then I?

Thirdly, and lastly, you must make good, that kneeling Namely, Abridg. p. 37.
by the book of Common Prayer, authorized by act of Parliament, Anno 5. Edw.
6. (to the which book we are in this point, (as you say) precisely bound by
the Statute, 1 Eliz) where is said, that this gesture is commanded for a
signification of the humble, and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of
Christ g^ven unto the worthy receiver. But what mystical signification does
the Common Prayer book speak of? here is no more signification then would
have been concluded out of the nature of the gesture, if the Common Prayer
book had said nothing. I for my part v^derstand not any fault in the words of
the book, which you allege: for is it no^ lawful in the act of receiving
humbly and thankfully to acknowledge the benefits of Christ? also is it not
lawful to signify that acknowledgement by our gesture? if the heart
acknowledge, may not the What ^vill you say to the significant standing in
prayer on Sundays of the ancient Church for many hundred years? what to their
osculum p^^is?
body acknowledge likewise? suppose the Common Prayer book commanded kneeling
in prayer, might it not so command upon this reason and end, that kneeling
might be a signification of the Christians humbl suing for grace, in petition,
humble acknowledgement of grace in thank^giving? and might no^ as much offense
have been taken at that commandment of kneeling in prayer for that reason, as
of kneeling in receiving the Sacrament for a like reason? And here let the
Reader be pleased to mind, that when you go about to condemn kneeling in the
Sacrament because of this signification, you must not think to save your
selves by taking for granted, and supposing, that it is a worship invented of
man, or a will worship: but this your argument should be it self of force to
condemn kneeling in the act of receiving, so as although it were lawful in
other respects, yet that it would be d^mnable for the signification, or else it
is no argument, else the gesture of kneeling is to be exploded, because it is
otherwise evil, and not for the signification, which is given unto it.

Finally, one thing I cannot but press upon you in R^p^ parti^ to Bp Mort. p.
42.
says) dare affirm, that the honor done unto Christ, ^lying in the manger,
represen^ed his honor now done to him in heaven; which saying in it self for
my part I dislike not; but how can it stand with your grounds, that a gesture
in the wo^ship of Christ, must not be made significant by man, when God
himself makes it not in his word. I hope you will not fly off by the word
[representation] for if your mind pass from the Antitype to the type, the type
is said to be a representation; but if from the type, to the Antitype, it is
said to be a signification. But this is neither all, no^ the principal, which
I would say. You condem^e kn^eling at Sacrament because it is a significant
gesture, (and yet it is but sig^ificant according to the nature of the gesture)
well. And yet you press sitting or standing ea^n^stly for the signification
sake. This I will show particularly. First, (you Treat. of di^. worsh. p. 25.
say) that sitting, or standing be signs and testimontes of spiritual things,
^^asmuch as they are ord^^nea for spiritual uses. Secondly, that si^ting ^oth
signify Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 36.
sacramentally ^n the Supper, yea is even a part of the sacramental sign.
Thirdly, that sitting signifies rest, Admonit. to the Parliam.
that is a full fin^shing of ceremonies, and a perfecting of the work of our
redemption. Fourthly, that sitting These have been complete arguments to
prove the necessity of sitting or standing.
at Table with Christ signifies, that we are guests with him, and we be
coheires with him of heaven. Fifthly, (w) that sitting and standing do
signify that we receive the Lords Supper cheerfully, thankefully, and
joyful, etc. Sixthly, that sitting signifies our communion with Christ, and
his Church: Survey p. 182
and these be followed by you with great confidence.

But what further if standing be pressed, not only as a significant, but also
as an operative gesture? (and note that it is standing, not sitting, which
themselves stand upon, that Christ used) these be their own words: Abridg p.
61.
The assurance of faith and cheerful thankefullnesse is stirred up by the
gesture of standing. Also the same Disp. p. 22.
does remember us and direct our hearts to conceive, and induce us to think
aright of our interest and relation to our future inheritance. Dare you
condemn now kneeling because it is significant, and make, (I say make) that
is, institute sitting and standing to be so many It is presumption without
Christ's example or warrant to appoint sacramental representations, Survey page
193. In your own glass you may see the foulnes of these significations, if
you will allow it, and look in it.
ways significant? nay and give an efficacy to standing, (though it be
diverse from the gesture which was used by our Savior Christ,) and not only
significancie? I conclude that you keep not due order to satisfy doubtful
consciences; and shall ever persuade my self, that kneeling in Gods worship
may and must be significant, and to speak properly, though the kind of
gesture may be of man in the present determination: yet the signification is
natural, so that man does not so much attribute a signification to kneeling at
Sacrament, as declare and establish it.

Objections drawn from the manner of the Churches enioyning, answered. CHAP. 3.
NExt I proceed to your argument against kneeling at Sacrament drawn from the
manner of the Churches enjoining, and that is, that the Church enioynes, the
said kneeling to be done with religious respect unto the elements of bread and
wine, and so commands idolatry to be committed. And this argument is put in
form on this manner.

Abridg. p. 66. Manuscrip. chapter 1 arg. 4. Disp. arg. 7. Perth Assemb. p. 46,
etc. The Ministers argument.
We are expressly forbidden to bow down or kneel before any creature with a
religious respect unto it, without Gods commandment.

But in this kind of kneeling, we shall bow down and kneel before the
creatures of bread and wine, and with religious respect unto them, without Gods
commandment.

Therefore this kneeling is forbidden.

For answer, I will distinguish. In worship there be two things to be
considered: first, the motive, or occasion of worship; and secondly, the
object: so religious respect is either to the creature as an occasion, or else
to the creature as an object. That in this latter consideration religious
respect is idolatrous, and a breach of the second commandment, it cannot be
denied; but in the former consideration, that is as religious respect is only
to the creature as occasion of worshipping; such respect is most warrantable by
the word of God. Now according to this distinction I will answer to your
proposition and assumption in order.

Answer to the Proposition.
FIrst to the Proposition I answer, as you will like to the Angels and servants
of the Lord fell before the throne and worshipped God Rev. 7, 11. 15.
casual position, as heaven, ^arth, men, buildings, etc. which do not at all
occasion our worshipping, the Scripture and reason do plainly allow, and
commend such kneeling before a creature, which the said creature occasioneth.
But first observe that things which may minister occasion of worshipping are of
two sorts, First, some things are such, ^s, ^^ough upon occasion they may
provoke us to worship God, yet themselves have no r^ligious state in divine
worship. Secondly, some aga^ne are con^ecrated things, and have religious use
in the worship in hand more or less, and of both these sorts Gods holy word
allows us to take occasion of worshipping.

Examples of the former sort, I shall need to mention Hezechiah kneeled before
a Letter, and worshipped God, and the Letter was occasion of his kneeling, or
worshipping, 2 Kings 19 14. Yea at that time he had had a religious respect
unto the Letter. Laban, Bathuel, and Rebecca were before Abraham's servant, when
he worshipp^d the Lord, bowing himself to the earth, (Genesis 24. 51. 52.) they
were occasion of his worshipping and bowing, yea in his worshipping he had a
religious respect unto them. The convinced sinner falls down on his face, and
worshippeth God before the Ministers that preach to his conscie^c^. 1 Cor. 14
25. They are occasion of his worshipping, and in the act of worshipping he has
a religious respect to them. If a man walk through standing corn, and in
contemplation of Gods goodness therein kneel down and worship him before it,
is not the creature occasion of his bowing and worshipping, and has not he in
the act a religious respect unto it? If a man eat his meat all alone, is it
not lawful to kneel down before it, in consecrating thereof, and giving of
thanks? If it be, is not his meat occasion of worshipping, and has not he in
that act a religious respect unto it? Its true, these things thems^l^es are
civil in the act of worshipping, yet the respect of the heart unto them in the
said act is religious, and this is so evident it cannot be denied.

Yet if this sort of things seem less to purpose, let us: David worshipped
toward the holy Temple. Psalm. 5. 7. 1^8. 2. Worship the Lord at his holy hill.
Psalm. 99. 9. He are me when I lift up my hands toward thine ^oly Oracle. Psalm.
28. 1. Worship the Lord at his footst^le. Psalm. 99, 5. We will worship at his
footstool, Psalm. 132, 7. I^shua and the Elders of Is^aell fell to the earth
upon their fa^es, before the Ark of the Lord. Ios. 7. 6. Secondly, I instance
in the Legal Sacrifices, before which the people of God worshipped, and with
religious respect unto them. When the fire consumed the the burnt offering, all
the people ^ell before it upon their faces. Levit. 9. 24. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. Where
with shall I come ^before the Lord, and how my self, shall I come before him
with b^rnt offerings. Micha. 6. 6. When they were offering solemn Sacrifices.
Heze^^iah and the Congregation ^owed themselves down. 2. Chron. 29. 28. 29.
30. Thirdly, I instance in other signs, and tokens of Gods presence, which
occasioned the people of God to kneel down before them. All the people saw
the cloudy pillar stand at the Tabernacle door, and all the people worshipped
every man in his Tent door. Exodus 33. 10. When all the children of Israel saw
the gl^ry of the Lord come down upon the house, they bowed themselves, with
their faces to the ground upon the p^uement, and worshipped. 2 Chronicles. 7. 3.

Secondly, This is true in things sensible to the ear, which are of I confess
(says ^. Martyr) that many do godlily kneel and adore at the hearing of
these words, (et verbum car^ factum est.)
like force in this case, though transient with them which be sensible to the
eye. Aaron spoke the word of the Lord to the children of Israel, and when they
heard it they bowed their heads and worshipped, Exodus 4. 30, 31. Moses called
the Elders of Israel, and taught them the word of the Lord, then the people
bowed the bead and worshipped, Exodus 12. ^1 27. Iehaziel spoke the word of the
Lord to Iehoshaphat, and all Judah, then Iehoshaphat bowed his head, with his
face to the ground, and all Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before
the Lord worshipping, 2 Chronicles. 20. 14-18. When the Apostles heard that voice,
[this is my beloved Sonn^, etc.] they fell upon their faces, Matthew. 17. 6.

Thirdly, this is true in visible holy things in time of: this you cannot tell
how to disprooue: then it follows, that the baptized kneeleth before a sacred
creature, with religious respect unto it. Secondly, you say for the Lords
Supper Manuscrip. chap. ^.
thus: The Apostles might verily lawfully in receiving the Sacramental
elements from the hands of the Son of God, have kneeled down before him, and
adored him. (Is not here as much allowed against the force of your proposition,
as we desire to be allowed for our kneeling at the Sacrament?) Thirdly, in
prayer for a blessing upon the Sacraments, we worship, or kneel down before
the bread and wine, and water, (all hallowed things) out of a religious respect
unto them present: even unto such prayer the terms of your proposition will be
also applied.

Perhaps you would except against all these examples and in such manner
kneeling upon occasion of, and before, the sacramental bread and wine, is
allowed also. But if you speak of special commandment to kneel down
before, and by occasion of the creatures, I deny there was any commandment in
my former examples. As there was no commandment to kneel down before the
Arc before David's time, yet it was as lawful before, as it was then there was
no There was express commandment to worship, o^ bow down in offering first
fruits, in De^t. 26. 10. But the presenting of the first fruits is not among
my forme^ examples.
commandment to kneel, or fall down before, and by occasion of the
sacrifices and fire: there was no commandment to worship before, and by
occasion of the cloudy pillar: there was no commandment to bow down to the
ground, when the glory of the Lord, (that is, some excellency visible to the
eye) came down into the Temple: there was no commandment for the people to
worship, bow down, and fall down, when they heard the word of the Lord from
Aaron, Moses, and Iehaziel: likewise no command for the Apostles to fall down,
when they heard a voice sounding unto them. There is no commandment for men of
years in being baptized, to kneel down before, and by occasion of the water
of Baptism. There was no commandment for the Apostles to kneel down before,
and by occasion of the Sacramental elements received from Christ, and yet you
say, they might have lawfully done it. Lastly, there is no commandment to
kneel down in prayer for blessing the Sacramental elements, before, and by
occasion of them. Wherefore kneeling in the act of receiving is as much
commanded, as upon any of all these occasions exemplified. Therefore there is
a lawful bowing down, or worshipping before creatures, with religious respect
unto them without special commandment: yet you would make us believe that
your proposition were generally true, yea it is urged as if there were none to
it.

But if your proposition be only meant of kneeling object of worship, then I
grant it is a most inpregnable truth. But then why do you deliver your
proposition in general terms? Belike you feared, if you should have
mentioned, [Respect of a thing as object, and as occasion] men would have had a
present help to keep kneeling at Sacrament out of the reach of one of them.
The truth is, let your meaning be what it will of the terms of your
proposition, your proofs only condemn kneeling before a creature, when the
creature is respected as the object of kneeling: let this be considered, First,
you Manuscrip. chapter 1. arg. 4. So others also.
say: The second commandment forbids to bow down before any creature, to
worship God in or by it; that is when the creature is obiectum in quo, or per
quod; for else the second commandment forbids not bowing down before any
creature, when it is only respected as a just occasion of worshipping God
himself, wholly and immediately. Again, you illustrate onward in this manner:
upon this ground (say you) Peter forbad Cornelius, and the Angel John to fall
down before them being but creatures, and accordingly the learned teach, that
it is idolatry to direct the worship of God, or any part thereof, to any
peculiar place or creature, without the appointment of God. But it is plain,
that Cornelius, and John, would have given worship divine to Peter and the
Angel. And our learned writers do never condemn worshipping God before the
creatures, but in case the worship be directed, (obiective, more or less, I
say directed) unto them, as your selves also set their judgment down. And I
suppose to these expositions so clear and undoubted, none even of your selves
will say contrary.

Of Popish Image Worship.
LAstly, you say, if it be lawful to worship before the creatures with
areligious respect unto them, then we cannot charg the Papists justly for
worshipping of Images: And by this illustration no other religious respect in
worshipping is condemned, then is by your former proofs; for the Papists do
respect their images in worshipping as objects not only relatiuely, but
absolutely. But in this matter I find you willing to contend, let the Reader
judge upon consideration how truly, and then to what purpose in your own
behalf.

The ancient Papists (say Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. ch* 3. page 61.
you) (for of the latter you yield, as whose image worship is express and
gross) were more moderate in their opinion of image worship, then our modern
Pontificians are. Well, and how moderate was their opinion of image worship?
They Ibidem.
held the worship before an image, to be abusiuely, and improperly called
worship; approoved Page 63.
of no adoration to be given to the image at all either inhaesive, or
adhaesive, made not Perth. Assemb. page 50.
the image in worshipping to be either objectum quod, or objectum in quo, or
per quod, but only objectum a quo significative. This was (you s^y) the
opinion of ancient Papists concerning image worship.

I answer, that all this hinders not, but they directed worship unto their
images in some manner; for was this obiectum a quo, object of sense only, and
not of worship? I pray you, let their own sayings be looked over again. First
Durand says, By the image we have a remembrance of the person which is
worshipped as well in the presence of the image, as if he were really present.
Where he shows that properly the person of the prototype is worshipped, but
behold it is in the very face of the image, the presence thereof answering for
the presence of the said person signified. Bonaventure (relating (as you say)
Durand, and the more ancient Papists opinion) says, Cruce^ Christ's non esse
adorandam nisi in quantum in ^a adoratur Christus. Alexander Hal. says also
thus: Mayor h^^or qui exhibetur crucirefert ad rom significatam, cuius est
sig^um, non ad ips^^ cruce^ in so. Is not here divine worship given to the
image in some sense manifestly? It is true, the same is performed unto the
image, not for it self, but for the prototype, and therefore it is at length
thereunto carried. But what then? Have you the forehead to say, that the
worship according to this learning is not at all carried, first to the image,
which being visible, and present, supplies the place of the prototype, and so
partly by representation, partly by conveyance is an object in worshipping. Can
you deny the evidence of this thing? If you can expound these speeches of
those auncienter Papists so, as to acquit them from allowing any worship of the
image directly, or indirectly, mediately, or immediately, permanently, or
transiently; verily you have a singular gift, let us not strive about words,
whatsoever special things they meant by their distinctions, this is certain,
they meant to allow the directing of worship to the images some way, as
appears. Let the Angelical Doctor, (who was coetanean with Bonaventure,
etc.) help us with his testimony, who speaking of the institution of images
in the Church, affirms expressly of the image of Christ, Secund. 2. qu. 94.
artic. 2.
institui in Ecclesia, vt ei cultus latriae exhibeatur, cuiratione divinitatis
latria debetur: that it was instituted in the Church, that high divine worship
should be given to it, being due by reason of the divinity of Christ, whose
image it is. If this will not satisfy you, it is in vain to spend time in
trifling. Furthermore except you be content to acknowledge that those Papists
did give worship unto their images, how can their worship be condemned as
idolatrous, as that which (according to your proposition) was forbidden to
Cornelius, and John, and in like manner forbidden in the second commandment.

But what if those auncienter Papists respected their images worshipping of
images Very well, for though we may not condemn taking occasion to worship God
ofrm his ordinances, yet we condemn and abhor their setting up and ordeining
their images to be such an occasion, which God never hallowed or allowed to
such purpose. But this is more then we need to answer: I beseech you look upon
reason, and be satisfied. Finally, what if none of us understand the true
meaning of those elder Schoolmen Then the vanity is yours to object against us,
that which you know not: All is one to us, whatsoever was their opinion. If
Durandus therefore, and his fellows had any mystical, or metaphysicall
conceit, let them, whom it concerns enjoy their own conceits, in divining
what it might mean. For our parts we have nothing to do wiht it, if you did
not force us to superfluous pains taking. Now I pass to your Assumption.

Answer to the Assumption.
THe Assumption is this [but in kneeling at Sacrament, we shall bow down
before the creatures of bread and wine, with religious respect unto them,
without Gods commandment.] for answer whereunto: First it is to be observed,
that this last clause is only begged; for this kneeling is grounded upon the
commandment of God, as I have showed in part 1. and ^* chap. 1.
other parts of this Treatise. All the maine matter lies in the religious
respect, which kneeling has to the Sacramental Elements, and that respect is
according to my former distinction, either to them as an occasion of
worshipping; or else as the object. Now I expect proof of your Assumption,
that in kneeling at Sacrament we direct some worship divine unto the outward
elements: and I find you declaring this. First by certain reasons without
respect of the Churches Iniunction. And secondly, and principally, by the
Churches Iniunction, which requires (you say) the said kneeling to be
directed unto the elements. Of these in order in two Paragraphs, for the more
effectual and plain discovery of the truth.

Paragraph. 1. Kneeling at Sacrament is not Idolatrous in it self.
FIrst then I deny, that kneeling must needs be Idolatrous, Reas. If the bread
(says the Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 64.
Replyer) be an object of sense, and no way of adoration, only moving us to
adore, then the word moves as well. I answer, if you speak of the gestures of
the word, and Sacrament absolutely (without respect of the difference, which
this Church uses at this time, whereof I shall speak with Gods help by and
by) I grant, that as the Sacrament does occasion us to adore, so the word might
also: neither do we say, that kneeling at Sacrament is necessary in it self,
but only lawful upon occasion, as upon other-like occasion it may be omitted.
I will say as much of the word, whereat it is lawful to kneel, as well as at
the Lords Supper; if we compare the ordinances themselves together, without
respect of scandalls, and customs of times. Further if we take occasion to
kneel at one ordinance, and not equally at another, that infer not, that
therefore we kneel at that one unlawfully. Many things may procure, and effect
a difference among the people of God, though there be no commandment. I ask
you, why you kneel in prayer; Does the respect of Gods presence, and the
nature of the Ordinance move you If it do, why does not the same presence, and
ordinance move you as well in table-blessing? Why do we ever sit bare at the
Sacrament, and not ever at the word preached? If the Sacrament move us to be
uncovered, why does not the word Preached move as well? In aword, why have
Gods people been wont to use gestures differing from othrrs, and from
themselves too, both in the same ordinance, and in ordinances of like nature,
herein never keeping one See part 1. chapter 1. etc.
unchangeable course? You might object against them, that if they were moved
at one time to use such, or such a gesture, in such or such parts of Gods
worship, why should they not be as well moved in some otherlike part, or in the
same all ways, and let this last point be minded: for out of doubt, if a
Christian may lawfully differ from himself in the same part of Gods worship,
concerning his gesture, much more may the gesture which is used in one part
differ from that, which is used in another. Reas. 2. Repl. page praedict.
To bow down before the Sacrament in singular manner, being no object of
adoration, but an help unto it, (you must mean by help motive or occasion) is
the same thing, that many Papists say they do, in kneeling before images. Ans.
First, it is false, that they say so in our sense, that they used their images
for helps, that is, for occasions, or motives of worshipping God only. They
be much beholden to you for pleading their cause about image worship, but as
they would give you no thanks if they were a live, so I am assured, you will
obtain little of the wiser sort of your own side, when they have considered,
that you are a pleader for them, whose Idolatry cannot be excused. You bid us
show a difference betwixt their kneeling before images, and ours at the
Sacrament. The difference is at hand (Sir): they applied unto their Images
directly, or indirectly divine worship, whereas we give none at all, more, nor
less, properly, nor impro. perly, to the bread and wine. But the Abridgement
objecteth Bellarmine against us, and what says Bellarmine for sooth Abridg. 66.
from the Protestants opinion of the lawfulnes of kneeling at Sacrament,
Bellarmine infers, that then it is not Idolatry to kneel before Images.
Answer. That opinion from which Bellarmine infers must be considered: for is
it the same opinion, that we hold in this Church, or is it not? If it be As you
seem to understand P. Martyr Rep. part. to By. Morton pa. 60. from whose words
Bell* infers in the place quoted de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 18.
not, what have we to do with his inferring from such an opinion of kneeling
which we disclaim. But whereas we make the elements an occasion, and no object
of kneeling, if Bellarmine hence infer, that it is lawful to kneel before
images, what is that also to us? For as his authority is none with us, so the
force of his inference is none at all, yea it is plainly ridiculous, and much
more, considering his own opinion of image worship, which is more gross the^
the auncienter Schoolmen allowed, but in urging against us Bellarmins
inferring, why did the Authors of the Abridgement forget, what they cite out of
Bellarmine in another Abridg. p. 31. citing Bellar. de Eucharist lib. 4. cap.
29. art. 2.
place: Bellarmine (say they) having said, that we whom he calls Calvinists and
Sacramentaries do not (as they and the Lutherans do) adore the Sacrament,
neither (says he) should any man marvel at that, seeing they die not believe,
that Christ is really present, but that the bread is indeed nothing else, but
bread that came out of the Ove^. Thus you may see how shrewdly (as the Replyer
Repl. partic. page 64.
speaks) Bellarmine concludes for you, nay it is so far, that he or any
other can infer his image worship, from our kneeling at Sacrament, that they
cannot so much ^s conclude thereof the lawfulnes of their ancient
image worship, yea though images were Gods ordinances, as I have showed before.

Here I cannot pass how the Replyer, abuses that learned Bishop, against
whom he deals most shamefully. Doct. Morton (says Repl partic. to Bp Morton
page 61. 62.
he) teaches to an hair as much as Durandus his words carry. Indeed if you be
the interpreter of both their words much may be pr^tended, let us compare them.
Christ is worshipped (says Durand) in the presence of the Image, as if he were
really present. Whereby is plain he means, that the presence of the Image
answers in the worship, for the real presence of Christ. What does Doct.
Morton say now? Forsooth that these praepositions [by and in the Sacrament] are
not simply to be excluded, as appears in Sect. 24. And if they be admitted in
any sense, then in that which Durandus expresses, when he says, In the
presence of the Image or Sacrament. By no means, Sir, the Bishop allows
those words, We may kneel in presence of the Sacrament, but not in Durandus
his sense, who teaches, if you consider his meaning, that Christ is to be
worshipped in the face or presence of an image, so as that presence answers
for the real presence of Christ himself. Observe then the difference [in
presence] with the Bishop is no more then it is with you, when ye kneel down
before the elements in prayer for a blessing: (I wish the Reader to see Sect
24. where he shall be satisfied in the Bishops meaning) [in presence] with
Durand is as when worship is performed to Christ mediately in the face of the
image, as if his own face, and person, were really present: wherefore the
Replier is a perverter of words, that he may seem to make a kind of
replication.

Secondly, but suppose it be true, that ancient Papists the Papists will say as
much. Is not the Sacrament to be used for remembrance of Christ's sufferings,
because the Popish Crucifixe is used for a remembrance of them?

Reas. 3. The Replier charge against Bishop Mort. that he holds worshipping
of the elements of bread and wine, as objects of worship, because (says Repl.
partic. p. 65.
he) the adoration which he maintains is relative from the sign to Christ.
Answer. You (I doubt wilfully) do misinterpret his words; for when he says,
that the relation is made from the sign, he means nothing less, then that
adoration is made upon, or to the sign, but the kneeler adores the Lord in
reference unto the sign, as an occasion, or motive of his adoring: and this
himself teaches so plainly, as words can be used, if yet words can suffice
to satisfy you. Sect. 28. he says, A man in kneeling at Sacrament, upon sight
thereof, should abstract his thoughts from the sensible object, and lift up his
eyes and heart to heaven, adoring God and Christ. Again, Sect* 31. We use
kneeling, (says he) tanquam obiectum a quo, that upon sight of this Sacrament,
as a visible word, (even as at the hearing of the audible words of Gods book)
our hearts may be moved to adore God. But what need I name any other place,
then Sect. 35. (which the Replier builds his accusation upon) where
(professedly setting down his mind in this thing, he says, that the sign
does but move us to that [sursum corda to lift up our minds to heaven in our
adoring. Therefore you have wrested his words, that you might seem to partial
Readers to say something, and that was not well done. And so much answer may
suffice to these trifling objections, and cavillations, which you use to show,
that kneeling at Sacrament is not used, cannot be, before the bread, and wine,
without being directed unto them. Now I will subjoyne some considerations, such
as they are, to manifest the contrary.

Considerations tending to show, that kneeling may be used upon occasion of
the bread, and wine, without committing idolatry with them.
AS by the weakness of your exceptions I am more Sect. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
in answer to your proposition) I am yet still more confirmed therein, by the
consideration of these things following.

First, if kneeling (ipso facto) is and cannot but be used to the bread and
wine, then the Sacrament would be an idol to us, and to so many, as ever did
receive it in the Will they not (...) of this?
gesture of kneeling, and so could be no Sacrament in its virtue, and comfort
to such Communicants, no seal of the righteousness which is by faith, no
means possible of growing in the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. But I doubt
not, it has been, and is better, both with our forefathers, and also with us,
else not only the case were lamentable for us, but it would follow our
Churches Sacrament is no Sacrament of Christ.

Secondly, it is very worthy to be observed, that whereas

Thirdly, if you say that kneeling before the consecrated See Bp. Mort. sect
42. in the chapt. of kneeling. See also the Repl. idle answer.
unto that practice your exception will equally be extended.

Fourthly, if it be idolatry to kneel before the bread

Fifthly, will not you allow the heart in the Sacrament (as you say kneeling of
the body is idolatrous, let the conceit of the soul be what it will) the same
shall be much more committed by the soul in worshipping, (let the carriage of
the body be sitting, or standing) especially when the body can be said to
worship no more, then the stones of the pauement, or the picture of a man
kneeling, but because it is acted by the soul, which understands, and
wills, and so is capable of the attribution of worshipping.

Sixthly, what say you to the uncovering of the head Repl. partic. to B. Mort.
p. 70
Every man of reason may consider, whether Cornelius his falling dow^e before
Peter, or John's falling down before the Angel, were no more then uncovering of
the head before them. I grant their falling down was more, in degree of
adoration, but still uncovering of the head is a fashion of adoration in some
degree notwithstanding. But (says he) should Cornelius and John have been
reprooved for uncovering their heads, as they were for falling down? I answer,
uncovering of the head is to be considered whether religious, or civil; if
they had uncovered their heads with religious respect unto them, who doubts but
they had been worthy of reproof, as well as for kneeling down with religious
respect unto them? But (says he) men uncover their heads to others in civil
reverence? I answe^, first, so they may kneel to men in civil reverence,
whereof the Scripture has many commendable examples: Genesis 44. 14. Ruth. 2 10.
1 Samuel 20. 41. especially unto Princes: 2 Samuel 14. 4. 18. 28. 19. 18. and more
specially to Prophets, (to whom such outward falling down resembled that of
Cornelius before an Apostle:) 1 King. 18. 7. 2 King. 1. 13. 14. 27. Secondly,
uncovering of the head, used for religious respect, is no fashion of civil
reverence. And it is not to be doubted, but thereby idolatry may be committed
as well as 1 King* 19. 18 Hos. 13. 2.
as by kissing, by Ezech. 8. 14.
weeping and any other bodily gesture, if it be used either to an Idol, or
else to Gods own creature with intention of divine worship. So that as all
special gestures, even the chiefest in civil use are no more thn civil: so
all special gestures, even the meanest, in religious use can be no less, then
religious.

But let us hear the Replyers conclusion. The truth is (says he) the
uncovering of the head is a general, or common gesture of reverence to be used
with discretion in all religious exercises, but kneeling is proper unto
adoration. Answer. And the truth is, this is a sleevelesse answer. For first,
that speech [with discretion in all re^^ious exercises] is to no purpose, for
as much as all gestures in themselves may be used with discretion in all
religious excercises, as I have showed, page 1. chapter first. Even kneeling in
it self may be used with discretion in^all religious exercises, lifting up of
the yes, may be used with discretion in all Religious exercises, yet are the
gestures of adoration. Nay, if you speak of gestures not as they may be used,
but as they be used presently by your selves, behold it is false, that
uncovering of the head is used with discretion in all religious exercises, you
are ever uncouered in the act of receiving, out of a religious respect, You are
never uncovered in the act of hearing the word preached (I think) out of a
religious respect. You are ever uncovered in singing of Psalms, out of a
religious respect. Where is your discretion now, to cover and uncover your
heads in holy ordinances, when you use to do either, in the same manner
unchangeably, yea more unchangeably, then to kneel? But suppose you used the
liberty of being covered, and uncovered according to your discretion, yet so
long as purposed, and religious uncovering is a fashion of worshipping, it is
idle to affirm, that the respect of your liberty takes away the respect of
worshipping in being uncovered, for that it does not in kneeling in prayer: So
much of your speech [with discretion in all religious exercises.] And that
other part of your speech [vncovering of the head is a general or common
gesture] has the like answer, in as much as kneeling, and other gestures of
adoration are as general, and common gestures in religious exercises, as
uncovering of the head with religious respect is.

Secondly, All the force of your answer stands in Kneeling (you say) is a
gesture of adoration, uncovering of the head of It is not civil reverence we
give in the act of receiving the sacred elements the motive of our reverence is
a matter of religion, it is therefore religious worship. Perth. Assem. p. 46.
then the Repliers distinction is no distinction. Zanchy says, that aunciently
they were wont at the naming of Jesus to uncover their heads in token of
reverence and adoration: in Philip. cap. 2. 10. fol. 123. then still the
Repliers distinction is no distinction.
reverence only. Answer. First I must tell you, that this is but begged of
you. Did you not consider, that this is the question in hand? You should
therefore have given us some little proof of your distinction more then the
truth is. Dare you lose your life in opposition of one gesture, and can
satisfy no better in another? Indeed (Sir) we cannot be so answered. But let
me pose you, that say uncovering of the head in religious use is not
worshipping, but reverencing: do you use it in reverence of God, or of the
creatures? If you say, you use it to God, me thinks there should be no great
controversy, of its worshipping. For do not we put off our hate to men in
civil worshipping? Is it not a kind of worship, as well as bowing of the knee
unto them? Is not also a worshipping in the act of prayer? Is it not
worshipping in Papists, when they use to uncover their heads to their images? I
see not, what you can answer. But if you say, you uncover your heads to the
creatures of bread and wine; then I pray, how does not the second commandment
forbid you so to do before a creature, and with religious respect unto it
without Gods commandment? How can you save that carriage from the stayne of
idolatry, according to the proposition of your own syllogism? And indeed the
veneration of the elements stands not in special gestures directed Yet out of
such gestures directed to God reverence arises to the elements, as afterward I
shall show, but this is no divine worship.
unto them, but only in comely, and decent using of them without lightness,
slubbering, or incivility. So it being most certain, that uncovering of the
head is used in the Sacrament with immediate respect to God, and so is a
fashion of worshipping, if it be no idolatrous worshipping, then kneeling is
not idolatrous. Surely, if that be lawful in Gods service before the creatures
of bread and wine, and with religious respect unto them, (that is, as the
occasion of it) in that respect wherein it is lawful, kneeling cannot be
condemned. Now I wish the Replier to help us with better answer, if he have
any, and not (forsooth) to put us off with his own idle dreams.

Seventhly, the gestures of sitting and standing be used P^^ 1. 2. c. 1. se. 8.
out of your own confession, that those gestures be gestures of worship, and
be religiously used by you: therefore how shall not these come under the same
condemnation, as does kneeling? It is true, kneeling is a more full expression
of outward adoring: but what if it be? that yields sitting to be idolatry,
but kneeling only is in an higher degree such.

Eighthly, what shall make kneeling idolatry in receiving bonum est adorare
hic, it is good to worship here, in good sooth, consider the elements but an
occasion of kneeling, and it is beyond my skill to say, wherein lies the
idolatry.

Ninthly, when you pray for a blessing upon the bread, unto them, without Gods
commandment: nay Gods commandment (according to your grounds) requiring to
follow Christ's example, who kneeled not (you say) in blessing the bread, and
wine, is rather against you.

Tenthly, if the Apostles might lawfully kneel, (as Manuscript, (whom I have
cited before) affirms) in receiving the elements from the hand of Christ, why
may not we kneel in receiving likewise? especially if we mark, first, that
Christ did not give the Sacrament as a Lord, but as a Minister. So the Replier
pl^inely Repl. partic. to Bp. Moat. p. 42.
affirms. He sustetned (says he) the person of a Lord in instituting of this
Sacrament, and in the authority of a Lord he says, Do this in remembrance of
me; but he sustained the person of a Minister in administering of it. Now show
if you can, why you may lawfully receive it at the hands of Christ ministering,
and not now of another man, at the worst the Minister is Christ's Deputy in
that holy business. Secondly, that if the Apostles had received the Sacrament
at the hands of Christ, kneeling; posterity might have imitated their example;
for so the Scripture, (as you will say) evidently commands. Remember your
selves now. That which they might have done, (and so we have imitated them
therein) we may as lawfully do, though they actually did it not, because, that
which made it lawful to them, and imitable of us, implies reason of common
interest. Thirdly, that the Apostles should have worshipped the bread and wine
in the bodily presence of Christ, as much as we do in the corporal absence of
him: and all the points of your proposition would have equally light upon them.
Nay they were in danger, (being at that time so rude and ignorant of spiritual
mysteries, even as we are) to worship (at least some of the weaker of them) the
very bread, or Christ in and by the bread, who spoke of it in this manner at
that very present, This is my body; which I only note to show that if it were
lawful for the Apostles to kneel to Christ before the creatures with
religious respect unto them, then it cannot be in it self idolatry unto us.

Eleventhly, what shall I say? What need I say? in: give us leave to avow our
sincericie in this matter, and it will take away the respect of idolatry in
Gods worship. Adoration may be lawfully used to him before his creatures;
(specially in public ordinances of worship) if your mind be rightly applied;
namely, not Pet. Mort. in def. ad Garden de Euchartst. part. 1 ob. 1. fol. 5.
applied unto the outward elements, but merely to God alone by So says Dr.
Abbot, as he is cited by the Replier, Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. page 56.
intendement of our affection. The Lord of heaven ever keep our hearts close
unto him, that we never give his glory and worship unto any of his creatures.
As Moses said to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Take heed jest ye lift up your
eyes to heaven, and when you see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars,
even all the host of heaven, ye should fall to worship them and serve them. So
say I to my Countrymen: Take heed lest you lift up your eyes to the heavenly
creatures of bread and wine, and when ye see bread and the wine, ye should
fall to worship them and serve them. Assure your selves, that such worshipping
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, of the bread and wine, is a vile idolatry,
and hateful abomination in the sight of God, for which his fury is in danger
to break out against a land without compassion, till it be laid desolate. See
Ezech. 8. verse. 16, 17, 18.

A Direction annexed showing upon what respects we may be lavvfully moved to
kneel down in the act of receiving the Sacramental elements, without
idolatry.
BEfore I pass to the next proof of your assumption, taken from this Churches
manner of enjoining, I have thought good to help the Reader a little to
understand how the Sacramental elements may be esteemed a just, and
warrantable occasion of kneeling, when we do receive them. Now Omitting the
general respect that the celebration of the Sacrament is a divine worship
there be two sorts of respects, which are to this purpose observable. First,
such as are principal and direct. Secondly, that which is only consequent,
and derivatiue. Of the former sort, I will propose three special respects,
which may lawfully occasion our kneeling down.

First respect is the special presence of God in the Sacrament.
FIrst, one respect is, that the Sacrament is a seal of Gods own impressing,
and so a special sign of his Israel were wont to fall upon their faces, when
God declared his special presence, by some singular, and illustrious symbol
thereof; so the Perth. Ass. p. 5^
Scotsmen teach us expressly; but yet they except, that there is not the like
presence in the Sacrament, as the Jews had in the Arc, and Cherubims; and
what if there be not, yet there is a special and singular presence, and such
as in respect whereof, the Jews adored in the exercise of the word, and of
sacrificing. There is a special presence; and that is sufficient for me; for
since the face of God, through Christ is in the Sacrament both present with us,
and as it were in special manner presented unto us, it is most lawful to
adore in the act of receiving upon that occasion.

Second respect is, the humble, and thankful remembrance, which the
Sacrament occaoneth of Christ's sufferings.
SEcondly, another respect is, that the Sacrament is Luke 17. ver. 15, 16.
Samaritanes, when he saw, considered, that he was healed, with loud voice
glorified God, and fell down on his face (as a man astonished) giving thanks
to the Lord Jesus. God was in Christ 2 Cor: 15. 19
reconciling us to himself, and making him unto us 1 Cor. 1. 30
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Oh Ephesians: 3.
verse. 18, 19
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of Christ, which
passes the knowledge of all creatures! Oh Psalm: 31. 19.
how great is thy goodness, which thou have wrought for them that trust in
thee before the sons of men! Who shall abundantly utter the Psalm: 145. 4, 7
memory thereof from age to age with thanksgiving! Shall we be condemned for
worshipping the name of the Lord in the commemoration of these things? Was
ever, can ever be more excellent occasion thereof, then the due remembrance of
our redemption wrought by the shedding of the blood of Christ? Surely, the love
of Christ provokes us, because we thus judge: God forbid, that I should dare
to say, this occasion suffices not.

The third respect is the gracious gift which God communicates unto us in the
very act of receiving.
THirdly, the last respect is, that in the Sacrament the: neither do the
receivers kneel down to such gifts, but to the Princes, and Parents
themselves, which graciously do bestow them.

But against this you take some exception. The consideration Disp: page 132
you) of a gift to be received from the Lord is not to direct us for our
gesture, but the nature of the gift we do receive, and the quality of the
person we do bear. Answer. The least gift in the world that we receive from
the Lord may be a just occasion in it self of kneeling and worshipping, when
we do receive it: then a spiritual gift, and that of all spiritualls most
excellent, and that exhibited also in divine worship may much more be such an
occasion: where you speak of the nature of the gift, you mean, that it is a
supper; and the quality of the person receiving, you mean, that he is a
feaster, and guest, as if these respects hindered our kneeling down in
receiving; so you send us back to the argument of a table gesture, where I have
answered you to the full. I but (say Perth-Ass p. 54
you) this consideration of a gift is common to all Sacraments. Answer. I
grant, neither can you disprooue the lawfulness of kneeling in receiving of
any Sacrament, either of Law, or of Gospel, yea it is lawful to kneel in the
very act of hearing out of the case of scandalls, and customs of times
overruling, as I have showed, p. 1. chapter 1.

But you take further exception to the illustration of Repl. partic. to Bp.
Mort. chapter 3. sect. 37.
say) Kings do allow of kneeling to them in receiving their gifts, so you bid
us show, that God allows kneeling at receiving the Sacrament. Answer. A
ridiculous exception! we show in this manner, men do lawfully kneel to Princes
in receiving gifts of them, and therefore we may much more kneel to God in
receiving the body and blood of Christ at his hands. You answer, men kneel to
Princes, because Princes allow them so to do; but you cannot show that God
does allow kneeling to him, when we receive. This is to deny the conclusion,
neither do we use this similitude, because Princes allow of kneeling unto
them, but because it is by them lawfully allowed: we were not so foolish, to
prove kneeling (in receiving a gift) to God lawful, by an illustration used
to man unlawfully. This then is the force of our illustrating, we may lawfully
kneel to a mortal man in receiving a gift, and therefore much more to
Almighty God. It seems whatsoever we say, you are minded to keep the
conclusion. I would you would please to look upon the simplicity of your
answer.

Secondly, you Ibidem.
say, Kings admit of some flattering observances sometimes, which are not fit
to be offered unto God. Answer. If this exception be worth a rush to the
purpose, it must imply, that receiving gift from Kings vp-the knees is no
other, then a flattering observance. But because your self and your brethren,
do grant the lawfulnes of kneeling to Kings in such case, it appears you did
insert this exception only for filling up. It is as if unto us showing that
we must perform reverence to Kings, and therefore much more to the King of
Kings, you should except, that Kings admit sometimes of unlawful reverence,
and so that it follows not, that the Lord by that illustration is to be
reverenced. Good Sir, look upon the simplicity of this answer also.

Thirdly, You Repl. ibidem, also page 65. Manuscript. chapter 6. Abridg. 68.
say, that in kneeling at Sacrament there is danger of Idolatry, so there is
not in kneeling before Princes and parents. Answer. What can you do I pray,
but there is danger of error and evil in it? Cornelius was not suffered to
fall down before Peter, and yet in elder time they were usually wont to fall
down before the Prophets. Besides, this exception affirming only danger of
Idolatry in kneeling at Sacrament, does not simply condemn it in it self. And
for danger of Idolatry, it falls to be handled in another place: so the
illustration still holds to the purpose, whereunto it is used: namely, that as
in receiving gifts of Princes, so it is not Idolatry in it self to kneel unto
God, before and by occasion of his gifts, povided that the gifts be considered,
but as an occasion.

But one speech of the Abridgement seems to be very It has been found in all
ages the chief root of Idolatry, if it be not gross Idolatry it self, to
give unto the gift the outward reverence, and adoration that is due to the
giver himself. Is this speech meant of Princes gifts, or of Gods? If you
understand it of Princes gifts, then you think it is Idolatry it self,
perhaps to kneel unto them when we receive their gifts, howsoever, that such
kneeling is utterly unlawful, as being a chief root of Idolatry. And so the
proportion will hold betwixt that kneeling to them, and kneeling to God, (as
your selves esteem of it) in the Sacrament, wherein yet you would declare
difference. And yet still such an assertion is false. But if you understand it
of Gods gifts, you make an impertinent hypothesis, as if our kneeling at
Sacrament, were given to the elements of bread and wine, and not unto God
alone, and only occasioned by them. Therefore in this sense, your speech is
altogether impertinent.

Fourthly Manusc. chapter 6. Disp. 134. Perth. Assemb. 54.
you say, in kneeling at Sacrament, we receive a gift from God by the ministry
of his servants, where as we kneel to Princes when their own hands bestow
gifts upon us. Answer. Suppose this latter part of your exception were true,
exclusive; (which it is not) yet is our illustration still remaining in force:
partly, because we are bound unto God more for his Christ, howsoever he is
bestowed upon us, then we can be to Princes of the earth, for their gifts
though they be given immediately; partly because God is at the Sacrament, in
his gracious countenance truly present, yea indeed, his own spirit, as it
were his own hand does immediately give the body and blood of his son to our
souls. And lastly, because it mattereth not in the force and use of our
illustration, whether we receive the gift mediately, or immediately, so long as
the said gift is (howsoever) but an occasion of worshipping. If the respect of
mediatenes, of receiving the gifts, did infer the kneeling of him, which
receives the same to be directed unto it, then this exception were to some
purpose. But we apply the illustration in this manner. Its lawful to kneel to
God upon occasion of a gift, which we receive from him, as it is lawful to
kneel to a Prince or parent, upon occasion of gifts received from them. It
skilleth not, whether the receiving be like in both for the point of
immediatnesse, considering it does not alter the case, for the making of the
gifts of either to be more then occasions of kneeling.

Fifthly, You Manusc. chapter 6. Disp. page 134.
say, Children and subjects kneel not down at table to their Princes, or
parents, though upon other occasions they may. Answer. First, the Sacrament is
improperly called a Supper, and the body, and blood of Christ therein received
is of that nature, that it may be compared with chains of gold, gemms, or
jewels, or any excellent gift, which Princes have to bestow as well, and much
rather, then with sole Suppers. Secondly, even at suppers in case Princes be
pleased to carue, or appoint in special and singular manner some special
dainty to their subjects eating in their presence, they rise up, and receive it
upon their knees. Neither is this unlawful, (as the Disputer Disp. page 135
opineth) it being only civil honor which (with other like observance)
tends to nourish in men's minds an awsull reverence of their Princely
Majesty's, whereby the world is ruled. But (says he) if Princes do not carue
to their subjects, then ordinarily they sit still. As if the special case were
not enough, and more then enough to justify our use of the illustration taken
from them. Besides Perth. Assem. page 54.
the will of Princes is to be considered in this case, if they please to grace
their subjects in sitting at table with them, it hinders not; but they may
expect attendance, and reverence, all the while as much as necessity of
eating, joined with comeliness will permit. But the Disputer is an endless
jangler about eating, and drinking.

Sixthly, and lastly, (say Perth. Ass. p 54 Repl. partic. pa. 65.
you) Ceremonies of the Court are no rules of religious adoration. Answer. Such
ceremonies maine a minore, humble reverence to God in his greatest gifts, from
reverence done to Princes, in bestowing of small gifts in comparison. And so
much for your exceptions, by the answer whereof appears, that one lawful
respect to move or occasion us to kneel, is the gracious and inestimable
gift, which therein it pleases Almighty God to bestow upon us. And thus I have
showed you three pricipall respects, upon which it is lawful to kneel down,
and worship God in the act of receiving the holy Sacrament.

Here I might answer two questions which offer Quest. 1. Concerning the three
former respects it may be asked, what kind of worship this kneeling is, which
is occasioned by them, namely, whether it be bare, and mere adoration without
prayer, or else worshipping, such as is in the exercise of prayer? Answ. There
is no doubt, but as prayer is made in our Church in the deliverie of the bread
and wine, so it may be secretly made also (as the state of the Communicants
soul requireth^) in the very Disp says, it is impossible to feed at
Sacrament, and pray both at once, page 20. See Answ. before, part. 2. chapter 7.
sect 3. and otherwhere
act of eating, and drinking. It is true, as Manuscrip. chapter 7.
you say: First, it is not necessary always to kneel when we do pray, as in
table-blessing we do not. Secondly, it is dangerous and unlawful to kneel in
prayer, before an Idol, before the Breaden God, and in Market places, where we
should be guilty of show of idolatry, and of scandal. Thirdly, it is not
necessary we should pray or give thanks in the act of receiving. But what is
all this to the purpose? Many things are lawful, which at all times are not
expedient, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6. 12. Yet, first, it is lawful to
kneel at table-blessing it self, and may be practiced by one, eating alone,
and by many consenting together. Secondly, there is no similitude betwixt
kneeling before idols, and kneeling at Gods own ordinance. Thirdly, it is
lawful in it self to pray in the time of eating and drinking, as Esther made
her humble petition to the King at the banquet of wine, Esth. 5. 8. and 7. 3.
Yea there is no employment under the Sun, but therein the heart may be
lawfully lifted up unto God. Therefore, where the Author of the Manuscript
presently adds, that it is not sit to pray in the act of receiving, he
speaks that which is not fit: for prayer does help, (and not hinder, if it
be rightly used) faith to receive aright, that which God in the Sacrament, does
offer, and exhibit unto us.

But for my part, if there be no prayer used in the time: what if there be no
more, but bare, and mere adoring without prayer? Sure I am, it is lawful to
worship or adore before the majesty of God, without prayer, as I have showed
in this Treatise Part. 2. ch 7. sect 11.
already. It is enough that we have special occasions, or motives to provoke
us unto it; for out of the said respects, (which I have named in number three)
I conclude in this manner.

At actions, be tokening Gods special presence, and which put upon us the
person both of Against this branch the Disput. trisleth, say ing, that
Eucharissicall actions have been used in other gestures. page 124, 125. Who
doubts of this? Put not in kneeling (says he) for that is incompatible with
them. Oh ungodly speech which the Scripture condemns, allowing of adoring and
falling down in actions of praise: Genesis 47. 31. Exodus 33. 10. Genesis 24 52. 2 Chronicles 29. 28, 29, 30. Matthew 2. 11. Revel. 5. 8. Secondly, in verbal praise: 2 Chronicles. 7. 3. Nehem. 8. 6. Perth. Assem. 48. Psalm. 95. 6. Luke 7. 16. Revel. 5.
8. 9. etc. Thirdly, in all reason of faith, and humility, whether we look to
God or ourselves. Wherefore this Disputer disputes against Gods own both right
and claim.
thankful remembrancers, and humble receivers, we may take occasion to kneel
down.

This is an impregnable proposition.

But the Sacrament, first, be tokens Gods special presence: secondly, puts
upon us the person Against this branch of the Assumption, the Disputer is also
cavilling, telling us that the Sacramental employment is not an Eucharisticall
action, or an action of thanksgiving, because, (says he) the actions of the
Sacrament are consecrating, breaking, distributing, behoulding, applying, etc.
none of which can be called properly Eucharisticall, inasmuch as we present
nothing to God Disp. 126, 127, 128. Verily this man's conceit is wonderful
gross, except the penury, and misery of that part he defends, put him upon
hard straits Sir, all these actions are Eucharisticall: Is not the whole
ordinance appointed for a remembrance of Christ's sufferings? Is not the
remembrance in the Churches part, and performance, most unquestionably intended
for a thankful remembrance? Christ need not have his death remembered, lest
himself should forget it. Christ his will is, that his people should
thankfully celebrate the memorial thereof in his Church to the worlds end.
Alas, that the Disp. should so much over shoot himself, there was never
action since the world began, that could be called an Eucharisticall action, if
this Sacramental employment be not such, that is, plainly appointed for a
thankful remembrance. But, oh Disputer, why did you forget your self, or why
did your brethren forget you so grossly, that do elsewhere mightily strive
for the necessity of sitting, or standing, because they be only apt, and
solemn expressions of faith, and thankfulness? See back good Reader, part. 2
chap. 7. sect. 6. etc.
of thankful remembrancers: and thirdly, the person of humble receivers.

Therefore thereat we may lawfully take occasion to kneel down.

So that adoring, or worshipping before the Lord, though without mental, or
vocal prayer, is plainly sufficient to justify kneeling in the act of
receiving the Lords Supper. And this be spoken to the first question.

Quest. 2. Again it may be demanded, concerning pro arbitrio, and lawfully
before God, etiam data agends occasion. The respects which I have observed are
only brought to justify kneeling, as respects may likewise be brought to
justify standing, respects may likewise be brought to justify sitting; from
them I would not infer necessity of kneeling in it self, but only show,
that being used it is not an impious gesture, but that which will suite full
well to the Sacramental business: and this matter is as clear in prayer, for
there be respects to justify standing, respects to justify sitting, and
respects also to justify kneeling in prayer: and it must be confessed to be so
in all ordinances, wherein liberty is granted of several gestures, for how
else shall the change and variety of them be allowed? nay the same respects may
warrant several gestures, if they be of the same kind, and if they be never
so indifferent, yet the respects which may warrant, and occasion one gesture,
be not contrary to such respects, as may warrant and occasion another, more
then the natural gestures themselves, (all ordained to serve* the Lord that
ordained them) be contrary: nay the gestures, like the four elements do
easily, and usually (as it were) pass into one another. And hitherto be spoken
of the three principal, and direct respects, whence we take occasion to kneel
in receiving the Sacramental elements.

Of another respect of kneeling at Sacrament, which is only consequent from
the principal respect before-named, namely, that the Sacrament may be
received more reverently.
WE come now to consider of another respect You may not, (say the Perth. Ass.
48.
Scotchmen) take the proper gesture of adoration, or worship, and apply it to
veneration, or reverence. Truly I confess, that as you make kneeling to
respect the Sacramental elements, you speak not without reason, but there is
nothing, wherein you are more mistaken, then in this matter of reverence, if
you will with patience give me the hearing, I will make you by Gods grace
understand a little better of that point. But I pray, let not conceit of
prejudice forestall you before I have spoken. I declare my mind in these
particulars following.

First, the distinction of worship, and veneration is found both in civility,
and religion. In religion you confess the same, namely, that worship is one
thing, and veneration another. In civility the same is no less evident: for as
in religion worship Perth. Ass. 47.
belongs to persons, and veneration to the things of persons, so in like
manner is it in civil matters, that carriage of respect, which is expressly
directed unto the person of any man is properly civil worship, whereas civil
things perteining to persons are by no means capable of civil worship, but
only of that which we call adoration or reverence. Thus far I hope we shall
be soon agreed.

Secondly, veneration, or reverence stands in two: first, in the inward
conceit, and estimation of the mind. Secondly, in the outward usage according
to the nature of the thing, which is to be reverenced: thus your selves do
determine. I have sundry times, (says the Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 69.
Replier) affirmed, that we stand as much and more for true reverence, both
inward, and outward, in celebration of the Sacrament, then our adversaries do.
Now outward reverence, is nothing else, but the using of things decently, and
honorably, according to their kind, that is, when they are not used lightly,
contemptuously, vncivilly, etc. but as the matter, place, and employment,
whereunto the said things deserve, shall evidently require: and herein also you
do fully agree with us.

Thirdly, outward reverence rises to things two such expressions as are
directed to the person of another, whence arises some reverence, to that which
is the motive of them. I will give instance in civil things. When a gift is
received from a superior, special civil worship is done unto the donor, and
yet it is plain, that some respect even from thence arises to the gift
received. Again, if a Prince make an oration, the subjects declare worship to
the person of the Prince, yet some respect and reverence is inferred thereby
unto the speech it self; but in Ecclesiastical duties, and ordinances, there
is nothing more clear: for what worship of God can you name, but some
reverence arises to the matter, and motive thereof? Can you pray in a
beseeming gesture, hear in a beseeming gesture, be baptized in a beseeming
gesture, sing Psalms in a beseeming gesture, etc. but thence, (though God be
the object of all divine worshipping, and so of all these exercises, as far
as you call them worshipping) yet I say thence will arise some comeliness, and
ornament, esteem, and dignity unto the ordinances themselves.

This will be yet more manifest, if you consider that gestures See back part 1.
chapter 4. sect. 6. etc.
must needs have a double consideration. First, as they be worshipping. 2ly, as
they be gestures of decency and comelines. Kneeling in prayer is a gesture of
worshipping directed to God alone, yet kneeling in prayer, is part of the
Apostles decency, as Mr. Calvin teaches. I beseech you now, is kneeling in
prayer used or directed to the sensible matter of prayer? That cannot be; yet
it brings reverence, that is, comeliness and ornament, esteem and dignity
thereunto, which cannot be denied. How then rises this reverence? Verily the
reverence is consequent, and issues out of the gesture, for though it be
directed only to God in heaven, yet all men see it is a comely ornament, and
commendable respect of the prayer it self. Where is Idolatry in all this
brethren? We say no more of receiving the Sacramental elements; our kneeling
is directd to God alone. That reverence, that comes to the elements rises
only out of this, that we come to God so reverently, when we do receive
them. We hold firmly, that no adoring gestures are to be used for directing of
reverence unto the creatures, and so if kneeling were not directed to the Lord,
it ought not then to be used for reverence of the Sacrament, if it were, it
could not be excused from being idolatrous.

But your selves are fowler ouerseene in the matter of Repl. partic. to Bp.
Mort. p. 70.
teach, that you uncover your heads not for adoration, but only for reverence
in receiving the Sacrament. For reverence, and not adoration? whom, or what
mean you to reverence I beseech you? God you cannot say, for then you could
not exclude the respect of worshipping or adoring therein. It seems then you
do reverence the Elements of bread and wine, with an express gesture of
worship used unto them. Behold this is more then I durst say of the gesture of
kneeling. But let me ask you. In civil use, you know we put off our hats to
persons, as inferiors to their superiors, not unto bread and wine at our
civil tables. This uncovering then in the Sacrament (in your sense) is to take
a proper gesture of worship, (belonging to persons) and apply it to things in
way of veneration only, which the Scotchmen have condemned before. You will
not be content to worship God, by being uncovered, and so let a certain grace,
and ornament issue to the ordinance which is in hand, but you will be uncovered
out of mere reverence of sensible things. For my part I say as much of
uncovering as I do of kneeling, that they be both fashions of worship directed
only to God, yet consequently do yield a certain reverence to those things,
that be the matter and motive of them, while by them we come to God so
reverently in his ordinance: and the lawfulness of this reverence, you can
never be able to take away, except you could take away all gestures of
worshipping, that is, all outward worshipping utterly out of the Church; for
even from those very gestures, a great part of the reverence of holy things,
that is, the decency, and ornament, dignity and esteem of the said holy
things, evermore arises. Here you must be entreated to judge uprightly betwixt
you and your selves, namely, your affections, and consciences.

Fourthly, furthermore outward reverence of holy Centurion: Lord, I am not
worthy, thou should come under my roof; or Lord, I am not worthy to come
under thy roof, much less to fit at thy table. Fourthly, it is a carriage of
special respect for the differencing of Sacramental eating from common. The
convenience of which difference moved them in the primitive Church to take away
common suppers from the holy Communion of Christ's body and blood, and the
speech of the Apostle 1 Cor. 11. verse. 29, 22.
seems thereunto to incline, whereby he taxes them, for not judgeing of the
Lords body, asking them, if they had not houses to eat and drink in. These
points have their use to show, that as kneeling is applied to the sovereign
worship of God, much reverence arises to the Sacrament from it, at least to
show, (I wot) that some degree of reverence arises undoubtedly.

Fifthly, and lastly, this reverend usage of the holy Sacrament crament is
profitable for all or the most part of men in some measure. First for opinion,
and that both in godly and carnal Communicants; those it stirs up to either
consider or increase the due and needful estimation of the holy Sacrament:
these it helps to suppress profane conceits, whereby their irreligious
hearts are easily persuaded to despise the ordinance of Christ. Next for
practice both for preparation, and use, inward, and outward, to good and bad;
the mind will be stirred up to thoughts of our unspeakable unworthiness, and
of Christ's love, the heart will be moved both to mount up to God in all sweet
adherence and dependence, and secretly also to bless the blessed author of
its everlasting welfare: in a word for the outward carriage, it will be as a
monitour, giving every man a silent Cave, to beware of looseness, and
sauciness. And especially all this in these last, and worse times, wherein men
are so very carnal, and earthly in the judging, and handling of Gods holy
things. Now your objections against the foresaid doctrine will be of small
value, as may be tried.

Object. 1. Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. sect. 25. of kneeling.
To fasten adoration upon God, that from him it might be referred unto a
creature, is worse then either Papish^ or Heathens ever defended: this were to
make God the deriving object, and the creature the last and chief. Answer.
This collection out of the words of Bishop Morton might have been made either
by Papists, or Heathens, it is unconscionably extorted. The Bishop teaches no
other kind of worship to come unto the Sacrament, then comes to the Temples,
and Lords day, to the word, and prayer; that is none at all: for worship is
only (as he teaches) directed to the Lord, and there rests; only a
certain reverence rises from them to the elements, as in all other
ordinances, it is wont to do to holy things. It is far from us to defend a
worshipping of God, and then the creature. We maintain nothing to the creature
but reverence, and that none other, but what in effect would follow from
sovereign worship to holy things, if we said nothing. The Replier is
licentious in perverting our meaning, because he cannot tell in the world how
to answer.

Object. 2. Abridg. 67.
If the reverence due to the Sacrament require that it be received with the
gesture of kneeling, then dobtlesse, God would have given direction for it in
his word. Answer. You make a false supposition here, as if we said, it is
absolutely necessary to kneel, or else the Sacrament could not be received
reverently. See before, sect. 51. For the objection it self, I ask you what
you mean when you say, God has not given us direction, for if you mean the
gesture it self of kneeling, I have showed, that God has given us direction
for it, Part. 2. chap. 1. If you mean, that God has not directed us in his
word, that kneeling, (though it may be used) should tend to the reverence of
creatures, you speak against common reason and sense, and I have refuted you
before, Sect. 48. So these two points I have already spoken sufficiently of,
for both I have showed, that Gods word allows of kneeling first, then, that
not only Gods wo^^ but common reason, and sense evince, that kneeling to God
himself, whiles we be employed about any part of his worship, may, and will
procure a certain reverence to the worship it self. What else needs to be
answered?

Object. 3. Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 65.
No man can teach us the reverence of receiving, better then Christ, and his
Apostles. Page 69.
We think meet to use no other guises of reverence, then Christ, and his
Apostles have taught us. Abridg. 67.
If this reverence were lawful, some of the Saints commended in holy
Scripture, and specially the Apostles would have used it: Nay it is Page 56.
great hypocrisy in us to pretend more reverence then was in the Apostles.
Answer. What would you reprove by this objection I pray? worshipping of God,
or idolatrous worshipping of the creature, or lastly, the reverence, which
issues out of the sovereign worship? The first sends the Reader to the great
argument drawn against kneeling from the example of Christ and his Apostles,
Part. 2. chap. 3, The second we do disclaim. The last cannot be condemned by
their example, partly, because examples of gestures be various, both used and
left at liberty in all ordinances, see part. 1 chap. 1. partly because Christ
and his Apostles gesture is not certainly known unto us; the Apostles, and
Saints showed as much reverence in receiving as we for ought any body can
infallibly tell to the contrary: and partly, because though they used only the
gesture of sitting, (yet thence as from your own sitting, and standing, being
duly applied) some reverence could not but reflect upon the Sacramental
elements. It can be none other in all gestures of divine worship rightly used,
albeit some procure more reverence by the kind, and manner of them, then
others. This answer is enough in this place, only I request the Reader to see
the answer, which is before, Part. 2. chap. 3. sect. 46. etc. and refer it
hither so much as apperteineth. The truth is, inasmuch as you use this
objection against our doctrine of reverencing the elements, which you charge
for idolatrous, it is, as if you should say, that mere using of a gesture
different from Christ and his Apostles, must needs be idolatrous, ipso facto,
and also hoc nomine, which is false, and frivolous out of measure: did you not
consider, that the proper consideration of this place, is of reverence of the
elements, whether the same be idolatrous?

Object. 4. Repl. partic to Bp. Mort. pa. 51. Manuser, chapter 5.
By this reverence the wisdom of the Apostle himself is impeached, who seeing
profane behavior to be used at the Communion among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.
never thought of kneeling, but contented himself with the word, and censures.
Answer. You build upon three ill suppositions, that the Corinthians never
kneeled, and that other gestures are not gestures of reverence to the Sacrament
as well as kneeling. And lastly, that gestures are not variable, but that
difference therein from good men impeacheth the wisdom, and controlleth the
practice of them which did otherwise. Three ill suppositions I assure you, and
never to be granted as I believe. For the particular instance it makes
against your selves: for whereas touching gestures there is altum silentium in
1 Cor. 11. yet there is direction for taking away civil fashions, (though
lawful in themselves) when they are abused in the Lords Supper. For it
appears, that the profanesse of the Corinthians was in regard of the
loue-feasts altogether, 1 Cor. 11. 22, 23. which therefore the Apostle remooved
utterly from the Sacrament. But you can infer nothing at all from such order
as he took against that profaneness to a necessity, that he must needs have
ordered for kneeling, if it be a lawful gesture of reverence: because there
was enough ordered for their particular case, in utter abolishing of their
loue-feasts, the abuses whereof fell out before the Lords Supper began, and the
reverence of the Sacrament may be maintained in other gestures, though that
which arises from kneeling, (when it may be used) nay be very profitable in
due time. Where you say, Paul never thought of kneeling I would ask ^ou, how
you can tell? How come you to be so privy to his thoughts at this day? Those
thoughts which he committed to writing you may be acquainted withal, but he
committed to writing no thoughts it all of the necessity of this or that
gesture in the Sacrament, nay, gave no particular order to the Churches, about
gestures in any ordinance of God in any one of all his writings, that I
remember. Where you add, that Paul contented himself with the word and
censures, you would imply, that we hold kneeling to resist vnreverence like the
word and censures; whereas we hold it has no other virtue in that case in the
Sacrament, then it has in all other ordinances. Again you speak absurdly in
opposing the gesture to the word and censures, as if that Paul had ordered for
kneeling in prayer, (or in the Lords Supper) he had not done it by the word and
censures. Finally, you tell us, that the Apostles knew well of all that
pronesse which is in man to esteem too lightly of holy things, and yet they
appointed ^^ kneeling. I answer. And therefore they forbad not kneeling because
they knew man's pronesse to evil so very well. I perceive we cannot say, that
such or such a gesture or carriage tends to the reverence of holy things,
except the Apostles did absolutely appoint it. You say, you use uncovering of
the head, as a gesture of reverence, yet the Apostles did not appoint that
fashion for reverence of the Sacrament, though he knew what pronesse is in man
to esteem of it too lightly.

Object. 5. Abridg. 67.
If our Savior had intended that the outward elements should have been thus
reverenced, he would not have made choice of those that are so common and base.
Answer. This objection makes a miserable non-sequitur, howsoever it be
expounded. If you mean by [thus reverenced] as much as [worshipped with divine
worship] it is utterly inconsequent; for if Christ did make choice of creatures
to be so reverenced, (which he never did not will do) yet it follows not,
that he would not make choice of the meanest, as soon as of the greatest,
whereby his worship should be conveyed unto him: nay, it is likely in reason,
if the Sun, and Moon, and host of heaven, and the most excellent things in
nature should have bin chosen for objects of relative worship, the blind world
would sometimes deify them, (as it has done heretofore) and wholly intend, and
terminate worship unto them; whereas in baser creatures the worship would be
more probably conveyed unto God himself. But howsoever in this sense your
objection is nothing ad rem, for we confess that worshipping of the outward
elements is damnable idolatry. If you mean by reverence no other thing then I
have before allowed, and which is distinguished from worship, then your
objection is plainly idle, and vain. You might say as well, if our Savior had
intended the word to be reverenced, he would not have delivered it in such a
manner as the world should esteem foolishness. If our Savior had intended
his Ministers to be reverenced, he would not have chosen such, as the world
accounts its refuse and off^couring. Yea you might say as well, if our
Savior had intended the outward means to be such admirable helps to heaven,
and of such an honorable use in the Church, he would not have chosen such
means as the supercilious world would despise for base, and contemptible.
Indeed the word and Sacran ents are not to be judged by their outward
excellency and luster in the eye of natural man; but by their spiritual
virtue which the institution of Christ has added unto them. And further, the
meaner, and baser the same be to the judgment of sense, the So you say, that
God appointed common bread and wine for avoiding of the danger of committing
idolalatry. Manuscr. chapter 6.
less danger is there of committing idolatry with them. So that Christ's
choosing of common and base creatures to be Sacramental, did not exclude
thereby such reverence, as all his ordinances ought to have, albeit some
gestures procure a greater measure thereof. And let Mr. Replier observe, that I
have answered to this objection, concerning [the choice of base, and common
elements] that his Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. pa. 44.
trifling, and childish defense of the Abridgement may be ^efelled in a little
room.

Object. 6. If that gesture Manusc. chapter 5.
be fittest to be used in the act of receiving, which may best breed a reverent
estimation of the Sacrament, then is the prostrating of the body, and falling
upon our faces, (which we know has been used in greatest show of reverence,
and humiliation, Matthew. 26. 39.) a fitter gesture then kneeling. Answer. This
is an inconsiderate objection, that I say no more for the reverence of the
Author; for (to pass that it builds upon an ill supposition, that we say
kneeling is absolutely the fittest, for what need we care for comparing if it
be fit in the positive?) this cannot be unknown to you, that if this objection
be truly consequent, for the act of receiving, it is also consequent for the
act of praying: and forasmuch as we ought to use the fittest gesture of
reverence in prayer, (specially when all circumstances give us most liberty so
to do) therefore we ought not to kneel even in prayer, but fall upon our
faces, and that the rather after your teaching, because your proof in Mat. 26.
39. is only of falling upon the face in prayer. But further, why did you not
please to compare the Evangelists? That which Matthew calls falling down, Luke
calls kneeling upon the knees, Luke. 22. 41. If therefore either Luke shall
expound Matthew, or that Christ according to both used both kneeling, and
falling upon the face, then is the force of your proof manifestly none at all.
Furthermore, you cross the Disputer, who teaches, that Disp. page 156
there are several brakches of corporal worship, and of them the same not
used amongst all Nations, to express the same degree of adoration, and that
branch thereof, which is in these parts by us usually observed, to represent,
and testify an adoration of an high nature, is the casting of our selves upon
the knees; and if it be not the same for particular fashion and form, which
the Jews used, when they prostrated themselves, and would thereby set forth
some high degree of humiliation, and reverence, yet for intent and use, it is
to us the same. If the Disputer had not given you this reasonable answer, I
should have given it my self, for you can hardly refuse that which he
affirms, kneeling being now used with us as the fittest gesture of reverence
both religious, and civil. Finally, we say that all gestures are in themselves
lawful gestures of worshipping God, whence reverence (more or less) may arise
to religious ordinances, and your objection, (if need were) would help us to
conclude for the one of them. But against us it inferres nothing. Yet I cannot
pass a kind of illustration, (such as it is) which you use, saying; If a
gesture of the greatest reverence be futest, then people should not presume to
receive the Sacramental elements with their hands, but the same for greater
reverence ought to be put into their months. Answer. I marvel that you do
take for granted, that putting into the mouth is a fashion of greater
reverence, then receiving the elements with the hands. If you be so minded, I
do not see any great reason for it: are not the peoples hands as holy as the
Ministers, and if they were not, are they not as holy as their own mouths and
stomachs? But if putting into the mouth be taken by you, and granted of us to
be a gesture of greater reverence, then handling, then I say though it be
unlawful in other respects, yet it cannot be condemned in that name. Besides,
you cannot reason from an artificial usage of the elements to a maine gesture
of the body, which is natural, and by God himself appointed to his holy
worship and service: belike, because the most reverend gesture is to be used in
prayer, therefore it is not lawful to pray without an halter about our necks,
without bowing of our backs as well as our knees, with gloves on our hands, or
with the liberty of spitting.

Object. 7. Manuscrip. chapter 5. Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 69.
There has been in all ages of the Church much more pronesse of people in
this case unto idolarty, and superstition by giving too much reverence to the
Sacramental elements, or any consecrated creatures, then unto profanesse by
esteeming too lightly of them; as may be made evident both by the holy
Scriptures, Judge. 8. 27. 2 King. 18. 4. and by the history of the Church in
all ages. Answer. Whether this be true or no, sure I am, the instances of
Gideons Ephod, and the Brazen Serpent are too few to show the space of above
five thousand years: therefore if Iset two against them, they are answered to
the full. In the old Testament look upon Malacby: It is in vain to serve God,
what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts, and now we call the proud, (not the
humble) happy, Mal. 3. 14, 15. In the new Testament the first scandalous sin,
that defiled the Lords Supper it self, was vnreverence, and profanesse, 1 Cor.
11. 21, 22. And these two Scriptures are more perrinent, then your two, because
Gideous Ephod was, (if you observe the place well, you will also think it was)
devised of purpose to make an idol of; and neither that, nor the Brazen
Serpent had any state in Gods own holy worship; but if your assertion be true,
what can you infer? What? That reverence of holy things in divine worship is
idolatry therefore? You will never conclude such a conclusion, it hangs
together like ropes of sand. So your objection is to no purpose in this place,
where you would make our reverence to be idolatrous: as for danger it is to be
considered in another chapter. And yet I will not grant your assertion true at
least of our own time, and religion, for it is evident, that the people of our
assemblies are generally more given to profanesse, then superstition. And
herein I will call your own selves to be my witnesses.

Object. 8. Abridg. 67. Manuscr, chapter 5.
The reverence due to the holy mysteries, stands in this, when the whole action
is performed in that manner, as the Lord himself has appointed. Answer. What
need you to tell us this? who did ever doubt of it? We say accordingly, that no
gesture is to be used, and directed to the elements; the reverence of the
elements stands not in appointing gestures unto them; therefore the more to
blame are you, that uncover your heads in reverence of the holy mysteries,
without respect of worshipping God. We do not thus, (as you speak) out of a
blind devotion, use this or that gesture of reverence to the elements. No, we
give sovereign worship to the Lord alone in his holy ordinance, (which his
blessed word allows) and that reverence that comes unto the elements does
only issue from the sovereign worship. For drawing near to his Majesty in
receiving upon our knees, there is a certain reverence, and esteem, decency,
and ornament from thence arising to the elements, which are received as being
not only the matter of our employment, but occasion of our adoring, as in
other ordinances it more or less falls ou^ in like manner: and if we said
nothing concerning this reverence, the thing it self would notwithstanding
declare it. This is so far from idolatry, that there cannot be true worship
performed in the public meetings without some degrees of it. And hitherto be
spoken of such respects by which we may be lawfully moved to kneel in the act
of receiving without idolatry, the discourse whereof I have inserted here
betwixt my two Paragraphs, as that which will give excellent light, to see the
error of your Assumption, that kneeling at Sacrament is idolatrous, whether we
look unto your proofs, as kneeling is considered in it self, which have
been examined in my former Paragraph, or as kneeling is enjoined by the Church
of England, which now falls upon us to be examined in the next place.

Paragraph. 2. Kneeling at Sacrament is not Idolatrous, as it is enjoined by
this Church.
FIrst, I must tell the Reader, that though in the first Paragraph, All bowing
(say you) before a creature with religious respect, etc. it idolatry; now (say
I) kneeling at Sacrament can never be used, but with religious respects to the
bread and wine: and yet you prove your Assumption, only by the Churches
enjoining to kneel unto, or worship before the creature. You might (in my
simple opinion) have disputed a great deal more readily, and more
perspicuously, and as pertinently in this manner. [Al^ divine worship given to
the creature is idolatry: But this Church gives (in kneeling at Sacrament)
divine worship to the creatures of bread and wine: Therefore our kneeling in
this Church is idolatry.] But if you meant to conclude out of your Proposition
absolutely against kneeling, (that it is idolatry in it self being used before
creatures with religious respect unto them) you did forget your selves in your
Assumption by forgoing a chief part of your advantage, and only taking to the
Churches injunction. So that either your Proposition is more exact, and large
then you needed, or your Assumption is stricter, and narrower in the proof,
then your need of proof would, or might permit, specially in a matter of so
great consequence, as the idolatry of kneeling absolutely considered. Well you
give us occasion to believe, that if the Church enjoyne not an idolatrous
kneeling, then in it self you think it is not idolatrous unto us; and for mine
own part I do believe, that the wiser sort of you think no otherwise. So I
hope you, and we shall be reconciled if we can justly vindicate the Church from
the guilt of to foul a crimination, as that she injoynes kneeling to be used
idolatrously.

Let us then without partiality make an equal trial of Perth. Assem. page 49.
Scotchmen, that although our private intents, (in observing a variable
constitution of the Church) may differ from the public, yet we should be
guilty of the public error and sin materialiter, and interpretative:
therefore let the Churches integrity be considered. At first I confess I
feared our Church had spoken dangerously in this thing; for I found in the
Abridg. p. 62.
Abridgement, (compiled by a company of grave Ministers) a bitter and grievous
accusation in these words: This gesture seems to be enjoined even with a
supersticious intent, and meaning to adore the Sacrament it self, as we shall
show by and by. Verily, said I hereupon, show this, and my mouth is stopped for
defending our Churches kneeling, by that intent not possible to be justified.
Well, I turned over the Abridgement to that place, where it promised to show
the same, yea I turned over all their books which I had to show this; and
behold, I could not find them prooving any such matter. Their conjectures,
(for they will prove at first sight no other) are of two sorts either rising
from affirmitiue, and positive respects, or from negative. I find three
conjectures of the first sort one depending upon another, and of the latter as
many, to show the Churches meaning. I will lead the godly Reader to them in
order, with mine answer annexed, heartily requesting him to arbitrate betwixt us
as the evidence of the truth shall require.

First conjecture whereby our brethren would show the Churches meaning to be
idolatrous, because kneeling was enjoined at first to stop the mouths of the
Papists.
FIrst, Perth. Ass. p. 48 Manuscr. chapter 1. arg 4.
you conjecture the meaning of the Church because kneeling was in King Edwards
time enjoined to quiet the Popish Rebels in Devonshire, who complained because
the Sacrament was not received kneeling, that it was profaned, and also to
stop the mouths of others, who reviled the Sacrament, terming the same, Jack
of the Box, round Robin, the Sacrament of the Halter, etc. Answer. 1. I am not
bound to believe, that kneeling was merely brought in upon this occasion,
except the first enjoyners had professed as much. I take notice of what is
extant in the Ecclesiastical history, yet I can observe nothing absolutely to
infer, that kneeling would not have been as much enjoined, if the Papists
had been silent and quiet. I know that proceedings of authority, in such
cases as this are common taken and censured amiss. And the Replier is Repl.
partic. to Bp. Mort. page 50.
on my side against you, who (out of the words of Johannes a Lasco, a learned
man living then in England, and (as he says) acquainted with the chiefest
Protestants, and with their counsels) collecteth, that the reproaches of
black-mouthed Papists were not such a motive to King Edward, and his Directours
to enjoyne kneeling, as is imagined. Yet I will not deny, that it is a probable
thing, (for all the words of Johannes a Lasco) that kneeling was enjoined
partly at least through the Papists. But when I enquire, what is the certain
meaning of the Church, I cannot be satisfied from that which The true reason of
kneeling must not be fetched from vain conjectures. Repl. partic. p. 48.
is uncertain. Indeed that only can give satisfaction in this case, which
the Church her self expressly declares unto us. The conscience asks rather,
what is the tenor of the law which binds to performance, then what motives
stirred up the enjoyners to make it, which were either reserved in their own
breasts, or else there wants full and express record, particularly asserting
the same, and the knowledge thereof cannot now be gained, being almost
fourscore years ago. Even this answer may serve to satisfy them which be
reasonable.

Answer. 2. Let it be presumed for certain, that the applied as they intend,
and apply it, your conjecture comes to just nothing. The Papists gave us
occasion to use the Temples, wherein we serve God, the Bells, etc. does that
imply now, that we intend and apply our Temples, Bells, etc. to the same
idolatrous use whereunto they did intend and apply them? At Geneva the Papists
gave them occasion to use wafer-cakes in the Supper, do they therefore esteem,
and use the same as the Papists do their wafer-cakes, which they dream to be
transubstantiated? Paul was occasioned from the Jews importunity to practice
certain Jewish Ceremonies, yet it follows not that he used them, as they used
them; he accorded with them in the things, which he did, yet dissented from the
erroneous conceit, which they had of them. Wherefore Papists were an occasion
of our kneeling as it is an outward act, which the bodily eye does judge of,
but they moved us not to kneel to the elements: yea for that outward act,
they were occasion only at that time; for they moved us not to kneel, as if
else we might not have kneeled, but only stirred us up to use the benefit of
our liberty, as the times, and seasons seemed then to require. And this is a
sufficient answer, as I suppose, inasmuch as the outward act of kneeling was
it, which sufficed to stop the mouth of calumniation, which outward act Gods
word allows, and we might have lawfully used, if the Papists had never been
heard of. So either of these two answers without more a do shows the vanity
of this conjecture.

Second conjecture, whereby they would show the Churches meaning to be
idolatrous, is because King Edwards second Book professes, that kneeling is
enjoined, that the Sacrament might not be profaned, but held in a reverent,
and holy estimation amongst us.
SEcondly, we come to the greatest of all conjectures, Behold King Edwards
second Book professes, that kneeling at the Communion is enjoined upon this
ground, that the Sacrament might not be profaned, but held in a reverent, and
holy estimation amongst us. And what then? Therefore kneeling is enjoined, (you
Disp: page 59. Manuscr. ch 1. arg. 4.
say) for veneration of the elements. Answer. I grant you the conclusion, for
veneration or reverence of the Sacrament is no idolatry: nay the gesture ought
to tend to the reverence of the Sacrament, or else it is not used aright, let
it be what gesture you will. May not an holy carriage be appointed (I pray you)
in Gods ordinance to avoid light and careless esteem thereof, but it might be
idolatry? Verily then all mutable circumstances shall be idolatrous, of which
as much may be said as of this gesture ^n question, that they be used to the
end the Sacrament may not be profaned, but reverently handled. Therefore I
entreat you to take into consideration both how reasonable our exposition is of
the words of the book to clear the compilers from intent of idolatry, and how
forced yours is, who in stead of milk, and equity, wring out blood.

For the first, is there any thing more manifest, then (...) say not, that they
be cau^es of prophanes of themselves, (...) Replie^ would (...) father^ (...)
^8.
abused by weak, and carnal hearts, to the light esteeming, and negligent
using of the Sacrament? That kneeling is an outward expression, or carriage of
greater reverence then sitting, and standing? Neither is this to purge
profanesse with superstition, Ibidem.
as the Replier beggeth, and cavilleth, when out of sovereign worship to God,
which is first lawful, and good, this reverence to the Sacrament only
springs and issues: for who sees not, that the said ordinance may have
greater reverence procured unto it by the Communicants adoring before the God
of heaven, in the celebration of it, as may be likewise procured to other
ordinances by the like humble demeanor?

For the latter, let us see how you can conclude against Repl. partic. to Bp.
Mort. page 48.
whether due estimation of holy rites, cannot be sufficiently testified without
kneeling? But let any man of common reason consider whether this exposition be
not most unreasonable; for by this declaring it follows, that the Magistrate
or Church can appoint no matter of circumstance upon consideration of the
fitness thereof, but forsooth all other circumstances are condemned by and by,
as absolutely unfit. Put case the Magistrate or Church enjoined kneeling in
prayer for avoiding of profaneness, (which might godlily be done) could any man
justly say, that (in the mind and meaning of the Commanders) prayer could not
be therefore used in other gestures reverently? when authority limiteth the
time, and the place of Gods public worship, and many other circumstances, (in
kind necessary) that the same worship may be decently, and orderly performed,
can any man therefore justly say that other times and places, and orders, are
esteemed absolutely indecent? Some time must be set, some place must be had,
some orders must be appointed; now of many times, and places, and orders, which
may be decently applied to Gods worship, such a time, and such a place, and
such other orders are limited, which the judgment of Governors can observe
most fit, according to the state of the Church and people. So it is for the
Sacramental gesture. The ancient appointers of kneeling in this Church having
all gestures before them to determine out of, for the due, and reverent
handling of the holy Sacrament, pitched upon the humble gesture of kneeling, as
which for that very purpose they judged then to be the meetest of all others,
and accordingly did appoint it. But (to keep you to the matter) what is this to
make idolatry? If the requiring of kneeling, that an ordinance might be handled
reverently, must import idolatry, then such requiring of kneeling at prayer, of
sitting bare at the Sacramental business for handling those ordinances
reverently, must also be flat idolatry; and yet (I think) you would allow of
constitution of either kneeling at prayer, or sitting bare at the Sacrament,
for handling the said ordinances reverently. The case is clear, that this
exception concludes no idolatry, so long as the reverence intended arises
only out of the sovereign worship, which is given to God himself: and
whether the words of the book make for other reverence then such must be
presently tried.

Again you except against the words of the book, for (say Ibidem.
you) except intermission (if such had been) of kneeling had been a cause of
profaneness, which it was not, how could kneeling be a remedy. Again, what is
the cause that in other Churches, remedy can be found against profaneness
without kneeling, and not in ours? Answer. Great and difficult demands I wot!
to the first I tell you yet again, that intermission of kneeling is not in it
self any cause of profaneness, but by accident through the weak and carnal
hearts of Communicants; and there is nothing more known then that laws are
made of restreining some indifferent things, not for the matter of the things
themselves, (for then all indifferent things should be commanded alike, that
is, every man should be left to do what he will) but from the condition of
men, and circumstance of the time. Now it is clear that kneeling may be a
remedy against the accidental profaneness, which is occasioned through the
intermission of it by other gestures. To the other demand, I certify you,
that other Churches are no rule to us, more then we be unto them; that some
other Churches do use kneeling for handling of the Sacrament reverently, as
well as ours; that the best learned, that have been in those Churches where
kneeling is not used, condemn it not in this Church; that those Churches may
have such Communicants as slight the Sacrament, by occasion of the common
gestures of eating and drinking, which is not impossible, or improbable,
whatsoever you say: lastly, we never thought that kneeling is simply necessary
for handling the Sacrament reverently, but only that it is good and fit unto
that end, when the same can conveniently be applied, as physical prescriptions
may be good and fit to prevent diseases, whereof there is cause of fear, when
yet there is no absolute necessity of them. But (say Page 51.
you) physic is not given as food, to all persons, and at all times, whereas
kneeling is so prescribed in this Church. I answer, you do ill press against
us the metaphor in those points, because the discase of profaning the Sacrament
is, (as other spiritual diseases are) incident to all persons at any time;
Gods word is compared to Balm in Scripture, and to other physical things;
belike you will check the Spirit of God, for comparing the same to physic,
when it is continually, and universally necessary: but if kneeling be not
requisite to all Communicants at all times for avoiding of profaneness, it is
sufficient that it is so for the most part, (for so laws respect what is
neeedfull generally, though not universally, as some where else I have already
showed) and at least if profaneness should not fall out by other gestures; yet
kneeling opposes profanesse, being a gesture of reverence in its own nature.
But (to keep you still to the matter) what is all this to idolatry? for what if
kneeling be no more a remedy against profanesse, then standing or sitting,
does that conclude that the use of it is therefore idolatry? Nay if kneeling
were not at all opposed to profanesse, but were it self profane, and profaned
the Sacrament, (as the Disputer Disp. page 164.
contradicting himself affirms) I hope you would be ashamed to conclude it
to be idolatry therefore.

Lastly, if any consideration of the words of the book This proof is thus
used by some of you in a Catechism beginning, what ought to be the chief,
and continual care of every man in this life, at exposition of the sixth
commandment.
1 Cor. 13. 5, 7. Verily if this be a rule at any time, it specially should
take place in expounding the words of that religious King of blessed memory, K
Edward 6. and of his Directours, who helped in reforming religion in this land,
and some of them honorable by Martyrdom. Now the words of the book may not
only be interpreted in a better sense then you make, but also take them in the
letter as they lie, without conceits and surmises, and they be godly, not to be
reprooved: for kneeling (as I have sufficiently manifested) may be lawfully
used, that the Sacrament may be reverently celebrated. Secondly, by what law of
God am I bound to exclude sovereign worship in the Churches appointment,
because it is not expressed. If those words of the book could not consist
therewith, then I confess the way of coming to God in this kneeling enjoined,
had been blocked up: but when the reverence which the words express will
plainly stand with sovereign worship given to God, (though unmentioned) and
opposes it not, nay may very well issue forth from it, what an uncharitable
construction is it to exclude the said sovereign worship in the Churches
meaning to make idolatry? Thirdly, observe the tenor of the words themselves,
as you do recite them, and it easily admits, yea supposes sovereign worship;
for it enjoynes not to kneel unto the bread and wine, (nay our Church abhortes
to speak so) but to use the reverent gesture of kneeling, that so the Sacrament
may not be profaned, but held in a reverend and holy estimation amongst us.
This context of words imports, that this reverence of the Sacrament arises
from kneeling by consequence, and comes not thereunto by the said kneeling
immediately directed unto it. Fourthly, you tell Survey p. 7^.
us, that the Attorney general reports it to be a resolution, according to a
general rule in law, that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction may punish offenses
against the Communion-booke, otherwise then the statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 2. does,
because that statute only affirms one manner of punishing. and does not deny
another: where you gather, that by the same rule, though kneeling be affirmed,
yet sitring, and standing are lawful, because they are not denied. But
(whereas for denial of sitting and standing I have spoken otherwhere) it is a
rule of force in the purpose of our Church appointing to kneel, that though
reverence be affirmed, sovereign worship cannot be denied: and here you may
see most evident application of it. Fifthly, let it please you to think of the
reason which your selves Manuscrip. chapter 1. arg. 4.
allege, why those words were used, and kneeling enjoined, namely to stop the
mouths of Papists, who complained that the Sacrament was profaned. Surely if
this be true, you might easily see that the compilers named outward reverence
only, because there was strife about it. There is no doubt, but they would
have named sovereign worship, much more, if strife had been about it, as was
not. How many laws are there, which only mention such respects as the time
(when they were made) gave occasion, pretermitting some other, (yet not to be
excluded) wherein the state and exigence of the time pressed them not? Sixthly,
in all the book of common prayer, you shall never find, (as I take it) that
wheresoever kneeling is enjoined, (as it is enjoined often) God himself is at
any time expressly mentioned, to whom the kneeling yet, (even in your opinion
of the Churches judgment) is without question intended. Wherefore you might
do well to measure kneeling enjoined in the Sacrament by all these: for though
there are outward, and inferior respects mentioned rather in that, then in
these, (through particular occurrence befalling) yet they be all alike set
down in the order of the book, which always supposes, (as a thing most
unquestionable) that religious kneeling is directed to God being so notorious a
gesture in the Church of sovereign worship. This consideration might have
moved you something. Seventhly, how hard, and harsh an opinion is this, that
whereas kneeling before the elements be received is evidently used to God, now
being continued to the act of receiving the case is altered, and God is by no
means to be worshipped thereby: either this opinion, and meaning is so fond,
it cannot be fathered upon such wise men, as the ancient compilers were, or
certainly we should have had a note of admonition to signify the ceasing of
sovereign worship. Eighthly, and lastly, your own writings will witness,
that kneeling is intended and used by our Church for worshipping of God: for to
pass Disp page 15.
these words of the Disputer, [whether our Communicants do direct their
knee-worship at the Lords table, to God the Father in several, or jointly to
the whole Trinity, who can define? It is a point not as yet resolved (for
ought I know) by our Church] to pass I say these words, (which grant as a
thing not to be disputed, that kneeling is directed to God, (either the first
person, or the whole Trinity) and that noresolution of the Church is against
that, I must specially put you in mind, that you contend by earnest argument
our kneeling in this Church to be a worshipping of God. First, the aforesaid
Disputer I boureth Disp page 159 160.
earnestly to prove Mark the intent and ground of this proof, from the
beginning at page 155.
our kneeling a part of the Lords worship, and directed unto him: but
especially the Abridgement speaks in this Abridg. p. 42.
manner, [kneeling in the act of receiving the bread and wine in the Lords
Supper is esteemed, imposed, and observed as a part of Gods worship.] Wherefore
out of the premises I dare say, that though kneeling be appointed by King
Edwards book for reverence of the Sacrament, yet sovereign worship is not
excluded, but supposed, whence the external reverence of that holy ordinance
celebrated in that gesture, arises. And this interpretation, which you ought
to make of that book, you may do well to make of our learned writers, who
though they plead for reverence of the Sacrament, yet ever do defend that
kneeling serves for adoring the majesty of God and Christ. So that according
to them by kneeling sovereign worship is directed to God, and therefore the
reverence which comes to the Sacramental signs and business flows from
thence as I have declared before. If any of the children of our Church speak
more vndistinctly then you can see to allow, you cannot therefore justly take
advantage against their mother.

And so much for your second conjecture taken from the Common Prayer Book of
King Edward 6. tending words of that Common Prayer Book, which makes me to
marvel either at the Authors of the Abridgement, (which had those words in
consideration, and whom it most specially concerned to make their promise good)
or else at others of our brethren, who stand upon this conjecture with such
confidence. Also I might add that those words of King Edwards Book do not
perhaps concern us at all, herein I will only write, what you do dictate.
The state (say Survey p. 171 See Park. of the Cross, chap 5. sect. 13. and
sect. 17.
you) of 1. Eliz. c. 2. established the second Book of Common Prayer of King
Edward 6. some few and those mentioned alterations only excepted; and the 4.
Rubric next after the Communion in that Book, [which Enquire this,
as I think is that, out of which the words are fetched which you so much
stand on] declaring that Communicants should receive kneeling, has been left
out of the Book of Common Prayer, that has been in use, ever since that
statute was made. Verily this consideration may serve to take away the scruple
about the meaning of the words themselves being taken out of the way, by order
of the State in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

The third conjecture whereby they would show the Churches meaning to be
idolatrous, is, because she ties all her Communicants to adore God before the
creatures.
THe last, and least of all conjectures, (arising from because the Church ties
all her Communicants to adore God before the creatures of bread and wine. The
Abridg. 66.
Abridgement, and the Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. sect. 24.
Replier defending the same, make no small account (as it appears) of this
consideration. Answer. I distinguish; Tie is to be considered: first, in
respect of the thing whereunto we be tied: secondly, in respect of that, by
which we be tied: thirdly, by the manner of tying. First, if the thing be
lawful in it self whereunto we are tied, and then the authority be lawful
whereby we are tied, and the manner be with no other opinion, then the word of
God does allow, you shall as soon make civil Magistracy, (which is Gods
ordinance) an idol, as make such a tying idolatrous. Indeed if the thing it
self be unlawful, as religious, and purposed kneeling before an image; or it
be put upon us by them which have nothing at all to do with us, as by the
Pope, or the King of Spain; or have an opinion of necessity put upon it, or
other superstitions, when it is but a mutable circumstance serving to order,
and comeliness, then the second commandment must needs be transgressed by
such a tying: but what is this to the gesture of kneeling at Sacrament? That in
other respects, of it self it is lawful, I hope I have plentifully showed;
that the authority of the Magistrate in enjoining is lawful, I hope will not
be denied, that it is imposed a thing indifferent, I have cleared in the first
chapter of this part of the Treatise. If the Magistrate command us before, and
after receiving, to kneel down both before the Temple, and before the bread
and wine, yet the thing being lawful, the authority lawful, and only
requiring it as a mutable circumstance, it is far from idolatry to be tied
unto it. But what should we trifle in this point? the words of the Abridgement
make this exception, that it is not idolatry to adore before the creatures,
except it be without warrant of the word. Now if you suppose kneeling, which is
used in the act of receiving, to be without warrant of the word, more then
before or after the act of receiving, when we confess, pray for a blessing,
and give thanks, (for these we also do before the creatures;) you do not
only suppose the ground of the controversy to be granted unto you, (which is
childish) but you do also yield, that if it be lawful in it self, this
conjecture taken from tying to make it idolatry is utterly of no value. But the
Scotchmen say, Perth. Ass p. 51
that worship is tied no longer to any certain thing, or place upon earth,
Ioh. 4. 21. Answer. You mistake the holy Scripture, at least by the manner of
your applying. Certain and unchangeable individualls there are none to be
imagined, (as the Papists dream that infallibility, and Catholic truth is
annexed to the Sea of Rome) ever since Christ: but there is no man can doubt,
that we may tie our selves, or be tied to worship before creatures lawfully,
upon an indifferent, and interchangeable use of them: else why should you tie
your selves to pray, (and kneel if you will) before civil creatures daily,
both at dinner, and supper? Why should you tie your selves to kneel daily in
such or such a room, morning and evening, as they offered morning and evening
sacrifice in the Temple? Why should you tie your selves to kneel before the
elements of bread and wine, always before, and after the act of participation?
The truth is, if your application of Ioh. 4. 21. be good against kneeling to
God, the bread and wine being before us, it is not lawful to tie our selves to
kneel to God in any place all our life long; you should have put a difference
betwixt the tie of inherent holiness, and the tie of external and
circumstantiall expedience. In that all persons were bound to accommodate their
adoring to the places and things: In this they are free to accommodate places
and things to their adoring. So much of your three conjectures, drawn from
respects affirmative, to prove the Churches intent to be idolatrous. Now let
us see what you are able to pick out of negatiues.

Of conjectures taken from certain negative considerations.
NOw certain negatiues you scatter up and down your books to show the intent
of our Church to be idolacrous. I will do you the benefit, as to bring them
together, and make an induction of them in this manner.

Kneeling, first, is not enjoined in this Church for a Tablegesture, Nor,
secondly, for lawful reverence of the Sacrament, Nor, thirdly, for adoring the
Lord himself, and no other probable respect can be given.

Therefore it is enjoined in this Church for veneration of the elements
idolatrously.

For answer, not to dally about the consequence of this argument, I will only
deny the Antecedent; and forasmuch as it propounds three several respects
for exemplification, let us generally see, whether this Churches intent, (in
enjoining to kneel at Sacrament) be denied of every one of them.

First Negative. The Church enioynes not kneeling as a fit Table Gesture.
FIrst, you Disp page 160. ^^ alibi.
say, kneeling cannot be enjoined as a fit Table Gesture? kneeling is unsuitable
to the carriage of a guest, debarrs us of the liberties of a Table, etc.
Answer. The question is not here, how suitable, or unsuitable kneeling is to the
person of a guest, liberties of a table, etc. but whether the Church do
respect it as a fit gesture for a spiritual table, and feast: and this it
does, as may appear, by the Book of Prayer, See the order of the Communion.
appointing a Communion Table, calling the Sacrament according to the
metaphorical speaking of the holy Scripture, a spiritual supper, feast,
banquet; and the Communicants guests, etc. and yet notwithstanding it
appoints kneeling for the said guests, as a fitting gesture of that
spiritual table, and feast: nay the Book takes notice of the gesture of
civil feasts, and makes express In the first exhortation.
mention of sitting; and yet appointe the gesture of kneeling at this feast
altogether, because it is spiritual. Wherefore you cannot show that the Church
enjoynes not kneeling as a fit spiritual table gesture: as for the Disputers
old song, it has been fully answered in the second part of this Treatise;
most lawful it is to use a worship-gesture in a worship-ordinance; though this
respect be but general, as I have noted before, Sect. 30. where (in setting
down the respects, upon which we may be lawfully moved to kneel) I only
pointed at it in the margin.) Even already then the Church is acquitted from
intent of idolatrous kneeling.

Second Negative. The Church enioynes not kneeling for any lawful, or
convenient reverence, that is due to the Sacrament.
SEcondly, say Abridg. p. 68.
you, it is evident, that this gesture is not enjoined, in respect of any
lawful, or convenient reverence, that is due to the Sacrament, for neither at
the administration of Baptism, nor at the hearing of the word read or preached
is any such gesture used, to both notwithstanding, there is every whit as much
reverence due, as to the Supper of the Lord. Answer. I retort in this manner.
You do not uncover your heads in the time of receiving in respect of any
lawful and convenient reverence, (which yet you pretend) that is due to the
Sacrament, for at hearing of the word read, or preached, you use not any such
gesture, to which notwithstanding there is every whit as much reverence due, as
to the Supper of the Lord. How can you possibly avoid this retortion? The
children of. Israel erred in the dissimilitude as we do, as the Scotchmen do
teach. When (say Perth. Ass. 45.
they) they received the law of the Passover, they bowed the head and
worshipped, Exodus 12. 27. Yet did they not so in the eating of it; they were
more reverent in hearing the law of the Passover, then in the participation of
it. Yet we are well, that the Church of England is but like the Church of
Israel in a commendable performance. Again, sometimes you pray in diverse
fashions or gestures, does it follow therefore that the same ordinance is more
or less reverendly to be handled then it self? This reasoning of yours should
import that the like reverence is to be declared always in all ordinances.
Again, you might well have considered, that the Church may prescribe a gesture
of greater reverence to the Sacrament, not because more reverence is due to it
in it self, but because it has been most abased by words, and deeds See what
anidle answer Repl. makes to this point, Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. ch 3. sect.
27. when he maks comparison betwixt the Sacrament and images, and the kneeling
of both, belike he can prove religious kneeling before images lawful in it
self; indeed he may prove any thing after his manner.
of vilifying vnreverence. Lastly, you must be remembered, that the reverence of
kneeling, (as it is appointed in this Church) does only issue out of the
sovereign worship; therefore if kneeling be lawfully appointed in the
Sacrament for sovereign worship (though it be not so, in hearing of the word,
and administration of Baptism) it may lawfully be appointed also consequently
for reverence; and the trial of this belongs to the next negative. Wherefore
for any thing, that is hitherto said, the Church is clear from intent of
idolatrous kneeling. As for the absolute lawfulness of this respect of
kneeling, namely, for reverence-sake, I have largely showed it, Sect. 45. to
Paragr. 2.

Third Negative. The Church enioynes not kneeling, for Adoration of the Lord.
THirdly, you say, that kneeling is not enjoined in this Church for adoration
of the Lord: and that it is not so, you endeavor to prove in this manner.

If kneeling be appointed for adoring the Lord, then either for adoration in
and upon occasion of prayer, or else for simple adoration without prayer.

But it is not appointed for adoration in prayer, nor for adoration without
prayer.

Therefore not for adoration at all.

I am contented to make the best of your several scatrerings, that the truth
may appear. Let your points be now tried in their order.

Of kneeling at Sacrament in respect of Prayer.
COncerning prayer I do freely confess, that inasmuch

First, you tell us, that, That prayer is unlawful, and contrary to Gods word.
And (though this be nothing to the present purpose) yet behold an heap of
proofs are at hand. First, (says the Disp. p. 117.
Disputer) This prayer is contrary to the person of guests and coheires,
directing us to an apprehension of our disfellowship with Christ. Therefore it
can not be lawful. Answer. This ridiculous, and contemptible logic is used
also against the gesture of kneeling, as well as against this prayer; the
profaneness whereof I have abundantly showed before, Part. 2. chap. 6. by the
same conceit all other prayers made before receiving are likewise unlawful,
all secret ejaculations in the very act, yea the practice of faith, and all
respects of humility, and dependence, and in a word, all intention, and
cogitation of serving the Lord in the duties which he requires at that time to
be done by us; but I hope this learning will dye, and be buried with the
Author it is so vile and detestable. Secondly, (says the same Page 65. 117.
man:) This prayer is a private worship during the public; therefore it is
unlawful. Answer. This objection is also made against the gesture of kneeling,
which I have clearly refuted before, part. 2. chap. 8. and thence the Reader
may also be satisfied for this prayer. Thirdly, (says he) Ibidem.
This prayer is contrary to meditation necessary at that time. Answer. As much
as if a man hearing the word should say in his heart The Lord bless his word
unto me. Is there any more said in this prayer, then as it were a (profit
tibi.) The holy Sacrament be effectual unto thy good. Is this contrary to
meditation of the Sacrament. Alas Sir, every one sees, that nothing was ever
said more falsely, and absurdly. Fourthly, (say the Perth. Ass. p. 52
Scotchmen) This prayer is contrary to the second commandment, partly because
it is made by direction before a creature, and partly because it is a rite
which God has not ordained, therefore it is not lawful. Answer. For the
former reason, being also made against the gesture of kneeling, I have of
purpose bent my self to answer it in this chapter already. And for the latter,
it is wonderful strange Divinity to teach, that a particular prayer for
sanctification of Gods ordinance is not appointed by God: by this conceit, we
must have no prayers appointed or used before, or after Sermons, Baptism,
Supper of the Lord at all; for why be they lawful, and not this? It is
evident, that the matter of this prayer is good, and also pertinent to the
occasion, neither may you help your self by saying, that it is a good prayer,
but not used in fit place; for your reason plainly affirms the prayer it
self to be a rite, which God has not ordained. Fifthly, (says Survey p. 75.
the Surveyour) The pronouncing of these words, The body of our Lord, etc. The
blood of our Lord, etc. in the act of ministering the elements, may occasion
idolatry. What? Rather then the pronouncing of those words in the institution
of Christ, nay not so much; for in the institution, the bread is called
(sacramentally) the body of Christ, the wine is called his blood in plain
terms, (and that in the act of ministration) whereas in this prayer is no such
matter: belike you would not have the people think of the body, and blood,
whiles the bread and wine are either seen, or felt by them for fear of
idolatry, Sixthly, (says the Surveyour) Ibidem.
It seems not warrantable by the word, that in the action of ministering the
elements, the Minister should minister to Christ and the Church both. Answer.
Where is that word I pray? The Priests in the law were appointed to minister
both to the Lord and to the Congregation, Numb. 16. 9. Nay the very act of
preparing and offering the peoples offering which they brought, was a
ministering both to the Lord and to them at the same time: and what will you say
to the blessing of the Minister, after the Sacrament is ended, and to Deutr.
10. 8. The Lord separated the Levites, to minister unto him, and to bless in
his name. And in truth this prayer is in the nature of a ministerial blessing
of the communicants; besides does not the Minister, even when he ministers
bread and wine, plainly minister as well to the Church as to Christ? At least
all Gods ordinances admit of interchange, and succession in respect of this
double respect of ministering: wherefore who would let such an objection pass
from his pen, that considered either that this twofold ministration may be
conjoined in one act, or when they be disjoined, the disjunction is
interchangeable. 7ly, lastly, (say they) Perth. Ass. p. 52 Disp. 65. 119.
Survey pa. 74.
This prayer of the Minister in the act of distribution, is flat against the
institution of the Sacrament. How prove you that? It argues the institution
defective: for what reason can be given, why we should not forbear the making
of a prayer at the delivery of the elements as well as Christ did? Are we wiser
then Christ, and more careful to perform a worship to God the Father then he?
Answer. Alas Sir, wiser then Christ was? Christ grant us but a drop of his
Ocean, in whom are all the treasure of wisdom, and knowledge, but are you
wiser then Christ was, that will not forbear long prayers before, and after
sermons, before and after the administration of both Sacraments? Moreover
Christ is said to pray for a blessing upon the elements to the receivers, but
what words, and how many they were you cannot tell, nor how long they did
continue. Nay Christ's blessing might be as near his distributing, as this
prayer is before our distributing for ought appears in the text; for if our
Ministers should break every Communicant his piece, or portion of bread, when
he comes unto him, and so breaking give it unto him, you can show no difference
in the time. And in the administration of the Cup this is more manifest; for
Christ is said to bless the Cup, and so gave it to his Apostles* Yea. But you
will say, Christ did not pronounce a prayer singularly to each Communicant. I
answer, if he did not, yet considering the common blessing of the table belongs
toevery one, and a several application thereof is to be made by every one;
here is nothing done in the particular, but what is done, and grounded in the
common blessing; nothing done by the Minister in applying the said common
blessing to the Communicant, but what every Communicant ought to do for
himself: and this is truly subordinate to the rule of Christ's institution.
Therefore it is too too foolishly said, that it seems as unlawful to add a
prayer to the words of the institution, as to add loue-feasts to the Lords
Supper: for besides that prayer is at liberty in every ordinance even the
tenor of the institution it self is partly prayer in the action of
ministration. Now to the rest of the Disputers trash, upon this occasion, page
114. (wherein he is (as he is wont to be) larger then others in showing his
vanity) this answer may be sufficient with the judicious. Only the Scotchmen
must be spoken to, who tax us for turning the words of Christ, [This is my
body] into a prayer; as if those words might not be inserted in the words of
distribution, not withstanding this prayer: therefore if there be a fault in
omitting the enunciatiue words [This is Christ's body] at the distributing, yet
the prayer being godly in it self cannot be condemned, or blamed therefore:
and yet the effect of them it touched even in the words of distribution. Christ
spoke thus, [Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you, this do in
remembrance of me] we speak thus, [Take and eat this in remembrance that
Christ dyed, or his body was given, as in the form of distributing the wine,
it is said, in remembrance that his blood was shed] he^re is the same sense,
and perhaps if (for avoiding such danger, as the Surveyour mentions before)
there be liberty left of changing the terms, the sense remaining entire,
herein there wants not matter of praise of the discretion of the compilers.
Thus much of the lawfulness of prayer.

Now indeed I might have spared the controversy of in this manner, [The
Minister shall deliver the Communion to the people, kneeling, and when he
delivers the bread and wine he shall say, the body of our Lord, etc. the
blood of our Lord, etc.] whereby there may be well some connection of the
kneeling, and praying together, especially when part of that kneeling enjoined
necessarily falls into the time of the said prayer.

First, (say Abridg. 65.
you) Prayer is made without kneeling at meals, and banquets, and therefore at
this banquet we do not kneel because of the prayer. Answer. This is an
evident non-sequitur, for you cannot reason from civil tables to this
spiritual absolutely, as I have showed in answering your argument of a
Table Gesture, Part. 2. ch 5. much less can you reason to the Churches
appointment, which (whether well or ill) may appoint that in spiritual use
which is not in civil. Again, what an heterogeneous instance is this, for in
the act of civil eating we commonly kneel not at all, and what then can you
proportionably collect for kneeling in religious eating? Again, do you not
consider, that according to your reasoning it follows, that the Church
appoints not kneeling before the Communion for prayers sake, (wherein the book
of prayer expressly confutes you) because we use not to kneel in civil
blessing. Moreover you suppose, that the Church would not appoint a reason of
kneeling contrary to ordinary civil use, wherein the thing it self confutes
you without other help; for that Church that would appoint kneeling in
Sacramental eating, without respect of gestures of civil eating, cannot be
denied, to appoint it for reason, that is strange unto civil practice. If the
maine civil matter have been neglected, inferior respects could not be much
esteemed of. Lastly, think you that the Church in the public and solemn
worship of God may not step out step in gesture beyond the fashion (either in
eating or blessing) of civil tables?

Secondly, (say Abridg. ibid. Manuscrip. chapter 1. arg. 4. and chapter 7.
you) Our Church uses not always to command kneeling at prayer or
thanksgiving at other times therefore she enioynes not kneeling at Sacrament
because of prayer. Answer. Oh noble reasoning, she appoints it not at all
times, and every where. therefore at no time, and no where. I doubt not but you
will acknowledge the weakness, and inconsequence of this argument: but the
Manuscript delivers this reason thus; Our Church and Book of Prayer uses not
to enjoin kneeling so strictly at any prayer. Answer. What strictness is used
de fact perteines not to the purpose: sure I am that it is untrue which you
say, that the Book uses not to enjoyne kneeling so strictly at any prayer.
See for example the Rubric before the general confession in the beginning of
Morning prayer. And again the Rubric after the Creed in Morning Prayer: and
compare them with the Rubric which is before this prayer in controversy, and
you shall see them enjoined with equal strictness, and therefore I marvel
that you would accuse the book so unjustly, and in so manifest a case. Where
the Abridgement adds, that the Book appoints not kneeling in those prayers
and thanksgivings, which are appointed to be used both before and after the
receiving of the Sacrament, it is evidently false. For at the first confession
and prayer, appointed to be made at the Communion, next after the exhortations
there is this Rubric, [Then shall this general confession be made in the name
of all those that are minded to receive the holy Communion, all kneeling humbly
upon their knees. How can you look upon this Rubric, and your consciences not
check you for saying as you do* If you say, that that direction is not renewed
at every prayer, you require a superfluous direction; for that which is set in
the front of many prayers, is sufficient for all that are continued together.
For whereas in the general confession of Morning prayer all are appointed to
kneel down, do you think the book intends not the continuance of kneeling
at the absolution, and the Lords prayer? Again, after the Creed of Morning
prayer all are appointed to kneel down at saying a company of versicles, do
you think the same kneeling is not intended to be continued at all other
prayers which shall be continuated unto them? In a word it is not necessary
that direction for kneeling should be renewed at every singular prayer, but one
is enough for all such prayers as by one plain and continued concatenation are
linked together. And this in reason and charity is to be judged the meaning of
the book, for else direction would be given for one prayer, and none for
twenty, which to think were to charge the compilers uncharitably with ba^ish
and ridiculous misprision. And to make this to be the meaning better appear,
it is to be observed, that the book is wont commonly to direct, for kneeling
at the first prayer, where many prayers are together, and not at any other that
follow; and though I know sometimes, (as at Evening prayer, etc. there is no
express direction at all, because the same is understood in the maine
directions of Morning prayer, which imply the like to be done upon like
occasions) yet commonly, where there is direction it is set at the first
prayer, as in Morning prayer before the confession, and again after the Creed,
again after the exhortations at the Communion, again before the versicles in
the order of matrimony, again in the beginning of the order of visiting the
sick, again in the beginning of the thanksgiving for women after childbirth,
again before Psalm. 51. in the commination, in all which places (besides other)
there is express direction for kneeling down.

Thirdly, (say Abridg. 6^. Manuscr. chapter 1. arg. 4. and chapter 7.
you) The prayer that is used at the delivery of the Sacrament, is made by the
Minister, who yet stands, and in his name not by the receiver, therefore the
receiver is not required to kneel for it. Answer. A pitiful objection* ^ is
not the prayer made in the peoples both be half and presence? Look into the
common prayer book, and you shall find kneeling required even in such forms
as this After the Creed of Morning Prayer, all are directed to kneel, and then
follows [The Lord be with you, and with thy Spirit] what say you to this one
parallel? Nay I will give you others, wherein the Minister stands, and the
people kneel in such like forms; as after the the general confession
following the exhortations in the order of the Communion, the Minister stands
up, the people kneeling, and says thus, [Almighty God our heavenly Father,
etc. have mercy upon you, etc. confirm, and strengthen you in all goodness,
etc.] Again, before the vesitles in the order of macrimony, the man and woman
kneeling down, the Minister standing up, and having his face toward them,
shall say. O Lord save thy servant and thine handmaid, etc. Again in the order
of thanksgiving for women after childbirth, the woman is appointed to kneel,
the Minister to stand, and say as follows: [O Lord save this woman thy
servant, etc. O Almighty God which have delivered this woman, etc. grant, etc.
that she through thy help may, etc.] By which places it appears, that you
cannot show, that the Church requires not kneeling for the prayer apappointed
before the act of receiving, because of the form, nor because of the Ministers
standing. Nay, where you say, that rather the Minister should kneel, then the
receivers for that prayer, we might say as much against you, who tell us, that
our kneeling is for reverence of the elements, be cause the Ministers
reverencing should be exemplary to all the Communicants. But it is evident that
the Ministers are occastioned to stand and walk, as the Priests in the law
often were, in the administration of holy things. As for the want of Amen in
this prayer, you do from thence with small reason infer, that the people are
not enjoined to mind it, as their prayer, when there are above threescore
prayers in the Communion Book besides versicles, without an expressed, and a
vocal Amen, yet consent both in all these, and in the prayer before the
delivery of the Communion is not more clearly employed, then universally known
and yielded.

Fourthly, (say Disp. 61, etc. Perth. Assem. page 52.
you) That prayer has no subsistence, and being in nature, during the whole
action of the Communicants kneeling; for both it is begun before the prayer,
and the prayer is finished before receiving. Answer. The former branch of this
proof is foolish and idle, partly, because kneeling is appointed before this
prayer for many other preceding prayers, which reach unto it, and partly
because it is a needful thing in making of all public prayers, that the
people kneel before the Minister begin, that they may be ready to begin with
him, but will you say because it is used a little space of time before the
prayer have being in nature, that it is not used because of the prayer? So you
say in this case, but who sees not how ridiculously? Now except kneeling be
used before receiving for one of the former respects there is no necessity that
it should be used by any order of this book. But the latter branch you most
of all stand upon, wherein others do likewise Abridg. 66. Manuser. chapter 1. arg
4. and ch 7.
join, namely, because the prayer is The Author of the Manuscript adds that
there is an exhortation betwixt the prayer, and receiving. Answer. A
consideration of no use here, for that exhortation is but a direction to take
and eat, and so is joined with the action of receiving: you might as well
object, that the receiver puts out his hand betwixt, for so he does before the
act
finished before the act of receiving, therefore kneeling in that act cannot be
appointed because of the prayer. Answer. This reason does not absolutely
convince for the meaning of the Book; for sometimes it is that the gesture of
kneeling is required by the Book in the reading of the word, for and by
occasion of the prayer which is adjoined unto it. Look the order of the
Communion it self, and this will be found true even there. Kneeling is
required in rehearsing the ten commandments, because prayer is enjoined at the
end of every commandment. Again kneeling is required of the people, whiles
certain comfortable sayings be rehearsed of holy Scripture: [Heare what our
Savior says, etc. Hear what S. Paul says, etc. Hear what S. John says,
etc.] and this because of prayer that is adjoined unto them. True the Minister
is appointed here to stand up, but since that is done for pronouncing of
matters, and for that cause he is singularly directed, there is no cause to
suspect that that implies the like direction to the people, especially when
they are by name directed for themselves when is occasion a the like may be
done in the act of receiving, for the prayer which is thereunto adjoined; and
so much the rather when the soul in the act of receiving may be sweetly
carried up to God in secret desires according to the matter and tenor of that
prayer, which so newly sounded in the ear of the Communicant. And yet I would
not stand upon that prayer alone, but rather the continued exercise of prayer,
whereof that is but a part, to give occasion of kneeling to be continued in the
act of receiving, especially when the time of receiving to one Communicant is
very short, and as it were but a moment, in the midst of the said exercise of
prayer, which the Church appoints to be adjoined. And yet again as receiving
is the principal employment, and the prayer is but occasioned thereby, it is
to be understood, that still the business of receiving has a principal
stroke in occasioning such kneeling to be used, (though used immediately-by
occasion of prayer) as causa causae est causa causati.

So much may suffice for answer of your reasons, Perth. Ass page 52. 53.
add of Namely that which is merely mental.
mental prayer in the act of receiving, affirming that the Church enjoynes not
kneeling for that it is merely unprofitable, because though it may be joined
with vocal prayers and add strength to my former considerations, yet there is
no man was ever so simple to say that, that was of it self a reason of the
Churches commandment. And now we will see how you can prove that, the Church
enioynes not kneeling in the act of receiving for simple adoration without
prayer. This is the chiefest confideration, and yet you say but a very little
unto it in comparison of the former.

Of receiving at Sacrament for adoring God without prayer.
FOr simple adoration, there be three maine respects in the holy Sacrament,
which I named before. The Sect. 31. The second is the humble and thankful
remembrance of Christ sufferings. Sect. 32. The third is the gracious gift of
Christ's body and blood, which is bestowed upon us, Sect. 33. etc. Can you show
now that the Church enioynes not kneeling to be used for adoring or worshipping
God in these respects, and so consequently enioynes it not for simple adoration
or worshipping at all? I promise you I will not balke any thing you say, that I
know, and therefore I will examine, what you speak to each of them in order.
For the first, you say not a word, and therefore I need not say a word for
answer, unless I certify you that your proof of the Churches intent of
Idolatry, by this, that it inioynes not simple adoration of God must needs be
lame, because (whatsoever you say to the other respects) against this (the
instance whereof was so necessary and plain) you say nothing.

That the Church inioynes not kneeling for adoration upon the thankful
remembrance of Christ's sufferings, Abridg. p. 67, Manuscrip. chapter 1. arg. 4.
you, The act of receiving is not properly an act of thansgiuing but of faith.
Answer, you contradict your selves, that say otherwhere, that kneeling is not
lawful in the act of receiving, because it is not a fit expression for the
outward acting of thankfulness. See part. 2. chap. 7. sect. 6. 7. But why do you
deny the act of receiving to be a thankful remembrance, when there is nothing
more evident in the world? for is it not instituted for remembrance, and why
for remembrance, but that it should be thankful remembrance? It is true, as
we look only to our own good, it is a mere act of feeding in grace, but as
we look unto Christ it is an Perth. Ass. says there is no mental praise,
therefore no thanksgiving, p 53. Sir, the action it self is Eucharistical and
yet also there is mental thanksgiving, because the mind so esteems and
uses it.
act of thanksgiving, and that is the principal looking by Christ's own order.
Do this in remembrance of me: but i^ both it is an act of faith, therefore is
faith unsoundly opposed to thanksgiving. But what is your inference out of this
antecedent? Therefore the Church appoints not kneeling for thanksgiving. This
follows not, for suppose the Sacramental action be no action of thanksgiving
properly, yet it is enough to cross your present purpose, that the Church does
judge it to be so. And that so it does, appears plentifully in the order of
the Communion, as he shall easily find that will search the same and consider.
In the forms of distribution of the elements, it is thus prescribed Eat this
in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him in thine heart by
faith with thanksgiving-Drinke this in remembrance Christ's blood was shed for
thee, and be thankful. In the thanksgiving to be used next after the
receiving is ended, it is thus said: O Lord our heavenly Father, we thine
humble servants entirely desire thy fatherly goodness mercifully to accept
this our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Whereunto may be added that
acclamation, Therefore with Angels, etc. we laud and magnify, etc. And in a
word thanksgiving is mentioned and used continually, before, and after, and in
the administration of this heavenly service. And you shall find no such
passages in the order of Baptism, neither do I see what could be said more by
any Church houlding the Sacramental action to be a proper action of
thanksgiving. Therefore your first consideration is false in the Antecedent,
false in the consequence, both which your selves cannot but evidentlie perceive.

Secondly, (say Abridg. p. 67.
you) If the act of receiving be properly called a thanksgiving, yet is not
kneeling the fittest gesture to be used in thanksgiving, by 1 King. 8. 54.
Answer. This assertion I have answered of purpose, and showed the falsehood of
it at large, part. 2. chap. 7. sect. 9. 10, 11. But suppose it were true, what
follows upon it? What? Therefore the Church appoints not kneeling for
thanksgiving. Surely this is a Non-sequitur, and gross in you, because you lay
so many faults to the charge of this Church, especially intent of idolatry in
receiving: for is it not absurd to go about to prove the Church to do that
which she ought not to do one way, because she must do as she ought to do
another. For thus you argue, Kneeling is not the fittest gesture for
thanksgiving, therefore the Church would not appoint it as Sacrament for
thanksgiving. You might as well have reasoned in this manner, and much better
also. Kneeling for idolatrous reverence of the elements is an abominable thing,
therefore the Church would not appoint it for such idolatrous reverence. Your
part was to prove the Churches intent of kneeling not to be for thanksgiving,
whether kneeling be fit in thanksgiving or unfit. And because you say nothing
to that, I will give the godly Reader to consider of the Rubric directing to
kneeling compared with the forms of distribution of the elements named before,
The people shall have the bread and wine delivered unto them kneeling, says
the Rubric, and then followeth-Take and eate-with thanksgiving-drinke this and
be thankful. I desire that this consideration may be duly thought on.

Thirdly, (say Manuser. chapter 1. arg. 4.
you) Though kneeling should be a gesture lawful, and fit to be used in a see
thanksgiving, [I marvel you make a question of it] yet no man will think it
needful or fit, that we should always kneel when we receive Gods blessings,
because we must receive them thankefully. Answer. It is true, it is enough for
us, that kneeling may be lawfully used, though not always necessarily, yet
if any blessing of God require humble thankfulness, it is the blessing of
Christ himself: also the Sacramental employment is Gods public and solemn
worship, therefore as that blessing is not to be compared with continual, and
ordinary mercies; so this employment gives free liberty of worshipping, then
some occasions, times, places, (as you instance in market places, and
worshipping before Nebuchadnezzar: idol, and the Breaden God, yea and I may
add many others of another nature then they) would allow unto us. But what
follows of this Antecedent? What? Therefore the Church appoints not kneeling
for thanksgiving. This is a consequence like the former, nay worse because the
Antecedent gives kneeling to be fit and lawful in thanksgiving sometimes: and
therefore the Church might more probably appoint it in this case.

Fourthly, (say Ibidem.
you) The Books of Common Prayer commands us not to kneel at any other
thanksgiving: therefore it requires not kneeling here for thanksgiving. Answer.
I deny the Antecedent, which I show to be false by instances in the book.
First all the thanksgivings at the end of the Letanie, which are six in number
are to be said in the gesture prescribed in the beginning of the prayers next
after the Creed. Again the thanksgiving of women after childbirth is appointed
to be performed in the gesture of kneeling, and this is a special and solemn
thanksgiving. If you say the woman is directed only to kneel down, and not
the Minister, you must consider the case is like in the gesture of receiving,
where the Minister is not to kneel, when he is employed on the particular
behalf of the Communicants, but they alone. So this is a clear and evident
instance to refute you when you say that the book commands not to kneel at
any thanksgiving. I may add that in the order of the Communion, the same
direction that is for kneeling at certain confessions and petitions, is
plainly of force for sundry thanksgivings that are inserted among them. And
these instances may suffice, then your consequence is not sound, and
convincing, because other thanksgivings in the book be vocal, and this
Sacramental thanksgiving is real, or an acting of thankfulness, and if there
be the same reason of both, yet that may be appointed once upon one occasion,
that is not appointed again, though the same occasion fall out again: as
standing is appointed at the Creed of Morning prayer, commonly called the Creed
of the Apostles, and yet is not appointed at the same Creed in the order of the
Communion, nor again at the Creed of Athanasius. So much for answer to your
reasons, (such as they are) to show that the Church enjoynes not kneeling at
Sacrament for thankful remembrance of Christ's sufferings.

In the next place, you endeavor to show, that the Church enjoynes not
kneeling at Sacrament for the excellent Kneeling (say Disp. 163. Demand. page
44. Manuscr. chapter 1. arg 4.
you) is not appointed for worshipping in respect of the gift, which we receive
in the Sacrament, for then should we also be required to kneel in the time of
Sermons, and in the administration of Baptism. Answer. First I might answer,
that the Church condemns not kneeling at the hearing of the word, as in the
receiving of the commandments, and other portions of Scripture, (which I noted
before) by the Book of Common prayer appears, nay condemns it not even in
Sermon time, namely in women, who kneel every where usually then, without so
much as (I say not expostulation) but question once made or moved about it.
And as much might be said of Baptism, that the Church condemns not kneling in
that ordinance, as it appoints it not: and it might well have appointed it,
if there had been occasion; for what occasion is there to prescribe a gesture
unto such as are baptized amongst us; for when you say we are appointed to
kneel at the Supper, and not at Baptism, you must not compare receivers in
the one, with lookers on in the other, but Communicants at the Lords Supper
with the Baptized in Baptism, such as are only children in our assemblies.
Well then and do you not see, that the Church could dot limit a gesture for
infants of a week old? Do you not see that no respect could or can be had
unto the gesture in such? If this be evident, (as it is) your comparison of our
Churches iniunction of the Supper-gesture with Baptism, (where no gesture can
be enjoined) argues a great deal of inconsideration. I doubt not but this
answer will give good satisfaction unto others, whatsoever it will do to you.

But let it be, that there is an evident difference in the Edwards Reign, did
give occasion that it should be imposed in the Supper, rather then in the
exercise of the word and Baptism. It is true the respect of a gift may be
common to the word and Sacraments, and therefore may warrant kneeling in it
self in them all; but yet accidental occasion may make the gestures to
differ. So when we kneel, we kneel for this respect of a gift, but we are not
always bound to kneel upon this respect, as it is in the Lords prayer, when
we pray, Give us, it is lawful to kneel, yet not ever necessary, and if a
man may leave such a gesture, which is used upon such respect as is permanent
in the same ordinance; he may do it much more in that which is diverse, as I
have showed somewhere else before. Besides, though the word and Sacraments have
all a consideration of being gifts, yet the Church might think the Eucharist a
more special gift, then either the word or Baptism, not absolutely, but for
the symbolicall manner of communication. For behold the Eucharisticall elements
are not only a visible pledge of Gods favor, and seal of his covenant, but
also a visible offer and tender of Christ's own body and blood, which is the
most express and lively Symbol of Christ, that the Church enjoys, yea and
the same delivered unto us in a sensible manner, gift-wise, in the proper and
outward guise of giving a gift, so as the word and Baptism are not. Now what
if hereupon the Church enjoined difference in the gesture, I mean upon the
apprehension of the difference of the gifts in the manner of exhibition, then
your consequence is quite spoiled, verily as he which compares the order of
administration of the Eucharist, and Baptism together shall easily see, that
the Church esteems of them unlike as gifts: So, that kneeling is enjoined at
Sacrament to worship God for the gift of Christ's body and blood is evident, by
that passage of the form of distribution, to be said, when the Communicant is
upon his knees ready to receive the sign [the body of our Lord Jesus Christ
which was given for thee] which word is also used by our Savior himself in
the Institution.

Furthermore, I must charge you with contradiction are as much to be honored,
as the Eucharist, according to your reasoning it must needs follow, that the
Church intended not to give divine worship, unto the Eucharisticall Elements,
as if there were some intrinsecall excellency therein, which did singularly
require us to kneel down unto them. And so indeed kneeling falls to be
appointed with us in one Sacrament only, upon particular occasion of the
present times, and yet in it self is lawful in the other also as well, so
that if either that public occasion of kneeling at Eucharist had not been, or
answerable occasion in Supposing that men of years were baptized with us.
Baptism had been, the gesture in both might have been appointed the same
without difference. See more answer back Sect. 74.

And now I have presented all your conceits together, Abridg. p 62.
Abridgement charge our kneeling to be Idolatrous, not only because it is
enjoined with an idolatrous intent, but also practiced so. Yea the Disp: page
57.
Disputer says, that for one of the common sort, who does it for other intent,
there are a thousand that do it out of reverent and humble respect to it. What
should be said to this, surely, if you speak of such a respect as is
idolatrous, I marvel you are so bold. As if any man of ^rames would believe
you, because you report a thing which you can never tell, how to justify. But
what if it were so, let the Disputer answer himself for me in the next words
to the former. We are here to consider (says he) not what is done by a few in
our Church out of a private opinion, but what is publicly intended and
directed to be done by all, that communic^te at the Lords table. To this
purpose see chap. 1. Sect. 19. And here I make an end of my answer to your
conjectures, for proving the intent of this Church Idolatrous in imposing the
gesture of kneeling to be used at the Lords Supper.

So then by Gods gracious help I have justly vindicated

Considerations tending to clear the Church (in imposing the gesture of
kneeling) from intent of idolatry.
FIrst, in King Edwards days there was a protestation Cartwright Repl. to Dr.
Whiting p. 131.
affirms. Besides you Repl. partic. to Bp. Mort. p. 49.
say, King Edward and his Directours would have taken kneeling away, but for
the sway of the times, and yet they did not lay aside their purpose so to do,
but waited a fit opportunity, and used the best means they could to compass,
and accomplish the same. Put now both these assertions together, and it is
evident the first compilers of the book were express adversaries to
idolatrous reverence of the bread and wine: And though kneeling was appointed,
as the time seemed then to require, yet their opinion and intent in imposing
thereof was contrary to that which you please unchristianly to accuse them of.
Moreover does not (I speak in the words of the Survey 182.
Surveyour) the 29. Article of Religion, (as it was published in King Ewards
Reign, and whereunto subscription is required, by 13. Eliz. c. 12.) say, that
the Sacrament of Christ's body is not by his ordinance to be worshipped. I add
that in one of the Rubricks after the Communion it is said. To take away the
superstition which any person has or might have in the bread and wine, it
shall be such bread, as is usual to be eaten at the Table with other meats.
Yea the Surveyour In the Quere of kneeling at the end of his book.
has spent a great many leaves to show the godly intent of the state in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth, how far they were from purpose of imposing
supersticious kneeling. Hitherto may be referred much that I have spoken chap.
1. of the Churches enjoining kneeling as a thing indifferent as other gestures
are without any supersticious opinion put upon it. In a word the gesture is
enjoined for no other reverence to the Sacrament, then such as other rites and
gestures are in all holy ordinances, the same being intended in common for Gods
glory, and the edifying of the Church, and (intended in common) for the due
reverence of Christ's holy mysteries, and Sacraments, at appears, 1 Eliz.
cap. 2. and I have fully cleared this in this chapter already.

Secondly, besides the testimonies of the Church is wine: for this is plain
that the controversy betwixt us is of the gesture to be used in the act of
eating and drinking, and therefore we have seen before, that you will by no
means allow this kneeling in controversy to be used for any part of the
prayer said in the time of delivering, because the prayer is ended before the
bread and wine are received; but what speak I of this passage, all your
arguments do import as much, the question is laid down by your selves no
otherwise but of the gesture in the act of eating, and drinking. Is it credible
now that our Church appoints kneeling to be used for worshipping of the bread
and wine, whiles the bread is torn with the teeth, and both bread and wine
pass into the stomach, and are about to be swallowed? Is this worshipping
possible? or is it not absurd? You may as well think our Church would stand
upon worshipping of the elements, when they be passed into the body, as when
they be thus in passing, at least for a certain space of time, if you say the
Church enjoynes kneeling for idolatrous reverence of the elements, when they be
before us, besides that you cast off the point of the controversy, who does
not see, that such kneeling before the act of receiving may godlily be referred
to the prayer to be made by the Minister and Communicants, which are appointed
to have continuance till the act of receiving take place? But for the act of
eating and drinking, that the Church intends idolatrous reverence, then to be
done to the elements in our mouths and stomachs, it seems too too harsh to
affirm, the Disputer, Disp. page 61.
defending for the Church, that she enioynes no absurdities, or impossibilities.

Thirdly, if the Churches intent be idolatrous in her so the Sacrament is an
idol to them, there is danger either, that you cannot say, The bread which we
break is the Communion of the body of Christ, for we being many are one body,
being all partakers of one bread, as 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. or else that you are
partakers of the general idolatry of the Congregation in some measure. And
then you must either pronounce your selves to be guilty, or this Church to be
innocent.

Finally, I would I were worthy to request you to: hereunto therefore let us
descend with hearts in writing, and reading so affected, as becomes both the
truth it self, and them also which search into it: and the God of all wisdom
and mercy direct me in handling the same with all faithfulness.

Objections against kneeling, drawn from conformity with Idolaters, answered.
CHAP. 4.
NOw therefore we must examine, (as God shall that it is not lawful to hold
conformity with idolatours, such as the Papists are, and to this purpose you
are copious in alleging of Scripture, and therefore you make no doubt but
kneeling, whereby we hold (as you think) conformity with them, is a gesture
against piety, and abominable in the sight of God. Of all your books, the
Abridgement is largest in this argument, and sets it also in the for most
place, yea propounds it in the exactest form, and therefore I will be guided
by them for my method in handling of it, bringing in what I find in other
books, as due place shall require. Thus Abridg. p. 17.
then the Abridgement reasons.

It is contrary to Gods word to use, (much more to command the use of) such
ceremonies in the worship of God, as man has devised, if they be notoriously
known to have been of old, and still to be abused unto Idolatry by the
Papists, specially if the same be now of no necessary use in the Church.

But kneeling at Sacrament has been devised by man, it notoriously known to
have been of old, and still to be abused unto idolatry by the Papists, and is
now of no necessary use in the Church.

Ergo.

Answer to the Proposition.
I must begin with the Proposition, explicating the

Ceremonies in Gods worship are either ceremonious substances, or ceremonious
actions, under which two heads I will range the proofs of your Proposition in
order, whereby the Reader shall attain more clear and perspicuous insight
into them.

For ceremonious substances of idolatry, you Abridg. p. 17, 18.
say, God commanded to destroy them, as the melten, graven, and painted images
of Idolaters, all their places, groves, altars, pillars. Numb. 33. 52. Deutr.
12. 2, 3. Isai. 27. 9. Vessels. 2 King. 234. Coverings and ornaments. Isai.
30. 22. Jewels worn in their honor. Genesis 35. 4. Meats sacrificed unto them.
Apoc. 2. 14. 20. And even all the remnant of them. Zephan. 1. 4. Yea great
detestation is to be showed in destroying these; they are to be hated, and
abhorred utterly. Iud. 23. Deuteronomy. 7. 26. Rejected as a menstruous cloth. Isai.
30. 22. Cut and broken to pieces. 2 King. 18. 4. Burned with fire. Deurr. 7.
26. 1 Chronicles. 14. 12. Yea Moses stamped the calfe, and ground it as small as
dust, and then scattered the dust into the water. Deutr. 9. 21. So did Josiah
with the Grove. 2 King. 23. 6. Yea the very names and memory of idol was to
be rested out. Exodus 23. 13. Deutr. 12. 3. Josh. 23. 7. Zechar. 13. 2. And this
ought to be done, partly because of the detestation, which the Lord, who is a
jealous God, bears unto idolatry. Exodus 20. 5, 6. Deutr. 7. 25, 26. and
partly because we cannot be said sincerely to have repented of idolatry,
whereby we, or our forefathers have provoked the Lord, unless we be ashamed
of, and cast away with detestation all the instruments and monuments of it. 2 Chronicles. 33. 15. Isai. 1. 29. 2. 10. 30. 22. 2 Cor. 7. 11. [The Abridgement
adds also other reasons why idolatrous things should be rooted out, taken
from scandal, but those I refer unto the next chapter, where God willing
they shall be considered.] Thus much you say concerning Ceremonious substances
of Idolatry.

For Ceremonious actions (you Abridg p. 1^. Manuser. chapter 1. arg 3.
says) God commands that we should not do after the works and doings of
Idolatours. Exodus 23 24. Levit. 18. 3. Deuteronomy, 124. v. 30. 31, That we should
have no communion or fellowship with them, but come out from among them. 2 or.
614. 18. Apoc. 18. 4. And the holy Ghost mentions this as a chief sin in
the ten Tribes, and the principal cause of their destruction, that in the
matters of Gods worship they went after the heathen, that were round about
them, concerning whom the Lord had charged, that they should not do like them.
2 King 17. 15. And to show his people how unlike, they should be to Idolators,
he forbad sundry mixtures unto them; as of cattle of diverse kinds, of diverse
seeds, and of linen and woollen in the same garment. Levit. 19 19. Yea he
forbad them to make any balcnes upon their heads, or round the corners of them,
to mar the corners of their beards, to make any cutting in their flesh for
the dead, or print any marks upon themselves. Deuteronomy. 14 1. Levit. 19. 27. 28.
Thus much you say concerning Ceremonious actions of Idolatours, wherein it is
unlawful to be conformable unto them.

Now to the parts of your Proposition, I will say some form and use, but not
the matter, which is the worke-manship of God himself. In actions, bodily
abillities, and performances are natural, and of God, in whom we live and
mou^e; only the intent and respect, where on such actions are carried, may be
man's devising. Look upon your proofs again, and judge what kind of devises
are condemned by them. In substantial things, there was the Idolit self,
which was the object of worshipping, and then those munericall, or individual
complements, that pertained unto it. The greatest part of your proofs do
speak of the Idol it self only. The complements were of two sorts, either
ornaments of the Idols, or instruments of idolatrous worship. Some of which
were no devises of men, but the good creatures of God, as the meats sacrificed
to Idols; and therefore, what I beseech you make they among your proofs, that
are excluded of purpose by the very first passages of your Proposition?
Especially when the Lord evidently allows of them out of the case of scandal,
notwithstanding idolatrous pollution. Rom, 14. 1 Cor. 8 chapter 10. 25 etc. And of
this sort are the materials of Idols appurtenances, which are not forbidden
unto us, as I shall show by and by. All the rest of your Scriptures speak of
mere devises, and inventions of wicked men, of purpose intended for the acting
of cursed idolatry; partly informing unlawful ornaments and instruments, which
are called in Scripture the work of their own hands, and partly in the
damnable application thereof, to the service of abominable idols; which could
not be done, without profaning and destroying Gods own holy truth and
worship. In the idolatrous actions, which the Scriptures quoted by you do
condemn, what can you see, but that which all godly people will condemn,
without question or hesitation? For there is no one of those Scriptures, that
forbids to do such actions in Gods worship as otherwise were lawful, but
only to worship with heathenish and idolatrous worship: let the places be
considered particularly. Thou shall not bow down to their Gods, nor serve
them, nor do after their works, but thou shall utterly overthrow them, and
quite break down their images. Exodus 23. 24. You shall overthrow their
Altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and you
shall hew down the graven images of their Gods, and destroy the names of them
out of that place: Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 12. 3, 4.
Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following them, after that
they be destroyed from before thee, and that thou enquire not after their Gods,
saying, How did these Nations serve their Gods? Even so will I do likewise.
Thou shall not dot so unto the Lord thy God: for every abomination, which the
Lord hates, have they done unto their Gods; for even their sons and their
daughters have they burnt in the fire to their Gods. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 30, 31. They
rejected the Lords Statutes, and testimonies, and followed vanity, and became
vain, and went after the Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom
the Lord had charged them, that they should not do like them. And they left
all the commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten images, even
two Calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served
Baal, and they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the
fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in
the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger. Therefore the Lord was very
angry, etc. 2 King. 17. v. 15. 16, 17, etc. After the doings of the Land of
Egypt, wherein ye dwelt shall ye not do, and after the doings of the Land of
Canaan, whither I bring you shall ye not do, neither shall ye walk in their
ordinances, ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and my indgements: you shall
use no unlawful marriages, or lusts, nor suffer your seed to pass through the
fire to Molech: for in all these things the Nations are defiled, and all these
abominations have the men of the Land done: Therefore shall ye keep mine
Ordinance, that ye commit not any of these abominable customs, which were
committed before you. Levit. 18. 3, etc: read the whole chapter. Behold, it is
an evident thing, that all these Scriptures (setting aside civil
uncleannesses) only forbid unto the people of God, heathenish and Idolatrous
manner of worshipping, which manner does respect both an Idol-obiect of
worshipping, and also such performances, as are simply wicked, and could not
otherwise be used to God himself. As for those Scriptures, which require us to
come our from idolaters. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Revel. 18. 4 What else is meant, then
that we must beware, and separate our selves from the communion of their sins
and idolatries. As for prohibition of diverse mixtures, amongst other lessons,
the Jews were taught thereby to make no mixture of true and false worship;
sundry fashions, and actions were, and will be indifferently used in both, but
that which is at any time proper to false religions, ought not to be mingled
with the pure and holy worship of God. Lastly, the Lord forbade his people to
mar, and abuse their heads and beards for the dead, and to make marks and
cuttings in their flesh, not because the Heathen did so, (see the places, Deuteronomy.
14. 1. Levit 19. 27, 28.) but because the practice agrees not to the faith and
hope of a Christian, if the Heathens had never used it; so that all the devises
that are to be observed in these places of Scripture, are no other but in
themselves vile ^dolatries, and superstitions, which the Church was bound to
abhor, if the Heathens wicked example thereof had never been set before it.

Here I may not unfitly subjoyne a certain amplification: [God has
commanded, (say you, Abridg. page 17.) to cast away even such things, as had a
good original and use when ence they are known to have been defiled by
idolatry, etc. Levit. 26. 1. 2 King. 18. 4. Dan. 1. 8. Hos. 2. 16. 17.] But it
were time ill spent to tarry upon this amplification, when three of your proofs
are of no force to confirm it, and it is not material, as it is confirmed by
the fourth. First, Levit. 26. 1. forbids not the use of pillars, but such as
were figured, or fashioned to represent something, and of purpose set up to
worship, Dan. 1. 8. is impertinent, but upon supposall of a false
interpretation. Hos. 2, 16, 17. condemns not the name Baali, absolutely, but
according to the customary usurpation thereof, as it was referred, and served
for the honor of the filthy idol. Lastly, the Brazen Serpent had indeed a good
original and use, but long before Hezechiahs time, that use was laid down,
and so to the Jews in his time it was no better, then a Jewish monument would
be unto us at this day. And so their making of the said Serpent an idol was
(in spiritual construction) as much as making it (in its outward form) to be
an idol. And so this place of 2 King. 18 4. is equivalent to the rest of your
quotations, used to confirm your Proposition, condemning images, groves,
altars, and other appurtenances of fille worship; but to these Scriptures I
need not make a further answer in this place, because the purpose of your
amplification whereto they serve does not require it.

Secondly, your Proposition is only of such ceremonies, by others, abused to
idolatry, themselves being applied to Gods own lawful worship.

Thirdly, your proposition is made of those ceremonies,: but what things do
you mean to be necessary? I know no ceremony that is necessary with an
absolute necessity; but all ceremonies, things, actions, fashions, (let them
be what ceremonies you will) are variable at all times for ever. It is true,
some ceremonies are necessary in their kind, though they be not necessary at
all, in the determination of this or that particular, thereunto belonging; as
place is necessary, but so is not such a particular Church or Chapel. Time
is necessary, but so is not such a particular hour of the day. Water, and
bread, and wine in the Sacraments are necessary, but so is not the particular
water of such or such a spring or stream, the bread of such a manner of
wheat, the wine of such a Country or manner. Clothes are necessary, but so is
not such a particular garment, of this or that fashion or color. Now if your
Proposition be meant of ceremonies, no necessary only in particular
determination, it is a most false one, as you cannot deny. For there is hardly
any manner of place, time, spring, or stream, grain, or grape, garment of
whatsoever fashion or color, which has not been abused idolatrously even in
our own land, and in this sense it is contrary to all the Scriptures, which
you quote; for they can condemn no places of worship, altars, pillats,
vessels, ornaments, jewels, meats, but that alone, which is idolatrously
abused in the service of idols, and not any other. Wherefore your ceremonies,
[of no necessary vse] must needs be those alone, which are [not necessary in
respect of the kind of them.]

A Direction tending to show, that the former Proposition cannot be applied
against natural gestures in Gods worship.
HAving more generally prepared the way, my special thereof may be man's
devising. But that will prove a poor evasion, as it is easy to manifest: for
first then, this passage in your Proposition, [as man has devised]
distinguishes not from Gods outward ordinances, the matter whereof may be
applied, and handled amiss, as well as natural gestures. But I dare say you
intended some further thing by that passage, when you laid it down. Secondly,
then that passage is a surplusage in your Proposition, for your last clause
would have sufficed, (not only because the mere devises of man cannot be of
necessary use in the Church, which makes it more then needs howsoever, but
also because that cannot be misapplyed to this or that part of divine worship,
that is of necessary use unto it, and may not be omitted. Thirdly, then your
Proposition is granted to have no force against gestures, but as supposing the
same to be misapplied. I hope the godly Reader will be careful to mind this.
Lastly, although it be true, that gestures may be misapplied through certain
occurrences, and circumstances, yet no maine gesture, (for every such God has
appointed to be serviceable to himself) can be As I have proved, part. 1 chapter ^
wickedly applied to any part of Gods holy worship, in respect of the natures
of both; as if there were a repugnancie betwixt material worship, and
personal: now when you say, man may devise gestures, that is, the application
of them, you must mean of such application as is simply unlawful to be made
unto such an ordinance; for else kneeling may be called the devise of man, when
it is used even in prayer, forasmuch as it may therein be sometimes unlawfully
used by circumstance; nay in this sense, your Proposition would be mere
confusion. and nonsense; but the nature of all gestures will agree with the
nature of all parts of divine worship, as I have showed, therefore it is clear
that this evasion of misapplying the gestures will not serve your turn.

For the second part of your Proposition; There is no gesture principal or
inferior used in Gods own worship, but it is idolatrously abused by the
Papists. You cannot take all gestures away, but you shall also take away all
the outward worship of God, What shall be said then against the gestures? will
the Popish idolatry make one gesture unclean unto us, and not another? In one
ordinance, and not in another? Of this you can render no reason: for if
standing be polluted to us by their idolatry, then also is sitting, if sitting,
then also is kneeling, and so consequently if any one be polluted, that we
cannot use it, then also is every one; and if Popish idolatry can pollute those
unto us in one kind of worship, then also in every kind. For so I am assured
you make no doubt, that as the Papists have polluted all their worship with
damnable idolatry, so they have accordingly defiled all the gestures by such
their polluted worship. Nay unto their Sacrament of the Altar, all maine
gestures have been applied, both standing, (which the Priest does use) and
sitting, (which the Pope does use) and kneeling, (which is the common gesture
of the people.) If now you answer, that one gesture is allowed by God otherwise
and not another, you renounce the force of the argument, taken from Popish
idolatry: if such or such a gesture be unlawful in it self, how idly do you
use this argument to condemn it? As if you should reason thus: [That which is
abominable in it self we may not do when it is polluted with Popish
idolatry:] which Proposition, if the same but understood it self, would be
content (if it could) to blush in your behalf. You should make this argument
taken from Popish idolatry to conclude effectually against a thing otherwise
lawful of its own strength.

Thirdly, the last clause of your Proposition concerns in Scripture, and
nature. Then they are respectively necessary, as being orderly, comely, and
commodious. Now many times when we do urge the lawfulness of our Temples,
Bells, Fonts, etc. continued from idolaters to us, your common Demand. pa. 28,
29. Sic et alij.
answer is this, that such things may be continued notwithstanding Popish
idolatry, as are either natural, or orderly, or decent, or profitable. What?
and is there any thing, whereof this can be said more truly, then of natural
gestures? Perhaps you will still be glad to say gestures are necessary in
divine worship, but some particular gesture is not always necessary. Answer.
If you speak of absolute necessity, no particular gesture is necessary by
Gods commandment at any time, and so the condition of all gestures is alike
in that respect; if you speak of respective necessity, any particular gesture
is necessary by Gods allowance at any time, being natural, (and more or
less) orderly, decent, and profitable in divine worship; and so the condition
of all gestures is still alike in this respect also. See before, Sect. 7.
Wherefore this last clause of your Proposition perteines not at all to natural
gestures in Gods worship, as standing, sitting, or kneeling, except as the same
depends upon a false supposition, as the other parts of the Proposition do
in like manner. Thus I have tried the gestures with the three parts of your
Proposition; now let us try them by all the places of Scripture which you
quote, and that the more mindfully, because all the foresaid parts of your
Proposition do depend upon them.

First, many of your proofs are for destruction of idols, and images
themselves, which were objects of worship. and ever will be common to the
worship of damnable idols, with that of the true God: I will not do you or my
self so much wrong, as to go about to refute such a gross and senseless in
consequence. Nay rather I will present you with an amphfication from the law of
destroying idols and images. against your selves. Look upon your quotations,
and you shall observe them speaking of artificial objects, of idolatrous
worship only: the images and idols to be destroyed were the works of men's
hands, and not the natural and innocent creatures of God. See now, if ever any
created thing should have been cashered, it should have been that same, which
man had made an express idol of formall-worship, for a more abominable use,
the creature cannot be put to. Yet created things, though worshipped thus
idolatrously God would not to be destroyed, and therefore much less should a
natural gesture be made vile, having been abused only as a means to worship
the creature. If any think, that those creatures only should have been
spared, which were partly out of man's power, and partly of durable necessity,
as the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. but nor such as increased or multiplied in the
air, earth, or water, if they could be gotten, I will not now dispute; for
though I yield that yet I shall not want the benefit of mine amplification
against you, inasmuch as if a creature made an idol of worship was to be
destroyed, yet other creatures of the same sort were not to be destroyed, but
that singular one alone: whereas the gestures which are used in holy worship
cannot be the same with the abused gestures of idolaters, but are only the
same sort or manner that they were. Nay further gestures have the two respects,
for which the Sun, Moon, and Stars are not to be destroyed; for as such
gestures as are used by others already be out of our reach so gestures be of
durable necessity to mankind for ever.

Next, the rest of your proofs concerning Ceremonies substances, are of those
complements that partcined unto the Idol: according to my division before sect.
5. I will first touch upon the ornaments of the Idol: and two places you quoute
apperteining to them. Is. 30. 22. Thou shall defile the covering of thy graven
images of silver, and the ornament of thy moulten images of gould, thou shall
cast them away as a menstrous cloth: thou shall say unto it, get thee hence.
And Genesis 35. 4. They gave unto Jacob all their earings [which they wore
probably in their ears in honor of their strange Gods] and Jacob hid them
under an Oak. Give me now leave to demand of you, whether those coverings,
garment; and earings belonged to the service first of the true God? If they did
not, then they make not against the gestures, which from the beginning
universally thereunto belonged? whether those coverings, garment, and earings,
were not artificial things? If they were, then they make not against the
gestures, which are plainly natural: whether those coverings, garments, and
earings, were not the individualls, which served unto the idol? If they were,
they make not against our gestures, which are only of the same manner with the
gestures of idolaters, and are not the same individualls, whether the
Abomination of those coverings, garments, and earings, stood not in this, that
they served the idol, and were used for the honor thereof? If it was so, they
make nothing against the gestures, of which the question is only made, as they
are applied to Gods own worship, and are used for the honor of his own
Majesty. And lastly, whether there be the same reason for an action, or
carriage of common use to Gods worship, as of a substance of proper use to some
idol? If there be not, what are idols ornaments to Gods worship-gestures? When
you have pondered upon these demands, I am deceived of your judgment, if you
think notwithstanding, by the Scriptures, which speak against the ornaments
of idols, to make something against natural gestures. And the same answer also
suffices for the instruments of idolatrous worship, which your other
quotations condemn; namely idolatrous places, groves, Altars, and vessels:
from which to gather any thing against gestures, in Gods own worship, is as
much as from the stews of Italy, and all their instruments of uncleanness, to
conclude against the singing of Larks in a Summers morning.

And yet I will give you a further answer: all the complements Demand. p. 20,
21.
No creature of God can be a monument of idolatry, but all gestures are Gods
creatures, or abilities whereunto man is disposed by creation, and therefore
they cannot be monuments of idolatry. Nothing Vessels of the Temple polluted
were restored, Eur. 1. 7.
which is taken from Gods worship, (whereunto himself had appointed, and
allowed it) applied to false worship can be a monument of idolatry: but all
gestures were transferred from Gods worship to idolatry by plain theft, and
unjust alienation of his title and interest: and therefore they cannot be
monuments of Idolatry, nothing which is used commonly and indifferently in true
and false worship both, can be a monument of false worship, or of Idolatry: but
all gestures are used commonly and indifferently in true, and false worship
both, therefore they cannot be monuments of Idolatry. Nothing which has
commodity, and needful use in Gods worship can be a monument of Idolatry, but
all gestures have commodity, and needful use in Gods worship, therefore they
cannot be monuments of idolatry. Nothing which Idolators never did defile, can
be a monument of Idolatry, but the gestures which Christians use in the true
Church, Idolaters never did defile, (for to the pure their own gestures are
pure) therefore they cannot be monuments of Idolatry. Nothing the abolition
whereof inferrs the destruction of Gods outward worship, or of any part thereof
can be a monument of Idolatry; but the abolishing of all gestures inferrs the
destruction of Gods outward worship, and the abolishing of one gesture inferrs
the destruction of some part thereof, therefore they cannot be monuments of
Idolatry. Finally, there is no place in the old or new Testament* that can be
brought forth, so much as looking toward the proof of this, that natural
gestures may be monuments of Idolatry.

Nay I will say more, those very complements of Idolatrous yea your Proposition
makes exception (in all your proofs alleged) of such idolatrous things, as
are of necessary use in the Church, and what is this against natural gestures,
I pray? Are artificial things more necessary in the Church, then natural? Does
the law dispense with Temples, and Bells, etc. when they may be conveniently
serviceable to true worship, and will it not much more dispense with standing,
sitting, or kneeling? That is unreasonable Divinity.

Now I will come to the other conditions, which concern Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Now it is
not meant, that there should be no remembrance at all, (for the Calfe which
Moses ground to dust, and Baal, in the extirpation of whom great zeal was used
by sundry men; and the Idols of many Nations are recorded unto posterity, and
remembered unto this day) but this is meant, there ought to be nothing left of
the idols which tended to the honorable remembrance of them. Mark therefore
God commands to root out so much as the name or memorial of Idols, and what
could be commanded more strictly? and yet that name or memorial of them is
rooted out, by taking away from them every honorable remembrance with this
condition, therefore, it was lawful to retain the appurtenances of idolatrous
worship, namely that no honor at all were imparted, or conveyed unto the Idol
thereby. Truly as an Idol is nothing in real excellency and virtue: so it is
nothing at all to us, if either we destroy, whatsoever may tend to make it
inestimation someting, (whereof we may learn a lesson in Baals Grove, which
when Gideon had By so doing he did destroy it according to the law, for now it
was no honorable remembrance of Baal.
cut down the Lord appointed him to offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of
it) or that the credit of the Idol being utterly decayed in our Country, or
age, his appurtenances are either not known, or not minded: as if a stranger
after Jacobs time, (becoming Lord of that place, where Jacob hid the earings)
should accidentally find those earings, do^btlesse he might most lawfully
possess the same; being either ignorant of their former use, or a despiser of
the Idol, whereto they served. I think your selves are of this mind, for out
of Augustine you Park of the Cross, chapter 1, sect 7. p. 10.
teach, though the appurtenances of the Idol be not destroyed, yet in the use
the same must be so altered and changed, that all honor of the Idol be
evidently turned vpside down. With this caution I suppose you Cartwr. Demand.
p. 20.
allow the gold and silver of Idols garments; and Demand, 21
that Idols garments may be sold in shops, and bought for man's service. This
then seems to be agreed betwixt us, that appurtenances of Idols may be spared,
so that all the honor of the Idol be quite destroyed. Now to apply, what (I
pray) does all this concern the natural gestures? Can they be for the honor
of an Idol in Gods own worship? If this be possible, then either because the
Idol set them in Gods worship, or they are directed unto the Idol in some part,
or they are such as are used in idolatrous worship in like manner; but the
first is a notorious falsehood; the second is impertinent to our controversy;
the third is absurd inasmuch as there is agreement betwixt true, and false
worshippers in all gestures, and ever will be.

The third condition, on which the appurtenances of: Deuteronomy. 7. 25. But what is a
snare according to the purpose of the law? For the best thing in the world,
even the Sun, Moon, and Stars, may become a snare through the corruption of
man. The word [snare] which the law does use is a metaphor taken from
artificial snares, which are of purpose made to catch something. The Lord
therefore condemns those idolatrous things, which were snares only by their
institution and nature: as first in respect of their idolatrous use continued,
before their faces, for that was an abomination and snare. Secondly, in respect
of their outward form, continued before their faces, (the things themselves
being otherwise without necessity or profit) for that was a temptation, as the
garish ornaments of an harlot are unto carnal uncleanness. Thirdly, if you
deem that the materials themselves were forbidden, because they might become
snares; I answer, suposing that, yet they were only the materials of such
appurtenances of the Idols, as were proper unto it, and the same munerically,
which adorned it. And this is clear in the law, as will appear unto you, if
you please to make search. But what is this to bodily gestures? As for
idolatrous use, we only speak of gestures as they are referred and applied
wholly to Gods own worship: for idolatrous and artificial form, gestures
have none, but what is natural, and of the making of God himself, and besides
every one of these is needful and profitable, as I have showed. Lastly for
materials of Idol-appurtenances, gestures have nothing to answer, except you
would abolish gestures from all parts of Gods worship, as well as from any one
part. And moreover, what are the gestures of wicked idolatours to the gestures
of godly people? Are not every man's gestures his own? In a word, ensnaring
objects, (which the Lord condemned and forbade to his people) were always
external matters without them it was never heard that standing, sitting, or
kneeling, were called snares from the beginning.

Thus I have showed three necessary conditions, on which it was lawful to to
spare idolatrous appurtenances: perhaps some man will object, that Gods law was
absolute without these conditions, because it runs in general terms without
limitation. I answer. First, I take it, that is not true, for it cannot be
prooved, that the materials of Idols appurtenances were to be abolished:
Groves indeed were to be burnt with fire. Deuteronomy. 12. 3. or cut down, Exodus 34.
13. Deuteronomy. 7. 5. except first they were to be cut down, and then burnt with
fire in useful occasion; as Gideon cut down the Grove of Baal, and then used
the wood to a burnt sacrifice, Judge. 6. 26. High places were only to be pulled
down, Numb. 33. 52. Altars only to be broken down, Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Ornaments of
the Idol, as gold and silver were only forbidden unto private men's liberty:
See Deuteronomy. 7. 25. Isai. 30. 22. though perhaps reserved to public use and
devoted to the Lords treasury, (compare Josh. 6. 17, 19,) and if they were to
be, utterly abolished, no other So the Manuscript expounds Deuteronomy. 7. 25. chapter
1. arg. 6,
gold or silver is meant, but that whereof the person of the Idol or Image, (as
I may speak) did consist, and not such as was but an appurtenance to his
person of which I only treat in this place. Secondly, suppose that God
commanded all the idolatrous appurtenances to be destroyed, yet that
commandment bound only the Jews in the Judicial strictness of it. I call
that Judicial strictness, which requires the abolishing of things, merely,
because they have served the Idol, though they be otherwise lawful and good,
and that all honor of the Idol be destroyed, and all danger of him utterly
taken away. These points are of moral and durable consideration, and therefore
when all honor, and danger of the Idol is taken away, what moral wickedness
can be in reteining, (otherwise) good and lawful things, which had been only
dead, and passive appurtenances unto it? Now it is evident, that the
strictness of the law concerned only the Jews, either in respect of the land
of Canaan; (for so the Lord directs only, what his people should do in the
land of Canaan, as may appear, Numb. 13 51, 52. Deuteronomy. 7. 1-25. Deuteronomy. 12. 1, 2,
3. and gave full liberty of taking all spoil of vanquished foreigners, as may
appear, Deuteronomy. 20. 14. Numb. 31. 22. or howsoever in respect of the time, which
dured no longer, then unto the end of the Jewish Pedagogue: and this is
confirmed by clear light of Scripture; for God had appointed special place
for his worship, of his own; (the high place of Mount Zion, which he chose to
place his name there;) also God had appointed Altars of his own, vessels of
his own, ornaments of his own, etc. and therefore did expressly forbid the
Heathenish places, altars, vessels, ornaments, etc. as which opposed his
institution in those times. Thus the Lord speake^h in the law: Ye shall utterly
destroy all the places, wherein the Nations which ye shall possess served
their Gods, but unto the place which the Lord shall choose out of all your
Tribes, to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall you seek, and
thither shall thou come, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 5. Now what is the strictness of the law
upon these considerations to us? Are not you resolved, that the judicialls, (as
we call them) of Moses be abrogated, so far as they serve not to fence the
law moral? I think it is hard to see any benefit of fencing the moral law in
the destruction of such things as had been used to idolatry; if they be not
only otherwise lawful, and good in themselves, but also be so cleansed of all
their abuse and filthiness, that all both honor and danger of the Idol, or
Idol-worship is quite taken away from them. Verily if these things be true,
then all your places of Scriptures alleged to the proof of your Proposition
concerning ceremonious substances of idolatry, are still further off from the
condemnation of natural gestures.

Now remains to try the gestures, by those your quotations, But what need I
trouble my self about words? let the fifth section before be reviewed, and it
will appear that your quotations do not come near to gestures in Gods own
worship: yet if any of your proofs had concerned them, these would have been
they, which speak of actions in false and idolatrous worship, but your own
proofs sufficiently refute your selves: we must not (say your quotations)
serve God, as the Nations served their gods: yet the same quotations do say
again, that the Nations bowed down to their gods. What? Must we not therefore
bow down to the living God in his worship? Nay there is no doubt but the
Nations used standing, sitting and kneeling in several parts of their public
worship; and can you imagine that any of these gestures were unlawful to the
Jews in that name? Alas my brethren, you have mistaken your proofs in this
point: did the law never take hold of agreement with Idolatours in gestures
till our time? It is evident that you cannot bring forth any command or
example in the book of God, whereby it may appear, that it is unlawful to
agree with them in the gestures of divine worship. Indeed herein the Church
agrees not with them, because it would conform unto their practice out of an
honorable respect of their false worship, (this were an ungodly respect or
motive) but uses her liberty of gestures which the word allows, whatsoever
they do according or contrary. And more (I think) I need not to add for
answer or explication of your Proposition.

Answer to the Assumption.
NOw I have an answer to make to your Assumption, [But kneeling at Sacrament
has been devised by man, secondly, is notoriously known to have been of
old, and still to be abused unto idolatry by the Papists, thirdly, and is now
of no necessary use in the Church.] Which Assumption, so far as the terms
thereof be, (as they ought to be) taken in the same sense with your
Proposition, I do deny in all the parts of it. In discussing I will begin with
the first part, wherein you assume, that kneeling at Sacrament is devised by
man.

Of the first branch of your Assumption. Whether kneeling at Sacrament be
devised by man.
I Confess in this passage, there is a great deal of force for you, if you
can make good that which you forgot your selves when you passed it over. Is
that which God allows in his word man's devise? or rather is it not Gods
ordinance? All gestures were man's devises by your conceit in the Sacraments of
Circumcision and Baptism, because God commands no one gesture in particular
absolutely, nay expressly no one at all. All gestures were man's devises in the
Passover among the Jews, because there was no gesture expressly and
particularly appointed: but who sees not that this is your devise without
reason: for since the Sacraments must needs be celebrated, celebrated they
could not be without gestures, which are of flat necessity, and great
importance therein, and yet it pleases the Lord to prescribe no gestures in
particular to be used in them, is it not an evident thing that liberty of
gestures is Gods ordinance, I say, his ordinance, for he appointed that liberty
of purpose, and not forgetting (as man does many things in making of laws) to
make mention of them. What did you mean therefore to presume the gesture of
kneeling at Sacrament to be man's devise without the trial of the word, which
only can determine in this case; especially when your selves speak other
where in this manner: If kneeling came from better men then the Papists, yet
that is nothing material, except it be prooved lawful out of holy writ, which
only can declare the good way, yea though it came from them, which were next
and immediate successors to the Apostles. Demand. p. 66, 67. It is a gross
and Popish course in questions of Religion, to ground, and infer upon the
ancient use of a thing, the lawfulness of it, Disp. page 139. We must not
look at antiquity, but follow the word of God, which is most ancient, Park.
of the Cross, l. 2. p. 124. Kneeling at Sacrament is allowed if it be
warranted by Gods word, as kneeling is allowed in prayer, Disp. page 100. That
which God has by his word purified for his worship ought not to be accounted
unclean, Demand. p. 20. Thus you should have gone about to prove kneeling
man's devise by the rule of Gods word, and not as you do by the use, or
practice thereof alone, which your selves determine cannot serve the turn.
Your other considerations without the word cannot be effectual to prove that
you desire; for Gods holy ordinance may sometimes Disp. reasons thus, page
104. Kneeling bad no use before Antichrists time, therefore could have no good
use Sir, I deny your argument.
be first put in practice by wicked Idolatours, as single as persion in
Baptism There is no mention of the public practice of sprinkling till about
1300 years a Christo nato: which was when (as you say) Antichrist was about
his full height.
was, before the Church of Christ did receive it; therefore you are short of
necessary proof already, whatsoever become of the other considerations which
follow. Yet let us also pass over unto them.

Secondly, therefore who did first put in practice the Disp. page 99.
that the man of sin was the author and mother of it, that Perth. Ass. 55.
the first act of kneeling, that ever was at the Sacrament is idolatrous; that
Abridg 30.
it grew first from the persuasion of the real presence, and this Page 31.
when Antichrist was at his full height, and in the Disp. page 99.
grossest time of idolatry, that the eye of this Christian world has seen.
Verily if you were as substantial in proofs, as you are confident in your
opinions, there were great reason the world should be led by you. But what
infallible, and demonstratiue evidences do you present us withal, that the
man of sin first brought kneeling into the Sacrament? For sooth the Abridgement
brings not forth one proof, but gives us bare affirmation that the thing was
so. Alas I that wise men should be so much overseene! Did they not think, that
opposing the practice of a famous Church, and so many learned men, (then whom
no age has known more, or more learned) the matter did require some manner of
proof? Well. The Abridgement pleases to say (being opponent) and I deny, and
so the Abridgement is answered; but if any body speak to the point, it is the
Disputer, and yet he gives us only a company of conjectures, and some of them
so simple, that they be worther to be hissed at then refuted. First, (says
Disp p. 70. 73.
he) The first age of the primitive Church, being that wherein the Apostles
lived, enterteined not kneeling. And how can he tell that? Forsooth the
Churches wo^ld follow the institution, and again in all probability they used
the same gestures at the Supper, that they did at their Loue-feasts, and at
Idol-feasts, which was not kneeling. Answer. Besides an ungrounded hypothesis,
all this is no more but conjectural; for the Disputer can conclude nothing
convincingly, whether they retained the gesture of Christ, (whatsoever it was)
or changed, whether they varied from the Loue-feasts, and Idol feasts, or no,
he and I can determine nothing; because it is left undetermined by the holy
writings. Yea they might kneel in those times, for ought he can disprooue, and
therefore this possibility makes all his other conjectures weaker, and weaker,
Secondly, (says Page 74.
he) In the first part of the second age of the Church can it be doubted, but
such worthy Fathers and Churches as then lived would follow the steps of the
worthies of the former age? Can it be thought that they would bring so soon a
gesture in use, which might not be used, but with violating Gods law? Can it be
doubted, but you are an egregious trifler, that go about first to prove, they
did not kneel, because their predecessors had not kneeled: and then they did
not do such a thing, because they ought not (as you surmise) to do it. Are
you not ashamed of all this childish froth? You beg that their predecessors
kneeled not, and that they would not vary in their gesture from them, because
kneeling was not a table gesture. It seems you need no books to gather the
history of times, you can gather it by reason from duty to practice: and so
much to this idle trifling. But what may be said to the latter part of the
second age of the Church? Why, (says Page 77.
he) if kneeling were used in the latter end of this age, then there were three
several gestures used in the same age: but there were not three several
gestures used in the same age. Answer. The sequel of the Mayor is false; for
sitting cannot be prooved in the second age of the Church: but what if sitting
and standing were used both, what does that hinder but kneeling might be used
also; As if in this present age, there be not standing, sitting, and kneeling
used, yea in the same Church at the same time. Thirdly, next he goes about to
prove, that no gesture was used in the Church, from the middle of the second
age, to each succeeding age before the year 1220 but standing only, and so he
comprehends above ten ages together, let us see therefore what he produces. If
(says Page 78.
he) kneeling had been used all this while, in all likelihood some mention
would have been made of it in the Church-writings. Answ. First, it is
commended unto us in the Church-writings, as in due place I will will make
appear. Secondly, if it were not, you cannot reason a non scripto ad non
factum, specially in mutual gestures; nay you cannot reason negatiuely in a
matter of fact from the story of Scripture it self; if you could, you might
prove the Jews used no gesture at all in their Circumcision, and Passover;
for none is recorded unto posterity. But what should I follow you in your
dallying? Your self confess that this reason is no more then a probability,
and so kneeling might be used in the Church notwithstanding. Again he gives us
another reason, (page 83. etc.) which (as far as I can see, for I confess
his proceeding and method is very confused) he afterward brancheth into three
arguments or considerations. Arg. 1. (says Page 93.
he) Standing was the gesture allowed, and used by the Church in all public
prayers on every Sabbath throughout the year, and so at the consecration of
holy mysteries, from Anno 150. till Anno 1220. therefore it was their gesture
allowed at the receiving of them. Answer. Your consequence is unsound, inasmuch
as one gesture may be used at consecration of mysteries, and another at the
receiving of them. You see the example of so much at this day, and though it
seem some what harsh in your ear, that they should stand at praying, and
kneel down at receiving, yet if you consider those times well, you shall
find that Christians did think it highly needful to worship, or adore at the
Sacrament, and you must not enquire what was fittest to be done, but what they
did or might possibly do, according as the stream of their devotions and
judgments did then carry them. Sure I am they allowed and used many things
more unreasonable, and improbable, then to kneel at the Sacrament, and stand
at their prayers and blessings. But what if your conclusion be yielded, what
harm will follow? I grant that standing was allowed in the act of receiving,
I deny, that kneeling was disallowed; for as for the custom of standing in
some Churches upon the Sabbaths at prayer, you know it was not, because
kneeling might not be used at prayer, but standing was used only in respect of
the Sabbaoths, so that neither was kneeling condemned in it self on the
Sabbaoths, nor at all condemned upon the week days: yea, and upon the
Sabbaoths, that standing at the Altar, which is spoken, is meant of the
Ministers rather then of the people, and the proofs which you bring speaking
of standing at the Altar will avow no more. Nay lastly, your own testimonies
do condemn you, many of which do confess, that standing was in many
Churches laid down, and not universally received in all places and times,
neither may you say that the public order and custom was for the most part
otherwise, for perhaps the better sort strove against that bond of standing, as
you do now against kneeling in this Church, and therein I doubt not but you
would have taken their parts, if with these resolutions you had bin then a
liuesman among the^. Mark now this argument of yours. It shows not, that they
concondemned kneeling on the Sabbath, as being unsuitable to the Sacrament, or
prayer, but as they thought unsuitable to that day. It shows not, they
condemned kneeling at Sacrament any week days at all excepting the days of
Pentecost. It shows not that the people stood, but the Ministers only at the
Altar. In a word it shows not, that the custom of standing was accepted
without exception, but rather that it found from age to age, great, (and me
thinks in your esteem also commentable) resistance. Arg. 3. Page 97.
is in effect the self same with this and therefore I need to give it no other
answer. Arg. 2. He reasons in Page 94.
this manner. If when Honorius made his decree for adoring the Sacrament,
kneeling were not in use, then in all probability kneeling at the Communion was
not received into practice, in any age preceding the days of Honorius: But
when Honorius made his decree for adoring the Sacrament, kneeling was not in
use. Answer. The Assumption here is not current, for kneeling might be used in
the time of Honorius, notwithstanding his decree which might suppose it, and by
the act of bowing divert, and direct it for a new adoring of the visible
mysteries. So Honorius might mention bowing only, because the same should
plainly distinguish, and signify adoration to be directed unto the bread, and
likewise increase the degree thereof; and he that observes shall see, that
both the cleerest evidence, and the highest degree and perfection of idolatrous
grossnesse in the Popish gestures in their Sacrament at this day, is the
sensible and express mooving or bowing of the body to the Wafer-cake made an
Idol. And therefore it is a thing probable enough, that Honorius enjoined
inclination or bowing down unto them Neither has Bishop Morton said any thing
of this decreed (...) which may not stand (...) supposed. See Def. partic. ch
3. S. 21. He says ne more then that the (...) of the decree are only for
bowing the body and not kneeling: and so the Relier has not outshot the
Bishop, (as he says) in his own bow, but outgone himself with precipitancy,
making trusty inferences of these words which he but surmiseth the meaning of,
and understands not.
which kneeled already, and so kneeling was settled in the Church by tradition,
before Honorius decree, and his decree does partly direct for the certain
applying of worship unto his new Idol of bread. (for if kneelers must bow to
the bread, kneeling also would be carried to the bread under and with bowing,
which demonstrates the object worshipped, as if one should point at it with the
finger) and partly also adds unto the degree of their adoration, for who will
not easily think that the highest degree, and not the least and lowest was
intended by the will of Honorius. And indeed when else was kneeling added to
the Romish Bread-worship? Strange it were that none of the Historians, or
Schoolmen, or Canonists mentioned how it came in the Sacrament, and by what
authority through all Christendom, if it came into practice so lately: neither
find we that any Popes or Councels made any decree since Honorius to bring it
into the Church: behold then how your Assumption is sick to death, except you
can cure it by some infallible testimonies. But for your Proposition, that
certainly is but a simple patch of your learning. If kneeling say you was not
in use, when Honorius made his decree, then in all probability it was not in
use in any age proceeding the days of Honorius: a pretty sentence, if kneeling
was not in use in Honorius time, then it was not in use above a thousand years
before. Now I put upon you to prove this sequel if you can, that we may all
wonder at your profoundnes. First, you say, Standing at all public prayers and
thanksgivings was yet in force. Answer. Thus you make all your three arguments
to hang upon one medium, and I have given answer before. Secondly, say you,
Shall we think that kneeling found place in the purer times of the Church, and
no grace in the corruptest age thereof. Answer. Shall we think, but you wanted
a little depth? And why (I pray) should kneeling rather be in the corruptest
times then the purest? I confess kneeling to a false God finds best
enterteinment in the corruptest times, (for that is it, whereby the times are
corrupted) but kneeling to God in his ordinance becomes the purest times of the
Church: belike you thought your words would leave an impression with men, which
could not abide kneeling already, but it was not wisely disputed with your
adversary, (Sir) who thinks of kneeling as honorable thoughts, as you do of
standing. But now the Reader has seen the substance of all, which is said
tending to prove, that the gesture of kneeling at the Sacrament was first
brought in by Antichrist. Here I must give the Reader to take notice of a
matter or two. First I have of purpose suppressed the mention of
Ecclesiastical testimonies in this place, (which I have reserved to the last
chapter if God permit) and only answer unto the force of such reasons, as the
Disputer produces. Again in all this sweating Disputer, you shall not find
one testimony, which is express for sitting in all this length of a thousand
two hundred years, and more. Hereunto let be added, that if the ancient
custom of standing at prayers drew standing at Sacrament upon the Sabbaoths
with it, in some ages or places, yet that standing was not used because of
Christ's example, or that it was a Table Gesture, but as the Supper had a reason
common with it to prayer, and so the Ancients setting these together in one
gesture have given us example to set them together in another.

Thirdly, if you will show our kneeling to be devised when Honorius decree was
of bowing at elevation of the host and that was of bowing unto the host
elevated, as the applying of kn. at the instant of elevation, together with the
doctrine and received practice of the Roman Church thereupon does evidently
import. Oh but then (says the Replier) you confess that bowing of the body
before the bread lifted up is to adore it. Repl. partic. chapter 3. sect. 21. Alas
good man! we expound the decreevndoubtedly by the doctrine of real presence in
the time of Honorius, general practice of Bread-worship thereupon received,
and applying of kneeling to the act of elevation. I warrant you (Sir) there is
no danger of concluding therefore that all bowing before the elements is
adoring of them, you have not outshot your adversary then, but outrunne good
reason, and plain dealing.
the consecrated host is lifted up, and it is against the rule in the Church of
Rome for the people to worship any thing, that is not higher then themselves.
What is this kneeling now unto ours I pray, whereof the question is of the act
of receiving, and not elevation? We worship only the living God, and detest
that abominable bread-worship perhaps as much as you do. Can you make kneeling
to God, and kneeling to an Idol to be of like nature? This you cannot deny,
that gestures and actions are principally distinguished by their objects and
ends. Papists and we do agree in the use of all gestures of worship; but they
apply the same to idolatrous use, and we apply them to the service of the Lord
in his own worship. Wherefore there is as much difference betwixt our kneeling
at Sacrament, and the Papists kneeling to their Breaden God, as is betwixt our
kneeling in prayer, and their kneeling unto Images. I would feign learn, how
any people can be more contrary to Idolaters, or more just then to give unto
God that which is Gods, when they had given it unto the Devil. Lo here is a
difference betwixt their kneeling and ours, wider then the heaven is from
earth. Secondly, let me press you with your opinion of the Papists Sacrament
of the Altar, for I am persuaded you are resolved it is no Sacrament of Jesus
Christ, why will you object unto us kneeling thereat, more then the kneeling of
any other Idolaters in false worship? Have wicked Pagans abused kneeling a
thousand ways? Those we pass, and kneel unto God notwithstanding without
doubt; and why should this idolatrous kneeling of the Papists be more unto us
then all they? Show us if you can out of Gods word, that this kneeling is liker
out kneeling then the kneeling of all other Idolaters? For if their Sacrament
be no Sacrament, if their Breaden God be an Idol to them, if their adoration be
the worst idolatry that the world has heard of, why should their abomination
come nearer to our kneeling at the Lords table then the like committed by the
brutish Pagans? Thirdly, our gesture which we use is our own, and the Papists
never had the command thereof. To the pure, (says the Apostle) all things are
pure; we kneel not out of subjection to the will of Antichrist, but out of the
allowance of Gods word: nay our kneeling at Sacrament unto God alone is a
confession against Antichrist and his idolatry. Fourthly, if our kneeling at
Sacrament be the same of nature with the Popish, then is your sitting and
standing, of the same nature with their sitting and standing. Behold the Pope
himself sits at Sacrament; the Priests do stand at Sacrament, (and these are
the principal Idolaters in the Bread worship) and therefore sitting and
standing be in the same case with kneeling. Perhaps you will say, Kneeling was
devised by the Papists, sitting and standing were not. Answer. So far as he
devised kneeling, (that is to worship an Idol) so far he devised sitting, and
standing; but as sitting or standing were or might be used in the Sacrament,
before the Breaden God was borne, lawfully, and according to Gods own order;
so kneeling was and might be so used also. Then the Papists at length, when
Bread-worship came up abused them altogether: and so how are they not every one
of them in the same case? Thus I have examined the first branch of your
Assumption, and I do not doubt but the Christian Reader will think all that
you say too weak to prove our kneeling at Sacrament to be man's devise. Nay
notwithstanding all that you say, the same may be Gods ordinance, practiced in
the ancient Church, and quite of another nature from the Romish kneeling in
their Breaden Idolatry. Now I pass to the second branch of your Assumption,
that kneeling is notoriously known to have been of old and still to be abused
to Idolatry by the Papists.

Of the second part of your Assumption, that kneeling at Sacrament is
notoriously known to have been of old and still to be abused unto Idolatry by
the Papists.
THis part of your Assumption carries three errors Perth. Ass p. 55.
affirm plainly, that our kneeling is a conformity to the Papists, and a
monument of Popish idolatry. Well thus you say, but how can you make it good?
Truly I find nothing material in any of your books, except I should refer
hither all those scattered sayings of yours, whereby you link us with, and
condemn us by the idolatrous Papists.

First you say, Abridg. p. 62. Disp. page 108.
at the same time in the same action, we use the same outward gesture that the
Papists do. Answer. Our action is not the same. But what if all be true, which
you say, your selves do as much in all gestures as the Papists do throughout
all divine ordinances. You kneel, and they kneel; you stand, and they stand;
you sit, and they sit. So you agree likewise with the worshippers of Baal, and
all idolatrous Gentiles in standing, sitting, and kneeling: know ye not that
the public doctrine and worship, which any people imbraceth or professes,
distinguishes public gestures? Thus it is in all religions, thus it is in the
true. Secondly, you Bradsh. arg. 2.
say, It is an honor to Antichrist to leave the practice of Reformed Churches
and follow him. Answer. Reformed Churches are diverse in outward orders, and
gestures, and there is liberty so to be; reformation consisting not in leaving
any gestures of Gods worship, but in referring them to his glory, as they ought
to be, and seperating the abuses from them. Now is it no honor to Antichrist
to use the gesture which he uses, wherein reformation stands not; for all
gestures are common to all false, and idolatrous worship with the true worship
of God: neither have those Churches, who have cast off the yoke of Antichrist
made a reformation in the gesture of the Sacrament by taking kneeling away, but
by taking abuses of kneeling away. As for kneeling it self, it is certain
they took that away only to remove scandal and danger in the first change,
when they saw needful to settle some one gesture among many. Furthermore, I
must tell Mr. Bradshaw that his speech supposes a grievous falsehood, namely
that we chose to kneel of purpose to side with Antichrist, and to differ from
the reformed Churches, when there was as it were a competition, which of them
should have our company: for it is manifest ^^ough we did not refuse standing,
or sitting, because other Churches used the same, nor again did we kneel,
because we honored the Romish abon ination; but upon other reasons looking
upon neither of both. You would make the world believe, that in setting before
us these two diverse parternes, we strove rather to be conformable to the
Romish; wherein to blessed King Edward 6. with many Martyrs, and worthies of
his time, besides the state in the beginning of blessed Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, (not to speak of more) you do manifest wrong, who studied to provide,
and appoint what gesture they could judge the fittest in their times, as became
so wise governors; having their eye rather upon the state of their Citizens,
and domestics, then beyond Seas either upon Rome or Geneva: and howsoever, the
conformity now of singular persons is to the Church of England it self alone.
Thirdly, you Manuscr. disp. 105. Survey p. 73. 80.
say, It is notoriously known, that this gesture of kneeling was borrowed from
them, and was enjoined for their sakes in King Edwards time. Answer. That it
was not continued from them is evident by this that there was in the beginning
of King Edwards Reign a certain space granted of liberty; and truly herein
was the providence of God declared, that the kneeling of former days was not
continued but intermitted for a time; and other borrowing of kneeling to God in
this holy Sacrament could be none, for they had none such to lend us. Again
where you say, that kneeling was brought into this Church for their sakes, it
is true no otherwise but according to the Apostles practice, who became all
things to all men, (Jews, Pagan Idolatours, and the weak) that he might, (if
it were possible) persuade and save them, but by no means for any honorable
respect to their Bread-worship, against which some of the first enjoyners of
kneeling confessed in the flames of devouring fire. Also to this objection I
have answered more largely otherwhere.

Fourthly, you say, Kneeling is a note of Antichrist. Answer. As washing was a
note of the Jewish Church to distinguish it from Christ and his Apostles. It
were wonderful strange if the true Church could be distinguished from the
false by bodily gestures, which are common unto both. Verily if our kneeling to
God be a note of the Church of Rome, I will begin a new Catechism. Indeed
kneeling to the bread-made-god is a note of a Papist, and the bread-made-god is
a note of Antichrist, and kneeling to God alone in his own ordinance is a note
of a true worshipper, but kneeling simply is a note of neither one nor other.
Hither may be referred that you say, that Disp page 110, 111.
the kneeling of Papists and Lutherans witness their faith. Answer. As if
every special gesture in divine worship did not as much: and your mentioning
of the Lutherans spoils all; you may add the Church of England unto them; for
all these witness diverse faith by kneeling at Sacrament. That is to say,
there are diverse a^ he publick^^ known and believed, and then each sort of
people refer, and apply kneeling accordingly.

Fifthly, you Disp. page 104 107.
say, Kneeling has an immovable abuse sticking to it, whereof it cannot be
purged: as, first, i t can never be purged from being a will worship, being so
lately brought into Gods service by Antichrist, without all warrant of the
word. Answer. All this is begged, and I have refu^ed abundantly in this
Treatise. Secondly, It can never be purged from being a gesture devised by
Antichrist; all preaching to the contrary will never prove it to have any
other author. Answer. This is but your confidence; for all your disputing has
not yet prooved the gesture to have no other author, then Antichrist. Then if
Antichrist first used the gesture of kneeling to his Sacrament, before the
orthodox Church used it at the Lords table, all your disputing cannot prove,
that he is the author of kneeling to God in his own ordinance therefore: feed
us not with the wind of your words, but give us reasons and proofs that are
convincing, or else be entreated to hold your peace. Thirdly, It can never be
purged from being an idolatrous gesture in that actions, (...) the members of
Antichrist, therefore we must not use it, for we are forbidden to walk in the
ordinances of Idolaters, and to do so to the Lord as they do to their Idols.
Answer. Idolaters bow down to their Idols, must not we therefore bow down to
the Lord? See you not that gestures are not, cannot be forbidden, which are
common to Idolaters and true worshippers. Wherefore it appears not that there
is any suc^ immooveable abuse sticking unto the gesture as the Disputer
imagines, nay he Disp page 101
confesses, that if the original were good, that is, if it had the warrant of
the word at first it may be purged by reducing it to his original. Sixthly,
you Dialogue be^vixt old Protestant, and new formalist, page 17, 18, 19, 20.
Disput, 100.
say, that kneeling i^ defended by Popish arguments. Answer. Some of the
arguments which you make your new formalist to use are none of your arguments,
and indeed the rest of them are not full arguments at all, but considerations
that are on our side pertinent to the controversy; but if there be any thing,
which we observe out of Gods word, taken up by the Papists, what great fault
can you find with us? Know you not that Papists have done the truth that wrong
in some degree in all their damnable heresies? But the truth is, if the Papists
say any thing to prove that sitting or standing are not necessary, so it is,
assure your self, that which they say to prove adoration of the Breaden God
lawful, we make none of our arguments. Seventhly, you Abridg p. 3^.
say, That kneeling is an evident sign of Bread-worship in the judgment of
the very Papists: for their conceit of Transubstantiation by their practice of
kneeling. Answer. Do they speak of kneeling to the Sacrament, or to God in
heaven? If they speak of kneeling to God, and from thence do prove
Transubstantiation, they were quite besides themselves; but if they speak (as
they did) of kneeling to the Sacrament, they might say so more tolerably,
though they concluded not effectually; for they might as well prove their
images to be transubstantiated, but what is that to us, who do abhorr^
kneeling unto the Sacramental elements: you see their reasoning touches us
not, their authority does touch us as little. You add that Bellarmine says,
he marvailes not that the Calvinists adore not the Sacrament, because they
believe not that Christ is really present. Answer. And does not Bellarmine
speak for us in these words, as well as for any other, whom he calls
Sacramentaries, and Calvinists, who adore the Sacrament no more then they do?
Alas what ^eeble concei^s be these of yours to condemn us withal? But you
must mark here that if Bellarmine and his followers did reason contrary to us
in this thing, then it follows that Popish arguments, which you objected
before are not our supporters, neither serve our turn for de^ence of ^ur
kneeling. Thus I have gathered together such scartered objections, as I find
in your books, and are ^^th^r to be referred, if they be of use any where, and
have likewise given reasonable answer unto them. Now therefore the second part
of your Assumption is v^terly false, if it be taken according to the necessary
sense of your Proposition whereon it depends; for the Papists have not abused
kneeling at the Lords Supper: again, they have not abused our knee, ling: and
lastly, kneeling to God Almighty is no honor to their wa^er-idolatry, but
rather a disgrace and condemnation thereof, as that which is contrary.

Whereas you amplisie this second part of your Assumption by telling us,
Abridg. p 31.
That there is no action in all Antichrists service, so idolatrous a^ their
kneeling at Sacrament: But Survey p. 182.
this of all Popish rites is most idolatrous, and so Abridg p. 31.
no action in Popery can be termed so prop^^ly Popish and Antichristian as
this, and Survey p. 177
that [in This cause makes your assertion false, also implies contrad^ction (in
it self) say you, (in respect of Transubstantiation) such a speech have the
S^otchmen, Pert^ Ass page 55. who affirm, that it is unlawful to conform
with the Papists in the act of kneeling, wherein the life and soul of their
idolatry stands. Then it follows, that forasmuch as we conform not with
them further then in the bare act, abhorring their idolatry, that wheresoever
kneeling is, there is the life and soul of Popish idolatry: Zeal makes you
speak sometimes great mysteries,
it selfe] it was and is the principal part of Popish idolatry in regard of
Transubstantiation. And moreover, (i) That it is daily used by them [in that
idolatrous manner] To what purpose serves it I pray? For if our gesture at the
Lords table was never abused by the Papists at all, have no spiritual
acquaintance, or kindred with their kneeling at all, serves not to honor their
damnable idol at all, what is the matter how frequent, and how vile is their
idolatry? First you must give your accusation a groundwork, before you must
set it out with amplification. That is the work of Logic, and this of
Rhetoric, except you would have Rhe^orick without reason.

Of the third branch of your Assumption, whether kneeling at Sacrament be now
of necessary use in the Church?
TO this last point you speak not any thing, but Abridg. 27. But what a
negligent and perfunctory prooving is this? Think you that you have said
enough to settle a man's conscience? Verily you do wrong unto the people of God
to abuse them with such weak and slender st^ff, that cannot possibly ab^de
trial, without discovering it self. I will give you three things to consider.
First, that what you say against kneeling at Sacrament may as well be said
against standing or sitting, which may be also spared in the Church of God. It
were ridiculous here to say that sitting or standing are lawful by Gods word,
and so is not kneeling; for besides that it is a begged falsehood, it is an
utter relinquishing of the present purpose, which only concerns the
necessary use of gestures, and behold you cannot deny, but standing may be
spared, sitting may be spared, and for company in that sense I will not deny
but kneeling may be spared also.

Secondly, kneeling at Sacrament is necessary as much as our Churches, Bells,
Ropes, Ringing, Fontes, Seats, Pulpits, Tables, Table-cloths, Chalices, etc.
which you do Demand. p. 28, 29.
allow notwithstanding they have been defiled unto idolatry, yet these are not
absolutely necessary: for if such or such Churches were b^aten down, as have
been abused to idolatry, (as the Christians here in England at their
conversion served the heathenish Temples. Mr. Fox Martyrol. page 96.) and
others built in their stead, the Church I warrant you would not want the same;
but you allow these things, because partly they be absolutely necessary in
their kind, and partly the particular things themselves be respectively
necessary, namely, orderly, comely, and commodious to Gods worship. Thus
kneeling is necessary inasmuch as gesture is necessary in it its kind: yea even
kneeling is a gesture that is orderly, comely, and commodious in the Lords
Supper, (which I have made plain in this Treatise already where your contrary
reasoning gave me occasion.) Thirdly, as kneeling in respect of its nature has
a necessary use in the Sacrament, so it is necessary to singular persons in
this Church by the commandment of superiors. Is it necessary to preserve the
liberties of your Ministeries? Then kneeling at Sacrament is necessary, for
resistance whereof the said liberty is restreined unto you. Again is it
necessary to receive the Sacrament, and feed upon the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus? then kneeling is necessary, without which that Communion with the
Church is denied unto you. You grant meats sacrificed unto idols might be
eaten, because they served for the private use of man's life, (Demands. page
20.) And shall not the food of our souls be broken, (in the ministry of the
word) and received, (in the Lords Supper) when the same has never been
sacrificed to idols; but only the natural gesture, (which serves for private
use of man's life, and public use of Gods worship both) has been (as it were)
sacrificed to idols, and yet not the self same numericall gesture (as the
Idols things were the self same) neither. So that if kneeling may be spared in
other respects, yet forasmuch as Popish pollution is but accidental unto it,
and that it is no sin formally, as blasphemy, witchcraft, lying, etc. behold
as the case stands (brethren) it cannot ^e spared, because the word and
Sacrament cannot be spared. Iadde that the peace of the Church cannot be
spared, and your resistance is against the peace. Your contentions may be
spared, your idle argu^ents against k^e lin^ ^ay be spared, b^t the p^a^e of
the Church ^s n^c^ss^ry and c^^^ot be spared, but with the grief o^ all good
h^arts, yea and the grief of Gods ^^ne Spirit, who is the author and worker of
peace in all the Churches of the Saints. The Lord make you willing to admit
into your minds the consideration of these things, and verily I do not doubt,
but the wise and humble sort of you will so do, and receive some fruit not to
be despised, as for the rest who have of^ in their Some of them have reproached
me, that I have pleaded for Ba^l: I hope this answer will be my desence, ^ay I
have pleaded against Baal, only I have resigned unto God his gesture of
worship, which he authorizeth, although defiled by Baal, as Gideon did wood,
and offering.
mouths, A Popish Relic, an idolatro^^ Relic, and such like grievous
invectives, I think they had more need to look at, and cry out against the
relics of old Adam within themselves, which are Pride and Ignorance. And thus
I have answered all the parts of your Assumption. In all which together I would
request the Christian Reader specially to apply and consider all gestures which
are used both in all parts of divine worship, and in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. Standing, sitting, and kneeling in prayer, etc. and standing, sitting,
and kneeling in the Communion, for as it is true, that they be Gods ordinances,
and of necessary use in the Church: so they have polluted of old, and are
polluted at this day, all and every one of them unto vi^e idolatry of the
P^pists. Thus by Gods gracious goodness I have answered your argument against
kneeling at Sacrament taken from pollution of the Papists, and so have answered
all your arguments tending to prove that kneeling, which is at this day used
at Sacrament is impie^y.

An Appendice to the former Answer.
Give me leave to alter the subject of your Assumption, and in stead of
kneeling at Sacrament, insert tithes impropriate in this manner.

But Tit^es impropriate are devised by man, are notorious^y known to have
been of old, and still to be abused to idolatry by the Papists, and are now of
no necessary use in the Church.

Is this a true Assumption or is it no^? If it be true, that Tithes be man^
devise now in the time of the Gospel, are notoriously known to have been of
old, and still to be abused to idolatry of the Papists, and are of no necessary
use in the Church, (which last your action avoweth in allowing, possessing, and
using impropriations) then let them be ashamed, which can be content to hold
Church Livings in their private clutches, and yet forsooth cannot find in
their hearts to kneel at Sacrament. But if the Assumption be false, (as it is
setting aside your own opinion and practice, and manner of reasoning) namely
tithes are not devised by man, our tithes have not been idolatrously abused by
the Papists, and they are also of necessary use in the Church at this time;
then let them be more ashamed to deprive the Church of her due, and yet make
scruple of kneeling at Sacrament. This is an act of Pharisai^^ll hypocrisy,
streining at a g^at, and swallowing a Camel. Alas, (good brethren, and
sisters) which of you is afraid either of polluting your hands with idolatrous
tithes, crying, away from me, get you hence, or of de^eining the lawful and
needful tithes from the Churches of Christ, whose they are, and which do
suffer grievous things in the want of them. The Lord amend you.

Objections against kneeling drawn from the breach of the bond of charity,
answered. CHAP. 5.
AT length by Gods gracious help, I am come to answer your reasons against
kneeling at Sacrament, taken from the breach of the bond of charity. And the
same I find to be two; one, that kneeling ca^seth evil in others, and is an
offense to their souls: the other, that it i^dgeth others for doing evil,
that have practiced other g^stures. I will begin with the former in the first
place, and in both I could have wished, that our breth^en had had some more
charity themselves, when they complained of our want, and then I doubt not but
these reasons would have been smoothered in the birth of them.

Of Scandal.
FIrst, then we may not do (you say) indifferent things, when we cannot do
them without s^andall. To this purpose Manuser. chapter 1. a^g. 5. Abridg p. 45
Demand page 53, 58.
you cite, Romans 14. 3, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21. chap. 15. 1, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 7.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13. chap. 10. 23, 28, 32. Matthew. 18. 10. Ezekiel. 13. 22. Abridg.
p. 1^.
chap. 16. 54. And you assume, That kneeling at Sacrament cannot be used
without scandal. Answer. That I may clear these Scriptures according to the
just, and necssary meaning of them, I must distinguish. Scandal is either
active or passive, that which is given, or that which is taken; all scandal is
not condemned in him, that uses indifferent things, but that only, wherein he
becomes a willing offender, by the evidence of manifest circumstances: and I
will give you this matter in four particular considerations.

First, all the Scriptures which you quote condemning the scandalizing of
others in things indifferent, speak only of scandalizing them which are
weak, in Romans 14. This appea^ech by verse 1. Him that is weak in says
recei^e you: and by chap. 15. 1. We then that are str^ng ought to ^eare the
infirmities of the weak. In 1 Cor. 8. it is express in this manner. Their
conscience b^ing weak is de^iled, verse 7. Take ^e^d your liberty become not a
stumbling block to them that are weake^ verse 9. If any man see thee which have
knowledge ^it at meat in the Idols Temple, shall not the conscience of him
which is weak to be emb^^ldened to eat: verse 10. And through thy knowledge
shall the weak brother perish: verse ^^. But when y^ sin so against the
brethren, and wound there weak conscience, ye sin against Christ: verse 12. In
1 Cor. 10. 23, 28, 32. the same matter is handled, of not offending another
man's conscience, which is weak, by eating meat offer^d in sacrifice unto
Idols. In Mat. 18. our Savior speaks only, and purposely of his little ones:
(As for Ezekiel. 13. 22. and chap. 16. 54. you quite outrunne your matter, when
you made them your proofs, which complain of wicked men only for offending
others by their lying divinations, and detestable whoredoms: we are now upon
indifferent, and not wicked things, if you do remember:) well the Scripture
condemn* scandal of the weak, but who are they? They are such as are weak
in knowledge and certainty of the truth; for if they be full of knowledge, and
stablished in religion, they are not weak ones, as your quotations do mean.
For in the want of settled knowledge, it comes to pass, that they be so easily
apt to take offense at lawful actions, and change their opinions and
resolutions so suddenly; and this is an evident case. And this their weeknesse
further implies two things. First, willingness to be instructed in the good
way. They which are so flexible, that the beholding of an example can make an
impression, and change upon them, will much more be contented to harken to
sound reasons, and be overruled by them. But such as are wilful and perverse,
either in ill opinion or practice, with an avowed confidence against all the
world, are by no means to be taken in the phraze of Scripture for the weak,
or little ones of Christ. Secondly, want of means of throughinstruction in the
good way; for so when any people have been thoroughly taught the truth by
preaching, conference, or otherwise, they are not to be esteemed for weak,
whom we should fear to offend by example; nay rather we be bound to confess
against their error by practice before their eyes, which by plentiful reason
we have refuted to their hearing. But the Replier Repl. gen chapter 5. ^^g. 77.
says, That Paul after sufficient information of the doctrine of Christian
liberty, yet absteined, and so counseled others for fear of scandell. Romans
14. 1 Cor. 9. Answer. It is false that Paul had thoroughly informed those
particular weak ones for whose sake he did, and counseled others to abstain,
or any body else for him. As for his Epistles, he wrote them for the Churches
direction, when they had to do with such weak ones, not that these (newly
converted to the says) could receive all the doctrines of them at once. For
their sakes therefore, ^^^bearance was to be used for the present time, but not
so for men of ancient profession, for whose instruction, or leaving
inexcusable, the common teaching of the Church should suffice; for so Paul
himself, and other Apostles and Christians, feared not to And thus the
Abridgement teaches, p. 48.
offend the I^wes about Circumcision, and other Jewish Ceremonies, when they
had publicly declared, and showed out of the word of God the doctrine of their
rem^^vall by Christ^ death. And truly if means of information suffice not to
take scandal away in respect of such, there is a license given to private
persons upon pretense of taking offense to keep off for ever all
Ecclesiastical orders, without which yet no Church can be established upon
earth.

But says the Ibidem.
Replyer, N^^^ c^n set a certain time, wherein others can be sufficiently
taught. Answer. Wisdom ^ay judge this by the consideration of the go^dnesse of
means, and willingness to receive the truth without prejudice, and how can it
else be in public pr^ceedings? How else will you judge of, and deal with
(...) in your Presbyteri^s in question for error; I pray you be not wilful Mr.
Replyer, the Truth does not rest upon your shoulders. But our brethren say
further, That was must not offend them, which are strong, ^^ well as not the
weak. I answer, that such as are strong, will not b^offended at the use of
indifferent things, and therefore that exception might have bin spared in this
controversy. It is men's weakness and want of strength, that they take offense
at that, which is lawfully done of other^^ But you also add, we must not
scandaliz^ ^he wicked in things indifferent, whether prophan^, or
superstitio^^. Ans. There is not any word of God, requiting us to avoy d^ the
offense of such men ^^ such things. For since we must no^ care to offend them
in the substantialls of divine worship, shall we be tied to their minds for
the manner of administration, and outward ordering? would you have thi^ to be
the Churches rule, for appointing the circumstances of Gods worship? Nay, is
there not evident word of God to the contrary, which the Abridgement ^^so
declares in this Abridg. p. 48.
manner. The Apostles did never s^^ke to winn^ the Gentles by using Ceremoni^s,
which would (...) them, neither would they use the Cere^^^yes of Moses to
please the Jews, when they had sh^^ed (...) to be obstinate. Yea our Savior
has taught us in this case by his own example (very many times) to make light
account of alienating the minds of such persons. And thus much in the first
place, for explication of the Scripture, for avoiding of scandal in things
indifferent, taken from the the persons offended, and and other explication I
shall further add in the particulars following.

Secondly, all Scriptures which you quote, condem^^ only the scandal of the
weak, which is made at tha^ time, when we know they will be scandalized, in
Romans 14. and Mat. 18. We are forbidden to despise our weak (...); where our
Savior and the Apostles show, that we must know the weak to be such, yea and
plainly see, how they will stumble, or else we cannot be said to set at naught,
or despise them: And in 1 Cor. 8. the Apostle speaks in like manner; but in 1
Cor. 10. he declares this point more expressly, saying, Whatsoever is set
before you eat, asking no question for conscience sake, but if any man say
unto you, this is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his sake that
she^ed it: verse. 27, 28. where the knowledge of scandal is said to arise out
of the information and admonition of the weak themselves. But what do I stand
upon this: the Author of the Manuscript delivers the Proposition in these
terms: We are forbidden to (...) an indifferent thing, when we know we cannot
do it without scandal. And the Abridgement in like manner. No such
Ecclesiastical orders should be ordained or used as are known to cause
offense, and hinderanc^ to edification. Indeed if this caution were not
necessary, no man could use his liberty before others at all, when (some or
other) might take offense, though himself knew not so much.

Thirdly, all the Scriptures which you quote condemnne only that offense of
another in things indifferent, which is made by him, who is at liberty, and not
bound. They speak not of the case (of our Church) of using, or refusing those
things, as men are tied by the commandment of authority, but as they are free
in themselves to do what they will. This you cannot but see. We must not
please our selves says the Apostle, but our neighbors for their edification.
Romans 15. 1, 2. But what is this I pray to those things which are done, not for
pleasing of our selves, but to obey the Magistrate by Gods own appointment? I
will give you two equal considerations, to make this more evident: first,
except authority ought to be obeyed in things indifferent notwithstanding that
some take offense thereat sometimes, cannot possibly stand. There is no action
publicly done, but some among many will be sure to mistake, and stumble at it.
Must not a servant or child do a business (though otherwise indifferent) at
the commandment of Master or Father, if others will be ^ff^nded thereby? Shall
a soldier for the offense of his ^ellowes lawfully presume to break the
commandment of his General in a thing indiff^rent? Shall the laws of Cities,
and Corporations, of Mannours, and Tow^es, of Statutes, and Kingdoms pass
upon the condition of men's not taking offense at them? Then not only every man
that will pretend scruple may deny obedience, but also all others must decline
obedience for satisfaction of the disobedient. And it is to be observed, that a
thousand commandments of Commonwealths, families, and other societies, do
stand upon things indifferent; indiff^rent I say for the singular accommodation
of them, though necessary in their genus, and species. Verily, in the Church,
the mischie^e is greater, then in all other societies. Is it possible to
establish a Church without some constitutions, and orders of things
indifferent? Is it probable, among infinite millions of that people, of diverse
humors, and dispositions, none should be offended at such constitutions, and
orders? Shall an wholesome Ecclesiastical law be always revoked upon
information, and complaint that some be scandalized? Then belike for times,
places, gestures, etc. of Gods public worshp, every man must be left at his
own liberty, and this will bring the Church to a speedy confusion without
remedy.

Secondly, obedience to the Magistrate in a thing indifferent is a greater
duet^, then pleasing of a private person in such a thing. The case is equal in
this, that the comparison stands in that which is indifferent, and as in such a
thing God commands me not to offend my brother: so in such he commands me not
to disobey the Magistrate; but how must not you needs grant, in many respects,
that obedience to the Magistrate far exceeds the satisfaction of some
scrupulous persons? First, if you compare the person of the Magistrate with
private person, you know the Magistrate far excels. Secondly, you know the
content of some private persons cannot equal or answer unto a law of general
The Replier says, Repl. genesis ch^p 5 page 76. Superiors have no power given
them for destruction, but for ^edification. True Sir, and that is the purpo^e
of all lawful commandments, which we speak of therefore, how ^dle are you to
take it, as if we would or need affirm that their end is or may be to command
scandalls.
edification, or fitness. Thirdly, whereas the Magistrate commands before the
scandal arises; equity requires, that a lawful commandment be not
disanulled for that, by which it could not be prevented, the same positive
reason of it re^aining. Fitter it seems to be, that the scandal, which was
uncertain, and comes, and goes like tempests in navigation, should be appea^ed
rather then the commandment should be abolished. Fourthly, the M^gistrates
commandment is just without the exception of the weak, the weakes exception
is unjust whether with or without the Magistrates commandment; now I am a
subject enquiring what I must do? I consider, that the commandment is just
and lawful in its own nature, and what? Shall I then refuse obedience to that
which is lawful, for surmises (of certain men) which are unrighteous, and
unlawful? Shall the beauty (which is ^ thing indifferent) of an honest woman
be defaced, and not rather the evil eye plucked out that is scandalized at the
beholding of it? Fifthly, the weak who are offended at a thing indifferent
commanded by the Magistrates authority are therein bound to obey the Magistrate
also themselves. What think you now? Must not I obey that which is commanded,
(I mean actiuely) because another thinks he may not, who should. Shall I be
bound rather to do, as he does, (who ought not to do so) then to do that,
which both of us, ought to do for conscience together? What conscience is
there in this? Sure if taking offense set a man at liberty, and acquitted him
from the sin of disobedience, (a toto) then it were more likely a great
deal; but now that that the weak himself offends against God, by being
offended against a lawful command of the Magistrate, there is small reason,
that I should make my self a voluntary partaker. Sixthly, and lastly, the
effect of scandal of private persons in a thing indifferent is nothing so
great, as the effect of disobedience to the law and Magistrate, as experience
of all times declares. And all these considerations do plainly show that
obedience to the Magistrate in a thing indifferent is a greater duty, then the
contenting of a private person; especially, if it be added, that a Christian
Magistrate understanding himself, does not only impose things to be done, but
provide that the lawfulness thereof be showed, that so convenient me^nes of
instruction being had, no scandal may rise at all, (I say not from the people,
whose obedience gives none howsoever, but) even from himself, but what is
taken, and not given.

But you object, first, Mr. Brad. at arg. 12.
That the greatest good cannot countervaile the least evil. Answer. You do
mistake your selves in comparing, why do you set sin against duty, and not
rather sin, against sin, duty, against duty. I may as well request, that
because (as you say) the greatest good cannot countervaile the least evil,
therefore I must not disobey the Magistrates command in the least measure, for
pleasing my neighbor in the greatest. You ought to compare the evil of
scandal, with the evil of disobedience, and then you wou^d do well. Besides
your assertion is utterly false; for I pray, must not I profess the truth, and
perform the several duties thereunto belonging, because I am sure, (by
Scripture, by man's nature, by experience, by presumptions, and signs already
manifested) that some will hate, some will deride, some otherwise persecute me
therefore? Every man must do the duty of his place, though (as Mr. Br.
contradicting himself affirms) the world go to wreck for it. Secondly, you
say, Ibid.
You contemn not the Magistrates authority; but meekely submit your selves to
his mercy, that you might perform an office of love to your brothers soul.
Answer. This is as much as if the child should say, he contemnes not the
lawful commandment of his father; but submits himself to his mercy; for the
love of his brothers or sisters soul, who would be offended at him, if he did
perform it. It is strange also, you could not see, that we may say as much by
interchanging the persons. For, for conscience of obey^^g the Magistrate,
(according to Gods commandment) I contemn not the we^ke brother, God forbid)
but pray for him, inst^u^^ him, exhort him, and what else I can do to keep
him from stumbling at my lawful obedience. Oh, but says the Replier, (Repl.
genesis chapter 5. page 76) May saperiours appoint, how far I shall show my charity
toward my brothers soul? Ans. They may not m^ke a commandment to restreine
necessary charity, yet in things indifferent, they may appoint charity to give
place to p^ety; or in that which tends to common edification, they may command,
though scandalls arise, and we are bound rather to be obedient, then
charitable, as I showed before: what need we say more to this profound man,
whose best proof is a silly asking, for when we lo^ke for proof, we find
none. Thirdly, you say, Ibid. also Manusccr. chapter 1 arg. 2.
A thing is not indifferent, but evil, when it causes scandal. The Apostle
says it is sin, it is evil to ^ate with offense, and can any humane
authority warrant a man to do that which is evil? Is it not at all times, and
in all places, better to obey God then man? Answer. Here you present us with a
service of great learning, and skill, by this last passage you would make us
believe, that by pleasing our neighbor we obey God, but not by obeying the
lawful command of the Magistrate. To the objection it self I retort in this
manner: a thing is not indifferent: but a necessary duty, (according to the
relation we stand in) when it is imposed by the commandment of a lawful
Magistrate. The Apostle says, it is sin, it is evil not to be subject unto
such a one, who is sent of God: and can any private persons warrant a man to
do that which is evil? Alas brethren! who cannot see, that sees but with
half an eye, that when an an indifferent thing is scandalous, (that otherwise
is lawful) that is, is scandalous, not ex natura sua^, but only by accident,
it cannot be thereby made unlawful, when there is a superior reason, The
practice of the Apostles, and other Saints of God in Scripture do every where
make this good, neither will any reasonable man deny this, except, such a one,
whose eye of reason, affection and parti^lity have put out. In this objection
therefore you do abuse us by the outward bark or pill of words, and names
without substance. Fourthly, you Manuscrip. and Mr. Br. as before.
say, The Apostle gives this reason against the use of a thing indifferent in
the case of ^ffence, that thereby, we shall destroy our brothers soul, and
cause him to perish, shall we then do that at the command of an earthly
power, which shall procure the damnation of our brothers soul? Nay rather
w^^^ght to s^ffer our lives to be taken from us. Answer. What mean you by
destroying our brothers soul? What? Actually to plunge it into hell, fire?
Then i^ would follow, that a brothers soul may be indeed destroyed; yea that a
thing indifferent can set the same into the state of damnation. Nay but also he
destroys his brothers soul, that makes him to commit any manner of sin,
tending (as every sin tends in its nature) unto destruction. For, is it to
be thought that all offenses which the Apostle condemns were ^ffectually
damning I pray? Nay there is no doubt, but if a weak Christian were made to
stumble but an hour, were induced to think but an ungodly thought, were
provoked but to surmise, and suspect an evil surmising, though it suddenly
vanished again: such a scandal is also meant by the Apostle to destroy his
soul and cause it to perish? for so it is evident that he speaks of every
scandal, whereby a brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, (Romans
14. 21.) whether it be more, or less, continue a longer or shorter space of
time. This objection therefore is answered in the answer which is made to the
former. But the Replyer is not contented with reason. A Scandal (says he, p.
genesis chapter 5. page 67.) in the nature of it, is spiritual murder; now suppose a
superior should command a thing in it self indifferent, whereupon murder were
like to follow, as to run an horse, or a cart, when and where little children
were playing, (though unwitting to him) would any ^ans conscience serve him to
do it. Answer. I think not, except his conscience were feared with an hot
iron, and his heart harder then the nether millstone, but what means this man
to make the case equal betwixt wilfulll murder, and scandal taken of a thing
indifferent? He should put case of a man, not a child, out of misconstruction
of something indifferent done at the Magistrates commandment, hurting
himself, not hurt by another, as he impertinently propounds. His
understanding was sure a sleep, when he penned this comparison: for scandal
taken unjustly is a murdering of ones self, another is not to be blam^d
therefore, who does but the duty of his calling, and place. Indeed scandal
given may be called murder of another soul, as when a man runs an other
through with a rapier, or rides his horse over little children to kill them.
Again, you go about to darken the truth with your ^ermes, for albeit scandal
may be referred to the sixth commandment, and so is murder, yet there is great
difference in killing a man out, and offending the mind but in some certain
degree. If a man be but provoked to sinful anger, there is murder committed
against his soul, will you say then that the Magistrates commandment must not
be obeyed in things indifferen^, if any man be but angry? (now all such anger
would be sinful, because the things themselves might be lawfully done) yet you
cannot deny but by opposing the gesture of kneeling at Sacrament your selves
provoke many unto anger: (now you will say, that such anger is without cause,
that is, is unjust anger) then behold you are also murderers of their souls,
for angring another is spiritual murder, and that also is yet worse in you,
because therein you do oppose also the commandment of the Magistrate in a
word, was ever indifferent thi^^ appointed in public, think you, but
(according to your speaking) some were murdered thereby? Therefore, if you
meant simply, you did simply to put no difference betwixt the needl^sse, and
incurable destruction of the person, and such infirmities, which are
unavoidable, and remediable. This my answer therefore would perhaps be yours,
if the Magistrate commanded sitting at Sacrament, for would not many be
scandalized, and provoked to sin thereby? Who can doubt of that? But first
you would say, they stumbled against a lawful course, and hurt themselves
perhap^ against admonition, and information too. Secondly, no order can be
appointed but such murders will follow through the co^ruption of men's hearts.
Thirdly, those wounds and hurts are curable by the balm of Gods word, which
must accordingly be applied. I add that the offense of some in our case is set
against a general benefit, and better it is, that one, or some be in danger,
then a mischief brought into the whole Church, nay vt pere at vnus, quam unit
as. Finally, it is too childish, that you are crying out so much of [Damnation]
and [Murder] of another soul, as if the words [Damnation] and [Murder]
without the true interpretation thereof would beat all down before them. But I
beseech you hear, and mark the Apostles own counterpo^se, Romans 13. 2. They
which resist the higher powers, shall receive to themselves damnation, and in
all the Scriptures, which you quote, as I said, the Apostle speakee against
those scandalls only, which arise from the use of indifferent things, when
they are in our own liberty, and not commanded by the authority of the
Magistrate. And so much of this point.

Fourthly, all the Scriptures which you quote condemning Scandal, must needs
especially cond^mne that which is So Abridgm. teaches, page 48*
greatest. Peter and his companions coming to Antioch were in danger of a
double scandal, either of the Jews by eating with the Gentiles, (which was
the less) or of the Gentiles, in refusing their company as if they had not
been brethren (which was far^e the greater) now Paul blamed Peter very much,
that for avoiding of the lesser scandal, he and his companions fell into the
greater, Gal. 2 12. and I think all men are of this mind, that when because of
things indifferent, diverse scandalls do offer themselves, the greatest is to
be eschewed notwithstanding others do happen, and not the less without
respect of the greatest; except it were good divinity, that men might streine
at a little Gnat, and swallow down a great Camel. I hope therefore I shall
need to enlarge no further in this point.

Of the Assumption, that kneeling at Sacrament is scandalous.
But let us pass to the Assumption of this Argument taken from scandal, and
that I may help you out in making the best of your cause, hither may be
referred two considerations, you give us in your books, which properly do
serve for grounds of showing, that kneeling at Sacrament is a scandalous
gesture. Those two grounds we will first consider, and then descend to that
which you say for showing the truth of your Assumption by the exemplification
of daily experience.

Whether kneeling at Sacrament be an appearance of Idolatry, such as for which
the Lord therefore condemns the use of it.
FIrst, then Abridg. 62. Disp. page 108. Manuscr. chapter 1. arg. 5.
you affirm, That kneeling at Sacrament is an appearance of idolatry. For the
outward act of kneeling (so far as the eye of man can judge) is the same with
that of the Fapists worshipping the bread* now the Apestle requires us to
abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Answ. I cannot but
wonder, that some of you especially should expound and apply the words of the
Apostle, as if the same were to be extended to all appearances of evil
whatsoever. Had not Jacobs laying of rods before the stronger cattle. Genesis 30
a manifest appearance of injustice, and fraudulent dealing? Had not the Altar
of testimony, Ioshu. 22. a manifest appearance of rebellion against the Lord,
in regard of his Altar, and worship? Had not Iaels friendly invitation of
Sisera, Judge. 4 18. a manifest appearance of dissimulation, and guile? Had not
Ruths coming in the night to the bed of Boaz, and willing him to spread his
skirt over her, a manifest appearance of immodesty, and dishonesty? Had not
Husha's abiding in the City with Absolon, 2 Samuel 15. 34. a manifest appearance
of double dealing and treachery? Had not Ionadabs charge to his sons, Ierem.
35. 67. a manifest appearance not only of cruelty to them, but of superstition
in forbidding for ever unto them that which God had sanctified and allowed? Had
not falling down on the face to mortal men (such as we read of in the holy
Scripture) some appearance of idolatry, specially when it was used unto the
Prophets of God, and also when civil worship was joined with divine, as when
Chron. 29. 20
the people worshipped the Lord and the King? Had not the Apostles observing
the Sabbath, Circumcision, and ceremonies of the Jews a plain appearance of
Iudaisme; and that those things were not abrogated by Christ? What shall I say?
David's leaping, and dancing before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6. 20. was an appearance of
baseness and vainesse. Mordoca^'s refusing to bow to Haman was an appearance
of pride. The Apostles plucking the ears of corn, Mat. 12. 1, 2. was an
appearance of prosaning the Sabbath day. The impropriations, which some who
will not kneel at Sacrament hold, cannot be less in your own judgment, then
a manifest appearance of sacrilege, and Church robbery, and a thousand things
more might be added in like manner: and yet forlooth we must abstain from all
appearance of evil, without any manner of restraint or modification? What
manner of expounding is this: How do you abuse the world, specially those, who
are content to take all for current divinity which comes from you?

Wherefore if I might deliver my opinion, I would say that the appearance of
evil, which the Apostle binds us to abstain from is not in respect of others,
but of Mr. Calvin is of this mind, referring the words to matters of doctrine
especially see him upon this place.
our own selves we ought to abstain from that, which appears to us to be
evil. For when the Apostle had said, Prove all things; some man might ask,
and when we have proved, what must we then do? Behold therefore he directs
what must be done both for good things, and for evil: Hold fast, that which is
good, abste^ne from all appearance of evil. This interpretation seems very
clear and evident of this place, especially, when an utter absteining from
that which appears to us to be evil, has easy confirmation in other parts
of the word: let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: for whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 5. 23. But on the other hand, any utter
absteining from that, which we know to be good when it appears to be evil to
others, has no footing in any place of the Bible especially, forasmuch as the
Apostle here speaks not of indifferent things, at least nor more then of such,
as are not indifferent, it would follow of your exposition, that we may not do
good duties at any time, if the same have (as they may and will have
oftentimes) an appearance of evil to some other. But set aside the meaning of
this text, must we not abstain from appearance of evil in some case? Truly I
grant, when there is a communion in professed evil, say idolatry. As if the
three noble Jews, Deu. 3. reserving their hearts to God, should have fallen
down before the Image of Nebuchadnezzar, or Protestants in Popish Countries,
when they see the Breaden God carried through the streets, and hear the
sacring Bell ring before it, reserving their hearts to God, should fall down,
as others do; or should so do at Mass in Elevation-time: but behold, here is
not appearance of evil only, but manifest evillat self, by houlding
communion in the outward man with idolaters in the profession of their
idolatry, against which they should bear witness. Again, I grant, when there
is an unseasonable practice against the seemelinesse or sutablenesse of public
places or businessee; as if in market places, or public meetings, or civil
occasions, a man should fall on his knees and pray: but also behold this
outward worshipping is contrary to the wisdom of the word, which appoints
every thing to be done in due season. But what is all this to kneeling at
Sacrament; for neither is there idolatry professed in, (but exploded from) our
Sacrament by Gods great mercy, neither is personal worship unseasonable to
material worship, as other where I have plenteously showed.

But if in other respects kneeling at Sacrament were an appearance of evil to
some men, yet being lawful in it self it is warranted unto us by three
respects overruling. First, the public doctrine deeres the practice of godly
Christians in this ease, then which there cannot be a better clearing under the
Sun. But what say you to this? Forsooth, Neither Papists, nor we do profess
in what belief or respect this gesture is used in the act of receiving. A
poor evasion! were it not for our public doctrine all our worship might be
as well an appearance of gross idolatry: for men might suspect us to worship
the Sun, and Moon, or Mahomet, or pictures in the windows, or what they
would, if the public doctrine did not determine it. (...) the gesture as well
as ours, you make theirs and ours equal in show of idolatry, so either making
the appearance of ours as bad as theirs, or the appearance of theirs no worse
then ours, for the gesture of neither can speak, if that be all the rule of
comparing. The truth is, you may well be ashamed of such a tristing exception
in a serious matter. Verily if the public doctrine take not away the show of
using our gestures as Idolaters do use them, then are all our gestures shows
of all manner of idolatry Popish and Heathenish, for in gestures, there is no
difference to be discerned betwixt us and them. Secondly, if a thing
indifferent have a show of evil, it makes it not unlawful to him who has a
calling to do it; Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide
with God. 1 Cor. 7. 24. we are called to kneel at Sacrament being children, and
servants of the Church and Magistate, we must obey: he that is called in the
Lord being a servant, is a freeman of the Lord Jesus, verse 22. Thirdly, we
must not refuse any gesture, because it has a show of evil, except we can use
another without having such a show: for in so doing, whiles we shall eschew the
rocks, we fall upon the sands. Now I ask you in respect of whom is kneeling
like to be a show of idolatry? You Disp. page 201
say, we seem to commit idolatry to the simple at least: and I say, to the
same simple, your standing, and sitting are like also to be a show of
profanesse: yea more your refusing to kneel is a show of atrogancy, and pride;
and in this Church of faction, and disobedience. Nay yet more, when you will
lose your Ministeries and the Communion it self rather then kneel, you make
show of vile hypocrisy, that will part with the greatest good things in the
world, for avoiding of evil, such in misconstruction, and outward appearance
to some people only. And yet inconclusion I add, that as far as I can
perceive, kneeling at Sacrament has not so much as appearance of idolatry,
whatsoever you say to the contrary. For to pass, that simple people, (such as
you speak of) do not lightly suspect us to worship the bread as the Papists
do, whose manner they never saw or understood, this is evidently improbable,
that any should suspect us to worship the bread and wine, when we receive them
into our mouths, and be eating, and drinking of them, for thereof is our
controversy at this time. But here I cannot pass one unkind speech of the
Abridgement. It is (says Abridg. p. 66.
it) a far less sin, and not so gross an appearance of idolatry to bind
us to kneel before a Crucifixe, then to bind us, as it is with us, to kneeele
before the bread and wine. Answer, For the consideration of tying and binding I
have satisfied in another place: to the comparison you make hither pertinent, I
say it is incredible that kneeling before an Image, (that is you mean to it
some way, for else we innocently kneel before the Images and Crucifixes in our
glass windows) which is an expressed idolatry forbidden in the word, is a
less appearance of idolatry, then kneeling before the bread and wine according
to the Lords own ordinance. I will not deny the worship of the Breaden God to
be a worse idolatry, then the worshipping of a Crucifixe, but you mistake of
your aim a mile, when you would make that which is an appearance of idolatry,
which it therefore appearance because it is expressedly such, a less
appearance, then that which is appearance only, and is not at all such.
Besides if you said truly, yet you should have considered, that the best action
may have sometimes an appearance of being worse then that which is bad. For it
is plain, that look what sin is adjudged and suspected of any excellent
action, (as a great sin may be adjudged, and suspected) the appearance of
that sin must needs be worse, (whiles you speak of nothing else but mere
appearance) then the appearance of any real sin, which is not so great as
it, though it be a great one. Therefore as my first answer is sufficient to
show this speech of yours to be false, if you compare mere appearance of
idolatry with the appearance of real idolatry: so this latter shows it out of
doubt to be most reproachful, if you compare mere appearances, (I say mere
ones) together. And so much to show that kneeling at Sacrament is no appearance
of idolatry, at least, that it is not such appearance, as in respect whereof it
is not lawful for us to use it in this Church.

Whether kneeling at Sacrament be an occasion of Idolatry, such as for which
the word therefore condemns the use of it.
NExt Abridg. 62. Manuscr. chapter 1. arg 6.
you affirm, that kneeling at Sacrament is ^^ke to prove an occasion of
idolatry, now we must b^^^are of every occasion, or provocation unto any sin,
as to adultery: Prove. 6. 27, 28. Romans 13. 13. wrong and unrighteous dealing.
Exodus 23. 7. And so to other sins, specially to the sin of idolatry, to which
we are naturally so prone. 1 Cor. 10. 14. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. Job. 31. 26. The Abridg.
p. 17.
second commandment forbidding all provocations unto spiritual fornication,
as the seventh does unto that which is carnal. Answer. Still as if you could
not abide the clear light of the Scripture you confound us in generalities,
without necessary distinguishing: does not your own conscience tell you, that
any thing may become an occasion of evil by accident, ex defectu nostro? You
should have showed therefore, what things the Spirit of God means to condemn
the use of, when they are occasions and provocations to evil, specially, when
all these Scriptures might have easily led you to have put a difference. Be
pleased therefore to take notice I pray you, that (setting aside Deutr. 7. 25.
which I have purposely answered in another place,) all the rest of your
Scriptures condemn no occasions of evil, but which are evil themselves, if
they were not occasions. Chambering, and wantonness, Romans 13. 13. with the
harlot, Prove. 6. 27, 28. is it self a kind of adultery. Not keeping far
from a false matter, Exodus 23. 7. is in some degree to become accessory. Not
flying from idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. 14. is in some measure to yield unto it.
Looking upon the Sun, and Moon in their bright shining, yea with admiration,
Job. 31. 26. is by no means unlawful, except it be with idolatrous intention
or cogitation. Wherefore I distinguish in this manner, some things provoke us
unto evil of their own nature, as the magneticall stone draws iron unto it;
some again are only abused by us, which easily can abuse the best of all Gods
creatures and ordinances, to make them occasions, and provocations to evil.
The hope of heaven may be, and has been occasion of idolatry. The law may be
occasion of all manner of concupiscence. The Gospel, and all comforts in
Christ are occasion Romans 7. 5. 8.
of stumbling to wicked men, occasion of their persecution and blasphemy; nay
any indifferent thing, even the times, and places, and all gestures, etc. of
Gods public worship (prescribe what you can) are like to prove occasions of
evil to some, in some respect or other. The truth is, sinful man can meddle
with nothing in the world, but there is danger he should abuse it, whether it
be a necessary duty, or a thing indifferent.

How now can kneeling to God at Sacrament be condemned, because it is likely to
be occasion of some idolatry? Perhaps you will say, that actions of liberty and
indifferency may and ought to be suspended for danger, though not necessary
duties. But I must tell you, that if there be danger of idolatry by kneeling,
it is none other, then what rises out of the appearance, that, that gesture is
idolatrous. Therefore my former answer concerning the appearance thereof may
plentifully suffice: as, first, the doctrine of the Church is sound concerning
the Sacrament, and therefore they which practice according to the said
doctrine, like good children of the Church give no occasion to any to fall into
idolatry, and especially if the people be helped therein by the benefit of the
word preached. But to this, you answer, First, that such Pers. Ass. p. 55 Repl.
genesis chapter 5. p. 77.
ceremonies must be appointed, which by their goodness, and edification may help
the preaching of the word, and not such as the word must daily have need to
correct. As if every ceremony, or gesture whatsoever it be, must not be
corrected by the preaching of the word. For I pray, which way shall any
gesture, say sitting or standing at Sacrament, be used aright without the
instruction of the public Ministry: you would make us believe that your
ceremonies should be so good, and full of edification that the people need not
to be directed or corrected at all for the right and comfortable use of them;
but such ceremonies were never known in rerum natura. Secondly, you Abridg, p
68, Perth. Ass. as before.
^ay, many want the doctrine of the word, and how can they be instructed
thereby? A^ if the same case would not fit to sitting, and standing, for not
preventing the danger of irreverence, and prophanes. 3. you Abridg page as
before.
say, there is that danger of kneeling that preaching cannot suffice to
pres^rue from it, such is man's pro^es to superstition. Manuscr chapter 2 arg. 6.
The doctrine of the Romish church is clear, that Images are not to be
worshipped with that worship which is due to God, yet the people cannot be kept
from committing Idolatry toward them; because they are allowed to show such
outward reverence unto them, as kneelling down. Perth. Ass. as before.
Meat does not nourish so fast as poison death corrupt. How many faults are
here? what, is not the doctrine of the Romish Church clear, for the peoples
committing Idolatry with Images? are we allowed at Sacrament to kneel unto the
bread and wine; or to use, any reverence directed unto them as they do to their
Images? Is there the same reason betwixt Idolatours who are given up, doing
that (in worshipping Images at all) which the Lord abhorres of all other
sins: And Gods own people, who come unto himself alone, and that in his
own holy ordinance? Is kneelling poison in it own nature? In a word, if there
be such danger of kneelling as you say, that preaching cannot suffice to
preserve from it, such is man's proueness to superstition, Is there not also
danger of sitting or standing, that preaching cannot suffice to preserve from
it, Such is man's pronenes to vnteucrence, and prophanes? Fourthly, you Abridg.
as before. Hither I may refer those two Sciptures quoted by the Abridg. p.
62. namely Exodus 21. 33, 34. Deur. 22. 8.
say, It is neither safe, nor lawful, for a man wilfully to dig a pit or
break a bridge or lay a logg in the way, and then cry out, and say, O take
heed you fall not. As if kneelling at Sacrament were a pit or a logge, or
bridge broken, and standing or sitting were a safe, plain, and perfect way!
what beggary is this? If any fall into Idolatry by our kneelling, it is not
because kneelling is a pit, but their hearts are a deep pit of error and
deceit: It is no logge, but they like mellancholik persons, carry the block in
their own idle imagination. Yet therefore because there is danger in it by the
corruption of men's hearts, as there is in all things we can do; give us leave
to tell men, that we kneel only to the God of heaven, as we would have them to
know the doctrine of our Church, that there is but one God, one Faith, and one
Baptism. Thus therefore the doctrine, and preaching of our Church acquits us
from being guilty, by kneelling, of giving others occasion of Idolatry.
Secondly, we have an honest calling to kneel, the commandment of authority,
and that also acquits us. Thirdly, sitting, and standing are as much occasion
of vnreverence and profaneness; as kneelling is of superstition, refusing to
kneel is an occasion of trouble in the Church, heartburning, and dissentions
amongst brethren, loss of your Minnisteries, and of the liberty of the
Communion. Do you tell us of occasion of evil? Behold brethren, in these
things, your refusing to kneel is an occasion of a whole world of mischeife.

And yet I add, that I od not perceive, that kneelling proves an occasion of
Idolatry in our Church. Danger there is you Manuscr. chapter ^ arg. 6
say, because such reverence is not used at the word, and Baptism. Ans. nay
therefore men will rather judge, God is worshipped only, when the word and
Sacraments are (in reason) likely to have an equality in the due (if any such
were) of worshipping, and in Baptism the Baptized might worship with us
perhaps, if he were not a little infant. In the hearing of the word, all men,
(even the simplest) do easily allow, an indulgence for sitting, or standing,
when they are upon consideration to try the spirits, and discern the truth,
and so they see the exercise of the word is not in so special manner an
exercise of devotion as prayer, singing of psalms, and the Sacraments. Besides
by your reasoning, your sitting bare is as much an occasion of Idolatry, which
is not used in the exercise of the word preached. Again you Abridg: p: 63:
say, If men kneeled to Ministers, there were danger of falling unto Idolatry,
much more there is there. Ans. why so? Do you reason from kneeling to the
Ministers to kneeling before the bread and wine? If you had compared justly,
you should have spoken of kneelling only before the Ministers, and have showed,
that they be dangerous for Idolatry: but then that would evidently help us, and
not you; for we kneel before the Minister in all our public worshipping, or
adoring, and yet without danger of falling into Idolatry. Lastly, Ibidem:
(you say) The Idolatrrus original kneelling had at first, and use it has had
ever since among the Papists, shows, it cannot choose but breed, nourish, and
maintain superstition, wheresoever it is used. Ans. It shows no such thing,
you might as well reason from sitting bare, which is used among the Papists to
show our sitting bare necessarily to breed, nourish and maintain superstition.
Can this be a good consequence, Papists have abused kneelling, therefore
kneelling must needs abuse Protestants, do you not consider that kneelling did
not make the Papists hearts Idolatrous, but their Idolatrous hearts did make
kneeling such. And truly if there be any among us that use kneeling
superstitiously, I do not believe, that they were thereunto brought by
kneelling, but their minds were first leauened with superstition, and then how
can it be, but they will use that gesture accordingly, and why th^n should
kneelling it self be faulted for that? if superstitious people offend likewise
in kneelling in prayer, by secret reference unto Saints departed (as they may
very well do among us) will you thereupon affirm, that their kneelling is
occasion of their Idolatry. Alas, alas! some men will turn all gestures into
sin; it is enough for us in such case, that the word allows them, we have a
calli^g unto them, and that we should occasion worse effects by far, by the
profane refusing of them.

Here I may annexe, that you Abridg p. 18
propound this danger somewhat more generally, as if kneelling at Sacrament
would not only occasion a supersticious conceit of the Sacrament, but also
corrupt us in the true religion, and make us ever fall backward to the Popish.
Your conceit may beformed in this manner. Such popish ceremonies are
unlawful, whereby we shall be in danger to fall again to popery (this
proposition you prove by Exodus 34. 12. 15. Deuteronomy. 7. 4. 25. 26. Judge. 2. 13.
Gal. 2. 5. and illustrate by this, that the Pope is revealed to be that great
Antichrist; and his Idolatry troubles the Church at this day more then any
other, and our people converse more with Papists, then with any other
Idolatours:) but kneeling at Sacrament is a popish ceremony, whereby we shall
be in danger to fall again unto popery. Ergo. Ans. (to pass the abusing of
Judge. 2. 13. they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashteroth, which is
nothing to your proposition) your whole proposition must be expounded in the
former part as I have showed in the former chapter, and in the latter part as I
have expounded in the former sections. Your Assumption is false as in the
former part I have showed also in the former chapter, and in the latter part no
body will believe you. Has exerience taught you, that kneelling at Sacrament
has brought us back to popery. In the whole Church thanks be to God there is
no such matter, and for the errors of particular persons, that they are fallen
into them, because they kneel at Sacrament is a thing which we all know you
can never make good: rather the want of love to the truth, the want of the
fear of God, selfe-opinion, and trusting to men's own learning, the base
depending of men's opinions upon humors and times, the spirit of contradiction,
and envy, which will ever make a part against their judgments, whose persons,
and practice it cannot endure: and lasty, the providence of God for men's
exercise, that the faithful may be tried and manifested, and the unfound left
to the punishment of their vnfaithfullnes. Rather I say these are in cause that
errors spring in the Church in all ages; and for evidence, that kneeling does
not cause errors in this Church, you might consider, that of such as are sound
(as you account soundness of religion) there are in this Church a greater
number without comparison that kneel at Sacrament, then such as do not.
Moreover know you nor that your adversaries may object unto you all your
opinions uttered in your books, which they account for errors, and especially
the errors of them of the separation? Shall we say, that zeal against
kneeling at Sacrament has made both your selves and them to run into a
labirinth of errors? We may say it as well as you accuse the errors of
certain in our Church to rise of kneeling or defense of kneeling at the Lords
Supper.

Of the scandal of Papists by kneeling.
Having cleared these two grounds, I hope it is an easy matter now to answer
all the exemplifications you use to confirm your assumption, only that
kneeling at Sacrament is a scandalous gesture. And first you affirm, that the
said gesture is scandalous to the papists, because it will be a means to
Abridg p. 18 p. 62., Manuscr. ch 1. arg. M. Brad. arg. 12.
harden, and confirm them in their Idolatry, and superstition, for they seeing
us to Abridg. p, 25 and p: 49.
borrow this ceremony of them, do justify their own Church and religion, yea,
their Idolatrous conceit of Transubstantiation, Abridg. p. 25
insult over and condeme our religion and page, 21 Manuscrip. as before. Dis.
page 46.
Church, and good Mr. Brad. as before
reason they have so to do, for if the b^oth be good that the Devil is s^d
in, sure the Devil himself must needs be good also. In a word hereby Abridg
p. 49.
they increase in their hope of the full restoring of popery again. Ans. It is
undoubtedly, but your conceit, that the papists are scandalized it this manner.
I will not deny but they may (according to their manner) make a great noise
about a color for disgracing our cause, and countenancing their own: but that
they are indeed more confirmed in their Idolatry, upon private consideration,
and judgment of our practice, you can never make us believe. All men do know,
that they are wont to triumph against us in manifould changes of our own
practice, not because they are more hardened in their religion thereby, but
because being already hardened they secke, and make occasions to themselves of
our reproach and discredit. For how can you reasonably think, that they will
be more hardened in their own religion by our agreement with them in a matter
of gesture (which is common to all religions) when they know we have disclaimed
their doctrine, (doctrine being it, which in all religions determines the use
and end of all gestures.) Besides, think you, that the papists esteem of us
so much, and of our judgment, and practice, that they will better like, and
more firmly stick unto their judgment, and practice, because in any measure
they gain some countenance from our. Churches? nay rather they strive as much,
as possibly they can (as it were by an Antiperistasis) to like, and stick unto
that which is most contrary. And this the Authors of the Abridgement (quite
forgetting themselves) affirm; Abridg, p. 26.
saying, that they are very precise in shunning all agreement with us, in the
least thing, that concerns the profession of our religion. What think you now?
Will they be more confirmed in their religion, because we partake with them in
some things, when the least thing (which concerns the profession of our
religion) is eschewed, and very precisely eschewed by them, therefore, because
we perform it. I but this is an encouragement unto them, that we have borrowed
the practice of our kneeling from them. I answer, (passing that he have not
borrowed it as I have showed otherwhere) there is no encouragement thereby
given, which makes them, but what follows, after they are already hardened.
And also the insulting and boasting which they use, is rather in pretense, then
in good earnest: for who of them can be so utterly ignorant, as in his
conscience to think his own to be the true Church, because we agree with it in
a natural gesture in divine worship, when we agree with all religions in all
gestures; or our Church to be false, becaue we use the same gesture with
theirs, which they are resolved is the true; or because we kneel in the act of
receiving, therefore it is a justifiable opinion, that the bread is
transubstantiated, or that there is hope Popery will get in again, because
kneeling (which is in all religions, as it is aplied) is also used with us, as
with the Papists in the bare outward gesture, when they know we do not only not
apply it as they do, but a quite contrary way. They cannot but see, that they
might as well hope for popery to return, by our sitting bare in the Sacrament,
by the continued use of our temples, yea, by our kneeling in prayer, standing
at Creed, and such like, which are things of common use; as hope for the
return of popery from our agreement with them in the gesture of the Sacrament.
Therefore whatsoever some of them think good against their own reason, to say
out of zeal to the Catholic cause, yet in their consciences it is to be
thought, they judge or say no such matter. As for Mr. Br. reason, why they
should so judge, namely because, (according to the Proverb) the Devil is good,
if the broth be good he is sod in, implying belike, that kneeling at Sacrament
is like broth to the flesh of Popish religion: what should a man say? Does Mr.
Br. think that, the Papists will reason for their religion by such an hateful
resemblance? O^ if they would, does he think, they know not, there be diverse
things to make pottage, and not only? Will not water, and other ingredients
also make good broth, if whole some flesh be boiled therein? And can any body
dream^, that our broth is the same with their^, which is made with none of
their stinking carryon, but is wholesome, and good by strength, and virtue of
the true religion? I add, that our kneeling is so far from confirming
Papists against us, that they are rather persuaded to come unto us, knowing
that we handle the holy Sacrament so r^verently. But take it for granted that
kneeling at Sacrament is scandalous to the Papists: what then? First; we are
not bound in ordering of Gods worship to be guided by them, but rather we must
lightly account of alienating such persons as they are by the example of our
Savior Christ and his Apostles. Secondly, what knowledge have we, that they
will be offended at our kneeling? I speak of singular Communicants; Shall such
abstain for the offense of the Papists, which never was nor will be taken at
them in particular, but only at the Church in general, the custom whereof is
not in their power to change! What for such offense as is neither increased nor
lessened, nor made more or less by them, nay whose kneeling is not so much as
once taken notice of? This learning sounds not; besides it is unknown to us,
that the Papists take any offense at the Church it self, except we will
believe your saying, which we have no reason to do in this controversy,
specially, when these respects, on which you say so, we have seen to be of no
moments. Thirdly, shall we set the commandment of a Protestant Magistrate, and
a Christian maintainer of the Gospel, behind the offense of the professed
enemies of the Church? Will you be so unthankful, where you are so much bound;
and so kind to those to whom you prosesse the greatest opposition? If you will
not, why do you talk of the offense of the Papists, and are not rather swayed
with the commandment of the Magistrate? Alas brethren! shall we square our
obedience by the Papists humors? Verily then we shall perform none, for if
they appreh^nd such a thing, they will pretend offense in all things that we
may perform obedience in nothing. But I will not urge this, because I hope,
you will be contented to yield of your old streines for shame I say not, but
conscience, when you shall better consider. Lastly, the scandal, which you
give the Papiste by standing, and sitting, and refusing to kneel is greater,
then the scandal of our kneeling. For, first, they are more persuadible to
enter into those Churches, where special reverence is used in receiving the
Sacrament, then where it is not: and howbeit Gods word is effectual to convert
Papists in those places, where kneeling is not used, (as the Replier Repl. genesis
to Bp. Mort chapter 5. Sect. 89.
says to no purpose, for whou doubted of that?) yet take the Papists as they
are in their judgments remaining such: (for is not this the true point?) and
there is no doubt but they are more inclinable to our Church, in respect of our
authorized kneeling, then to those that reject it. Now judge fairly, whether
i^ worse to incline them to our religion, or further alienate them? to make
them worse, or please them for their edification, which to do we are
commanded, Rom, 15. 2^ Secondly, Such as the Papists be are not so to be
respected, that for winning them, we should grie^e or offend the brethren. This
is the answer of the Abridg. 4^.
Abridgement to us, objecting, that rejecting of kneeling would further
alienate the Papists; and could they b^ ignorant, that it served more against
them for them? for thereof it follows, that though Papists be offended at us,
yet we must more look to avoid the offense of the Church, it being a greater
scandal to offend the Church, then the Papists, as indeed it is without
comparison. Thirdly, will you rather scandalize the Papists, by refusing the
benefit of the Communion, and the liberty of your Ministeries, then in a
gesture? You tell us of offending the Papists in a gesture, and yet in greater
matters you make the Papists rejoice, yea scorn and reproach the Gospel ^ory
our sakes Fourthly, I answer: Some things you allow, which gives more offense
to the Papists, then kneeling at Sacrament; I will name our Churches, which all
our Papists are always reproaching us withal, that those Churche^, which
their Catholic Ancestors builded, we are glad to turn to the use of our
religion: and I will nam^ the impropriations which some of you hold, you are so
far from building of Churches, that you can be content to devour the
maintenance of them. It is well known that the Papists take you for vile
Church-robbers, that so do. What say they You are not hot^er in fighting
against the ceremonies, then in holding Church Livings, your religion is a
sacrilegious religion. It is certain, that this thing is a great scandal unto
them. And yet for all this dare you not kneel at the Communion for
scandalizing of them whose zeal cannot be kindled against such a zeal It is
well for you if your consciences be as void of hypocrisy, ^^ you are bold in
charging the same upon other men's.

Of the scandal of ignorant persons by kneeling.
NExt you tell us, That the gesture of kneeling is s^andalo^^ to such as are
ignorant, and popishly affected a^^ngst us: For, first, at breeds in them an
opinion of the necessity of it with a Disp. 46. and 103. Abrid 63
superstitious conceit, and reverence of the outward ele^ents, and also Abrid
49. 62 Survey page 73.
confirms i^ them, the p^rsuasion, and superstition there have of it already.
Secondly, Abridg page 62.
Church Papists, and such as are popish^^, and superstitiously minded in this
matter of the Sacrament, ar^ thereby allowed to commit the outward act of their
idol^ Survey. page 73.
^ry; and all this especially of they s^e the same Mr. Brad. at arg. 12.
more vrg^d, then kneeling at prayer; and also (f) see the Rulers of the Church
curse and exco^^unicate all such a^ refuse it. Answer. It is no^ true that our
kneeling in the act of receiving breeds and confi^meth in ignorant people
such superstition: for those Popish people you speak of hold by tradition the
old Popish opinion of Transubstantiation, and that is the ground of their
superstitions conceit and reverence of the bread: And indeed such ignorant
people as otherwise are free from Popery, have also continued unto them, (for
want of instruction, and Catechism) Popish phrazes of eating their maker, and
such like, whereby their minds are ill pos^est in that matter. This, this
begets superstition in their kneeling: kneeling begets not superstition it
self. But what object you the offense of ignorant people, which misin^erpret
all things in the Church both necessary and ind^fferent through their
ignorance? Must the Church frame her constitutions to the will and satisfaction
of such as are ignorant? That were a^ much, as if a wi^e man should order his
best actions according to the minds, and conceits of them which are plainly
foolish; and what can be more foolishly affirme^ or imagined? Besides, what if
such ignorant people be in the world, must we abst^^ne from the gesture of
kneeling without particular knowledge of them ^ Suppose I know none such in the
congregation where I receive, must I abstain for avoiding offense (which also
will be none at all) of them which are in other congregations. Oh simple
divinity! But what ^ Must I refuse obedience to the King, and Church for their
sakes? Did you ever read in Gods word, that, that should be denied for the
blindness of ignorant people? In a word, the scandal of refusing to kneel is
greater to them, then the scandal of kneeling: are they not at their wit^ end
in conceits of religion, when for a gesture they see men so hott, as to turn
their backs upon the Sacrament, to forsake their Ministeries, to distract the
Church to disob^y the Magistrate, also is not the scandal of the wisest men in
our Church greater then of such as are ignorant? Those taking offense upon
considerations of judgment, these upon simple surmising only without ground or
reason. Also it is well known, that ignorant people are ^ighly offended at
sitting as a gesture (in their judgment) of great vn^euerence; also it is
notorious, that they take great offense, that men are so scrupulo^s to stand
against kneeling at Sacrament, and yet for their worldly profit without doubt
can find in their ^eart^ to hold Church-liuings in their hands from those, to
whom they conceive them to be due. Mor^over, much of that misconceit which is
in way of kneeling unto the bread is wrought, or confirmed in them, by your
selves, who bear all men in hand, our Churches doctrine to be, that kneeling
ought to be used unto the bread, which when ^gnorant people do hear, in their
simplicity they do accept, and so your own sla^ders are the scandal of them,
and not the gesture of kneeling. I add that where ye word is plainly taught
(as where it is not so people are ignorant in substantials) it is as casie to
inform, and persuade the ignorant people, that kneeling ought to b^vsed to God
alone, as it i^, that the Sacrament all ^read i^ not transubstantiated. Every
Minister therefore shall do well in his own charge to lift up the people to
God, and draw the simple off from their Popish conceits, that offense may be
removed: and that let a man in the pulpit speak according to his duty for
their instruction in this case, and behold of all things you cannot abide to
hear it. So the same men, who blame us for the offense of ignorant persons,
deny us to use the ready means which we have for the cure and remedy. And so
much be answered to the former part of your exeoption, that kneeling breeds,
and c^nfirmeth superstition among ignorant people. Next, where you say, that
Church-papists, and such as are popishly, and super stitiously minded
concerning the Sacrament are allowed by kneeling to commit the outward act of
their idolat^y. I answe^, you cannot speak here of instructed Papists; for they
do hold our Sacrament to be no Sacrament, and our Consecration to be worth
nothing. And as for such ignorant persons you spoke of before, it is not true,
that they be allowed to comm^t an outward act of idolatry. They be allowed to
kneel, but kneeling as it is allowed is not an outward act of idolatry; truly
by your learning we allow all the outward idolatry of Papists and Pagans also.
Oh, but being idolatrously minded, they abuse kneeling to an idolatrous end in
their secret, and reserved intention. Ans. so they may abuse kneeling in prayer
by directing their heaarts therein unto the Virgin Mary, or some other Saints,
though the Churches direction, and practice be to God alone. So they may abuse
the fashion, or carriage of sitting bare in the act of receiving unto
superstitious reverence of the outward elements, so they may abuse all the
circumstances of divine worship established among us, which no skill of man is
able to prevent. Alas, what is this to the doctrine or practice of our Church?
Call you suffering of lawful fashions, and gestures, because ignorant people
may apply them amiss, a scandalizing of them? Behold then we must have none at
all in the Church, no worship at all, forasmuch as all things are subject to
men's unknown and re^erued abusing of them, yea we may report concerning your
standing or sitting in this manner, that profane persons, and such a^ are
carnally minded concerning the Sacrament, are by those gestures, allowed to
commit the outward act of their profaneness. See how an ill cause puts upon you
most absurd, and pitiful inconvenience. As for your illustration, that
ignorant people are more offended by seeing kneeling in the Sacrament to be
more urged then kneeling at prayer, yea urged upon pain of excommunication, I
see no such matter, for an ignorant person understands that no Church ^an be
without orders, and no orders without government, and discipline, yea and so
much as respects the upholding of those orders discipline, is more to be
showed against contempt and opposition, then neglect, and security. But you
never consider that Country people have an eye upon you as well as us, for do
they not see, that you urge sitting or standing at Sacrament more then kneeling
in prayer? Nay do they not surmize ^ worse thing, that you urge sitting, or
standing, at Sacrament, more more then the duty or comfort of receiving the
Sacrament it self, more then preaching of Gods word, more then the peace of
the Church, obedience to his excellent Majesty, and to the law en^cted by the
high Court of Parliament. Here, here they stand amazed, and cannot tell (in
their simplic^ty) what to think of religion, for whiles that standing, and
sitting seem but small in their eyes, and yet they see all divine ordinances
set at sixes, and sevens for the love of them; God knows what lamen^able
effects Satan works in their hearts by that means toward their destruction.

Of scandal of profane persons by kneeling.
IN the next place we are to answer for our kneeling at Sacrament against the
deposition of scandalizing profane persons: but who would have looked for this
deposition of all others? Is it so indeed, that we provoke profane ones to
sin by kneeling, which is a gesture both in its nature in special manner,
and also in the purpose of the Church enjoining opposed against their
profaneness Belike, when our brethren were among seandalls, they meant to
multiply many, to present their Readers with ta^e at least, though there were
no truth in them, for who sees not this charge to be notoriously false, and to
argue in them much partiality, or inconsideration What ordinary conceit will
not easily judge, that proph^ne minds are not hurt, but helped by beholding us
to come to the Lord in his holy ordinance most reverently But what is it you
say The pr^ph^^^ (say Abridg. page 59.
you) will draw many arguments to bless ^^^selfe in hi^ co^temp^ of all
r^ligi^^. What Arguments ^ pray you will they draw from serving the God of
heaven with an humble and reverend gesture But let the Replier show us from
whence, for he is ^ ready man, and of a special gift in dissolving such a knot
as this, but I know not whether he do it with more folly or impudency: I
answer (says Repl. genesis to Bp. Mort chapter ^. Sect. 11.
he) from wh^^ce 1. That religions rites are invinted by men, and appointed to
^e used in Gods worship, as Gods ordinances are. Answer. As if profane men
took kneeling at Sacrament to ^^ man's devise, and not an ordinance of God: and
though they did in some sense yet they cannot be ignorant that gestures are
determinable by man, out of knowledge of your practice, who stand or sit at
Sacrament at your own pleasur^.

Secondly, profane men see trifles urged to the increase of contention.
Answer. As if profane persons took k^eeling at Sacrament to be a trifle! Oh
trifl^ng Replier! then assure your self they take sitting and standing to be
trifles much more: truly this latter is freely enough uttered by thousands.
Again, do profane men think contemions to arise from them which urge
kn^eling, or them which oppose it? Alas whose ears cannot give in testimony,
that every where they take you to be the contentious.

Thirdly, Prophan^ men see much holiness put in kneeling at Sacrament, which
they know to be man's devise. Answer. What holiness do they see? then whiles
the members of the Church come to God (as they should com^) in an ho^y manner
in his holy worship^ they judge rather profaneness to be among your selves in
sitting, for so they are con^cious to their own profaneness, and by reason of
that most of all condemn (in their conscience) that carriage which seems to
themselves to represent, or come nearest to it. Again, they cannot see so much
holiness put in kneeling, as they see in your contempt, and stubborn
opposition against it: now whether is worst off^nce unto them, to see a lawful
(^o they judge it to be) and religious gesture to b^e ^oli^y used, and
applied, or the same to be despi^^d and ^roden under foore? And suppose they
(...) some ^x es^e of opinion thereof among simple people, they can easily
acq^it religion in such case, and not condemn the glory of the Sun, for the
hard conceits and ^vill mistakings of Batts and Owletts.

Fourthly, Profane men see other gestures cried down. which are every whit as
good as this. Ans. Do profane men see them every way to be as good as this?
that is begged against manifest evidence of the contrary; also do profane men
see them cried down, as vile in their own nature, or for uniformity in the
Church? Further do they not see that you do earnestly cry down the gesture
of kneeling even to the pit of hell, and would utterly explode it from
sacramental worship for ever.

Now h^arken good Reader. The Replyer says, profane persons will contemn all
Religion, because we cry down sitting and standing, and yet themselves cry
down kneeling so much, as that they cry down Preaching, the Communion of the
Church, the Sacrament it self, the authority of government, the peace of
Jerusalem, in a word they cry down all public, both comforts and duties
rather then kneeling shall not be down among them. Judge now whether this
Replyer be not a weak and partial man, and worthy who should be the guide of
them who will not kneel at Sacrament.

Fifthly, Profane men see Religious men more molested for toys, then they are
for their profaneness, Answ. As if profane men did not know that the Law is
good against their profaneness, as if such also thought Gods outward worship
to be but a toye, as if such (being ^arnall) did not think it more needful
to look to those faults, which they rather conceive to be intended for the
destruction of government, as if they saw not your selves to make more a do
against kneeling, and also to molest your selves a great deal more for atoye
(as they do iuged) then for the loss of the Sacrament, for the leaving of
your ^locks, the giving over of preaching, and such like, which they judge
irreligious profaneness.

Besides you are off from the matter Mr. Replyer. For it matters not what
offense it is to profane ones. that you are molested more then they, but
whether our kneeling do cause them to contemn all Religion. Thus the learned
and judicious Replyer may be pleased to take thus much for an answer at this
time.

But let us go^ further, what if some profane ones take offense at our lawful
kneeling, must we not therefore use it? are we bound to relinquish the gestures
of public worship, if they dis^aste the same? if we were, must we refuse,
except we knew particularly, they will take offense at us? nay, may we disobey
authority to give them content, especially when the same by enioyning kneeling,
intended to prevent profaneness, whereupon they are incessantly carried?
lastly, whether there be not greater scandal taken by them at your standing
and sitting, and refusal of kneeling; for contemning the public worship of
God, for disesteeming the Sacrament it self, for sleighting the Magistrate,
and Churches authority, for undervaluing the preaching of the Gospel, for
rejecting the communion of Gods people; in a word, for despising, and deriding
your own persons, which sometime you complained against them of, I leave
either to your selves, or to wise and ingenuous men to consider.

Of Scandalls of Separatists by kneeling.
NOw we are to pass to the examination of your charge against us for them of
the separation, a proud and fantastical brood they are, and yet we would be
sorry to do them wrong to our knowledge. Howbeit, forasmuch as you declare
against us, it behooues us to put in our answer.

Now your declaration is to this purpose. 1. Some (say Abridg. 49.
you) by kneeling will be driven out of the Church to the separation of the
Brownists. And those that are Mr. Bradsh. Arg. 12.
separated, will thereby be confirmed in their schism, and separation from us.
And that upon this ground, that we mingle with diuin^ worship this, and other
base and vile inventions of Antichrist, Disp. p 46.
preferring the same before the practice of Christ, and his Apostles.

Ans. I answer: first by denying that which you say, and then supposing it to
be true. I deny, that ever man made a separation from our Church, by reason of
our kneeling at Sacrament. The Replyer is of that mind almost, who speaks in
this Repl. gen to Bishop M^rton. chapter 5. Sect. ^8.
manner. The dislike of Ceremonies is not the chief cause for which separation
is made, but the intolerable abuses; which are in Ecclesiastical Courts, yea
(says he) the thing is plain enough to all indifferent men, that obtruding
and urging of Ecclesiastical corruptions, is the proper occasion of separation.
He should have said, the true cause of their separation is their pride, and
ignorance, joined with anger and coffeehouse, but yet he acknowledges that
kneeling at Sacrament is hardly any cause, or occasion thereof at all.

And why did the Replyer lispe a truth so well known? for if there had been
nothing else which they disliked, but kneeling at Sacrament, would they have
have rejected us for a false Church? It is plain by their books, that they
allow a Church, though it have greater corruptions, then they take kneeling at
the Communion to be; only ours (they say) was never hitherto yet rightly
constituted, I confess they make kneeling one corruption of the Church, as
your selves likewise do, but it is false that thereby they be driven out of
the Church (as the Abridgement says) and induced to renounce our public
assemblies. And indeed, except they had been out of their right wits, they
would never separate from us for ^sing only one gesture for another. But
suppose it be true that they separate from us by occasion of our kneeling at
Sacrament, is it a sin in us therefore to kneel? First, they have showed
themselves not as weakelings in the meaning of Scripture, but in this
particular as obstinate opposers, and adversaries to the truth: therefore we
are bound to confess against them, as well as they hold themselus bound to
confess aguinst us. Secondly, shall I abstain from kneeling, for avoiding of
that offense which I have no cause particularly to surmise? perhaps one
separates in many shieres once in many years, (blessed be God the number is
small) must all England therefore abstain, and ever abstain from a lawful
gesture for that ones sake, unsuspected? Truly the rule of such a practice
could be observed in no order in the world, inferring upon the Church an
impossible, and infinite vassalage. Thirdly, but is the Magistrates command to
be neglected for satisfaction of obstinate Brownists? Nay is not his authority
to be obeyed for opposing, and resisting them in all their follies and errors?
We think, you should not doubt of this, except you had in you, (which I am
well enough persuaded you have not) the spirit of Anabaptists. Lastly, the
truth is, you do scandalize them more then we do, as evidently is seen; for
if they be offended at our kneeling, it is upon The Replyer asks if any
separate from Churches, where Images are retained, who is the cause, they that
dislike of Images, or they that retain them? Repl. genesis chapter 5. Sect. 18. Ans.
Taking you to speak of unlawful reteining of Images. I answer, they that
enjoin unlawful images. If the case were put of any lawful thing: then I
answer, they that dislike them upon unjust grounds, if on those coming from
them the Separat^st builds himself. A difficult question, to what purpose I
pray you?
those grounds which you have furnished them withal against us. You have
Replyer asks, if O^ius had separated from the Church, wherein Diotrephes
lived, whether John condemning his abuse of excommunication had been cause of
that separation: Repl. genesis ch, 5. sect. 18. Ans. Ye^ an outward cause, if John
had slandered Diotrephes, and upon that slander (supposing it for a truth)
^aius had separated. Another difficult question ^ to what purpose also?
slandered the Church to enjoin kneeling with an Idolatrous intent: you have
cried out with full mouth against the gesture, that it is a will worship, that
it is a Popish relic, and such like, and hereupon they have grounded their
fantastical resolutions. Let w^^e men judge now, whether you give them
scandal, or we; nay I dare say, they take more offense at your joining with us
at Sacrament, though you sit or s^and, and other parts of Gods worship, then at
our kneeling when we receive. Further, you know they take as much offense at
our Temples, and diverse things, which you allow of as well as at our said
gesture of kneeling. I pray let a natural gesture be as innocent toward them,
as artificial Temples are.

Moreover if you look to the Church, the offense of it is more to be declined
then of them, now the same is as much offended by refusal of kneeling, as they
are by conformity to it. I might add, that if sitting or standing were in use
in this Church, not only would the Brownists be as auerse as they are from us,
and our assemblies, but men of another streine would be like to take as much
offense at us, by conceit of irreverence. In a word, it is plain, we give them
no more occasion of separating by kneeling, then we give to you. And therefore
except you will say, we give to you thereby occasion to be gone, you cannot
charge us to be faulty toward them. Now what offense we give unto your
sel^es, follows in order to be tried in the next place.

Of Scandal of non-conformers by kneeling.
TO your selves therefore Abridg 49 Manuser. chapter 1. arg. 2.
you say, we are scandalous many ways. For first, it cannot but grie^e many of
the godly to see this kneeling brought into the service of CHRIST, which has
been so defiled by Antichrist (and you mean by godly such as are strongly
persuaded of the unlawfulness of the gesture, as Manuscript plainly
speaks:) Secondly, you say, we may by our example embolden some who have
been persuaded of the unlawfulness of it, without further ground to use it,
to the wounding of their consciences.

Thirdly, hereby some will grow to a dislike of such Ministers as yield unto
it, to the great hinderance of their Ministry.

Fourthly, we shall give many good Christians, who are strongly persuaded,
occasion to call in question the truth and sincerity of our profession.

Fifthly, especially Abridg. 50.
if kneeling shall be brought back again to those congregations where it
has been long out of use, and practiced by such Ministers, as are known to
have refused it heretofore; for whereas the Minister is bound to lead his
people forward unto perfection, 2. Cor. 13. 9. Hib. 6. 1. and to provide by all
good means, that his Ministry be not despised, Tit. 2. 15. By this means he
shall draw them back again to the liking of superstition, or at least not to
dislike it so much as they have done, and give them evident occasion to blame
his Ministry, and to call in question the truth of all his doctrine. Ans. I may
not deny that which you speak of your selves to be true, so far as you have
had, and found experience thereof either in your Preachers or hearers; yet that
which you affirm only upon probability, is not presently to be granted,
without some little deliberation. But what you can be taken as it were
dogmatically to determine, as that kneeling gives occasion to some to call in
question the truth of all our Doctrine, is worthy to be called in question as
that which is against the common light of every man's understanding: for is it
possible to find such a man, who in truth by such occasion has called in
question all the doctrine of his Religion, even to the principles and
foundations of Catechism.

But what if all be true which you tell us at large concerning your own
selves, shall it follow therefore the kneeling at Sacrament is unlawful in
this Church? you must consider that if the conclusion were sound, the Church
could have no orders at all. Make what orders you can devise, appoint what
gestures, or circumstances of divine worship you can think the fittest, and
some will be g^ieued, some emboldned without ground, and some dislike their
Ministers, and others, whom they see conformable to them. Besides kneeling
being lawful and convenient unto the Sacrament, why will you not allow us the
same answer, which you make your selves in opposing it? if So in effect the
Replyer speaks for their opposing of kneeling, when offense thereat is
objected. Repl. genesis Chapter 5. Sect. 17.
men be offended because ^ee kneel that is their sin; I am sure a gesture
of divine worship, of pure, and undefiled worship has no fi^nes in it to work
suspicions and jealousies of Christian profession and doctrine; nay, it is so
far that any scandalls are produced by the nature thereof, as that the same
must needs rather be contrary to it directly tending to edification.

Especially, when we have to answer. First, that you are not weak ones in the
sense of holy Scripture, nor do you take your selves so to be. For whereas
there be among you of two sorts, either such as are guiders, and leaders of
others, or such as are guided and led; For those I am sure, you take them not
only for strong Christians, but also for the strongest in all the Land: and
what should we think of them, who with so much confidence have Yet the Replier
says, that they have had enough to do to teach the people the maine points of
religion. Rep. gen Chapter 5. Sect. 12. I confess. but some of them have done
more, to make the people to be refractarie against lawful orders. Besides
there are persons who kneel at Sacrament: who have taught the people the maine
points of religion (by the grace of Christ) as much as ever he did, if I be not
d^ceiued.
opposed against kneeling, by preaching, writing, talking, and suffering, for
so many years together? who is so foolish, as to imagine these men to be
Paul's weak ones, or our Savior Christ's little ones? may we not, nay are we not
bound to confess against those, who by all the means in the world confess
against the Church, and truth? for the rest of your professors against
kneeling; they also are such as are set on work either by humor and
prei^dice, or by grounds of conscience seeming good unto them. Let not our
brethron be offended that I say, many of their professors, are set on work by
humor and prejudice, for Mr. Bradstaw has taught us At arg. 12.
a pretended scandal in humor way easily be discerned, I doubt not to make
appear, that the same humor is to be found in many of them. For first, they
which profess in great resolution without grounds, or reasons, that is, which
merely profess in i^itation of certain men of note, or for company of the
best sort of Christians (as they judge opposers to be) or out of ill opinion
conceived of conformable persons, or Church government, are led by humor and
prejudice. Secondly, they which cannot abide to be instructed, or directed by
them of contrary judgment, despising the words and writings of such before
they know them, are led by humor and prejudice. Thirdly, they which upon
discourse hearing many things which they cannot satisfy their consciences in,
do yet never seek to have their doubts resolved, but rest in one song say
what one can to the contrary, are led by humor and prejudice. Fourthly, they
which dare avow the necessity of confessing against kneeling upon pain of
eternal damnation, charging other men in the depest obligation, that may be
to stand out, and yet upon some other man's declaration of the lawful liberty
of kneeling at some time, can be content without gainsaying to profess they
never studied the point, are led by humor, or prejudice. Fifthly, they which
make no conscience of slandering, backbiting, usury, holding Churchliuings
from their Minister (making him to take up with a service at their own
admeasurement) conformity to the world in vanities of apparel, pleasure, and
most scandalous covetousness, unfaithfulness in their callings, v^iustice in
their dealings, and such like, in opposing against kneeling at Sacrament are
led by humor and prejudice. Sixthly, in a word, they which have confessed
themselves to be convinced, that it is lawful to kneel, and yet will not, or
would but for their discredit in the world, specially among the persons of that
side, are led by humor and prejudice. But (I assume) that there is nothing
more manifest, then that many of your professors are thus, and thus disposed,
and carried, which (if it shall concern for Gods glory) I doubt not but I can
particularly maintain so far as outward expressions can discover the inward
meaning, or purpose. Now I know you would not have us bound to abstain from
kneeling for avoiding of the scandal of such persons. Yet I am not so ill
conceited of you (brethren) but I assure my self there be among you, that
strive only in this thing to follow the (persuaded) direction of Gods word.
But are they weak ones I speak of? nay, they are such as are resolved upon so
clear and evident ground, as no man in their judgment can hold any opinion
with better assurance. But if besides all these, you say there be some weak in
knowledge and * otherwise, behold unto them we How the Repl. will, who thus
speaks after long teaching and sufficient knowledge, there may be still a
weakness in regard of some things: though many circumstances required unto
strength beside bare knowledge. Rep. gen C^a. ^. Sect. 12
offer the doctrine of our Church, the direction of our preaching, the
instruction of our books, the edification of our conference, to take away the
danger of scandalizing of them. Also we forbid unto you, that are guides, and
strong Christians to trouble their consciences without cause (as indeed their
scruples in this particular do only rise from your teaching or practice; for
you must think, that we cannot well allow the exception of those scruples for
your nonconformity, which your selves have both begun, and increased in them.
For how weakly do you refuse to kneel for their sakes; who are scrupulous,
when your teaching and practice goes before, and makes them to be so
scrupulous, I add, that there is not any Christian in this Church, (carrying
himself soberly as becomes him) who has not indulgence of time enough to be
informed in the truth, for justifying the Church in urging him to be
conformable both to a lawful order, and to lawful authority. Secondly, if
there be weak Christians, that may be hurt by kneeling, yet I hope you will
not have us culp^ble of that offense, which we could not foresee. For my part
I know not such a weakling in all the Shiere I dwell in* must I therefore
confess against the Church, because by kneeling I should not offend a
weakling? Nay, must the Church confess against her self, for the private
infirmities of such unknown w^eaklings? Truly then sarewell all
Ecclesiastical orders, how necessary soever they be in kind; for what can be
ordained of man, at which some weak ones will not in likely hood ^ee offended?
Thirdly, show us some reason of weight to prove if you can, that for avoiding
scandal which arises to a few such weak ones in our Country, the
Magistrates (otherwise lawful) command ought to be resisted and disobeyed,
no, no. You can never show it, except withal you bring an universal Anarchie
into both Ecclesiastical State. and civil. Specially, you shall be least
able to show it against our worthy Magistrates, and State, of whom your selves
give this testimony, that in making orders there Surney. Pa. 176.
was in them an holy, and noble fear of scandalizing the weak. But here I
cannot pass the noting of Mr. Bradsha^s arrogancy in one Argum, 12
place, who says, that in other things besides Ceremonies he, and his
fellows are more obedient to the Magistrate then any other of his subjects.
We will take this as a fruit of the spirit of one man, for the wiser sort of
them would be ashamed to say so, and the humbler to think so, it were better
that their life and action commended their goodness in silence, then their
own tongues and pens should proclaim it. Especially, by a comparison which
were odious if it were true, much more when it is notoriously false and
slanderous. It is well known, that as in lawful conformity we yield
obedience, where he and they do deny. So in all other points of due obedience
to our knowledge we do equal at least in loyalty, and fidelity the very best
of them. 4. Whiles you object scandal arising to your selves, why do you
never take into consideration the scandal which arises to others from you?
you are too partial that can see and complain of no bodies h^rt but your
own. If you would bestow a little time in meditation thereof, you might
possibly observe that there is a greater scandal which you give then which you
suffer. For first the greater dishonor is done to God and to his Gospel, and
the greater is the sc^^d^ll, but in the leaving of your flocks, forsaking of
your Ministeries, turning your backs upon the Lords ordinance, there is
incomparably more woeful dishonor done unto God, then in our commanded
kneeling is or possibly can be. Therefore the scandal is greater. Secondly,
Where one is offended with our practice of kneeling; twenty, I may say ten
thousand are offended with your refusal. Nay we are persuaded (be you judges
your selves) that if all gestures were le^t at liberty, there would be
greater offense by sitting in this Church, then by kneeling, at least for a
^^^ne. Now the scandal of a ^ew most not sway us* in a thing not ^^pugnant to
Gods word, vbi major numer us per^^cit, ^alu. Epist. 379.
as Mr. Calvin ^^^cheth. Thirdly, the scandal which you commit it is evident
contempt both of the peace of the Church, and of the authority Authority
scandalizeth us, (say you) because differences in matters of circumstance are
not wont to breed scandal, till v. ^^formitie be enjoined by authority, as we
^ay see in the primitive Churches. Rep. (...) chap. 5. Sect. 7. (...) and all
Churches. No s^andall (...) i^ no (...) Think you it would be so in this
Church if all gestures (...) is therefore guilty of scandal no more in (...)
then of that which is taken at any lawful (...) you may lay fault (...) you to
go to Church such (...) when you pray, and (...)
of government Partly whiles upon the ^^etence of scandal you will not kneel
at ^t a^y time Or place. Partly, whiles (...) and there will be small scandal,
I (...)
you^ study to make and encrea^e such scandals with your utmost end^uour;
partly whiles you yield not one lot of your ^eale for the reverence of the
Magi^^tate or peace of the Church. And in a word (...) you can be content not
only to love them the worse, but also to de^p^^e, ^^out and (...) them that
do obey, and satisfy (...) in this case. Fourthly, are there not weak ones
also with us, whom you scandalize by your standing and sitting, and by your
(...) of kneeling ^ a great number, God knows, whose souls are distracted and
wounded thereby many ways. I wish you had cast an eye of some compassion and
indulgence upon them. Fifthly, you do not consider, that if we should leave
our kneeling, as you desire, we should confirm in you an ungodly opinion, if
kneeling at Sacrament is ungodly; and nourish exceedingly that corruption from
which your violence against the same does proceed. Sixthly, I add that in
refusal to kneel we should be guilty of greater scandal to our own souls,
as the time now is, when for fear of others offense in a circumstance, we
depri^e our selves of the substance of the Lords supper; the due partaking
whereof is not only a badge of the true Church, but a blessed conduit pipe to
convey both grace and comfort into the souls of faithful Communicants.

But I will pass to the particular scandals which you charge against us, in
respect of your selves. First, you say Kneeling at Sacrament cannot but gree^e
you. Ans. You are grie^ed without cause, and this is a sufficient answer unto
those who are strongly persuaded. Then (me thinks) you ought to be grieved
more, at the loss of the commu^ion and greater matters. Again, it seems, you
c^nt not of the grie^e of many of us (which is perhaps neither small nor
seldom) at your unreasonable opposing. But the truth is, in stead of grieuing
for the most part, we can sooner hear of your anger, scoffing, and
contemptuous, both words and carriage. Secondly, you say by your kneeling you
fear to e^bolden some to kneel^ (who have thought it unlawful) against their
consciences.

Answ. So you give us to understand the state of some of your Professors, who
can be content to follow your examples* though it ^e against their
consciences. I think also, that such whom your example would sway to kneeling,
are especially such whom it swayeth against kneeling. No mer^aile therefore if
they which follow you in standing or sitting, did with the same consciences
follow you also in the other. Besides might not this exception fall against
sitting and standing as well as kneeling; yea or against any lawful
circumstance of divine worship? I will do my duty which I know and see, that
inconvenience which is secret in other men, must be referred to God who knows
all; and we must give account that does wrong. Thirdly, say you, by kneeling at
Sacrament some of you will grow to a dislike of those Ministers which use i^.
Answ. So some may grow to a dislike of those Ministers also, which refuse to
use it. But whence is it they are so forward to dislike their Ministers who
kneel? is it not of their privy pride, ignorance, and other like distemper?
and this we may truly say of them which in an unrighteous cause are so
extremely censorious. Besides whether is more to be blamed, the Minister who
does his duty, or the people who will not do it? should the Minister refuse to
kneel, that he might not be disliked of some of his people, or the people
rather be contended to kneel, that they might not be disliked of their
Minister? Judge impartially, I pray you betwixt the Minister and his people.
Only you do well to speak the truth of your peoples disposition, which both
they and you may be ashamed of. I am heartily sorry, that men and women
professing the fear of God, should carry themselves so far out of good
order. Are we not the Messengers of the Lord Jesus? have we not approved our
faithfulness and diligence in our Ministries to God and the Church as well as
the best of you? Are we to stand or fall to our hearers, and not rather to our
Master in Heaven? is there a necessity for the comfort of our Ministries that
we only use what gestures some of our timorous people think well of? Oh
Brethren, call upon your followers in good earnest that they despise not the
Ministers who are contrary minded. Let them not make our ^eproach and disgrace
their common talk among themselves in their reserved meetings. Bid them to lay
their hands upon their mouths, when they are ready to utter bitter censures
against us. Admonish them to be willing to hear the word of the Lord without
Partialities. These Councels are good I suppose n^^ only from you to them, ^ut
from me to you. I know you are too dull and remiss in calling upon them; nay
many of you (I speak what I know) do lend a glad and willing ear to those
who do backbite and ca^umniate, But your cause against kneeling at Sacrament
(naught o^ it self) prospers the worse through such unjust and irregular
managing. Fourthly, you say, some of you who are strongly persuaded may be
occasioned by others kneeling at Sacrament to call in question the truth and
sincerity of their profession. Answ. And do not all men see that by this
opposing of kneeling you give as much occasion to us, to call in question the
truth and sincerity of your profession? nay more; because affecting of an
unlawful singularity is a dangerous ^ote of hypocrifie; and especially when it
is of a matter of circumstance, in the neglect of Gods substantial worship, of
love and justice to men, and of your scuered vocations. Only again you are
trumpetters of your own shame, and, as if experience could not teach us the
ra^^nes of your professors sufficiently, you thought good to certify the
world by writing. True it is, it is an ordina^ie thing with your ^ide to judge
and call us formalists, tim^ seruers. Hypocrites, and such like; whereby
appears if God had committed our judgment to some of you, we should be sure
to find hard measure at your hands. But blessed be God, that all judgment is
Ioh. 5. 2^*
committed unto the Son, that so judgment may be ^oyned with justice. Yea,
says the Rom 14. 10
Apostle, why dos^ thou judge thy brother? or why do thou ^^t at naught thy
Brother? We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. Truly in
this consideration (I hope) we labou^ 2^2. Cor. 5. 9. 10.
to be accepted of him, and ^s Paul passed not 1. Cor. 4. 34.
need not pass to be judged with man's judgment. I add also, that in
thousands who have kneeled at (...) has proved the sincerity and truth of
their pr^fession; and I hop^ will still prove, though there have be^ne and will
be dissemblers both with us and you, whose hypocri^ie we cannot hinder I
beseech you for the love of Christ (by whose blood we believe to be saved as
well as you) look into your own hearts, since you have no windows to look
into ours, and if you will not encourage us in a Christian course, do not
discourage us. Weaken not our hearts and hands (at the best weak enough) in
the profession of the Gospel, lest the guilt of a scandal (incomparably worse
then you complain you suffer) lie heavy upon your own souls.

Lastly, you say especially it will be hurtful, that Ministers and people
should conform to Kneeling, who have long disused and refused it heretofore,
because by so doing where the people should gr^w forward to perfection, they
will grow backward to poperic and superstition; and also the Ministers shall
expose all their doctrine to the danger of being called in question for the
truth of it. Answ. If I ask you here, why kneeling at Sacrament is not in the
way to perfection, as well as sitting or standing, you give no reason at all
for it, as though your authority and saying would serve our turn. I hope it
has appeared by this Treatise, that kneeling is not a going backward, but
forward in the way to Heaven. And for your charge that the same is a declining
to Popery or superstition, I have answered in this Chapter at large already.
Besides may not we except against their standing and sitting, who have kneeled
heretofore, in like manner; namely, that they go back from a gesture of
devotion and humility, to a more irreverent carriage, and more answering and
serving to men's profaneness? But the chiefest thing you seem to fear is the
discredit of your Ministeries. I know that a Minister ought to his power to
preserve the credit of his Ministry, partly by the grace and authority of his
Preaching, and partly by fidelity in his Calling, and an unblameable life; as
the Apostle commands Timothy. Let no man despise thee, but ^ee thou a^
example of the be^^euers, in w^rd, in conversation, in charity, in Spirit, in
faith, in purity; and give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to Doctrine.
1. Tim. 4. 12. 13. But did ever the Apostle require a Minister to preser^e the
credit of his Ministry by contending against a lawful gesture; and therein
against the custom of the Church, and the authority of the Magistrate?
Again, it seems you account it no discredit to your ministries to oppose the
gesture of Kneeling, though you open the mouths of thousands against you
therefore. But if you ought to have a good report among them which are without,
1. Tim. 3. 7. I am sure you ought much more to have declined the discredit of
your persons and ministries, among the true (though conforming) members of the
Church of God. Strange it is, you should regard no discredit, but with people
of your own side! Again, you speak of discrediting your Ministries, and do
not you, de industria, lay the ground of such your discredit? For if before the
people you had not discredited a lawful gesture, your selves should not have
bin discredited among them for all the practice of it. Again, who are you,
that you should stand upon your credit in this manner? Do the people take you,
for men inspired as were the Apostles? Would you by no means be seen to
acknowledge an infirmity, or revoke an error, before them? Alas, poor Bats
that we are! (that I may use the words of that Bishop Mort. Defens. genesis chapter
^. Sect. 14
learned Bishop;) Why should we presume, that the credit or discredit of the
Ministry of the Gospel should rely or depend upon us? Have we seen Christ
in the flesh? Or came the word of the Ministry from us, that we should assume
to our selves the Apostolical honor of not erring in any thing? Again, do
you set the credit of your Ministries in a gesture, before the liberty of your
said Ministries? That is, as if a man should rather be contented to loose a
great Lordship, then walk up and down in some part thereof, least envious
beholders take thence occasion to dispraise both him and it. Is it not a woeful
pretense, not to kneel for discrediting your Ministries, when yet by that
respect you expose your Ministries, not to contempt alone, but confusion.
Again, you must consider that all the comfort of your preaching and pains
depends upon Gods blessing. Wherefore so long as you go on therein Perhaps
here and in many other places, you will be opposing according to the old wo^t,
that kneeling at Sacrament is unlawful in it self, but lo^k whatsoever you
have said tending to pr^ue that, I have refuted in proper place; let us not
dally therefore, the case is now of scandal in a thing indifferent, such as the
gesture of kneeling at the Sacrament is; at least in this place must be
supposed to be; esse what force shall your arg. taken from scandal have of it
own to prove the unlawfulness of that gesture? if it have none your trifling
about it, is shamefully childish and ridiculous. You see I am feign often to
call you from an old haunt and refuge.
according to truth and a good conscience, you have no cause to fear the
discredit of your persons and Ministries. I say further, that you have
discredited this Church by an unlawful resistance against kneeling; not only
the Conuocation-house, (as the scornful Repl. genesis to B. Mort. chapter 5. page 82.
Replyer says,) but also the Parliament house, yea all degrees of men, all
conformers to kneeling in all the kingdom. Alas! how much, and how earnestly
you seek our shame, your books and speeches and practice do give infallible
testimony. Now ought you not to make amends, where you have done wrong? Should
you not speak for the peace of the Church for fear of some disparagement with
her contentious members? have you discredited kneeling, and will you not of
conscience do it right again, for fear of your private discredit? what a
strange kind of perverseness is this, in those which would be thought to
excel others in wisdom and honesty? Furthermore, take notice I pray, that
God of his great goodness has maintained the credit of such as kneel at
Sacrament, and of their Ministries, as much as ever he did (for ought we are
able to see) the credit of the worthiest man that ever graced your
non-conformitie. Yea of those, who after refusal of conformity have upon
riper judgment yielded unto it, this Church has had excellent lights to Gods
glory; when some of your Preachers persisting in their nonconformitie (as
Master In his Epi. to the Reader.
Sprint has observed) have notwithstanding fallen into plain profaneness
and wickedness. So that whiles they have endeavored to shun a less disgrace
in an evil manner, by Gods justice they have fallen upon a worse. And
sometimes it has happened, that they for whose sake some Minister has opposed
against the practice of ceremonies, have proved afterward either bitter
enemies, or at least no better then enemies to himself. Finally, you confess
(nothing at all to your credit) still, that which we believe to be true, that
many of you do refuse kneeling at Sacrament, for avoiding of discredit among
the professors of your own side. And in my conscience I am persuaded, and so
are many more, (upon strong presumptions) that were it not for such and such, a
great many of you would be contented to kneel. Sure I am in our conformity,
we have suffered many aspersions of reproach and disgrace (of which I have not
had the least portion my self) that we So the Replyer charge many of us, in
the beginning of his Preface to conform upon unknown motives, his purpose is
to gird by that speech, yet it is his shame to gird against that which he
confesses to be unknown. Iud. Epist. verse. 10.
conform upon evil motives, that we have lost the power of our Ministries,
and such like: but we are well content to wait the time which God has set,
for full disconerie, both of our hearts and our cause. In the mean time
according to our talent by the grace of God in some measure laboring to serve
him, not with the flesh of men's humors and fancies, but with the spirit of
truth and holiness, in the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ. And so much be
answered to your former argument against kneeling at Sacrament, taken from the
breath of the bond of charity, kneeling breaks the bond of charity, because
it causes scandal and sin unto the souls of others. Now remains the
other, whereby you endeavor to show the said kneeling to break the said bond
of charity. The God of all wisdom and grace guide my heart and hand, to the
setting forth of his glory in such answer thereof, as duly app^rtaineth.

CHAP. 6.
YOur other argument to show, that kneeling at Sacrament breaks the bond of
charity, is this, because All actions, which cross the Catholic Church of
Christ; that is, the Church of all ages and places, break the bond of
charity: but kneeling at Sacrament is an action which crosses the Catholic
Church of Christ, that is, the Church of all ages and places. Ergo: My meaning
is not by this form to wrong your cause, for (as I said) the sum and effect
thereof is in your own books, as i^ the process of this Chapter, (God
willing) I shall ma^e appear.

I will not stand upon the proposition at this time. The judgments, though
according to the present time they have practiced some other gesture; or
lastly, they have not condemned it, as being unlawful, and impious in its own
nature.

Now for the more effectual finding out of the truth, Luther, we may descend
to our own time. I will reckon the C^nturies, as the Magdeburgian Divines do;
and so the first centurie beginning at the birth of Christ, shall end with the
death of his beloved Disciple John, who suruiued all the rest of the Apostles.
And at every period of several either times, or places, or persons; first I
will set down what you do say thereof, (if I find you to say any thing) and
then I will deliver my own mind, as much as good reason shall lead me to
judge, pertinent to the purpose, and agreeable to the truth.

First, then we must begin with the Primitive Church, Disp. page 69.
him to prove that kneeling was never used before the days of Honori^^. In
like manner the Abridgm. Abridgm. page 58.
affirms, that the Primitive Churches for sundry hundred of years, after the
Apostles never used to receive the Sacrament kneeling. But before we pass to
the particular centuries, it is not a misle, that we take some needful things
into consideration. As,

Consideration 1. for Stating of the question.
1. What our brethren do mean, when they deny Repl. part. page 52.
they) the question is not of bowing, or any other fashions of adoration, but
only of kneeling. But let all men judge, whether this be an equal stating of
the question betwixt us; for if other adoring gestures be of the same kind with
kneeling, and we can prove such like to have been used in the Primitive
Church in the act of receiving, have we not the effect of our desire? has not
the disputer given us a rule, Disput. page: 156.
that from one form of personal adoration, we may reason for any one? surely,
if the Christians in the Primitive Church did bow, and otherwise adore in the
act of receiving the Lords Supper, (though kneeling be not expressed, yet)
their example is evident against you, and for us; for all the grounds whereby
you defend sitting and standing, and condemn kneeling, do in like manner
oppose and condemn other such adoring gestures; for kneeling is condemned by
you, because it is a gesture of adoration, as sitting and standing are
defended, because they are not such; so that kneeling and other forms of
personal adoration, being of the same kind and use, do stand or fall all
together. Therefore you do us wrong to pitch the question upon the name and
word, kneeling rather then upon the sense and purpose thereof, which is
humility and adoration, especially when your selves in stead of sitting, prove
altogether by standing, (as supposing it to be of the same kind) yea and
endeavor to prove standing also at the E^charist, by the custom of standing
at prayer. Secondly, (say Disp. page 13.
they) the question is not, whether there be any record, that kneeling was
used at the time of communicating, but whether it was used, as the received and
allowed carriage of a Communicant.

But this is a hole provided only to creep out at. What if we can prove,
that good Christians did use kneeling at Sacrament, will not that serve the
turn? is it not as good a testimony, as if our posterity should prove
standing or sitting to have been used in this Church in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, and K. James? yet that I am sure, you will judge, would be a good
testimony for the praise of standing and sitting, and for an historical
continuation of times catalogue; behold therefore if we can produce out of
Antiquity examples and testimonies for kneeling, so long as the persons were
godly Christians, though private persons, there is no reason, why we should be
tied to bring forth any record of the public allowance of them. Is it not
enough that kneeling was used by them, who were as well as your selves true
believers in Jesus Christ?

Thirdly, (say Repl. partic. to Bish. Mort page 52.
they) the question is not, what was done or spoken by particular men, but what
was enjoined to whole Churches. But this is both an unlearned and an
unreasonable shift. For know you not, that many Mr. Baines gives you instance
in sundry particulars and some of great importance. Diocles. trial, page 42.
things were taken up, and generally practiced in the ancient Church, before
any Council did enact or enjoin them? besides is it so. that there is no rule
for the trial of a Churches practice, but the Canon of some Oecumenicall or
Synodicall assembly? must we now reject Historians, when reporting of some
fashions in such or such a country, or place, they tell us only; This, or
this was the manner there; Again, does not custom obtain in time vi^ legis,
the force Mr. Baines expounds, Decre^um est, of a father, to import no more
then it was taken up for a custom, which (says he) is elegantly said to be a
^ecree Dio ^^triall, page 44. I say not so much here.
of a decree? and why then do you stand so much upon the voice of a Council,
if we can acquaint you with the voice of custom? Further more, a decree does
not always infer, either a general practice, or practice of the best
people; at least this latter, you will easily believe of your selves, in
opposing the decrees of the Church of England. I add, that decrees are many
times laid asleep, so that howsoever they may determine for the practice of
the present time, yet cannot speak for scores and hundreds of years
afterward. Therefore if we be able to give you custom for kneeling in the
ancient Church, be contented I pray, and show your selves men of equity, in
captiuating your wills to right reason.

Now concerning all these rules which you have given,

First, that you cannot reasonably limit the question so much, if you but
consider how largely you have spoken against the antiquity of kneeling, for
you Disp. to the Reader.
affirmed, that Antiquity is wholly against us, and the Primitive Churches
never so much as heard of kneeling, and the Churches succeeding excluded it out
of their Congregations, and gave no entertainment unto it, for the space of
1200. years. What are these but flourishes and vaunts, before the world to
disgrace our kneeling withal, which you will not stand to?

Secondly, you can much less limit the question, if by any instance of
kneeling or adoring gestures, our purpose is plentifully attained. For why do
you search into the ancient Church in this controversy, but partly to show the
consent thereof against the practice of our Church, and partly to show, that
kneeling was not brought into the world, before the man of sin brought it in;
and therefore you have taken upon you the proof of a Negative, in these Disp.
page 67, etc.
words; That kneeling to receive the Sacrament was not used at the institution
of the Lords Supper, nor after in any age of the Church, before the time of
Honorius the third, about the year 1220. Now who does not see, that one plain
instance of kneeling at Sacrament in the ancient Church quite overthrows this
great Negative; specially if the same be approved by the writings of such as
were principal Doctors in the Church, for that implies the like and
answerable allowance of multitudes, who were led undoubtedly of them.

Thirdly, you can least of all limit the question as you sitting was used for
the first twelve hundred years, and not another gesture of the same kind; yea
and that it was also publicly allowed and decreed in the Church. But alas, you
bind a burden on our shoulders, without pity, which would break your own
back, if you were put to it. Again, giving you the liberty of standing (so
far as it is of the same kind with sitting) to prove upon, according to your
own order, we expect, that for the ages before the time of Honorius, you
shall prove that standing was allowed and decreed by the Church at the Lords
Supper: In all these things, both on your part and ours, what can be done, will
(I suppose) in some degree appear by and by. And so much for the first
needful point of consideration.

Consideration 2. for instruction about the proof.
NOw that we have spoken to the stating of the question, let us next observe
something about the your proof I must tell you: First, it is impossible to
prove your Negative, being of that latitude, in a matter of fact, if all the
wits on your side, were thereunto set on work. This you cannot deny:
Secondly, all your proofs look quite off from sitting, as if it were an utter
stranger in ancient times; and those testimonies you allege for standing, are
nothing to your just purpose, because that standing they speak of, is not to
be considered of the same sort with sitting, that is, as a table gesture. This
you cannot fairly deny: Thirdly, your pr^ofes leave the mind suspending,
because they are but probabilities, as the doubt^ull construction of words in
Grammar; the concluding from one ordinance to another; the report of some late
writers of Antiquity without certain record, and such like: bold and bare
conjectures satisfy not.

Touching our proof, if the same appear to be effectual The Repl. parti^. to
Bp. Mort. page 52.
places which we allege for adoration or kneeling out of the Fathers, the
Papists plead for their idolatry; for all men know a difference between
kneeling unto God, and to the ^lements of bread and wine: and though our
testimonies do prove their pract^se of the ^or^er, yet the latter they prove
not; and if the Papists do pervert the sa^e, with their false and vn^aithfull
interpretations, shall that prevent the lawful use of the testimonies, and
take our right in them quite away from us? Secondly, fly not off, by saying,
Disp. page 66.
That the adoration which the Fathers sp^ke of, was inward only and not
corporal: why did you not show reason to evince, that this was their undoubted
meaning? Such is the vanity of man contending, that he pleases himself in any
shift, whereby he may ^lude, what his adversary produces. But what if they
spoke of adoration internal, truly they which allow of that in the act of
receiving, will not disallow the ex^^rnall: but as the word Adoration both in
Scripture and the Ecclesiastical writers, is commonly used for outward
worshipping: so in our testimonies of the Fathers, the sa^e will manifestly
appea^e. Thirdly, fly not off by saying, Disp. page 65.
That the Fathers did sometimes speak of the Sacrament in a Rhetorical
manner: for though they speak ^hetorically sometimes, yet then they use some
evident trope or figure, which does show as much: but in a matter of fact, in a
thing affirmed or persuaded to be done, to say they ^he^orize, is to make them
abusers of the people, or your selves rather abusers of them, that I may be
admitted so to speak in a ^hetoricall manner. Fourthly, fly not off by
sleighting of the ancient Fathers, and godly people of their times: what if
kneeling were used in the Church before Honorius time, what then? If the Treat.
of div. worship page 40.
Fathers used that gesture, it was not well done; and howsoever page 39.
kneeling cannot be proovea before Popery, because some Popery was in the
Apost^es time. Alas! what judgment and understanding is in such arguing as
this? what edification redounds to other men, from these idle vagaries? Lo, we
make no man's pr^ctise a rule to build our faith on, we hold the holy writ
all-sufficient for our guidance in very gestures. Only with the eye of reason,
look upon your own intentions, in sear^hing into An^iquity, and upon ours in
this place; and stick close to the matter in h^nd, which is de facto of our
agreement and disagreement with the An^ient Church in the gesture of the Lords
Supper. And so let us friendly join together in this issue; all other
objections having bin fully answered already. Now your reas^ns against kneeling
in the Ancient Church are either general and more large, or else restreined to
the several Ages and Centuries. Those first I must tak^ out of the way, and
then (I hope) I shall b^at liberty to take the particular Conturies in their
order without more ado^.

First general reason against kneeling in the Ancient Church, taken from the
gesture appointed at prayer on the Lords days.
YOur first general reason (and the great one in your account) is this: Ther^
was (say you) Disput. arg 4
a general order in the A^ciens Church for standing at prayer on the Lords
day. The principal ground was in the fourth Centurie, Can. 20. of the first
and great Council of Nice, in these words. Quoniam sunt in D^minica die qu^dam
ad oratione^ gen^a flectentes, et in diebus Pentecostes, pr^pterea vtique;
statutum est a sa^ct^ Syno^o, qui^ cons^na et c^nveni^ns per omnes Ecclesias
custod^^nda consuet^do est vt sta^tes' ad oration^m vota Domino redd^mus,
because th^re are some which how their knees upon the Lords day, and in the
days of Pe^tecost, therefore the holy Synod ord^^neth, that when we pay our
vows unto the Lord in prayer, we do it stan^ing, ^o the end a convenient
custom may be k^pt alike in all Churches. This Canon you say was in the next
Centurie, Disp. page: 87 says, that this Council made a ^anon ^or standing in
prayer; where it only decreed Can^^^s Nic^ni ^n^^y ^e^os. (which are there
repeated 20 in number) esse obser ran^^s: the man was mistaken a little.
confirmed by the sixth Coun^ill of Carthage; and by one held at Rome under
Hilari^^ then Bishop. Also you say in the seventh Century the same Canon was in
eff^^t confirmed by the sixth general Council^ at Constan^^^ople; and in the
ninth Centurie by the Synod of Turon.

Moreover you quote for standing at prayer in several Justin Martyr and
Te^tullian in the second Century. Cyprian in the third. Basil and Ier^^ in the
fourth. Chry^stome and Augustine in the fifth. And for want of more witness
you skip over to A^selme, who lived in the eleventh: and This the Scotchmen
Perth ass. 58. borrow cut of the ^p. of R^ch page 161: and so ad it to the
Disp. number.
so to Hug^d^ sancto victore in the twelfth. And further you think you need
not go, because in the thirteenth you fall upon Honorius the third, who is
your Terminus ad quem.

Now from all this, you infer in this ^bridg, p. 89.
manner. That either the primitive Church used a gesture of greater reverence
and humility at the rec^^ving of the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, then
they did at prayer; or they never received the Sacrament on any Lords day, or
one any other day betwixt Easter a^^ W^^^so^tide, (all which were absur^ to
affirm or imagine) or else it m^st needs be granted, that they used to receive
the Communion you might insert sometimes for that is all your conclusion will
beare] with so^^ other gesture t^en kneeling.

Our Answer.
SOmething I have answered to this matter, chap. 4*

There was a decree (it cannot be denied) in the Church, for standing at prayer
on the Lords days, Nice made the Canon for standing at prayer, kneeling was in
common practice, as the Canon it self declares. In the fifth Centurie the
Council of Carthage cvinceth not much; for that Council did not de industria
fasten their thoughts and care upon the particular matter of standing at
prayer; but so it was, that the Popes at that time, Zozimus, Bonifac^^s, and
Celestinus, one after another, most vehemently urged the Council, with the
privilege of appealing to Rome, which they said was granted by a Canon of the
Council of Nice, which indeed Zozimus had wickedly counterfeyted. Hereupon
the Fathers of the Council of Cart^age, were put to it, to find out the true
Canons of the Nice^ Council. But when after diligent search made, and no
copi^s could be found greek^ or latin, which had therein that Canon of
appealing to Rome, they rejected the Popes both unreasonable demand and
abominable fraud, and established the true Canons only wherein their copies
agreed. So that their purpose was not (as is plain) to pitch upon the Here the
Disput pa. 87. was mistaken, for the Canon he mentions was the N^c^ repeated.
gesture of prayer in particular, but by searching and finding out the true
Canons, to withstand that which was false and supposititious, by the pretense
whereof the Popes had contested for the privilege of Appeals. Sure here was
not much for particular standing at prayer. And unto like purpose may it be
said concerning the Roman Council under Pope Hilarious; for as it establishes
only in general words the Canons of the Council of Nice: So the ocasion of
that Council is said to be i^cumbens necessi^as, de confirmandis Concili^
Nic^^i stat^^is d^ ordinatio^e. See what great respect was particularly had to
standing at prayer. And indeed the general reviving of old decrees includes
oftentimes some particular things, which the Revivers thought not upon; n^y
which peradventure they would have condemned or corrected, if present occasion
had brought the same into public demurment and agitation. It is a small
countenance therefore, which the Councils of Cart^age and Rome seem to give
you for standing at prayer, when they established only the Canons of Nice, the
one for asserting the true against the Popes counterfeit, the other for
reviving those Decrees which concerned ordination. Sure I am Augustine who
lived in this Centurie, speaking of the custom of standing at prayer August.
Epist. 119. sub finem, cap. 17.
professes, he was not able to affirm, that the same was used in his time
used through the whole Church. And we know that Augustine was as likely to know
the custom of his own time, as you living in this age can possibly be. In the
seventh Centurie, though the sixth general Council of Constantinopl^ reuived
the old Decree of standing at prayer, yet it was, (which you also confess)
because that custom was in many Churches neglected at that time, In the ninth
Centurie the Synod of Turo^ under Charles the great made a (x) decree for
kneeling at prayer, excepting the Lords days, and some other solemnities,
whereon (says the Canon) the universal Church uses to stand. And this
testimony I confess does declare the practice of the Church in those days,
though their testimony would have had more strength, ^f the Council had been
general, which it was no^, for it consisted only of the Bishops and Abbats of
Turon.

Now I will add a word of your testimonies of particular men: Justin Mar^yr
says, After the exercise of the word, they rose up and prayed. What
follows? Verily this they might do, and yet kneel down. Tertull^an indeed
is cleerer, That standing at prayer on the Lords days, and the days betwixt
Easter and Whitsontide was a custom in his time: (yet it was the Disputers
^rrour, that dies Stationum were put by Tertullian for the Lords days, which I
let pass.) So take this testimony for the second Centurie. For the third, you
bring Cyprian, saying, Cum stamus ad ortaio^e^^, as if this would prove, that
kneeling was not used at prayer, on the Lords day, throughout the year, in the
whole Church, for the space of an hundred years: this Disputer regarded not
weight, so he could get tale. For the fourth Century Basils testimony and
Iero^s are needless, for the authority of the Nicen Council in that age might
suffice; yea and Basil de Spiritu sancto, specially that latter p^rt which you
allege for your purpose, is a counterfeit, as Mr. Cook in his censure
shows. For the fifth Century Chrysostomes testimony is weak for you, who
speaks only of the Ministers or Deacon, standing at the Altar, and calling
upon the people to pray. Indeed Augustine speaks plainly that they stood at
prayer, but he doubted, whether they did (...) in all Churches, as I have noted
before. For the eleventh Century Anselme (like Cyprian) is cited for saying,
Cum st^m^s ad orationem. For the twelfth Century Perth Ass borrowes Hugo de
sancto victore, out of the Bishop of Roch. discourie, where Page 161.
he might have seen how little it is for the generality of standing only at
prayer on the Lords days; for there he is showed, that in Hugo's time, they
stood at prayer, but till the collect [Domine Deus Pater q^inas ad prircipium,
etc.] was said, which is the last Collect of our first service; yea that this
h^th been the pra^^ise of the Church aforetime may seem by the end why they
stood in prayer, namely to confirm their Catechimeni in the point of Christ's
resurrection. Therefore, doing that service which they called Missa^
Catechumenoru^ ^hey might stand in prayer, yet not at the other which they
called Missam ^idelium, when the Catechumeni were dismissed. This then is the
sum of your pertinent allegations and testimonies: for Centurie 2. you have
Tertullian. Centur. 4. you have the Council of Nice with Ierom. Centur. 5. you
have Augustine: (the Councills of Carthage and Rome are litt^e to your
behoof.) Centur. 7. you have the sixth general Council of Constantinopie: and
for Centur 9. you have the Synod of Turon. And this is all that you have said
of any moment, as you may plainly see. And now I will deal with you, with
application of some particular answers.

First, of the 12. hundred years and more, you have no certain proof of 7.
hundred, and more: for of Centuries Nice could not be an absolute bond to
posterity, but as the same was approved by them, whose it was for the present
to govern the Church of Christ. Old decrees of indifferent things do not
sempiternally bind, but Christians may use their liberty therein, non
renit^^te Magistratu, Praesectisque Ecclesi^. Thirdly, your selves no doubt
think that Canon of Nice to have been an unlawful decree; and so the
practice of them which did othewise out of conscience, to have been
commendable and good. Upon which ground the decree is not so good a testimony
of the ancient Church, as the practice of those, whom your selves in confessing
against this Church do resemble. Fourthly, but why should you once pretend a
decree when from the differing practice of the Church in many age^ and places,
your purpose of quite condemning us by all antiquity must quite fail. So then
let the Reader observe, that if you ^ould conclude, from the gesture of prayer
on the Lords day to the gesture of the Communion, yet you were little helped
thereby, because you cannot show us, what was done at all for 700. years, nor
what was certainly done in all the Churches in the other 500. Thus far already
the wing of your argument is clipped in my first particular answer.

Secondly, it will be further ^lipt, if ou^ of that Huge testifies that they
kneeled down at some prayers, (see Bp. of Roch. discourse, page, 162.) and
again that standing was only used at the former service, if yet you will
yield Huge to expound the Synod of Turon which was not long before him.
Howsoever) the week days you must be contented to leave unto us.

Thirdly, your reason follows not from their standing absurd to think or
speak, that the ancients used a gesture of greater reverence and humility at
the Lords Supper, then they did at prayer; and the Disput. says, it is to make
the Fathers and Councels senseless, ridiculous, and in^erters of the order of
nature: but with their leave it is no more to think or speak this of them
then it is to think or speak it of our own selves; for how do we use our
liberty of standing at prayer, though we kneel in receiving the Lords Supper,
and so might they, who had as high a conceit of the holy Sacrament, as we have,
as appears by the Fathers writings, setting out the excellency there of in a
hyperbolicall manner, and we can not judge of ancient times so well, by your
presumptions and rules, as by the opinions and strains of them, which were
then the principal lights of the Church. They saw not with the disputers eyes,
the doctrine of a Table Gesture was not then on foot. Adoring gestures were not
then conceived more unlawful for a Communicant, then for a supplyant. Besides
in the strength of your own opinion you do weakly beg, that because custom
and Councels had led the Church to stand at prayer, upon a severed respect, it
was therefore absurd, senseless, ridiculous, and against nature to kneel at
the Lords Supper: for if there was a fault, it was in prohibiting the gesture
of kneeling on the Sabbath prayers, and not in practicing the gesture of
kneeling on the Sabbath Sacraments, which might lawfully be done, whether the
other was or was not; and I pray you mind, that their standing was used for
commemoration of Christ's resurrection, but the Sacrament is appointed for
commemoration of his death. Also there appears no reason out of the ancients,
why they should receive the Sacrament in the same gesture, wherein they used to
pray.

This be added, that the tenor of the Councels Canons condemns you, if you
please to mind it, ask them at what times, and in what ordinance standing must
be used, and they will tell you, for times, only on the Sabbeth days, and the
feast of Pentecost: for ordinance, only at prayer. Now that which is de iure
speciali (so as this decree of standing at prayer was) ought not be extended
further, then is specified in the letter of the decree; think you any body
would hold themselves bound to stand at receiving the Lords Supper, by the
Canon which was made for standing at prayer? were it not absurd and ridiculous
to think so? you might as well say that the decree reached to other days
besides those which were mentioned as to other duties besides prayer. The Canon
of Nice is only for standing at prayer? so that of Constantinople and Turon.
So Tert. and Ier. (as Perth. ass. 58.) either in one place say, the custom war
to stand on the Sa^boths without menti^^^irg of prayer: bu^ (besides that no
Supper is expressed) no doubt Can 20. of the Nicen Council must clear both: for
as that Canon by Tert. testimony and the custom of many Churches seems to be
set on foot: so the same became a law unto Ier. who lived after. So that as the
Canon spoke what Tertul. meant. In like manner, ^er. meant wh^^ the Canon spoke
And this is a reasonable exposition.
Basil and Augustine, so your impertinent allegations, as of Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Anselme, and H^go, all only for standing at prayer. What now? was
in so many ages the gesture of standing by no Council, Father or Writer
expressly referred to the Communion; and yet must we believe, that the Church
used that gesture. because it was required in prayer? Be it known unto you
therefore. that the Canons of Councels, and Writings of Fathers, mentioning
standing only at prayer, are so far from concluding for the Lords Supper,
that they exclude it, for Exceptio firmat regulam, and the constant omitting in
all antiquity of standing at Supper, in the constant expressing of it in the
order of prayer, in so many ages, in so great a distance, is in stead of an
exception, and strong against your manner of reason^ng.

Fourthly, but what if we should yield, that the ancients used such a gesture
at the Communion which they used at prayer? verily it would neither condemn^
they condemned it not in prayer. Nay at other times then commanded kneeling in
prayer, as besides the testimonies of Fathers, your Synod of Turon does bear
witness, therefore they condemned it not at Sacrament in it self. Secondly, if
they used the same gesture at prayer and Communion, they justify us, for
behold so do we, if you say, we use another gesture in both then they did, I
answer as we have actually changed, so they knew they had liberty to do
likewise, you will grant they had liberty for kneeling at prayer, and then for
the Sacrament your own manner of reasoning will infer it also: for if such
an order had bin made in the Church, that all should have kneeled (even on the
Sabboths) in prayer, (which might well have bin) then we might have concluded
as you do; therefore also they kneeled in the act of receiving. Thirdly, let
the reader observe, that sitting by this reason taken from the gesture of
prayer, is so much more cond^mned by all antiquity, as the same has judged it
of all the gestures, the most unfit to pray in. For as their practice in the
Primitive Church was Surgi^^^ (...), and (...) ^ationes (...). Just. Mar^.
Apol. 2.
to rise from sitting (which in the exercise of the Word they had used) when
they went to prayer: So their doctrine was, that to fit before God in prayer,
was an Fact^^ istu^ irrel^g^sis (...) est. Tert. de Orat^^^.
vnre^erent, and unchristian carriage, therefore the ancient Church refusing
and condemning sitting at prayer, refused as much (after your manner of
proving) and condemned sitting at the Communion. Fourthly and lastly, if
s^anding was used in the ancient Church at the Supper, because it was used at
prayer, yet that is nothing to your standing I trow: for as the Fathers never
thought (as far as we know) kneeling at supper a will worship, or not decent
enough or against the dignity and duty of a Communicant, or a private worship
in a public place, or against Christian liberty, piety, or charity: so did
they never stand, because standing was commanded in the institution, or because
they would i^itate Christ's example, or because they would use a table gesture.
No, no, the reason is clear, that if they stood at Sacrament, because of the
bond of standing at prayer, they did it for respect of the time; namely, the
Sabbath, and the feast of Pentecost, when by standing, they would remember the
resurrection of Christ. So the same respect that set up standing at Sacrament,
pulled kneeling away from prayer it self, for the time, to set up standing
also. It was not, it was not any proper or severed respect of the Supper it
self, that standing was so used; for out of the times appointed, the
consideration, on which such standing was used by the Church, utterly ceased;
and so your standing and theirs are not of the same use and signification,
Wherefore (my brethren) you are to blame to trouble the world with such
pretenses of antiquity against us. But, oh Disputer, worthy you are to be
noted for a wise man, that spend so many leaves, in thus disputing after your
manner, to no purpose, except to mock ignorant people. And so much be answered
to your first general argument, which is the ^aptaine of your whole troop.

2. General reason against kneeling in the ancient Church, taken from the
silence of some Ancients in their Treatises of Ceremonies.
NExt you urge in this manner, Abridgm. page 60.
Justin in his Apologit. makes no mention of kneeling. In that little book^ of
Orders, which is fathered upon Clemens, there is not the least inkling given of
kneeling in the act of recei^ing: yea, many of the Fathers have purposely set
down Liturgies and forms of ad^inistring the Saraments used in their times,
and therein mentioned even the least of the Cere^^^ies, that were then in use,
but where shall we find any mention of kneeling, before Antichrist grew to his
full height.

Aus. This reason deserves not an answer, because it is taken a non scripto,
and that in certain designed books, concerning a matter of fact. Besides, I
retort in Iustins Apologit. in that little book of Orders fathered upon
Clemens; in other books wherein the Fathers purposely set down such Liturgies
and forms of administering the Sacraments; we find not a word of sitting, till
Antichrist grew to his full height, and that the Pope himself took that
liberty. Again, in all these books you mention, we find not a certain word
of standing at Sacrament, till Antichrist grew to his full height, and the
Popish sacrificers used it; and therefore you may see the falsehood of your
assertion, for how can Justins Apologit. and Clemens book, and the rest,
mention the least ceremonies that were then in use, when there is mention of no
gestures at all; But it is better with us, for to answer your Negative, you
will expect, we should give you instances: Suspend then a little, and I hope,
not only an inkling, but declaring of other gestures, then either sitting or
standing are to be found, before Antichrist grew to his full height. Thus much
may suffice for this place.

3. General reason against kneeling in the ancient Church, taken from the
general opinion and testimony of some late Writers.
WE pass to your last general reason, taken from Abridg. page 59. 60.
say, Master Fo^e affirms the use of the Primitive Church to have been
sitting at supper, or standing after Supper, and the Writers of the Centuries
affirm, that the custom of standing was very ancient, and used by many
Churches. Answ. You mistake the Writers of the Centuries. See after in Centur.
2. Master Fox speaks only of the Apostles times, and grounds upon 1 Cor. 11.
where no mention is made of any gesture, and therefore his testimony must
needs be uncertain.

Secondly, you say Disput. page 111.
out of the Lord of Ples. de Eucharistia, that the East Churches of Grecia and
Asia, did never admit of adoration. Ans. The Lord of Ples means adoration of
the bread, as he says, they never received the doctrine of
transubstantiation, otherwise some testimonies of the Fathers of the Eastern
Church, shall be brought tending to show, that adoration was used to God
himself.

Thirdly you say Abridgm. page 59.
the dialogue betwixt custom and truth in Mr. Foxes Martyrol, page 126. 4
compiled out of Peter Martyr, and other learned men's writings, affirms, that
the old Councels forbad all men to kneel down at the time of the Communion,
fearing that it should be an occasion of Idolatry. Answ. This dialogue mooues
us not, for neither can we find such a thing in Peter Martyr. or other learned
men's writings of his time, nor is the thing truly affirmed. There is no old
Council forbad kneeling at Sacrament: for as for that decree which forbad, that
Communicants should be humiliter intenti erga propositum panem, that makes
nothing against kneeling at Sacrament, as I shall show by and by in Centur. 4.
of that forbidding which was of kneeling in prayer, I have said enough before,
but this dialogue should mean some express forbidding of kneeling at
Sacrament, because it expresses this to have been the reason, least Idolatry
should be committed: but there was no such Council; perhaps the Surueyour was
misled Survey page 177.
by this Dialogue*

To these general testimonies of yours, I will also subioyne some common
answer: for what if all this be true, Honorius 3. a thousand years, and also
some little pittance of place in the Western part, namely half the globe of
the earth.

A Counterpoise of general considerations for kneeling in the Ancient Church.
FIrst what say you to the four beasts, and 24. Elders, Apoc. 4. and 5. which
fell down before the Lord, and before the Lamb, in the celebration of his
praise for their redemption? Master Brightm. says, this is meant of the Church
militant, namely the Ministers and people in the public assemblies, which if
it be true, then is there no time, when the Church could express this more
fitly, then at the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Where can Christ be
more honored, then where the disgrace of him is most lively represented? for
he will not his sufferings to be remembered, that he should still suffer, but
that he might now be honored, having overcome. Consider therefore the
Reuelat. in that same sense, and it cannot be denied, that the adoraration
there mentioned holds plain correspondence with that thankful commemoration,
which symbolically presents the blessed Lamb slain before our faces.

Secondly, what say you to the phrases, which you dreadful. terrible,
venerable, precious, and honorable mysteries, that the Communicants Such like
speeches they use also of Baptism.
should come with weeping and wailing, with sighing and sobbing, with fear and
trembling, with confessions, and deprecations, with prayers and thanks giving,
with contrition and compunction, with shame and sorrow, with humility and
reverence. Think you that men thus speaking, and thus thinking, would esteem
kneeling in the act of receiving, contrary either to the nature of the
Sacraments, or to the dignity and duty of the Communicants, or in a word, in
it self abominable to be used?

Thirdly, it is not amiss to tell you, that you say Perth. ass. page ^5.
it has taken away, 1 Sitting: 2. I he use of a Table: 3. The enunciatiue
words of Christ: 4. Communicants distribution among themselves: 5. The nature
of the Sacrament, that it is not used as a Supper or feast. But if this be
true, then kneeling was used in the ancient Church, for they used not sitting
more then we do; nor a table, nor the enunciatiue words of Christ, nor
distribution, but as we do; nor did they stand upon civil fashions of suppers
and feasts more then we do in this Church, none of this can be denied, and
therefore it follows that the ancient Church used to observe kneeling, which
you say brought these abuses among them, which you call the breaches of the
institution.

Fourthly, it was worth the observing, that was objected Aug contra Faust lib.
20. cap. ^3.
Nonnulli eos propter panem and calicem, Cecere^^ and liberum colere
existimabant: and your selves Perth. ass. page 59.
allege, how Auerroes objected, that the Christians adored that which they
ate. Whence isit likely, that this objection should rise. but from the humble
and reverent receiving of the Lords Supper? You say the Pagane mistook the
Christians, and who can doubt of that? all that I affirm, is, that something
was in the carriage of receivers, when in the Sacrament they came before the
Lord, that is, adoration in some degree; whereof the Pagans took occasion to
charge them for worshipping bread and wine.

Fifthly, lastly, will you give me leave to tell you, what Erasmus says,
namely, Erasm. de amab-concerd.
That in ancient times of the Church of Rome, the people did not gaze upon the
Sacrament, but animie in coelum erectis, they praised God for their redemption
upon their knees. Also what Doctor John White says, Way to the true Church,
page 397
That kneeling was in use at the Lords Supper before the real presence came
in. To whom I will add Bishop Jewel, Artic. 8. of adoration, Divis. 22.
saying, That the old learned Fathers taught the people, at the Sacrament, to
adore Christ sitting in heaven. And these witnesses carry greater authority,
when they testify that of the ancient Church, which your selves do confess
might have been therein expediently used. Because Perth. page: 5^.
says the Perth Assembly, the Arians debased the Son of God, if it bad been
otherwise lawful for the ancient Church to kneel in the act of receiving, it
had bin expedient. Then Mr. Beza goes further, Bez. Epist. 12. page 100.
saying, kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, speciem quidem habet pia and
Christian venerationis, ac proinde olim potuit cum fructu vsurpari, has a
show of godly and Christian reverence, and therefore might profitably be used
in the old time. But now it is high time, to examine in order the particular
Centuries.

Of the first Century, or hundred of years.
Of that which belongs to this Century we have considered in other places of
this book, because it

Of the second Century.
IN this Centurie our brethren have cited Disput. page 75, 76.
Justin Martyr Apol. 2. ad Anton, saying thus, After the exhortation of the
word we rise up and pray, afterward is brought forth Bread and wine, and water,
then the Pastor gives thanks, and the people say Amen to it, and so the
consecrate elements are delivered to every one. Ans. 1. That which Justin
speaks here is of their manner on the Saboth days when if they stood, it was
in regard of the day, as I have answered before. 2. For other days Justin
shows a little before the reason why they called the Sacrament Eucharistia in
these words, Non enim vt vulgarem panem, et vulgar poculum hoc sumimus: for we
use not to receive it as common bread and wine. Which speech may be both
referred to their opinion of the consecrated Bread and cup, that there was more
in it then in common meals as also to their different manner of communicating.
3. But take your quotation, and read it over again, and you find not a word of
the Supper-gesture, and think you in so few words all the carriage in their
assemblies in Iustins time is fully described? Besides the word Afterward
brings in a several description of the supper-employment, I say several from
that which had preceded of rayper, how is it then possible to conclude, that
the gesture was common? 4. Take your desire, that the gesture of prayer was
continued unto the supper, truly yet the same might be kneeling for all that
is said here. For in this Church after exhortation of the word, we rise up
(namely from sitting,) and so go to prayer, and afterward we receive, and yet
notwithstanding we kneel down. And indeed Clemens Clemen. vitim. Strom.
shows plainly that in their prayers, they were wont to prostrate themselves
to the earth. who can be persuaded now, that Justin Mort. condemns kneeling at
Sacrament?

Next Disput. p. 91.
is brought in Clemens of Alexandria; Strom. When certain (as the manner is)
have divided the Eucharist, they license every one of the people to take his
part. Now says the Disputer, to take a part, without being reached to them by
the hand of others, implies sitting or standing at the table. Ans. two childish
conceits, 1. does taking a part immediately, imply sitting or standing at the
table? As if Co^municants cannot kneel at a table, and take their part. Behold
we do so in the Church of England. 2. Does licensing every one to take his
part, import the taking of it immediately? No such matter, specially of Clemens
time it is conjectured ill, for does not Justin Justin Apol. 2.
tell you, that, The Deacons gave to every one of them that were present their
part of the bread and wine. Diaconi, quos vocamus, dant singulis present thus
partem panis and calicis. And does not Tertullian tell you, Tertul. de corona
mill.
Eucharistia Sacramentum nec de aliorum manu quam praesidentium sumimus. Then
here is poor prooving. But the Disputer grounds upon some further speech out
of Clemens, (though it be but imagined) and so does the Abridgement both
mistaking the Centuries. The said Clemens (says the Disp. p. 75, 91
Disputer) makes mention of the custom of standing at the Communion, as of a
custom at that time received into many Churches, as is witnessed, Centur. 3.
cap. 6. So also the Abridgement Abridg. p. 60
says, That the writers of the Centuries affirm, Centur. 3. page 133. (upon
Clemens words) that this custom was ancient and used by many Churches. But if
the Centuries be consulted, it will appear, that you are mistaken: for
speaking of the manner which the people used in receiving, namely to put out
their hands to receive the Sacrament, (which their intent is to press against
the Popish niceness of putting it into the peoples mouths) they add, that
this was an ancient custom in many Churches, quod and Clemens Alex. quem
admodum in superiori Centuria ostendimus, eius meminit. Now look back to the
former Centurie, and the foresaid speech of Clemens [of licensing every one to
take his part] is only to be found, and not a word of standing or sitting.
Therefore you have mistaken the Centuries, whether willingly you your selves
can best tell. Now good Reader see, whether Clemens spoke half a word against
kneeling, or for standing or sitting in the Lords Supper.

Next is brought in Disp. page 77 Perth. Ass: p: 59
Tertullian, flourishing at the who speaks (lib. de oratione) of the station
which they used at the Altar, where they received the Lords body. Ans. First,
it is plain that their station was used in respect of prayer, yea was a
solemn day kept in watching to prayer, ad vesperam Tertul: l: de Ieiunio
vsque: and therefore though the same for more solemnity, (as is said) was made
at the Altar, yet nothing follows thereof concerning the gesture of the holy
Sacrament, whether it was received, or not. Secondly, suppose the stationary
prayer infer for the gesture of the Communion, what does that show, but only
that they stood in receiving in a certain special case: what is this to the
Churches judgment against kneeling in it self, or practice against kneeling
in ordinary; Thirdly, Tertullian speaks as plainly for kneeling, at
Sacrament, as this place seems for standing, where he shows how Libr: de
penitentiae
penitent Christians should come unto God, namely, by weeping, wayling,
fasting, and per ad geniculationem ad Aras, by kneeling down before the Altar;
as he likewise requires in him that is about to be Libr: de Baptism
baptized, Prayers, fasting, kneeling, and confession of all his sins.
Fourthly, I add that Tertullians testimony of the stations testifies properly
the practice of the Montanists whose they were, and describes not the practice
of the orthodox Christians of his time. These answers I hope will satisfy
wise men. Wherefore to all that is hitherto objected, what need any further
Counterpoise.

Of the fifth Century.
IN this Centurie you Abridg. p: 60 Disput. page 75. The Authors of those books
(the one it seems misleading the other) have placed Dionysius about the year
175. for 275
quote a speech of an Epistle Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, which Eusebius
mentions (lib. 7. cap. 9) where speaking of one that bad received the
Communion, he says, that he had stood at the table (...) whereof the writers
of the Centuries gather, that the manner in those times in the act of receiving
was mensae assistere, to stand at the table. Ans. First, one singular example
is a weak direction for the custom of the Church in all the world for an
hundred years; besides condemns not kneeling in the least degree, more then
he that should say, Abraham stood in prayer, and Solomon, and Christ, should
condemn or show the practice of the Church in their times to have been
against kneeling at prayer: you consider not, that we have some advantage of
you in this controversy; for we need not be asraid of some singular example of
standing, because both we hold it lawful in it self; and some singular
example denies not either an answerable or more general practice of kneeling.
Secondly, but what is standing to sitting? or what was their standing to yours?
or where is the decreeing and allowing of this man's standing by the Church? Let
the Disputer look upon this instance, and his own answer to ours of Gorgonia
afterward, and blush for shame. Thirdly, but we need not yield you, that this
man stood at all, for the Greek word signifies only presence oftentimes, and
not gesture. See 2 Timothy 4. 17. Act. 1. 3. Romans 13. 1. where no regard is to be
had of the gesture. In Mark. 14. 69. a maid said (...) which Matthew describes
thus; A maid said to them that were there, Mat. 26. 71. Yea the word sometimes
notes presence, though in kneeling, or what humble carriage possibly may be
used as Luke 1. 19. Romans 14. 10. And thus the Latin Assistere is also used
sometimes, and Astitit mensa may be applied to a Minister in our Church, who
post^is genibus received the Sacrament at the Table. And this must be marked,
that the force of Dionisius spech consists in this, that such an one as he
speaks of, was present at the table, and so received the Communion, the
consideration of the gesture not being material or pertinent.

Next the Scotchmen Perth-Ass. 59
bring us another speech of Dionysius Nonne soleunior erit statio tua, etc. But
they mistook, for this speech is Tertullians, answered before; and no such
words are in the Epistle of Dionysius: whereby appears, that our brethren have
not written out of the chair of infallibility, as some zealous people imagine.

Lastly, the Disputer tells us, Disp. page 92
Out of i^e writers of the Centuries, Centur. 3. Cap. 6. it was the custom of
Rome, that when the Bishop administered the Communion, all the Priests stood by.
Answer. I will recite the words out of the Centuries as they lie. Fuit in
Romana Ecclesia hic mes, vt patina^ vitreas Ministri Sacerdotihus praeserrent,
et Episcope celebrante Sacerdotes omnes assisterent. Now, 1. at most
Assisterent can prove no more, then before it did, in the Epistle of Dionysius.
This answer might perhaps suffice. 2. but Assisterent here may signify, Did
assist: for that service which inferior Ministers did to the Priest, Sacerdote
celebrante, the Priests themselves were to do to the Bishop, Episcope
celebrante. 3. I answer, say the Priests stood by, during the celebration of
the Sacrament, so it is in our Church commonly done, yet kneel notwithstanding
in the act and instant of their own several communicating. Take which answer
you think good. These be your doubty proofs in this Century.

Our further Counterpoise.
PAssing the high esteem which this age had of the Sacrament, calling it the
Sanctum Dei, dreading, yea not As Cyprl^^ shows of one, Se^m. de lapsis
daring to touch it Indignis manibus, and holding it an Tertul. speaking of
prayer, lib de (...): he flourished also in this Century.
irreligious thing to sit before God when reverence and honor was done unto
him, I say passing these and the like, that I may speak more effectually, let
us consider. 1. They were wont to humble themselves in the act of receiving as
the Centurion humbled himself unto Christ. When thou eatest and drinkest the
body and blood of the Lord, (says Orig. in Homil 5 in diversos locos.
Origin) Tunc Dominus sub tectum ingreditur, et tu ergo humilians teipsum;
imitare hunc Centurionem, et dicito, Domine, non sum dignus, vt intres sub
tectum meum. What do we (I pray) persuade more to our Communicants in the
Church of England? The Scotchmen say, Perth-Ass. 60.
This work is counterfeit; but I find none, that so says of this Homily.
Again they say, Origin requires the same reverence, when the Preacher enters
into our house, as when we receive the Sacrament. But that seems not true, for
this last enforcement, Tu ergo, etc. depends properly on that which precedeth
immediately, when thou eatest and drinkest, etc. As the other matter of the
preacher has also a several inforcement by it self. See the place. 2. They
were wont to abstain from the ordinary gestures of civil tabes, as appears
by their taxing those which come to the Communion, and yet Auth. libr. apud
Cypr. de cardinal. Christi operibus; Tractas, de Caena.
nec se indicent, nec Sacramenta diiudicant; sed sicut cibis communibus
irreverenter sacrisvtuntur muneribus. 3. Such as had fallen into sin, were
wont to kneel down at the Altar, where after confession thereof and
absolution they received the Lords Supper. See Magd. Centur. 3. cap. 6.
Their manner was, Presbyteris advolvi, and aris Dei adgeniculari: and there
were they absolved with imposition of the Presbyters hand, and so Absolutis
dabatur Eucharistia. 4. That reverence which they used in their prayers and
thanksgiving about the holy Communion, they were to continue to the act of
receiving. Now they prayed Tertulin Apologet.
capite undo, Tertul. de cer^^ mill.
and (excepting the Sabbath days, and the feast of Pentecost) genibus flexis.
show if you can, that they left in receiving those gesture^ of praying. Nay you
will be content to yield, that they continued uncovered, surely then (besides
that adoration is grant^d so far) you may as well yield that they continued
to kneel, there ^eing no historical evidence to the contrary: especially when
kneeling agrees so well to that which they judged the Sacramental service to
be common with prayer, namely Te^^^l. lib. de ^^lsn ^aminar^m Cypr. Epis^. 1^.
Sacrifice of praise not of propitiation.
offering ^p of a Sa^rifi^e. Let the Reader judge of this little.

Of the fourth Century.
IN this Century, first you tell us of Basil Abridg. p. 60
that ^e says in his time every man wa^ bound by Apostolical tradition at
prayer and the Communion to stand upright. Answer, If Basil said so, you see
his time no more condemned kneeling at the Communion, then kneeling at prayer.
But you show not where Basil said so of the Communion by name, nor I think,
can you show; but of kneeling in prayer, where of we have said enough before.

Next you Abridg. p. 60
tell us, that in those times the Communion table was made of boords, and so
placed that men might stand round about it. Answer. What then, is not ours also
so made and placed? Yet we use the gesture of kneeling. You should have showed,
that they st^^d about the table, and not, that they might stand. Yet whether
this was the common manner of placing their table, I leave to the judgment of
learned men. The Church of A^tioch in Syria (says S^r^^. lib: 5, cap. 22
S^crates) i^ scitnated contrary to other Churches, for the Altar stands not ad
orientem, sed ado^cidente^^; showing that other Churches had every one an Altar
unto the East Side, as that of the Church of A^tioch was disposed Westward: and
this Altar is the same which Theod^r^t Theod^res lib: 5, cap: 18
calls the holy table; and whereof Optatus Milevitanus Op^at. lib. 6. ^^^^ra
Parm^^i^^^^*
thus speaks, Quid est Altar, ^is^ s^des and corp^ris and sanguinis Christi?
Howsoever this observation of yours co^cludes nothing against us.

Next the Disp. page 91, 92.
disputer furnishes with an idle and Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 17. where speaking
of a certain sect of Philosophers, and of their maker of feasting, he
affirms, that Philo Iudaeus in their description has noted, that they used
the same custom, which was used at the festival day of the blessed passion by
Christians, in the days wherein himself (the said Eusebius) lived;) and that
was sitting, as Philo shows.

Answ. It grieves me to take up so much paper with such a childish observation.
Eusebius says nothing about the Sacrament more or less. They did use (says
Eusebius out of Philo, and Eusebius takes them to have been the Christians in
the Primitive Church, whom Philo speaks of) some thing (...) yet are in use
among us, and specially such as (...) use a ou^ the festival day of the
blessed passion, on ou^ just (...), and reading of Scripture. And (after says
Eu^^t) (...) ^^^eth, how in the foresaid days they lay vp^^ green pallets,
tasting no wine or other creature, but clear water, bread with salt, and
Hysop^. Here is all. Eusebius says not, those people used all the customs,
which they did in his time, about the feast of the passion, but such as
himself mentions, and I have here recited. Now if the comparison of the
Christians in Eusebius time, with those men Philo discribeth, were about the
Lords Supper, it only shows the custom of the fostiuall day of the Passion,
which differed from other days, as appears by Eusebius singling it out. But
here is no comparison about the Supper, but the fastings, vigils, and reading
of Scripture. Nay the comparison (if it continue to those words, which you
seem to ground on, where he speaks of lying or sitting upon pallets) plainly
excludes the Lords Supper, except salt and hysope, and not wine, were in
Eusebius time, and by him thought also to be in the Primitive Church, the
materials of the Lords Supper. I add, you have before striuen to show that
standing in Eusebius time (and many hundreds of years, before and after him)
was the allowed and accustomed gesture of the Church in receiving the
Sacrament, and was it now a sitting upon mats, and bassocks, after the manner
of those whom P^il^ describes? behold then a ridiculous and senseless
collection of the disputer, that neither agrees with himself, nor with the
common wit of a cobbler.

Next, a certain Canon of the Nicen Council is Disput. 80. 92.
providing that Communicants should not be humiliter intenti erga propositu^
pa^em. Answ. Here the disputer is blind, and cannot understand, that all
artolatrie is by us undoubtedly held for Idolatry. That Canon only forbids to
fasten our devotion or worship upon the visible elements, but would have us
with elevated minds to look upon Jesus Christ. So this is an excellent Canon
against Popish Idolatry, but touches not them, which are humiliter intenti
toward God himself in his holy ordinance. The disputer mistakes us; This
Canon or the like might be made in our Church (I would to God it were) and yet
kneeling nevertheless continued. Nay this Canon makes on our side, as I shall
touch presently in my Counterpoise.

Lastly, the disputer Disput. page: 92.
brings in the Canon of the Apostles: forbidding all worship in the Lords
Supper, but which himself has appointed. I answer, the Lord in his Word
allows of kneeling, as I have abundantly showed. But the truth is, I still
find this disputer to have been a silly Doctor, for that which he takes for
a Canon of the Apostles (of the Canons so called) is only the title of one of
those Canons, which the writers of the Centuries collect themselves out of the
new Testament. This was an ignorant and simple mistake Master Disputer. Thus
much be answered to these poor testimonies of yours, affording against
kneeling, or for standing or sitting in this Centurie, not so much as an
evident syllable.

Our further Counterpoise.
FIrst, though Athanasius say nothing of the suppergesture expressly, yet
At^anas. Apol. 2.
he presses the Order of the Church. Nos pro Canone ecclesiastice accipimus,
and sanguini Christi cont^melia^ facit, qui praeter ecclesiasticam
constitutione^ calice mystice ab^titur: yea, his speeches may be applied to the
defense of the adoration at the Sacr: Athanas. Ep^. ad Adelph.
Si recte fecerint I^daei, etc. If the Jews did well to adore the Lord where
the Arc and Cherub^^s were, shall we refuse to adore Christ where his
(mystical) body is present: shall we say, ^bsi^^e a corpore, (or a Sacramento
corporis) vt te adercmus, Lord if thou would be worshipped, thou must be
pleased to keep thee from the Sacrament, for there worship we dare not.

Secondly, Epiphanius Epiphan. lib. 3. Ho^. ^. de v^ra fide^ formula.
describing the manners of the Christians in his time, says thus, Quarta and
pros^bb^t^ jeiunium statutum est vsque ad horam no^am, this is constant except
in Pentecost, qua genna non flectuntur, and ad ^oram ^onam Communiones fiunt,
and prayers are powered forth, cum omnisedulitate prolixitate and geniculation^,
whereby no other gesture but kneeling appears to have bin accustomed diebus
ordinatis, in the exercises of prayer and fasting, and receiving the Lords
Supper.

Thirdly, Cyril of Jerusalem Cy^il in Ca^^^^. (...). 5.
describing the manner of celebrating the Eucharist, comes at last to show the
Communicant what to do, when he should receive the mysteries in this manner,
Accede^non extendens manus, sed pronu^ adorationis in mod^ and venerationis,
dicens, Amen. Come thou not stretching out thy hands, but falling on thy face,
after the manner of adoration and reverence, and saying, A^en. Many answers are
made: First Perth. page 60.
This is a counterfeit Cyril; Ans. Why did you show no reason of this charge?
Mr. Cook says nothing to prove it to be such in his censure. H^are what your
Centuriators C^ntur. 4. cap, 10 in vita (...).
of Magdeb. say, Hier. (...) ^b eo in adol^scentia conscript as ^uo tempore
extitisse scripsit. Secondly, Repl. part: to Bish. M^rt. chapter 3. sect. 21.
this may be a superstitious precept of Cyril. Answ. A posse ad esse non
valet. Sure I am, a precept may be given without superstition in these
terms, pronus adorationis in modum, if Cyril meant somewhat superstitiously,
it forces not in our disquisition of historical passages. What practice of
the Fathers will you take upon you to justify in all respects? Thirdly, the
Greek Ib^d.
word (...) translated by Pronus, properly signifies a gesture of the eyes, and
so Cyril understands of the Cup, by prop^rtion to his direction of
sanctifying his eyes with the bread. Answ. This seems a harsh exposition, and
devised for a shift; for would not Cyril have his Communicant to look down
upon the bread also? and did you ever read in any of the Fathers, that they
sanctified their eyes with the cup by looking upon it? besides, thus you make
Cyril idolatrous indeed, for adorationis in modum, is referred to the same
thing that Pronus is. Again, the context of words is against you, where (...)
is joined with adorationis in modum, yea seems to be expounded thereby.
Moreover, what if Pronus were not, adorationis in modum would serve our turn?
Lastly, there is no object of sight specified, so that after your translating,
it must not be looking down upon the cup, but looking down and adoring, say
Amen. Therefore here you you seem to have dallied. Fourthly, Perth as. page, vt
supra.
but for all this at the most, Pronus signifies not, falling on the face, but
bowing of the body. Answ. It is enough that pronus adorationis in modum,
signifies either prostration or a carriage of the same nature: but whether (I
pray are our kneeling Communicants in England, or your ^itters in the act of
recei^ing, proni adorationis in modum) ^e like indeed these words mean a
Table Gesture* But you press this Repl. page, vt supra.
Cyrils precept ^s only ^er the cup, and not for the bread, and therefore we
cannot interpret him of falling down, without imputation of superstitious
advancing the wine above the bread.

Answ. S^e you not, that if nothing but ^owing be meant, as much may be
objected as this is. But the truth is, the Cup in the Fathers (so far are
they from taking it from the people) is many times put for the whole mystery.
So Athanasius cited before, runs only upon the poculum mysticum ^alic^m
mysticum; to not^ you no more at this time. But you press yet further, saying
^bidem.
Cyril in the quoted place, names small matters in taking the Elements, and
therefore would have named kneeling, if it had been used. Answ. Was there a
necessity to name the word kneeling? Truly he would sufficiently distinguish
our kneeling in England, that said of us no more; but that we received pro^s
adorationis in modum, and Cyrils (...) is commonly used for a gesture of
Prostration, as I have showed in the first part of this Treatise. Therefore
Cyrils testimony is clear.

Further Gregory Nazianzen Gregory Nazian: Orat: infunere Gorgon.
describing the practice Gorgonia; says of her, that in her sickness in the
night alone ante altar procubuit, having consecrated mysteries before her, and
called on him, who wa^ honored at the Altar. Gregory testifies that so the
Lord was wont to be honored, and himself approves both her fact and faith.
But our Brethren except here, 1. God Perth. assem^ Page 60.
is honored at the altar (by them which sit^er stand) by the administration of
the Sacrament to his honor. Answ. This is not a just interpretation, for
Gorgonia's practice, on occasion whereof those words are used, urges us to
expound them of honoring; ante altar procumbendo. Besides, you may see in
these times they were wont to worship before the Altar; yea, jacentes sub
altari, as Ruffi^us gives example, in Ruff. lib. 1. cap. 12
Alexander, and Lib. 2. ^, 16.
Ambrose. ^. Gorgonia was not in the act of receiving at this time. Answ. That
is not a probable thing, for did she religiously bring the mysteries to use,
without feeding upon them? specially when the manner was to receive them
sometimes alone, and then specially when they were sick as Gorgonia was, and
at the Altar also. But what if she did not receive, yet while she fell down
before the Altar and mysteries, yea of purpose used them there; does it not
argue, there was some ground and occasion given her from the public practice,
specially Gregory commending her for it? 3. Gorg. was Perth. assem vt supra.
sick in body, and sick in mind. Answ. I allow not her error, I show the
practice of her time; yet her worship was not directed to the Elements, but to
God himself, that's plain. Your selves are sick in mind in this controversy.
Lastly, her Ibidem.
fact was pr^uat, and Markethis Disp. page 82.
what if Gregory and many more Fathers and Doctors report, that Gorgonia and
many others, prostrated themselves in the act of receiving, when such their
carriage was disagreeable with the received and allowed practice of the Church.
Ans. If this last clause were true, yet the consent of their practice being
good Christians, ought not to be despised, more then yours (in your conceit)
ought to ^ee to posterity against the practice of the Church of England. Also
it follows, that kneeling to God was used, before transubstantiation was
believed or allowed. But was Gorgonia her practice disagreeable with the
Churches? Where is that to be found I pray you? the disputer is an impudent
beggar in this saying. Truly if she did vary from the Church, it follows not,
that the Church condemned her practice in it self. But (good Sir) what
testimonies would you have to satisfy? Was not that which Gorgonia and many
others did practice, a received gesture in the Church? and was not that which
Gregory and many more Fathers and Doctors should report and approve, an allowed
gesture in the Church? therefore Nazianzens testimony is against you.

Fifthly, Ambros de Sy^rit. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Ambrose upon the words of the Psalm [adorate sc^bellum pe^um eius] says, per
scab^llum terra intelligitur, per terram Caro Christi, quam body quoque
inmysterij^ adoramus, and quam Apostoli in Domino Ie^u adcra^unt. W^ere he
speaks of outward adoraito^ and the mysteries of the Sac^am. That which the
Apostles adored in the person of Christ himself, we adore in the Sacramental
mysteries. And again Ambros. in 1. Cor. 11.
when we come to the Communion, we must take the body of Christ with fear,
devotion and reverence.

Sixthly, I allege the Council of Nice, which whiles humiliter intenti erga
propositum panem, shows that in the act of receiving they were wont to be
humiliter intenti. Only he forbids to be so erga propositum panem.

Lastly, I wish you to consider that Communicants in those times Ba^il de
Spirit. Sancto cap. 27. H^lar. in Ps. 6^.
also kneeled down in prayer, belonging therein making answer denote
confessionis, and the change of gesture afterward is not mentioned. Yea there
were three times, in which they were by tradition to kneel, in which when the
Sacrament was administered, the same tradition stood to them in force. Hier^n in
Daniel.
Tria sunt tempora quibus Deo ^lectenda sunt genua. Tertia^ ^oram sextam, and
nonam Ecclesiastica traditio intelligit. Again in Baptism their custom was
Basil Exhor. ad Baptis.
genua adorando flectere. In hearing of the word they used so much reverence,
that it is said of Constanti^e himself, Eusebius. de vita Const^^tin^, l. 4. cap.
33
Conciones stans reuerenter audierit. Again the Sacrament is called by the
Fathers of this age, an oblation or Sacrifice. I add what Arnob. contragentes.
lib: ^.
Ar^^bins says, we are all Worshippers of Christ, nihil aliud inuenies inista
religione versari, ^ic proposi ^us term ^^s officiorum di^i^orum, hic ^ini^,
k^ic omnes ex more profternimur. Furthermore they were wont to receive,
secundum aliquam propriam dis^^plinam, as the Canon of the Synod at Antioch,
under Constantius declares. So Ambrose (in 1. Cor. 11.) says, we must receive
cu^ disciplina, for so (mark this) gratias videbimur reddere redempt^rs. I
will not omit that it was only lawful for Ministers, ingredi ad altar, and
ibidem communicare, as was Canon 19. of the Synod of La^^icea.
decreed in another Synod. Where Cannon 28
again it was decreed in this manner. Non oporte^ in Basilic^s (...) Ecclesiis
accub^tus s^ernere: Behold (my Brethren) decrees one forbidding the
Co^municants so much as to come to the Table. The other feasting in the Church,
and sitting down at the Table. And how be it this last forbids love ^easts by
name, yet no doubt there would have bin an exception, if the Church had either
used or allowed Christians Accubitus sternere for the Lords Supper. To conclude
their Books afford not any respect in the Sacramental^ gestures of Christ's
example, of a Table Gesture, of dignity of the Communicants, etc. It is easy
to see their strains are quite contrary. As for standing or sitting at the
supper, there is not a fair picbabilitie, or half a footstep for them in this
whole Centurie.

And now, be admonished (good Reader) that my
Book growing great, beyond my expectation, and against my desire, I am
enforced to be very brief in all that follows; It is my grief I cannot say
so fully for latter times, specially as I meant; wherefore if God permit, I
shall undertake this province another time, if it be judged needful, and now
request thee to take in good part, if I only point at the Authors remaining.
And I am the better content, because I am past all the troublesome shallowes of
our Brethren, and have also in this Centurie plainly declared the use of that
kneeling, which no man that is acquainted with the state of the Church can once
imagine to be less accepted in the ages following.

Of the fifth Centurie.
IN this Centurie you cite Chrysostom Dis^. Page 87, and 92. Perth, ass. Page:
59.
in Ephesians. Ser. 3. frustra sta^^s ad Altar, and in 2. Cor. ^omil. 18. the
Deacon stood up at the holy Mysteries, and said, let us all pray together, and
in homil. in E^ceni^s stemus trementes and timidi d^^issis oculis, etc. Answ.
Besides, this last quotation overthrows your own grounds, it cannot be
restreined to the act of receiving. For thus Chrysostom speaks. Let us not
be absent from the Church, nor talk of impertinent things, but s^a^^^
trementes and timidi, etc. And moreover Chrys^st^^^s intent is not to note
gesture, but as if he had said, (...) trementes and timidi, etc. I aode that
the very Popish Communicant^ at this day have as big a word said of them. So
But speaking of Transubstantiation, says, ^i^l. ad ^erb^ Hoc est ^uim, in
(...) ^^ Cano^^^
It cannot be evidently certain, neque celebrante, neque populo circumsta^ti,
that the bread is ^^^ned into Christ's b^ay. As for frustra (...) ad A^t^re, the
very Priests in Italy may say as much, yea Hard^^g refers the Priests eating
alone to the ^lacknesse of the Communicants: and do not our Ministers stand
and wait for the people to come up together, who mind to receive. As for the
De^cons calling to prayer, standing up that he might be heard, it is too
childishly alleged. Oh Chrysostom thou art beholden to these men.

Next Augustine Disp. page 92.
is brought, on John, Ser^. 42. in What is the cause, O my (...) that you see
the table, and come not to it. T^^s (says the Disputer) ^ust be meant of
sitting or standing thereat, for they might not kneel in his time. Answer. But
(good Sir) what does (...) place quoted prove to your desire of ^^ self?
Truly you might with the same force have brought a thousand places out of
Augustine. You have a notable pa^e for depth! Much ado for a man to contein at
the ^ystery of this quotation. but I pray you when you print your Dispute
again, let Augustine here be left ou^.

Next (^aith the Disp. page 93.
Disputer) I pass by the fifth Co^^cill of Constanti^^ple, though is also
makes for this custom. And I pass by the answer, because there is no such
^atter. He add^, That the Council^ under Hilariu^ then Bishop, confirm^th the
C^^^^ (of Nic^ n^^ely) which forbids ^^be ^^^^iliter intenses: which I have
answered before. Now I bid my brethren farewell, till we meet again about
fifteen hundred years after Christ.

Our further Counterpoise.
CHrys^st^me. Si excluserimuseos, qui non possunt esse and in i^sdem
borrendissi^is mysteri^s been precatur Sa^erdos popul^, and pop^lus Sacerdoti.
Ch^^sist. ad popul. Antioch. Homil. 61.
Adora and Communica. Again, Homil. 7. in Matthew.
be not like Herod pretending to adore Christ, when thou would kill him: say
not, vt and ego venicus adorem, cumque veneri^ interimere co^eris; but domum
spiritualis pacis ingredere adoraturai atque honoraturus Dominum. Again,
Homil. 24 in 1 Cor. 10.
Hoc corpus Barbari cum timore and tremore plurimo adoraverunt. Imitemur
salte^^ Barbaros nos, qui non in praesepe id, sed in altar videmus: quod enim
summo henore dignum est, id tibi in terra ostendam; ^am quemadmod^m in Regus,
non parietes, non tectum apr^um, sid Regium corpus, in throne s^dens, omnium
prestantissimum est, ita quoque in cali^ Regium corpus, quod nunc in terra
videndum tibi proponitur.

Augustine August. in Psa. 98.
debating with himsel^e what should be meant by Scabellum pedum eius, finds
that the earth is called his foo^stoole; but how then may the earth ^^ adored?
Fluctuans converto me ad Christum, and invento quomodo sine impietate adoretur
terra: suscipit de terra terram, quia caro de terra est, et de carne Mariae
carnem accepit: and quia ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedis, namo
autem carnem illam mandu^at, nisi prius adoraverit, inventam est quem admodum
adoretur scabellum pedum Domini, and non selum peccemus adorando, sed peccemus
non adorando: ideo and ad terram quamlibet, cum te inclinas and prosternis, non
quasi terram int^earis, sed illum fanctum. Again, Epist. 120.
Proud men adducti sunt ad mensam Christi, and accipiunt de corpore and
sanguine eius, sed adorant tantum, non etiam saturantur vt pa^peres.

A S^z^m Lib. 8. Cap. 5. Nicepher. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
certain woman is said to come to the Communion, sicut ^^s erat, pa^e^
accepit, and before she a^e it, perinde atque or ationi v^cat^r a in terram se
inclin^^^ summi^it: bewed her selfe^^ the ground.

Theodoret speaking Th^^d^ret. D^^l^g. 2.
of the Sacrament, says, That To pass (both here and hereafter) that which
might be noted of the gestures of prayer, of Baptism, and such other like
considerations, observed in some former Centuries.

Of the 6th. 7th. 8th. 9th. 10th. 11th. 12th. 13th. Centuries.
IN all these Centuries you bring forth nothing. Indeed Rochester; adding some
other briefly which I have observed.

In the sixth Century Page 195.
the Bishop of Rochester q^otes against you Casari^s Arelatensis, who says, we
must celebrate the Sacrament, compunct^ cord, humiliate corp^re. In the
seventh Century, Page 198.
Eligins Novio^ensis, who says, We must come to the table of the body and
blood of Christ, humiliter cum Centurion^, also comp^^cti^n^ mentis, omnique
reverentia. In the eighth Century, Ibide^^.
Damascen, who says, We must come to the Lords Supper with all fear, and
veneration of Christ. (I add the Fathers of the Synod of Francofort, in answer
to the Image* mongers all dging the Psalm [worship his foot-stoole] denying
the same to make for Image Worship, and expound in this manner; By his
footstool is mean^ the flesh of Christ, quam ^odie in mysteriis adoramus, and
qua^ Apostoli in Domino Jesus adorarunt.) In the ninth Century I cite In Psalm.
33.
Remig^us, who says, When ye receive understand what y^ do: for ye receive in
exemplum humilitatis, imitantes h^ militatem Christ's, therefore sumito cum
tim^r^ and reveren^ia: (this is outward humility and reverence of the body,
which must be exemplary:) Can. 37. of the Synod of Tur^^ serves for proof of
kneeling at the Sacramental solemni^es, because diverse do show, that they
communicated Bertram. p^af. ad Carol. mag. Raba^. lib. 4. de Sermon. propr. ca.
10. H (...) lib. 1. in Apoc, ca. 2.
quotidie. And Leo 4. decreed, Sige^ert. Anno D^m. 847.
Ne quis ex Laicis in Presbyteri^ stet, aut sedeat, dum sacra Missarum sole^nia
celeb^ent^r. And it is said of one Plecgilis a Priest, that Raban. de
E^charist. ^. 39.
c^lebrans pie sole^^a Missarum, more solito procumberet genibus. And Ha^m^
Haim^. ^n 1 Cor 11.
says, cu^ timore and trem^re, etc ^punctione cordis, omnique reverentia
debemus accedere ad illud Sacramentu^ terribile, vt sciat men's reverentiam se
d^bere praestare ^i ad cuius corp^s sumendu^ accedit. In the eleventh Century
the Bishop of Rech. Page 201.
quotes Algerus, saying, Cassa videretur to^ homin^^ adorantiu^ ve^eranda
sedulitas, ^isi ipsi^s Sacramenti longa mayor credere^ur, quam ^ideretur
verita^ and vtilit^^, cum erg^ ^xteriu^s nulla sint, quibus t^nta impodi^^tur
obsequia, ad inti^a mittimur magn^ sal^tis mysteria. In the twelfth Century I
find Lombard, L^br. 4. dis^. 4.
sayin^, The Sacrament must be received with discipline, with fasting, and must
be discerned from other meats singulari reverentia. Patrus Clu^iacensis says,
Lib^. 1. Ep. ^.
Christ gives us hi^ body and blood, non solu^ ad adorandum, sed^tiam ad
manduca^du^ and bibendum. And it is reported See Magd^b. Centur. 1^. cap. 6.
of one Vicelin^s, Ad Altar pronum in terra adorass^: that he adored in
falling down before the Altar. Now let not the Reader think it strange that
kneeling in the act of receiving is not more evidently expres^; for 1. In all
these ages sitting was never heard of, nor the peoples standing in the act of
receiving at the Lords table. 2. Considering the doubtful doctrine of those
ages about Transubstantiation, (even before the time of I^nocentius 3.) and the
degrees whereby the practice of religion (though otherwise good) were
superstitiously turned to the setting up their great Idol, and that in Honoriu^
time there was bowing only enjoined to the host in Elevation time; which the
P^^ests of Ro^e observe at this day in the gesture even of standing, it is
incredible, that kneeling was not used at the Sacrament in these times before
Hon^rius obtained the Papal sea. Let a man of reason and judgment without
partiality consider of this. 3. These phrazes of receiving with humility,
devotion, adoring and such like, mentioned before, import no less then
kneeling, if they be compared with the age of Innocentius and Honoriu^: for in
the thirteenth Century, when Transubsta^tiation had been decreed, and
adoration had been enjoined to the host, how do the Doctors still speak I
pray? Two things you shall observe: 1. that they still speak only such
phraz^s as the former writers had done. 2. That they speak of adoration, as of
a thing accust^med aforetime. Take for instance these testimoni^^. Alexander.
P. 4. q. 38. m. 1.
There be many reasons, why the bread is transubstantiated: and this is one:
s^^^. sub sacrament^ ^^^^ret p^nis, f^rtasse quoque adoraretur indistincte cum
Domin^. Thomas exactly describing all the business of the Mass, 3 Su^. q. ^3.
a. 4.
at length sets down what is done about consecration, and therein prim^
excitatur populus ad devotion^^, ^nde and movetur sursum cor da ^abere ad
Dominum. And I take it, you cannot find in all this Century, concerning
kneeling more plains, though you believe yea and contend, that the gesture was
now in practice.

But I hasten to latter times, and therein I am first to Er^^te, and the Low
Countries, the Waldenses, and scholars See for these Authors, Abrid. 31. 51,
56, 57, 58, 64, 65. Disp. 106, 107, 109, 110, 111. Something is in Perth-Ass.
36, 54, 55. anuscrip. chapter 5. Brad. at arg 5.
of Iohn-Husse, all the Reformed Churches, which have cast away the real
presence, the Church of England, (that is, the learned and diligent Pastors,
and well instructed and conscionable professors thereof restorers of religion,
assemblies of Parliament) also the Church of Sevtland, to whom may be added the
Muscovites, and the Abyssenes. Then you press against us, P. Martyr, Bucer,
Bullinger, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Beze, Keckerman, Bucan, Mor^ey, Sz^ged^^,
Chemnitins; and of our Countrymen, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Pilkington, Th.
Beacon, Dr. Sutelisse, and Dr. Willet. Lastly, you tell us, (and prove neither
where nor when) that diverse Synods provide against kneeling and national
constitutions have condemned it: Manuscr. chapter 4. And if you add any other
testimony of moment, I wish I could have informed the Reader, though I think
there is none. But what shall be answered to this multitude? Verily this, that
you go about to outface us with the authority of mere names and number, and
abuse us as you have abused your Authors. I assure the Reader, that none of all
these testimonies (so far as I can judge) I say not one of them simply
condemns kneeling in the act of receiving: for either your saying of them is
false, or else that which you quote out of them, speaks only of standing and
sitting, affirming them to be indifferent or lawful without affirming kneeling
to be unlawful, or delivers their opinions only what gesture Christ and his
Apostles did use at the Institution, or else only condemns kneeling unto the
bread, or kneeling at first reformation for fear of Idolatry and scandal, or
lastly, this opinion of kneeling, that the Sacrament cannot be reverently
received without it- If the Reader think it worth his labor, let him please to
take the pains to examine whether I say true. It Is clear, that these learned
then which you quote condemned not kneeling in it self, nay many of them were
wont to kneel at Sacrament in their own practice. As for your arrogating,
that the Church of England is for you, is somewhat strange. Suppose our
religious Parliaments, Ministers, people, restorers of religion have desired
the remoovall of the bond of kneeling for the Churches quiet, do you think they
condemned as unlawful therefore that gesture, which themselves have been wont
and still continue to use? but that you cannot think, except you think
withal that they were all of them timeservers and hypocrites. Noither is it
disparagement to our cause that other Churches use a different gesture from
ours, for whiles we all agree in the substance, it is best for us to vary in
such variable things, for the right understanding of them as they are. As for
some opposers in Scotland, they are parties with you in this present
controversy. Longer answer would perhaps be superfluous, when as this is just.
I will end with a short Counterpoise now, promising to make a liberal amends
(if God so please, and the same shall be needful) at an other time.

Our further Counterpoise.
To pass that which is Damian a Goes de Aethiop monb. they never confess their
sins before their Ministers, but they kneel down. and quotescunque
consitentur assumunt carpus Domins.
said of the Aethiopick Church, and come nearer to home, I will first note the
testimonies Auspurge, of Sueveland, and of Belgia, allow great and singular
Reverence. Of Basil worshipping Christ in heaven: of Bokemia, falling upon the
knees, which also is expressly justified by the Churches of France and the Low
Countries For Councils; see Petricovital. Synod. gener. 15. 8. conclus. 4. And
Wlodistvuiens. Synod. gener. conclus 6.

Particular men. 1. Def of Admon. of T C. sol. 84 Disput. 111.
Luther and Lutherans in all the world you yield unto us. 2. For Divines of
sounder judgment I will point you to a few of those whom you most esteem of,
as Instit. lib 4. cap. 17. sect. 3^.
Calvin, Epist: 8 and 12
Beza, In Iud. cap: 11
P. Martyr, (...)
Bucer, (...) Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Morney, (...) part. 2. fol. 835, etc.
(...), Let. 48. ^ris. 96.
(...), De (...). 2. cap. 7.
(...), Polit. Eccles. ^^ 1 Cor. 11.
Z^pp^ru^^, (k) Parent.

For our own Church I will not enlarge at this time; Edw. and Q. Eliz.
Secondly, to the gl^^^ ou^ (...) in the persecutions of Q. Mary. Third^^ to all
the great propugners of the religion established in this Church. Fourthly, to
our most excellent Ca^^ists, and such as have been of principal note for
cases of conscience. Nay fifthly, to those that have been the most noted men
of your own side; some of which never made scruple of kneeling at Sacrament at
all* others that did, either repented of their former judgment, (as a great
many godly and learned men have done in this Church,) or else stood not upon
unlawfulness of kneeling absolutely, though they preferred sitting and
standing before it. And for all these, if you stand upon tale, with Gods
gracious leave I can make the same plenteously to appear. Only of this last
sort I will conclude with Mr. Baines, who to one asking his advise whether it
was lawful to kneel, answered in this manner, as I would answer to any one
that should ask me the same question. When there is no apparent scandal you
may kneel: latent things which cannot with moral certainty be presumed must
not hinder us. My reasons, first it is a gesture sanctified of God, to be used
in his service. Secondly, it is not vn^oseeming a feaster, when our joy must be
mingled with reverent trembling. Thirdly, it neither as an occasion, nor by
participation Idolatry: kneeling ^^ver ^ead bread-worship: And our doctrine of
the Sacrament (...) to all the world, does free us from suspicion of ad^ration
in it.

FINIS.

