THE DVTY OF ALL TRVE SVBIECTS TO THEIR KING:

As also to their Native Country, in time of extremity and danger.

With some memorable examples of the miserable ends of perfidious Traitors.

In two Books.

Collected and Written by H. P.

-- inutilis olim,
Ne videar vixisse --
PALINGEN.



LONDON,

Printed by E. P. for Henry Seyle, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Tigers Head in Fleet street, over against St. Dunstanes Church.

1639.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR PAUL PINDAR KNIGHT.
Worthy Sir,
WHen I had ended this Discourse, and bethought my self of a Subject, who for
h^s loyalty and love to his King and Country, might answer and suit with the
subject in hand, and as it were stand in stead as a fair light at the entrance
of the door, to show others the way; your self came to my remembrance; who
have so clearly expressed your affection to either. Indeed by the Law both of
God and Nature, every man according to that ability God has blessed him withal)
is bound so to do, but the greater number want the means, and burdens of
this nature m^st commonly lie upon the backs but of a few, yea many there are,
who (thou^h able enough) in hard and dangerous times (like foolish patients in
a desperate disease, who will not be persuaded to be let blood though it would
save their lives (will not yield their assistance, till forced by ex remity or
a stronger hand: this the Citizens of Constantinople prooved by woeful
experience, when they were surprised by Mahomet the first, having such a mass
of money and treasure in their ho^ses, that the Turks were astonyed thereat. I
rather set before such, that true pattern and mirror of Magnificence, (so
highly honored and admired, even until this day, for so many ways deserving
of his Country) Cosmo de Medicis, of whom the Florentine History thus
reports. This Cosmo (says he) was the most esteemed and the most famous
Citizen of Florence, ( being no man of war) either in Florence or any other
City, because he did not Hist (...). lib. 7.
only excel all others of his time, in authority and rich^s, but also in
wisdom, for among other qualities that advanced him no be chief in his
Country, he more then other men liberal and magnificent, which liberality
appeared much more after his death then before, and though he did Princely
things, yet in his conversation, riding abroad, or marrying of his children or
kinsfolks, he was like unto all other men, modest and discreet, because he
well knew that extraordinary things, which are of all men with admiration
beheld, do procure more envy then those which without ostentation are honestly
covered; surely private men have equalled many Prince in Magnificence, I might
allege many examples for this purpose. But I only show how much we are first
obliged to God, then to all those who study to provide for the safety of their
King and Country, the advancement of Gods Church and true Religion, of which
number (Sir,) as you are one so eminent, here on earth, so may you receive your
reward with the number of those, whose piety and deeds of mercy, shall receive
their reward in another Kingdom.

Yours in all observance to be commanded, H. P.

Imprimatur,

April 29. 1639. JOHN ALSOP.

TO ALL HIS MAJESTY'S LOYAL AND TRVE loving Subjects in general, of what
degree or condition soever.
THE divine Plato, to show us, of what form the best established Commonwealth
ought to be, uses this Musical Theoreme. Tunc omnis ( says he) Respublica
sub^rtitur, cum ex numero ternario, quinario juncto duae efficiuntur Harmoniae.
Every Commonwealth, is in hazard to be ruined, when of a third joined with a
first are made two several or disagreeing harmonies.
This as an obscure riddle could not for many ages be resolved, till
Melancthon, and some others the best learned of these later times, discovered
Plato's meaning, which was this, since the most and best governed
Commonwealths, consist first, of the King, who is the Base, and first no^e (or
key) of the Fifth, ( hence (...) quasi, (...)) secondly of the Nobility, who as
a Fourth do perfect and make up the Fifth, then of the People, who as a Third
make up a full Eight: now if this Third and Fifth make a discord of two several
Harmonies, the Music is harsh and naught: for example, if the King and
Nobility, should take Part against the Commons, or Commons and King against the
Nobility, Nobility and Commons against the King, that Estate or Commonwealth
is in great danger, hereby concluding, that nothing more supporteth a Kingdom,
then Unity, and the mut^all Concord of those three Estates in the same, one
not being able to subsist without the help of another.

Hence I remember the Estates of the United Provinces in the Netherlands,
caused to be stamped upon their gold the Belgic Lion ( r^pant) with Unity
makes might.
seventeene arrows in his right paw, ( meaning thereby the seventeene
Provinces,) borrowing that Emblem, from th^se arrows which Silurus on his
death bed gave to his seventeene sons, commanding each of them to take an
arrow, and upon his knee, or as he could to break it, which they easily did,
then gave he unto them seventeene other arrows all bound together in one
bundle, to break, which ( one essaying after another,) they could not, Thus
after my death ( quoth their Father) it will fa^e with you, if you be divided
among your selves, (as these arrows were) every one will crush you, but if you
unite your selves, none will be able to injure or overcome you.

The case is ours, who are ( or ought to be) faithful and true to our King and
Country, neither to suffer, or give the least consent or way to any division
among our selves, which has been the ruin even of the most flourishing
Kingdoms, foreign enemies taking advantage of their discords and combats (
as the Kite in Aesop, did by the Mouse and the Frog.) So the Danes in our Land,
and after them the Saxons did, and too well it is known, how that fatal and
unfortunate division and emulation between the Nobility of Hunga^ie and Jews
their ^ung King, made a fair and an open way for Solomon to the possession (
almost of all) that most (...) and ^rishing Kingdom.

Now if we duly consider, and search out the cause of these tumults and
commotions, that of late years, and daily do arise in Christian Common
wealths, we shall find it to proceed from a pretense of conscience, and
Reformation of abuses in the Church, under which color our obstinate
Innovators bandie themselves against their own good and R^ligious Kings, ^en
the Apostle says, ( and so did the Primitive C^ristians practice) for
conscience sake we ought to submit our selves unto them, whether they be good
or bad, and because we maintain this they power out whole vollies in their
volumes of slanderous imputations against our Reverend Bishops, being indeed
(...), the Bulwarks or outworkes of our Church, so that I may say of such a
people and a Religion, as Lucretius said of theirs who allowed the slaughter
and Sacrifice of ^ptrianassa the innocent virgin.

Tantum Religio poterat suadere malorum.

We need neither them nor t^eir reformation, our Church of England, being as
well se^led and governed as any in the Christian world: let us then submit our
selves, first unto God, next to our King, his Laws and discipline of our
church, labor for Unity and peace on with another: so will God b^esse and
defend us, our Adversaries utterly disabled, fear us, and we shall not only
live, but go to our graves in peace; which God, in the times of the Patriarchs
and Prophets, promised to his children, as an especial blessing.

Yours, H. P.
May 7. 1639.
THE DVTIE OF ALL TRVE SVBIECTS TOWARD THEIR KING AND SOVEREIGN.
HArd is the task, whosoever shall undertake in these discordant times (like
another ORPHEUS) the taming of so many wild Beasts as are daily bred in this
vast wilderness of the world, and to reduce them with the sweet and delicious
air of unity and concord, unto Civilitie and Obedience. But such is the
nature of some savage creatures, and untameable monsters, that the more you
seek to win them, the more stubborn and intractable they become. Every good
Prince is another Orpheus, who by the well-tuned harmony of wholesome Laws,
Mercy, and his own example, labors to draw unto him the whole body of his
people, and is listened unto by the best and greater part: but yet under the
most mildest Governments that ever were, there never wanted some who altogether
(...) have either stopped their ears, or in stead of mildness have been
possessed with madness. Hence the best Princes, and freest from tyranny, have
found the most perfidious Traitors to themselves and their Country; like
Serpents hatched, even in the Sunshine of their glorious reign; we need
not to travel far for examples and proofs. I have heard the Spaniard much
commended for his fidelity to his Prince, and true it is, that in Spain a
Taitor or Rebel, is hardly heard of in an age, only what moved that Spanish
Cavalero (who took the Admirant of Arragon prisoner at the battle of Newport)
to quit his Country and Kings service, I know not: examples of their
disloyalty are not many, and as fidelity or loyalty is the Spaniards prime
virtue, so is it the glory of every good Subject, (as in this discourse I
entend to show) to be faithful to his Sovereign, and loving to his Country,
his native soil, that both bred and fed him, and like a sweet and indulgent
Nurse, will receive him (fallen a sleep) again into her lap.

The first Argument therefore I will use to persuade all subjects unto loyalty
and fidelity unto their Sovereigns, is drawn from the dignity of their
callings, seeing that God the Supreme Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, has
communicated unto them his own Attributes, that we might the more fear honor,
and be afraid to offend them, yea not so much as to think ill of them in our
hearts; ( For even the Birds of the air will reveal thy secret thoughts, and
ill intents against the King, (says Solomon.) When the Lord spoke unto Moses,
and commanded him to go to Pharaoh, to deliver the people of Israel out of
their Egyptian bondage, Exodus 4. 10.
Moses excusing himself, said, he was not an eloquent man, but slow of speech
and tongue, (albeit the Lord allowed him his brother Aaron as his speaker) the
Lord answered, Thou shall be unto him as a. God as if he had said unto him (as
it is interpreted) thou shall have pre-eminence and authority over him, thou
shall not fear the threatenings of the Tyrant, because Exodus 7 1.
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh. Again, I have said, ye are Gods, ye are
all the children of the most High. And again, in the first verse of the same
Psalm, God stands in the Assembly of Gods. He Psalm. 82. 6. and 1.
judges among Gods: is it not written in your Lam, (says our Savior to the
Jews) I have said y^e are G^ds? hereby we are taught to bear all honor and
loyal respect to those who have the superintendency over us, and to yield all
reverence to those whom God has appointed to reign over, to respect them with
all our hearts and affections.

Again, all people ought to consider that they cannot enjoy any thing of all
the wealth, riches, and possessions God has blessed them withal; if there
were not Law, Justice, and a Prince: now Justice is the end of the Law; the Law
is the Act or Ordinance of the Prince, and the Prince is the Vicegerent of God,
having sovereign powerover those whom he has given in charge, to rule and
govern; so the Sovereign is a speaking Law, and the Law a dumb Prince; if
therefore we must live under and obey the Law, how much more the Prince, that
made and established it, yea who gives vigor and life unto the Law? and makes a
good King to have obedient and loyal Subjects, as Theopompus King of Sparta
witnesses, Plutarch.
when speaking to one of his domestique servants, who told him that the
Spartane affairs did prosper well, because they had Kings who knew how to
govern well, No, but rather (said he) but because the people know well how to
obey; for the Kings commandment, and the Subjects obedience are correlatives.
Men indeed unwillingly obey those who know not how to govern well, but where
the Prince is a good Leader, he is with all unanimity and alacrity followed;
for if a Subject loves not his Prince, that is, if he be not true and loyal
unto him, what good will all his honor, wealth, dignity or preferments do him,
since there is no title in the world that becomes a Subject more then true
loyalty; which no man can have; except true love and obedience precede and go
before, for want whereof, he makes shipwreck of all the honor and reputation,
that he had formerly purchased. As a Prince has always some occasion or other
to make use of his Subjects; so are the Subjects bound by the Law of God, to
serve, honor and assist him by all means possible to their abilities. Now if
you would know what power and authority God has given unto Kings and Princes
over their Subjects, the Prophet Samuel does very amply and plainly declare:
these be the words of the Prophet speaking unto the Israelites (who desired to
have a King to govern and judge them, as other Nations,) He will take your
sons and appoint them to 1 Samuel 8. 11.
his Charrets, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his
Charret. Also he will make them his Captains over thousands, and Captains
over fifties, and to ear or plo^ his ground, and to reap his Harvest, and to
make instruments of war, and the things that serve for his Charriots; he
will also take your daughters and make them Apothecaries, Cooks, and Bakers,
and he will take your fields and your Vineyards, and your best Olive trees, and
give them to his servants, and he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your
Vineyards, and give it to his Eunuchs, and to his servants. And he will take
your servants, and your maidservants, and the chief of your youngmen, and
your Asses, and put them to his work; He will take the ten^ of your sheep,
and you shall be his servants; and then the Prophet adds this. And then you
shall cry out at that day because of your King, whom ye have chosen you, and
the Lord will not hear ^ou, at that day, signifying hereby unto the
Israelites (and also to all others) that they ought with all patience to endure
the Dominion of their Sovereign Prince, and perform this condition without
grudging, mutiny or rebelling, and indeed this is an excellent lesson to teach
all Subjects to contain themselves within the bounds of their duty and
obedience, toward him whom God has appointed to bear rule and Dominion over
them, for (as the Apostle says) There is no power but of God.

To enter into more particular considerations, Roman. 13. 1.
which ought to moove Subjects so much the more to love their Kings and
Sovereign Princes, it is most certain, that God does endow (most commonly)
those whom he would have to reign over his people, with some singular and
Supernatural gifts, as wisdom, fortitude, knowledge, vivacity of Spirit,
goodness of nature, etc. above and beyond the common people. We read an
excellent and good example in Moses, the first Governor and Conductor Numbers
11. 11. and usque ad 18.
of the Children of Israel, complaining unto the Lord of the burden of his
charge, and of the hardness of the hearts of the Hebrews, praying him to
comfort and assist him with some Counselors to help him to bea^e the weight
of his charge, received this answer srom the Lord, I will do it (says he) but
I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them, to the end
that they may bear the burden, or the charge of the people with thee, so that
thou shall not bear it alone: which shows manifestly, that Kings and Princes
have the gift of the Spirit, and that their Subjects have it not but in a
small measure or in part; as the woman of Tekoah said unto David, My Lord the
King is even 2 Samuel 14.
as an Angel of God, to know good and bad; signifying hereby, that he knew
what to do upon Earth: for God does by Kings, as great Princes are used ^o do
by their (...), (...) ^deth for them understanding, the (...) excellent Tutors
to instruct them, viz. the Angels, and withal we observe, that they begin to
bud, and yield the ^ire blossoms of their (...) understanding, and
consequently to bring forth fruit soon^ than their Subjects, as we may read of
Salamon, who decided the controversy between the (...), when (...) was but
twelve years old; as says (...) of Josias, and many others.

Hence we may justly gather, that Subjects are oblig^d to love their (...) and
Superiors, not only by the Law of man or of Nations, but by the Laws and
Commandments of God, as appears in many places throughout the whole
Scripture.

The (...) had no lesson, (...) often The second part of the obligation of
Subjects to their (...).
taught them, then to be always ready to obey their Superiors and
Magistrates, to be patient in labors, constant in (...), and never to (...).
(...). (...).
forsake or run away from the place which they were to desend and make good,
for they were enjoined to die first, rather then by abandoning it to save their
lives, which if they did, they were immediately to be put to death, and (...)
this Commonwealth was best ^steemed of all others in the world for Policy,
(...) under the Laws of (...), it flourished for the (...) of five hundred
(...) and upward, that they (...) as a rule to all other Nations in the world,
to conform themselves by, ^

^, Tit. Liv^ lib. 8. D^. 1.
^ V^ Max. lib. 2. cap. 2.
^ with the enemy contra^ to his commandment.

^ his commandment in going forth (...) ^
^ Sovereign. Submit your selves (says the Apostle) 1 (...). (...).
unto all ma^er of Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, (...) we ought to obey
for conscience sake: where you see a manifest and most ^cient proof of the
authority and power God has imparted unto Princes over (...) Subjects, again
by the same Apostle, The Prince (...). 1. 5.
is the Minister of God for thy (...); but if thou (...).
do evil fear, for be (...) not the Suord in vain, (or for naught,) for
he is the servant of God, to take (...) on him that does, evil; and writing
unto his Disciple Titus, h^ says, Put them in remembrance that they be subject
to Principalities and p^wers, and that they obey their Governors, for we must
acknowledge, that there is no (...) but of God, and he that resists this
power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves judgment, Seeing therefore it has pleases God to establish this
order amongst men, that is, to be governed by Kings and Sovereign Magistra^s,
unto whom he has given power of ruling and reigning over them, we must
readily and willingly yee^d them all obedience, tendering unto them our service,
as well in times of peace as of war^, in peace as ornaments, in war as (...)
and Bulwarks against a common enemy; ^sides, we ought to speak of them with
all honor and respect, not to tr^duce them nor their actions in public or
private among (...), for were it but for our own (...), knowing that Princes
have (...) ears and as long (...): and as I formerly (...). The Birds of the
air will bear (...).
away thy (...), and the fowls will relate thy words, etc. (...). 22. 28.
Again, Thou shall not rail upon the Judges (^aith the Lord) nor speak^ evil
of the Ruler of thy people: in brief we must with all humility, honor, serve
and reverence them, as well in words, deeds, as also in our very thoughts.

Neither is this sufficient, but we are bound to be mindful of them in our
prayers, as well public as private. Saint Pa^ writing unto Timothy, exhorts
him, That first of all supplications, 1 (...) 1, 2, 3.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for Kings, and for all
that are in authority or dignity, for that, ^aith he; is good and acceptable
in the ^ight of God our Savior: which ought to be performed without any
exception whatsoever they be, good or bad, for all power is of God, which
whosoever (...), (...) the Ordinance of God, and draw judgment upon
themselves, yea though sometimes God makes use of them to chastise and punish
his people, according to their deserts: as for example, what cruelty did
Pharaoh use against the people of Isra^ in Egypt, commanding the Midwives to
kill all the male-children of the He^, Exodus 1. 9 and (...). 16. 22.
as soon as they should be borne, and with all commanding all his people to
cast Roman 9. 17.
them into the Rivers, endeavoring by this means, wholly to exti^pate Gods
people, yet the Lord said, he had raised up Pharaoh, who tyrannized thus over
them.

What Tyrant or thief could be more cruel then Nebuchadnezzar King of
Assyria, for he wasted 2 C^on. 36. 17. until the 26. ver. (...). 1.
all Palestina, befieged all Jerusalem, pillaged it, brake down the walls of
it, burned the Da^ cl 3. 12.
Temple, defiled the holy Sanctuary, slew the greater part of people, killed
the King, and carried the remnant of the people unto Babylon, and made a golden
Image, commanding all men without exception to worship it, upon pain of being
burned alive, in an hot fiery furnace, and yet nevertheless Dan^ said thus
unto him: Oh King, thou art King of Kings, for the God of heaven has given
thee a Kingdom, (...), strength and glory: and the Lord himself calls Ierem.
25 9.
him his servant: and the Prophet (...) in his Letter written unto the Jews,
who were captives Ibid 27. 6, 7, etc.
in Babylon, exhortes them to pray for the peace of the City whither they were
carried captives. And the Lord commands all nations to put their necks (that
is) to submit themselves under the yoke of the K ng of Babylon, and that he
will visit those Nations with the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, that will not
^mit themselves to be Subject to Nabuchad^ezzar, and that those who would serve
him, should live. Serve therefore (says he) the King of Babylon, that ye may
live. Now concerning the benefit that Subjects reap by being loyal and
faithful to their Sovereigns.

Now let me speak in a word of the benefit the faithful Subject receives for
performing this duty of Obedience. First, it gives a man great satisfaction in
his conscience to Godward, he may with alacrity and boldness, either speak
to, or petition his Sovereign in case of necessity or oppression; he shall
thrive in his estate, he shall live in safety, and be protected from injuries
and inconveniences, according to that of the Wiseman, He that Ecc^tes 8. 5.
keeps the Commandments shall know no evil thing.

On the contrary, by their disobedience they repugne the Ordinance of God and
infringe his Law, which who so does, his life shall ever Leviticus.
hang in fear before him, and he shall be afraid even of a shaken leaf, and
many times the disloyalty and undutifullnesse of subjects toward God and their
lawful Princes, draws down the vengeance of God upon the Land, by taking
those good Princes away, and giving them more cruel and tyrannous in their
room, from whom they must expect like the Israelites among the Egyptians,
heavy and g^ievous tasks, both give their tale of brick, and gather the straw;
Subjects who stick not to offend their Sovereign should remember that, Ira
Principis est nuntia mortis, the indignation of a King is not a small matter,
as many populous Countries Proverb. 19. 12. etc. 16. and 14.
have found to their cost, It is the roaring Eccle^tes 8. 2. 4.
of the Lion, and again (says the Preacher) Where the word of the King is,
there is power,, I advise thee (says he) to take heed to the mouth of the
King: yea the Lord, for a good Kings sake sometime defers the punishment and
misery he means to inflict upon a stubborn and rebellious Nation, as we read
he did in the time of good Josias, when he said, he would (...) the calamities
preordained for the Israelites, for their sins and Idolatry, for their Kings
sake, who walked uprightly before them; let us therefore by all means seek
the favor of the Iosep de antiqui. Iud. lib. 10. c. 5.
King, which as (...) says, is like the dew upon the grass, yea a man's heart
is as it were revived, Proverb. 19. 12. and cap. 16. 15.
when his Princes countenance is favorable and pleasant toward him.

Let me give some examples of true love, and loyalty of some Subjects toward
their Sovereign Princes, beginning with those of Great Alexander, of whom it
is written, that they loved their Prince so dearly, and bare such respect and
honor unto him, that they did worship and reverence him, as if he had been a
God. And after his death, his (...) never sat in Counsel about the affairs of
the Empire of Macedonia, and of other Provinces Aelian. Histor.
by him conquered, but they had in their Tents, or Counsel chambers, the Image
of this great Monarch their Sovereign, lively drawn out, as to ^reate and
deliberate of State affairs in his presence.

The Persians loved Cyrus their first King (...) Xenophon in (...).
well, that in memory of him, and for his sake, they loved all those that were
crooked nosed, nay, they would not permit any to sit in his Throne, but such
kind of men, We do think, (said they) that the holiest ordinance, which we
have, is that which commands us to honor, and love our King, neither more nor
less then the Image of our God, because there was never, or ever shall be a
better King then Cyrus was. And Zen^phon for his sake wrote his Cyropadia, to
give the world a pattern of a good and excellent Prince, exhorting all others
to imitate him.

Xerxes another King of Persia, who came with that mighty Army (consisting of
more then a million of men) to conquer Greece, was no less beloved of his
Subjects then Cyrus, (and after him Darius, as may appear by this ensuing
History. Herodotus discoursing of the Herodot. in Urania lib. 8
diverse and sundry opinions that men had, of that cowardly retraite or plain
flight of Xerxes, after that his Army was vanquished, says, that he was feign
to embarque himself in a ship of of Phoenicia, and to direct his course for
Asia, when being surprised with a dangerous storm, (the wind standing
Northward,) and the ship so full of people and overcharged, (many of the
Persians being cast away in their flight.) The King much affrighted herewith
demanded of the Pilot, if there were any hope or means of saving their lives?
who answered he saw none at all; unless many of the passengers were cast into
the Sea; which Xerxes hearing, said thus unto them; My friends, I beseech you,
that some of you would have a care of your Kings safety, seeing his life and
death is in your hands, at which words, many of his faithful subjects rising
up, and doing him low reverence, presently threw themselves headlong into the
Sea, so by this means the ship being light ned, Xerxes arrived safe in Asia.

There cannot be a more real proof, and truer touchstone of love and
loyalty, then when men do lose their lives freely and willingly for their
Prince, as these men did, surely it is an example worthy of eternal memory.

Menander King of Bactria, was also so well Plu^ch.
beloved of his Subjects, that when he dyed, all the Cities and chief Towns
under his Dominion, held several Obsequies, and made shows of a funeral for
him, yielding him after his death, all the honor and respect that they could
possible imagine, a manifest token of their extraordinary affection they bare
unto him in his life time; yea more, to manifest their love, when his body was
to be consumed with fire, (as was then the manner of those people) a great
contention arose among the forenamed Cities, which should be honored with his
Sepulcher, in the end after much strife and debate, it was agreed and consented
unto between them all, that each City should have an equal portion of his
ashes, to be kept as an holy relic in their Temples, which was an apparent
sign, how desirous they were to have had him always to be among them.

After the death of Pelopidas, who was slain Plutarch. in vita Pelopidas.
in a battle, in defense of the Thebanes and Thess^ns, endeavoring to free
themselves from the cruel tyranny of Alexander Phereus, those people showed
the true love and affection that they bare unto him, for we read, that all
those who were at this battle, did never put off their Armor, unbridle their
horses, or dress their wounds, until such time as they were gathered together
about him, (his blood as yet being sca^ce cold,) and there before him cast
down all the spoils, that they had taken from their (...), a^ though he had
been alive, and understood of their dictory, and moreover as in sign of their
extreme sorrow, they shaved off their own hair, and cut off the maines and
(...) of their horses and many of them af^ their return back to their Tents
and Pavi^s, would neither kindle (...), light a candle, eat or drink, in
so much that throughout all the Camp, there was great sorrow, and a silent
mo^ing, (...) one calling (...); ^ther Defender and Master, and when his body
was to be ca^yed to the (...), the (...) and Thessalians, were at (...), which
of them should (...) the (...) him. (...), they made a (...) of his (...) in
these words. All the (...) that can be (...) be given (...) the most (...),
(...). Every one of (...) accompanying him, and (...) so the (...), as Crown,
Armor of (...) gold, (...) with either who should (...) him (...) honor.

The (...) be had governed Suoten. in vita Othonis.
the Empire but a small time, (...) so well beloved of his Subjects, that when
his body was laid upon the pile to be burned, many of his people slew
themselves to be confumed with him.

The Soldiers of Sertorius did the like over his body, and others by whole
troops killed themselves willingly, because they would not (...), (...) live
him, moreover they loved him so dearly, that they vowed o^ dedicated
themselves to his shadow or ghost; as appears by an Epitaph, which is in
Spain at this day to be seen, the inscription whereof ((...) this effect) I
have here inserted, for the better content of the Reader.

Here lie enterred many bands of Soldiers, who vowed Historia general. de
Spania.
themselves to the ghost of Quintus Sertorius, and to the Earth, the ^ther of
all things, who living in sorrow and grief for him, most courageously
assaulted one another, and joyfully enjoyed the death which they willingly
desired.

Take also another Epitaph of the same nature, but of one particular man, out
of the same general History of Spain, who showed the like affection to the
same (...).

I Berrucius Calaguritanus, have given my life Diis Manibus.
to the Gods Manes of Quintus Sertorius, the son of M. being persuaded in my
conscience, I could not live any longer in the world after him, who had all
things common with the (...) Gods. Passenger who read ^his; farewell, and
learn after my example, to be (...) and faithful, which is acceptable unto
the dead, who are disroabed of their humane bodies.

I must not forget nor omit to relate in this Robert Gaguin. Histor. lib. 1.
place the true and sincere love of one Guyemanus Paul's Aemylius lib. 1.
a Frenchman, to his King and Sovereign, Childerick King of France, ( Paulus
Aemilius calls him Inventor. de Ser^es lib. 1. cap. 1.
Vidomar, and not Guymanus,) this man seeing in a manner the whole Nobility
wonderfully offended and ^nraged against the King, (because abasing himself
and his authority) he had ravished their wives and daughters, gave him
counsel to give way to their violence, and to depart out of France, seeing hoe
could not resist them, promising him his true and faithful service and
assistance in this his extremity, and to use his best endeavor to pacify the
enraged Frenchmen, yea, and to procure them to send for him back again,
whereupon Childerick fled from thence to Turinge to King Basin, his intimate
friend and kinsman, taking with him one half of a piece of gold, which was
broken between him and Guymanus who kept the other half, as a token, to the
end to solicit his affairs, as earstly and secretly as he could. Guymanus
managed his business so (...), that be got the favor and grace of Gillon a
Roman borne, (whom the French Nobility) upon the expulsion of Childerick had
chosen to their King, and who then kept his Court at. Soisson, and still
keeping his credit with the Nobility, became gracious, and in favor with both
parties, and in the end the only man, by whose, advice Gillon was guided in
tall his affairs, wherefore having so good an opportunity to effect his
designs, he gave the new King counsel, and told him, that the only way to
maintain his authority over his Subjects, and to keep them in due obedience,
was to raise new and great Imposts and Taxations npon them. The Roman
following this ill and unseasonable advice of Guymanus, (and being misinformed
of the humors of the French,) laid great imposts and Taxations upon them,
contrary to the custom of the Country; immediately the people began to murmur
and complain in all parts of the Kingdom, and such as were most in favor
with the common people, cried out that it was high time for them to shift for
themselves, and to prevent these and the like future mischiefs, and those who
had been chiefest and foremost in the banishment and expulsion of Childerick,
were not the last that began to complain and cry out against Gillon their new
King; and in the end, most of them were ready to rebel: Guymanus perceiving
how the game wont, gave Gillon (in private) counsel, to cross and cut off
their designs before they came to their full growth and head, and to put to
death the principal Authors and ringleaders of that rebellion, followed his
advise, and caused all that had a hand in the deposing of Childerick, to be put
to death. Now by this means, Guymanus got two strings to his bow, first taking
(...) those who might hinder him to bring his design to pass, then by
disposing the he^ of the rest, of the French, to de^ and (...) after their true
ancient and natural King: and withal, having made Gillon odious to the
people, this faithful Subject laying hold upon so good (...) occasion, showed
unto the Frenchmen their lightness and inconstancy in deposing their natural
King, and in making choice of a stranger far more insupportable then their
King was; hereupon he ^sily persuaded them to recall back Childerick; who
having notice of their good will and affection, and withal receiving that
half piece of gold which Guymanus had sent unto him, as a private to (...) or
sign, that (the coast being now clear, he should with all speed return, came
back again unto France, and was received by the French for their lawful.
King, compelling Gillon (by the aid of his true friend and Subject Guymanus) to
give him place, and be content with his former Government and condition which
he had over the Gauls at Soyssons.

And as firm and constant, was that love of Zopyrus toward Dari^ King of
Persia his Sovereign, who seeing him much perplexed in mind, because he could
not take in the City of Babylon, which was revolted from under his obedience,
Herodot. lib. 3. Thalia.
and knew how difficult it was to recover it Justin. lib. 6. 1.
again, resolved nevertheless with the peril of his life, to reduce it
again unto his Sovereigns subjection, therefore to effect his design, ^hee
cuts off his own nose, ears and lips, and withal, caused his servant towhip
him so extremely, that he (...) so mangled and dis^gured, that few could hardly
know him; then he went unto Darius (who was astonished at the fight of him) and
acquainted him with his plot, which done, away he goes to Babylon, and there
related unto the Citizens how cruelly Darius had used him, whom before them,
he threatens with great protestation, that he would be (...) on him. These
(...) (...) seeing his pitiful and miserable estate, believed all that he said
to be true, and knowing him to be very valiant, and a brave Soldier, made
choice of him to be their Commander and General, which authority and place,
(...) so discretly and cunningly managed, that in a short ^ime he brought his
designs to effect, surrendering the City into the posse^ion of Dar^, who had
(...) the (...) two (...) years together, without hope of (...) taking it.

To conclude these examples, only one more, out of the (...). (...), where I
observe the great love of the Israelites to King David, their 2 Samuel 23. 16,
17.
Sovereign, as being ready to hazard their lives upon one word which he spoke,
yea in a manner a thought. This King having his Army by the Cave of (...), and
the Army of the (...) his enemies, in the valley of Reph^, having also their
Garrison in the Town of Beth-lehem, it happened, that David as it were longed
for some of the water of Beth-lehem, when h^e said, Oh that one would give me
to drink of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by the gate; then three of his
mighty men brake into the Host of the Philistims, and drew water out of the
well of Bethlehem, that is by the gate, and took and brought it to David; but
he would not drink thereof, but powered it down to the ground, because they
had brought it with the peril of their lives, saying, O Lord be it far from
me to do this, is not this the blood of those men, who went in jeopardie of
their lives to bring it? Nevertheless the act was a most certain proof of
the great love and affection which they bare unto their Sovereign.

Wonderful strict and hard, is that obedience and duty the Turk exacteth from
his Subjects, true love is volountary, not compelled, oderunt quem me^uunt,
among the Christian Nations, England and Spain honor and reverence their
Sovereigns (as one writes) above all others. What greater love and affection
could be shown or exacted from Subjects, then that Queen Elizabeth, of happy
and blessed memory, received from the hearty votes of her people, who could
never be weary of viewing her person, and with general acclamations praying
for her long life, in fields, streets, highways, which way soever she went,
in time of her 'Pro gresse and in other times; the like reciprocal love she
returned them again, with, God bless you my good people every one, I will
protect you all to the utmost of my power, etc. And blessed be God we now live
under a most gracious, mild and merciful Prince as ever reigned in England,
our dear and dread Sovereign King Charles, of whom, why may I not say as much
as the Romans did of their Titus? that he was Humani generis delitiae:
therefore by so much the more, deserve all disobedient Subjects, and laesae
Majest (...) is rei, to be severely punished, by how much his goodness and
lenity is abused, but hereof enough. I will now draw toward a conclusion of
this Discourse, heartily desiring unity and peace between all Christian Princes
and their Subjects, and that Kings as Sovereign Lords, would have faith and
truth in all their actions, with wisdom and Justice, for the well governing
and guiding of their people, which is the greatest motive to cause their
Subjects to love and honor them more and more, and with their goods, to be
ready to lay down their lives for them, especially when they do regnare lenta
manu, govern with mildness, a virtue so requisite in a Prince, that it does
comprehend and contain in it self all others virtues; as we read how that
great King (...), being wonderfully incensed against the Jews, upon the false
accusation of wicked Haman, when Queen Hester came and made Hester 8. 14.
request unto him in the behalf of her people, it is written that God turned
the Kings heart into mercy and m^ldnesse, and saved the lives of all the
Jews, who were then at the very point to be put all to death, if this change
of his rigor into mildness and mercy had not been, which is indeed an
especial gift of God.

And for Su^jects, their love should be showed by the honor and respect which
they bear to their Sovereigns. Therefore they should always be endued with
patience, constancy, and diligence being borne to that estate or calling.
Saint Peter wills us, to submit our selves unto 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
all manner of Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the Kng,
as unto the Superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well:
and Saint Paul says, Give unto all men their duty, tribute to whom tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom is due, honor to whom honor: and to show that we
ought Romans 13. 7.
to submit our selves not only to good Kings and Princes, but also unto all in
general whom God has ordained over us; the same speaks Ibid. v. 5.
again in these words, Yoe must be subject not because of wrath only, but
also for conscience sake: for even as a Prince is obliged to maintain by force
of Arms, and by the Laws his Subjects persons, goods and families in safety,
so the Subjects do owe by a reciprocal obligation to their Prince,
Allegiance, sidelity, subjection, obedience, succor, all aid and help, that
lies in their power.

They ought to consider, that he that angers his Prince, endangereth his own
life, for says Solomon, He that prov^kesh the King to anger, sins Proverb.
20. 2.
against his own soul. Let us therefore love him with all our hearts, Let us
fear him as we ought to do, that is to say, with a fear full of honor and
respect, and let us study to continue in his favor and grace, then shall we
fulfill and perform that which God requires of us, yea, commands (...) to do
in his holy Word. My (...), ( (...)) 2 Samuel 15. 21.
(...) God, (...), and Saint (...) the like, Honor all men, love brotherly
fellowship, fear God, honor the King. Last of all, let us have (...), that we
walk, via ^na, join hearts and hands, and now or never imitate that good
Subject Ittai the Gitti^e, who (when David his Sovereign Lord and King, fled
before Absalon, said unto him; As the Lord lives, and as the Lord my King
lives, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in death or life, even
there surely will thy servant be.

THE SECOND BOOK, Of the Love and Duty, we all owe to our Native Country.
I Am now to entreat of the second Duty which every man owes to his native
Country, and the Commonwealth; wherein he lives and inhabiteth. But ere I
proceed, let me expound the meaning of this word Patria or Country, because
there are sundry opinions ^oncerning this point; some affirm that, We ought to
take this Universal world, for our true and N^tive Country, of which opinion
Socrates was, for on a time being demanded what Countrie-man he was, made this
answer; The world is my Country, and of that opinion were Cicer. (...). Tuku^.
many other, considering what small certainety there is in the dwelling of any
man in any one place; and the often revolution, vicissitude, or alteration of
things, and therefore would without naming any place in particular, take the
wide world for it. All the earth is a virtuous man's proper dwelling place, as
the Sea is of fishes. The Philosopher Anaxagoras, one the other Laer^ius in
vita (...).
side being asked what Countrie-man he was, answered (pointing up to heav^n
with his finger) there is my Country, adding withal, (as Lactantius
reports) that he was borne only to contemplate upon heaven his native
Country, whither he was to return again. The Ecclesiastical History makes
mention of a man called Sanctus, who being brought before a Magistrate for the
profession of the Christian Religion, and there examined what his name was, and
of what Country, I am, said he, a Christian, that is my name, my Country, my
parentage, and all Histor. Ecclesia. lib. 5.
in all. But I must, as Pliny advises every writer, cogitare titulum,
remember the subject I am in particular to entreat of, without exspatiation;
therefore here I must take a man's Country to be the place of his birth, not
only in a Kingdom of Province whereon he depends, but also of a City, or
any other particular place of Government, where it was the will of God he
should be borne, yea, of the place where he personally dwells and inhabiteth
with his wife children and family, and where he has his goods and maintenance
for the sustaining of his livelihood; for every man's Country (says Cicero) is
where he is best pleased Cic. Tuscul. l. 5.
to live, and has his means about him according to the French Proverb, La ou
sont nos biens, la est nostre pays, that is, where our substance and wealth
are; there is our Country; which is most true: therefore every man is bound to
defend and preserve it against all invasion, either of domestike or fo^aine
foes, even as his own life, wife, children, family, or what else is most dear
unto him. So in brief I affi^me the place of our abode, as well as of our
birth to be rightly called our Co^ntrie, which Country of ours ought not to
have the last place (as some would) in our affection and love, but rather the
first. ( Art thou so foolish, says Plato) as thou know not tha^ thy
Country ought to Plato in Cri^one.
be preferred before thy parents and kind^d, and that thou ought to love it
more then father or mother. The love of our Country and Commonwealth, said
Theognis the Poet, Is and ought to be no less sacred, then that which is (...)
a father and his child. And (...) says, If a f^er (...) (...). (...). lib 4.
his (...), his o^ne son should (...) keep^ ^is ^sell, but at the first
diss^ade him, if he prevailed (...), t^en to rebu^ hi^, if he at (...) to
(...), for (...) is neither blood (...) ((...) (...). (...). (...) re.
(...) place) (...) unto us, (...) to be (...) to us then (...), it ought to be
(...) with us (...) love of our (...), (...) it (...), all (...) or affect, for
in (...) and if it be wasted (...) destroyed, who (...) have any pleasure in
any thing that he (...)? When a (...) and (...), (said Peric^) He (...) ease
and plentifully, is withal ruined and undone, on (...) H. (...). lib. 2.
the contrary when it flourishes, the poorest man feels no discommodity but
fares the better: if a Country or Commonwealth be affrighted and terrified,
(said Caesar,) there is not any one man therein, be he never so stout or wary
of himself, but he will stumble and fall with the ruin thereof; but in the
welfare and flourishing of the same, the meanest shall find wherewith to make
himself merry: therefore we should be wanting in nothing that might redound
to the honor land profit of our Country. Cato Vticensis well knew how to put
Plutareb. in vila Catonis.
this in practice, and withal to certify so much unto Cicero, who thanking
that grave and wise man, for that in the Senate he had defended Fabia Terentia
Cicero's wives sister, against P^blius Clodius, who had accused her falsely, It
is not unto me (said Cato) that you ought to give thanks, but rather, to the
Commonwealth, because all that I do, say, or c^unsell, is for the love of the
common good of my Country.

Agesilam said as much to the King of Persia, Idem in vita Agesil.
which King admiring the virtues of Agesilaus, after such time as the peace was
concluded between him and the Spartanes, he sent unto him and requested, that
he might join friendship and amity with him, yea, and hospitality in living
together: Agesilaus refused it, saying, That the love and amity of the
Commonwealth of Sparta did both content and suffice him, and as long as it
would last and endure, he had no need to contract with any other, for that was
enough: and the greatest glory of praise and commendations that ever Antiquity
gave or could give, to excellent men, and the bravest spirits, was for that
which they did either for the preservation and defense of their Country, or
else for the enlargement or extension of the bounds and limits thereof, and
from this generous affection to their native Country, have proceeded so many
glorious acts and noble achievements, that they have afforded matter to the
most learned pens that ever wrote, to the admiration of all posterity. There was
never yet any good and noble spirit, that did not love and affect his Country,
Nature herself having impressed in the hearts of such as are well borne, a
charitable love, and a most sweet and dear affection toward it; for men
naturally love that air they first drew, and with which Nature first refreshed
them at their first coming into the world. For hereby Nature has a great
interest in us, yea, we perceive her for^e in plants, herbs, and other
insensible things, as there are plants that cannot endure to be transported out
of their own natural soil, as Balm will grow no where but in Iudaea or
Palestina, (and there in the valley of Jericho.) The Assy^ian Apple Tree being
transported will bear no fruit, the Palm Tree loves no other, save her own
territory, if it be carried from thence, it will bear no fruit, bewayling her
transportation in her sterility the; Cinamomo tree, and the Indian Lavender
cannot endure to be remooved out of their own clymate, which Seleucus by
experience found to be true. If therefore these insensible things seem to
sympathize with the soil wherein, by the Almighty they were first planted and
had their being, how much more ought men endued with reason, love and affect
the same, yea good Subjects and true to their Country (I speak not of
fugitive Traitors, and our home-borne Renegado's) though they traveld to the
worlds end, would still have a longing homeward, and most true it is that Ovid
says,

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit, and immemores non finit esse sui.
Sertorius a Roman borne, and one of the most Plutarch in vita Sert^rii.
valiant and courageous Captains of his time, being constrained for saving of
his life, to fly into Spain, where he was chosen to be General of an Army
against his own Country, being then at mortal enmity with Spain, who having
overcome the Romans in many battles conducted by Pompey and Metellus, and
albeit all his affairs prospered so well, that he could not (in any man's
judgment) wish to have better success, yet he offered the Romans his
Countrie-men, that if they would be pleased to accept of his service (although
it were but as a private Soldier) he would serve them in that mean calling,
rather then to govern and command a great Army of their enemies in a strange
Country.

Aristides going out of Athens, being exiled Idem in vita A^istid.
thence into the I Will of Aegina, whither his ungrateful Citizens had prescribed
him, in recompense of all the good service he had done toward their
Commonwealth, loved his Country so well, that looking back toward Ath^ns,
he prayed heartily that his Country might never have need of his help,
inferring withal that his banishment would then be so much the more tolerable
unto him, if his native Country did flourish and prosper. Seneca de Been. sic.
lib. 6.


Callistratus also going out of Athens, from whence he was banished, together
with some other Citizens, and hearing one of his company wish, that the
Athenians might be reduced to that extremity, as to be constrained to recall
home again all those whom they had banished, he detested and abhorred his
wicked and uncharitable wishes, as one unworthy the name of a good Patriot.
Idem ibidem.


Rutilius another Roman, loved also his Country so well, that when one told
him, (when he lived in exile) there would be shortly Civil wars in his
Country, and all that were banished should be called back, what hurt have I
done unto thee my friend (said he) to wish me a more grievous and sorrowful
return, then my departure was from Rome? for I had r^ther that my Country
should be ashamed to have banished me, then to see it to mourn and wail her
miseries at my return.

Cimon an Athenian Captain, being banished Plutarch. in vita Cimon.
his Country by his ungrateful fellow Citizens, did nevertheless help his
Country, when he saw it in great danger; for when the Lacedaemonians made war
against it, he came armed into the Camp of the Athenians purposely to aid
them, and to fight against their enemies.

Thrasibulus in like manner declared what affection Aemilius Probus in vita
Thrasibuli.
he bare unto his Country, as by this answer may appear, which he made on a
time unto one of his Countrie-men, he advising with himself and some friends
how to deliver the Athenians from the hands of those thirty Tyrants that did so
sore oppress them, one asked him what benefit or thanks he should reap
thereby, if thou freest them of their bondage, wherein they now are; I beseech
the immortal Gods, (said Thrasibulus) that I may be able to yield Athens my
dear Country, that duty and service which I am obliged to do, meaning hereby,
a man cannot do too much for his Country, yea, in those times it was a very
absurd thing, to bewail or weep for those who were slain, fighting valiantly
in their Countries defense, saying they did them great wrong, for that they
dyed gloriously in their Countries defense.

And certainly if our Country wherein we now live, be anyway injured or
oppressed, by foreign enemies or domesticke, and homebred Traitors and
Rebels, the Commonwealth is in great hazard and danger, because the enemy
labors to win to himself by Libels and leters, as many friends and
abettors as he can; besides, we commonly (I hope not many) that will be very
cold in affording their assistance, and these in the mean time, deserve to be
banished and expelled their Country. As that good Emperor Antoninus did, who
took away the stipends of certain Pensioners who did the Commonwealth no
service or good at all, saying, there were no greater villains then those that
did devour and consume the Commonwealth, and would never comfort and assist
the same, as they were both by nature and conscience obliged; it shall not be
amiss in this So (...).
place to recite some certain verses of Sophocles, which may teach every man
how to carry himself toward his Country, which ought to be preferred above
all things: they are these in effect.

He who doth's Country or his City see
By casual means brought to extremity,
And able for to yield the same relief;
And will not do it, he is worser then a thief,
And he that for base fear, or some reward
His Countries good, will not at all regard,
Is a false Traitor, a degenerate slave,
Deserving a rope (worthily) to have
The Immortal Gods to witness here I call,
When need and just occasion does befall,
My native soil to help, aid, and assist,
And Rebels, or a foreign foe resist;
In deed and word I Will does best I can
Without reward, or fear of any man.
Yea, howsoever we had private quarrels, and suits, and discontentments with in
our selves, we ought to forget and forgive (at the arrival of a common enemy,
or when a whole Army, or the Commonwealth li^s at the stake and bleeding) all
differences, emulation for place or command, private grudges and the like, as
being no time to fall out among our selves, so did those two brave Generals at
the Battle of Lepanto, Herodot. lib. 8. Vran.
in the year 157^. and so we read of Aristides and The^cles, who though
through a Plutarch. in vit. A^stid.
secret kind of Envy, did (...) contradict and oppose one another in all
affairs, yet when Xerxes King of Persia came with his huge Army consisting of
a million of men, with a resolution to conquer all Greece. Aristides being a
man wondrous careful of the welfare of his Country, casting away all former
malice and envy departed the I Will of Aegina, whither he had been banished, and
very boldly traversed the Army of the enemy, unto the Camp of Themistocles,
who was elected Captain General of the Athenians, and being arrived in the
night time athis Tent, called him forth and spoke unto him in this wise.
Themistocles, it is now or never high time (if we are both wise men, to leave
this vain and idle jealousy and envy which we ever conceived one against
another, and to take in hand some other course more honorable, and wholesome
for all Greece, our common Country, thou in commanding, and performing the
duty of a good Captain, and my self in counselling thee, and executing thy
commaendements,) whereupon Themistocles, according to his innate goodness and
accustomed virtue, especially out of the abundant love he bare to his native
Country, answered in this wise. I am sorry Aristides that thou have herein
showed thy self an honester man then I my self, but since it falls out so,
that the honor is due to thee, for to have begun, and to have provoked me to
so honest and praiseworthy a contention, for the good of our Country; I will
do my best to overcome thee hereafter: in brief these two brave Commanders,
being after this manner reconciled and reunited, equally resolved to defend
their Country, gave the overthrow and vanquished Xerxes, and his mighty Army.

Cretin and Hermias, in the like manner, two great Magnisian Lords, between
whom there was great emulation for priority and the honor, of being the chief
in the Commonwealth, laying willingly aside all ambition, in seeking for the
prime places of Government, agreed together Plutarch in Tract. de Repub.
in time of necessity, when the Commonwealth should be in any danger, to be
all one in their counsels and course for the safeguard thereof: it happened in
the end that Magnesia was besieged by the enemy, and brought to a very narrow
straight; Cretin considering, that if the least spark of emulation, should
again revive and appear from the ashes of their buried quarrel, it would be
the ruin of the City, repaired unto Hermias, and offered to surrender unto him
the charge or place of Captain General of the City Army, and to depart out of
it if he pleased, or else that the other would leave and abandon it for a time,
and let him enjoy that place of command, least being both together, some
jealousy might arise betwixt them, or by the subtle and crafty suggestion of
some (as in all places) favoring the enemies designs, they might again be
unglued and divided. Hermias considoring how the case stood, and withal the
honest heart of his opposite and corrivall (who gave him his choice to stay in
the City as chief General, or else to depart, and withal knowing that the
other was more expert in military affairs, and consequently more fit to
command the City then himself, presently surrendered all his authority unto
Cretin, to the end that all things might succeed well, for the good of the
Country.

Themist^, a Noble man of (...), (...) the Plutarch. Apo^ (...).
Army of his Sovereign King Leonid^, it being told him by some Oracle or other,
with which he had consulted, that the Lacedaemonians should be ruinded as Ther^;
The King would have sent him back to Sparta, under color of bringing back
news of what should happen, but indeed lest he should be slain, together with
the rest of his Soldiers; to this Themi^ would never consent, but with a
courageous spirit and a bold countenance, told the King his Master, that he
was sent thither to fight in defense of his Country, and, not to play the Post
to carry ne^es.

Hippodamus another Lacedemonian (being aged Idem ibidem.
fourscore years) being in a battle with King Archidamus, would never go to
Sparta whither the King would have sent him with Agis, for to provide for the
affairs of the Kingdom, affirming that he had rather there die honorably in
the defense of Sparta, then go home, and therefore presently armed himself,
and standing on the Kings right hand, dyed there honorably, fighting valiantly
in the defense of his Country: hereby you may see, that there is nothing more
preferred of a courageous heart then the safety of his Country, and Sovereign.

(...) Captain General of the Lacedaemonians, being prepared a time to fight a
battle against the Athenians, the Southsayers (according to their
superstition) having told him, (after they had viewed the entrails of the
beasts which were sacrificed) that their Army should obtain the victory, but
that (...) Plutarch. in ^it. Pelop.
should die, who having notice thereof, nothing moved or amazed hereat, though
he assuredly beloeved it to be true, as if it had been the saying of an Ora^,
made this Heroique answer; Sparta depends not upon one man's life only, for
when I am dead, my Country will not be one j^t the ^orse or the weaker; but if
I should (...), and refuse to fight in its defense, the honor and reputation
of it would be much diminished and eclipsed. Now, having appointed one Cleander
to succeed him in his charge and place, he fought a battle with his enemies;
wherein he was slain, leaving nevertheless by that days journeys, his
Country victorious, to his perpetual honor and glory.

Solon, albeit he was old and decrepit, understanding Pl^tarch. in vita Solonis.
how Pisistratus intended to usurp the Government of the Commonwealth, whon
none durst contradictor oppose him, out of an ardent zeal that he bare to his
Country, plucked up his old courage, and going out of his house, (before his
door) in the street cried out with a loud voice unto his fellow Citizens. Help
me, help your Country, let us die valiantly, or else put them them to death,
who would tyrannize over (...).

Thrasybul^ deserves no less commendation (...) Probus in vita (...).
then Solon, who (when many men have delivered their Count^ie from one man's
tyranny) freed it from the violence and tyranny of many usurping oppressors,
no less then thirty in number, who had banished some of the chiefest Citizens,
murdered others, and confiscated the goods of others. This Thrasybulus was the
first, and the only man, that began to make war against them, albeit he had
not then above thirty men to assist him; hereupon the Tyrants began to mock
and laugh to scorn him and his small Company; but he by little and little
fortifying himself, in the end brought them all to ruin, and so delivered his
Country from oppression.

Marcus Brutus, one of the principal conspirators Plutarch. in vit. Caesaris
and Bruti. App. Alex. lib. 2. cap. 16.
against Caesar, is highly commended by Plutarch, for that act of his in
vindicating the City of Rome from an usurper, (who being a man naturally of a
grave and mild behavior) ventured his life to set his Country at liberty,
whereupon he caused certain money or meddailes to be stamped and coined,
which had on the one side a Cap or Bonnet between two poyniards, and under
them these two words. Idibus Martii: that is the fifteenth day of March, on
which day Caesar was slain, on the other side a man's head with these two
capital leters M. B. for Marcus Brutus, by the Cap, he meant liberty, for
after the death of Caesar, they carried publicly in Rome a Cap upon the point
of a Lance, crying with a lo^d voice, Libert^ populi Romani.

Remarkable is the act of Ge^itius Cipp^ Valeri^ Max. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Praetor of Rome, who chose willingly to banish himself, rather then to
encroach upon the liberties of his Country, for as this Cippus passed through
the brazen gate, which was called Raduusoulana, therehappened unto him a
strange prodigious thing, which was two horns upon a sudden grew out of his
forehead, whereupon he went presently, to consult with Oracles and Southsayers,
what it should mean, they told him that it signified, that he should bear
supreme Authority over all the rest of his fellow Citizens, and that at his
return back to Rome, he should be crowned King; this good Patriot or friend to
his Country, determined with himself (to the end that should never come to
pass,) never to return back to Rome, and therefore chose ever to live in a
perpetual and a voluntary banishment, and to deprive himself of such great
and eminent glory, rather then to rob his Country of its freedom and liberty.

I will now conclude this point of Duty, with some notable examples of valiant
men, who have willingly hazarded and laid down their lives for the
preservation and safety of their Country, as briefly as I may.

Attilius Regulus, a noble Roman, being in the Titus Livi^. lib. 1. De^. 1.
wars against Carthage taken prisoner, and Valerius Max. lib. 9. cap. 2.
there a long time detained, in the end taking his word and oath to return
back, they sent Cicer: in Offic. lib. 3. and de Senect. 5.
him to Rome, as well to treat of a peace betwixt them and the Senate, as to
make an exchange of such prisoners as had been taken betwixt Paul Oros lib. 4.
Eutrop. lib. 2.
them on either side, but being come to Rome, Horat. lib. 3.
in stead of persuading them to peace, and to ex Od. 5.
change the prisoners, he counseled them to the contrary, (for regarding more
the public good of his Country, then the love of his friends, kindred, and
family, yea his own life,) He in open Senate persuaded them, not to accept of
the conditions which the Carthagenians offered, all^ ^at it would prove unhappy
and dishonorable to the Romans; and for his part, he was grown old, and ready
to go to his grave, no way able to do his Country service, and how that the
Carthaginians which were at Rome were young men, able, lusty, and many in
number, who if they were sent back, would do great mischief to the Romans,
and withal (the better to persuade the Senate to follow A. Gellius lib. 6.
cap. 4.
his advice) he told them that the Carthaginians had poisoned him, with
certain drugs which had a long or lingering operation, to the end he might live
until such time as his men might be released, and that in a very short time
the poison would come to his heart, and then there could be no other remedy for
him but death; at last the Senate followed his advice; he then with a full
resolution to keep his oath and promise, returned back to Carthage, where
with most cruel tortures he ended his life. Some write that they cut off his
eyes lids, and laid his face a whole day together in the Sun; others say he
was enclosed naked within a great Pipe or Hoggeshead driven full of nails with
the points inward, and so tumbled down an hill or rock, keeping him without
sleep for many days together.

Sous King of Lacedemonia, loved his Country Plutarch. in vita. Lycurg.
so well, that he preferred the good of it before his own life; this King upon
a time being very straightly besieged by the Clytorians in a very barren place,
where no water was to be had, in the end, after he and his (...) endured
extreme thirst, he offered unto (...) (...) to surrender unto them all the
Countries and Territories, which formerly he had won from them, if so be that
he and his people might drink of a fountain that was in their possession, and
not far from that place; the Clytorians accepted of this offer, and so the
parties were sworn, to perform the conditions agreed upon between them,
whereupon Sous having assembled his men toget^er, told them, that if there was
any man among them, that would abstain from drinking of that water, he would
surrender and give over unto him his Kingdom and Royal dignity. But there
was not one that would abstain from drinking, so extreme great was their
thirst; but they drunk all very greedily except King Sous, who coming last of
all to the well, took a little of the water, and rubd or coold the outside of
his mouth, in the presence of the Clytorians, but did not drink or swallow
down one drop at all, by means whereof he would not perform the agreement
formerly made to his enemies, saying he was not obliged so to do, because he
had not drunk at all, and from thenceforth he continued his wars, to the
great advantage and honor of his Country, which he preferred before his own
life in so great an extremity.

The which Lysimachus one of the successors of Alexander the Great could never
do, for when he was surprised in such a straight in Thrace by King
Dromic^ates, and reduced to the like extremity as King Sous was, and being not
able to endure thirst any longer, he yielded himself and his whole Army to
the enemy, but when he had drunk, and saw himself prisoner, he cried out; Oh
ye Gods, how am I now (being a King before) become and made a slave for a
little pleasure, when Sous (for his abstinence) shall be honored, and had in
everlasting remembrance.

There were two Carthaginian brothers, whose Salust. de bello (...). and Val.
Max. lib. 5. cap. 5.
sur-names were Philaenes; the Inhabitants of Car^hage and Cyreni, two nigh
bordering Cities in Africa, were for a long time at great debate and variance,
about the bounds or limits of their Territories, and in the end, to come to a
peaceful accord, it was agreed between them, that certain young men should
at one and the selfsame hour, set out or part, some from Carthage and the
others from Cyrene, and that the one company should go or run toward the
other, and in that very same place where they should meet, there should be the
confines or limits of eithers Territory, whereupon those two brothers of
Carthage (not performing the Articles which were agreed upon, between them
and the Cyrenians, departed out of their City before the hour appointed,
purposely to extend their limits, and to get ground of the other, but the
Syrenians having notice of this fraud, they complained of their wrong, and
would not have that place to be the limit, unless these two brethren would be
contented to be buried both alive in that place, where they would have their
City bounds to be, which they imagined would never be accepted of by these
young men; but in brief, these brothers presented themselves unto the
Cyrenians, and were presently (...) alive in the same place, such love they
bare to their Country and the enlargement of the bounds thereof.

Sc^ having taken the City of (...) condemned all the Inhabitants thereof, to
die by the sword, his host where he lay only excepted; but he (...) true
lover of his Country, ^nne in among therest of his fellow Citizens, whom by
numbers the Soldiers were hewing in pieces, and cried with a loud voice, It
will not please God that I should be beholding for my life unto him, that
murders all the rest of my Country-m^n; hereupon he lost his life among the
rest.

(...) that stout Roman Knight, being Plutarch. in vit. Camilli.
(it seems) justly accused for some great (...) he (...) committed, and having
received the sen^ of d^h, ^ned his face toward the (...) (which he could from
that place see, and from which he had beaten away the enemy, that had besieged
it) with the great danger and peril of his life, and so saved his City and
Co^ie,) and with a loud voice cried out, and (...) the Judges (pointing at the
Capitol with his finger in this manner.) How can you (my Lords) have the
hearts to condemn (...)? how can you in your consciences do him hurt (...) to
fore most willingly, and of his (...) accord, would have dyed for you, who
exposed his life to save yours, who did hazard it so often in the defense of
his Country and Commonwealth; that Capitol will tell you more news, those
walls will speak for me; this pitiful oration so struck the hearts of the
Judges, that they could not see him die, but set him free and at liberty, in
regard of his good service formerly done, for the good and honor of his Country.

I might allege many more rare examples out of Antique H^tories for this
purpose, as of those brothers, the Horatii and Curiatii, in Livie, with those
glorious acts of Pompey, Metelius, Cursius, and infinite others, as well
Latins as Grecians: but I willingly pass them over, and cometo examples
nearer our own times, which perhaps (as near neighbors or not far dwellers)
will become more familiar and please better.

I will begin with a notable example of a Historia general, de Spania par L. de
Mayerna.
Spaniard, Alphonso Perez de Gus^n, a Castilian Knight, and he that gave the
first beginning to the illustrious Family of the Duke of Medina Sidonia in
Spain, worthy immortal praise, for having preferred the welfare of his
Country, his duty and fidelity to his King, before the life of his only son:
it was thus, Don Sanchez the 4. of that name, King of Castile, having recovered
Tariffa from the Moors, (who in those days possessed a great part of Spain,)
being a very strong place, and of great importance, also a frontier Town, made
this Knight Governor of the same, who was within a while after besieged by Don
John King Sanchez his own brother, (who had conceived some great indignation
against him) with a great Army, which Aben Jacob King of the Moors (who was
then King of Granada) had given him unto which he was fled, upon purpose to
annoy and vex his bother. It so fell out, that Don Alphonso Peers de Guzmans
son was taken prisoner by the Moors, by whose means Don John hoped to take
Tariffa, which (...) could not obtain by force of arms, and therefore to that
end and purpose, having gotten assurance to parle with Don Alphonso, he brought
this young man hard to or by the walls of Tariffa, his father, Don Alphonso
being within the Town, and upon the battlements of the wall, whom Don John
threatened that if he would not yield and surrenderup the Town unto him, he
would presently cut off his sons head; unto whom Don Alphonso made this
answer; the Town is the Kings, who has appointed me to keep and defend it,
the which I will do for mine honor and reputations sake, and the good of my
Country, and as for my son, he is in your power, you may do with him what
you please, and because you shall not imagine, that I will prefer the love of
my son, to that of my King and Country, there is a sword for you to strike
off his head, and herewith threw his fword unto him from the battlements of the
wall, and then returned back unto his house, Don John being wonderfully
enraged against him, caused presently this poor innocent child to be beheaded:
when the Soldiers that were within the Town saw that cruel and bloody
spectacle, they made a great shout and a cry, which when Don Alphonso (who was
then at dinner with Dona Maria de Alphonso de Carvel his wise) heard, imagining
that the Moors had assaulted the Town, ran presently to the walls, and
perceiving that the noise and stir was, because that his son was executed,
if it be no other thing, said he, it is no matter, be you careful and look
well to your charge, and then without making any show of outward sorrow,
returned back to his house, and sat down again at the Table with his Lady,
not speaking one word of the matter unto her. The Moors and their Captain Don
John, considering with what a resolute Soldier they had to deal, presently
raised the siege, and returned back with great shame and confusion, to the
immortal honor of that stout and g^ous Knight, who was so faithful and true
to his King and Country.

The Town of Calice in France, being besieged Histoire de (...)
by King Edward the third, in the year 1346. the Inhabitants thereof were
reduced to such extremity, by long continuance of the siege, which endured well
^igh a whole year, that they were constrained (being not able to hold out any
longer) to yield the Town and themselves to King Ed^rds mercy, who being
wonderfully incensed against them, had formerly sworn to put them all to the
sword, not sparing any one, in the end he was pleased to reduce the number of
those who should die only to (...), and those the chiefest of the Townsmen,
to expiate, or in part to save his oath. This commandment being brought to the
Towne-hall, where those miserable Townsmen were gathered together by the Kings
permission, to give their friends and Country the las^ farewell, who beholding
one another with heavy and dejected countenances (the spirits and blood,
through the fear of death being (...) to the heart) and standing all mute, one
of the chiefest amongst them, (...) name was, (...) Saint Pierre, (or Eustache
of Saint (...)) brake that pitiful silence, speaking cheerfully in this
(...): (...) I so often hazarded my life for the good of my Country; and shall
I (...) fear to sacrifice it for the last victim^? I will therefore yield my
head ((...) fellow countrie-men) (...) King Edward of England, being not (...)
to live any longer, to the damage of my thrice (...) Country; he uttered those
words, without any tears, or the least show of the fear of death, but with
such a courageous countenance and manly voice, that he persuaded the whole
multitude to do the like: then one Ieand' Air was the next that seconded him,
and afterward all the company cried out. Allons, allons, a la mort, c'est le
dernier devoir quenous devons render a la nostre pau^re Patrie. Let us go, let
us go to our death, it is the last duty that we owe to our poor Country. Now
among all the whole multitude that offered their heads willingly unto King
Edward to save his oath, only six were bound and led away to execution; but
in the mean time the Queen of England being then and there present, seeing
them all thus manacled, and by the Executioner led away to the place where they
should suffer, fell a weeping, and desired the King to take some compassion
upon them, and to give them their lives, saying, that it was great pity to put
to death men of such a resolution, and magnanimous fidelity, the King forthwith
granted her request, and more-over, albeit that the King had planted and
established in (...) a new Colony, he gave those men leave still to continue
and dwell in the Town, imagining that they would be as true and faithful to
him their deliverer, as they had been lately to their own King and Country.

One John Pecolat a Citizen of Geneva performed Le Citad. Genv. en laresp. au
Caval. Savoy.
a notable act to maintain the liberty of his Country. This man being in
Savoy, at such time as Charles the third of that name, and the ninth Duke of
Savoy made wars against Geneva, in the year of our Lord 1518. to debar
them of their ancient liberties,, was by the instigation, and prosecution of
the Savoyans put upon the rack, to make him confess something that was to the
hurt and prejudice of his Country, the which he endured very constantly for
the space of three hours, albeit he was left once upon the rack, all the
while the tormentors were at dinner, who in the end, seeing that he would not
abuse his tongue in relating any thing against his Country, caused a Barber to
be sent for, to shave off the hair of his head and beard, because they
imagined, that he was charmed, in the mean time (still unwilling to confess
or say any thing, that might endamage or injure his Country, the Commonwealth
of Geneva,) upon a sudden he snatched the rasor out of the Barbers hand, and
with a courageous resolution cut out his own tongue therewith, which his
persecutors would have enforced to lie, against the liberty and privileges of
his native Country, whose memory is to this day, and ever shall be had in
perpetual honor in that famous City.

Let us on the contrary, take a view of the lamentable events and miserable
ends of those who have prooved Rebels to their King and Country, and how they
have been rewarded, yea, by those who did employ and set them on work, who
rewarding them for the most part, according to their demerits, have hated them
after ever to the death, and all in general have branded with the name of
Traitors, disdaining their base disloyalty, to the disgrace and shame of their
posterity, who many times though they may redeem their credit with men, they
hardly can escape the just judgment of God heavily falling upon themselves and
their issue: for confirmation hereof I will produce some notable examples.

Philip King of Macedon kn^ very well how to use and handle a wicked Traitor,
for albeit sometimes he made use of such vipers, yet hated them unto death, for
when one (...) an Olynthian (by whose aid and treachery, he had taken the Town
of Olynthia,) complained unto him, how the (...) continually reviled him, still
upbraiding and calling him Traitor, for his treachery in betraying his native
Country: Philip made him this witty and fatyricall answer: The (...) (quoth
he) are such f^s and dolts, that they (...) call any thing, but by its own
name. Therefore (...) all Traitors consider that those great Princes who employ
them, do (...) the same affection toward them (during the time they are to
make use of them) as (...) to the gall and poison of some v^ous beasts; when
they Plutareh. in vita Romuli.
stand in need of them, for they are very glad to find them out, wheresoever
they may become by, to serve their turn, when they have occasion to use them,
but when they have by their help and means, obtained that which they wished
for, they hate and detest the malice and venom of such beasts, and commonly
kill them. So Treason is acceptable to great personages, when hereby they have
obtained that which they sought for and desired, as the Emperor Augustus once
said unto Rhymitalces King of Thrace, who had forsaken and abandoned Marc.
Antonie, and made his brags that he had joined and associated him unto
Augustus Plutar^. ^thegs.
who made wars against him. I love (said he) the Treason, but I hate the
Traitor.

Darius King of Persia, caused his own son Ariobarz^ to be beheaded, because
he sought to betray his Army unto Alexander the great.

Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia, having notice that Pausanias his son, had
received five hundred talents in gold of King Xerxes, to betray Sparta into his
hands, pursued him unto a certain Temple whither he was fled to save his life,
where the King caused the doors of the Temple to be stopped and blocked,
withal, appointing a strong stone wall to be made round about it, leaving him
there to die most miserably with hunger and thirst, whose body afterward was
cast forth unto dogs, not vouchsafing to give him a grave, so much did he
detest and abhor this Traitor (though his own son) who would have betrayed
his native Country.

Iunius (...), the first Consul of Rome, Tit. Livius lib. 2.
caused his two sons Titus and Tiberius to be Decad. 5.
Dionys. Halicar. lib. 5.
beheaded, because they conspired to let the Tarquines into Rome, from whence
they had been formely banished, by reason of their Tyranny and horrible vices.

(...) a Senator of Rome did likewise kill his own son, because he had been
a partaker in the confpiration of Catili^, and had forsaken Rome to take part
with Catiline, a notorious Plutarch. in vita val. Publ. Salust. in Bello Catilin
Traitor to his Country, saying, Oh wicked and base Traitor, it was not for
Catiline that I begat thee, but for Rome, thy native Country. Flavius vopiscus
in Aurel.


The Emperor Anrelius, having made use of one Heraclemon, a wicked Traitor who
betrayed his own native Country unto him, permitted one to kill him, and then
wrote unto Mallius Chilo, in this manner, I have given leave to one to kill
him, by whose means I took the town of Thyane, for I could not endure the
Traitor, and therefore I have willingly consented that my Soldiers should
dispatch him out of the way; for seeing he had no pity of his Country, he
would (it is like) not keep his faith and be true to me.

The Emperor Maximinus gave thanks to Iul. Capitolinus in Maximin.
one Macedonius, for having killed Tyc^, who strove with him about the Empire,
but afterward frowned upon him, as upon a Traitor, and in the end, caused him
to be slain. Inventoire de l'Histoire (...) France, par I. de Scrres.


Now as concerning the rewards of Traitors; I will produce unto you one
notable example, put in practice by Clovis the first of that name, and the fifth
King of France. This King had suborned two Serving-men, to betray their Lord
and Master unto him promising to bestow upon each of them a golden Corselet.
Afterward by their means, having taken their Master (whom he supposed to
have conspired against him, and had caused to be put to death) these Traitors
demanded their reward of Clovis, who sent each of them a Corcelet of iron, but
when they complained of the King, he sent for, and spoke unto them in this
manner: You have judged better then my self, for I have not done well, in
giving unto you Corselets of Iron, a reward or a present indeed fit for honest
men, but you have deserved an halter, a collar worthy and well beseeming false
Traitors: and hereupon presently commanded them to be hanged.

But among many examples, I will relate unto you two which are very remarkable,
wherein as in a glass you may behold the just judgment of God, against
wicked and perfidious parricides or Traitors to their Country, the like
whereof, a man shall ever harldly hear of, or read in any author.

The first is of a Spaniard named Julian Earl ^istoria general. de (...) lib.
5.
of Ceuta, who being wonderfully enraged against Roderick his natural
Sovereign (who had ravished his daughter called Cava,) was the cause, ^ot
only of the Kings death, but also of the utter ruin of all his Country, a
perfidious an act as can be imagined, and as extreme a vengeance as can be
spoken of. But behold the reward, this wicked man received for his pains. The
Moors having by his means conquered almost all Spain, which they had in
quiet possession, allowing well of the treason, (but hating and utterly
abhorring the Traitor,) first of all they laid violent hands upon this cursed
Earl, and reprooved his disloyalty, and after having confiscated and ceased
upon all his lands and goods, they put him into a close prison, where he dyed
most miserably, having first seen his wife Faldrina stoned to death, and his
son thrown down from the top of an high Tower in the town of C^uta Sanches
a Spanish Historiographer relates his History, and end something otherwise, for
he faith, that after the death of King Roderick, (who was slain in a Battle
against the Moors,) they laid hands on this Julian, and after that they had
reviled him for his perfidious treachery, they hewed him to pieces in the
fields, whereby you may see how justly he was rewarded (...) against his
Country.

I might for a little more content and satisfaction to the Reader, insert in
this place the Epitaph of this Roderick, who was the thirtieth and (...) King
of the Goths, which is as yet to (...) in the town of Visena in ^gall, in
detestation of the perpetual (...) of that per^ous Julian, but fearing to be
overtedious, I pass it over.

The other example is of him, who by wicked treachery betrayed the I Will of
Rhodes, unto Sultan Soliman, the eleventh-Emperour of the Turks Anno 1522. and
in the month of December, Solomon had promised to bestow upon the Traitor in
recompense of his disloyalty, one of his daughters in marriage, together with
an exceeding rich dowry, after the taking Meditat H slor, (...). Ca^rarii.
or conquest of the Island, this Traitor demanded of Soliman the performance of
his promise, whereupon the Turk caused his daughter to be brought forth in a
most magnificent pomp, according to her state and dignity, and gave her to him
in marriage, which made this wicked Traitor to be so ravished with joye, that
he knew not what to do, or how to behave himself, but all his mirth and joy
lasted but a small while, for Solomon turning toward him spoke unto him in
this manner. Thou see (said he) how that I am a man of my word, but yet in
regard thou art a Christian, and that my daughter and thy wife, is a Mahumetane
by birth, and profession of Religion, you cannot live in peace and a^ity
together, and withal I cannot love my son in law, except he be a Musulman
within and without, neither is it enough that thou do abjure Christianity
(as many of thy sect do) in hope of gain or profit, therefore thou must be
stripped of thy baptized and uncircumcised skin, and having spoken these
words, he commanded this, his pretended son in law to be ^yed, and afterward
to be laid down upon a bed of salt, commanding his servants (that if some small
deal of Mahumetisme would possess him in stead of Christianisme,) they then
should bring his spouse (and not till then) unto his bed to lie with him, this
was the reward this wretched Traitor received for his disloyalty.

I will conclude this Discourse of men Traitors, with the treasons of some
women against their Country, beginning first with two maidens, and a married
wife, who sped no better in their reward then the for^er.

The first was Tarpeia the daughter of Spurius T. L^vius lib. 6. Decad. 1.
Tarpeius, who commanded the Capitol in Dyonis. (...). lib. 1. Autiquit.
Plutarch. in vita Romu^.
in Rome, this maiden gave entrance to the Soldiers of Tatius, Captain
General of the Sabines, who had corrupted her with money, for she had promised
him, when she went forth for water, to leave the door open for his Soldiers to
enter in, upon condition, that they should give unto her all the golden
bracelets, rings, and jewels they wore upon their left arms, hands, and
wrists, who in stead of Jewels, cast upon her their Bucklers and Targets, which
they bore in their said left hands, deceiving her by that means of her purpose
and expectation, hereby she was pressed to death with the weight of the
sheilds of those that entered the Capitol.

The other was a Grecian maid whose name Meditat. Histop. 10. (...).
was Daemonica, who was rewarded much like the other, for Brennus King of the
Gauls, having pillaged all Asia, and besieged the town o^ Ephesus, this maid
falling in love with Brennus, promised to betray the town unto him, upon
condition, that all the Gauls should deliver unto her for a recompense, all
the golden chains and bracelets they had, the which he promised her she should
have, now having taken the town by her means, he commanded his Soldiers to
cast into the maids lap, all the golden chains and bracelets which they
carried about them, the which (in obedience of their King and General) they
did, where she with the very wight of the gold, was pressed to death.

The last example is of Romilda the wife of 10. Aventin. lib. 3. de Annal.
(...).
Gisulph^, Duke of Tivoli, who beholding Cacan King of Scythia marching round
about the walls of Modena, which he then besieged, affected him so well, that
she was upon the sudden surprised and taken with his love, insomuch, that
she sent unto him a messenger who should signify, that if he would marry
her, she would deliver the City unto him, together withal the treasure
Gisulphus her husband had, who was then but lately slain at the first arrival
of the Scythians in that place; Gacan being very desirous of the victory,
accepted of the condition, and hereupon she caused the ports to be opened, and
so received him into the town, which he and his men afteward pi^laged, and
b^ought the Inhabitants into a miserable servitude. Afterward Cacan feigning to
be willing and ready to perform his promise and vow made unto her, lay with
her one night, and used and entreated her as his wife. But the next morning
(because he would have all the world to know, that he hated and deteste her
treason,) he caused her to be buried alive in the midst of his Camp, telling
her that such an husband became her best, who through her inordinate love, or
rather lust, had betrayed her Country.

Hereby you may see and have heard, how hateful treason and a Traitor, is to
God and man, insomuch, as the most barbarous nations of the world, have
detested and grievously punished the same, yet as an ancient writer says, men
ought to be more wary in pre^enting the designs of Traitors, then in
consulting by what manner of torment they should suffer death: and says
another, There is not a better or sweeter perfume, then the savor of the dead
body of a Traitor, nor anything more infectious, or pestiferous then his life.

But to draw toward a conclusion, since obedience to our King is so pleasing
to God, so necessary for the preservation of our Country, our selves, wives
and children, and estates let us with One heart, walk one way, (...) devide
our selves, like Sampsons Foxes, to (...) the whole Land, nor it is not enough,
to contribute coldly and unwillingly in times of danger, but freely and
cheerfully, and if need be with the hazard of our lives, to open our purses,
with the widest, for the common good; which necessary lesson, if the Greeks
had learned at what time the great mistress of the East, their City
Constantinople was besieged by Mahomet the first, they had been their own
men, even to this day, for the City being taken, there was such a mass of money
and Trea^ therein, that the Infidels were amazed thereat, enough to have
furnished the City with men and munition, repaired the battered walls and
works, and to have made it defensible against any enemy whosoever, but,
Tanquam sacrum attingere nolebant, every man made his money his Idol, they
would not part hardly with a penny, so that to them it may be said, as the
Prophet said to the Jews; Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but surely
God gave them not the hearts, they lying at that time wallowing in sloth, and
all manner of sensuallity. Let us therefore be warned, and earnestly entreat
of the Lord of Hosts, that he would give unto us understanding hearts, able
hands, peace in these our days, unanimity in our resolutions, and constancy in
our loves, and loyalty to our most dread Sovereign King Charles, and to our
dear nursing mother, this famous and most flourishing Country of England.

FINIS.

