PASQVILS IESTES, Mixed with Mother Bunches Merriments.

Whereunto is added a Bakers doozen of Gulles.

Very pretty and pleasant, to drive away the tediousness of a Winters EVENING.

Newly Corrected with new Additions.

LONDON Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint
Dunstones Churchyard, in Fleetestreete. 1609.

PASQVILS IESTES, And Mother BVNCHES Merriments.
A merry Jest, of a Blind man and a Cripple.
THere were two Beggars (I mean not of the Court, but meaner creatures of the
City) that had no means to keep life and limbs together, but by the
charitable alms of exorable people, the one being youthful and blind, the
other very aged and lame, (and such persons are seldom admitted into the great
chamber much less into the Kings presence.) This blindman always when he went
abroad, carried the cripple on his shoulders to direct him, so likewise the
cripple oppressed with his infirmities, could not travel without supportance.
Now it was the lame man's luck one day about one of the clock after dinner,
being borne by his blind fellow through Fleetstreete, to cast his eye on a
great Oyster, which lay on the ground near the Miter door. where some Oyster
seller sitting (as their custom is) belike had let it fall from her basket:
and thereupon he directed his fellow porter to stoop and take it up, which done
they fell into controversy about it, the one saying he deserved it best,
because he saw it and guided the others hand to it; the other answered, yt he
had most right to it, because he brought him thither and took the pains to
take it up: and while they were thus wrangling, a poor Lawyer coming out of
Ram alley with his seacole beard embrodered with grease like the snowt of a
Mastiue, new lifted out of the porredge pot, and understanding the cause of
their falling out; my honest friends (quoth my Lawyer) pray let me see your
Oyster, and you shall see me quickly end this variance, the blind man delivered
the shelfish unto the Lawyer, who having fingred it, forthwith drew forth his
rusty whittle, laid the Seabred animal upon his knee, and dividing his house
into two parts, gave the one to the blind, the other to the lame, and devoured
the inhabitant himself: the old cripple seeing that, cried out, now the Devil
go with it, and the Lawyer removed himself into the Tavern from his eye and
clamors. Whereupon the blind lame bearer being advertised of the jest, wished it
might poison or choke him. and so departed, So Lawyers often get their gold
with curses,
and to their Clients share, leaves empty purses.


A tale of a Scriuener of London and a Countreyman.
IT fell out upon a Satterday, being market day, that a Country fellow, of the
better sort of husbandry, came to London, to lay out a little money upon some
necessary trinkets: and having dispatched his business, after he had pretely
refreshed his spirits with a pot of the best that the Alehouse could afford
him, made homewards very merrily; but by the way, casting his eye, by chance,
upon a kind of writer, that would have kept a Scriueners shop, and seeing the
master of the poor house, or the poor master of the house, sitting alone in a
rugge gown, wrapping in his arms, to avoid the bitterness of the weather,
minding to make himself a little sport, fell thus to salute the poor Penman:
I pray you master, what might you sell in your shop, that you have so many
ding-dongs hang at your door? Why, my friend, quoth the Obligation-maker, I
sell nothing but Logger-heads. By my fay, master, quoth the Country man, you
have made a fair market with them, for you have left but one in your shop,
that I see: and so laughing, went his way, leaving much good sport to them that
heard him.

A pretty Tale of a poor man and a Lawyer.
A Poor man having been much injured by an unkind neighbor, who by the power
of his purse would have put him by the right of his land, went to a Lawyer
dwelling not far off, to whom having delivered his grief, he gave litte for
his Counsel, but a great many thanks, and country courtesies, with God save
his life, and so forth: entreating him to let him know, when he should again
wait upon him for his further advise. Who answered him somewhat short, When you
will neighbor, when you will. The poor man, upon this when you will, came
oftentimes afterward to him, but found no will in him to speak with him,
Whereupon the poor man telling his wife of his ill hap, was advised by her to
take one of his best lambs, and present it unto him, and then he should see
what would follow: her counsel he followed, took his lamb, and went to the
Lawyer: to whose gate he was no sooner come, but the Lawyer hearing the
bleating of the lamb, opening his window, called him up, and within two words
told him he understood his case, and all should be well: wherewith he departed,
meeting with his wife going to the market. After they had been at the
Alehouse, and taken a pot or two, the poor man got him up into the market
place: and there having his throat well cleared made this mad out-crie: All ye
that have any matters to try in law, get ye every one a fat lamb, and carry
to your Lawyer: for one word of a lambs mouth will be better understood of the
Lawyer, and do more good, then twenty of your own. Probatum.

Of a Citizen of London, that ^id out of the (...) five miles.
A Citizen riding to Edmonton, had his man following him on foot, who came so
near, that the horse slrake him a great blow on the thigh. The fellow thinking
to be revenged, took up a great stone to throw at the horse, and hit his
master on the raynes of the back. Within a while his master looked back, and
seeing his man come halting so far behind, chid him. Sir, your horse has
given me such a blow, quoth his man on the thigh, that I can go no faster.
Truly said his master, the horse is a great kicker, for likewise with his
heel right now, he gave me a great stroke on the raynes of my back: when it
was his man that threw the stone.

A pretty tale of a Complaynant, that cried to a Judge for justice, yet refused
it when it was offered him.
ONe Dromo a certain Tiler, sitting upon the ridge of a house, laying on
certain roof tiles, looking back, and reaching somewhat too far for a
little mortar, that lay by him, fell backward, and by good hap fell upon a man,
that was sitting under the house, whom with his fall he bruised to death, but
thereby saved his own life. Not many days after, a son of the dead man's,
caused this man to be apprehended for murder, and having him before the
Judge, cried unto him for Justice: who asking of the prisoner, what he could
say for himself, received this answer, Truly Sir, I never thought the man
any hurt, neither did I think to fall: but since it was my hap to hit upon him
to save my life, if it please your Lordship, I am contented that he shall have
Justice: for my self, I had no malice to his father, though I see he has a
great deal to me: let him do his worst, I care not, I ask no favor: let him
go up to the top of the house, where I sat, and I will sit where his Father
sat, let him fall from the place as cunningly as he can, and fall upon me to
save his life, I will be contented. The Judge seeing the man's Innocence, in
intent of any evil to the man, whom he had slain, willed the Complaynant to
take this course for his contentment: which he refusing, was dismissed the
Court, and the Prisoner thus by his wit released.

How a Merchant lost his purse between Waltam and London.
A Merchant that traveled between Ware and London, lost his budget, wherein
was a hundred pound, who caused to proclaim in all villages and market towns,
that who so had found the same, and would restore it again, should have twenty
pounds for his pains. An honest husbandman that chanced to find it, brought it
to the Baylife of Ware, and required his twenty pounds for his pains, when he
delivered it. When the covetous Merchant understood this, and that he must
needs pay twenty pound for the finding of it, he said, there was an hundred
and twenty pound in the Budget, and so would have had his own money, and
twenty pound over. So long they strove, that the matter was brought before a
Justice. When the Justice understood by the Baylife, that the cry was made for
a Budget with an hundred pound in it, he demanded where it was? Here (quoth
the Baylife) and gave it him. Is it just an hundred pound (quoth the Justice?)
Yes (quoth the Baylife.) Hold (quoth the Justice) to him that found the budget,
take thou this money to thy use, and if thou happen to find a budget with a
hundred and twenty pound, bring it to this honest Merchant man. It is mine, I
lost no more but a hundredth pound (quoth ye Merchant.) You speak now too late
(quoth the Justice) for your covetousness has beguiled your self.

A Jest, saving your reverence, worth the laughing at.
IN a City, I find not where, met a company, I know not who, and about I know
not what, but after that they had laid their heads together, to conclude upon
a thing of nothing, as the use is of such kind of people, fearing to surfeit of
fasting, they got them to dinner, where, when their bellies were full of Wine,
their brains set their tongues to work about wonders: and having made a great
noise to little purpose, they fell to questioning among themselves, what was
the rarest thing in the world. One, he said the Phoenix, because there was but
one, and she killed herself, and lived again of her own ashes. Another
said, A Diamond, because it would write in glass. Another said, A Parrat,
because it would speak like a man. Another said* A true friend, the world was
so full of falsehood. Another said, Gold, for that it wrought wonders in the
world. And another said, Love, because it robbed wise men of their wits. But
while they did thus differ in their opinions, one plain Asse-headed fool,
being willing to say his mind, upon a sudden falling into a laughing, told them
they were all wide: for he knew a rarer thing then al they: which they desiring
to know, he told them it was a sweetarse hole. Whereat every one holding
themselves by the nose, left off their talk, and laughing at the fool, rose
from the table.

A Parson being summoned to appear personally at London to answer unto diverse
faults by him Committed.
A Parson of Bedfordshyre being summond to appear personally in the Spiritual
Court at London, because contrary to the exhortation of Saint Paul, he had
committed fornication, or in plain English had gotten a wench with child: for
fornication is derived of the Latin word Fornicatio, and Latin he was little
acquainted with: as many are of his function in Country Villages, where the
Shepherd must pipe a plain song, or the Sheepish flock can never dance to
it, being better Lanists then Latinists. This illiterate parson being Cited (I
say) to show his proper person in this court of Carnalitie obeyed the officers
Citation, and considering with himself that he should use and expend good
store of money in bribes, I would say, necessary fees: when this day of doom
drew near, he took the sum of twenty pound of lawful English money (as the
Scriueners phrase is) out of his yron-garded chest, and causd it to be sowd up
in a Gooses belly in stead of her intrails, of which with her head wings and
feathers she was lately deprived, and so sent it sowed fast in an old Napkin
full of holes to the Carrier, that he seeing the coat might not suspect the
lining, and gave his man this lesson also, that he should give the Carrier,
great charge of it, and inform him that it was only a Goose with the
appurtenance, hoping by that fabulous information, to be merry with his Goose
at London, paying only for the Carriage of that Goose, and so receive his
twenty pound scot-free. Now, his man went and carried the Goose to the carrier
with speech agreeable to his masters direction, the Carrier took it, and
perceiving by the ponderousness or strange weight, that there was more then a
bare Goose in the cloth; concealed his suspicion, promising that it should be
safely conveyed. And thereupon the servant returned to his master. To be short
the Parson with his man within a few days after being come to London, he sent
his man to fetch this counterfeit commodity, his man went and demanded it of
the Carrier offering a groat for the carriage. The Carrier holding it a
presumptuous part to rip open the cloth and take a large view of the contents,
told the fellow, that one of the Kings Takers met him on the way, and took it
away with many other things of other men's. The Parsons messenger being laden
with this coynd answer ran back and made his master a partaker of it, his
master being almost astonished at so cold and unexpected a message, yet stird up
with furious wrath, and fear of such a loss, started from his chair where he
sat, meditating upon his transgression, and throwing his cloak nastely upon
his shoulders (the wrong side outward) ran out of doors like an Ox that had
broke loose from the Axe of the Butcher, and never discontinued his course till
he came to the Inn where encountering the Carrier he demanded his goose,
offering a groat for the carriage, alas Sir (quoth the Carrier) the goose
(saving your worship) was as I told your man, taken from me by the Kings
taker. By the Kings taker? (quoth the Parson) the Kings taker and thou his
partaker I believe, have done more then is answerable, there was twenty pounds
of good new coined silver, in the birds belly, and though he seasd on the one,
he had no commission to meddle with the other; it is plain robbery to take money
from a man by the Kings highway, run fellow (quoth he to his man) fetch me
the Cunstable; I Will indite the taker, and have the Carrier before a Justice in
the mean time, to be forth coming against him. The Carrier hearing his
threats and thundering words, stepped into his warehouse and bringing forth the
Goose (quoth he) to the passionate Parson. Sir, behold here is your Goose which
I thus long detein'd, that you might not make me your Goose, and now be it
known unto your worship, that I must and will have a groat in the pound for
the carriage of your money, with a groat for the Goose, and then you may take
it to your self. So to end this difference, the Parson glad and mad to hear
and see this event, glad that his money was so near his fingring, and mad that
the Carrier had so deceived and ouer-reached his intent, nevertheless seeing
he had no means to save a little money without the loss of much more; with a
resolute heigh-ho he told out seven shillings to the Carrier, and upon payment
thereof receiving the Goose he cut it up, as the Hangman did Hacket, just in
the belly, and drawing forth the silver garbage, he fell with his man to
numeration, vowing that if he found a round cros^e imbeslled, the Carrier
should answer his knavery dearly, but the Dice running even, he put up the
money into his flesh bag again, and left the Carrier with many others
laughing at his hard fortune.

Of one excusing a backe-wind.
A Sturdy Sayler being in cheapside amongst the throng of people, when the Lord
Mayor etc. came from Westminster, was thrust and crowded so hard, that with
ouerlabouring to get out into an easier place, he let out a great Fart. A
poor Citizen standing near reproved him for it, to which he replied, fore
god honest man my arse has had a great desire of late to speak, he wants
nothing but thy tongue.

How cunningly a knave devised to get money by his wit, for himself and his
three companions.
THree loytring companions that fell in company together, domineerd so long,
that all their money was consumed and gone. So being penilesse, said one of
them, By my faith, we are now in a fair taking: for we may, if we will,
seek our dinner with Duke Humphrey. Nay, Zounds (quoth the second) If I come
where any press of people he, I can get money enough for us all. Sblood, and I
(quoth the third) can lightly assemble people. They were at that time not
passing two miles from a small town in Barkshire, where, when they came, there
was a new Pillory set up, where the third of them steps to the Baylife, and
desires him to have the Maidenhead of their new Pillory. The Baylife being a
Butcher, was half amazed, and standing musing* at last he asked counsel of
his neighbors, and they bad him set up the knave and spare not. So up he went,
and when he was up, he looked about, and saw his two fellows busy in the
holes of the Butchers aprons, where they put all their money. To it, to it
(quoth he) apace. The people laughed heartily to see him stand there. At last,
when he saw that his fellows had sped their matters, and were going away, he
said to the Baylife, Turn the Pillory about, and now I will come down. So
laughing heartily did. And when he was come dowe, the Baylife said, Now by my
faith thou art a good fellow, and because thou have made us some sport, I will
give thee a Tester to drink: and so thinking to take some money out of the
hole of his apron, he found there never a penny. Cocks arms (quoth the
Baylife) my money is picked out of my apron: and then the rest of the Butchers
beside swore they had lost theirs also. I hope (quoth the fellow) you do not
think that I have it. No, by my troth (quoth the Baylife) I know well enough
thou have it not: for thou were on the pillory all the while* Why, then no
harm, no force (quoth the fellow) and so went his ways.

How one at Kingstone fained himself dead, to try what his wife would do.
IN Kingstone dwelt one Rawlins, newly married, which to prove what his wife
would do, fained himself dead, while she was in the backside, washing of her
clothes, and laid himself all along the flower. Whereupon his wife coming
suddenly in, thought that he had been dead indeed: but having labored hard
all the day, and being sore an hungered, she stood musing with herself, wether
it were best to lament his death, or to dine first: which motion of eating
liked her best: whereupon she cut two or three collops of salt Bacon, and
broyled them on the coals, and eat them up: and being very hungry she forgot
to drink, but the saltnes of the meat at last made her throat so harsh, that
she took a pot and went to draw some drink: but one of her neighbors coming
suddenly in, made her set down her pot, and as if her husband had but new
fallen down, she began to lament so heavily, and with such a noise, that all the
neighbors came running in, where they found her most pitifully bewailing the
sudden death of her husband. Whereupon they began to comfort her, and told
her she must be content, for there was now no remedy. Alas said she, Oh my
sweet husband what shall I do? At which words, her husband lift up his head,
and said, Full ill, my sweet wife, except you go quickly and drink: for the
salt bacon I am sure has almost choked you.

A knauish answer of an unhappy country wench to a foolish young fellow.
A Certain Idle headed young man, that loved to hear himself speak, though
it were of matter to little purpose, riding upon a fair day to a market town,
over took by chance, among other creatures of her own kind, an indifferent
well favored and well grown country wench, whom singling by her self as much
as he could, he fell to commune with, in an odd manner of love making, when
beginning very low, marking her new shod feet, hanging over her dossers,
began with this commendation: Truly sister, you have a very fine foot
there. Yea sir (quoth the wench) that I have a couple. The young man thinking to
show some little wit, in a scoff replied with this speech. But are they
twins, sister? were they both borne at one time? No indeed sir (quoth the
wench) there has been a man borne betwixt them. Wherewith her neighbors that
rod by her, falling into a laughing, made him find, that she was a married
wife: which being contrary to his expectation, being much troubled with her
answer, with lack of wit to reply, galloped away with a flea in his ear.

A flowting answer to a flowting question.
A Poor man, upon a time coming into a market with a very lean horse,
setting him near unto a company of fat and fair Geldings to be sold, was
asked of a scoffing companion, how he sold his horse by the ell? Which the
poor man taking something discontentedly and yet not willing to quarrel with
him, made him an answer fit for his question: when holding up his horses
tail, I pray you sir (quoth he?) come into the shop, and you shall see.

A warning for tale-tellers.
I Reed in the records of a certain school, where faults were reckoned up all
the week, to be paid upon the Satterday, that an unhappy boy, willing to have
one of his fellows taste of such schoole-butter, as he had often broke his
fast with, one morning came to his master with this speech. Truly sir you have
often beaten me for looking off from my book, and such a one scapeth without
rebuke. Yea (quoth he) call him to me. Who no sooner came to him, but heard
him his lesson. Which perfectly repeated, how now Sir (quoth he) to his
accuser? how like you this gear? How did he look from his book, and say his
lesson so well? Let me hear you: who was imperfect in many points. Well Sir
(quoth he) how do you know that your fellow did not look upon his book?
Marry Sir (quoth he) I did watch him all the while. Then Sir (quoth his fellow)
I beseech you ask him, who looked on his book while he watched me. Whereat
his master smiling, took the accuser, and openly in the School whipped him
well, first for his lesson, and after for his accusation.

Of a worshipful Gentleman in Lincolneshire, and his man,
A Certain Gentleman in Lincolneshire, being also a Justice of Peace, had an
old servant many years, called, Adam Milford, who upon a time came unto his
Master and desired him, in regard he had been his servant so many years, he
would now give him something to help him in his old age. Thou say true
(quoth his Master) and I will tell thee what I will do: Now shortly I am to
ride up to London, if thou will pay my cost and charges by the way, I will give
thee shortly such a thing, as shall be worth to thee an hundred pound. I am
content (quoth Adam) and so paid for all the reckoning by the way. So being come
to London, he put his Master in mind of his former promise that he had made to
him. What, did I promise thee any thing? I (quoth Adam) that you did: for you
said, you would give me yt that should be worth to me a hundred pound, for
paying your charges to London. Let me see your writing (quoth his Master.) I
have none (quoth Adam.) Then thou art like to have nothing (quoth his Master:)
And learn this of me, That when thou make a bargain with any man, look
thou take a writing, and beware how thou make a writing to any man. This has
auailed me an hundred pounds in my days. When Adam saw there was no remedy,
he was content: but when they should depart, Adam stayed behind his master, to
reckon with his Hostis; and on his Masters Scarlet cloak borrowed so much
money, as came to all their charges, that he had laid out by the way. His
Master had not ridden past two miles, but it began to rain apace: wherefore
he called for his cloak. His other men made answer, that Adam was behind, and
had it with him. So they shrouded them under a tree, till Adam came. When he
came, his master said al angerly, thou knave, come give me my cloak: have thou
not served me well, to let me be thus wet? Truly sir (quoth Adam) I have laid it
to pawn for all your charges by the way. Why knave, quoth he did thou not
promise to bear my charges to London? Did I quoth Adam? I, quoth his Master,
that thou did. Let Us see, show me your writing of it, quoth Adam. Whereupon
his Master perceiving he was over reached by his man, was feign to send for his
cloak again, and pay the money.

How mad Coomes, when his wife was drowned: sought her against the stream.
COomes of Stapforth, hearing that his wife was drowned, coming from Market,
went with certain of his friends to see if they could find her in the river:
he contrary to all the rest, sought his wife against the stream: which they
perceiving, said, He looked the wrong way. And why so (quoth he?) Because (quoth
they) you should look down the stream, and not against it. Nay Zounds (quoth
he) I shall never find her that way: for she did all things so contrary in
her life time, that now she is dead, I am sure she will go against the
stream.

Of the Farmer in Norfolk, and his Physician.
A Certain rich Farmer having lain long sick in Norfolk, at last sent for a
Physician from the next Market town: who when he came, he felt his pulses, and
viewed his water, and then told them, that he could by no means nor Physic
escape, the disease had so much power in his body, and so went his way. Within
a while after by Gods good help, who is the only giver of all health, the man
escaped, and was well again, and walking abroad, being still very weak and
feeble, he met with his Physician, who being very sore afraid to see him,
asked him, if he were not such a Farmer? Yes truly (quoth he) I am. Art thou
alive or dead (quoth he?) Dead (quoth he) I am: and because I have experience
of many things, God has sent me to take up all Phisicions I can get: which
made the Physician to look as pale as ashes, for fear. Nay, fear not (quoth
the Farmer) though I named all Phisicions, yet I meant thee for none: for I am
sure, a verier Dunce lives not this day, then thou art: and then I should be a
fool to take thee for one, that art not fit to come to any man, but to the
dogs with thy physic: and so he left him: but the Physician never left
quaking till he was out of the sight of him.

How merry Andrew of Manchester served an usurer.
MErry Andrew of Manchester, who is well known, meeting with three or four of
his companions on a Sunday, presently he bade them home to dinner, yet he
neither had meat nor money in his house. Well, but to his shifts he goes, and
went into an old Usurers kitchen, where he was very familier, and privily under
his gown, he brought away the pot of meat, that was sodden for the old misers
dinner. When he came home, he put out the meat, and made his boy scour the
pot, and sent him with it to the Usurer, to borrow two groats on it, and bade
the boy take a bill of his hand: which the boy did, and with the money bought
beer and bread for their dinner. When the Usurer should go to dinner, his
meat was gone: wherefore he all to beat his maid, calling her whore. She
said, there came no body but Andrew there all that day. Then they ashed him.
And he said he had done. But at last they said, that he and no body else had
the pot. By my faith (quoth Andrew) I borrowed such a pot on a time, but I sent
it home again: and so called his witness, and said, it is perilous to deal
with men now a days without writing: they would lay theft to my charge, if I
had not his own hand to show: and so he showed the Usurers bill: whereat the
Usurer stormed, and all the rest fell a laughing.

How he served another, that would have put him down in his merry sayings.
ANdrew once was at Supper with his friends, and among the Company there was
one that spited at his jests and merry conceits. After supper they fell to
reasoning among themselves, which was the most reverent part of man's body. One
said, the eye: another, the nose: a third said, the leg: but Andrew knowing
that he that spited him, would name the contrary, said, the mouth was most
reverent of all. Nay (quoth the other) the part that we fit on is the most
reverent: and because they all meruailed why he should say so, he made this
reason: That he was most honorable, that was first set, and the part that he
named, was first set. Which saying contented them all, and grieved Andrew. The
next day they all met again, and Andrew coming last, found them sitting
altogether. And when he had saluted them all, but his enemy, he turned his
backe-side to him, and let a great fart in his face. At which the fellow being
mighty angry, said, walk knave, with a mischief, where have thou been
brought up? Why disdainest thou, quoth Andrew? if I had saluted thee with my
mouth, thou would have saluted me again: and now when I salute thee with
that part, that by thy own saying, is most honorable, thou call me knave.
Then the company fell a laughing at this jest heartily.

The tale of the Black Moore.
IN the year when fresh wits began to season themselves to abide weathers, it
fell out, it is no matter where, that a certain young fellow, next neighbor
to a fool, having more money in his purse, then he knew well how to use, and
yet willing to adventure a little, to gain more, light into the acquaintance
of a noble crafty companion, who finding his humor, was not to learn how to
fit it: and nothing his foolish kind of fleering, when he came among the
Feminine gender, and how far he would be in love with maid Marian, upon the
first measure of a Morris dance, came one day to him very closely, and getting
him to bear him company alone into the fields* there very soberly, in the way
of much affection, (as he seemed to make show of) told him, that it grieved
him to see so propper a man spend his time so, without a companion fit for his
person, meaning a wife: which, if an Owl would not serve his turn, it had
been pity any better creature should have been bestowed upon him. Yet
forsooth, in great secret he told him, and looked about, as though some body
had heard him that if he would be ruled by him, he would help him to such a
wife, as all the world should not find a better for his purpose. For she should
be fair, and welthy, and wise, and what more, I know not: but she should be
such a one, as he should have cause to give him thanks for. The young green
Goose some what shamefast, and yet foolish enough to harken to an idle tale,
answered him, that though he was not determined to marry, yet if he liked her,
and she him, he did not know what would come to pass: but he would bestow a
quart of Wine to have a sight of her. Not to make a long tale of a little or
nothing, without many hummes or haes it was agreed betwixt them that a day
should be set down when the meeting should be. The place was appointed, the
parties were acquainted, the plot was laid, and the matter performed. But while
the goose was gaping for one bait, he was caught with another. For the cunning
rascal, intending to make himself merry with his money, told him he must be
finely apparrelled, and bestow a Supper or two, in show of a brave mind: but
when he had her once, then let him do as he list. The fool already in a net,
began to tangle himself bravely, made himself new apparel according to the
fashion, gave money to bestow upon a Supper or two: where met him a fine boy
dressed woman like, to whom he made such love, that a dog would not abide to
hear it. The counterfeit young Mistress, with kind words, and knauish wiles,
finding the length of his foot, gat many tokens of his love; as Gloves,
Skarfes, and such like, besides a Ring or two, and a bracelet: all which he did
bestow, solouingly that he must needs be used like himself, and so he was:
for nothing was refused that came so gently to pass. But after many kind
meetings, in the end it was agreed betwixt them, that in a friends house of
his, the matter should be made up: which being little better then a bawdy
house, it served the turn as well as could be. There they met, and being both
agreed, upon assurance of each other love to bed they should go that night,
and be married shortly after, well, that night there lacked no good cheer,
nor Wine to make the heart merry: which being taken in full cups, wrought the
matter as they would have it: for after they had well supped, and sat a while
by a good fire, the good Ass fell a sleep: in which being laid in his bed, in
stead of the fair boy, they had laid a black Moore wench by him, with whom I
know not how he handled the matter: but in the morning, seeing what a sweet
bedfellow he had gotten, suddenly starting out of the bed, ran to his clothes,
and taking them in his hand, ran out into another chamber, crying that he was
undone, for he had lain with the vgliest thing that ever was, and he feared it
was the devil. In which fear blessing himself, as from sprites, running out
of the house, with the expense of his money, almost loss of his wits and
laughed at of all that knew him, like a good woodcocke, fled away so far, that
I never heard more what became of him.

Of a Doctor and his man.
A Doctor that was newly commen'ct at Cambridge, charged his servant that he
had, not to say any thing, but that he should ask of him. Within a while
after, he invited diverse of his friends to dinner, and sent his man to desire
another Doctor to come and dine with him. The fellow went, and the Doctor told
him that he could not come: for he had great business to dispatch that day. So
home he comes, and says nothing. When the guests were all come, they staid
from going to dinner, til the other Doctor came. When they had staid till two
of the clock, he asked his man, if he had bidden him come to dinner? Yes
(quoth his man) that I did. And why does he not then come? Marry, he said, that
he had other business, and he could not come. Why did thou not tell me this
before (quoth his Master) Why Sir (quoth he) because you did not ask me.

Of one that believed his wife better then others.
A Man, whose wife was no better then she should be nor so neither, his friends
counseled him to look better unto her. The man went home, and sharply
rebuked his wife, and told her what his friends said of her. She knowing that
perjury was no worse then adultery, with weeping and swearing denied the same,
and told her husband that they devised those tales in envy, because they saw
them live so quietly. With these words her husband was content and well
pleased. Yet another of his friends was at him again: and said that he old not
well, to let her have her liberty so much. To whom he answered, I pray you tell
me whether knows my wives faults best, she or you? They said she. And she
that I believe better then you all, says you lie all like knaves.

The Harfordshire man's answer to the Abbot of London.
THe Abbot riding in Visitation, came to a place where they had newly builded
their steeple, and put out their Belles to be new cast. The Abbot coming
near the towns end* and bearing no Belles to Ring, in a chase said to one of
the townsmen, have you no Belles in your steeple? No, my Lord quoth he. Then
said the Abbot, Sell away your steeple. Why so, and please your Lordship? Quoth
he, because it stands void. Marry, said the man, we may well also sell away
another thing in our Church, as well as that, and better too. What is that
(quoth the Abbot?) Marry our Pulpit (quoth he) for this seven year have we not
had a Sermon in it, nor I think never shall, but Belles I am sure we shall
have shortly.

Of one that lost his purse.
A Country man coming up to the Term, by misfortune lost his purse: and
because the sum was great, he set up bills in diverse places of London, that
if any man had found such a purse, and would restore it again, he should have
very well for his pains. A Gentleman of the inner Temple, wrote under one of
his bills, that he should come to his chamber, and did write where. So when he
came to the place, the Gentleman asked him, first, what was in his purse?
Secondly, what countey man he was? And thirdly, what was his name? Sir (quoth
he) twenty pound was in my purse. I am half a Welshman, and John up Ianken is
my name. John up Ianken (quoth the Gentleman) I am glad I know thy name: for so
long as I live thou nor none of thy name, shall have my purse to keep. And so
farewell gentle John up Ianken.

Of mad conceited Bulkin.
BVlkin, well known in diverse places for his mad conceits, and his cozenage,
upon a time came into Kent, to Sittingborne: and there in diverse villages
thereabout set up bills, that all sorts of people, young and old, that would
come to Sittingborne, on such a day, they should find a man there, that would
give a remedy for all diseases: and also would tell them what would happen unto
any of them in five or six years after: and he would desire but two pence a
piece of any of them. Whereupon people came of all sorts, and from all places:
so that he gathered of the people that came, to the value of twenty pounds: and
he had provided a Stage, and set it up, and placed a chair where he would
sit: and so they being all come in, and every one set in order, he comes to
the gate, and takes the money from them that gathered it; and bids them look
that good rule be kept, and so they did: also he bid them by and by sound the
drum, and then he would begin his Orations. He when they were gone, with all
have gets him to the backeside, and there having his gelding, gets upon his
back, and away toward Rochester rides he, as fast as ever he could gallop.
Now they thinking he had been preparing of things in a readiness, sounded
the drum. The Audience looked still when he would come. and staying one, two,
three hours, nay more, thought sure they were couzened. Whereupon one of the
company seeing a paper in the chair on the stage, took it, wherein was
written: Now you have heard the sound of the drum.
You may all depart like fools as you come.


Whereupon all of them falling to cursing and swearing, were feign to depart
like fools indeed.

Of the rich Widow of Abington.
THis Widow desired a goship of hers, that she would help her to a husband,
not for any carnal desire she had, but only to keep her goods, and see to her
lands, which is hard (says she) for me to do my self. The woman for all her
talk, yet knew she spoke against her mind: and therefore three or four days
after, she came to her, and said, Gossip, I have found an husband for you, that
is very wise and worldly given: but he lacks the thing you wot of, whereof I am
sure you care not at all. Marry, quoth the widow, let the devil take that
husband, if he will: for though I desire not the bodily pleasure, yet I would
not have him lack that thing, which if we should fall out, should make us
friends again.

Of a Lawyer and his man.
A Worshipful Gentleman, being a counselor, keeping a very good house, kept a
Gentleman's son to be his Clarke, and to wait upon his Table. So one day
having store of guests, there wanted bread on the Table, he beckened to his
man to fetch some: who not understanding him, came to him, and said, Sir, what
would you have? See not knave (quoth he) there is no bread on the Table?
therefore fetch some. There was enough even now (quoth his man) if they would
have let it alone, and not have eaten it up. Another time, his guests having
supt, and ready to depart, he bade his man draw a cup of Wine, to make them
drink before they went. The fellow coming up with the guilt cup covered his
master beckened him to take of the cover. He not understanding, said, Master,
what would you have? Why, knave, take off the cover, quoth he of the cup. Then
hold you the candle, said his man: for I cannot do two things at once.

How finely one sold two loads of hay.
IN London dwelt a mad conceited fellow, which with his wit lived with
Gallants, and domineerd with good fellows. Not long ago, in hay harvest, he
gets a Pitchforke on his neck, went forth toward Istington in the morning,
and meets with two loads of hay, coming toward the City to be sold: for the
which he bargayned with them that owed the same, for thirty shillings. Whither
shall we bring them, quoth they? To the Swan, by Smithfield, said he. And so
went his way, and left them, and to the Swan he went, to the goodman of the
house, and asked if he would buy two loads of hay? Yes, quoth the In keeper,
where be they? Here they come quoth he, What shall I pay quoth the In-keeper?
Four Nobles, quoth make-shift. But at last they were agreed for twenty
shillings. When they were come, he bade them unload the hay. So while they
were unloading, he came to the In holder, and said, I pray you let me have my
money: for while my men unload, I will buy some stuff to have home with me.
The In-holder was content, and gave him his money. And so he went his way. When
the men had unloaded their hay, they came and demanded their money. I have
paid your Master, quoth the In-keeper. What Master quoth they? Marry, quoth he,
he that bade you bring the hay hither. We know him not (quoth they) Nor I
(quoth he) but with him I bargayned, and him have I paid. with you I meddled
not, and therefore go seek him if you will. And so the poor men were
couzened of their hay.

Of a young Gentleman, that would have kissed a maid with a long nose.
A Young Gentleman, none of the wisest, would have kissed a fair maid, that
had something a long nose, who said, How should I kiss you, your nose is so
long, that our lips cannot meet? The maid waxing angry in mind, said, if you
cannot kiss my mouth, Sir, for my nose, you may kiss me there, where as I
have never a nose.

Of one that fell off a tree at Greenested.
THere was a Husbandman that dwelet at Greenested, that was gathering his
fruit, and being hard at work, forgot his footing, and down he comes
tumbling, and with his fall brake one of his ribs. To comfort him came a merry
man his neighbor, who said, he would teach him such a rule, that if he would
follow it, he would never fall off a tree again? Marry, said the hurtman, I
would you had taught me that rule before I fell: nevertheless, because it may
happen to profit me another time, let me hear it. Then said the other, take
heed that you never go faster down, then you go up, but descend as softly,
and you shall never fall.

Of a Scholar and a Ploughman.
A Certain Scholar being in Bedfordshire a rude plough-swaine reproved him for
something, saying, that he could say all his prayer with a hole mind, and
steadfast intention, not thinking of any thing else. Go to, said the Scholar,
say one Pater noster to the end, and think on no other thing, and I will give
thee my horse. That I shall do, quoth the ploughman, and so he began to say,
Our Father which art inheauen, till he came to, Hallowed be thy name: and then
his thought moved him to ask this question, Yea, but shall I have the bridle
and the saddle to? And so he lost his bargain.

How drunken Mullins of Stratford dreamed he found Gold.
MVllins being drunk, and lying in his bed, dreamed that the devil led him
into a field to dig for Gold: and when he had found the Gold, the Devil said,
Thou can not carry it away now, but mark the place, that thou may fetch it
another time. What mark shall I make, quoth Mullins? With Pilgrim salve
(quoth the Devil) for that shall cause every man to shun the place, and for
thee it shall be a special mark. Where he did so, and when he awaked, he
percesued he had foully berayed his bed. Thus between stink and dirt up he
rose, and made him ready to go forth. And last of all, he put on his hat,
wherein also the cat had shit: so, for great stink, he threw away his hat, and
was feign to wash his head. Thus all his Golden Dream was turned to Dirt.

Of a young woman at Barnet, that sorrowed for her husbands death.
IN Barnet was a young woman, that when her husband lay a dying, sorrowed out
of all measure, for fear that she should lose him. Her father came to her,
willing her to be contented: for he had provided her another husband, a far
more goodly man. But she did not only continue in her sorrow, but was also
greatly displeased, that her father made any motion to her of any other
husband. As soon as her other husband was buried, and the Sermon was done, and
they were at dinner, between sobbing and weeping, she rounded her father in
the ear, and said, Father, where is the young man, that you told me should be
my husband? Whereat her father suddenly fell a laughing.

A poor beggars answer to a rich Citizen.
A Poor beggar that was foul, black and loathsome to behold, came to a rich
Citizen and asked his alms. To whom the Citizen said, I pray thee get thee
hence from me, for thou look as though thou came out of hell. The poor
man perceiving he could get nothing, answered, Forsooth sir you say troth, I
came out of hell indeed. Why did thou not tarry there still, quoth the
Citizen? Marry Sir (quoth the beggar) there is no room for such poor beggars
as I am: all is kept for such Gentlemen, as you are.

The subtilty of a Lawyer repaied with the like subtilty.
THere was an unthrift in London, that had received of a Merchant certain
wares, which came to fifty pounds, to pay at three months, and at three
months: but when he had it, he consumed and spent it all: so that at the six
months end, there was not any left to pay the Merchant: wherefore the Merchant
arrested him. When he saw there was no other remedy, but either to pay the
debt, or go to prison, he sent to a subtle lawyer, and asked his counsel how
he might clear himself of that debt. What will thou give me (quoth he) if I
do? Five marks (quoth the other) and here it is, and as soon as you have
done, you shall have it. Well, said the Lawyer, but thou must be ruled by my
counsel, and do thus: When thou come before the Judge, whatsoever he
says unto thee, answer thou nothing, but cry, Bea, still, and let me alone
with the rest. So when he came before the Judge, he said to the debtor, Do
thou owe this Merchant so much money? Bea (quoth he.) What, beast (quoth he?)
answer to that I ask thee. Bea (quoth he) again. Why how now, quoth the
Judge? I think this fellow has gotten a sheep tongue in his head: for he
answers in the sheep language. Why Sir, quoth the Lawyer, do you think this
Merchant that is so wise a man, would be so foolish as to trust this Idiot with
fifty pounds worth of ware, that can speak never a word? no Sir I warrant you.
And so persuaded the Judge to cast the Merchant in his own suite. And so the
Judge departed, and the court brake up. Then the Lawyer came to his Clyent, and
asked him his money. since his promise was performed, and his debt discharged,
Bea (quoth he.) Why, thou needst not cry Bea any longer, but pay me my money,
Bea (quoth he again. Why, thou will not serve me so, I hope (quoth the Lawyer)
now I have used thee so kindly. But nothing, but Bea, could Master Lawyer get
for his pains, and so was feign to depart.

A tale of a merry Christmas Carroll, sung by women.
THere was sometime an old Knight, who being disposed to make himself merry,
in a Christmas time, sent for many of his tenants, and poor neighbors, with
their wives to omner: when having made meat to be set on the Table, would
suffer no man to drink, till he that was master over his wife, should sing a
Carroll, to excuse all the company: Great niceness there was, who should be
the Musician, now the Cuckoo time was so far off. Yet with much ado, looking
one upon another, after a dry hemme or two, a dreaming companion drew out as
much as he durst, toward an ill fashoned ditty. When having made an end, to
the great comfort of the beholders, at last it came to the women's table, where
likewise commandment was given, that there should no drink be touched, till
she that was master over her husband, had sung a Christmas Carroll: whereupon
they fell all to such a singing, that there was never heard such a
catterwalling piece of Music. Whereat the Knight laughed heartely, that it did
him half as much good, as a Corner of his Christmas Pie.

A jest of a Felon at Oxford.
THe Assizes being at Oxford, among the rest, there was a Felon that had the
benefit of the Clergy, to have his book. but he could read never a word. Which
a scholar perceiving, stood behind, and prompt him with his verse that he was
to read; and coming to the latter end, he held his thumb upon the book,
that the scholar could not see: wherefore he bade him softly take away thy
thumb: he thinking that the same was so in the book, said aloud, take away
thy thumb. Which the Judge perceiving, bade take him away. And so he was
condemned: and being upon the ladder, ready to dye, and the rope about his
neck, he said. Have at yon Dasie, that grows yonder. And so leaped of the
gallows.

Of a Gentleman of Norfolk and his Host.
A Gentleman of Norfolk, as he was riding toward London in the winter time;
and sitting by the fire side, with his Host, until supper could be made ready,
there happened a Rabbet to be at the fire a rosting, which the Gentleman
perceived to be very lean, as he thought. Quoth he unto his Host, we have
Rabbels in our country, that one will drip a pottle. and bast it self. The
In-keeper wondered with himself, and did think it to be a lie, but would not
say so, for manners sake, and because he was his guest: but thinking to requite
him, Now truly, quoth he, it is very strange: but I can tell you of as strange
a thing as that. Which the Gentleman very desirous to hear: quoth he, I had as
sine a Grayhound, as any was in England: and if I had happened to go abroad to
my grounds, the Grayhound would always go with me. And sometime there would start
out a Hare before me, which my Grayhound would quickly catch. It fortuned that
my dog died, and for very love that I bare to him, I made me a bottle of his
skin, to carry drink withal. So, one time in hay heruest, my folk being
making of hay in my grounds, and the weather hot, I filled my bottle with
beer, to carry to them, least they should lack drink. And as I was going
along, there start a Hare out of a bush before me; and as it was my custom, I
cried Now, now, now. My bottle leaping from my girdle, ran and caught the Hare.
What quoth the Gentleman, me thinks that should be a lie. Truly sir, said
the In-keeper, so did I think yours was. The Gentleman perceiving that he was
requited for his kindness, held himself contented.

A tale of a Printer and a Gentlewoman.
AS a merry conceited Printer was going through S. Martins in London, with a
friend of his, being merrily disposed, quoth he, I will lay a quart of Wine
with you, that I will go and kiss yonder Gentlewoman, who is coming on the
other side of the way. Will thou, quoth the other? and I will lay it with thee.
The wager being laid, presently this Printer crosses the way, and met this
Gentlewoman, and with cap and bended knee salutes her, and taking her by the
hand, kissed her. The Gentlewoman somewhat abashed at this sudden salutation,
and could not call to mind where she had seen or known him: Truly sir, said
she (and made a low cursie) you must pardon me: for as yet I do not know you.
Truly, nor I you, Mistress: but I hope there is no hurt done. So saluting her,
went his way leaving the Gentlewoman much ashamed, and much laughing to the
beholders.

A tale of a Gentleman and his man.
A Gentleman upon a time having a man that could write and read well, rebuked
him one day for idleness, saying if I had nothing to do, I would for the better
comfort of my wit, set down all the fools I know. The fellow making little
answer, took his pen and ink, and as his Master had wished him, fell a
setting down a Catalogue of all the fools, that he was well acquainted with:
among whom, and first of al, he set down his Master, who reading his name,
would needs know the nature of his folly. Marry (quoth he) in lending your
Couzin twenty pound this other day: for I think he will never pay you. Yea,
but (quoth his Master) what if he do pay me? Then (quoth his man) I will put
out your name, and put down his for a fool.

A fray betwixt a clown and a Pasty of Venison.
A Certain rich Counselor of the common law, who kept his Terms at an Inn
of Court near yt Citte of London, and his vacations in the Country, used
every Sunday to have one Client or other (whose purses paid for it soundly
before hand) at dinner with him, to the end (I guess) that his kind
entertainment might cause them to retain him in their Law-causes for counsel.
Now it chanced one Sunday in the last long vacation that a silly Rustiche
fellow that never or seldom tasted better cheer then Rye bread and whey
butter, being seated at the tail or lower end of this Counselors table saw a
hot Reddeere Pasty standing under his nose, and taking it to be a brown loaf
(as indeed it was like one) he took it out of the dish, set it against his
breast, and whipping out his tool no larger then a Cooks mincing knife, he made
a breach in the walls and thinking to pass quite through the town viz. the
Pasty without detriment, a troop of hot shot viz. the fat liquor lying in
Ambush suddenly sallied forth, and gave the inuader such hot welcome, that
between rage and weeping he flung away his weapon and retired swearing a great
Oath that he never saw Porredge baked in a brown loaf before. The Counselor
with the rest of his meal mates beholding this Issue of ignorance viz. his
Pasty cut up the wrong way, his table-clo^h embrodered with baked ^utter and
Deeres grease, his fool hardy guest making faces like Singer the clown when
his Master in the play bade him untruss, and blowing his tawny clutch like a
Chauncery Clarke at Westminster Hall in a Hillary Term gave him counsel that
he should never assault such a Town again, till the breach were made before
him, and so with much pain and more shame he departed hastily to get a cooler
for his heat, leaving many there to laugh and jest at his simplicity.

A deceit of the hope of the covetous, with a Turnep.
THe King of France, Charles the fifth, being presented by a poor Gardener,
with a Turnep of a huge greatness, gave him for his reward five hundred
rrownes, giving him charge to lay it up, and keep it safely for him, till he
did call for it. Which bounty being noted of all his Court, and chiefly
observed by one covetous rich officer of his house, caused him, in hope of some
greater recompense for a greater present, to present his Majesty, with a fair
and goodly horse: which the King thankfully receiving, nothing his miserable
nature, and that his gift rather did proceed, from hope of gain, then good
will, called for the Turnep; wherewith he rewarded the miserable Ass: at
which, he no less fretted, then all that saw it, bartely laughed. And so I
wish all such churles to be served.

A pretty tale of a Fox and an Ass.
IN the time out of mind, when men wrote they cared not what, I find a
discourse of a Lion, which being King of beasts, upon some, I know not what
cause, called a Parliament. whereto a great number of his subjects, being come
as near to his presence as they durst, he caused a proclamation to be
pronounced to the whole assembly, that what beast soever bare a horn in his
head, should not after that day presume to set foot within that chief wood of
his, without his especial license, and whosoever did violate his command,
should be held as a traitor, and suffer death, without further judgment. It
fell out within few days after that, a Fox having one night met with a breed
of young Geese, besides Rabbets and Chickins, and having drawn them to a bush,
under which he had laid them, far from the high way, chanced in the morning
to epsy a poor Ass coming toward him, to whom after a few salutations, and
questions touching his passage that way, he told the summary of the aforesaid
proclamation: who answered him, that it nothing touched him, for that he had
no horns. Oh, (quoth the Fox) take heed, thou have long ears, and if the
Lion will say, that they be horns, then they are as ill as horns: but if thou
will help me to carry a little poultry, that I have taken here for the Court,
I will warrant thee to go and come safe. The poor Ass, whose back was made
for the purpose, to bear the Foxes burden, followed his counsel, and took up
the poultry, which the Fox made shift to lay upon his back: wherewith he was
no sooner come to the wood side, but a Wolf espying him, ran toward him, of
whom not a little afraid, he flung down his burden, with this outcry: let
never an Ass follow a Fox, lest he meet with a Wolf at his iourneys end.

How a woman served a Glutton, but yet he was too good for her.
NOt unlike to Mother Bunch our Hostess, an old woman in Sussex, that brewed
good Ale, there dwelt, that had every week a lusy eater, and as tall a
drinker, used to her house: but when he had served himself, he would not pay
any thing at all. The woman grieuing to be thus used still, knew not what
remedy to have: for with his swaggering he domineerd, because he had been a
Soldier. One Tuesday morning he comes thither, saying, Hostess, what shall we
have to breakfast? I have nothing of your price (quoth she) at this time.
Whereupon he began to swear so pitifully, that he so feared the woman, that she
set a dish of sweet butter before him, that she had kept for others, that were
to come thither: whereof he began to eat so greedily, that she feared he would
eat up all. And thereupon she slept to the door, as though one had knocked,
and came in again, and said to him, Sir, there is one at the door would
speak with you. Whereupon he went to the door, In the mean space she
thruste his knife in the fire, and heat it almost red hot. In comes he again,
saing there was no body there. Then belike he is gone, quoth she. He taking
his knife again, would have cut the butter, but it fell still from the knife
whereat he wonding, said, Hostess, I marvel what ailes my knife! Truly,
Sir, your knife blushes to see his master so unreasonable. In faith, said he,
if this knife blush, his fellow here yet looks pale: and so draws out his
other knife, and eats up the rest of the butter clean.

The answer of a Gentleman's man to his Master.
A Worshipful Gentleman in London, having on a time invited diverse of his
friends to supper to his house, and being at supper, the second course coming
in, the first was one of the Gentleman's own men, bringing a Capon, and by
chance stumbling at the portall door, the Capon flew out of the platter, and
ran along the bords to the upper end of the Table where the Master of the house
sat, who making a jest of it, said, By my faith, it is well, the Capon is
come first, my man will come anon too, I hope. by and by came his man, and
takes up the Capon, and lays it in the platter, and sets it on the board. I
thank you sir quoth his Master, I could have done so my self. I, quoth his
man, it is a small matter, sir, for one to do a thing, when he sees it done
before his face.

Of one that coosened himself.
TWo schoollers of Oxford coming to London and having little money betwixt
them they alighted in great Wickham at an June and there called for two
peny-worth of Eggs, which being brought and quickly eaten, they paid the
reckoning, got upon horseback and rid forwards on their Journey, and by the
way quoth the one to the other, I have coosend mine Host finely, how I prithee
(quoth the other) why quoth he I have eaten a whole chicke in one of my Eggs
and paid nothing for it.

Certain sullen speeches of Diogenes to Alexander.
DIogenes walking on a time in a Churchyard near unto a highway, that lay in
a valley, espied Alexander with a great train a far off upon a hill, coming
down toward that town, where the Church stood. Whereupon, minding to put
Alexander out of such proud humors, as he doubted of him at that time to be
possessed with, ran in all have unto the Sexton of the Church, for the key of
the door, within which lay the dead men's sculles, and bones, which had been
dug up: where taking out as many as he could well carry in his arms, he
laid them one by one, in the way where Alexander was to pass: who being come
somewhat near unto him, and seeing his pains, in laying of the bones* asked
what he meant by it? Why (quoth Diogenes) I have heard that here have been as
well the bones of Princes, as poor people, buried here in this Churchyard: and
now I have been laying them together, to see, if I can find any difference,
whereby I might find which were the Princes, and which the Beggars: but truly
they are so like one another, that I find no difference at all. Well (quoth
Alexander) this is one of thy dogged humors: but how dare thou thus trouble
me in my time of pleasure, knowing that I can take thy life from thee, if I
list? Why (quoth Diogenes) do thou know, that I will die in spite of thy
teeth, and therefore care not for thy threats, knowing death to be the worst
that can come of them, and my offense no greater then this in deserving of
them. Which answer Alexander well noting* knowing his nature, left him to his
sullin humors.

Of a drunken fellow that fell in the fire.
THere was a notable drunkerd of Rochester, whom his wife persuaded as much as
in her lay, to leave that sin: but the more she spoke, the worse he was, and
because she controuled him, he would al to beat her. So she let him alone, and
because his use was still to stay out till almost midnight, she would go to
bed, and bid her maid tarry up for him, and make a good fire: and so she did.
One night when he came home, the maid let him in, and he stood by the fire
and warmed himself: but his head being to heavy for his body, down he fell in
the fire all along, the maid ran crying? Oh, Mistress, Mistress, my Master is
fallen into the fire. No force, maid (quoth she) let him take his pleasure in
his own house a Gods name, where he will himself.

A pretty tale of a Fox and a Goose.
IN the time when birds and beasts could speak, and the winds could carry many
tales through the wood, as it is written by some idle head, there came a Fox
out of a wood, unto a country house, there near to adjoining, where finding a
brood Goose, within a kind of open pen, saluted her in this manner: How do
you sister? I heard you were not well of late, which made me come to visit you,
as one, who would be glad to do you any good that lay in his poor power. The
goose sitting over her young brood crowding, made him this answer: Truly, I am
not well, yet I think I and mine should do much better, if you would not come
so often to visit us: yet for that I have a pain in my back, I pray you come
in and feel how it is swelled, that you may the better teach me what to apply
unto it. The Fore very glad of this unlooked for kindness, hoping to have that
he came for, put his head no sooner within the door, but a dog lying closely
hidden, caught him by the nose, and biting off a piece of his chap, with a
sudden snatch let him go. The poor Fox making no little have home to his
borough, no sooner came among his fellow Foxes but with great sighs told them,
that he was bitten with a Goose. Which the bitch-foxe hearing, with an open
mouth ran at him, and beat him out of the hold, with this shameful reproach:
Go coward, bite ber again, thou shall never come within my borough, to be
bitten of a Goose, and bring away never a feather.

Of King Henry, and the countriman.
KIng Henry riding a hunting, in the County of Kent, he came by chance to a
great gate, that he must needs pass through, and in the way there stood a
ploughman, to whom the King said: I prithee good fellow, open the gate. The
fellow perceiving it was the King, stood like an Image, and said: No, and it
shall please your Grace, (quoth he) I am not worthy to be in that office, but I
will fetch Master Cooper, that dwells but two miles hence, and he shall open
you the gate. And so ran away, as fast as ever he could.

Of the old man of Monmouth, that gave his son all his goods in his life time.
IN Monmouth dwelt an ancient man, of fair possessions and great lands, having
but one son to enjoy all his substance. His son being married, he gave him
all that he had, and so would live free from all wordly matters in his old age
with his son in his own house. After the deed of gift was made, a while the
old man sat at the upper end of the Table, afterward they set him lower about
the middle of the Table: next, at the Tables end: and then among the servants.
And last of all, they made him a couch behind the door, and covered him with
old sackcloth, where, with grief and sorrow the old man dyed. When the old man
was buried, the young man's eldest child said unto him: I pray you father, give
me this old sackcloth. What would thou do with it, said his father?
Forsooth said the boy, it shall serve to cover you, as it did my old
graundfather.

How a woman, to hide a small fault, showed a greater.
A Woman at Romford, had for some cause shaven her head, and newly as she had
put her kerchiefe of her head, one of her neighbors called for her hastily in
the street. When her neighbor saw her so, she blamed her, for coming abroad
bare-headed. She remembering herself, whipped up her clothes from behind her,
over her head. And so to hide her head, she showed her bare tail.

How a mad man in Gloucester shire answered a Gentleman.
IN Gloucester shire dwelt one that cured frantic men in this manner: When
their fit was on them, he would put them in a gutter of water, some to the
knees, some to ye middle, and some to the neck, as the disease was on them. So
one that was well amended, standing at the gate, by chance, a gentleman came
riding by with his hauks, and his Haunds. The fellow called him to him, and
said, Gentleman, whither go you? On hunting, quoth the gentleman. What do you
with all those Kytes and Dogs? They be Hawks and Hounds, quoth the
Gentleman. Wherefore keep you them, quoth the other? Why quoth he, for my
pleasure. What do they cost you a year to keep them? Forty pounds quoth the
Gentleman. And what do they profit you, quoth he? Some ten pounds (quoth the
Gentleman.) Get thee quickly hence, quoth the fellow: for if my Master find
thee here, he will put thee into the gutter up to the throat.

Of an Hermit by Paris, that lay with all the chiefest gentlewomen in the
Country.
THis notable knave, that under color of holiness, enticed all the chiefest
Matrones of the Country to folly; at last, his doings were detected and known,
and he was brought before the Duke of Anioy, which to hear the number of them
for his disport, called his Secretary to write them down. The Secretary bade
him recount them. The Hermit named to the number of xxvii. of the Dukes
servants wives, and others, and then stood still and said nothing. Is there no
more, quoth the Duke? No, and it shall like your Grace, quoth the Hermit. Tell
troth quoth the Secretary for if thou do not, thou shall be sharply
punished, Then said the Hermit, sighing, to make up the xxviii. write thine
own wife, in the number. Whereupon, the Secretary for very grief, let fall
his pen. And the Duke, laughing heartily, said, I am glad, that he that with so
great pleasure, has heard the faults of other men's wives, should now come into
the same number himself.

The miserable niggardice of a Justice.
A Hoary-headed miserable Justice, came to London, to the Term: And lying in
Fleet Street, a company of excellent Musicians, in a Morning, played very
early at his chamber. But being loath to bestow his money so vainly, bad his
man tell them, he could not as then hear their Music for he lamented for
the death of his Mother. Wherefore they went their way, for their hope was
deceived. A Gentleman, a friend of his in London, hearing the same, came to
comfort him, and asked him when his Mother dyed? Faith (quoth he) some xvi.
years ago. When his friend understood his deceit, he laughed heartily.

A witty answer of a Magistrate to a malicious accusar of an offender.
A Malicious fellow, willing to bring a neighbor of his unto all the disgrace
he could devise, and shrewdly suspecting him, to have more then a months mind
to a fine Mistress near unto him, oftentimes watching his going in, and coming
out of her house. One day among other in the evening, noting his long stay,
suspected that there was somewhat to do more then all the parrish was
acquainted with, and therefore seeing the maid gone forth upon some errand,
being very early in the morning, suddenly stepped in with a companyon of his,
and took them together at their exercise: which being glad of, and that he
had witness to make his matter good, runs to the Magistrate of the City,
who had to deal with such persons, and such cases, and told him as much as he
had seen: with, oh Sir, I assure you he is a perilous man for a woman, and to
tell you the troth, we took him in bed with her: what say you to such a
fellow? The Magistrate somewhat allied unto the young man, and wishing rather a
secret amendment, then an open reprehension, gave him this answer: Truly, for
the matter it is not well: but for being taken in bed with her. in truth, I can
think no otherwise, but he was a slugard: I know not what to say to him. The
accusar seeing the people smile, and himself mocked with this speech, did no
further aggrauate the matter, but with a flea in his ear, went away with his
malicious humor.

A Tale of a merry young Gentleman.
A Gentleman coming to bait at an Inn in Egham, called to have a cloth
laid, and went up into a Chamber, the Chamberlain comes presently after, and
brings up a cloth, trenchers, bread and salt, which being laid, he went down
for the meat. Meane-while the Inne-keeper comes up, and entertaines the
Gentleman (as most of his trade will do) only to win favor and get
custom. And seeing neither Beer nor Napkin on the Board, snatches up one of
the Trenchers in a rage, and throws it out of the Window at his servant. The
Gentleman seeing that, takes the Bread and Salt, and Table-cloath, and throws
all out at the Window after it. The Host asked him what he meant by that. Why
mine Host (quoth the Gentleman) I thought you would have had me dined beneath.

A tale of a Miller.
A Millers man that never knew what belonged to wit or good manners, brought a
sack of corn ground to a Gentlewomans house being a widow, and keeping house
in Essex, who sitting at her door when this dunce came, asked him what he had
brought, sir reverence of your worship (quoth he) my master has sent home
your corn forsooth, whereupon she willed him to lead his horse into the
stable: and while her men unloaded him, come in and eat somewhat, O no quoth my
Abraham Ninnie, my horse has a great laske with lying in the open fields, and
should he come in he would be-pisse your worships stable, and eat out of all
measure.

The Bakers doozen of Gulles.
The first Gull, upon the wager of the Horse and the Cow for good travel.
THere was sometime, not many years since, a mercy conceited man, of what
profession, I do not well remember, who having occasion to take post from some
haven Town near the Sea, came to the Mayor of the Town, to complain uthe
Constable of the Town, for his little honesty in proaiding him such ill
horses, knowing the nature of his business, and the have it required. The Mayor
looking upon them, as tne that had not often made any posting iourneis, told
him, hat though they were not so good as he had seen, yet they could serve
the turn well enough, and that as then he hought the Town would yield him no
better. Whereupon the poster told him, that if he were no better furnished,
that in his Country a man would teach a young Cow, to carry him further in a
day, then the best horse in that Town: and for a need he could do as much
there: and thereupon he would lay twenty pounds. The Mayor discontented with
his speech, told him he would lay the wager, took money in earnest, the words
were set down, witness set to their hands that in xxiiii. hours he would so
diet a young Cow, that she should carry him further in a day, then the best
horse in the Shire. The Cow was brought into a stable, hay, and water set to
her, and in the morning when he should ride, a horse brought thither to the
place, which presently he would have bound to the Cow: which being too heavy
for the Cow to carry, they all found the deceit: and the poor Mayor being
made a good Gull, was forced to confess his folly, and to give the poster a
good piece of money, to be rid of his wager.

The second Gull, upon the wager of leaping.
A Certain young well limmed, broad shouldred, and milpost-legged young man,
(who it should seem) with following of hounds, was used to leaping of ditches:
and so with use grew to be held the captain leaper of that side of the
country. One day among other, wherein games came about the country; best,
second, and third, a great assembly of the youth of diverse parishes striving
before their best beloved, who had the lightest pair of heels, put in their
pieces of money, each one for the best, or the rest, as it fell out. This
gallant yonker advancing himself, being untrust for the purpose, offers any
man a foot before him, for the price of a quarter of the best malt in the
country. But while no man would meddle with him, one mad-headed fellow
standing by him, suddenly stepped to him, and told him, that if he might choose
his ground, there upon the ground before him, that he would adventure upon the
advantage of a foot before him, at the vprising or standing, he would leap
with him for forty shillings. The wager was laid, the money put into a box,
and the witnesses came to see the leaping: when he that took the foot before
him, took his ground just before a great Elm tree, that grew on the green
hard by: where being able to leap no further then the tree, the other finding
himself deceived, was contented to loose part of his money, to learn him
better wit: and so like a good Gull went his way.

The third Gull, upon a wager of going as fast as a horse, and go all one way.
A Dapper young fellow, upon a time having bought him a pretty ambling gelding,
was for certain days almost never off from his back: and riding him no long
journey, but as it were betwixt London and Mile-end, in the view of many
people, willing to make show of his horse, or horsemanship, sitting as upright
as a picture of Rye dowe, a subtle companion of his acquaintance, meaning to
make a Gull of his mastership, told him it was a pretty Nagge, but he was but
slow pased, and that he would lay five pounds, that he would go as far in a
day on foot, as he should ride his horse, and go both one way. The fine and
all so fine, being much moved, to hear his horse so disgraced, accepted his
offer, laid the wager, and they put the money into a man's hands of good worth,
that stood by. Which done the merry fellow standing in the high way, went
backwards. Which the horseman assaying to do, not used to those kind of
tricks, his horse rising aloft, fell backwards with him, with danger of his
life, when rising up, and seeing the other still going backewards, called to
him, and with confession of loss, taking back what he would give him,
remained a good Gull for his labor.

The fourth Gull, upon a wager to hang himself,
Upon a time, I have forgotten when, in a place out of mind, met a company of
good fellows, which being likely to be some Inn, while the people were all
set at dinner, came in an old rich Farmer of the country, who being well lyned
in his purse, and therefore might have the merier heart, was so full of talk
at dinner, that scarce any man else was heard at the table. Which a Scholar
sitting among them, well observing, and withal seeing him well tickled in the
head with the good drunk, upon the sudden fell into this speech with him:
Honest man, I pray you pardon me, if I say any thing that may offend you; I am
sorry to see the evil that is toward you: you have been very merry, but I
fear, you will never be so again in this company: for I see in your eyes a
spirit of madness, which will very speedily bring you to your unhappy end:
for indeed, within this hour, you will hang your self in the stable, upon
one of the great beams: and that I will lay a good wager, either with you, or
any of this company. The old man much moved at this speech, and yet noting his
gravity, told him, that he was sorry to see a Scholar have so much learning,
and so little wit: but my friend (quoth. he) if you have any money in your purse,
you shall be rid of it, when you will, upon that wager. Whereupon the Scholar
gave him ten shillings, and told him, that if be did not hang himself, within
an hour after, and first come into the house, and ask forgiveness of all the
house, he should give him but ten pound for it. The Farmer took the money,
called in for wine and sugar, and made merry withal. At the hours end, he
came to take his leave of the Scholar, and his company, who told him, that he
must pay ten pounds, for that he had not hanged himself. At which words, he
finding the deceit, confessed his ignorance, paid for the good cheer, and
trebling the Scholars money, like a true Gull got him home again.

The fifth Gull, that lost the wager upon the great Hog.
IN the midst of the term, at a certain Alehouse or Inn, where covetous
wretches set their half starued horses, and themselves feed upon brown
bread, and red Herrings, using after supper to sit sixteen at a faggot and a
pot of beer, and inquiring of mine host, what news in the town? a cunning
companion, that could feed upon the brains of a cunny, gat him a lodging in
the house: and getting a company of old written papers, bound up in scrowles,
like law cases, would play the penny-father among them, till he had made his
market with some of them: so holding an even hand among them, talking of many
idle things, atlast brake out into a great admiration of the strange wonders of
the world, and of all not the least, of a huge great hog, that he had seen
in the county of Lincoln, near unto the Fens, where were three Sowes that
were so high, that the tallest man in the company standing upright, let him
reach as high as he could, he should not touch the back of it, and those three
Sowes with their pigs, were a poor man's, that would sell them for twelve
pounds, and if he had had money, he would have bought them, and have gotten a
hundred pounds by the bargain. Four or five of those greedy Asses, giving no
little ear to his talk, entreated him that he would bring them thither, and
they would bear his charges. Bnt he, only leaning to one of them, whose purse
he knew to be full of money, secretly in a morning stole away with him, and rode
down with him into the country: where keeping of a certain blind house of
lodging, kept the poor man at his house five or six days, to see these great
sowes, and in the end brought him unto a pretty Sow, by whom he caused him to
stand upright, and reach up his hand as high as he could, when he asked him, if
he did not touch her back? Who answered, No: for he was too high above it.
Well (quoth he) this is the Sow that you shall have for four pounds of your
money that I have received of you, which he had delivered him the night before.
The poor man, finding his greedines kindly met withal, and that he must take
the Sow, or lose all, was content with loss of half of his money, to return
again, as good a gull as he went out.

The sixth Gull upon a lifting Dog.
AN idle headed fellow, new come out of the Country, and determining, after a
little money spending, to return home with a budget full of news, met by
chance with an odd wagge, cousin Germane to a Page: who finding his humor, and
meaning to fit him in his kind, fell into this honest kind of parlee with
him: Oh old huddle and twang, what news in the country, that you are come to
town? have thou been at a play yet? Yea (quoth. the good clown) that I have,
two or three. But Sir, what news where you keep? I am sure you hear all
the world. No great news (quoth the wag) but only of the huge great lifting
dog, that came lately out of Barbary: they take but two pence a piece of
every one that sees him: he is at the sign of the Carnation Hedgehog in
Westminster, near to the Gatehouse: go thither when thou will in my name, and
thou shall see him for a penny, the poor Ass little mistrusting the boys
waggery, went in all haste, seeking for such a sign as was not to be found. But
being demanded wherefore he sought? one of the Pages coparteners in his tricks,
told him, if he would give him but a quart of wine, he would bring him to the
Dog. The fellow weary with seeking for the Carnation Hedgehogge, was contented,
for the abridging of his further trauile, to give him both wine and sugar, with
such appurtenances as cost his purse above an ordinary. Which done, and the
shot paid, out this youngster lead this little wit, from one lane to another,
till having traced most streets to be thought upon, at last he brought him out
of the towns end, to a poor woman's house, that kept a little Iseland curr:
whom showing unto this good Goose, Look you (quoth he) he lifts up his tail
so high, that you may kiss his arse* if you list: and with those words,
laughing, ran away, crying, Oh Gull, Gull, get thee home into the country, and
carry news of the lifting Dog.

The seventh Gull, for the Pigges, that were Hens.
Travailing upon the way to London, out of what country* I know not, a
certain pretty quick witted fellow, ouertooke a company of horsemen, who to
pass away the time, fell to talk of such things, as came in their heads: Some
of horses, some hawks, some hounds, some hares, and some connies: but toward
their iourneys end, they fell to talking of wonders, each one recounting what
he had seen: Some the long ditch at Newmarket, other the stones by Salisburie,
and some the top of Powles and other of the Lions in the Tower: but among all
this, the youth in a basket that ouertooke the company, began to tell of a most
miraculous thing that he had seen, and that but two nights before: that in a
town some forty miles behind him, at the sign of the whip and the Eg-shell,
he did see twelve pigges in a yard, going by two Sowes, and in the morning they
were all hens. Many seemed to wander at it, and the more at his sober
protesting of his truth in his tale, Whereupon, one simple man of the company,
desirous to carry news home of such things as he had seen abroad, desired
this fellow at his coming back again, to bear him company to that town,
and into his way back again, and he would bear part of his charges, for his
kindness. This being betwixt themselves agreed upon, their business being
dispatched together, they rid home together: where, being well dried after a
wet journey, going to supper, they had one of the pigges well roasted in his
house, whose name was hen: and in the morning, asking for these hen Pigges,
he showed him all the rest. Wherewith finding himself sweetly deceived,
ashamed to tell the world how he was abused, like a good poor Gull, got him
out of the country.

The eight Gull, upon the Gardens.
IT fell upon a time, much about Sturbridge fair, that many mad people,
minding to throw away a little money, for lack of company in the city, would
needs go make merry in the country, among whom was one ially lusty wench,
that had made herself fat with good ale and laughing. This piece of
houshould-stuffe, being hostess of I know not what Inn, say her husband what
he list, would make one among her friends: and being some three or fourscore
miles out of London, in a country market Town, where were some such girls,
as thought their pennies good silver, and their ware worth money: After they
had been merry some few days, and almost emptied a poor tavern of all his
runlets, inquiring as the fashion is, after news, this good mistress, falling
to her turn to talk of wonders, told them, that one of the greatest wonders,
that ever she saw, or heard of, was of late in the city, done by a stranger
touching Gardens, and the preservation of flowers, for she had seen it with
her eyes, that he had taught diverse how to take in their gardens every night at
their windows, and let them out again every morning. Which thing the
neighbors that came with her, seemed to sooth up, that they had heard of the
like, but they had never seen it. But she with solemn oaths still affirmed,
that she had seen it, and could bring them to it. While they all gave ear
unto it, one chief woman of the company* who had her purse well lyned, and
cared not for to spend a little money for the satisfying of her humor, upon a
belief of her solemn protestations, told her, that if she might be assured to
come to the sight of that she spoke of, she would take some of her neighbors
with her, and she would bear her company back to London. To be short, the
matter was agreed upon, the wonder was believed, the day appointed for their
journey, and together they came to London, where they lay all at her house, had
good cheer, and paid well for it. But after that they had gone abroad with
the hostess, to see sights, Cheapeside, the Exchange, Westminster, and London
bridge, had trod the top of Powles, under their feet, been at Bear garden,
seen a play, and had made a tavern banquet, looking into their purses for to
discharge their expenses, were willing to see this strange sight of these
Gardens, which she had daily promised to bring them to, but still making
excuse, that they were in the country, and not yet come to London again, that
had such gardens to be seen: in the end brought them into a little lane,
whereout at a garret window, she showed them a poor widow setting ont
certain boords, and upon them certain earthen pots, in which were diverse
kinds of flowers, and herbs, as Gillyflowers, Carnations, and such like. The
woman seeing her self, with her company mocked with this jest, made little
show of anger, but seemed to laugh it out, and with this trick of mistress
Hestesse, to gather some money with her wit, took a Gull with her into the
country, to feed a soole when she found him.

The ninth Gull, that wished for the wood.
AMong mad country wenches, that when they sit a milking, will be talking of
their sweet hearts, it was my hap not long since, lying close under a bush,
to hear a merry tale, of a bird little wiser then a Woodcocke. There was a
young fellow that was well furnished for implements of household, mary his wealth
was not great, and his wit but little, and his spirit of a weak constitution.
For as it fell out, a rich widow, that was past a girl, and therefore knew
what to do with a good thing, when she had it, hearing diverse reports of such
persons, as she was wished to make much of, among all, she heard of one young
man, a neighbors son of hers, to be a sufficient man to do her much good
service, either within the house, or without, either for plowing, or threshing,
or sowing, or such country work, as best fitted her occupation. This yongman
she sent for, and as far as modesty might, she made show of her affection:
which the Goose not perceiving, she carried him one day alone into her chamber,
where she told him, she must have his help to remove a chest. The fellow
understanding nothing more then was told him, went up with the widow, and all
alone from one chamber to another, the doors shutting after the^: where she
often smiling at his either shamefastnes or foolishnes, in the end carried him
to a chamber, where stood a chest that he could not remove: when, saying he
would fetch company to help him, she answered no, now she was otherwise
minded. And so leading down again the good Ass, she never sent more for
him. A friend of his, meeting of him coming forth, hoping of his good hap,
knowing his being above with her alone, asked him how he had sped. Whose
answer was, Oh, I wished I had had her in the wood, and then I would have told
her my mind. Now what a notable Gull was this, I leave to all good humored
wenches to consider.

The tenth Gull that shook his gloves.
THis tale was no sooner ended, but another wench began to quite her in this
sort: Nay, then I will tell thee of as good an Ass, as that was for his life.
In our Town not long ago, one of the chief of our parish, who was twice
Churchwarden, and in election to be Bailife, a good fat gross churl, having a
good house of his own, and well to take to, married a widow, that dwelled
three miles off: who, having good cattle, and corn, and some household of her
own, by the motion of good friends, made a match together. But this churl,
being troubled with some sixteen diseases, lay himself in one bed, and his
wife in an other by him: who having a kind of more then good liking to a young
man in the house, some kinsman of his, with sheepes-eyes, and smiles, and such
odd kind of wicked kindness, she made him understand her mind: and being
agreed one night to come into her chamber, when he was a sleep, she told him
for fear of the worst, that he should take a pair of her gloves, and flap
them too and fro in his hand, which would make a noise like unto a great
Spaniell, that used often to shake his ears: which lesson he forgot not. Night
was come, the candles out, they in bed, and he came creeping like a dog. But
the door creaking, the old man half awake, or not fast asleep, asked who was
there? when the fellow shaking of his gloves together, made him think it was
the dog: when saying, Oh, Troll, he lay still as though he slept. But the
fellow missing his way in the dark, running his head against his masters
bed-post, upon a sudden the old man start up his head, with, How now? who is
there? The poor man amazed, forgetting to flappe his glove, answered,
Forsooth, it is the dog. Whereat his mistress laughing, bad hang him up. Whereat
the fellow, as it were following in, and seeking to drive him forth, cried,
come out. But in the morning, as I heard, the Gull was put in a coope, where I
heard no more of him.

The eleventh Gull, upon the Colewort.
IT is a trick among many trauailers, if they light into company, that they
think have not passed the Seas, to tell wonders, that wise men ought not to
believe upon the first hearing, Among which kind of people, it fell out one
day at an ordinary, that a certain idle companion, that loved to hear
himself speak, and would talk more then either he understood, or ever heard
of, hearing diverse at the Table talking of the diversity of soyles, and the
natures of fruits, began himself with a fine and all so fine kind of lisping
utterance, to tell that he had seen many countries, and noted the diversities
of their natures (...) one especially he noted for the fertility of the sople
(...)any kinds of roots,G^wrdes, (...) of frutis* there grew (...) together
under the (...) at his tale, and (...) that he (...) that no body (...) of the
company, upon the sudden, (...) in his kind^ brake out into this speech. (...)
is not so strange, as that which I heard was in the same place, that all those
Tinkers did work together upon one kettle. For what use (quoth the Trauailer?)
Mary sir (quoth the other) to see the (...) Colewort in. At which the (...)
with as much speed as he coul(...) Gull, gat him a way from the comapny.

The twelfth Gull, upon (...) cry of Hounds.
I Read among the discourses of country actions, that a gentleman of the
country, that loue^ home-sports, as Hawking, Hunting, Ducking, Fowling, and
Fishing and such like: but of all, especially a good try of Hounds, of which
he kept the best in all the Country: upon a morning riding forth, near a
(...) side start a Hate, who led the Hounds a chase through the wood; where
the winding of the horns, the hollowing of the huntsmen, and the mouths of the
dogs, made such a country pleasant sweet noise, that the master of the
sport, sitting still upon his horse, as one half ravished with his pleasure,
esteeming no music comparable to such a cry, suddenly brake out into this
speech among them that were near him, Oh what a heavenly noise is this! List,
list, for Gods sake, is not this a heavenly noise? Whereat one Gull of the
Company, who, as it should seem, never heard any dog but a Mastiffe, holding
up his ear, as it were toward the Sky, to hear some noise from the heavens
brake out into these words, Oh Lord, where is this heavenly noise? Why hark
(quoth the Gentleman) list a while, do thou not hear? No (quoth the Gull)
the curres keep such a bawling I can hear nothing for them. Whereal the
Gentleman laughing, and yet inwardly chaffing at the fools wit, rode away from
him, and left him to learn more understanding.

FINIS.

