The pa^dectes of the Euangelycall Law. Comprisyng the whole Historye of
Christ's Gospel. Set forth by Thomas Paynell.

Anno Domini. 1553.

To the right worshipful sir John Baker knight, Chauncelour of the kings
Majesty's court of first fruits and tenthes, and under Tresurour of England.
Thomas Paynell sends gretinge.
IN as much as mine acquaintance is but very raw, and slender with your
Mastershyp: and that I of a certain custom have evermore required the company
and familiarite of learned and poletyke men, although I my self be unlearned:
yet through the admonition and counsel of gentle Master Ergal, a favorer of
Gods true word, and of good letters a mayntayner, I purposed by some virtuous
means, to win your love and favor, and with some goodly and delitius
present, to wind my self in to your Mastershyppes familiarite and further
acquayntaunce. Gold and silver with other Jewels I have none: such as I have,
I lovingly send unto you: that is, this fyn^ and virtuous book, named the
Pandectes of y^ Euangelical law: comprehending y^ whole history of the four
Evangelists in one, recitynge y^ of every one of the^ is spoken: and
contaynyng the time and place of Christ's supernatural natiuite and acts, his
godly and prudent aunsweres, his celestial life and conversation, his most
easy yoke and commandments, his pleasant and most sweet Sermones, with
his most bitter death, the only redemption of mankind, worthy to be believed,
embrased, ensued, and continually thought upon. This gift right worshipful
sir, although it be enrolled in paper leaves: yet I dout not but unto you a
worthy champion of Gods holy gospel, a fauorer of Christ's true religion, a
defe^der of his precepts and commandments, a shylde and buckeler of the
ensuers and faithful folowers of the same, it shall be a great deal more
welcome, more esteemed and acceptable than a great heap of deceyptefull
riches, or glytterynge Gold and silver: the which as of it self, it is
fading and corruptible ^o it corrupts man, which is naturallye frail and
brittell, wauerynge, inconstant, never satisfied, never content: Such is the
insaciable mind of man, drowned in these earthlye and corruptible treasures,
delytes and worldely pleasures. For this my gift is from heaven, heavenly,
having no taledge at all, or sent of earthly things, but redolent with al
vertous precepts, with the most flagrant and odoriferus word of God,
contemnynge the world, with the caduke delytes and pleasure thereof, erectynge
the earthlye mind and heart of man to things celestial and incorruptible,
and his inconstante affectyons from mortal and uncertain things to
immortal: From iniquity and vice, to virtue. From wicked Mammon, to our
Sauyoure Jesus Christ: In whom, and in his holy and only word should
consiste our whole delight and pleasure, and not in brutyshe and beastlye
carnalite, upon whom, as upon the most surest ancker and corner stone, we
should take hold, and stay our selves, and have our only refuge and
confidence. For it is he alone that has created us, redeemed us, and from all
parylles defended us, and not we our selves. It is he that offers unto us
salvation, and that vnburdeneth us of al y^ whole l^mpe of sin, and not we
our selves. It is he that has promised us eternal life, if we keep his holy
laws, and follow the trade of his godly and virtuous living, and not we our
selves. For as much then as this my gift does admonyshe and instruct us of
all these things, how to declyne from the world, and the pride thereof: How
to please the Lord our God, and how to accomplish and fulfill his
commandments: Is it not worthy (I say) to be embrased, and magnified:
Worthy to be thankfullye accepted and followed? It is (I confess) but paper,
but yet it contains the precious word of God, his wonderful works, and ye
mysteries of our salvation, the which should be graven in the hearts,
words, and deeds of men, and not in books of parper and parchement only.
Readers and hearers of this most holy word are many. But (alas) how many
worthy folowers are there? Shall the hearer be saved, or the doer^ God give us
grace to do that we read, and so to read Gods holy word that by him and his
tender mercy we may be saved, and not to be praters and babelers there of
only, deccauynge our selves. Thus I commend your Mastership to almightye
God, desiring ye^re goodness at this present, to accept this my labor and
travel in godd part, and my gift, as ye shall think it worthy.

The first Book of the Pandecte of the Euangelical law, contaynynge Christ's
coming into the world, and his eternal Generation.
Of Christ's eternal generation. Joan. i. Cap. i.
IN the beginning was the word, John.
and the word was with God, and God was the word. The same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by the same, and without the same
was made nothing. That was made in him was life, and the life was the light of
men: and the light shyneth in the darckenesse, and the darckenesse
comprehended it not.

Of the Annu^ciation and conception of John ye Baptist. Luc. i. Ca. ii.

IN the time of Herod king of Iewrye, Luke.
there was a Priest named Zachari of the familye and house of Abia: and his
wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name Elizabeth. They were both
ryghteous before God, and walked in all the commandments and statutes of the
Lord vnreproueablye. And they had no child, for Elizabeth was barren, and
they were both well strycken in age. And it came to pass, as he executed the
Priests office before God, when his course came (according to the costume of
the Priesthode) it fell to his lot, to burn incense. And he went into the
temple of the Lord, and the whole multitude of the people was without in
prayer, while the incense was a burning. And the aungel of the Lord appeared
unto him, and stood on the right side of the aultre of incense. And when
Zachari saw him, he was abashed, and there came a fear upon him. But the
Angel said unto him: fear not Zachari, for thy prayer is heard. And thy wife
Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, whose name thou shall call John, and thou
shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth, for he
shall be great before the Lord. Wine and strong drink shall he not drink.
And he shall be filled with the holy ghost, even in his mothers womb. And many
of the children of Israel shall he turn unto the Lord their God. And he
shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn ye hearts of
ye fathers unto the children, and the unfaithful unto the wisdom of the
righteous to make the people redye unto ye Lord. And Zachari said unto the
Angel, whereby shall I know this? For I am old, and my wife well strycken in
age. The Angel answered, and said unto him: I am Gabriel that stand before
God, and am sent to speak unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings.
And behold, thou shall be domme, and not able to speak, until the day that
this come to pass, because thou haste not believed my words, which shall be
fulfilled in their season. And the people waited for Zachari, and meruayled
that he tarried so long in the temple. And when he went out he could not speak
unto them. And they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he
beckened unto them and remained speachelesse. And it fortuned when the time of
his office was out, he went home into his house. And after those days,
Elizabeth his wife conceived, and hyd her self five months, and said: thus
has the Lord done unto me in the days, wherein he has looked upon me, to
take away from me my rebuke among men.

Of the Co^ception of our Savior. Luc. i. Joan. i. Cap. iii.
ANd in the syxt Month was the Aungel Gabriel sent from God into a city of
Galile called Nazareth, Luke.
unto a Uirgyn that was spoused unto a man whose name was Joseph, of the house
of David, and the Uirgyns name was Mary. And the Angel came in unto her, and
said: Hayle thou full of grace, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among
women. When she had heard these things, she was abashed at his saying, and
thought: what manner of salutacion is this? And the Aungel said unto her: Fear
not Mary, for thou have found grace with God. Behold, thou shall conceive in
thy womb, and bear a son, and shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great,
and shall be called the son of the highest. And the Lord God shall give him the
seat of David his father, and he shall be King over the house of Jacob for
ever, and there shall be no end of his kingdom. Then said Mary unto the
Angel, how shall this be, seeing I know not a man? The Aungel answered, and
said unto her: The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest
shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore that holy also, which shall be borne (of thee),
shall be called the son of God. And behold, thy cosyn Elizabeth, she also
has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the syxte mooneth of her,
which is reported to be baren, for with God is nothing impossible. And Mary
said: behold, here am I the handemayden of the Lord, be it unto me as thou
have said. (John) And the word became fleashe, and dwelte among us. (Luke)
And the Aungel departed from her.

How Mary visited Elizabeth. Luc. i. Cap. iiii.
ANd Mary arose, Luke.
and went into the mountains with have, into the city of Iewry, and came into
the house of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth. And it fortuned as Elizabeth
heard the salutacion of Mary, the Babe sprange in her womb. And Elizabeth was
filled with ye holy ghost, and cried loud, and said: Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And how happens this to me y^
the mother of my Lord comes unto me? Behold, when I heard the voice of thy
salutacion, the Babe sprange in my womb with joy. And blessed art thou that
have believed: For the things shall be performed, which were told the from the
Lord. And Mary said.

My soul magnifieth the Lord. And my spirit reioyse^h in God my Savior.

For he has looked upon ye low degree of his handmayden: Behold, from hence
forth, shall al generations call me blessed.

For he that is mighty, has done great things unto me, and holy is his name.

And his mercy endures thorowoute all generations, upon them that fear him.

He shows strength with his arm, and scatered them that are proud in the
imaginacion of their heart.

He puts down the mighty from the seat, and exalts them of low degree.

He filled the hongry with good things, and lets the rich go empty.

He remembers mercy, and helps up his servant Israel.

Even as he promised unto our fathers Abraham, and to his sede for ever.

And Mary abode with her about three Months.

Of the birth and circumcision of John y^ Baptist. Luc. i. Ca. v.
ANd Elizabethes time was come, Luke.
y^ she should be delivered, and she brought forth a son. And her neighbors
and kinsfolks heard that the Lord had showed great mercy upon her, and they
rejoiced with her. And it fortuned upon the eight day, they came to circumcise
the child, and called him Zachary after his father. And his mother answered,
and said: no, but he shall be called John. And they said unto her. There is none
in thy kin, that is so called. And they made signs unto his father, how he
would have him called. And he asked for writing tables, wrote, and said: his
name is John. And they maruayled all. And immediately was his mouth and his
tongue opened, and he spoke and praised God. And there came a fear upon all
their neighbors. And al these acts were noysed abroad throughout all the hill
contreye of Iewrye. And all they that heard thereof, took it to heart and
said: What manner of man will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was
with him. And Zachary his father was filled with the holy ghost, and
prophicied and said.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people.

And has set up the horn of salvation, in the house of his servant David.

Even as he promised before time, by the mouth of his holy prophets.

That he would deliver us from our enemies, and from the hand of all such as
hate us.

And that he would show mercy unto our fathers, and thyncke upon his holy
couenaunte.

Even the oath that he swear unto our father Abraham, for to give us.

That we delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve him without
fear all the days of our life, in such holiness and ryghteousnes as is
accept before him.

And thou child shall be called a Prophet of the highest, for thou shalt go
before the Lord to prepare his ways.

And to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remission of their
sins.

Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from on high
has visited us.

That he might give light unto them that sit in darckenesse and shadow of
death, and to guide our fete into the way of peace. And Mary returned home
again.

Of the temporal Genealogy of Christ. Math. i. Cap. vi.
This is the book of the Generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, Math.
the son of Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac.

Isaac begat Jacob.

*Jacob begat Judas and his brethren. Genesis 29. g and. 28. g


Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar.

Phares begat Hesrom.

Hesrom begat Aram.

Aram begat Aminadab.

Aminadab begat Naasson.

Naasson begat Salmon.

Salmon begat Boos of Rahab.

*Boos begat Obed of Ruth. Ruth. 4. d


Obed begat Iesse.

Iesse begat David the King.

David ye king begat Solomon of her that was the wife of Ury.

Solomon begat Roboam.

Roboam begat Abia.

Abia begat Asa.

Asa begat Iosaphat.

Iosaphat begat Ioram.

Ioram begat Osias.

*Osias begat Ioatham. ^. Par. 17. a


Ioathan begat Achas.

Achas begat Ezechias.

Ezechias begat Manasses.

Manasses begat Amon.

Amon begat Josias.

Josias begat Iechonias, and his brethren about the time of the captivity o^
Babylon. And after the captivity of Babylon. Iechonias begat Salathiel.

Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

Zorobabel begat Abiud.

Abiud begat Eliachim.

Eliachim begat Azor.

Azor begat Sadoch.

Sadoch begat Achim.

Achim begat Eliud.

Eliud begat Eleazar.

Eleazar begat Matthan.

Matthan begat Jacob.

Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Jesus, which is
called Christ. All the generations from Abraham to David, are fourtene
generations. From David unto the captivity of Babylon, are fourtene
generations. From the captivity of Babylon unto Christ, are also fourtene
generations. The birth of Christ was on this wise. When his mother Mary was
married to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child by ye
holy ghost. But Joseph her husband was a perfyte man, and would not bring her
to shame, but was minded to put her away secretlye. Nevertheless, while he thus
thought. Behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream
saying: Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the holy ghost. She shall bring
forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. All this was done, that the thing might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying: *Behold,
Esai. 7. c.
a maid shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Emanuell, which is by interpretacion, God with us. Now when
Joseph awoke out of sleep he did as the angel of the Lord badde him, and he
took his wife unto him, and knew her not, till she had brought forth her first
borne son, and called his name Jesus.

Of the Natiuite of Christ. Luc. ii. Cap. vii.
IT fortuned at the same time that there went out a commandment from Augustus
the Emperor, Luke.
that the whole world should be taxed. And this taxing was the first that was
executed, when Syreneus was Lefetenant in Siria. And they went al, every one
to his own city to be taxed. Then Joseph gat him up also from Galile out of
the city of Nazareth, Nazareth is from lerusale^. 44. mile.
into Iewry to the city of David which is called Bethleem (because he was of
the house and lineage of David) that he might be taxed with Mary his spoused
wife, Bethleem is from Jerusalem 15. mile.
which was with child. And it fortuned, while they were there, the time was
come that she should be delivered. Also she brought forth her first begotten
son, and wrapped him in swadlynge clothes, and laid him in a manger, for
they had else no rowme in the Inn. And there were in the same region shepherdes
in the feldes watchynge their flock by night. And behold, y^ angel of the
Lord stood by the^, and the bryghtnes of the Lord shone round about them, and
they were sore afraid. And the Aungel said unto them: be not afraid.
Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, which shall happen unto all
people: For unto you this day is borne the Savior, even Christ the Lord in
the city of David. And take this for a token, ye shall find the babe swadled
and laid in a manger. And strayghte way there was by the Aungel a multitude
of heavenly hoostes, which praised God, and said: Glory be unto God on
high, and peace upon earth, and unto me^ a good will. And it fortuned when the
angels were gone from them into heaven, the shepherdes said one to another:
Let us go now even unto Bethleem, and see this thing that is happened, which
the Lord has showed unto us. And they came with have, and found both Mary
and Joseph, and the Babe laid in a manger. And when they had seen it, they
published abroad the saying that was told them of this child, and all they
that heard it wondered at the words which the shepherdes had told them. But
Mary kept all these sayings, and pondred them in her heart. And the shepherdes
returned praysynge and lauding God for all that they had heard and seen, even
as it was told them.

Of Christ's Circumcision. Luc. ii. Cap. viii.
ANd when eight days were ended, Luke.
that the child should be circumcised, his name was called Jesus, L^ui. ^. a
which was named of the angel before he was conceived in his mothers womb.

Of the coming of the wise men. Math. ii. Cap. ix.
When Jesus was borne at Bethleem in Iewrye, Matthew.
in the time of Herod the King: Bheolde, there came wise men from the East
to Jerusalem, saying: Where is the new borne king of the Jews: We have seen
his star in the East, and are come to worship him. When Herod the king
had heard this, he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him. And he gathered the
hye Priests and Scribes of the people, and axed of the^, where Christ should
be borne. And they said unto him: at Bethlee^ in Iewrye, for thus it is
written by the prophet. *And thou Bethleem in the land of Iewry art not the
least among the Princes of Judah, Miche. 5. a
for out of thee shall come unto me, the captain that shall govern my people
Israel. Then Herod priuelye called the wise men, and dilygentlye enquired of
them, what time the star appeared, and sent them to Bethleem, saying:
Go, and search diligently for the child, and when ye have found him,
bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also. When they had
heard the King, they departed: and ^oe, the star which they saw in the
East, went before them, till it came and stood over the place where the
child was. When they saw the star, they were meruelously glad, and went into
the house, and found the child with Mary his mother, and *kneled down and
worshipped him. Psalm. 71. b.
And opened their treasures, and offered unto him gifts, Gold, Frankyn^ense,
and Myrce. And after they were warned of God in a Dream, that they should not
go again to Herod, they returned into their own country another way.

Of ye presentacion of Christ in the temple. Luc. ii. Capi. x.
ANd when the days of their purification (after the law of Moses) were come,
Luke.
they brought him to Jerusalem, y^ they might present him unto the Lord, as
it is written in the law of the Lord (every manchylde that first opens y^
matrix, Exodus 13. a Numi. 8. c Leuiti. 12. c
shall be called holy unto the Lord,) and that they might give the offering as
it is written in the law of the Lord (namelye) a pair of turtle Doves, or
two young Pygeons. And behold, at Jerusalem there was a man whose name was
Simeon, and the same manne was just and feared God, and longed for the
consolation of Israel, and the holy ghost was in him, and an answer was
given him of the holy ghost, that he should not see death before he had seen
the Lords Christ: And he came by inspiration into the temple. And when the
Elders brought the child Jesus in the temple, to do for him after the
costume of the law, then took he him up in his arms and praised God, and
said:

Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
promise.

For mine eyes have seen thy Savior, whom thou haste prepared before the face
of al people.

A light for the lightening of the Heathen, and for the praise of the people
of Israel.

And his father and his mother meruayled at the things which were spoken of
him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother: Behold, this
child shall be set to a fall, and to an vprysynge again of many in Israel, and
for a tooken, which shall be spoken against. And the swearde shall pearce thy
soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. And there was a
Prophetisse, one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser, which
was of a great age, and had lived seven years with her husband from her
virginite, and had now been a wydowe about four score and four years,
which came never from the temple, serving God with fasting and prayinge day
and night, the same came forth also the same hour, and praised the Lord, and
spoke of him unto all those that looked for the redemption of Israel. And when
they had performed all, according to the law of the Lord, they returned
into Galile, to their own city Nazareth. And the child grew and waxed
strong in spirit, full of wisdom, and the grace of God was with him.

Of his flyte into Egypt, and occision of the Innocents, and of his
retournynge out of Egypt. Math. ii. Cap. xi.
WHen the wise men were departed. Behold, Matthew.
the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: arise, and take
y^ child and his mother, and fly into Egypt, and abide there till I bring
thee word. For Herod will seek the child to distroye him. Then he arose and
took the child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and was
there unto the death of Herod, that the thing might be fulfilled, which
was spoken of the Lord, by the Prophet, which says: Osee. 11. a
* Out of Egypt have I called my son. Then Herod perceauyng he was deceived
of the wise men, was exceadynglye wroth, and sent forth and slew [ the year
after Christ's natiuite] all the children that were in Bethleem, and in all the
coasts thereof, as many as were two year old and under, according to the
time which he had diligently searched out of the wise men. Then was that
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet Jeremy, saying: Iorem. 31. c
* On the hills was a voice herd, great mourning, weping and lame^tacion:
Rachel weping for her children, and would not be comforted because they were
not. When Herod was dead: [ the seventh year after such flyghte.] Behold, an
angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying: arise,
and take the child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel. For they
are dead, which sought for the chyldes life. And he arose up, and took the
child and his mother and came into the land of Israel. But when he heard
that Archelaus did raygne in Iewry, in the rowme of his father Herod, he was
afraied to go thither. Notwithstanding after he was warned of God in a dream,
he turned aside in to the parts of Galile, and went and dwelte in a city
called Nazareth to fulfill that which was spoken by ye Prophets: *he shall be
called a Nazarite. Iudi. 13. c


Of John's habitacion in the Deserte. Luc. i. Capi. xii.
ANd the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the wyldernes till
the time that he should show him self unto the people of Israel.

Of the fyndyng of Christ in the temple. Luc. ii. Cap. xiii.
ANd his Elders went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of easter. Luke.
[ After they were returned out of Egipt]. And when he was twelve year old,
they went up to Jerusalem, after the costume of the feast. And when they had
fulfilled the days, and were gone home again, the child Jesus abode still at
Jerusalem. And his Elders knew it not, but thought he had been in the
company. And they came a days iourneye, and sought him among their
kinsfolks and acquayntaunce. And when they found him not, they went again to
Jerusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned after three days that they found
him in the temple, sitting among the teachers hearing them, and aposyng
them. And al they that heard him, wondered at his understanding and answer.
And when they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said unto him: my
son, why have thou done this unto us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee
sorowing. And he said unto the^: what is it y^ ye have sought me? Wist ye not
y^ I must go about my fathers business? and they understood not y^ sayi^g y^ he
spoke unto the^. And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and was
obedient unto the^. And his mother kept al these words in her heart. And
Jesus increased in wisdom, age, and favor, with God and men.

Of y^ authority of preaching and Baptisynge given unto John of God. Luke iii.
John. i. Mark. i. Math. iii. Cap. xiiii.
IN the. xv. year of ye reign of Tyberius ye Emperor, Luke.
when Po^tius Pilate was leftenau^te in Iewry, and Herod one of ye. iiii.
princes in Galile, and his brother Philip one of ye. iiii. princes in Iturea,
and in ye costs of Traconitis, and Lisanias one of ye. iiii. princes of
Abilene, when Annas and Caiphas were hie priests. [ Ioh] There was sent from god
a man whose name was John. The same came for a witness to bear witness of ye
light, y^ through him they all might believe. He was not that light, but that
he might bear witness of the light. That was the true light which lights
all men y^ come in to this world. He was in the world, and the world was made
by him, and the world knew him not. He came into his own, and his own
received him not, but as many as received him, to them gave he power to be the
children of God, even such as believe in his name. Which are not borne of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. (Luke.)
Then came (Math.) in those days (Luke) the word of God unto John the son of
Zachari, in the wilderness (Mark.) Behold I se^de a messe^ger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. (Luke.) And he came in all the
coasts about Iordane, and preached the baptime of penance, for the remission
of sins, as it is written in the book of the sayings of Esaias ye Prophet,
which says. Esai. 40. a
* The voice of a crier in the wilderness: prepare the way of the Lord, and
make his paths straight, every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and
hill shall be brought low, and what so is crooked, shall be made straighte: and what
rough is, shall be made smoth, and al f^esshe shall se the salvation of God
(Math.) This John had his garment of camels here, and a letherne girdel about
his loins, his meat was locustes and wild, honey. Then went out to him,
(Mark) the whole land of Iewry (Math.) and they of Jerusalem, and all the
region round about Iordane, and were baptized of him in Iordane (Mark) river,
and confessed their sins. (Math.) Now when he saw many of the Pharisees and of
the Saduces come to his baptysme, he said unto them, (Luke) and unto the
people that went out to be baptized of him (Math) Do penance, for why, the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. Ye generation (Luke) of vipers, who has
certified you that ye shall escape the wrath to come? Take heed, and bring
forth due fruits of penance, and begin not to say, we have Abraham to our
father, for I say unto you, God is able of these stones to raise up children
unto Abraham. The axe is put unto the tree already, that every tree which
brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewe^ down and cast into ye fire. And
the people axed him and said, what shall we do then? He answered and said unto
the^: he that has two coats, let him part with him y^ has none, and he that
has meat, let him do likewise. The publicans came also to be baptized, and
said unto him: master what shall we do? He said unto them: require no more then
is appointed you. The^ the soldiers axed him likewise, and said: What shall we
do then? And he said unto the^, do no man violence nor wrong, and be content
with your wages. But wha^ the people were in a doubt, and thought all in their
hearts whether he were Christ, John answered and said unto the^ all. I
baptyse you with water to penance, but after me there comes one stronger then
I, whose shues (Math.) I am not worthy to bear, (Mark.) to stoop down,
(Luke.) and to lowse ye lachet of his shue. He shall baptyse you with the holy
ghost, and with fire, whose fan is in his hand, and he shall pourge his
floor, and shall gather y^ wheat into his barn, and shall burn the chafe
with unquenchable fire. And many other things more exhorted he, and preached
unto ye people.

Of John's testimonies of Christ. Joan. i. capi. 15.
John did bear witness of him, John.
cried and said. It was this of who^ I spoke: After me shall he come, y^ was
before me, for he was or ever I, [ more noble and honorable] and of his
fullness have all we received grace for grace: for the law was given by Moses,
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. No man has seen God at any time: with
a vision of perfect comprehe^tion. The only ^e gotten son which is in ye
bosom of ye father, he has declared ye same unto us. And this is ye record
of John, wha^ ye Jews sent priests and leuits from Jerusalem to axe him, who
art thou? And he confessed and denied not. And confessed and said, I am not
Christ. And they axed him, what the^? Art thou Helias? He said I am not. Art
y^ the Prophet? And he answered no. Then said they unto him. What art y^ then,
y^ we may give answer unto the^ y^ sent us? What say thou of thy self? He
said. I am the voice of a crier in ye wilderness, make straight ye way of the
Lord as the Prophet Esai said. And they that were sent, There are two
Bethanies, the one is Marthas, and is from Jerusalem. 3. mile, most Oliuete
liynge between the^ Another by Jordan where John Baptized, and is from
lerusale^. 16. mile.
were of ye Pharisees, and they axed him and said unto him, why baptisest thou
then if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor a Prophet? John answered the^, and
said. I baptyse with water, but there is one come among you, [ In the temple
when he was twelve years of age.] who^ ye know not: it is he y^ comes
after me which was before me, whose shue lachet I am not worthy to lowse.
This was done at Bethania beyond Iordane, where John did baptyse.

The second Book of Christ's procedynge in the world, contaynyng what Jesus
did, and said inclusyuely from his Baptyme unto Maundy Thursday. It is divided
in four parts. The first, does contain the worckes that he did in his
thyrtie year. The second, the worckes of his one and thyrtye year. The third,
the worckes of his two and thyrtie year. And the fourth, the worckes of his
three and thyrtye year, unto the deeds he did on maundye Thursday.
Of Christ's Baptime. Mat. iii. Luke. iii. Mark. i. Cap. i.
AT the same time Jesus came out of Nazareth of Galile, Mark.
to Iordane unto John to be Baptized of John, but he forbadde him, saying: I
have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? Jesus answered and
said unto him: let it be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness. The^ he suffered him. (Luke) And it fortuned when all the people
received baptyme, and when Jesus was also baptized (Mark,) in Iordane, (Luke.)
and prayinge: (Mark,) as soon as he was come out of the water: (Math.) To,
heaven was open over him, and he saw the spirit of God desce^di^ge like a
dove, (Luke) in a bodily shape, (Math.) and light upon him. And lo, there came
a voice from heaven, saying: This is my beloned son, in whom is my delight.

Of the genealogy of Christ Luck. iii. Capi. ii.
ANd Jesus was about thyrtye years when he began. Luke.
And he was taken for the son of Joseph, which was the son of Eli.

Which was the son of Mathat.
Which was the son of Leui.
Which was the son of Malchi.
Which was the son of Ianna.
Which was the son of Joseph.
Which was the son of Mathathias.
Which was the son of Amos.
Which was the son of Nahum.
Which was the son of Esly.
Which was the son of Nagge.
Which was the son of Maath.
Which was ye son of Mathathias.
Which was the son of Semei.
Which was the son of Joseph.
Which was the son of Judah.
Which was the son of Iohanna.
Which was the son of Resa.
Which was the son of Zorobabel.
Which was the son of Salathiel.
Which was the son of Neri.
Which was the son of Melchi.
Which was the son of Abdi.
Which was the son of Susan.
Which was the son of Elmadam.
Which was the son of Her.
Which was the son of Ieso.
Which was the son of Eliezer.
Which was the son of Ioram.
Which was the son of Mathat.
Which was the son of Leui.
Which was the son of Simeon.
Which was the son of Judah.
Which was the son of Joseph.
Which was the son of Ionam.
Which was the son of Elaichim.
Which was the son of Melcha.
Which was the son of Menna.
Which was the son of Mathata.
Which was the son of Nathan.
Which was the son of David.
Which was the son of Iesse.
Which was the son of Obed.
Which was the son of Booz.
Which was the son of Salmon.
Which was the son of Naazon.
Which was the son of Aminadab.
Which was the son of Aram.
Which was the son of Esrom.
Which was the son of Phares.
Which was the son of Judah.
Which was the son of Jacob.
Which was the son of Isaar.
Which was the son of Abraham.
Which was the son of Their.
Which was the son of Nacher.
Which was the son of Saruch.
Which was the son of Ragan.
Which was the son of Phalech.
Which was the son of Heber.
Which was the son of Sala.
Which was the son of Cainan.
Which was the son of Arfaxat.
Which was the son of Sem.
Which was the son of Noe.
Which was the son of Lameth.
Which was the son of Mathusale^
Which was the son of Enoch.
Which was the son of Iareth.
Which was the son of Malalehel
Which was the son of Cainam
Which was the son of Enos.
Which was the son of Seth.
Which was the son of Adam.
Which was the son of God.
Jesus full of the holy ghost came again
from Iordane.
Of Christ's fasting and temptacion. Matthew. iiii. Mark. i. Luke. iiii. Ca.
iii.
ANd immediatlye [ Mathevve] was Jesus led away of the spirit into the
Wilderness, Mark.
to be tempted of the Devil: [ Marke] and was with the wild beasts. [
Mathevve] And when he had fasted fourtye days and fourtye nyghtes. [ Luke]
In those days did he eat nothing, and when they were ended, (Math.) he was
afterward an hongred, and the tempter came to him, (Luke) the Deuel, (Mat) and
said unto him: If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be
made bread. (Luk) And Jesus answered him:* Deuteronomy. 8. a
It is written that (Mat) manne shall not live by bread only, but by every
word that proceadeth out of the mouth of God. Then the Deuell took him up
into the holy city, (Luke) Jerusalem, (Math) and set him on a pinnacle of
the temple, and said unto him: If thou be the son of God, cast thy self
(Luke) from hence (Math) down. For it is written:* Psalm. 90. c
He shall give his angels charge over thee, (Luke) to keep thee, (Math) and
with their hands they shall hold thee up, that thou dashe not thy foot
against a stone. Then said Jesus unto him: It is written also.* Deute. 6. a
and. 10. d
Thou shall not tempt thy Lord God. Again the Deuell took him up (Luke) and
led him (Mathe) into an exceadynge high mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world (Luke) in the twincklyng of an eye (Mat) and all the
^glory of them. And said unto him: all these, (Luk) and all this power (Math)
will I give thee, (Luke) for it is given unto me, and I give it unto who^ I
will. Therefore, if thou now wylt worship me, they shall all be thine. (Math)
Then said Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan, for it is written. *Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, Deute. 6. ^
and him only shalt thou serve. (Luk) And when the Deuel had ended all the
temptacions, he departed from him, (Math) and left him, (Luk) for a season.
(Mat) And behold, ye angels came, and ministered unto him.

Of other testimonies of John of Christ. John. i. Cap. iiii.
THe next day [ after that he came out of the deserte] after John saw Jesus
co^mi^g unto him, and said: behold ye lamb of God, which takes away the
sin of the world. This is he of who^ I said unto you. After me comes a
man which was before me, for he was or ever I, and I knew him not. (so fully as
now) But y^ he should be declared in Israel. Therefore am I come to baptize with
water. And John bare record and sayde^ I saw the spirit descend from heaven
like a Dove, and abode upon him, and I knew him not: But he that sent me to
baptize with water, said unto me: Upon whom thou shalt see the spirit
descend, and tarry still on him, the same is he that baptiseth with the holy
ghost. And I saw it, and bare record, that this is the son of God.

Of the first vocation and calling of the disciples, by the which they were
called to the simple knowledge of Christ. John. i. Luke. iiii. Cap. v.
THe next day after John stood again, and two of his disciples: and when he
saw Jesus walking, he said: Behold the lamb of God. And two of his
disciples heard him speak and followed Jesus. And Jesus turned him about and
saw them following, and said unto them, whom seek ye? They said unto him: Rabi
(which is to say, by interpretacion, master) where art thou at lodging? He
said unto them: Come and see. They came and saw it, and abode with him the
same day. It was about the tenth hour. One of the two which heard John
speak and followed Jesus, was Andrewe the brother of Simon Peter. [ The other
was John the Evangelist, by whom his brother James was called,] The same
found first his brother Simon, and said unto him: we have found Messyas,
(which is by interpretacion, the anointed) and he brought him to Jesus, when
Jesus beheld him, he said: Thou art Simon the son of Ioanna, thou shalt be
called Cephas, which is by interpretacion Peter. The next day after, would
Jesus go into Galile. [ Luke] And Jesus came again in the power of the
spirit into Galile, [ Iohn] and found Philippe, and Jesus said unto him:
follow me. Bethsaida is from Capernau^ 4 mile.
Philippe was of Bethsayda the city of Andrewe and Peter. Philippe found
Nathanael and said unto him: we have found him of who^ *Moses in the law and
the prophets have written, Genesis 49. b Deute. 18. c Esaias. 40. c and. 45, b
even Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth, and Nathanael said unto him: What
good can come out of Nazareth? Philip said unto him: Come and see. Jesus saw
Nathanael coming to him, and said of him: Behold, a right Israelite, in whom
is no gyle. Nathanael said unto him: from whence know thou me? Jesus
answered, and said unto him: Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast
under the fig tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered, and said unto him:
Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the king of Israel. Jesus
answered, and said unto him: Because I said unto thee, I saw the under the
fig tree, thou beleuest, thou shalt see yet greater things then these. And
he said unto him: Uerely, verily, I say unto you, from this time forth shall ye
see the heaven open, and the angels of God, goinge up and down over the son
of man.

The second part of the second book, contaynynge what Jesus did and said in
the one and thyrtye year of his age.
Of the mutacion and chaungynge of water into wine. John. ii. Cap. vi.
ANd upon the third day there was a marriage at Cana in Galile, John.
and the mother of Jesus was there, Cana is from Emaus. 4. mile.
Jesus also and his disciples, were called unto the marriage. And when the wine
failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: They have no wine. Jesus said unto
her: woman, what have I to do with thee, mine hour is not yet come, his mother
said unto the ministers: whatsoever he says unto you do it. There were set
there six water pottes of stone, after the manner of ye purifiyng of the Jews,
every one containing two or three measures, Jesus said unto the^: Fyl the water
pottes with water, and they filled them up to ye brymme. And he said unto them:
Draw out now, and bring unto the master of the feast. And they bare it.
When the master of the feast had tasted the wine, which had been water, and
knew not whence it came, (but the ministers that drew the water knew it) the
master of the feast called the Brydegrome and said unto him: Every man at
the first gives ye good wine, and when they are droncken, then y^ which is
worse, but thou kepest back the good wine until now. This is the first token
that Jesus did at Cana in Galile, and showed his glory, and his disciples
believed on him.

Of his first coming to Easter, and of the dryuynge out of those that did
sell in the temple. John. ii. Ca. vii.
Afterward he went down to Capernaum. He, his mother, her brethren, John.
Capernau^ is the head city of Galile.
and his disciples, and tarried not long there. And the Jews easter was at
hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and found syttinge in the temple, those
that sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and changers of money. And he made a scorge
of small cords, and drove them all out of the temple with the sheep and oxen,
and poured out the chaungers money, and overthrew ye tables, and said unto
them that sold doves. Have these things hence, and make not my fathers house
an house of merchandise, his dysryples remembered it that was written.* Psa. 78.
b
The zele of thine house has even eaten me. Then answered the Jews and said
unto him, what token show thou unto us, that thou may do these things?
Jesus answered and said unto them. Break down this temple, and in three
days will I set it up again. Then said the Jews. Six and fortye year was
this temple a building, [ by Zorobabel: for Solomon made it perfect in. vij.
yeres] and wylt thou set it up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his
body. Now when he was risen again from the dead, his disciples remembered
that he thus said, and they believed the scripture, and the words which Jesus
spoke. When he was at Jerusalem at Easter in the feast, many believed on his
name, when they saw ye tokens that he did. But Jesus committed not him self
unto them, for he knew them al, and neded not that any man should testify of
man, for he knew well what was in man.

Of Nicodemus. Joan. 3 cap. 8.
THere was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus a ruler among the Jews. Joan.
The same came unto Jesus by night, and said unto him. Master we know that
thou art come a teacher from God: for no man can do these tokens that thou
doste, except God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him: verily,
verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne a new, he cannot se the
kingedome of God. Nicodemus said unto him: Now can a man be borne, when he is
old, can he enter into his mothers womb, and be borne again? Jesus answered,
verily verily I say unto the, except a man be borne of the water and of y^
spirit, he cannot come into the kingdom of God. That which is borne of flesh,
is flesh, and y^ which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Maruayle not that
I say unto thee, ye must be borne of new. The wind blows where he will, and
thou hear his sound, but thou can not tell whence it comes, and whether
he goes, so is eueryone, that is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and
said unto him, how may these be, Jesus answered and said unto him. Art thou
a master in Israel, and know not these? verily, verily, I say unto thee, we
speak that we know, and testifye that we have seen, and ye receive not our
witness, if y^ believe not when I tell you earthly things, how should you
believe when I speak unto you of heavenly things? And no man ascends up
into heaven, but he that is come down from heaven, namelye the son of man
which is in heaven.* Number. 21. c
And like as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
son of man be lift up, that who soever believes in him should not peryshe,
but have everlasting life. For God so loved the world that he gave his only
son, that who so ever believes in him should not peryshe but have
everlasting life. For God sent not his son in to the world to condemn the
world, but that the world might be saved by him: he that believes on him,
shall not be condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, because
he believes not on the name of the only son of God. But this is the
condemnacion, that the light is come into the world, and men loved ye
darkness more then the light: for their works were euel. Who soever does
euel hates the light, and comes not to the light, that his deeds should not
be reproved, but he that does the truth, comes to the light, that his
works may be known, for they are done in God.

Of the complaynte that Jesus did baptize. Joan. 3. cap. 9.
Afterward came [ going from Jerusalem to other places of Ievvry nie unto
Iordane) Joan.
Jesus his disciples into the land of Iewrye, and had his being there with
them, and baptized. John baptized also, in even beside Salem: for there was
much water there: And they came thither, and were baptized, for John was not
yet put in prison. Then arose there a question among the disciples of John with
the Jews about ye puryfyinge: and they came unto John, and said unto him.
Master, he that was with the beyond Iordane, of whom thou barest witness:
behold he baptiseth, and every man comes unto him. John answered and said: A
man can receive nothing, except it he given him from heaven: ye your selves
are my witnesses, how that I said, I am not Christ, but am sent before him. He
that has the bryde, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the brydegrome
stands and herkeneth unto him, and reioyseth greatly over the voice of the
bridegroom, this same joy of mine is now fulfilled. He must increace, but I
must decreace. He that comes from on high, is above all. He that is of the
earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth. He that comes from heaven is
above al, and testified what he had seen and herd, and no man receaueth his
witness. But he that receaueth it, has set to his seal, that God is true.
For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God. For God gives not
the spirit unto him by measure.

The father loves the son, and has given him al things into his hand. He
that believes on the son, has everlasting life, he that believes not the
son, shall not se the life, but the wrath of God abides upon him.

Of John's incarseracie. mat. xiiii. Mar. vi. Luc. iii. Capi. x.
BUt Herod ye Tetrarcha wha^ he was rebuked of John because of Herodias the
wife. Math.
(Mark) of Philippe his brother, for he married her. (Luke.) And for all the
euels that Herod did. (Mat.) For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee
to baue (Mar.) thy brothers wife: (Luke) beside all this Herod (Math.) took
John, bound him, and put him into prysonne for Herodias sake his brother
Philips wife. (Mark) For Herodias laid wait for him, and would have slain
him, and could not. Notwithstanding Herod feared John, for he knew that he
was a just and holy man. (Math.) And feign he would have put him to death, but
he feared the people, because they held him for a Prophet. (Mark) And he kept
him, and herkened unto him in many things, and heard him gladlye.

Of the beginning of Christ's public, predicacion. Mat. iii. mar. i, Ioa.
iiii. cap. xi.
When Jesus had herd that John was taken [ Ioan] Math.
and had knowledge that it was come to the ears of the Pharyses, that Jesus
made and baptized moore dyscyples then John (How be it Jesus him self
baptized not, but his dyscyples) he left the land of Iewrye, (Mark) and came
into Galile. (Joan) Now when he came into Galile, the Galileans received him
which had seen all that he did at Jerusalem in the feast, for they also were
come thither to the feast. (Matthew) And leauinge Nazareth, he went and dwelt in
Capernaum, which is a city upon the sea, in the coasts of Zabulon and
Neptalim, that the thing might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
Prophet saying:* Esai.. 9. a
The land of Zabulon and Neptalim, the way of the sea beyond Iordane, and
Galile of the Gentyles, the people which sat in darkness saw a great light,
and to them which sat in ye region of shadow of death, light is begone to
shine. From that time forth began Jesus to preach (Mark.) the ghospel of
the kyngedome of God, and said: Because the time is fulfilled. (Mat.) do
penance, (Mark) and believe the gospel (Matthew.) For the kyngedome of
heaven is at hand.

Of the second vocation of the disciples, by the which they were called to
Christ's familiarite. Luke. v. Cap. xii.
IT came to pass, that the people pressed upon Jesus to hear the word or
God, Luke.
and he stood by the lake of Genezareth, and saw two ships stand by the
lake side, but the fishers were gone out of them, and had washed their
nets. Then went he into one of the ships, which was Simons, and prayde him,
that he would thruste out a little from the land. And he sat him down, and
taught the people out of the ship. And when he had left of talking said unto
Simon. Launche out into the deep, and let slyppe your nets to make a
draughte. And Simon answered and said unto him: Master we have labored all
the night and taken nothing, but upon thy word, I will lowse forth the net.
And when they had so done, they took a great multitude of fishes, and their net
brake. And they made signs to their fellows which were in the other ship,
that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both ye
ships full, so that they sanke. When Simon Peter saw that, he fell down at
Jesus knees, and said: Lord, go fro me, for I am a sinful man, for he was
astonished, and all that were with him at this draughte of fyshes: which they
took, and so were James and John also the sons of Zebede, which were Simons
companions. And Jesus said unto them: fear not, for from hence forth thou
shalt take men, and they brought the ships to land, and left all, and
followed him.

Of the third vocation of the Apostles, by y^ which they are called to y^
discipleship of Christ Math. iiii. Mark. i. Cap. xiii.
ANd Jesus walked by the sea of Galile, and saw two brethren, Math.
Simon which was called Peter, and Andrew his brother casti^ge a net into y^
sea, for they were fyshers. And Jesus said unto the^: follow me, and I will make
you fishers of me^. And they strayghte way left their nets, and followed him.
And when he went forth from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son
of Zebede, and John his brother in the ship with Zebede their father,
mendynge their nets, and he called them. And they without tarienge, left the
ship, and their father (Mark) Zebede in the ship with the hired
servants, (Mathe) and followed him.

Of the healing of a certain demoniake in the sinagoge of the city of
Capernaum. Luke. iiii. Mark. i. Cap. xiiii.
ANd he went into Capernau^, Mark.
and immediatlye upon ye sabbothes, he entered into the sinagoge, and taught,
and they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one having
power, and not as ye scribes, [ Luk] for his preachinge was with power. [ Mar]
And in their sinagoge there was a man, [ Luk] possessed with a foul deuel, and
he cried loud, and said: Let me alone, what have we to do with thee, thou
Jesus of Nazareth?

Art thou come before the time to bestroye us? I know thee who thou art, even
that holy one of God. (Mark) And Jesus threatened him, (Luke) and rebuked him
and said: Hold thy tongue, (Mark) and depart out of him. And the foul
spiritetare him, and cried with a loud voice. And departed out of him (Luk)
and did him no harm. And there came a fear over them al, (Mark) and al they
wondered, in so much that they axed one another among them selves, and said:
What is this? what new learning is this? What manner of word is this? For he
commands the soul spirits with power, (Luke) and they depart (mark) and
are obedient unto him. (Luke) And y^ fame of him was noised thoroweout al
places, (mark) and borders of Galile.

Of the healynge of al diseases. Math. iiii. Cap. xv.
ANd Jesus went about al Galile, Math.
teaching in their sinagoges, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
healed al manner of sickness, and al manner of diseases among the people. And
his fame spread abroad through out all Siria. And they brought unto him al
sick people that were taken with diverse diseases and grypynges, and them that
were possessed with Deuels, and those which were Lunatike, and those that had
the Palsye, and healed the^. And there followed him a great multitude of people
from Galile, and from the ten cities, and from Jerusalem, and from the regions
that lie beyond Jordan.

Of Simons mother in law. L^. iiii. Mat. viii. Mar. i. ca. 16.
ANd Jesus rose up out of the sinagoge (Mar) forth with (Luke) and came into
Simons house, (Mar) and Andrewe with James and John. (Luk) And Simons mother in
law was taken with a great fever and they prayed him for her, and he standing
over her commanded the fever, (Mar) and took her by y^ hand, and the fever
left her, and she arose, and ministered unto them. (Mark.) And even when the
S^nne was gone down, (Math.) they brought him many that were possessed with
Deuels. (Luke) And he laid his hands upon every one of the^. (mat) and cast
out y^ spirits with a word, and healed all that were sick, that the thing
might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esai the prophet, saying:* Esaias. 53. a
He took on him our infirmities, and bare our sycknesses. (Luke) The deuels
also departed out of many, cryeng and saying: thou art Christ the son of
God. And he rebukynge them suffered not them to speak, for they kn^we that he
was Christ. (Mark.) And in the morning before day he arose and went out in to
a deserte place, and prayed there, (Luke) and the people sought him. (Mark,
Peter also and they that were with him, followed after him. And when they had
found him, they said unto him: Every man seeks thee. And he said unto them.
Let us go in to the next towns y^ I may preach there also, for thereto am I
come. Luk And the people came to Christ, and kept him that he should not
depart from them, unto whom he said: I must peache the Gospel of the
kingdom of God, to other cities also, for therefore am I sent. And he preached
in the sinagoges of Galile.

Of the calling of Matthew. Luc. v. Mat. ix Mar. ii. ca. xvii.
ANd afterward he went out, [ from the sinagogo] (Math) And as Jesus passed
^orth fro thence, Luke.
(Mar) he went forth again unto the sea, [ of Galile] and all the people came
to him, and he taught them. And as Jesus passed by he saw (Luke) a publicane,
(Mar) Leui y^ son of Alpheus, (Mat) named Mathewe sit and re^eauyng y^
custom, and said unto him: follow me, (Luk) and he let al, rose up, and
followed him.

Of the election of y^. xii. disciples unto the apostleship done in mou^te
Thabor: and of y^ first part of Christ's sermon made there, contaynynge eight
Beatitudes, and certain maledictio^s. Mat. v. Mar. iii. Luc. vi. ca. 18.
ANd it fortuned in the same time [ after that Christ had called more disciples]
that he went out^ into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer
to God. And when it was day, he called his disciples, (mar) whom he would,
and they came to him. And he ordened the twelve, that they should be with him,
and that he might send them to preach, and he gave them power to heal
sickenesses, and to cast out Deuels, [ Luke] whom he called also Apostles.
Simon whom he named Peter, (Mark.) and James the son of Zehede, and John
the brother of James, and gave them the name of Bonarges, that is to say: the
Children of Thonder, Philippe and Bartholomewe, Mathewe, and Thomas, James the
son of Alphe us, Simon of Cana, (Luke) which was called Zelotes, Judas ye
son of James mar Teddeus, and Judas Iscarioth [ Lu] which was a traitor,
(mar) and betrayed hi. (mat) and when he was set his disciples ca^ to hi, and
he opened his mouth, and taught the^ saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is y^ kingdom of heaven. Blessed are the meke, for they shall inherit
the earth. Blessed are they y^ mourn, for they shall be comforted, and blessed
be they that hunger and thyrste for righteousness, for they shall be fyiled.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shalse God. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be
called the children of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kyngedome of heaven. Blessed are ye when
men reuyle you, and persecute you, and falsely say al manner of euel sayings
against you for my sake. Rejoice and be glade for great is your reward in
heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets, which were before your days,
(Luke.) their fathers. And coming down with them from the mount, he srode upon
a plain in the field: and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude
of people from al Iewry and Jerusalem, and from Tire and Sidon by the sea
coast, which were come to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases: and
they that were vexed with foul spirits were healed. And all the people sought
to touch him, for there went virtue from him, and healedthe^ al. And he life
up his eyes upon his discyples, and said. Blessed are y^ poor, for youres is
the kyngedom of God. Blessed are ye y^ hunger here, for ye shall be satisfied.
Blessed are ye that weep here, for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye when me^ hate
you, and put you out of their companies, and reuyle you, and cast out your
name as an evil thing, for the son of man's sake, rejoice ye then and be
glade, for behold, your reward is great in heaven. But woe unto you rich, for
ye have your consolacion al ready. Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall
hunger. Woe unto you y^ laugh here, for ye shall weep and wail. Woe unto you when
every man prayseth you, even so did their fathers unto the false Prophets also.

What prelates ought to do in word and deed, and that Christ came not to
break, but to fulfill the law. Math. v. Capi. xix.
YE are the salt of y^ earth, butand if y^ salt have lost his saltnes, Math.
what can be salted there with? It is thence forth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trode^ underfoot of men. Ye are the light of the world. A
city that is set on an hyil, cannot be hyd, neither do men light a candel, and
put it under a bushel, but on a candelsticke, and it lyghteth all that are in
y^ house. But let your light so shine before men, that they may se your good
works, and gloryfye your father which is in heaven.

Think not that I am come to destroy the law or y^ Prophets: no, I am not
come to destroy the^, but to fulfill the^. For truly I say unto you, till heaven
and earth perysh, one ^o^e or one title of y^ law shall not escape, till al be
fulfilled. Whosoever breaks one of the least commandments, and teaches
men so he shall be called the leest in the kyngedom of heaven. But whosoever
observes and teaches the same, shall be called great in the kyngedome of
heaven. For I say unto you, except your righteousness exceade the
righteousness of the Scrybes and Pharisees, ye can not enter into the kyngedome
of heaven. Ye have heard, how it was said to them of the old time. *Thou
shall not kill, Exodus 29. c Deu. v. b.
for whosoever kylleth shall be in danger of judgment. But I say unto you,
whosoever ever is angry with his brother, is in danger of the judgment.
Whosoever says unto his brother Racha, is in danger of the counsel. But
whosoever says thou fool: is in danger of hell fire. Therefore when thou
offrest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has
ought against the, leave there thine offeringe before the altar, and go thy
way first and reconcyle thy self to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. Agree with thine aduersarye quickly while thou art in the way with him,
lest the adversary deliver the to thee judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
mynister, and then thou be cast into prison. I say unto the verily, thou shall
not come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthyng:* Exo. xx. c
xv^ij. b.
Ye have heard, how it was said to them of the old time. Thou shall not
commyt aduoutry: But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a wife lustynge
after her, has committed aduoutery with her already in his heart. Wherefore if
thy right eye offend thee, pluck him out, and cast him from thee, better it
is for thee that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body should be
cast into hell. And if thy right hand offend thee cut him of, and cast him
from thee, better it is that one of thy members peryshe, then that all thy body
should be cast into hell.* Deu. 24, a 19. b.
It is said, whosoever ever puts away his wife, let him give her a testimonial
of the deuorcement. But I say unto you, whosoever puts away his wife
[except it be for fornicacion] causes her to break matrimonye, and whosoever
maryeth her that is deuorced, breaks wedlock. Again ye have heard, how it
was said to them of old time*. Leu i. 19. c, Exo, xx. b Deuteronomy. v. b.
Thou shall not forswear thy self. But shalt perform thine oath to God.
But I say unto you. Swear not at all, nether by heaven, for it is gods
seat: nor yet by the earth, for it is his foot stool, nether by Jerusalem,
for it is the city of the great king. Nether shall thou swear by thy head,
because thou can not make one here white or black. Let your communicatio^
be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then that, comineth of evil.

Of having patience, and of shewi^g liberalite to our neighbors. Math. v.
Luck. vi. cap. xx.
YE* have heard how it is said: Mat. Exo. 21. c Leui. 24. d Deu. 2, d.
An eye for an eye, and a toothe for a toothe. But I say unto you, that ye
resyste not euel. But whosoever gives the a blow on the right cheke, turn to
him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And who so compels thee to go a
mile, go with him twain. Give to him that axeth, and from him that borow,
turn not away. (Luke) Whosoever axeth of thee, give him: and who so takes
away that is thine, axe it not again. And as ye would that men should do
unto you, even so do ye unto them.* Leuit. 19. d
Ye have herd how it is said, thou shalt love thine neighbor, and hate
thine enemy: But I say unto you, love your enemies. Bless them that curse
you. Do good to them that hate you. Pray for them which do you wrong, and
persecute you, that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven.
For he makes his sun to arise on the evil, and on the good: and sends his
rain on the just and unjust: for if ye love them which love you, what
reward shall ye have? Do not the publicans even so? And if ye salute and be
friendly to your brethren only, what synguler thing do ye? Do not the
publica^s likewise? (Luke) And if ye do good for your good doers, what thank
have ye therefore, for sinners also do the same. And if ye lend unto them of
whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye therefore? For sinners also lend
unto sinners, that they may receive as much again. But lend ye lokynge for
nothing thereof again: so shall your reward be great and ye shall be the
children of the highest, for he is kind, eue^ to the unthankful and to the
evil. (Math.) Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father in heaven is
perfect.

Humayne praise is not to be looked for in doing of good works. Mat. vi.
Capi. xxi.
Take heed that ye give not your aims in the syghte of men, Math.
to the intent y^ ye would be seen of them, or else ye get no reward of your
father which is in heaven. Whenever therefore thou geuest thine alms thou
shall not cause a trompet to be blown before thee as the ypocrytes do in
Sinag^ges, and in the streets, for to be praised of men, verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. But when thou doste alms, let not thy left hand
know what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be secret: and thy father
which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. And when thou prayest thou
shalt not be as the ypocrites are. For they love to stand and pray in the
synagoges, and in the corners of the streets to be seen of men. Uerelye I say
unto you, they have their reward. [ For why, they entend not to be heard, but
to be sene] But when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and shut thy door
to thee, and pray to thy father, which is in secret, and thy father which
sees in secret shall reward thee openly. [ To do a thing in the dark, is
only to will to be seen of God].

Of the manner of prayinge and forgeuynge. Math. vi. Luke. xi. Cap. xxii.
ANd when ye pray, babble not much as the heathen do, Math.
for they thyncke that they shall be heard for their much bablinge sake. Be
not ye like them therefore, for your father knows whereof ye have need,
before ye ask of him. After this manner therefore shall ye pray. Our father
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy king dome come. Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, (Luk) our
daily bread. (Math) And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trepasse against us. And led us not into temptacion, but deliver us from
evil. Amen. For if ye forgive other men their trespasses, your heavenly
father shall also forgive you your sins. But if ye will not forgive me^
their trespasses no more shall your father forgive you your trespasses.

Of the manner of fasting, and that we should not treasure up in earth, but in
heaven. Mathewe. vi. Luke. xii. Cap. xxiii.
Moreover, when ye fast, be not sad as the ypocrites are, for they disfigure
their faces, y^ they might be seen of men to fast. Uerelye, I say unto you,
they have their reward. But y^ when thou fastest, anoynte thine head, and
wash thy face, that it appear not unto me^, that thou fastest, but unto thy
father which is in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly. See that ye gather you not treasure upon the earth, where
rust and Mothes corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But gather
you treasure together in heaven, where nether ruste nor Mothes corruppe, and
where thieves another break up nor steal. For where your treasure is, there is
your heart also. The eye is the light of the body, if thine eye, [ that is
thine entencion,] then be single, all thy body shall b^ [ that is thy vvorke]
full of light: But and if thine eye be wicked, al thy body shall be full of
darckenesse, wherefore, if the light that is in thee be darkness, how
great then shall that darckenesse b^. No man can [ commaundynge contrary
thynges] serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one and love the
other, or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other. Ye can not
serve God and Mammon.

Therefore I say unto you, be not ye careful for your life, what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is
not y^ life more worthy the^ meat? And the body more of value then raiment. [
Solicitude whereby spiritual things are let is prohibited, not the
solicitude of providence.] Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not,
another reap, nor yet carye into the barnes, and yet your heavenly father
fedeth them. [ Luke] Consider y^ Ravens, they another sow nor reap, they have
also another stoore house nor barn, and yet God fedeth them. But how much
better are ye then the fowls? Who of you (though he took thought therefore
could put one cubyte to his stature? Seeing then ye be not able to do that
which is least, why take ye thought for the other? [ Mathevve] Consider the
Lilyes of the field how they grow: they labor not, nether spynne, and yet
for all that I say unto you, that even Salomo^ in all his royalte was not
arrayed like unto one of these. Wherefore, if God so cloth the grass which is
to day in the field, and to morrow shall be cast into the furnace: Shall he
not much moore do the same unto you (O ye of little faith.) Therefore, take ye
no thought, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewyth
shall we be clothed? (Luke.) And clyme not up on hye. The Heathen in the
world, seek after all such things. (Mat) Your heavenly father knows that
ye have need of all these things. Seek ye first therefore the kyngedome of
God, and the ryghteousnes thereof, so shall all these things be ministered unto
you. Care not the^ for to morrow, for the morrow shall care for it self. Every
day has enough of his own travail.

Of doing of mercy, and that we should not judge, and of the trust and
confidence of prayer. Luke vi. Mathewe. vii. Cap. xxiiii.
BE ye therefore merciful, Luke.
as your father also is mercyful. Judge not, and ye shall not be judged.
Comdempne not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgeuen.
Give, and to you shall be given, a good measure pressed down shaken together,
and runnynge over shall men give into your bosom. For with what measure ye
mete, with the same shall it be measured to you again. And he said a
similitude unto them. Can the blind lead the blind? Do they not both then
fall into the diche? The disciple is not above his master. But whosoever is
perfect, the same shall be as his master. But why see thou a moate in thy
brothers eye, and considrest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how
can thou say unto thy brother, hold still brother, I will pluck out the
moate out of thine eye, and thou thy self see not the beam in thine own
eye. Thou ypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine own eye, and then
shalt thou see clearly to pull the moate out of thy brothers eye. (Mathe)
Give not that which is holy to dogs, another cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they tread them under their feet, and the other turn again and
al to rent you. Ask, and it shall be given you: Seek, and ye shall find:
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever asks, receaueth: and
he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Is there
any man among you, which if his son asked him bread, would offer him a
stone? Or if he asked fish, would he profer him a serpent? Or if he asked him
an egg, would profer him a scorpion? If ye then which art evil, can give
your children good gifts: How much more shall your father which is in heaven,
give good things to them that ask him? therefore whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, even so do ye to the^. This is y^ law and the prophets.

Of the narowe way, and conclusion of the Lords sermon made in ye mount
Thabor. Mat. vii. Luke vi. Ca. xxv.
ENtrei at ye strait gate, for wide is the gate, Mathe.
and broad is ye way that leads to destruction, and many there be, which go
in there at. But strait is ye gate and narow is y^ way, which leads unto
life, and few there be y^ find it. Beware of false prophets, which come to you
in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves, ye shall know them
by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns? or figs of thistles? (Luk)
For it is no good tree, y^ brings forth euel fruit: and no evil tree y^
brings forth good fruit. Every tree is known by his fruit: For men gather
no figs of thorns, nor grapes of busshes. A good man out of ye good treasure
of his heart, brings forth y^ which is good. And an euel manne out of ye
euel treasure of his heart brings forth y^ which is euel. For of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. (Mat] Even so every good tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A
good tree cannot bring forth badde fruit, nor an evil tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Every tree y^ brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down,
and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. (Luke)
But why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not that I say unto you? (Matthew) Not
al they that say unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
But he that does the will of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into
the kyngedome of heaven: many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord have
we not prophesied in thy name? Have we not cast out deuels in thy name? have
we not done many great deeds in thy name? And then will I knowledge unto them.
I never knew you, depart from ye workers of iniquity. (Luke.) Whose ever
comes unto me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show you to
whom he is like. He is like unto a man which buyldeth a house, and dygged
deep, and laid the foundation upon a rock (Math.) And when abundance of rain
descended and the wyndes blew, and bet upon the same house, it fell not, because
it was grounded (Luke) upon a steadfast rock.

(Mat.) And whosoever hears these my sayings, and does them not, shall be
lykened unto a folyshe man which builte his house upon the sand (Luk) without
foundation. (Math.) Now when abundance of rain descended, and the wyndes
blewe, (Luke) and the stremes bet upon that house, and it fell immediately, and
great was the fall of that house. (Mat.) And it came to pass, that when Jesus
had ended those sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine, for he
taught them as one having power, and not as the Scribes.

Of the leper which was healed. Mat. viii. Mark. i. Luc. v Capi. xxvi.
When Jesus was come down from the mountain, much people followed him, Math.
(Luk.) and it fortuned as he was in a city. (that is nigh unto a city, for
Capernaum, which is from mount Thabor. iii. mile. (Math) And lo, a leper,
(Luke) a man full of leprosye: when he saw Jesus, (Mat) worshypped him, (Mar)
and kneled (Luke) and fell upon his face, and besoughte him, saying: Lord, if
thou will, thou canste make me clean [ Mark) and it pytied Jesus, (Luk) and
he touched him, and said, [ Mat.] I will, be y^ clean, and immediately his
leprosye was cleansed. Mark) And he straytly forbad him, and forthwith sent him
away, and said unto him. (Matthew) Se thou tell no man, but go* and show thy
self to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded in witness to
them. Leui. 14. ^
(Mark) But when he was departed, he began to speak much of it, and made
the deed known. (Luk.) But the fame of him went out farther abroad. And there
came much people together to hear him, and to be healed by him from their
sickenesses, (mark) in somuche that he could no more go in to the city
openly, but was without in desert places. (Luke) And he departed in to the
wyldernesses, and gave him self to prayer, (Mark) and they came unto him from
all quarters.

Of the Centurions servant. Mat. viii. Luc. vii. Cap. xxvii.
When he had ended his talking unto the people, Luke
he went into Carpernaum. And a capitaynes servant lay dead sick whom he
loved. When he heard of Jesus, he sent the elders of ye Jews unto him, and
prayed him that he would come and make his servant whole. But wha^ they ca^e
to Jesus, they be sought him instantly and said, he is worthy that thou
should show this for him, for he loves our people, and has builded us a
Synagoge, and Jesus went with them. Now when they were not far from the
house, the Centurion sent fre^des unto him. [ Math.) There came unto him a
captain, and besought him, saying: Sir, my servant lies sick at home of the
palsye, and is grievously payned. Jesus said unto him, I will come and heal him.
The captain answered and said: (Luke) Lord, trouble not thy self, I am not
worthy that thou shuldestenter under my roof: and therefore I thought not my
self worthy to come to the. (Mat) But speak the word only, and my servant
shall be healed. For I my self also am a man subject to the authorite of
another and have soldiers under me. Yet when I say to one: go, he goes, and
to another come, he comes, and to my servant do this, he does it. When
Jesus heard that, he maruayled, (Luk.) and turned him about, and said unto
the people, verelye I say unto you, (Math.) I have not found so great says,
no, not in Israel: but I say unto you, many shall come from the east and
weste, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaar, and Jacob in the kyngedome of heaven:
and the children of the kyngedome shall be cast out into utter darckenes, there
shall be wepinge and gnashinge of teth. And Jesus said unto the captain, go thy
way, and as thou beleuest, so be it unto thee. (Luke) And when they that were
sent came home again, they found the servant that was sick, whole.

Of the wyddowes son revived. Luc. vii. Cap. xxviii.
Luke Naim is not far from Nazareth.
ANd it fortuned afterward that he went into a city called Naim, and many of
his dyscyples went with him: and much people. When he came nigh unto the gate of
the city: behold, there was carried out one dead, which was the only son of
his mother, and she was a wydowe, and much people of the city went with her.
And when the Lord saw her he had compassion on her, and said unto her, weep
not. And he came nigh and touched the coffyn, and they that bare him stood still.
And he said: young man, I say unto thee arise. And the dead sat up, and
began to speak, and he delivered him unto his mother. And there came a fear
on them all, and they praised God and said: a great Prophet is risen up
among us, and God has vysyted his people.

Of a craftye Scribe, and of two that would follow Christ. Math. viii. Luc.
ix. Capi. xxix.
When Jesus saw much people about him, Math.
he commanded his dysciples to go over the water [ of Galile.) (Luke) And it
fortuned as they went by the way, (Math) there came a Scrybe and said unto
him: master, I will follow the whyther soever thou go. And Jesus said unto
him. The fores have holes, and the birds of the air have nestes, but the
son of man has not where on to rest his head. Another that was one of his
dysciples said unto him: Sir, give me leave first to go and burye my father.
But Jesus said unto him, follow thou me, and let the dead burye their dead.
(Luke] But go thou thy way, and preach the kyngedome of God. And another
said: Sir, I will follow thee. but give me leave first to go bydde them fare
well, which are at home in my house. Jesus said unto him. Who so puts his
hand to the plowe and looks back, is not meet for the kyngedome of God.

Of the quietinge of the sea, at Christ's commandment. Math. viii. Mar. iiii.
Luc. viii. cap. 30.
ANd the same day at even, he said unto them: Mark
Let us pass over. [ To the contrary side beyond the sea.] And they let the
people go, and took him as he was in the ship, and there were more ships with
him. (Math) And he entered into a ship, and his disciples followed him, (Luke)
and he said unto them: Let us pass over to the other side of the lake, and
as they sailed, he slept. (Math) And behold there arose a great tempest in the
sea, in so much that the ship was covered with waves, (Luke) and the waves
fell upon them, and they stood in great ieoperdye, (Math) and he was a sleep,
(Mar.) behind in the ship upon a pilowe. (Mathe) And his disciples came unto
him, and awoke him saying: Lord, save us we perish. Then he arose and rebuked
y^ wyndes and ye sea, and there followed a great calm. (Luke) But he said unto
them: where is your faith? (Matthew) Why are ye fearful, (o ye of little
faith?) (Mark) have ye yet no faith? (Math.) and the men maruayled, (Marke]
and they were excedynglye afraid, and said one to another, what is he this: [
Math.] What manne is this? (Mark,) for wind and sea are obediente unto him.

Of two Demoniakes which were healed mat. viii. Luc. viii. Mar. v. capi. xxxi.
ANd they sailed [ Mar.) and came unto the other side of the sea, Luke.
(Math.) into the country of the Gergesytes, (Luke) which is over against
Galyle. And when he went out of the ship to land (Math) there met him two
possessed of deuyls, which came out of the graves, and were out of measure
fearce, so that no man might go by that way, (Luke) which had a deuell a
long time, and did wear no clothes, and tarried in no house, but (Mar) his
dwelling was in the graves, and no man could bind him: no, not with cheynes:
for he was often bo^d with fetters, and cheynes, and plucked the cheynes asunder,
and brake the fetters in pieces, and no man could tame him. And he was always
both day and night upon the mountains and in the graves, cryinge and
beatynge him self with stones, (Luk) he was driven of the devil into the
wyldernes, (Mat) but when he saw Jesus a far of, he ran, and adourynge
him, (Luke) and fell down before him. (Math) And behold, they both cried out,
(Mark) with a loud voice, (mat) saying: Oh Jesus thou son of God, what have
we to do with thee? (Luk) of the most highest, (Mathe) why art thou come
hither to torment us before the time be come? (Mark) I charge thee by God,
(Luk) and I beseech thee that thou will not torment me, for he commanded the
foul spirit, (Mar) to go out of y^ man. And he asked him, what is thy name? He
answered, and said: my name is legion: for there be many of us, (Luke) for
there were many deuels entered into him. And they besought hi, (Mar) instantly,
(Luk) that he would not command the^ to go into the deep, (mar) nor y^ he
would not expel the^ out of that contre. (mat) There was not far of from the^ a
great heerde of swine, (mar) feding about ye mo^taines, in y^ feldes. (mat)
Then all the deuels besought him, saying: If y^ cast us out, send us into ye
heerd of swyne, (mar) that we may enter in to them, and anon Jesus gave them
leave, (math) and he said unto them: go your ways. Then went they out, and
departed into the heerd of swyne. And behold, the hole heerd of swyne was
carried with violence. (mark) headlonge into the sea, they were about two
thousand, and were drowned in the sea, (mathe) and perished in the water
(^Luk) but when the heerdmen saw what had chanced, they f^edde, (mat) and
went their ways, and showed in the city, (mar) and in the country, (Luk) and
in y^ villages, (man) al these things, and what had fortuned unto the
possessed of the deuel. And behold, al ye city came out and met Jesus, (Luc)
for to se what was done, and came to Jesus, (mar) and saw him which was
possessed, and vexed with the deuel, (Luk) out of who^ the deuels were
departed, sytting at Jesus feet clothed, (Mar) and in his right mind, and they
were afraid. [ Luk] And they that had seen it, told them how the possessed
was healed of the Legion, (Mark) and of the swine, [ Mathe] and when they saw
him, [ Luk] the whole multitude of the Gabaranites besought him (Mat) for to
depart, (Mar) and go out of their coasts, (Luk) and from them, for there was
a great fear come upon them (Mark) when he was come into the ship, [ that
from the country of the Gerazerithes he might return into Galile.] the
possessed prayed him, that he might be with him. Nevertheless, Jesus would not
suffer him, but said unto him: Go, (Luk) and return home to thy house,
(Mark) and to thine own, and tell them how great been fytes Jesus has done
for thee, and how he has had mercy upon thee, (Luke) and he went through
out all the city, (Mark) and began to publyshe in the ten cytyes, how
great benefytes Jesus had done for him, and every man meruayled. And when
Jesus passed over again by ship, there gathered much people unto him, and
waited for him, by the sea side.

Of him that was healed of the Palsye. Mathe. ix. Mark. ii. Luc. v. Ca. xxxii.
ANd Jesus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city,
(Math) Math.
Capernaum after certain days. (Luk) And it fortuned upon a day, that he sat
and taught, (Mark) and it was noysed that he was in the house, and immediatlye
there was gathered together a great multitude, in so much that they had no
rowme, no not without the door. And he spoke the word unto them, (Luke) and
there satte the Pharisees, and the docters of the law, which were come out of
all the towns of Galile, and Iewrye, and from Jerusalem. And the power of the
Lord healed every man, (Math) and lo, they brought him a man sick of the
palsye lyenge in his bed, (Mark.) borne of four, (Luke) and they sought how
they might bring him in, and lay him before hi^. And when they could not
find by what way they might bring him in for the people, they climmed up to
the top of ye house, (mar) they uncovered the rofe of the house where he was,
and when they had made a hoole, (Luke) they let him down through the tylynge
with the bed, among them before Jesus. (mat) And when Jesus saw the faith of
them, he said to the sick of ye palsye. Son, be of good chere, thy sins
are forgeuen thee. (Luk) And the Scribes and pharisees began to think, (mar)
and thought in their hearts, (Luk) saying among them selves. What is he
this, that speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but only God? (mark)
And when Jesus knew in his holy spirit, (Luk) their thoughts, he answered
and said unto them: (Math) wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Whether
is it easier to say, (mark) to ye sick of ye palsy, thy sins are forgeuen
thee, or to say: arise, take up thy bed and walk? But y^ ye may know, that
the son of man has power to forgive sins upon earth, he said unto the
sick of the palsye: I say unto thee, arise, take up thy bed, and go home,
(Luk) and immediately he role up before the^, and took up the bed that he had
lien upon. and went home, and magnified God. And they were al astonished, and
gave God y^ praise, (mat) glorifiynge God which had given such power unto me^,
(Luk) and they were filled with great fear, and said: we have seen marvelous
things to day, (mark) for we never saw such.

Of y^ feast in Mathewes house, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. Ca. 33.
LEuy made him a great feast in his house, Luke.
(math) and it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in ye house: behold, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down also with Jesus and his disciples,
(mark) for there were many that followed him, (mat) and when the pharisees and
Scribes saw y^ (mar) he did eat with publicans and sinners, (Luk) they
murmured against his disciples, and said: (mat) why eats your master with
publicans and sinners? (Mark) and drinckech, [ Luke] and wherefore do ye eat
and drink with them? and Jesus answered, and said unto them. The whole uede
not the Phisi^ion, but they that are sick, (Math) go, and learn what this
means, I have pleasure in mercy, and not in offering. (mar) I am not come to
call the righteous, but the sinners (Luke) to penance. (Mark) And the
disciples of John, and of ye Pharisees fas^ed, (Mat) Then came they to him,
saying: why do we and the Pharisees fast so often, (Luk) and the disciples of
John pray, also the disciples of ye Pharisees likewise, but thy disciples eat
and drink, (Math) and fast not. Jesus said unto them: Can the children of
the brydegrome, (Mark) and wedding fast (Mat) and mourn, (Mar) while the
brydegrome is with them? they can not fast, but the time will come that y^
bridegroom shall be taken from the^, and then shall they fast in those days.
(Luk) And he said unto the^ a similitude, no man puts a piece of new^ cloth
into an old garment, (Mar) no man sows a piece of new cloth to an old
garment, for else he takes away ye new piece from ye old. (Mat.) He takes the
fullness from the garment. (Luke) For he renteth the new (Math) and the rent
is made greater, [ Luke] and the new agrees not with the old.

[ Math.] Neither do men put new wine in to old vessels, for then the
vessels break, and the wine runs out and they peryshe, but they pour new
wine in to new vessels, [ Mark] and must be put, [ Luke] and so are they both
preserved. And there is no man that drinks the old, would strayghte way
have the new, for he says the old is pleasanter.

Of the reuyuynge of the Arche synagoges daughter. And of her that was dyseased
with an issue of blood. mat. ix. Mark. v. Luke. viii. Capi. xxxiiii.
While he thus spoke unto them, behold a Prince [ Luke] of the synagoge, Mat.
whose name was Iayrus, fell at Jesus feet and besought him, that he would come
into his house: for he had but one daughter upon a twelve year of age, and the
lay at ye point of death. (Mat.) And he worshypped him, saying: Lord, my
daughter is even now deceassed, but come and lay thy hand on her, and she shall
live, Jesus arose [ from Matheas house] and followed him with his disciples
(Mark) and much people. (Luke) And it chaunsed as he went the people thro^ged
him. (Math.) And behold, there was a woman which had ye bloody issue twelve
years, (Mark,) and had suffered much of many phisicio^s, (Luke) and spent al her
substance nor was any thing ye better, nor could be healed of none, (Mark.)
but rather in worse case. Wha^ she herd of Jesus, she came behind among the
people.

(Luke) And touched the hemme of his garment, (Mat.) and said wtin her self, if
I may touch his clothes, I shall be whole. (Luke) And immediatlye her issue of
blood was staunched [ Mar.) And the fountain of her blood was dried up, and
she felt in her body, y^ she was healed of the plage. And forthewith Jesus felt
in him self, ye power that was gone out of him, and turned him to the people,
and said. Luke Who has touched me, (Mark) my clothes? (Luke) But when they al
denied, Peter said, and they y^ were with him. Master, the people thronge thee,
and thruste thee, and thou say, who has touched me? Jesus said: Some body
has touched me, for I know and feel y^ there is virtue gone out from me.
(Mark) And he looked about to se her, that had done it. (Luke) But when the
woman saw that she was not hyd, she came tremblinge and fearinge, and fell
down before him, and told him before all the people, for what cause she had
touched him, and how she was healed immediately. (Math.) But Jesus turned him
about, and beheld her, saying: daughter be of good chere, thy faith has
made the safe, (Luke) go thy way in peace (Mar.) and be whole of thy plage,
(mat) and she was made whole, eue^ ye same hour. (Mar) While he yet spoke,
there came certain to ye ruler of ye Sinagoge, and said. Thy daughter is dead,
why troublest y^ the master any more? (Luke) disease not him. Wha^ Jesus heard
that, (Mar) which was spoken. He said unto the ruler of the synagoge, [ Luke)
the maidens father: fear not, believe only, and she shall be made whole. (Math.)
And when Jesus came into the rulers house. (Mark) He suffered no man to follow
him, but Peter and James and John James brother. And he came into the rulers of
the Sinagoges house, and saw the business, and them that wayled and wept
greatly (Mat) and ministrelles, (Luke.) they wept all and sorowed for her:
but he said: weep not. (Mark) Why make ye this a do, and weep? (Math) Get you
hence, for the maid is not dead, but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn,
(Luke) knowing well that she was dead. (Mark) And he drove them all out, and
took the father and ye mother of the maiden, and them that were with him, and
went in where the maid lay. And he holdinge y^ maid by the hand (Luke)
cried out, (Mark) and said unto her, Thabita cumy, which is by
interpretacion, maiden, I say unto thee, arise. (Luke) And her spyryte came
again, and she arose strayghte way, (Mark) and walked, (Luke) and he
commanded to give her meat. (Mark) She was twelve year old, and they were
greatly astonyed (Luke) her elders, whom he commanded to tell no man what was
done, (Math.) and this was noysed through out all the land. (Mark) And he
departed thence, and came in to his own country, [ Nazareth] and his
dyscyples followed him.

Of two blind men illuminated, and of the domme demoniake. Matthew. ix. Capitu.
xxxv.
ANd as Jesus departed thence, Math.
two blind men followed him, cryinge, and saying: O thou son of David, have
mercy upon us. And when he was come home, the blind came to him. And Jesus
said unto them, believe ye that I am able to do this? And they said unto him,
yea Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying: According to your faith, be
it unto you. And their eyes were opened. And Jesus charged them, saying: Se
that no man know of it. But they departed, and spread abroad his name
throughoute all the land. Wha^ these were gone: behold, they brought to him a
domme manne possessed of a devil. And when the devil was cast out, the do^me
spoke. And the people maruayled saying: it was never so seen in Israel, but ye
Pharisees said: he casts out devils, through the chief devil.

The dysciples are commanded to pray the Lord of the harvest to send
workmen. Mat. ix. Mar. vi. Luc. x. cap. xxxvi.
ANd Jesus went about in all cities, Math.
and towns, teaching in their synagoges, and preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healynge al manner sycknesse, and all manner disease among the
people. And when he saw the people he had compassion on them, because they
were pyned away, and scattered abroad, even as sheep having no shepeherde.
Then said he to his disciples, the harueste is great, but the laborers are
few: wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers in to his
harvest.

Of the sendynge forth of the twelve Apostles to preach with power, to heal
the dyseased. Math. x. xi. Mar. vi. Luc. ix. x. Capitu. xxxvii.
ANd he called his twelve discyples unto him. Math.
(Mark) And began to send them two and two (Mat.) and gave them power over
the unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal al manner of syknesses,
and all manner of dyseases. The names of y^ twelve Apostles are these. The first
Simo^ called Peter, and Andrewe his brother, James ye son of Zebede, and John
his brother, Philyp, and Bartholomew, Thomas, and Matthew the Publicane, James
the son of Alphe, and Lebbeus otherwise called Thaddeus, Simon of Cana, and
Judas Iscarioth which betrayed him. These twelve sent Jesus (Luke) to preach
y^ kingdom of god, and and to heal the sick (Mathe.) and commanded them
saying: Go not in to the ways of the heathen, and in to the cities of the
Samaritans enter ye not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, go and preach saying: The kyngedome of heaven is at hand, heal the
sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out the deuels: frely^ ye
have received freely give again, possess not gold, nor silver. [ Marke] And
commanded them that they should take nothing with them in their journey, save
only a rode. [ small, the which the preacher among the Jews used, as now
among us a sergeante does use. (Luke) And he said unto them: ye shall take
nothing with you by the way, another staff, (great, where upon men lean,
nor scrippe, nor bread, nor money (Mark.) nor money in the gyrdell, nor two
cotes, (Math.) nether shues (Mar.) But be shod with sandales. (Mat) For the
workman is worthy of his meat. Into what so ever city or town (Mark) or
house ye shall enter (Math.) enquire in it, who is mete for you, and there
abide, til ye go thence. And when ye come into an house, salute ye same,
saying: Peace be unto this house. And if ye house be mete for you, your peace
shall come upon it. But if it be not mete for you, your peace shall return to
you again. And if no man will receive you, nor hear your preaching, depart out
of y^ city or house, and shake the dust of your feet (Luk) for a witness over
the, (math) truly I say unto you: it shall be easier for the land of Sodoma
and Gomorra in the day of judgment then for y^ city. Be hold I se^d you forth
as sheep among wolves, be ye therefore wise as serpe^tes, and innocent as
doves, beware of men, for they shall deliver you up to ye councels, and shall
scourge you in their sinagoges, and ye shall be brought before princes and
kings for my sake in witness to them, and to the gentiles. But when they
deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given
unto you even in the same hour, what ye shall say. For it is not ye that
speak, but the spirit of your father, which speaks in you. The brother shall
deliver the brother to death, and ye father the son, and the children shall
arise against their fathers and mothers, and shall help them to death, and ye
shall be hated of all men, for my names sake. But he that endures to ye end
shall be saved. When they persecute you in one city, fly into another. I tell
you for a truth, ye shall not finyshe [ nor your successors, conuertynge] all the cities of Israel, till the son of man come, [ to the universal
judgment.] The disciple is not above the master, another the servant above
the Lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as his master, and the
servant as his Lord, if they have called the good man of the house Beelzebub, [
saying that he vvorked in Belzebub] how much moore shall they call them of
his household so? Fear them not therefore. There is nothing hid, that shall
not be openly showed, and nothing secret, that shall not be known. What I
tell you in darckenesse, that speak ye in light, and what ye hear in the
ear, that preach ye upon the house tops. And fear ye not them that kill
the body, and b^ not able to kill the soul: But rather fear him, which is
able to destroy both soul and body into hell. Are not two sparowes sold for
a farthynge? Yet does there none of them light upon the ground without your
father. And now are all the heeres of your Head told. Fear ye not
therefore, ye are of moore value then many Sparowes. Therefore, who soever
knowledgeth me before men, him will I knowledge also before my father, which
is in Heaven. But whosoever denies me before men, him will I also deny
before my father which is in Heaven.

Thyncke not that I am come to send peace upon Earth: I am not comme to
send peace but a Sword. For I am comme to set a man at varyaunce against
his father, and the Daughter against the mother, and the Daughter in law,
against her mother in law, and a man's foes shall be they of his own
household, who so loves father and mother moore then me, is not mete for me:
and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not mete for me. And he
that takes not his cross and follows me, is not mete for me, who so fyndeth
his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find
it. (Luk) He that hears you, hears me, and he that dispiseth you, dispyseth
me, but whosoever despises me, despises him that sent me, (mathe) he that
receaueth you, receaueth me, and whosoever receaueth me, receaueth him that sent
me. And he y^ receaueth a prophet in ye name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophets reward. He that receaueth a righteous man, in ye name of a righteous
man shall receive a ryghteons man's reward. And whosoever gives unto one of
the least of these a cup of cold water only to drink in ye name of a
disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. And it came to
pass when Jesus had made an end of commaundynge his twelve disciples,
(Luke) they departed and went through the towns preaching the gospel, and
healyng every where, (mar) and they went forth and preached that men should do
penance, and they cast out many deuyls, and many that were sick anoynced they
with oil and healed them, (mat) and he departed thence to teach and to preach
in their ctyes [ In the which the Apostles had remained preaching peace]

Of John's interrogation. Art thou he that shall come. Mathe. xi. Luke. vii.
Cap. 38.
ANd the disciples of John showed him of al these things. (mat) Mat.
When John being in prison herd of the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples to Jesus, and said unto him: Art thou he that shall come, or shall
we look for another? (Luke) When the men came to him, they said: John the
Baptist has sent us unto thee, saying: Art thou he that shall come, or shall
we look for another? And at the same hour, healed he many from syckenesses
and plagues, and from evil spirits, and to many that were blind, gave he
sight. (Math) And Jesus answered, and said unto them: Go your ways, tell John
again, what ye see and hear. The blind see, the lame go, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead rise again, and the Gospel is preached
to the poor, and blessed is he, that is not offended in me. When they went
their way Jesus began to speak unto the people, concerning John, what are ye
gone out to see in the wilderness? Would ye see a read shaken with the wind?
Or what are ye gone out to see? Would ye see a man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold, they that weer soft clothing (Luk) and are in precious array, and live
delycatelye, (Mathe) are in kings houses. But what are ye gone out to see? A
Prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and moore then a Prophet. For this is he of who^
it is written: * Behold, Mathe. 3
I send my messanger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee,
verily I say unto you: Among the children of women arose there not a greater
then John the Baptist. Notwithstanding he that is left in the kingdom of
heaven, is greater. [ For the least of the blessed is perfecter, then an^e
just that is yet alyue] From the time of John Baptist hitherto, the kingdom
of God suffers violence, and the violent pluck it unto them. [ by the
violence of penaunce] For all the prophets and the law prophesied unto John.
Also if ye will receive it, this is Helias, which should come.

Whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear. (Luke) And all the people that heard
him, and the publicans justified God, and were baptized with the baptyme of
John. But the Pharisees and Scribes despised the counsel of God against them
selves, and were not Baptized of him.

But the Lord said: Where unto shall I lyken the men of this Generation?
And whom are they like? They are like unto children, which sytte in the
Market and cry one to another, and say.

We have pyped unto you, and ye have not daunced, we have mourned unto you, and
ye have not wept. For John the Baptist came, and did eat no bread, and drancke
no wine, and ye say that he has the devil. The son of man is come, and
eats and dryncketh, and ye say: (mat) Lo, what a glotton and a wine bybber
this man is, and the friend and companion of publicans and sinners. (Luke) And
wisdom is justified of her children. [ Disciples.]

Of the maledictions of the cities, unto the which Christ had preached. Math.
xi. Mar. iii. Luke. x. Cap. xxxix.
THen began he to vpbrayed the cities in the which most of his miracles were
done, Matthew
because they amended and repented not. Corozaim is from Capernaum. iiii. mile.
Woe unto thee Corozaim. Woe unto thee Bethsaida: For if the Miracles, which have
been showed among you, had been done in Tire and Sodom, Bethsaida is from
Capernaum, iiii. mile.
they long ago sytting in sack clothe, and ashes (Luke) had done penance.
Nevertheless I say unto you, it shall be easyer for Tire and Sodom, in the day
of judgment then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lift up unto heaven,
shalt be brought down unto hell, for if the miracles which have been done in
thee, had been showed in Sodom, they had remained unto this day.

Nevertheless I say unto you, it shall be easyer for the land of Sodom in the
day of judgment the^ for thee. (Mark) And they came into ye house, then
assembled the people together again, in so much that he had no leisure to
eat. And when they that were about him heard of it, they went out to hold
him, for they said he was become furious. And y^ Scrybes that were come down
from Jerusalem, said: he has Beelzebub.

Of the Apostles returning to Christ. Mar. vi. Luke. ix. capi. 40.
ANd the Apostles came again, Luke,
(Mark.) and came together unto Jesus, and told him al, and what they had done
and taught. And he said unto them. Let us go out of the way into the
wilderness, and rest a little (Luk.) And he took them to him and went aside
into a solitarye place by the city called Bethsaida. (Mark) For there were
many comers and goers, and they had not time enough to eat.

Of the sendynge forth of the seuentye and two dyscyples. Luke. x. Capitulo.
xli.
AFter this the Lord appointed out other seuentye and two and sent them two and
two before him in to every city and place whether he him self would come,
Luke.
and said unto them. The harueste is great, but the laborers are few, pray
therefore the Lord of the harueste, to send for the laborers into his
harvest. Go your way, behold: I send you forth as the lambs among the
wolves, bear neither waller nor scrype, nor shues, and salute no man by the
way. Into what soever house ye enter, first say peace be in this house: And
if the child of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him. If no, then
shall your peace turn to you again. But tarry ye still in the same house
eating and brynckynge such as they have: for the labourer is worthy of his
reward. Go not from house to house, and into whatsoever city ye enter, and
they receive you, eat such things as are set before you. And heal the sick
that are there, and say unto them. The kyngedome of GOD is come nigh unto you,
but in to whatsoever city ye come, and they receive you not, go your way
out into the streets of the same, and say: even the very duste which
cleueth upon us of your city wype we of upon you. But of this ye shall be sure
that the kyngedome of GOD was come nigh unto you, I say unto you, it shall be
easyer for Sodom in that day, then for that city.

Of the coming again of the seuentye and two disciples Matthew. xi. Luc. x.
Capitulo. xlii.
THe seuentye and two came again with joy and said, Luke
Lord the deuels also are subdued unto us in thy name. But he said unto them, I
saw Satan fall down from heaven as a lightening. Behold I have given you
power to tread upon serpents, and scorpions, and over all power of the
enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. Nevertheless rejoice not ye in this that
the spirits are subdued unto you: but rejoice that your names are writ in
heaven. At the same hour rejoiced Jesus in the holy spirit, (Mat and
answering, (Luke) said, I praise thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth,
(Matthew) that thou haste hyd these things from the wise and prudent, and
opened them unto babes, even so father, (Luk.) for so it pleased thee. All
things are given over unto me of my father, and no man knows who the son
is, but only the father: another who the father is, save only the son, and
he to whom the son will open it. And he turned him to his disciples, and
said. Blessed are ye eyes which se that ye se. For I say unto you, many
Prophets and kings would have seen the things that ye se, and have not seen
the^, and to have heard the things that ye hear, and have not heard them.
(Math) Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and I will ease you.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meke and lowlye of heart, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light.

Of the Samaritane that took cure of the wounded. Luke. x. Capitulo. xxxiiii.
ANd behold, Luke.
there stood up a Scrybe, and tempted him, and said: Master, what must I do
to inheret everlasting life? he said unto him, what is written in the law?
How read thou? He answered and said. Thou shalt love thy Lord God with
all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. He said unto him. Thou have answered
right, this do, and thou shalt live. But he would have iustyfyed him self,
and said unto Jesus, who is then my neighbor?

Jesus lokynge upward said. A certain man went down from Jerusalem unto
Jericho, and fell among murderers, which stryped him out of his clothes,
and wounded him, and went their way and left him half dead. And by chance
there came down a priest the same way: and when he saws him, he passed by.
And likewise a Leuyte, when he came nigh unto the same place, and saw him, he
passed by. But a Samaritane was going his journey, and came that way, and
when he saw him, he had compassion upon him, went unto him, bound up his
wounds, and poured oil and wine therein, and lift him up upon his beast,
and brought him in to the ynne, and made prouysyon for him. Upon the next
day when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the hooste,
and said unto him. Take cure of him, and what soever thou spendest more, I
will pay it thee, when I come again, which of these three now thynkeste
thou, was neighbor unto him that fell among the murderers?

He said, he that showed mercy upon him. Then said Jesus unto him. Go thy
way then, and do thou likewise.

Of Mary Magdalens conversion. Luke. vii. Capi. xliiii.
ANd one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. Luke.
And he went into ye house, and set him down at the table. And behold there
was in that city a woman which was a sinner.

When she knew that Jesus sat at the table in ye Pharisees house, she bought a
box with oyntement, and stood behind at his fete, and wept, and began to
water his feet with tears, and to wype them with her heeres of her head, and
kyssed his fete, and anointed them with ointment. But when the Pharise which
had called him saw that. He spoke within him self, and said: if this man
were a Prophet, he would know who, and what manner of woman this is y^ touched
him, for she is a sinner. And Jesus answered and said unto him: Simon, I have
somewhat to say unto thee. He said: master say on. A certain lender had two
detters, the one ought five hundredth pens, the other fyftye, but when they had
nothing to pay, he forgave them both: tell me which of them will love him
most? Simon answered and said: he, (I suppose) to whom he forgave most.
Then said Christ unto him. Thou haste judged right. And he turned him to the
woman, and said unto Simon: See thou this woman? I am come into thine house,
thou haste given me no water unto my fere, but she has watered my feet with
tears, and dried the^ with y^ heeres of her head. Thou haste given me no
kiss, but she (sense the time y^ she came in) has not ceased to kiss my
fete: Thou have not anointed my head with ointment, but she has anointed my
head with ointment. Therefore I say unto thee, many sins are forgeuen her,
for she has loved much, but unto whom less is forgeuen, the same loves
the less. And he said unto her: Thy sins are forgeuen thee. Then they that
satte at the table with him, began to say, within them selves: What is he
this, that forgeueth sins also? But he said unto the woman, thy faith has
saved thee, go thy way in peace.

Of Marthas ministerye and service Luke. x. Cap. xlv.
IT fortuned as they went that he entered into a town, where there was a woman
named Martha, which received him into her house^ And she had a sister called
Mary, which satte her down at Jesus feet, and herkened unto his word. But
Martha made her self much a do for to serve him. And she stepped unto him, and
said: Lord, carest thou not that my sister lets me serve alone? Bydde her
therefore, that she help me. But Jesus answered, and said unto her: Martha,
Martha, thou take thought and combrest thy self about many things, there
is but one thing needful. Mary has chosen a good part, which shall not be
taken from her.

Of the doctrine of prayer. Luke. xi. Capitu. xlvi.
ANd it fortuned that he was in a place and prayed. And when he had ceased, one
of his disciples said unto him: Lord, teach us to pray as John taught his
disciples. He said unto the^: When ye pray say. Our father which art in
heaven, wed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done. Give us this dai
our daily bread. And forgive us our syns, for we also forgive al the^ y^ are
detters unto us. And led us not into temptacion, but deliver us from evil. And
he said unto them: Which of you is it that has a friend, and should go to him
at mydnyght, and say unto him: Lend me three loves, for a friend of mine is
come to me out of the way, and I have nothing to set before him: And he within
should answer, and say: disquiet me not, the door it shut already, and my
children are with me in ye chamber, I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto
you, and though he would not arise and give him, because he is his friend, yet
because of his unshamefast begginge, he would arise, and give him as many as he
neded. And I say unto you also. Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek, and ye
shall find: knock, and it shall opened unto you. For whosoever asks,
receaueth: and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks, shall it be
opened, if the son ask bread of any of you y^ is a father, will he give him a
stone therefore? Or if he ask a fish, will he for ye fish offer him a serpent?
or if he ask an egg, will he profer him a scorpion? If ye then which are evil
can give your children good gifts, how much moore shall the father of heaven
give the holy spirit to them that ask him.

The third part of the second Book, contaynynge what Jesus did and said in
the two and thyrty year of his age.
Of the woman of Samaria. John. iiii. Cap. xlvii.
HE left the land of Iewrye, and departed again into Galile. John.
But he must needs go through Samaria. Then came Jesus into a city of
Samaria called Sichar, nigh unto the piece of land that Jacob gave unto Joseph
his son: Sichar is from Samaria iiii. mile, and from Jerusalem. 26. mile.
Samaria is xxx. mile from lerusalem.
And there was Jacobs well. Now when Jesus was w^ry of his journey, he sat him
down so upon the well, and it was about the syxt hour. Then came there a woman
of Samaria to draw water. Jesus said unto her: give me drink, for his
disciples were gone their way into the City to bye meat. So the woman of
Samaria said unto him: How is it that thou ask drink of me, seeing thou
art a Jew, and I a woman of Samaria: For the Jews meddle not with the
Samaritans. Jesus answered, and said unto her: If thou knew the gift of
GOD, and who it is that says unto thee, give me drink, thou would ask
of him, and he would give thee, the water of life. The woman said unto him:
Sir, thou haste nothing to draw with all, and the Well is deep, from whence
^hen haste thou that water of life? Art thou greater then our father Jacob
which gave us this Well? And he him self drancke thereof, and his Children, and
his Catell. Jesus answered, and said unto her: Whosoever drynketh of this
water, shall thyrste again: But whosoever ever shall drink of the Water that I
shall give him, shall never be moore a thyrste. But the water that I shall give
him, shall be in him a Well of water, which spryngeth up into everlasting
life. The woman said unto him: Sir, give me that same water, that I thyrste
not, another need to comme hither to draw. Jesus said unto her: Go, call thy
Husband, and comme hither. The woman answered, and said unto him: I have no
Husband. Jesus said unto her: Thou haste said well, I have no Husband, for
thou haste had five Husbands: And he whom thou haste now is not thine
Husband: There saydest thou right. The woman said unto him: Sir, I see that
thou art a Prophet. Our fathers worshypped upon this Mountain: And ye say
that at Jerusalem is the place, where men ought to worship. Jesus said
unto her: Woman, believe me, the time comes, and is now all ready that the
true Worshyppers shall worship the father in Spirit and in ye truth: For the
father will have such so to worship him. GOD is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and the truth. The woman said unto
him: I wotte that Messyas shall come, which is called Christ: When he
comes, he shall tell us all things. Jesus said unto her: I that speak unto
thee, am he. And in the mean season came his disciples, and they meruayled
that he talks with the woman: Yet said no man what ask thou. Or what
talkest thou with her? Then the woman let her Pot stand, and went into the
City, and said unto the people: Come, see a man, that has told me all
that ever I did. Is not he CHRIST? Then went they out of the City, and
came unto him. In the mean while his Disciples prayed him, and said: Master,
eat: but he said unto them: I have meat to eat, that ye know not of. Then
said the Disciples among them selves, has any manne brought him meat?
Jesus said unto them. My meat is this, that I do the will of him that s^nte
me, and to fynyshe his work. Say not ye your selves, there are yet four
Months, and then comes the Harueste? Behold, I say unto you: Lift up
your Eyes, and look upon the Field, for it is White all ready unto the
Harueste. And he that reapeth receaueth reward, and gathers fruit to
everlasting Life, that both he that sows, and he that reapeth may enjoy
together. For herein is the Proverb true. One sows, another reapeth, I have
sent you to reap, that, whereon ye bestowed no labor, other have labored,
and ye are comme into their labors. Many of the same City believed on him.
For the saying of the woman, which testified. He has told me all that ever
I did.

Now when the Samaritans came to him, they besought him y^ they would tarry
with them. And he abode there two days, and many mo believed because of his
word, and said unto the woman. We believe now henceforthe, not because of thy
saying: we have heard him our selves, and know that this of a truth is
Christ the Saueour of the world. After two days he departed thence, and went
into Galyle. For Jesus him self testified, that a Prophet is nothing set by in
his own country.

Of the Rulers Son. John. iiii. Capitulo. xlviii.
ANd Jesus came again into Cana in Galile, John.
where he turned the water unto wine. And there was a certain ruler whose
son lay sick at Capernaum. This heard that Jesus came out of Iewry in to
Galyle, and went unto him, and besoughte him that he would come down and
help his son, for he lay dead sick And Jesus said unto him, except ye se
tokens and wonders ye believe not. The ruler said unto him. Come down Sir, or
ever my child dye. Jesus said unto him. Go thy way, thy son lives. The man
believed the word that Jesus said unto him, and went his way. And as he was
going down, his servant met him, and told him, and said. The child
lives. Then enquired he of them the hour wherein he began to amend, and
they said unto him yesterday about the seventh hour the fever left him. Then
the father perceived that it was about y^ same hour wherein Jesus said unto
him, thy son lives. And he believed with his whole house. This is now the
second token that Jesus did when he came from Iewry to Galyle.

Of the women which ministered unto Christ. And of the parable of the sower,
and the exposicion there of. Luke. viii. Math. xiii. Mark. iiii. Capi. xlix.
ANd it fortuned afterward that he went through the cities and towns, Luke
and preached and showed the gospel of the kingdom of God, and the twelve with
him, and certain women also, whom he had healed from euel spirits, and
infyrmities, namely Mary which is called Magdalene, out of whom went seven
deuyls, and Ioanna the wife of Chusi Herodes stuarde, and Susanna, and many
other that ministered unto them of their substance. (Matthew) And ye same day
went Jesus out of the house, (Mark) and began again to teach by the sea side,
and there gathered much people unto him, so that he went into a ^hyp, and sat
upon the water, (Mat) and all the people stood upon ye shore, (Mar) and upon
the land by the sea side. (Luke) Now wha^ much people was gathered together,
and hasted unto him out of ye cities, he spoke (Mar) and taught the^ in his
dortrine (Luk) by a similitude. (mark) Herke^ to, behold there went out
(Luk.) a sower to sow his sede, and while he was sowing, some fell by y^ way
side, and was trode^ under foot and ye fowls of y^ air did eat it up. And
some fell on stone, (Mark) stony ground where it had not much earth, and anon
it came up, because it had not deep earth. Now when ye sun arose, it caught
heat and wycheres away, (Luke) because it had no moystnesse (Mark.) nor no
root (Luke) and some fell among the thorns, and the thorns spra^ge up,
(Mark.) grew up, (Mat.) grew up, and choked it, (Mark) and it gave no fruit.
And some fell upon a good ground, which gave fruit that came up and grew
(Math.) some an hundredth fold, some syxtie fold, some thyrtye fold. (Luke)
Wha^ he said this, he cried: Who so has ears to hear, let him hear. (Mark.)
And when he was alone, (Math) his dysciples came unto him, [ Mark) they that
were about him with ye twelve asked him, (Luke) what parable was this, (Math)
and said unto him: why speak thou to them by parables? (Luke) And he said:
(Mathe.) unto you it is given to know the misterye of the kingdom of heaven,
but unto them (Mark. that are without, al things happen by parables (Mathe.)
And to them it is not given. Therefore speak I unto them by parables (Mar.)
that with seeing eyes they may se and not dyscerne, and that with hearing
ears they may hear, and not understand (Mar.) that in them may be
fulfilled, ye Prophecy of Esai, which says: Esai. vi. ^
ye shall hear in deed, and shall not understand, and with seeing eyes shall ye se,
and not perceive, for the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears
are thick of heari^g, and their eyes have they closed lest they should once se
with ye eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, and turn
y^ I might heal them, (Mark) and their sins be forgeuen the^. (Math) But
blessed are your eyes, for they se, and your ears, for they hear, Uerely, I
say unto you, many prophets and righteous me^ have desired to se the things
y^ ye se, and have not seen the^, and to hear ye things y^ ye hear, and have
not heard them, (Mark.) understand ye not this parable? How will ye then
understand al other parables? (Math.) Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower. (Luke) This is ye parable. The sede is ye word of God. (Mark) The
sower sows y^ word (Luke) as for those y^ are by ye way side (mark) where y^
word is sowe^, (Luk.). are they y^ hear it, (Mark) and as soon as they have
heard it, immediately comes Satan (Luke) and takes away the word out of
their hearts, that they should not believe, and be saved (Mat.) When one
hears the word of the kyngedo^, and understands it not, the euel man
comes and plucketh it away, that is sown in his heart. (Luke) But they on
the stone are such, as when they hear it, (Mark) by and by receive it with
joy, (Luke) and these have no root, they believe for a while, (Mark) when
trouble and persecucion aryseth for the words sake, immediately they are
offended, (Luke) and in the time of temptacion they fall away. As for it that
fell among the thorns, are such as hear it, and of the carfulness, (mat.)
of this world, and the deceatfulnesse of riches, (Mar) and many other lusts
enter in, and choke the word, and so it is made vnfrutful. And these are they
that are sown upon a good ground, which hear y^ word, and receive it, and
bring forth fruit in patience, (Math) and some gives an hundredth fold,
some sixtye fold, and some thyrtye fold. (Mar.) And he said unto them: is a
candell lyghted to put under a bushel, or under a table, or a bed? (Luke) No
man lights a candel, and covers it with a vessel, or puts it under a
bed, but sets it upon a candelstycke, that such as go in, may se light,
for there is nothing hyd, that shall not be openly showed, and there is
nothing secret, that shall not be known, and come to light. (Mark) Who so
has ears to hear, let him hear, and he said unto them, (Luke) take heed
therefore how and what ye hear. (Mark) With what measure ye meat, with the
same shall it be measured unto you again. (Math.) Who so has, unto him
shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but who so has not, from him
shall be taken away, even that he has, (Luk.) and that he thyncketh to have
shall be taken from him.

Of the Parable of tares, and of mustarde seed. Mat. xiii. Mark. iiii. Luke.
xiii. Capitulo. l.
ANother parable put he forth unto them, Math.
and said: The kyngedome of heaven is like unto a man that sowed good sede in
his field. But while men slepte, there came an enemy, and sowed tares among
the wheat, and went his way. Now wha^ the blade was spronge up, and brought
forth fruit, then the tares appeared also. Then came the servants to the
householder, and said unto him: Sir sowdeste thou not good seed in thy field?
From whence then has it tares? He said unto them, that has the enemy done.
Then said the servants, wylt thou then that we go and wede them out? He said,
No, lest while ye wede out the tares, ye pluck up the wheat also with them.
Let them both grow together, till the harvest, and in time of harvest, I will
say unto the reapers. Gather the tares first, and bind them in sheaues to be
burnt, but the wheat into my barn. (mar.) And he said unto them. The
kyngedome of God is after this manner, as when a man casts sede upon ye land,
and slepeth, and it ryseth night and day, and the seed spryngeth up, and
grows he not knowing of it. For the earth brings forth the fruit of
itself, first the grass, afterward the ear, then the full Wheat in the
ear. But when she has brought forth the fruit, he puts to the Sickle,
because the Harvest is come. (mat) Another Parable he put forth unto them,
(Mar) and he said: (Luk) What is the kingdom of God like? Or where unto shall
I compare it? (Matthew) The kingdom of Heaven is like unto a grane of Musterd
sede, which a man took, and sowed it in his field, (Mar) which when it was
sown upon the land, (Mathe) it is the least among all seeds (Mark) of the
earth, and when it is sown, (math) and grown, it is the greatest among
Herbs, (Luke) and it grew, and wared a great tree, (Mar) and gitteth great
branches, (Mathe) so that the Birds under the Heaven, come and dwell in y^
Branches thereof. (Mark) So that the fowls may dwell under ye shadow thereof.
(Math) Another Parable spoke he unto them. (Luke) And again he said: Where
unto shall I lyken the kingdom of God? (Math) The kingdom of God is like unto
Leven, which a woman took, and mixte it among. iii. peckes of meele, til al
was leuened. Al such things spoke Jesus unto the people by Parables. (Mark)
And by many such parables he spoke the word unto the^, thereafter as they
might hear it, and without parables spoke he nothing unto them, (math) that
the thing might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the Prophet, saying: * I
will open my mouth in parables, Psalm. 77. a.
and will speak out the secrets from the beginning of the world, (man) but
unto his disciples he expounded al things priuatelye. (Math) Then sent Jesus
the people away, and came home. And his disciples came unto him, and said:
declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. Jesus answered, and
said unto them: He that sows the good seed is the son of man, the
field is the world, the good seed are the Children of the kingdom. The tares
are the children of wickedness, the enemy that sows them is the deuell. The
Harvest is the end of the world: The reapers are the Angels. For like as the
tares are weded out, and burnt in the fire, even so shall it go in the end
of this world. The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom al things that offend, and them that do iniquity,
and shall cast them into a Furnace of fire, there shall be waylynge and
gnashynge of teeth.* Then shall the righteous shine as the sun in the
kingdom of their father, Sapi. 3. b
whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear.

Of three Parables in the house. Mathewe. xiii. Capitulo. li.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in y^ field, Matthew
which a man found and hid it, and for joy thereof, he went and sold all that
he had, and boughte that field. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Merchant that sought good Pearls, and when he had found a precious pearl,
he went and sold all that he had, and boughte it. Again, the kingdom of
heaven is like unto a net cast into the Sea, wherewith are taken all manner of
fyshes, and when it is full, men draw it out unto the shoore, and sit and
gather the good into the vessels, but cast the badde away. So shall it be in
the end of the world. The Angels shall go out, and sever the badde from
the ryghteous, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire. There shall be
waylynge and gnashynge of teethe.

Have ye understand all these things? They say: Yea Lord. Then said he
unto them: Therefore, every Scribe taught unto the kingdom of Heaven, is
like an householder which brings out of his treasure things new and old.
And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these parables, he departed thence,
[ From the house where he was.] and came into his own countreye, [
Nazareth] and taught them in their Sinagoges.

Of the Lords coming to Nazareth, where he rode, and yt the Nazarites would
have cast him down headling. Mat. xiii. Mar. vi. Luke. iiii. Capit. lii.
ANd the fame of him was noised through out all the region round about. Luke.
And he taught in their synagoges, and was commended of every man. And he came
to Nazareth where he was noursed? And as his custom was, he went into ye
Sinagoge upon the Sabbath, and stood up for to read. Then was there delivered
him the book of the Prophet Esaias. And when he had turned over the book,
he found the place where it is written:* The spirit of the Lord is with me,
Esaias. 61. a.
because he has anointed me, to preach the Gospel unto the poor, has he
sent me, to heal the broken hearted, to preach delyueraunce to the captive,
and sight to the blind, and freely to set at lybertye them that are bruised,
and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And when he had closed the
book, he gave it again to the minister: and sat him down. And the eyes of all that were in ye sinagoge were fastened on him. And he began to say unto the^:
This dai is this scripture fulfilled i^ your ears. And they al gave him
witness, and wondered at y^ gracious words which proceaded out of his mouth.
And they said, (mar) from whence has he these things? And what wisdom is this
y^ is given him, and such as are done by his hands? Math) Is not (Mar) this
the carpenter (Luke) Joseph (Mat) the carpenters son? Is not his mother called
Mary^and his brethren James and John, and Simo^, and Jude? And are not all his
systers here with us? Whence has he then all these things? And they were
offended at him: (Luke) and he said unto them: doutles, ye will say unto me
this proverb. Phisitio^ heal thy self: for how great things have we heard
done at Capernaum? Do the same here also in thine own co^^trey. (Math) But
Jesus said unto the^: A prophet is no where less set by, the^ at home and
among his own. (mar) And he could not show any miracle there, but laid his:
hands upon a few sick, and healed them, and he marueyled at their unbelief. [
therefore he healed fevv, lest they should say, he despises his country men.]
(Luk) Uerely, I say unto you:* there were many widows in Israel, 3. reg. 7. a.
in the time of Elias, when heaven was shut. iii. years and. vi. months, and
when there was a great dearth in all the land: and to none of the^ was Elias
sent, but only unto Sarep^a of ye Sidonians to a widow. 4. reg. 5. c
* And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus ye prophet, and none of
the^ was cle^sed, save only Naaman of Siria. And as many as were in y^ sinagoge
when they heard y^, were filled with wrath. And they rose up, and thrust him out
of y^ city, and led him up to the edge of ye hyl, where upon their city was
builded, y^ they might cast him down headling. But he went his way, through
the myddest of them.

Of John y^ Baptistes death. Math. xiiii. Mar. vi. Cap. liii.
ANd there came a convenient day, Mark.
that Herod on his birth day made a supper, to the lords captains, and
chief Estates of Galile. Then the daughter of Herodias came in, and dau^sed,
and pleased Herod, and that them sat at the table. Then said y^ king unto ye
damsel^^ ask of me what y^ wilt, I will give it thee, and he swear unto her:
what soever y^ shalt ask of me, I will give it unto the, eue^ unto ye one
half of my kingdom. When he had said, she went forth, and said unto her
mother: what shall I ask? she said: John Baptistes head. And immediately she
went in unto y^ king with have, and said: (Mat) being instructed of her mother,
(mark) I will y^ thou give me straight way in a platter, the head of John ye
Baptist. Then ye king was sorry, yet for y^ oaths sake, and them y^ sat at the
table, he would not say her nay, and immediately he sent y^ hangman, and
commanded his head to be brought i^: so he went and beheaded John in y^
prison, and brought his head in a platter, and gave it unto ye da^sel, and the
damsel gave it unto her mother. And when his disciples herd that, they came and
took his body, and laid it, (mat) and buried it, (mat) in a grave, (mat) and
went and told Jesus. When Jesus heard y^, he departed thence, by ship in to a
desert place alone.

Of y^ refectio^ of. v. M. m^. Mat. 14. Ioh. 6. Luc. 9. Mar. 6 ca. 54.
ANd departing by ship they went away (Joan) over y^ sea, Mark.
unto y^ city Tiberias in Galyle (Mark) into a desert place alone. (Mat) And
when the people heard thereof they followed him. (mar) And the people saw them
departing away, and many knew of it, and ran thither together on foot out
of all cities, and came before them. And Jesus went out and saw much people,
and had compassion on them, for they were as the sheep y^ have no shepherde,
(Luk.) and he received them, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and
taught them many things, (Math) and healed their sick. (Joan) And much
people followed him, because they saw the tokens that he did upon them which
were dyseased. But Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
dysciples.

And Easter the feast of y^ Jews was nigh. (mathe) But at even came his
dysciples unto him, and said: This is a desert place, and the night falls
on, let the people depart from thee, that they may go into the towns, (Luk.)
and vyllages round about, where they may find meat, (Mark) and bye the^
selves meat to eat, (Luke) for we are here in the wilderness. (Math) But
Jesus said unto them. They need not go away, give ye them to eat. (Joan) Then
Jesus lift up his eyes, and saw that there came much people unto him, and he
said unto Phylyppe: whence shall we bye bread that these may eat? But this he
said to prove him, for he him self knew what he would do. Philippe answered
him, two hundredth penyworth of bread is not enough among them, that every
one may take a little. (Mark.) He said unto the^. How many loaves have ye, go
and se. (Joan) Then said unto him one of his dysciples Andrew the brother of
Simon Peter. There is a lad here that has fy^e barley loaves, and two fyshes,
but what is that among so many (Luke) except we should go and bye meat for so
much people. (Joan) Jesus said, make the people sit down, (Luke) by fyftyes
in a company (Joan) there was much grass in the place. Then they sat them
down (Mark) upon y^ grene grass (Joan) about a five thousand men, (Mark)
here a row, and there a row by hundredes and by fyftyes: (Joan) Jesus took
the loaves, (Mark.) and looked up to heaven, and gave thanks, and brake the
loaves, (Joan) and when he had given thanks, (Luke) he gave them to his
disciples to set them before the people, (Math) and the dysciples gave them to
the people. (Joan) Likewise also of the fyshes as much as they would, when
they were filled, (Luke) and were all satysfyed. (Joan) He said unto his
dysciples, gather up the broken meat that remains, that nothing be lost.
Then they gathered, and filled twelve baskettes with the broken meat that
remained or ye five barlye loaves, (Mark) and of the five fyshes (Joan) unto
them which had eaten, (Mat.) and they that did eat, were about five thousa^de
me^, besides weme^ and children, (Mark) and anon he caused his disciples to go
into y^ ship, and to pass over before him unto Bethsaida, while he sent away
y^ people. (Joan) Now when y^ me^ saw y^ toke^ y^ Jesus did, they said: This
is of a truth y^ Prophet y^ should come into y^ world. When Jesus now
perceived that they would come, and take him up to make him king, he gat him
away again into a mountain him self alone (Math) to make his prayer. And at
even he was there him self alone.

Of Christ's deambulation upon the sea. Math. xiiii. Mark. vi. Joan. vi. Capi.
^v.
AT eue^ his dysciples went down to y^ sea, Joan.
and entered into the ship, and came to the other side of the sea unto
Capernau^, and it was dark already, and Jesus was not come to them. And the
sea rose through a great wind. (Mat) And the ship was already in the myddest
of the sea, and was toste with waves, for the wind was contrary, (Mark) and he
^aw them in parell with rowing. (Joan) Now when they had rowed upon a five
and twentye or thirtye furlonge, (Mark) about the fourth watch of y^
night, he came unto them, and walked upon the sea, and would have gone over
by them. And when they saw him walking upon the sea, they thought it had been
a spirit, and cried out, (Math.) for fear, (Mark.) for they saw him all and
were troubled, (mat) but strayte way spoke Jesus unto them, and said: be of
good chere, (Mar) be of good comfort. It is I, be not afraid. (Mat.) Peter
answered him and said: Lord if it be thou, hyd me come unto thee upon the
water. And he said, come on thy way. And Peter stepce out of the ship, and
went upon the water to come unto Jesus, but when he saw a mighty wind, he
was afraid, and began to synke, and cried saying: Lord help me? And
immediatlye Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caughte him, and said unto
him: O thou of little faith, wherefore doutest thou? (Joan.) Then they would
have received him into the ship, (Mar) and he went into the ship to them,
and the wind ceased. And they were astonyed, and maruayled exceadyngelye, for
they had forgotten the loaves, and their heart was blinded. (math.) Then they
that were in the ship came and fell down before him, and said: Of a truth
thou art the son of God, (Joan) and immediatlye the ship was at the la^d,
whether they went, (Math.) and they shypped over and came into the land of
Genazareth, (mark) and drue up into the haven. And when they were come out of
the ship immediately they knew him, and ran about through out all the region,
and began on every side to bring unto him in beds such as were sick,
where they heard that he was. And whether so ever he entered, into towns,
cytyes, or vyllages, there laid they the sick in the streets, and praide him
that they might but touch the hemme of his garmente, and as many as touched
him, were made whole.

Of the Predicacion of Eucharistia, for the which certain went back and
departed. Joan. vi. Capi. lvi.
THe next day after, Joan.
the people which stood on the other side of the sea, saw that there was none
other ship there but that one. And that Jesus went not in with his dyscyples
into the ship, but that his dyscyples were gone away alone. How be it there
came othere ships from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where they had eaten the
bread after that the Lord had given thanks. Now when the people saw that
Jesus was not there, neither his dyscyples, they took ship also, and came to
Caparnaum, and sought Jesus. And when they found him on the other side of the
sea, they said unto him: Master, when camste thou hither? Jesus answered
them, and said: verily, verily I say unto you, ye seek me not because ye saw
the tokens, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. Labor not
for the meat that does peryshe, but that endures unto everlasting life,
which the son of man shall give you, for him has God the father sealed.
Then said they unto him: what shall we do that we may work the works of
GOD? Jesus answered and said unto them? This is the work of GOD, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent. Then say they unto him, what token do thou
then, that we may see, and believe thee? What workest thou? Exo. 16. c
Our fathers did eat * Manna in the wyldernes, as it is written: he gave them
bread from heaven to eat. Then said Jesus unto them. Uerely, verily, I say
unto you: Moses gave you not bread from heaven, but my father gives you the
true bread from heaven, for this is that bread of God which comes from
heaven, and gives life unto the world. Then said they unto him. Sir give us
always such bread. But Jesus said unto them, I am y^ bread of life, he that
comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that believes on me, shall never
thyrste. But I have said unto you, that ye have seen me, and yet ye believe not.
All that my father gives me, comes unto me, and who so comes unto me, him
will not I cast out: For I am come down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that has sent me. This is the will of the father which
has sent me, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
should arise it up again at the last day.

This is the will of him which has sent me, that who soever sees ye son,
and believes on him, should have everlasting life, and I shall raise him up at
the last day. Then murmured the Jews thereon that he said: I am that bread
which is come down from heaven. And they said: Is not this Jesus Joseph's
son? Whose father and mother we know? How says he then, I am come down
from heaven: Jesus answered, and said unto them: (Mark) Murmr not among
your selves. No man can come unto me, except my father which has sent me draw
him. And I shall raise, him up at the last day. It is written in the
Prophets. Esaias. 54 c Ierem. 33. f.
* They shall al be taught of God, whosoever now hears it of the father, and
learneth it, comes unto me. Not that any manne has seen the father, save
he which is of the father, the same has seen the father. Uerely, verily, I
say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life. I am that bread
of life. Your fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness and are dead. This is
that bread which comes from heaven. That whosoever eats thereof should not
die. I am that living bread which came down from heaven: whosoever eats of this
bread, shall live for ever. And the bread that I will give, is my fleash, which
I will give for the life of the world. Then strove the Jews among them
selves, and said: how can this fellow give us his fleash to eat? Jesus said
unto the^: Uerely, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat y^ fleash, of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my
fleash, and drinks my blood, has everlasting life: and I shall raise him up
at the last day. For my fleashe is the very meat, and my blood is the very
drink. Whosoever eats my fleashe, and dryncketh my blood, abides in me, and I
in him. As the living father has sent me. And I live for the fathers sake,
even so he that eats me shall live for my sake. This is your bread which is
comme from heaven. Not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead, he that
eats of this bread shall live for ever. These things said he in the
synagoge, when he ^aughte in Capernaum. Many now of his disciples that heard
this, said: this is an hard saying, who may a^ide ye hearing thereof? But
when Jesus perceived in him self, y^ his disciples murmured thereat, he said
unto them. Does this offend you? What and if ye shall see the son of man
ascend up thither where he was before? It is the spirit that quickens, the
fleashe profyteth nothing. The words that I speak are spirit, and are life.
But there are some among you, that believe not. For Jesus knew well from the
beginning which they were that believed not, and who should betraye him. And
he said: Therefore have I said unto you. No man can come unto me, except it be
given him of my father. From that time forth many of his disciples went back,
and walcked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve: Will ye also go
away? The^ answered Simon Peter, Lord, whyther shall we go, thou haste the
words of everlasting life: And we have believed and known, yt thou art
CHRIST the Son of the living GOD. Jesus answered them. Have I not chosen
you twelve? And one of you is the Devil. But he spoke of Judas Simon
Iscariote, the same betrayed him afterward, and was one of the twelve.

Of the rubbing of the ears of corn upon the Sabbath. Matthew. xii. Mar. ii.
Luke. vi. Capitulo. lvii.
ANd it fortuned, upon an after principal Sabbath, that Jesus went through
the corn field, Luke.
(Math) his disciples being, hongrye, (mark) began to make a way through,
and to pluck the ears of the corn. (Luke) And did eat, rubbing them with
their hands. But certain of ye Pharisees said unto them: Wherefore do ye that,
which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath? (Math.) when the Pharisees saw
that, (Mark) they said to Jesus: Behold, what thy disciples do, which is not
lawful upon the Sabbath? And he said unto them: have ye never read what David
did, when he had need, and was an bongred both he and they that were with
him: 1. Reg. 21. b
how he went into the house of God in the time of Abiathar the high priest,
(Luk) and took the show ebread and did eat, and gave also unto the^ that were
with him, (Mat) which were not lawful for him to eat, another for the^ that
were with him, but only for the priests. Or have ye not read in y^ law, how
that the Priests in the temple brake the Sabbath, and yet are blameless? But
I say unto you, that there is one greater then ye temple. But if ye wist what
this were. Osee. 6. b
* I have pleasure in mercy, and not in offering, ye would not have
condemned inno^entes. (Mar) And he said unto them: The Sabbath was made for
man's sake, and not man for the Sabbothes sake. Therefore is the son of man
Lord even over the Sabbath.

Of the healyng of the wythered hand. Math. xii. Mark. iii. Luke. vi. Capitu.
lviii.
ANd when he was departed thence (Luk) it came to pass, Math.
upon an other Sabbath, that he went into the Sinagoge, and taught. And there
was a man whose right hand was wythered. But the Scribes and the Pharisees
marked him, whether he would he heal upon the Sabbath, that they might
find an occasion and cause, to accuse him. Nevertheless, he perceived their
thoughts. (Mat) And asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal upon the
Sabbath? Because they might accuse him. (mark) And he said unto the man with
the withered hand. (Luk) Arise, and come hither. And he arose and came forth.
Then said Jesus unto the: I will ask you a question? What is it lawful to do
upon the Sabbath? Good or evil? to save life, or to destroy it? (Mar) But
they held their tongue, (Mat) which of you is it, if he had a sheep fallen
into a pytte upon the Sabbath, that would not take him and lift him out? And
how much is a man better then a sheep? Therefore it is lawful to do good
upon the Sabbath. (Mar) And he looked round about upon the^ with wrath, and was
sorry for their blindness. And said to the man. Sretche out thine hand, and he
stretched it out, and his hand was made whole like as the other. (Luk) But they
were filled full of madness, and communed together, what they would do to
Jesus. (math) Then went the Pharisees out, and held a counsel, (Mar) strayte way
with the Herodie^s against him, how they might destroy him. (Mat) But when
Jesus knew thereof, he departed thence, and much people followed him, and he
healed them all, and charged them y^ they should not make him known, y^ the
thing might be fulfilled, which was spoken by Esaias Esaias. 42. a.
the prophet, which says:* Behold, this is my servant whom I have chosen, and
my beloved in who^ my soul deliteth: I will put my spirit upon him, and he
shall show judgment unto y^ heathen: he shall not strive nor earl, another shall
any man hear his voice in y^ streets. A bruised read shall he not break, and
flare that begins to burn, shall he not que^che, til he send forth
judgment unto victory, and in his name shall y^ heathen trust. (Mar) But Jesus
departed away with his disciples unto y^ sea, and there followed him much people
out of Galile, and from Iewry, and from Jerusalem, and out of Iduniea, and they
that dwelte about Tire and Sidon, a great multitude which had heard of
his noble acts, and came unto him.

And Jesus said unto his Disciples, that they should keep a ship for him,
because of the people, least they should thronge him, for he healed many of
them, in so much that all they which were plagued, preased upon him, that
they might touch him. And when the foul spirits saw him, they fell down
before him, and cried, and said: Thou art the son of God. And he charged
them straytlye, that they should not make him known.

Of Herod saying y^ John was risen, and did miracles. Mat. xiiii. Mark. vi.
Luke. ix. Cap. lix.
Herod (mark) the king, (Luke) the Tetrache, Math.
(Math) heard of the fame of Jesus, (Luke) and of all that was done by him,
(Mar) for his name was known. (Luk) And he was in doubt, for so much as it was
said of some. John is risen again from the dead, of some, Elias has
appeared, of some, one of the old Prophets is risen again.

And Herod said, John have I beheaded, who is this then of whom I hear such
things, and he desired to se him. (Math.) And said to his servants. This is
John the baptist, he is risen again, therefore are his deeds so mighty.

Of the domme Deuell. Mat. xii. Mark. iii. Luke. xi. Capi. lx.
THen was there brought unto him one possessed of a deuel, Math.
the which was blind and domme (Luk.) and he drove out a deuell that was
dome, and when he had cast out the deuel, the domme spoke, (Mat.) and he healed
him, in so much that he both spoke and saw, (Luke) and the people wondered,
(Mathe.) and said: Is not this the son of David: but the Pharisees, (Mar.)
and the Scrybes that were come down from Jerusalem (Math.) heard that, they
said: (Mar.) he has Beelzebub, (Luke) and he dryueth out the deuels, through
Beelzebub the thief of the deuels. The other tempted him, and desired a token of
him from heaven. (Mark.) And when he had called them together, (Luk.) he knew
their thoughts, (Mark.) and spoke unto them in parables. How can one Satan
drive out another? (Luk.) Every kyngedome divided within it self, shall be
desolate, and one house shall fall upon another (Math.) And every city, or
house divided in it self, may not continue, (Luke) if Satan than be at
variaunce within him self, how can his kyngedome endure? (Mark.) if Satan
now rise against him self, and be at variaunce with him self, he can not
endure, but is at an end, (Luke) ye say, that I drive out deuels through
Beelzebub, and if I drive out deuels through Beelzebub, by whom then do your
children drive the^ out? Therefore they shall be your judges, but if I cast out
the deuels by the finger of God: (math.) by the spirit of God, (Luk.) the^ is
the kingdom of God come unto you, when a strong harnessed man keeps his
house, that he possesses it in peace. (Mark) No man can enter into a strong
ma^s house, and take away his goods, except he first hynde the strong man,
(Luke) but when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he
takes from him all his weapens wherein he trusted, and deuydeth the spoil,
(Mark) and then shall ^poile his house. (Luke) He that is not with me, is
against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad. (Mark.)
Uerely, I say unto you, al sins shall be forgeuen the children of me^, and the
blasphemy also, and y^ blasphemy also wherewyth they blaspheme: But who so
blasphemeth the holy ghost, has never forgiveness, but is gyltye of the
everlasting judgment: for they said, he has an unclean spyrite. (Math)
And who so ever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgeuen
him: but who so ever speaks against the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen
him, another in this world, nor in the world to come. Either make the tree
good, and his fruit good also: or else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil
also. For the tree is known by the fruit.

O ye generation of vypers, how can ye speak good, when ye your selves are
evil, for of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good manne
out of a good treasure of his heart, bri^geth forth good things, and an evil
man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things, but I say unto
you, that of every idle word that men have spoken, they shall give
accomptes at the day of judgment. Out of thy words thou shalt be
justified, and out of thy words shalt thou be condemned.

Of the Jews requyrynge a sign from heaven. Matthew. xii. Luke. xi. Capi. 61.
THen answered certain of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math.
and said. Master, we would feign se a token or sign of thee. (Luke) wha^ the
people were gathered thick together, he began to say. This is an evil
generation. (mat). This evil and aduouterous generation seeks a token, and
there shall no token be given them, but the token and sign of the *Prophet
Jonas, Ion. ^, ^
(Luke) for like as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall the son of
man be unto this generation. (Math.) For as Jonas was three days, and three
nyghtes in the whalles belly, so shall the son of man be three days and three
nyghtes in the heart of the earth. The men of Niniue shall rise in the
last judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, for they did
penance at the preaching of * Jonas. Iona. 3, ^
And behold here is one greater then Jonas*. 3. Reg. x. a 2. para. i. a
The Queen of the southe shall arise in the last judgment with this
generacio^, and shall condemn it, for she came from the utmost parts of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon: and lo, here is one greater then
Solomon.

[Christ declares that he ought not for the Jews incredulite to cease from
preaching, telling this symilitude.] (Luke) No man lights a candel, and
puts it in a priuye place, another under a busshel, but upon a candelstycke,
that they which come in, may se the light.

The eye is the light of the body. If thine eye then be syngle, all thy body
shall be full of light: but if thine eye be wicked, then shall al thy body be full
of darckenesse. Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee, be not
darkness, if thy body now be light, so that it have no part of darkness,
then shall it be full of light, and shall light the even as a clear lightening.
(Math.) But when the unclean spirit is gone out of man, he walks through
dry places, seeking rest, and fyndeth none. Then says he, I will turn again
in to my house from whence I went out. And when he comes, he fyndeth it
emptye, swepte, and garnyshed. Then goes he his way, and takes unto him seven
other spyrytes worse then him self, and when they are entered in, they dwell
there. And the end of that manne is worse then the beginning. Even so shall
it go, with this evil generation.

Of the woman that lyfted up her voice, and of the Lords mother and brethren
which sought him. Mat. xii. Mar. iii. Luke. xi. and. viii. Capit. lxii.
ANd it fortuned wha^ he spoke such words, Luke,
a certain woman among the people lift up her voice, and said unto him,
blessed is the womb that bare the, and the pappes that thou haste sucked. But
he said: yea, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.
(Mat.) While he yet talked unto the people, behold his mother, and his
brethren stood without, desirynge to speak with him, (Luke) and they could
not come at him for ye people, (Mark) and they sent unto him, and called him,
and the people sat about him. (Math.) Then said one unto him: behold, thy
mother and thy brethren stand without, and would speak with thee, (Luke) and
would se thee. (Math.) But he answered and said unto him that told him. Who
is my mother, and who are my brethren? (Mar.) and he looked round about him,
upon those y^ sat round in compass about him, (Mat.) and he stretched forth
his hand to his disciples, and said: behold my mother and my brethren, for
who so ever does ye will of my father which is in heaven, ye same is my
brother, sister, and mother. (Luke) my mother and my brethren are these, which
hear the word of God, and do it.

Of the checkynge of the Pharisees. Luke. xi. Capitu. 63.
ANd while he yet spoke, a certain Pharise prayde him y^ he would dyne with
him. And he went in, Luke
and sat him down at the table. When the Pharise saw that, he maruayled that
he washed not first before dinner. But the Lord said unto him: Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outesyde of the cup and platter, but your inward
parts are full of robbery and wickedness: ye fools, is a thing made clean
within, because the outesyde is cleansed? Nevertheless, [ above that is
necessarye] give alms of that ye have, and behold all is clean unto you. But
woe be unto you Pharisees, ye that teeth mint, and rewe, and al manner herbs, and
pass over judgment, and the love of God. These ought to have been done, and
not to ^eaue the other undone.

Of the brother which desired Christ to deuyde the heretage Luke. xii.
Capitulo. lxiiii.
BUt one of the people said unto him: Master, bid my brother diuyde the
enhiritaunce with me. But he said unto him: man, who has set me to be a judge
or heretage parter over you? And he said unto them: Take heed and beware of
covetousness, for no man lives thereof, that he has abundance of goods.

Of the rich man, that would make wyder his barnes. Luke xii. Capitulo. lxv.
ANd he told them a similitude, and said. There was a rich man whose feldes
had brought forth fruits plenteouslye, and he thought in him self and said:
What shall I do? I have nothing wherein to gather my fruits. And he said: This
will I do, I will break down my Barnes, and build greater, and ther^in will
I gather all mine increace, and my goods, and will say unto my soul: Soul,
thou haste much goods laid up in stoore for many years, take now thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him: thou fool, this night
shall they require thy soul from thee: and whose shall it be that thou have
prepared? thus goes it with him that gathers treasure for him self, and is
not rich in God. But he said unto his disciples. Therefore, I say unto you:
Take ye no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, another for your body, what
ye shall put on. The life is moore then meat and the body more then raiment.
Consider the ravens, they another sow nor reap, they have also another stoore
house nor barn, and yet God fedeth them. But how much better are ye the^ the
fowls? Which of you though he take thought therefore, could put one cubyte
unto his stature? Saying then ye be not able to do that, which is lest, why
take ye thought for the other? Consider the Lylies of the field, how they
grow: They labor not, they spinne not. But I say unto you: that even Solomon
in all his royal^ye was not clothed like one of these. Wherefore if God so
clothe the grass that is today in ye feld and to morrow shall be cast into the
furnace, how much more shall he cloth you (O ye of little faith?) Ask not ye
therefore what ye shall ear, or what ye shall drink, and climb not up an hie.
The heathen in y^ world seek after al such things, your heauenly^ father
knows y^ ye have need of al these things. But seek ye the kingdom of God,
and all these shall be ^^^ystred unto you. Fear not thou little flock, for it
is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give
alms, make you bags which wax not old: even a treasure which never
fails in heaven, where no these comes, and no mothes corrupts: for where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also. And he said unto the people.
When ye see a cloud rise out of the West, straight way ye say, there comes a
shoure, and so it is: And when ye see the Southe wind blow, ye say: It will
be hot, and it comes so to pass. O Ypocrites, ye can discern the
fashion of the Sky and of the Earth: Why can ye not discern this time
also? Yea, and why judge ye not of your selves what is right.

When thou go with thine adversary unto the prince, give diligence by the
way, that thou may be quite of him, least he bring thee before the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee to Iayler, and the Iayler cast thee into ye prison,
I tell thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou pay the uttermost myte.

Of the poole probatique. John. v. Capitulo. lxvi.
Afterward was there a feast of the Jews, [ called vvitsontyde] and Jesus
went up to Jerusalem. There is at Jerusalem by the slaughter house a poole,
which in Hebrewe is called Bethsaida, and has five porches, wherein lay many
sick, blind, lame, wythered, which wait when the water should move. For
the angel went down at his time into the poole and styrred ye water.
Whosoever now went down first after that y^ water was styred, the same was
made whole, whatsoever disease he had. And there was a man, which had lain
sick. xxxviii. years. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had lain so
long, he said unto him: Will thou be made whole? The sick answered him:
Sir, I have no man when the water is moved, to put me into ye poole. And when I
come, another steppeth down in before me. Jesus said unto hi: arise, take up
thy bed, and go thy way. And immediately, the man was made whole, and took up
his bed, and went his way. But upon the same day, it was the Sabbath. Then
said the Jews unto him that was made whole. Todaye is the Sabbath, it is not
lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He answered the^: he that made me whole, said
unto me: take up thy bed, and go thy way. Then asked they him. What man is
that, which said unto thee, take up thy bed, and go thy way? But he that was
healed wist not who he was: for Jesus had gotten him self away, because there
was much people. Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said unto him:
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.
The man departed and told the Jews, that it was Jesus which had made him
whole. Therefore did ye Jews persecute Jesus and sought to slay him, because he
had done this upon the Sabbath. But Jesus answered the^: My father works
hitherto, and I work also, therefore sought the Jews more to slaye him,
because he brake not only y^ Sabbath, but said also ye God was his father: and
made him self equal with God. The^ answered Jesus, and said unto the^:
verily, verily I say unto you. The son can do nothing of him self, but that he
sees the father do. For what soever he does, y^ does y^ son also. The
father loves the son, and shows him all that he does, and will show him yet
greater works, so y^ ye shall marvel. For the father rayseth up y^ dead, and
makes them live, even so ye son also makes living whom he will. For y^
father judges no man but has given al judgment unto ye son, that they all
might honor the son, even as they honor the father. Who so honors not
the sonue, the same honors not the father which has sent him. Uerely,
verily, I say unto you the hour comes and is now already, that y^ dead shall
hear the voice of the son of God: And they that hear it shall live. For as
the father has life in him self, so like wise has he given unto y^ son to
have life in him self: And has given him power also to execute judgment,
because he is the son of man. Maruayle ye not at this, for the hour comes,
in the which that al y^ are in the graves shall hear his voice: and shall go
forth that have done good unto the Resurrection of life. But they that have
done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnaption. I can do nothing of my
self. As I hear, so I judge, and my judgment is just. For I seek not mine
own will, but the will of my father which has sent me. If I hear witness
of my self, my witness is not true, there is another that bears witness of
me, and I am sure that the witness which he bears of me is true. Ye sent
unto John, and he bear witness of the truth. As for me I take no record of
man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved. He was a burning and
shinyng light, but ye would have reioysed a while in his light.
Nevertheless, I have a greater witness then the witness of John, for the
works which ye father has given me, to finish, the same works which I do,
bear witness of me, yt the father has sent me. And the father him self which
has sent me, bears witness of me: Ye have another heard his voice at
anyetyme, nor seen his shape, nor his word have ye not abiding in you, for ye
believe not him, whom he has sent. Search the scriptures, for ye thyncke, ye
have everlasting life therein, and the same is it, that testifies of me, and ye
will not come unto me, that ye might have life. I receive no praise of men. But
I know you that ye have not ye love of God in you. I am come in my fathers
name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his down name, him will ye
receive. How can ye believe, which receive praise one of another, and seek not
the praise that is of God only? Ye shall not thyncke that I will accuse you
before the father. There is one that accuses you even Moses, in whom ye trust,
if ye believed Moses, y^ should believe me also. For he has written of me. But if
ye believe not his writi^ges, how shall ye believe my words.

Of the Galileans which were s^ayne. And of the fygge tree. Luke. xiii. Capi.
67.
THere were present at the same season [ when he was returned from Jerusalem
into Galyle] certain, Luke.
that showed him of the Galyleans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
own sacryfyce. And Jesus answered and said unto them: Suppose ye that these
Galilea^s were greater sinners then all the other Galileans, because they
suffered such punyshmente? I tell you nay, but except ye amend your selves,
ye shall all peryshe likewise. Or think ye that the eyghtene, upon whom the
tower in Siloe fell and slew them, were gyltie above all men that dwell at
Jerusalem? I tell you nay: but except ye amend your selves: ye shall all
peryshe likewise. And he told them this symylytude, a certain man had a fygge
tree, which was planted in his vineyarde, and he came and sought fruit thereon,
and found none. Then said he unto the vine gardener: behold, this three year
long have I come every year, and sought fruit thereon, and found none, cut it
down, why hyndereth it the ground? But he answered and sayd^: Sir, let it
alone yet this year, till I dygge round^ about it, and dounge it, if it will
bring forth fruit, if no, then cut it down afterward.

Of the crooked woman. Luke xiii. Cap. xlviii.
ANd he taught in their Sinagoge upon the ^abboth, Luke.
and behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infyrmitie eyghtene
years, and was crooked, and could not well look up. When Jesus saw her, he
called her unto him, and said unto her: woman, be delivered from thy disease.
And he laid his hands upon her, and immediatlye she was made strayghte, and
praised God. Then answered the ruler of the Sinagoge, and took indignacion
because Jesus healed upon the Sabbath, and said unto the people. There are
sire days, wherein meu ought to work, in them come and be healed, and not on
the Sabbath. Then the Lord answered him, and said. Thou ypocryte.

Does not every one of you lowle his ore or a^se from the crybbe upon the
Sabbath, and lead him to the water? But should not this, which is Abraham's
daughter whom Satan has bound now eyghtene years, be lowsed from this
bond upon the Sabbath. And when he thus said, all his adversaries were
ashamed.

And all the people rejoiced over all the excellent deeds that were done by him.

Of the interrogacion made unto Christ, whether few should be saved. And
that Herod sought to kill him. Luke. xiii. Capitu. lxix.
ANd he went through ^ytyes, Luke.
and towns, and taught, and took his journey toward Jerusalem. And one
said unto him, Lord, are there few that shall be saved? But he said unto
them, strive ye to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you,
shall seek to come in, and shall not be able from that time forth, when the
good manne of the house is risen up, and has shut the door, then shall ye
begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, and say, Lord, open
unto us, and he shall answer and say unto you: I know you not whence ye
are. Depart from me all ye woorkers of iniquity. There shall be weping and
gnasshynge of teeth. When ye shall se Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets in the kingedome of God, and your selves thruste out. And when
they shall come from the east, and from the Weste, from the North, and from
the Southe, which shall sit at the table in the kyngedome of God. And behold,
they are last, which were first, and they are first, which shall be last upon
the same day. There came certain of the Pharisees, and said unto him: get
thee out of the way, and depart hence, for Herodes will kill thee. And he
said unto them, go ye and tell that fore, behold I cast out deuels, and
heal the people to day and tomorowe, and upon the third day shall I make
an^ende: for it cannot be, that a Prophet peryshe without Jerusalem.

Of him that was healed of the dropsye, and of Christ's exhortacion to humilite
Luke. xiiii. Capitulo. lxx.
ANd it fortuned that he came into the house of one of the chief Pharisees upon
a Sabbath, Luke
to eat bread, and they watched him. And behold there was a man before him
which had the dropsye. And Jesus answered and spoke unto y^ Scribes and
Pharisees, and said. Is it lawefull to heal on the Sabbath? but they held
their tongue. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go, and answered
and said unto them: which of you shall have an ox, or an ass, fallen into a
pytte, and will not strayghte way pull him out on the Sabbath day? And they
could not answer him again to that. And he told a symylytude unto the
gestes, when he marked how they chose the highest seares, and said unto them,
when thou art bydden of any man to a wedding: lytte not down in the highest
rowme, l^s^e a more honorable manne then thou be hydden of him, and he that
had both thee and him, come and say unto thee: Give this manne rowme, and
thou then begin with shame to take the lowest rowme. But rather when thou
art bydden, go and sit in the lowest rowme, that when he that bad thee
comes, he may say unto thee, friend sytte up hyer: then shalt thou have
worship in the presence of them that sytte at the table, for who so ever
exalts him self, shall be brought low, and he that humbles him self, shall be
exalted.

Of calling the poor to the feast, and the parable of a great supper. Luke.
xiiii. Capitu. lxxi.
HE said unto him [ the prince of the Pharises] that had bidde^ him, Luke.
when thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy fre^des, nor thy brethren,
Tob. iiii. b
* nor thy kynsefolkes, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they call thee again,
and recompense be made thee: But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
cryppel, the lame, the^ art thou blessed, for they cannot recompense thee. But
it shall be reco^pensed thee, in the resurreccion of the righteous. When one of
them that sat by at the table heard this, he said unto him: blessed is he
that eats bread in the kyngedome of God. But he said unto him. A certain
manne made a great supper, and called many there to. And in the hour of the
supper, he sent his servant to say unto them that were bydden: Come, for
now are all things ready. And they began all together to excuse them
selves one after another. The first said unto him, I have boughte a ferme. I
must needs go forth and se it. I pray thee have me excused. And the second
said, I have boughte five yoke of oxen, and now I go to prove them, I pray
the have me excused.

And the third said, I have married a wife, therefore can I not come. And
the servant came and brought his Lord word again there of. Then was the
good manne of the house dyspleased, and said unto his servant. Go out
quickly in to the streets and quarters of the city, and bring in hither the
poor and creppel, and lame, and blind. And the servant said. Lord it is done
as thou have commanded, and there is yet more rowme. And the Lord said unto
the servant. Go out into the high ways, and to the hedges, and compel them
to come in, that my house may be filled. But I say unto you, that none of
those me^ which were bydden, shall cast of my supper.

That for Christ's sake we must hate our pare^tes. Luc. 14. cap. 72
THere went much people with him: Luke.
and he turned him about, and said unto them, if any man come to me, and hate
not his father, mother, wife, children, brethren, systers, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple. And who so ever bears not his cross,
and follows me, cannot be my disciple. Which of you is it that will build a
tower, and sytteth not down first and counts the cost, whether he have
sufficient to perform it? Least after he has laid the foundation, and is
not able to perform it, all they that see it, begin to laughe him to scorn,
and to say: This manne began to build, and is not able to perform it. Or
what King will go make battle against another King, and sytteth not down
first and casts in his mind whether he be able with ten thousand to meet
him that comes against him with twentye thousand? Or else, while the other
is yet a great way of, he sends Embassage and desires peace. S^ likewise
every one of you that forsakes not all that he has, can not be my
Disciple. Salt is a good thing, but if the Salt be unsavory, what shall they
season with all? It is another good upon the Land, nor in donge hill, but
shall be cast away. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

Of the feast of Tabernacles and predication of Christ's Passion. Mathe. xvii.
Mar. ix. Luke. ix. John. vii. Capitulo. lxxiii.
ANd being departed from thence. (John) Jesus after that went about Galile,
for he would not walk in Iewry, because the Jews fought to kill him. But the
Jews feast of Tabernacles was at hand. Then said his brethren unto him: Get
thee hence, and go into Iewry, that thy disciples also may see thy works,
that thou do. He that seeks to be openly known, does nothing in
secret, if thou do such things, then show thy self before the world. For
his brethren also believed not in him. Then said Jesus: my time is not yet
come, but your time is always ready. The world cannot hate you, but me it
hat^th, because I testify of it, that the works of it are evil. Go ye up unto
the feast. I will not go up yet unto this feast, for my time is not fulfyled.
When he had said unto them, he abode still in Galile. (Mathe) While they
were occupied and conuersaunt in Galile (Mar) he taught his disciples, and said
unto them: The son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, and
they shall put him to death, and when he is put to death, he shall rise
again the third day. But they understood not that word, and it was hydden
from them, that they perceived it not, and were afraid to ask him, (Mathe)
and they were very sorye. (John.) But as soon as his brethren were gone up,
then went he up also un to the feast, not openly, but as it were secretly.
Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said: Where is he? And there was a
great rumor of him among the people. Some said: He is God. But other said:
No, he does but deceive the people. How be it, no man spoke frelye of him
for fear of the Jews. But in the mids of the feast went Jesus up into the
Temple, and taught. And the Jews maruayled, and said: How can he the
Scriptures, seeing he has not learned it?

Jesus answered them, and said: My doctrine is not mine, but his that has
sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know whether this doctrine be of
God, or whether I speak of my self, he that speaks of him self, seeks his
own praise, but he that seeks the praise of him that sent him, the same is
true and there is no unrighteousness in him.

Has not Moses given you the law, and none of you keeps the law? Why go ye
abou^e to kill me? The people answered, and said: Thou have the Devil, who
goes about to kill thee? Jesus answered and said: one work have I done, and
ye all maruayle. Moses, gave you the circumeirio^, not because it comes of
Moses, but of the fathers, yet do ye circumcise a man upon the Sabbath, if a
man receive circumcision upon the Sabbath, that the law of Moses should not be
broken, disdain ye then at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on
the Sabbath? Judge not after the utter apperau^ce, but judge righteous
judgment. Then said some of them of Jerusalem. Is not this be whom they go^
about to kill? And behold, he speaks boldelye, and they say nothing unto
him. Do our rulers know in deed that he is very Christ? How be it, we know
whence this is: But when Christ comes, no man shall know whence he is. Then
cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, and said: yea, ye know me, and whence
I am ye know. And of my self am I not come, but he that sent me is true, whom
ye know not: But I know him, for I am of him, and he has sent me. Then
sought they to take him, but no man laid hands upon him, for his hour was
not yet come. But many of the people believed on him, and said: when Christ
comes shall be do more tokens then this does? And it came to the Pharisees
ears that the people murmured such things of him. And the Pharisees and hye
Priests sent out servants to take him. The^ said Jesus unto them: I am yet
a little while with you, and then go I unto him that has sent me, and ye shall
seek me, and not find me, and where I am, thither can ye not comme. Then
said the Jews among them selves. Whither will he go, that we shall not find
hym^ Will he go among the Gentiles that are scattred abroad, and teach the
Gentyles? What manner of saying is this that he says: ye shall seek me and
not find me, and where I am thither can ye not come? But in the last day
which was the most solemn day of the feast, Jesus stood up, cried, and
said: Who so thyrsteth let him come to me and drink. He that believes on
me, as the scripture says, out of his body shall flow ryuers of the water
of life. But thus spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him,
should receive: For the holy ghost was not yet there, because Jesus was not
glorified. Many of the people now when they heard this saying, said: This
is a very Prophet. Other said, he is Christ. But some said: shall Christ
come out of Galile? Say^thnot the Scripture, that Christ shall come of the sede
of David, and out of the town of Bethleem where David was. This was the
diffention among the people for his sake. Some of them would have taken him,
but no man laid hands on him. The servants came to the hye Priests and
Pharisees, and they said unto them. Why have ye not brought him? The
servants answered. Never man spoke as this man doeth^ Then answered them
the Pharisees: are ye also deceived? Does any of the rulers or Pharisees believe
on him? But the common people, which know not the law, are cursed. Nicodemus
said unto them, he that came unto him by night, which was one of them: Does
our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what has he done? they
answered and said unto him: Art y^ a Galilean also? search and look, out of
Galile arises no prophet. And so every man went home.

Of the woman deprehended in Aduoutry. John. viii. Ca. lxxiiii.
Jesus went unto most Oliuete, and early in ye morning came again into ye
temple, and all ye people came unto him. And he satte down, and taught the^.
And ye scribes and the pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in Aduoutrye,
and set her there openly, and said unto him. Master, this woman was taken
in Aduoutrye even as the deed was a doing.* Leui. 20. b
Moses in the law commanded us to stone such: What say thou? This they
said to tempte him, that they might have whereof to accuse him. But Jesus
stouped down, and wrote with his finger upon the ground. Now while they
continued asking him, he lift him self up, and said unto them. He that is
among you without sin, let him cast the first stone at her. And he
stouped down again, and wrote upon the ground. But when they heard that,
they went out one after another, the eldest first, and leafte Jesus alone,
and the woman standing before him. Jesus lift him self up, and when he saw
no man but the woman, he said unto her: Woman, where are thine accusers?
Has no man condemned thee? She said: Lord, no man. Jesus said: Another
do I condemn thee. Go thy way, and fynne no moore.

Of Christ's words in the treasury. Joan. viii. Capit. 75.
THen spoke Jesus again unto them, Joan.
and said. I am the light of the world. He that follows me, shalnot walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Then said the Pharisees unto him.
Thou bear record of thy self, thy record is not true. Jesus answered and
said unto them. Though I bear record of my self, yet is my record true,
for I know whence I came, and whether I go, but ye cannot tell whence I come,
nor whither I go: ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man, but if I judge, my
judgment is true. For I am not alone, but I and the father that has sent
me.* Deu. 17, a xix. c.
It is written also in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I
am one that bear witness of my self, and the father that sent me bears
witness of me also. Then said they unto him, where is thy father? Jesus
answered: ye another kn^w me, nor yet my father? If ye knew me, ye should know
my father also. These words spoke Jesus in the Treasury, as he taught in the
temple. And no man took him, for his hour was not yet come.

Of another communicacion of Christ, for the which they would have slayue him.
Joan. viii. Capitulo. lxxvi.
THen said Jesus again unto them, Joan
I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall dye in your sins: whither I go,
thither cannot ye come. Then said the Jews: will he kill him self then, that
he says, whither I go thither cannot ye come? And he said unto the^, ye are
from beneth, I am from above, ye are of this world, I am not of this world.
Therefore I have said unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins, for if ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. Then said they unto
him, who art thou then? And Jesus said unto them, even the very same thing
that I say unto you. I have many things to say, and to judge of you, but he
that sent me is true, and look what I have heard of him, that speak I before
ye world, how be it, they understood not y^ he spoke of ye father. Then said
Jesus unto the^. Wha^ ye have lift up an hye ye son of man, the^ shall ye know
y^ I am ^e, and y^ I do nothing of my self, but as my father has taught me,
eue^ so I speak: and he y^ sent me is with me. The father leaves not me alone,
for I do al way that pleases him. When he thus spoke many believed on him. The^
said Jesus unto y^ Jews, that believed on him: if ye continue in my word, the^
are ye my very dysciples, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free. Then answered they him, we are Abraham's feed, we were never
bond to any manne: how say thou then, ye shall be free? Jesus answered them
and said: Uerely, verily I say unto you, who so ever does sin, is ye
servant of sin: As for the servant he abides not in the house for ever,
but the son abides ever. If the tonne therefore shall make you free, then
are ye free in deed. I know that ye are Abraham's seed, but ye seek means to
kill me, for my word takes not am^nge you. I speak that which I have seen of
my father, and ye do that ye have seen of your father. They answered and said
unto him: Abraham is our father. Jesus said unto them, if ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the deeds of Abraham: But now ye go about to kyl me, a
man that have cold you the truth, which I have heard of God, this did not
Abraham, ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they unto him, we are not
borne of fornication, we have one father even God. Jesus said unto them, if
God were your father, then would ye love me, for I am proceaded forth, and
come from God, for I am not come of my self, but he has sent me. Why know ye
not then my speech? even because ye cannot abide the hearing of my word, ye
are of the father the devil, and after the lusts of your father will ye do.
The same was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, for
the truth is not in him, when he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own:
for he is a liar, and a father of the same, but because I say the truth, ye
believe me not. He that is of God, hears the word of God, ye therefore do not
hear it, because ye are not of God. Which of you can rebuke me of any sin?
if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? Then answered the Jews, and
said unto him. Say we not right that thou art a Samaritane, and haste the
devil? Jesus answered, I have no devil, but I honor my father, and ye have
dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise, but there is one that seeks it,
and judges. Uerely, verily I say unto you, if any man keep my word, he shall
never sedeath. Then said the Jews unto him, now know we that thou haste the
deuell, Abraham is dead and the Prophets, and thou say, if any man keep my
word, he shall never taste of death. Art thou greater then our father Abraham
which is deade^ and the Prophets are dead, whom make thou thy self?
Jesus answered, if I praise my self, then is my praise nothing. But it is my
father that prayseth me, which ye say is your God, and ye know him not, but I
know him. And if I should say I know him not, I should be a liar, like unto
you: But I know him, and keep his word. Abraham your father was glad, that he
should see my day, and he saw it, and rejoiced. The^ said y^ Jews unto him.
Thou art not yet fyftie year old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto
them: verily, verily I say unto you, or ever Abraham was I am. Then took they
up stones to cast at him, but Jesus hid him self, and went out of the temple.

Of him that was borne blind Joan. ix. Capi. lxxvii.
ANd Jesus passed by, Joan
and saw a man that was borne blind, and his disciples asked him, and said:
Master, who has sinned? this, or his elders, that he was borne blynde^ Jesus
answered, another has this sinned, nor his elders, but y^ the works of God
should be showed on him. I must work the works of him y^ has sent me, while
it is day, ye night comes wha^ no man can work. As long as I am in ye
world. I am ye light of y^ world, when he had thus said, he spat on ye ground
and made clay of ye spatle, and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blind, and
said unto him: go thy way to ye pole of Siloe which is interpreted, sent, and
wathe thee. Then wenth^ his way, and washed him, and came seeing. The
neighbors, and they y^ had seen him before, how y^ he was a beggar, said: Is
not this he that sat and begged? Some said it is he, other said, he is like
him, but he him self said. I am eue^ he. Then said they unto him. How are
thine eyes opened? he said, the man y^ is called Jesus made clay, and anointed
mine eyes, and said, go thy way to y^ pole of Siloe, and wash thee, I went my
way and washed me, and received my sight. The^ said they unto hi^: where is he?
he said: I cannot tell. The^ brought they him to ye Pharisees y^ was blind. It
was ye Sabbath wha^ Jesus made y^ clay, and opened his eyes. The^ again ye
Pharisees asked him, how he had received his sight. He said unto the^, he put
clay upon mine eyes, and I washed me, and now I see. The^ said some of ye
Pharisees. This man is not of God, seeing he keeps not ye Sabbath. But y^ other
said how ca^ a synful man do such tokens? and there was a strife among them.
They said again to the blind, what say thou of him, y^ has opened thine
eyes? he said he is a Prophet. The Jews believed not him, that he was blind,
and had received his sight till they called the elders of him that had received
his syghte. And they asked the^, and said: Is this your son, whom ye say was
borne blind? how does he now se the^? his father and mother answered the^, and
said. We know y^ this is our son, and that he was borne blind: but how he
now sees, we can not tell, or who has opened his eyes, can we not tell, he is
old enough, ask him, let him speak for him self. This said his elders,
because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had conspired already, that if any
manne did confess that he was Christ, the same should be excommunicate,
therefore said his elders, he is old enough, ask him.

Then called they the manne again that was blind, and said unto him: give
God the praise, we know that this manne is a sinner. He answered and said:
whether he be a sinner or no, I can not tell, one thing am I sure of, that I
was blind, and now I se. Then said they unto him again, what did he unto
thee? How opened he thine eyes? he answered them: I told you right now,
heard ye it not: what, will ye hear it again? will ye also be his dyscyples?
Then rated they him, and said: be thou his disciple, we are Moses disciples, we
are sure y^ God spoke with Moses: As for this fellow we know not whence he is.
The man answered, and said unto them: This is a merueylous thing, that ye
wotte not whence he is, and he has opened mine eyes. For we know that God
hears no sinners, but if a man be a worshipper of God, and does his will,
him hears he. Sense the world began was it not heard, that any manne
opened the eyes of one y^ was borne blind. If this man were not of God, he
could have done nothing. They answered, and said unto him. Thou art al
together borne in sin, and teach thou us? And they thrust him out. Jesus
heard that they had thrust him out, and when he had found him, he said unto
him: Beleuest thou on the son of God? He answered and said: Lord, who is he,
that I might believe on him? Jesus said unto him: Thou haste seen him, and he it
is that talks with thee, he said: Lord I believe, and he worshypped him. And
Jesus said: I am come to judgment into this world y^ they which see not,
might see: And that they which see, might be made blind. And some of the
Pharisees that were with him, heard this, and said unto him: Are we then blind
also? Jesus said unto the^: If ye were blind ye should have no sin, but
now that ye say: we see, therefore your sin remains.

Of Christ's Sermon, I am the good shepherd. Ioh. x. ca. 87.
UErely, verelye, John.
I say unto you: he y^ enters not in at the door into ye shepefold, but
climmeth up some other way, ye same is a these and a murderer. But he ye goes
in at the door, is the shepherd of ye shepe^ To him the Porter opens, and
the sheep hear his voice, and he called his own sheep by name, and ledeth
them out. And when he has sent forth his own sheep, he goes before them,
and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. As for a stranger they
follow him not, but fly from him. For they know not the voice of a stranger,
This proverb spoke Jesus unto the^: but they understood not what it is was,
that he said unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: Uerelye, verily,
I say unto you: I am the door of the sheep. All they that are comme before me,
are thieves and murderers. But the sheep herkened not unto them. I am the
door, if any manne ent^e in by me, he shall be saved, and shall go in and
out, and find pasture. A thief comes not but for to steal, kyl, and
destroy. I am come that they might have life, and have it moore
abundauntlye.* I am a good shepherde, Esaias. 40. c.
a good shepherde gives his life for the sheep. Eze. 34. 37f
But an hired servant, which is nor ye shepherd, another are the sheep his
own, seyth the Wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flies: and the Wolf
catches and scatereth the sheep: but y^ hired servant flies, because he is
an hired servant, and cares not for the sheep. I am a good shepherd and know
mine, and am known of mine. Even as my father knows me, and I know ye
father. And I give my life for my sheep: and I have yet other sheep, which are
not of this these same must I bring also, and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one ^ocke, and one shepherd. Therefore does my father love me,
because I leave my life, that I may take it again. No man takes it from,
but I leave it of my self. I have power to leave it, and have power to take it
again: This commandment have I received of my father. The^ was there
discention among the Jews for these sayings. Many of them said: he has the
devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? other said. These be not words of one
that is possessed, can the devil open the eyes of the blind?

Of the dedication. John. x. Capitulo. lxxix.
IT was the dedication of the temple at Jerusalem, John. 2. Mac 4 f
[ The fyftene day of December,] and it was winter, and Jesus walcked in
Salomons porche. Then came ye Jews round about him, and said unto him: how
long do thou make us doubt? If thou be Christ tell us playnelye. Jesus
answered them. I told you, and ye believe not, the works y^ I do in my
fathers name, bear witness of me. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
know me, and I give them everlasting life, and they shall never peryshe, and
no man shall pluck them out of my hand. My father which gave them me, is
greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my fathers hand.
I and the father are one. Then the Jews took up stones again to sto^e him.
Jesus answered them. Many good works have I showed you from my father, for
the which of them stone ye me? The Jews answered him, and said: For the
good work sake we sto^e thee not, but for ye blasphemye, and because that thou
being a man, make thy self God. Jesus answered them: Is it not written in
your law.* Psalm. 81. a.
I have said: ye are Gods? If he call them gods, unto who^ the word of God
came: and the scripture can not be broken: Say ye then unto him whom the
father has sanctified, and sent in the world, thou blasphemest God, because I
said, I am the son of God. If I do not the works of my father, believe me
not, but if I do the^, then (if ye believe not me) yet believe the works, that
ye may know and believe, that the father is in me, and I in the father. They
went about again to take him, but he escaped out of their hands, and went
away again beyond Iordane, into the place where John had baptized before,
and there he abode. And many ^ame to him, and said: John did no tokens, but all that John spoke of this man is true. And many believed in him.

Of the reprehencion of the Jews tradition. Mathewe. xv. Mark. vii. Capitulo.
lxxx.
THen came unto him the Scribes and Pharisees from Ierulem. Math.
(mark) And when they saw certain of his disciples eat bread with commune
(that is with unwashed hands) they complained. For the Pharisees and all the
Jews eat not, except they wash their hands oftymes, observing the
tradicions of the Elders. And when they comme from the market, they eat not
except they wash. And many other things there be, which they have taken
upon them to observe, as the washing of cups, and cruses, and brazen
vessels, and tables. Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, (math) saying:
why do thy disciples transgress, (mar) and walk not after the tradicions of
y^ elders, (Math) for they wash not their hands when they eat bread, (Mark)
but eat bread with unwashed hands, (Mathe) he answered, and said unto
them: Why do ye transgress the commandment of God, because of your own
tradicions? (Mark) Leaving the commandment of God, keep the tradicions of
men, as washing of cruses and cups, and many such things do ye. And he
said unto them: How goodlye have ye cast aside the commandment of GOD, to
maintain your own tradicions? (Mat) For God said: (Mark) and Moses, Exodus
10 ^
honor father and mother. D^ute. 5. ^
Who so cursed father and mother shall dye the death. But ye say: A man shall
say to father and mother Corban, that is the thing that I should help thee
withal, (Mathe) is given to God. Nor shall not honor his father or mother,
(mark) and thus ye suffer him no moore to do ought for his father or his
mother, Leui. 20. b
and make Gods word of none effect, Prou. 20. c
through your own tradicions that ye have set up: and many such things do
ye. (Math) Ye Ypocrites, full well has Esaias prophesied of you, saying: * Esaias.
29. d
This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lyppes, how be it, their heart is far from me, (Mar) but in vain, (math)
and with out a cause do they serve me, teaching the doctrine and the
commandments of men. And he called the people to him, and said: (Mar)
Harken to me ye all, and understand me. (Mathe) That which goes into the
monthe, defyleth not the man, Mark) there is nothing with out a maime that
enters into him, that can defyle him, but that goes cute of hym^ that it is
that makes the manne unclean. If any manne have ears to hear, let him
hear.

And when he came from the people in to the house, (Mat.) his disciples came
unto him, (Mark) and axed him of this parable, (Math.) and said unto him:
know thou that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard this saying? He
answered and said, al pla^tes which my heavenly father has not planted,
shall he pluck up by the roots. Let them go, they are the blind leders of the
blind. When one blind leads another, they fall both in the diche. Then
answered Peter and said unto him, declare unto us this parable. And Jesus said
unto them, are ye then without understanding? (Mar.) Are ye then so unwise?
perceive ye not yet that (Math.) whatsoever goes in at the mouth, (Mark)
cannot defile him? for it enters not into his heart, but into the belly, and
goes out into ye draughte that pourgeth all meats. And he said: for why,
(mat.) the things that proceed ^ut of the mouth, come from ye heart, and they
defyle the manne, Mark.) for from within, out of the heart of man proceed
evil thoughts, murder, adulterye, whoredom, theft, false witness,
blasphemy, (Math. coueteousnesse, wickedness, deceate, uncleanness, a wicked eye,
pride, folyshnesse, al these things proceed from within, and defyle the man^
(mathe) These are the things that defyle a man. But to eat with unwashed
hands, defyleth not a man.

Of the woman of Chanane. Mat. xv. mar. vii. Capi. lxxxi.
ANd Jesus went out from thence, Mathe.
and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sido^ (Mark) and entered into a
house, and would let no man know of it, and yet could he not be hid. Matthew.)
And behold a woman of Chanane, an heythen woman of Syrophenices, whose
daughter had a foul spyryte, (Mat.) went out of the same coasts (mark)
entered in, (mat.) and cried, saying unto him. O lord y^ son of David, have
mercy upon me, my daughter is sore vexed with a deuell. And he answered her
never a word. Then came his dis^yples unto him, and besoughte him, saying:
Send her away, for she cries after us.

But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the ^^ste sheep of the
house of Israel. Notwythstandynge she came and fell down before him, (Mar.)
she was an heythen woman of Strophenices, and she besoughte him, that he would
drive out the devil from her daughter, (Math.) saying: Lord help me. He
answered and said. (Mar.) Let the children be fed first, (Math.) it is not
good to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it unto the dogs. It is
truth Lord said she, nevertheless the welpes eat of the crommes, that fall
from their Lords table, (Mar.) and eat of the crommes under the childre^s
table. (Math.) Then answered Jesus, and said unto her: O woman, great is thy
faith, be it unto thee, as thou defyrest, (Mark) because of this saying: go
thy way, the devil is departed out of thy daughter, (Math.) and her daughter
was made whole, at the same hour. (Mark) And she went unto her house, and
found that the deuel was departed, and her daughter lyenge on the bed.

Of a deaf and a dumme man which was healed, and of many other. Math. xiii.
Mark. vii. Capitulo. lxxxii.
ANd when he went out again from the coasts of Tire, Math.
and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galile, through the my^ste of the coasts
of ye te^ cities. And they brought unto him one that was deaf and dome, and
they prayde him that he would lay his hand upon him. And he took him aside
from the people, and put his fyngers in his ears, and did spyt, and touched
his tongue, and looked up unto heaven, syghed, and said unto him: Ephata, y^ is,
be opened. And immediately his ears were opened, and y^ bond of his tongue was
lowsed, and he spoke right. And he charged them, that they should tell no man.
But the more he forbad them, the more they publyshed it, and maruayled out of
measure, and said: He had done all things well.

The deaf has he made to hear, and the domme to speak. And a^cendynge up
into a mountain, he sat down there: And there came unto him much people,
having with them, lame, blind, domme, crepell, and other many, and cast them
down at Jesus fete. And he healed them. In so much, that the people wondered,
to se the domme speak, the crepell whole, y^ halte to go, and the blind to
see. And they praised God of Israel.

The fourth part contaynynge those things which Jesus did and said in the
three and thyrtye year of his age.
Of the second refection of the people with seven loves. Math. xv. Mark.
viii. Capi. lxxxiii.
AT the same time wha^ there was much people there, Math.
and had nothing to eat: Jesus called his dyscyples and said unto them. I
have compassion upon the people: for they have tarried with me now three days,
(Mat.) and they continue with me, and have nothing to ^ate, and I will not let
them depart fasting, lest they peryshe in the way, (Mark) for some of them
were come from far. And his disciples answered him. Where should we get bread
here in the wilderness to satysfye them? (Mathe) Whence should we get so
much bread in the wilderness that w^ might satysfye so much people: (Mark)
And he axed them, how many loaves have ye?

They said, seven, and a few little fyshes. (Mar) And he commanded ye people
to sit down upon the ground.

And he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave the^
unto his disciples to set them before the people, (Mathe.) and they gave them
unto the people. And they all did eat, and were su^^ised. (Mar.) And took up
seven baskettes full of the broken meat that was left. And they that did eat
were upon a four thousand, (Mathe.) beside weme^ and children: (Mark) And he
sent the^ away (Mat.) And when he had sent ye people away, he went into a ship
with his disciples, and came into ye parties of Magdala, (mark) and came into
the coasts of Dalmanutha.

Of the Jews askinge again a sign from heaven. And of the avoiding of the
Pharisees leue^. Math. xvi. mar. viii. Capi. 84.
THen came the Pharisees and Saduces unto him, Math.
and tempted him, requiringe him to show them a sign from heaven, but he
answered and said. At even ye say. It will be fair wether, for the sky is
red: and in the morning ye say. It will be foul wether to day: for the sky
is read and glometh. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the fashion of the sky,
can ye not then discern the tokens of these times also? (Mark) And he syghed
in his spirit, end said? Why does this generacio^ seek a token. (Mat) This
euel and aduouterous generation seeks a token, (Mar.) Uerely I say unto you,
there shall no sign be given unto this generation. (Mat) But the sign and
toke^ of the prophet Jonas. Jonas. ii. ^
So he left them, (Mark) and went into the ship, and passed over. Math.

And when his dyscyples were come to the other side of the sea, they had
forgotten to take bread with them, (Mark) and they had no more with them in the
ship but one loaf. And he commanded them, and said: (Mat.) Take heed and
beware of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the Saduces, (Mark) and of the
leven of Herod. (Math.) Then thought they them selves, saying: we have taken
no bread with us. (Mark) When Jesus understood that, he said unto them.
(Math.) O ye of little faith? why are ye troubled in your minds, because ye
have taken no bread with you. (Mark) Are ye yet without knowledge, and
understanding? Have ye yet a blinded heart in you? Have ye ^yes and se not?
Have ye ears and hear not? And remember ye not y^ I brake five loves among
five thousand, how many baskettes full of broken meat took ye the^ up? They
said. xii. And when I brake the seven among the four thousand, how many
baskettes full of broken meat t^ke ye then up? They said seven. And he said
unto them, why are ye then without understanding? (Mat.) For I spoke not to
you of bread when I said, beware of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the
Saduces. Then understood they how that he bad not them beware of the leven of
bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Saduces.

Of a blind man healed at Bethsaida. Mar. viii. Cap. 85.
ANd he came to Bethsaida: Mark.
and they brought one blind unto him, and prayed him to touch him. And he
took the blind by the hand, and led him out of y^ town, and spatte in his
eyes, and laid his hands upon him, and axed him, whether he saw ought. And
he looked up and said, I se men going, as if I saw trees. After this he laid
his hands upon his eyes again, and made him to see, and he was restored
again, and saw all clearly. And he sent him hame, and said: if thou go into
the town, tell it unto no man. And Jesus went out and his dysciples in to
the towns.

Of Peter's confession of the true faith. Mat. xvi. Mar. viii. Luke. ix. Cap.
lxxxvi.
THe^ came Jesus into the coasts of the city Cesarea Phillippi. Math.
(Luke) And it fortuned when he was alone at his prayer, and his disciples with
him, (mark) in the way. (math) He asked his disciples, and said: whom do men
say that the son of man is? (Mar) They answered, saying: (Math.) Some say
thou art John y^ baptyst. Some that thou art Helias. Some that y^ art
Hieremias, (mar.) some that thou art one of the Prophets. (Luke) Some, that
one of the old Prophets is risen again. (Math.) Then said Jesus unto them.
But whom say ye that I am? The^ answered Peter, and said unto him. Thou art
Christ, ye son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him.
Blessed art y^ Simon ye son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not opened y^
unto thee, but my father that is in heaven. And I say to thee, thou art Peter,
and upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it: and the keys of heaven will I give unto thee. And what
so ever thou shall. bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven. And what
soever thou shall louse upon earth, shall be lowsed also in heaven. (Luk) And he
charged them, (Mark) and threatened them, (Math.) and commanded his disciples
y^ they should tell no man, that he was Jesus Christ. From that time forth
began Jesus to show unto his dysciples, how that he must go to Jerusalem,
and suffer many things of the elders, and of ye hye priests, and of the
Scribes, and be put to death, and rise again the third day. (Mark) And that
word he spoke openly. (Math.) But Peter took him aside, and began to
rebuke him, saying: Lord favor thy self, let not this happen unto thee.
(Mark) But he turned him about, and looked upon his dyscyples, and reproved
Peter, and said: (Math) Go after me thou Satan, y^ hindreste me, for thou
fauourest not the things that be of God, but of men.

Of bearing the cross after Christ. Mathe. xvi.. Mark. viii. Luke. ix. Capi.
lxxxvii.
ANd he called unto him ye people, Mark.
with his dysciples, and said unto them. (Mat.) If any manne will follow me,
let him forsake him self, and take up his cross, and follow me. For who so
will save his life, shall lose it, but whosoever loses his life for my sake,
(Mark) and the gospels, the same shall save it, (Math.) and shall find it.
(Mark) What helps it a man though he wanne the whole world, and yet took
harm in his soul? (Luke.) And loses him self, or runs in damage of him
self? (Math.) Or what can a man give to redeem his soul with all? for the
son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his angels, and then
shall he reward every one according to his deeds. (Mar.) Who so ever
confesses me, and my words: among this aduouterous and sinful generation,
and the son of man shall confess him, when he comes in the glory of his
father with his angels. (Luk.) Who so is ashamed of me, and of my sayings, of
him shall the son of man also be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and
in the glory of his father, and of the holy angels.

(Mark). He said unto them: verily I say unto you. (Mat.) There stand here
some, which shall not taste of death, till they see the son of man come
in his kyngedome.

Of the Lords trans^yguracion. mat. 17. Mar. 9. Luke 9. Cap. 88.
ANd it fortuned, Luke.
(Mat.) that after six days, (Luk) that eight days after these words.
(Math.) Jesus took Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up
into an hye mountain out of ye way, (Mark) alone (Luk) for to pray, (math.)
and was transfygured before them. (Luk) And as he prayed, the shape of his
countenance was changed after another fashion, (Math.) and his face shone as
the sun, and his clothes were as white, as the light, or snow, (Mark) as
white as no fuller can make upon earth, (Luke) And behold two men, (Math)
appeared unto them, Moses and Elias, and they talked with him (Luke) and were
seen in majesty, and spoke of his departige, which he should fulfill at
Jerusalem. As for Peter, and they that were with him, they were full of sleep,
but wha^ they awo^e, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him.
And it chanced when they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus: Master,
here is good being for us, if then will let us make three tabernacles, one for
thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias, (mark) for he knew not what he said.
For they were very fearful. (Mat.) While he yet spoke, behold a bright cloud
ouershadowed them, (Luke) and they were afraid when the cloud covered the^.
(Mathe.) And lo, there came a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is my
dear son, in whom I delight, hear him. When the dyscyples heard that, they
fell upon their faces, and where sore afraid. But Jesus came and touched them,
and said. Arise, and be not afraid. (Luke) And while this voice came to pass,
(Mathe.) they looked up, (Mark) they looked about them, and saw no man more
but Jesus only with them, (Luk) they found Jesus alone. (Mat.) And when they
came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, and said. Tell no man of
this vyspon, till the son of man be risen again from the dead. (Mar.) And
they kept that saying by them, and axed one another. What is that rysynge
again from the dead? (Luke) And they kept it close and told no man in those
days of the things which they had seen. (math.) And his dysciples axed him,
and said: Why say the Scribes then, (Mark) and the Pharisees, that Elias must
first come? He answered, and said unto the^.* Mala. 3. b.
(mathe.) Helias shall first come in deed. (Mark) And when he is come, he shall
first restore all things to right again. And as it is written, of the son
of man, he shall suffer many things, and be despised. (Mathe) But I say unto
you, Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but they have done unto him,
what they would, (Mark) as it is written of him. Esaias. 53. ^
(Math) Even so shall also the son of man suffer of the^. Then perceived y^
dysciples, y^ he spoke unto the^ of John ye Baptist.

Of the domme and lunatike spirit, who^ Christ's disciples could not heal.
Math. xvii. Mar. ix. Luke. ix. Cap. Ixxxix.
ANd it chanced on the next day after, Luke.
when they came down from the mount, (Mark) he came to his discyples, and
saw much people about them, and the Scribes dysputynge with them. And as soon
as the people saw Jesus, they were astonyed, and afraid. (Mathe) And when he
was come to the people, (Mark) they ran unto him, and saluted him. And he
axed the Scribes, what dyspute you with them? (Luk) And behold a man, (Mark)
aunswerynge, (Luk) among the people, (math.) came and kneled unto him, (Luke)
cried out, and said. Master, I have brought unto the my son, which has a
domme spirit, and when so ever he takes him, he teareth him, and he fometh,
and gnasheth with the teth, and pyneth away. Math) Lord have mercy upon my
son, for he is lunatyke, and sore vexed: He falls often times in the fire,
and often into the water. (Luk) He is mine only son, behold the spyryte
takes him, and suddenly he cries, and he teareth him that he ^ometh, and with
pain departs from him when he has rent him. And I offered him to thy
dyscyples.

(Mark) I besoughte them, (Luk) to cast him out, (Mat) and they could not.
And Jesus answered and said, O thou faythelesse and froward generation, (Luk)
unfaithful. (Mathe) How long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer
you? Bring him hither to me, (Mark) and they brough thym, (Luk) and when he
came to him, (Mar) and had seen him. By and by the spyrite troubled him, (Luk)
the deuel rent him, and tare him, (Mark) and fell upon the earth, and weltred,
and fomed: And he asked his father. How long is it sense this happened unto
him? He said: Of a child, and often times has he cast him into the fire, and
water to destroy him. But if thou canste do any thing, have mercy upon us,
and help us. Jesus said unto him, if thou couldeste believe. All things are
possible unto him that believes. And immediately the father of the child cried
with tears, and said: Lord, I believe, O help thou mine unbelief. Now when
Jesus saw that the people came unto him. He threatened the foul spyrite,
(Math) and rebuked him, (Mark) saying: Thou domme and deaf spyrite. I charge
thee depart out of him, and enter no more into him. And he cried, and rent him
sore, (Math) and the devil went out of him. (Mark) And he was as though he
had been dead, insomuche that many said: he is dead. But Jesus taking him by
the hand, set him up, and he arose, (Mat) and the child was healed eue^ the
same hour, and delivered him to his father again. And they were all amassed at
y^ mighty power of God. And while they wondered every one at all things which
he did, he said unto his dysciples: Co^prehende these sayings in your
hearts, for the son of man must be delivered into the hands of men. (Mark)
And when he came home, his disciples (Math) came secretly, and said: why
could not we heal him? And Jesus said unto them, because of your unbelief.
For I say verily unto you, if ye have faith as a grain of muster sede, ye may
say unto this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and he shall remove,
another shall any thing be impossible unto you. (Mark) This kind can go out
by no means, but by prayer and fasting.

Of the disciples desiring their faith to be increased. Luke. xvii. Capi. xc.
ANd the apostles said unto the Lord. Luke.
Increace our faith. The Lord said, if ye have faith as a grain of muster
sede, and say unto this molbery tree, pluck thy self up by the roots, and
plant thy self in the sea, it shall be obediente unto you?

Which of you is it, that has a servant which ploweth or fedeth the
cattle when he comes home from the field, that will say unto him: Go
quickly, and sit down to meat: Is it not thus that he says unto him, make
ready that I may suppe: gyrde up thy self, and serve me till I have eaten
and dro^ken, afterward shalt thou eat and drink also.

Thanketh he the same servant, because he did that was commanded him? I
trow not. So likewise ye, when ye have done all that is commanded you, say
we are unprofitable servants, we have done that we were bound to do.

Of the paymente of Didragma. Mat. xvii. Capi. xci.
ANd when they were come to Capernaum, Math.
they that received the trybute money, came to Peter, and said: Does your
master pay trybute? He said yea. And when he was come home. Jesus prevented
him, and said. What thynkest thou Simon. Of whom do the kings of the earth
take toll or tribute? of their children, or of strangers? Then spoke Peter,
unto him, of strangers. Jesus said unto him. Then are y^ children free.
Nevertheless, lest we offend them, go thy way to the sea, and cast thy
angle, and take the fyshe that first comes up, and when thou haste opened
his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of twentye pence, take that and give it
them for me and the^.

Of the dyscyples contencion which of them should be greatest. Mat. xviii.
mark. 9 Luke. ix. Capi. xcii.
AT the same time, (Luke) there came a thought among them which of them
should be ye greatest. Math.
But when Jesus saw the thoughts of their hearts. (Mark) And when he was come
home, he axed the^. What dysputed ye among your selves by the way? But they
held their tunges: for they had dysputed by the way among them selves,
which of them should be the greatest. (Math) The disciples came unto Jesus,
and said, who is the greatest in the kyngedome of heaven? (Mar.) And he sat
down, and called the twelve, and said unto them. If any man will be the first,
the same shall be the last of all, and the servant of all. (Mathe) And Jesus
called a child unto him, and set him by him in ye midst among them, (Mark.)
and took him in his arms, and said to them. (Mat.) verily I say unto you,
except ye turn and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Who soever therefore humbles him self as this child, the same is ye
greatest in the kyngedome of heaven. And who so receaueth such a child in my
name, receaueth me. (Mark) And who soever receaueth me, receaueth not me, but
him that has sent me. (Luke) For who so is least among you, the same is
greatest. (Math.) But who so offends one of these little ones which believe in
me, it were better for him, that a mylstone were hanged about his neck, and he
drowned in the depte of the sea. Woe unto the world, because of slanders, yet
there must slanders come, but woe unto that man, by whom slander comes. But
if (Mark) thy hand offe^de thee, cut him of, (Mathe.) and cast him from
thee. (Mar.) Better it is for thee, to enter into life, without a hand, and
lame, then having two hands to go into hell, (Math.) everlasting fire,
(mark) and vnquensable, where their worm dies not; and their fire goes not
out. If thy foot offend thee, cut him of. Better it is for thee, to enter
into life crepell, then having two fete to be cast into hell, in the fire
everlasting, where their worm dies not, and their fire goes not out. If
thine eye offend thee, pluck him out, (Math) and cast him from thee.
(Mark) Better it is for thee to enter into the kyngedome of God with one eye,
then having two eyes, to be cast into the fire of hell, where their worm
dies not, and their fire goes not out, for every man must be salted with
fire, and every offering shall be seasoned with salt. Salt is good, but if the
salt be unsavory, where with shall it be salted? Have salt in you, and peace
among your selves. (Mat.) Take heed that ye despise not one of those little
ones. For I say unto you, their angels do always behold the face of my
father which is in heaven. For the son of man is come to save that is
lost.

How think ye if a man have an hundred sh^pe, and one of them gone astraye,
does he not leave the nyntye and nine in the mountains, and goes and seeks
that one which is gone astraye? And if it happen that he find it. Uerelye I
say unto you, he rejoices more over it, then over the nyntye and nine, which
went not astraye. Even so, it is not the will before your father in heaven,
that one of these little ones should peryshe.

Of him that cast out deuels and followed not Christ. Mark. ix. Luke. ix. Capi.
xciii.
John answered him, Mark.
and said: Master. (Luke) We saw one drive out deuels in thy name, and we
forbad him, for he followed the not with us. And Jesus said unto him, (Mark)
forbid him not, for there is no man that does a miracle in my name, and can
soon speak euel of me, (Luke) for he that is not against you, is for you.
And who soever gives you a cup of cold water to drink in my name, because ye
belong unto Christ verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.

Of three parables, the sheep, and grote that was lost, and of y^ prodigal
son. Luke. xv. Capi. 94.
THere resorted unto him all the Publicans and sinners, Luke
that they might hear him. And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured and said.
This man receaueth sinners, and eats with them. But he told thee this
symyltude, and said. What man is he among you, that has an hundred sheep,
and if he lose one of them, that leueth not the nine and nyntye in the
wilderness, and goes after that which is lost, till he find it? And when
he has found it, he lays it upon his shoulders with joy: and when he
comes home, he calls his friends and neighbors, and says unto them.
Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep, y^ was lost, I say unto you,
eue^ so shall there be joy in heaven, over one sinner that does penance, more
then over nine and nyntye righteous, which need no penance. Or what woman is
it, that has ten grotes, if she lose one of the, that lights not a candel,
and swepeth the house, and seeks dilygentlye, till she find it? And when she
has found it, she calls her friends and neighbors, and says: Rejoice
with me, for I have found my groate which I had lost. Even so, I tell you,
shall there be joy before the angels of God, over one sinner that does
pen^unce. And he said: A certain manne had two sons, and the younger of them
said unto ye father. Father, give me my portion of the goods that belongs
unto me, and he divided the good unto the. And not long thereafter, the younger
son gathered all together, and took his journey in to a far country, and
there wasted he his goods with riotus living. Now when he had spente all that
he had, there was a great dearth through out all the same land. And he began
to lack, and went his way and did eleaue unto a citesyn of the same
country, which sent him into his field to keep swyne, and he would feign
have filled his belie with the ^oddes that the swyne did eat, and no man gave
him them. Then came he to him self. and said: How many hired servants has
my father, which have bread enough, and I peryshe of hunger? I will get up,
and go to my father and say unto him. Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before the, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hired servants. And he gat him up, and came to his father. But when he was
yet a great way of, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and
fell about his neck and kyssed him. Then said the son unto him: father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee: I am no more worthy to be called
thy son. But the father said unto his servants: bring forth the best
garmente, and put it upon him, and give him a ring upon his hand, and shues
on his fete, and bring hither a fed calfe, and kill it, let us eat and be
merry for this my son was dead, and is alive again, he was lost and is
found: And they began to be merry. But the elder son was in the field, and
when he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard the minstrelsye and
daunsinge, and called one of the servants unto him, and asked what it was. He
said unto him, thy brother is come home, and thy father has slain a fed
calfe, because he has received him safe and sound. Then was he angry, and
would not goo in. Then went his father out and prayed him. But he answered
and said unto his father: loo, thus many years have I done thee service,
neither have I broken thy commandment, and thou gau^ste me never a kyd, that
I might make merye with my friends. But now that this thy son is come, which
has devoured his goods with harlot^es, thou haste slain a fed calfe. But he
said unto him: my son, thou art always with me, and al y^ is mine, is thine,
thou should be merye and glade, for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again, he was lost, and is found again.

Of brotherly correccion. Mat xviii. Luke. xvii. Capitu. 95.
Take heed to your selves (Math.) Luke.
if thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault (Luke)
rebuke him, (Math.) between thee and him alone. If he hear thee, (Luke) and do
penance, forgive him, (Math.) and thou haste won thy brother. (Luke) And
though he sin against the seven times in a day, and come seven times in a
day to thee again, and say, it repents me, forgive him.* Leui. iij. d
(Math.) But if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, Deu. 19, b.
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every matter may be stablyshed,
Eccle. 19. b.
if he hear not them, tell it unto the congregation, if he hear not the
congregation, hold him as an heythen, and publicane. Uerely I say unto you,
what so ever ye shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and what
soever ye lowse upon earth, shall be lowsed also in heaven. I say again unto
you, if two of you shall agree upon earth (for what thing so ever it be that
they would desire) they shall have it of my father which is in heaven. For
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the myddeste
among them. Then came Peter unto him, and said: Lord how often shall I
forgive my brother that trespasseth against me^ Seven times?

Jesus said unto him: I say not unto the seven times, but seventy times, seven
times.

Of the wicked servant unto whom all the debt was forgeuen. Mat. xviii.
Capi. xcvi.
THerefore is the kingdom of heaven lykened unto a king, Math.
which would reken with his servants. And when he began to reken, one was
brought unto him, which ought him ten thousand pound. Now when he had
nothing to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and his
children, and all that he had, and paymente to be made. Then the servant fell
down, and besoughte him saying: sir have patience with me, and I will pay the
all. Then had the lord pity on that servant, and discharged him, and forgave
him the debt: And the same servant went out and found one of his
fellows, which ought him an hundredth pens, and laid hand upon him, and
took him by the throat, and said: pay me that thou owe. Then his fellow fell
down, and besoughte him saying: have patience with me, and I will pay the
all. Nevertheless he would not, but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt. When his fellows same what was done, they were very
sorye, and came and told their lord all that happened. Then his lord called
for him, and said unto him: O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all this
det, because thou pra^edst me, should not thou then have had compassion also
upon thy fellow as I had pity upon thee? And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him unto the Iaylers, till that he paid all that he ought. So shall
my heavenly father do also, unto you, if every one of you from your hearts
forgive not his brother his trespasse^.

Of Christ's coming into the coasts of Iewrye: and that his Disciples
should not fear those that kill the body. Mat. xix. Mar. x. Luke xi. Cap.
xcvi^
ANd it came to pass, Math.
when Jesus had ended these sayings he gate him from Galile, and he came in to
the coasts of Iewrye beyond Fordane, and much people followed him, and he
healed them there, (Mark.) and as his manner was, he taught them again,
(Luke) and much people being about him: in so much that they trod one
another, he began and said to his dysciples, beware of y^ leven of the
Pharisees, which is Ipocrisye, for there is nothing hid, that shall not be
discovered, another secret that shall not be known. Therefore what so ever ye
have spoken in darkness, that same shall be heard in light, and that ye have
spoken into the ear in the chambers, shall be preached upon the house roppes.
But I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do: But I will show you whom ye shall
fear: fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell:
Yea, I say unto you, fear him. Are not five sparowes boughte for two
farthynges? yet is not one of them forgotten before GOD.

The very heeres of your head also are nom^red every one. Fear not therefore
for ye are better then many sparowes. I say unto you, whosoever confesses me
before men, him shall the son of man confess and knowledge before the
Au^ngels of God: but he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the
Angels of God. And whosoever speaks a word against the son of man, it
shall be forgeuen him. But whosoever blaspemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him. When they bring you in to their synagoges, and to the rulers,
and officers: take ye no thought how or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall
speak: for the holy ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what you ought to
say.

Of the cause why a man should forsake his wife. Mat, 19. Mar. 10. Luc. 16. Cap.
98.
THen came unto him the Pharisees, Mathe
and tempted him, and said. Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife, for
any manner of cause? (Mark) But he answered and said, what has Moses
commanded you? They said: Moses suffered to write a testimonial of deuorcement
and to put her away, (Math) He answered and said, Genesis 2. d.
have ye not red, how that he, which made manne at the beginning, made them
man and woman, and said. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother,
and cleue unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. Now are they not
^waine then, but one flesh: Let no man therefore put a sunder, that which God
has coupled together. Then said they, why did Moses then, command to give a
testimonial of deuorcemente, and to put her away. He said unto them: Deu.
24. a.
Moses because of the hardness of your hearts, I suffered you to put a way your
wives. (mark) And he wrote you this commandment, (Math) Nevertheless from
the beginning it was not so. (Mark) And at home his disciples asked him again
of the same, and he said unto them. (Mathe) I say unto you, whosoever puts
away his wife except it be for fornicacion, and marieth a another, he
commits adnoutery, and who so maryeth her that is deuorced, commits
aduouterye, (Mar) to her ward, (Luke) and he that marieth her which is
deuorced from her husband, breaks wedlock. (Mar) And if a woman for sake her
husband, and be married to a another, she commits aduouterye. (Mat.) Then
said his disciples unto him, if the matter be so between manne and wife, then
it is not good to marye. But he said, all men cannot comprehend that saying,
save they to whom it is given. For there be some gelded, which are so borne
from their mothers womb, and there be some gelded, which are gelded of men,
and there be some gelded, which have gelded them selves for the kingdom of
Heavens sake. He that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it.

Of young children which were brought unto the Lord Mat xix. Mark. x. Luke.
xviii Capi. xcix.
THen were brought unto him young children, Math.
that he might touch them, and lay his hands upon them, and pray, (Luk)
but when the Disciples saw that, they rebuked them (Mar.) and thretend those
that brought them, nevertheless when he saw it, he was displeased. (Luk) And
Jesus called them unto him, and said: (Mat) Suffer the children, and forbid
them not to come unto me: for unto such belongs the kingdom of heaven.
(Luk) And he said: verily I say unto you, whosoever receaueth not the
kingdom of God as a child, shall not enter therein. (Mark) And taking them
up in his arms, and laid his hands upon them, and blessed them (math) and
when he had laid his hands upon them, he departed thence.

Of the young man that asked what he should do to possess eternal life. Math.
xix. Mar. x, Luc. xviii. Capi. C.
Jesus departed from thence (Mar) And when he was gone forth upon the way,
Math.
there came a ruler runnynge, and kneled unto him, and asked him, and prayed
him, saying: (math.) Good master, what good shall I do, that I may have
everlasting lyfe^ Jesus said unto him: why call thou me good, there is
none good but God only. Nevertheless if thou wylt enter into life, keep the
commandments. (Mark) Know thou the commaundementes^ (Math) He said unto
him: whiche^ Jesus said. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commit aduoutrye.
Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt bear no false witness. (Mar) Thou shalt
begyle no man. (Mat) Honor thy father and thy mother, and thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyselfe. Then said the young man unto him, all these have I
kept fro my youth up. What lack I yet? (Mar) And Jesus beheld him and loved
him. (Luk) Wha^ Jesus heard that, he said unto him: yet lackest thou one
thing. (Math) If thou wylt be perfect, go thy way, and s^ll that thou have, and
give it to the poor, and thou shalt have a treasure in heaven and come and
follow me. When the young man heard that word, he went away sorye, for he had
great possessions, (Luke) and was very rich. When Jesus saw, that he was
sorry, he said to his disciples, how hardlye shall the rich come in to the
kingdom of God?

How hard it is for a rich man to enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Mat.
xix. Mark. x. Luc. xviii. Cap. Ci.
UErely I say unto you, Math.
it shall be hard for a rich manne, to enter in to the kingdom of heaven.
(Mark) The disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answered again,
and said unto them: dear childreu, how hard is it for the^ that trust in
riches, to come in to the kingdom of God^ (Mat) And I say unto you again, it
is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Nedle, then for a rich man to
enter into heaven. When his disciples heard that, they were exceadingly
amassed, (Mark) certain that heard that, were more astonyed, and said among
them selves (Luk) Who can then be saved? (Mark) And Jesus beheld them, and
said unto them, (Mat.) with men it is impossible, but with God, all things are
possible. (Luke) Look what is impossible with man, is possible with God.

Of the reward of those which leave all and follow Christ. Mat. xix. Mar. x.
Luc. xviii. cap. 102.
THen answered Peter, Math.
and began to say unto him. Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed the,
what shall we have therefore? Jesus answered and said unto them, verily I say
unto you. That when the son of man shall sit in the seat of his majesty, ye
which have followed me in the new birth shall sy^ also upon twelve seats, and
judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And whosoever forsakes house, or brethren,
or systers, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands. (Mar) with
persecucion for my sake, and the Gospelles, (Math) and for my names sake,
(Luke) and the kingdom of God, (mat) y^ same shall receive an hundred fold,)
Luk), now in this time, and much more in the world to come, (Mark) and
inheret everlasting life, but many that be the first, shall be the last, and
the last shall be the first.

Of the laberous quotidian penny, which were sent into the vyneyarde. Math. xx.
Capitu. 103.
THe kyngedom of heaven, Math.
is like unto an householder, which went out earlye in the morning, to hyre
laborers into his vyneyarde. And wha^ he had agreed with the laborers for a
penye a day, he sent them into his vyneyarde. And about the third hour, he
went out, and saw other standing idle in the market place, and said unto
them. Go ye also into my vineyarde, and what so ever is right I will give it
you, and they went theyr^ way. Again he went out about the syxte hour,
and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour, he went out, and found other
standing idle, and said unto them, why stand ye here al^ the day y^le.

They said unto him, because no man has hired us: he said unto them. Go ye
also into y^ vyneyarde, and look what is right, ye shall have it. Now when
the even was come, the Lord of the vyneyarde said unto his steward.

Call the laborers and give the^ their hyre, beginning from the last unto
the first. Then they that were hired about the eleventh hour, came and
received every man a penny, but when the first came, they supposed that they
should receive more, and they also received every man a penye. And when they
had received it, they murmured against the householder, and said. These last
have wroughte but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us, which have
borne the burden and heat of the day. He answered and said unto one of
them: friend, I do thee no wrong, dyddest not y^ agree with me for a penye^ Take
that thine is, and go thy waye^. I will give unto this last also like as to
thee. Or have I not power to do as me lusts with mine own? Is thy eye evil,
because I am good? So y^ last shall be first, and y^ first last. For many are
called, but few chosen.

Of the unrighteous (...) ward. Luke. xvi. Capitulo. Ciiii.
HE said also unto his disciples: There was a certain rich man, Luke
which had a steward that was accused unto him, that he had wasted his gods.
And he called him, and said unto him: what is it that I hear this of thee^
give accomptes of thy stewardeship, for thou may be no longer steward. The
steward said within him self. What shall I do? My Lord will take away the
stewardship fro me. I cannot dygge, and to beg I am ashamed, I wot what I
will do, that when I am put out of the stewardeshyppe they may receive me
into their houses. And he called unto him all his lords detters, and said unto
the first. How much owe thou unto my Lord? He said an hundredth ^onne of
oil. And he said, take thy bil, sit down quickly, and write fyftye. Then
said he unto another^ How much owe thou^ he said an hundredth quarters of
wheat. He said unto him, take thy bil, and write four score, and the Lord
commanded the unrighteous steward, because he had done wisely. For the
children of this world, are in their kind wyser, then the children of light.
And I say unto you, make you friends with the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye
have need, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles. He that is
faithful in the least, is faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous
in the least, is unrighteous also in the much. If ye then have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will believe you in that which is true^
And if ye have not been faithful in an other ma^s business: Who will give you
y^ which is your own? No servant can serve two masters for either he shall
hate the one, and love the other, or else he shall leave to the one and despise
the other, ye cannot serve God and Mammon. All these things heard the
Pharyses which were couetouse, and they mo^ked him: And he said unto them, ye
are they that iustyfye your selves before men, but GOD knows your
hearts: For that which is hye among men is an abhominacion before God. The
law and the Prophets propheryed unto John, and from that time forth is the
kingdom of God preached through the gospel, and every man preasseth into it by
vyolence. But easyer is it for heaven and yearthe to peryshe, then one title of
the law to fall. Who soever puts away his wife, and maryeth another,
breaks wedlock, and he that maryeth her which is deuorced from her husband
breaks matrimonye.

Of the rich glotten. Luke. xvi. Capitulo. cv.
THere was a certain rich man, Luke
which clothed him self with purple, and costly lynnen, and fared deliciously
every day.

And there was a poor manne named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of
sores, and desired to be filled with the crommes that fell from the rich man's
table, and no man gave him them, yet came the dogs, and ly^ked his soores.
But it fortuned that the poor manne dyed, and was carried of the angels into
Abraham's bosom. The rich manne dyed also, and was buried in hell. Now when
he was in hell, he lift up his eyes in the pain, and saw Abraham a far of,
and Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said: Father Abraham, have mercy
upon me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the typpe of his finger in water,
and coule my tongue: for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said,
remember son that thou haste received good in thy life, and contrary wise
Lazarus received evil. But now is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

And beside all this, there is a great space set between us and you, so that
they which would go down from hence unto you cannot: another may they pass
over from thence unto us. Then said he, I pray thee then father, that thou
will send him unto my fathers house, for I have yet five brethren, that he
may warn them, lest they also come into this place of tormente. Abraham
said unto him. They have Moses, and the Prophets let the^ hear them. But he
said, nay father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they would
do penance. But he said unto them: if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
then shall they not believe also, though one rose again from the dead. After
these things Jesus went with his dysciples over Iordane, where John
baptized first.

Of the reuyuynge of Lazarus. Joan. xi. Capitu. Cvi.
THere lay one sick, Joan
named Lazarus of Bethania, in the town of Marie, and her sister Martha. It
was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ^yntemente, and dried his fete
with her here, whose brother Lazarus lay sick. Then sent his systers unto
him, and said: Lord behold, He whom thou loueste lies sick.

When Jesus heard that, he said: This sycknesse is not unto death, but for
the praise of GOD, that the son of GOD may be praised there through. Jesus
loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. Now when he heard that he was
sick, he abo^e two days in y^ place where he was. [ where John had
baptized.] Afterward said he unto his dyscyples, let us go again into Iewrye.
His dysciples said unto him: Master lately would the Jews have stoned thee,
and will thou go thither again? Jesus answered.

Are there not twelve hours in the day^ He that walks in the day stombleth
not, for he sees the light of this world. But he that walks in the night,
stombleth, for there is no light in him. This he spoke, and afterward said
he unto them, Lazarus our friend slepeth, but I go to wake him out of sleep.
Then said his dyscyples. Lord if he sleep, he shall do well enough. How be
it Jesus spoke of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of the
bodily sleep. Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead, and I am
glade for your sakes that I was not there, that ye may believe: Nevertheless
let us go unto him.

Then said Thomas which is called Didimus, unto the dyscyples. Let us go
also, that we may dye with him.

Then came Jesus and found that he had lain in the grave four days already.
Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem about syxtene furlonges. And many of the Jews
were come to Martha, and Mary to comfort them over their brother. Now when
Martha heard that Jesus came, she went to mete him, but Mary sat still at
home. Then said Martha unto Jesus: Lord, if thou had been here, my brother
had not been dead: But nevertheless I know also, that what soever thou
ask of God, that God will give it thee. Jesus said unto her. Thy brother
shall rise again: Martha said unto him. I know that he shall rise again in
the resurreccion at the last day. Jesus said unto her, I am the resurreccion
and the life. He that believes on me, shall live, though he were dead
already: and who so ever lives, and believes on me, shall never dye: beleuest
thou this? She said unto him, ye Lord, I believe that thou art Christ the
son of GOD, which should come into the world.

And when she had said this, she went her way, and called Mary her sister
secretly and said. The master is come, and calls for the. She when she herd
that, rose up quyckly and come unto him, for Jesus was not yet come in to the
town, but was yet in y^ place where Martha met him. The Jews that were with
her in the house and comforted her, when they saw Mary that she rose up hastily
and went out, they followed and said: she goes to the grave to weep there. Now
when Mary came where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his fete and
said: Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not been dead. When
Jesus saw her weep and the Jews weeping also that came with her, he groned in
the spirit, and was sorry with in him self, and said, where have ye laid
him: They said, Lord come and se, and Jesus wept. Then said the Jews,
behold how he loved him, but some of them said, could not he, which opened
the eyes of y^ blind, have made also, that this man should not have dyed^ But
Jesus groned again in him self, and came to the grave, it was a cave, and a
stone laid on it. Jesus said: take away the stone. Martha the sister of him
that was dead, said unto him: Lord he stinketh already, for he has been
dead four days. Jesus said unto her: said I not unto thee, that if thou
dyddest believe, thou should see the glory of God: Then took they away the
stone, where the dead lay: Jesus lift up his eyes, and said: Father I
thank thee, that thou haste heard me. How be it, I know that thou hear
me always: but because of ye people that stand by, I said it, that they may
believe, that thou haste sent me: when he had said this, he cried loud,
Lazarus come forth. And the dead came forth bound hand and foot with
grave clothes: and his face bound with a napkyn. Jesus said unto them: lowse
him, and let him goo. Many now of the Jews which were come unto Marye, and
saw what Jesus did, believed on him. But some of them went their way unto the
Pharyses, and told them what Jesus had done.

Of the conspiracye made against Jesus and of his going to Ephraim. Ioh. xi.
Capitulo. C. vii.
THen the high priests, and the Pharisees gathered a counsel, and said. What
do we: This man does many miracles, if we let him goo thus, all men will
believe in him. The^ shall the Romans come and take away our land and
people: but one of them named Cayphas, which was high priest the same year,
said unto them: ye know nothing, another consider ye anyethynge at all. It is
better for us that one man dye for the people, then that all the people should
peryshe. This said he not of him self, but for as much as he was high
priest of the same year he prophe^yed. For Jesus was for to dye for the
people, and not for the people only, but that he should gather together the
children of God, which were scattered abroad. From that day fourth they took
counsel how they might put him to death. Jesus walked no more openly among the
Jews, but went from thence in to a country by the wilderness, to a city
called Ephraim, and there had he his being with his disciples. The Jews
Easter was nigh at hand, and there went up many to Jerusalem, out of that
country before the Easter to purify them selves. Then stood they up and asked
after Jesus, and spoke among them selves in the temple. What think ye that
he comes not to the feast? The high priests and the Pharisees had given a
commandment, that if any manne knew where he were he should show it, y^ they
might take him.

Of his departing from Ephraim to Jerusalem. Mat. xx. Mar. x. Luke xviii. Cap.
C. viii.
THey were in the way goinge up to Jerusalem, Mark.
and Jesus went before them, and they were astonnyed, and followed him, and
were afraid. (Math) And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and took the twelve
Disciples aside in the way and secretlye said again unto them: (Math) and
told them what should happen unto him, (Luke) and said unto them, behold we
go up to Jerusalem, and it shall all be fullfilled that is written by the
prophets concerning the son of man. (Mar) He shall be delivered unto the
high priests, Scribes and elders, (Math) and they shall condemn him to
death, and shall deliver him unto the heythen, to be mocked, to be scourged,
and to be crucified, (Luke) and to be spitted upon, and when they have scourged
him they shall put him to death: and upon the third day, shall he rise again.
And they understood nothing of these things, and this saying was hyd from
them, and they perceived not the things that were spoken.

Of the true Lepers healed in the way. Luc. xvii. cap. Cix.
ANd it fortuned when he took his journey toward Jerusalem, Luke.
he went through the midst of Samaria and Galile. And as he came to a town,
there met him ten Lepers which stood a far of, and lift up their voice,
and said. Jesus master have mercy upon us. And when he saw them he said unto
them, goo and show your selves unto the priests: Leu. 14^ a.
and it came to pass as they went, they were cleansed, and one of them, when he
saw that he was cleansed, he turned back again, and praised God with loud
voice, and fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him thanks. And the
same was a Samaritane. Jesus answered and said, are there not ten cleansed? But
where are those nine? There were else none found that turned again, and gave God
the praise, save only this stranger. And he said unto him: arise, goo thy
way, thy faith has made the whole.

How the Samaritans received not Christ. Luke. ix. Capit. C. x.
ANd it fortuned when the time was fulfilled that he should be received up
from he^ne, Luke.
he turned his face to go straight to Jerusalem: and before him he sent
messengers which went their way and came into a town of the Samaritanes to
prepare lodging for him, and they would not receive him, because he had turned
his face to goo to Jerusalem. But when his disciples James and John saw that,
they said: Lord will thou that we command that the fire come down from
heaven and consume them, as Elias did? Nevertheless Iessus turned him about
and rebuked them, 4 Reg. 1
and said. Know ye not what manner of sprite ye are of? the son of man is
not come to destroy men's souls, but to save them. And they went into another
town.

The peticion of the children of zebede. mat. xx. Mar. x, Ca. cxi
THen came unto him the mother of Zebedes children, Ma^he.
with her sons, fell down before him, and desired a certain thing of him.
And he said unto her, what wylt thou? She said unto him. Let these two
sons of mine sit in thy kingdom, the one upon thy right hand, and the other
upon thy left hand. (Mark) Then went unto him, James and John the sons of
Zebede, and said. Master we desire that whatsoever we ask of thee, thou will
do it for us. He said unto them: what desire you that I shall do to you? They
said unto him: grant us that we may sit, one at thy right hand, and one at
thy left hand in thy glory. (Mat) Jesus answered and said, ye wot not what ye
ask, may ye drike the cup that I shall drink? (Mark) and to be Baptized
with the baptyme that I shall be Baptized with all? (Mat) They said unto him,
yea, that we may. (Math.) Jesus said unto them: my cup truly shall ye
drink, (mark) and be baptized with the baptime that I shall be baptized
withal, (Math) but to sit upon my right hand, and on my left, is not mine
to give, but unto them, for whom it is prepared of my father. When the ten
heard that, they disdayned at the two brethren James and John. But Jesus called
the^ unto him, and said, ye know that the Princes of the world, (Mar.) and
they that seem to have dominacion of the people, (Mathe.) the mighty, exercise
authority among them. It shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your m(...)ter. And whosoever will be the
ch^efe, let him be your servant, even as the son of man came not to be
served, but to do service, and to give his ly^e to a redemption for many.

Of the illuminacion of the blind before his goinge into Hierico, and of
zacheus, and the ten pounds. Luke. xviii. xix. Mar. x. Cap. cxii
ANd it came to pass, when Jesus came nie unto Hiericho, Luke
there sat one blind man by the way and begged. And when he heard the people
pass by, he asked what it was. Then said they unto him, y^ Jesus of Nazareth
passed by. And he tried and said. Jesus thou son of Dauyd, have merrye upon
me, but the people that went before, rebuked him that he should hold his
tongue. Nevertheless he cried much more: thou son of Dauyd have merry upon
me. Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be brought unto him. And when he
was come nere, he asked him and said: what wylt thou that I do unto the^ He
said, Lord, that I may receive my syghte. Jesus said unto him: receive thy
sight: thy faith has saved the. And immediately he saw, and followed him, and
praised God. And all the people y^ saw it, gave God the praise. (Mark) And
they came to Hierico: (Luke.) and he entered in, and went through Hierico. And
behold: there was a man named Zacheus, which was a ruler of the Publicans,
and was rich: and desired to se Jesus what he should be: and he could not
for the people, for he was low of stature. And he ran before, and clymed up
into a wild fig tree, that he might ^^ him, for he should come that way^ and
when Jesus came to the same place, he looked up and saw him; and said unto him.
Zache come down hastily, for to day must I turn into thy house. And he came
down hastelye and received him with joy. When they saw that they murmured
all and said, that he was gone in to a sinner. But Zacheus stood forth and
said unto the Lord, behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor, and if I have defrauded any man, I restore him four fold. Jesus said
unto him: this day is health happened unto this house, for so much as he also
is Abraham's son: for the son of man is coin to seek and to save, that
which was lost. Now while they herkened, he told a similitude also, because
he was nigh unto Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God
should appear immediatelye. And he said: a certain noble man went into a
far country, to receive him a kingdom, and then to come again. This man
called ten of his servants, and delivered them ten pound, and said unto
them: Occupy till I come again. But his citesyns hated him, and sent a
messenger after him, and said: We will not have this man to reign over us,
and it fortuned when he came again, after that he had received the kingdom,
he bad call the servants unto whom he had given his money, that he might
know what every one had done: then came the first and said: sir, thy pound
has won ten pound, and he said unto him. Well thou good servant for so much
as you have ben faithful in ye lest, you shalt have authorite over ten cities.
The second came also and said. Sir, thy pound has won five pound. And to
him I said, and thou shall be over five cities. And the third came and
said: loo sir here is the pound, which I have kept in a napkyn: I was afraied
of thee, for thou art an hard man, taking up that thou haste not sown: he
said unto him, of thine own mouth iu^ge I thee thou euel servant, knew thou
that I am an hard man, taking up that I laid not down, and reapinge that I
did not fowe: Wherefore then haste thou not delivered my money to the exchau^ge
banke^ and at my coming might I have required mine own with vantage. And he
said unto them that stood by: Take the pound from him, and give it unto him
that has ten pound, and they said unto him. Sir he has ten pound.
^lready, but I say unto you: Whosoever has, unto him shall be given, but from
him that has not, shall be taken away even that he has. As for those mine
enemies which would not that I should raygne over them, bring them hither,
and slaye them before me: And when he had thus said, he went on forward and
took his journey to Jerusalem.

Of two blind men which received their syghte, at his departing from
Hierico. Mat. xx Capitu. C. xiii.
ANd when they departed from Hierico, math.
much people followed him: and behold two blind men sarte by the way side:
and when they herd that Jesus passed by, they iryed and said, O Lord thou
son of Dauyd, have merrye upon us. But the people rebuked them, that they
should hold their peace. Nevertheless they cried the more, and said: O Lord
thou son of David, have mercy upon us. And Jesus stood still and called
them, and said. What will ye that I do unto your They said unto him: Lord
that our eyes may be opened. And Jesus had compassion on them and touched
their eyes, and immidiately their eyes received syghte, and they followed him.

Of blind Bartimeus, which received his syghte betwyxte Hierico and Bethani.
Mack. x. Capit. C. xiiii.
ANd when he went out of Hierico, Mark
and his disciples and much people, there sat one blind Bartimeus the son
of Thimeus by the way and begged. And when he herd that it was Jesus of
Nazareth, he began to cry, and said: Jesus the son of David have mercy
upon me. And many reproved him, that he should hold his tongue: But he cried
much more: thou son of David have mercy upon me. And Jesus stood still and
had call him: and they called the blind, and said unto him: be of good
comfort, arise, he calls the: and he cast away his garment from him, stood
up, and came to Jesus: and Jesus answered and said unto him: What will thou
that I do unto thee? The blind said unto him: Master, that I might se. Jesus
said unto him: goo thy way thy faith helped thee. And immediately he had his
syghte, and followed him in the wae.

When that the lord, after his return from Ephraim came to Bethani. John.
xii. Capitu. C. xv.
Six days before Easter, came Jesus unto Bethani, where Lazarus was dead,
whom Jesus raised up from the dead. Then much people of the Jews had
knowledge that he was there: and they came not for Jesus sake only, but also
that they might se Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. But the high
priests were aduysed to put Lazarus to death also, because that for his sake,
many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.

Of the sitting upon the Ass. Math. xii. Mark. xi. Luc. xix. John. xxi. Cap.
C, xvi.
UPon the next day, Joan
(Mat) when they came nigh Jerusalem, to Bethphage, Bethphage is avilage at the
^ote of mount oliuete partaynynge to the priests.
and Bethanye, unto mount Olyuet. Jesus sent two of his disciples, [Peter and
Philyp] and said unto them. Goo in to the town that lies before you, (Luk)
and a^^one as ye are come in, (Mat.) anon ye shall find an Ass bound, (Luk)
and a foale of an Ass tied (Math) with her, (Luke) where on yet never man sat,
lowse it, and bring it hither, and if any man ask you wherefore ye louse it,
say thus unto him: because (Math) the Lord has need of them. And strayte way
he will let them go: but all this was done, that the thing might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet, saying: Tell the daughter Sion, zacha. 9. b
(John) * Esaias. 69 d.
Fear not thou daughter of Sion, behold thy king comes, (Math) unto thee,
meke sitting [successiuelye] upon an Ass, and a coalte (John.) of an Ass
(Math.) used to the yoke. (John.) Nevertheless his disciples understood not
these things at the first: but when Jesus was gloryfyed then remembered they
that such things were written of him: and that they had done such things
to him. (Math.) The disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them, (Mark)
and found the foale tied by the door without at y^ partynge of the way, and
loused it. (Luke) But when they lowsed y^ foale, the owners thereof said unto
them, why l^use ye the foale? They said: (Mark) like as Jesus had commanded
them, (Luke) the Lord has need thereof (mark) and so they let them alone,
(Math) and brought the Ass, and the foale, and laid their clothes upon them,
and set him thereon.

Of the glorious rec^auynge of Christ upon Palm sunday. Math. xxi. Mark.
xi. Luke. xix. Joan. xii. Capi. Cxvii.
Now as he went, Luke.
(Math.) many of the people (Joan) which were come unto the feast. When they
heard that Jesus came toward Jerusalem, went to mete him, (Math.) and sprede
their garments in the way, other cut down branches (Joan) of Palm, (mark)
and bows, (Math.) from the trees, and strowed them in the way. As for the
people that went before, and that came after, they cried and said. Osanna unto
the son of David. Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.
(Mark.) Blessed be the kyngedome of our father David, which comes in the
name of the Lord. Osanna in the heyghte. (Luke.) And when he went down from
mount Oliuete, all the multitude that came down, began joyfully to praise
GOD with loud voice, over all the miracles that they had seen, and said:
blessed be he that comes a king in the name of the Lord, peace be in heaven,
and praise in the heyghte. (Joan) Blessed be he that in the name of the Lord
comes king of Israel. The people that was with him wha^ he called Lazarus
out of y^ grave, and raised him from the dead, bare witness. Therefore ye
people met him, because they heard that he had done such a miracle. But the
Pharisees said among them selves, ye se that we prevail nothing, behold: all
the world runs after him. (Luke) And some of the Pharisees among the people
said unto him. Master, rebuke thy dyscyples. He said unto them: I tell you if
these hold their peace, yet shall the stones cry.

How Jesus wept upon Jerusalem, and of the casting out of those that sold.
Mat. xxi. Mar. xi. Luke. xix. Capi. Cxviii.
ANd when he was come nere he beheld the city, Luke.
and wept upon it, and said. If thou knew what were for thy peace, thou
should remember even in this present day of thine, but now it is hid
from thine eyes, for the time shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall
cast up a bank about thee, and besege thee, and keep thee in on every side,
and make the even with the ground, and shall not leave in the one stone upon
another, because thou have not known the time wherein thou have been vysyted.
(Mar) And he went into Jerusalem, (Math.) and when he was come in, all the
city was moved, and said: Who is this? and the people said. This is Jesus ye
Prophet of Nazareth, out of Galyle. And Jesus went into y^ temple of God, and
cast out al the^ y^ boughte and soulde in y^ temple, and ouerthrewe the tables
of the money chaungers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and said unto
them. It is written: (Luke) my house, is an house of prayer, but ye have made
it a den of thieves. (mathe.) The blind, I^re. 7. b.
and the lame also came unto him in the temple, and he healed them. But when
the high Priests and ye Scribes saw the works that he did, and the children
cryinge in the temple, and saying. Osanna unto y^ son of David, they
dysdayned, and said unto him: hear thou what these say?

Jesus said unto them. Yea, have ye never red. Out of the mouth of very
babes and suckelynges thou haste ordained praise, Psalm. 8. a.
(Luk) and he taught daily in the temple. But y^ high Priests and the
Scrybes, and the chefest of the people went about to destroy them, and
found not what to do unto him. For all the people stacke to him, and gave him
audience.

Of the heathen which sought to se Christ. Joan. xii. mat. xxi. mar. xi. Luke.
xxi. Capi. Cxix.
THere were certain Gentyles among them, Joan.
that were come up to Jerusalem to worship at the feast, the same came to
Philyp, which was of Bethsayda, out of Galyle, and prayed him, and said: Sir,
we would feign se Jesus. Phylip came and told Andrewe. And again Phylyp and
Andrew told Jesus. Jesus answered them, and said. The hour is come that she
son of man must be gloryfyed. Uerely, Uerely I say unto you, except the
wheat corn fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone, but if it die it
brigeth forth much ^^uyte. He that loves his life, shall lose it, he that
hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life everlasting. He that
will serve me, let him follow me. And where I am, there shall my servant be
also: and he that serves me, him shall my father honor. Now is my ^oule
heavy, and what shall I say: Father help me out of this hour. But therefore
am I come into this hour. Father gloryfye thy name. Then came there a voice
from heaven: I have gloryfyed it, and gloryfye it again. Then said the people
that stood by and heard: It thondreth. Other said. An angel spoke unto him.
Jesus answered and said. This came not because of me, but for your sakes. Now
is the judgment of the world. Now shall the prince of this world be thrust
out. And I when I am lift up from the earth, will draw all unto me. But this
he said, to sygnifye what death he should dye. Then answered him the people:
We have heard in the law, that Christ endures for ever: and how say thou
then, Psalm. 109. b
that the son of man must be lift up? Who is this son of man? Then said
Jesus unto them. The light is yet a little while with you, walk while ye have
the light, Psalm. 116. a
that the darkness fall not upon you. He y^ walks in the darkness woteth
not whyther he goes. Believe ye on the light, while ye have it, that ye may
be the children of light. These things spoke Jesus, and departed away, and
hyd him self from them (Mathe.) And he left them there, (Mark) and looked
upon all, and at even (Math.) he went out of the city unto Bethany. (Mar.)
with the twelve, (math.) and abode ^here. (Luke) And an the day time he taught
in the temple, but in the night season he went out, and abode upon mount
Dliuete. And all the people gat them up early unto him in the temple, for to
hear him.

Of the cursynge of the fygge tree, and of the third election of those that
sold. And of y^ Pharise and the Publicane. Mat. xxi. Mar. xi Luke. xviii.
Capi. Cxx.
ANd on the morrow [ the third day] when he departed from Bethany (Math.) Mark.
and in the morning as he returned into the city he hungered. And in the way a
far of he saw a fygge tree chaunginge leaves, and he came unto it, and found
nothing thereon but leaves only, for y^ time of fygges was not yet. And he
said unto it. Never fruit grow on thee from he^ne forth. And immediately ye fyg
tree withered away. (Mark) And they came again to Jerusalem, and wha^ she went
into ye temple, and began to drive out ye sellers and biers in ye temple, and
overthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and y^ stools of dove sellers, and
suffered not any manne to carye a vessel through the temple.

And he taught and said unto them. Is it not written. My house shall be called
a house of prayer for all people^ But ye have made it a den of thieves. And
the Scrybes and hye Priests heard of it, and sought how they might destroy
him: but they were afraid of him. For all the people maruayled of his
doctrine. (Luk.) And unto certain which trusted in them selves that they were
perfect, and d^spised other, he spoke this parable. There went up two men
into the temple to pray. The one a Pharise, the other a Publicane. The Pharise
stood and prayed by him self after this manner. I thank God that I am not as
other men, robbers, unrighteous, aduouterours, or as this Publicane. I fast
twyce in the weke. I give the tithes of all y^ I have. And the Publicane stood
a far of, and would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his
breast, and said. God be thou merciful unto me sinner. I tell you. This man
went down into his house, justified more then the other. For who so eralteth
him self, shall be brought low, and he that humbles him self, shall be ^ralted.
(Mark) And at even he went out of the city.

Of the disciples admiracion upon the wythering of the fygge tree. mat. 21.
mar. 11. Capit. Cxxi.
ANd on the morrow they passed by, Mark.
and saw the fygge tree y^ it was withered unto the rote, and (Mat) they
maruayled, and said: How is it wythered away so sone? (Mark) And Peter
thought thereon, and said unto him. Master, behold the fyg tree that thou
coursedest is withered away. Jesus answered and said unto them. Have faith in
God. (Math) Uerelye I say unto you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall
not only do this with the fygge tree, but if ye shall say unto this mountain
avoid, and cast thy self into the sea it shall be done. And therefore I say
unto you, that what soever ye axe in prayer, if ye believe ye shall receive it.
(Mark) And when ye stand and pray, forgive if ye have ought against any man,
that your father also in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.

Of the question of John's baptime. Mat. xxi. Mark. xi. Luke xx. Capi. Cxxii.
ANd they came again to Jerusalem. Mark.
(Luke) And it for^uned one of those days, wha^ he taught y^ people in the
^emple, and preached the ghospel. (mathe.) The chief priests came unto him as
he was teaching, (Luke) and the Scribes, with the elders (Mat) of the people,
and said: by what authority do thou these thinges^ and who gave the this
authority (mark) to do such? (Luke) tell us. (Math.) Jesus answered, and said
unto the^: I will axe a word of you also, which if ye tell me, I in likewise
will tell you, by what authority I do these things. The baptime of John, whence
was it, from heaven or of men? (Mar) Answer me, (Math.) then thought they
(Luke) in the^ selves, and said. (mark) If we say it was from heaven, then
shall he say, why did ye not then believe him? but if we say, it was of men,
then fear we (Math.) the people. For every man held John for a prophet. And
they answered Jesus, and said: we can not tell.

Then said he unto them, nether tell I you, by what authority I do these
things.

Of two sons, of the which the one accomplyshed his fathers will. Mat. xxi.
Capi. Cxxiii.
But what think ye? A certain man had two sons, Math.
and came to the first, and said. Go thy way my son, and work to day in my
vyn^yarde. He answered and said, I will not, but afterward he repented and
went. He came also unto the second and said likewise. And he answered, and
said: I will sir, and went not. Whether of the twain did y^ will of your father?
They said unto him the first. Jesus said unto the^. Uerely I say unto you. The
Publicanes, and harlottes shall come into the kingdom of God before you. For
John came unto you, and taught you y^ right way, and ye believed him not, but y^
Publicans and harlottes believed him. As for you, though ye saw it, yet were ye
not moved with repentance, y^ ye might afterward have believed him.

Of the vyneyarde which was let out to the husbandemen. mat. 21. mar. xii. Luke
xx. Cap. Cxxiiii.
Hear another parable. Mathe
(Luke) A certain man, (Mat.) was an householder, planted a vyneyarde, and
hedged it round about, and dygged a vynepresse in it, and a poole, and buylte
a tower, and let it out unto husbandemen, and went in to a strange country
(Luke) for a long season^ (Mat) Now when y^ time of the fruit drew nere, he
sent his sernauntes to the husbandemen (Luke) to give him of the fruit of the
vineyard. (mat) Then y^ husbandeme^ caught his servants, one they bet, (Mark)
and sent him away empty, (Mat.) another they killed, another they stoned.
Again he sent other servants mo then y^ first, and they did unto them in
like manner, (Mark) and brake their heddes, and sent them away shamefully
dealte wythal. (Luk) And besides this he sent another but they wounded him, and
thrust him out. (Mat) At the last (Mark) having as yet one derely beloved
son, (Luk) the Lord of ye vyneyarde said? What shall I do? I will send my
dear son. (Mar) Him he sent also unto them at y^ last, and said:
parauenture they will stand in aw^ of my son, (Luke) when they se him. But
when ye husba^dmensaw him, they thought in them selves, (Mar) and said one to
another. (Mat) This is the heir: come, let us kill him, and take his
enheri^aunce unto our selves. And they took him, and thruste him out of the
vineyarde, and slew him. Now wha^ the Lord of the vyneyarde comes, what shall
he do with those husba^dme^? (Luke) He shall come and destroy these
husbandemen, and let out his vyneyarde unto other. (mat.) They said: he will
cruelly destroy those evil persons, and let out his vyneyarde unto other
husbandemen, which shall deliver him the fruit in times conuenyente (Luke)
when they heard that, they said unto him, God forbid. But he beheld the^ and
said, what is this the^ that is written: (mar.) have ye not red this scripture?
The same stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone in the
corner? This was the lords doing, Psa^. ^7. c.
and it was marvelous in our eyes. (Mat) Therefore I say unto you, the
kyngedome of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given unto the heithen,
which shall bring forth the fruits of it. (Luke) Whosoever ever falls upon this
stone, Esaias. 28. d
shall be broken in sunder: But up on whom so ever he falls, he shall grynde
him to poulder (Mar.) And wha^ the high priests and Pharisees heard his
parables, they perceived he spoke of them. And they went about to take him,
(Luke) and to lay hands upon him, the same hour, and they feared the people,
(mat) because they held him for a Prophet. (Mark) And they left him, and
went their ways.

Of the wedding garmente Math. xxii. Luke. xiiii. Capitulo. Cxxv.
ANd Jesus answered, and spoke unto the^ again in parables, Math.
and said. The hyngedome of heaven is like unto a king which married his
son. And sent forth his servants, to call the gestes unto the marriage,
and they would not come. Again he sent other servants, and said. Tell the
gestes. Behold, I have prepared my dynner, mine oxen, and my fed cattle are
killed, and all things are ready come to the marriage. But they made light of
it, and went their ways, one to his husbandry, another to his marchandyse. As
for the remnau^t they took his servants, and entreated them shamefully, and
slew them. When the king heard that, he was wroth, and sent for his
warryers, and destroyed those murderers, and set fire upon their city. Then
said he to his servants. The marriage in deed is prepared, but the gestes
were not worthy. Go your ways out therefore in to the high ways, and as
many as ye find, bid them to the marriage, and the servants went out into
the hye ways, and gathered together as many as they could find both good
and badde, and the tables were all full. Then the king went in to se his
gestes, and spyde there a man that had not on a wedding garment, and said
unto him: friend, how cam^^e thou hither, and haste not on a wedding
garmente?

And he was even specheles. Then said the king unto his servants. Take and
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be
waylynge, and gnasshynge of teth, for many are called, but few are chosen.

Of payinge trybute unto Caesar. Mat. xxii. Mark. xii. Luke. xx. Capi. Cxxvi.
THen went the Pharisees, Mat.
and took council how they might tangle him in his words. (Luk) And they
watched him, and sent forth spiers, (Mark) certain of the Pharisees, (Mat)
their disciples with Herodes officers, (Luk) which should feign them selves
perfect (Mrke) to take him in his words (Luk) to deliver him unto y^ power and
authority of the debite. (Mark) and they came, (Luke) and axed him, and said:
(Math) Master, we know y^ y^ art true, (Luke) and say, and teacheste right
(mat) nor carest for no man. For thou regardest not ye outward appearaunce of
men (Mar.) nor the face of man, but teach the way of GOD truly. (Luke)
Is it lawefull that we give tribute unto ye Emperor, or not? But he
considering their craftynes, said unto them. (Math) O ye ypocrites, why
tempte ye me? Show me the tribute money, (Mark) that I may se it. (Math) And
they took him a penye: and Jesus said unto them, whose is this image and
superscripcion? (Luke,) They answered and said, the Emperors, (mat) then
said he unto them. Give therefore unto the Emperor, that which is the
Emperors, and give unto God, that which is Gods. (Luke) And they could not
reprove his word before the people. (Mat) When they heard that, (Luk) they
maruayled at his answer, and held their peace, (Mat.) and left him, and
went their way.

Of the woman which had seven husbands. Matthew. xxii. Mar. xii. Luc. xx. Cap.
C. xxvii
THe same day there came unto him the Saduces which hold that there is no
resurrection, Math.
and asked him, and said: Master, Moses said, (Mark) and wrote unto us, if
any man's brother dye, and leave a wife, Deuteronomy. 15. b
and leave no children, (Math) his brother shall marye his wife, and raise up
sede unto his brother. Now were there seven brethren. The first married a
wife, and dyed, (Luk) with out children. (Math) Likewise the second, and
third unto the seventh, (Mark) took her to wife, (Luke) and left no children
behind them, and dyed. At the last after all, the woman dyed also: Now in
the resurrection whose wife shall she be of them? For seven had her to wife.
(Mar) Jesus answered and said unto them: ye err and understand not the
scriptures nor the power of God (Luk) The children of this world mary and are
married, but they that shall be worthy to enjoy that world, and the resurrection
from the dead, shall another mary nor be married, for they can dye no more, for
they are like unto the angels, and are the children of God, in so much as
they are children of the resurreccion. But that the dead rise again has
Moses also signified besides the bushe, when he called the Lord the God of
Abraham, Exodus 5. b.
the God of Isaa^, and the God of Jacob. But God is not a God of the dead, but
of the living, for they live all unto him. (mark) Therefore ye err greatly.
(Math) And wha^ the people heard that, they were astonyed at his doctrine.
(Luc) Then answered certain of the Scribes, and said: Master, thou haste
said well, and from that time fourth, they durst ask him no more questions.

Of the first commandment that is, of the love of God. mat xxii. Mark xii.
Luke. x. xvii. Cap. Cxxviii.
When the Pharisees heard that he had put the Saduces to silence, mark
they gathered them selves together, (Mar) one of the scribes came unto him,
(Math) a doctor of the law, (mar) that had herkened unto the^ how they
disputed together, and saw that he had answered them well, (Mat) tempted him
and said: Master, which is the chiefest commandment, (mar) of all? Jesus
answered him, the first and chiefest commandment of al commandments is
this: hear o Israel, the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 6. b.
is one god, and thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. This is the first,
(Math) and the greatest commandment: as for the second, is like unto it.
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self, (mark) there is none other greater
commandment, then these, (Mathe) in these two commandments hang all the
law and the prophets. (Mar) And the Scribe said unto him: Master, verily
thou haste said right. For there is but one God, and there is none other
without him, and to love him with all the heart. (Mat) with all thy soul,
(Mark) with all thy mind, (Lue) with all thy strength, (Mar) and to love a
man's neighbor as him self, is more then burnt sacrifices, and all
offringes. But when Jesus saw that he answered discretelye, he said unto him.
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. (Luk) But when he was demanded of
the pharisees: when comes the kingdom of God? He answered them and said: The
kingdom of God comes not with outewarde apperaunce, another shall it be
said: loo here or there is it. For behold, the kingdom of God is inward in
you. (Mar) And no man now durst ask him any mo question.

Of the interrogation, whose son Christ is. Math. xxii. Mar. xii. Luc. xx.
Capi. C. xxix.
Now while the pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, Math.
and said. What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They said David's.
(Mar) And Jesus answered and said when he taught in the temple? Now say the
Scribes that Christ is the son of David? But David him self says through
the holy gooste, Psalm. 109. ^
the Lord said unto my lord, sytte thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstole, (Math) how then does David in spirit, (Luke) in the
book of the Psalms (Math) call him lord. (Luke) How is he then his lord?
(Math) And no man could answer him one word, (Mark) and many people herd
him gladlye, (Mathe) another durst any man ask him any mo questions from that
day fourth.

Of hearing the Pharyses doctrines. Mat. xxiii. Mat xii Luke xxiiii. Cap. C.
xxx.
THen spoke Jesus unto the people, Math.
and to his disciples, and said, (Mar) in his doctrine. (math) The Scribes and
the pharisees are set down upon Moses seat: whatsoever they bid you do and
observe, that observe and do: but after their works, shall ye not do: for
they say and do not. They bind heuye and intolerable burdens, and lay them
upon men's shoulders: but they them selves heave not at the^ with one of their
fyngers. All their works do they to be seen of men, (Luc) take heed, (mark)
and beware of the Scribes. (math) They set abroad their Philacteries, and make
large borders upon their garments. (mark) They love to goo in long
garments, (math) and love to sit uppermost at the table (Luc) and at
bankettes. (mark) and to have the first seats in the Synagoges, and to be
saluted in the market: they devour wyddowes houses under a color of long
prayers, (Luc) dessemblynge long prayer: these shall receive the greater
damnacion, (Mark) more longer and paynefull iuogemente. (math) they love to be
called of men Rabby. But ye shall not suffer your selves to be called Rabby,
for one is your master even Christ, and all ye are brethren: and call no man father upon earth, for one is your father, which is in heaven. Nor ye
shall not suffer your selves to be called masters: for one is your master,
namely Christ. He that is greatest among you, shall be your servant, for
whosoever exalts him self, shall be brought low, and he that hu^bleth him self,
shall be exalted.

Of diverse and many vows Math. xxiii. Luc. xi. xiii. Capit. C. xxxi.
WOE unto you Scribes and pharisees, math.
ye ypocrites, that shut up the kyngedome of Heaven before men, ye come not
in your selves, another suffer ye them to enter, that would be in. Woo unto
you Scribes and Pharyfes, ye Ipocritas that devour widdous houses, and that
under the couloure of prayinge long prayers, therefore shall ye receive the
greater damnacion. Woo unto you Scribes and Pharisees ye ypocrites, which
compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is become one, ye
make of him a child of hell, two fold more then ye your selves are. Woe unto
you blind gydes, which say, whosoever swears by the temple, that is
nothing: but whosoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is guilty: ye
fools and blind, whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that
sanctifies the gold? And whosoever swears by the altar, that is nothing,
but whosoever swears by the offering that is upon it, he is guilty: ye fools
and blind, whether is greater the offringe, or the aultars that sanctifies
the offering? Therefore whosoever swears by y^ altar, swears by the same, and
by all that is thereon: and whosoever swears by the temple, swears by the same,
and by him that dwells therein. And whosoever swears by heaven, swears by the
seat of God, and by him that sytteth thereon. Woe be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, ye ypocrites, which tith Mint, and Anyse, (Luke) Rewe, (mat.) and
Commin, (Luke) and al manner of herbs, (Math.) and leave the wayghtier matters
of the law behind, namely judgment, mercy, and faith, (Luke) and the love
of God.

These ought to have been done, and not to leave the other undone. (Mathe.)
Oye blind gydes, which strain out a gnat, but swallow up a Camel. (Luk) Woe
unto you Pharisees, for ye love to sit uppermost in the Sinagogges, and to be
saluted in the market. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrytes, for ye
are like covered sepulchers, where over men walk, and are not a ware of them.
Then answered one of the Scribes, and said unto him: Master, with these words
thou put us to rebuke also. But he said. And woe be to you Scribes and
lawers also. For ye lade me^ with intolerable burdens, and ye your selves
touch the^ not with one of your fyngers. (Math.) Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, ye ypocrites, which make clean ye utter side of ye cup, and platter,
but wtin ye are full of robbery, and uncleanness. Thou blind Pharise, cleanse
first the insyde of the cup and platter, that ye inside may be clean also. Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites, which be like unto painted
Sepulchers, that appear beautiful outward, but wtin they are full of dead men's
bones, and al fylthynesse, even so are ye also. Outewarde ye appear righteous
unto me^, but within ye are full of ypocrisy and iniquite. Woe be to you Scribes
and Pharisees, ye ypocrites, which build ye tombs of the Prophets. (Luk) But
your fathers put the^ to death, (Mat.) and garnish y^ sepulchers of ye
righteous, and say: if we had been in our fathers time, we would not have been
partakers with the^ in ye blood of ye Prophets. Therefore ye be witnesses unto
your selves, (Luke) and douteles ye bear witness, and consent unto the deeds
of your fathers, (mat.) that ye are the children of the^, which slew y^
Prophets. (Luke) For ye build y^ sepulchers of y^ Prophets, but your fathers
put the^ to death. (mat.) Go to, fulfill ye also the measure of your fathers. O
ye serpents. O ye generacio^ of vipers, how will ye escape the damnacion of
hell? (Luke) Therefore said y^ wysede^ of God. (mat.) Behold, I send unto you
Prophets, (Luke) and Apostles, (Mat) and wise me^, and Scribes, and some of
the^ ye shall kill, and crucify, and some of the^ shall ye scourge in your
sinagoges, and persecute the^ from city to city, that upon you may come, (Luk)
and be required (mat) all the righteous blood (Luk) of all the Prophets, (Mat)
which has been shed upon the earth, (Luk) sense the foundation of ye world,
of this generation, Genesis 4. b
(Mat.) from ye blood of righteous Abell, Zacha. 1. ^. ^. para. 24. ^
unto the blood of Zachari the son of Barachias, who^e ye slew, (Luk)
which peryshed, (Mat) between the temple and the aultare.

Uerelye I say unto you, all the things shall light upon this generation.
(Luke) Woe unto you lawers, for ye have received the keye of knowledge, ye are
not come in your selves, and have forbidden them that would have been in, wha^
he spoke thus unto them, the Scribes and Pharisees began to preasse sore upon
him, and to stop his mouth with many questions, and laid wait for him,
and sought to hunte out some thing out of his mouth, that they might
accuse him. Matthew) O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that slaiest the Prophets,
and stonest them that are sent unto thee: 4. Esd. i. c
How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as the hen
gathers her chekens under her wings, and ye would not: Behold your
habitacion shall be left unto you desolate, for I say unto you, ye shall not se
me hence forth, till ye say. Psalm. 117. c
(Luke) Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Of the Jews obstinacy, and of the wyddow which offered two mytes. ^^un. 12.
mar. 12. luke 21. Cap. 132
ANd though he had done such signs before the^, loan.
yet believed they not on him, y^ the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be
fulfilled: which he spoke, Esaias. 53. a
Lord who believes our preaching, or to who^ is the arm of the Lord o^ened?
Therefore could they not believe, for Esaias said again. He has blinded their
eyes, Esaias. 6. c.
and hardened their heart, that they should not se with eyes, nor understand
with their heart, and should be converted, and he should heal them. This said
Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him. Nevertheless many of the
chief rulers believed on him, but because of the Pharisees, they would not be
aknowen of it, lest they should be excommunicate: for they loved more the
praise of men, the^ of god. Jesus cried, and said. He that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me. And he that sees me, sees him
that sent me. I am come a light into the world, that who so ever believes in
me should not bide in darkness, and he that hears my words, and believes
not. I judge him not, for I am not come to judge the world, but to save the
world. He that refuses me, and receaueth not my words, has one already
that judges him. The word that I have spoken, that shall judge him at the
last day. For I have not spoken of my self, but the father that sent me, has
given me a commandment what I should do, and say. And I know y^ his
commandment is life everlasting. Therefore look what I speak, y^ speak I
eue^ so, as my father has said unto me. (Mark) And Jesus sat over against
gods chest, and beheld (Luke) the^, that cast in their offeringes into the
cheste, (Mar) and how y^ people cast in monye, and many that were rich put in
much. And there came a poor wedow, and put in two mites, which make a
farthinge. (Luke) He saw also a poor wedowe which put in two mytes. (Mat.)
And he called unto him his dyscyples, and said unto the^ Uerely I say unto
you, this poor wedow has put more into the chest, then al they y^ have put
in: they all have put in of their superfluity (Luke) unto y^ offering of God.
But she of her poverty has put in, (Mark) all that she had, even her whole
living.

Of the building of y^ temple, and of the threatening of y^ destruccio^ of the
same. Mat. 24. Mark. xiii. Luke. xxi. Capi. Cxxxiii.
ANd Jesus went out and departed from y^ temple: Math.
and his disciples came unto him, to show him y^ buildi^g of the temple. (Luke)
And when some spoke of the temple, that it was garnyshed with goodly stones and
Jewels. (Mat.) Jesus answered and said unto them. S^ ye not all these things?
(Mark.) And what a building is this? (Math.) Uerely I say unto you, (Luke) the
time shall come wherein of all this y^ ye see, there shall not be left one stone
upon another, which shall not be broken down. (Math.) And as he sat upon the
mount Oliuet, (Mark) over against the temple, (Math.) his discyples came unto
him secretlye, (Mar.) namely Peter, James, John, and Andrew, asking him, (Mat.)
and saying: Te ^vs when shall these things come to pass, and what sign shall
there be of thy cominge, and of the end of the world? Jesus answered and
said unto them. Take heed that no man deceive you, for there shall many come in
my name, and say I am Christ, and shall deceive many, (Luke) and the time shall
draw nigh, follow them not. (Math.) Ye shall hear of wars, and of the noise
of war. (Luk) But when ye hear of wars, and insurreccions, be not ye
afraied. For such must come to pass, but y^ end is not yet thereof so sone.
The^ said he unto the^. One nation shall rise against another, and one realm
against another. And there shall be great earthquake here and there, pestilence,
and dearth, and fearful things, and great tokens shall there be from heaven.
(Math) All these are the beginning of sorrows. (Mark.) But take ye head to
your selves. (Luke) But before al these, they shall lay hands upon you, and
persecute you, (Mat) they shall put you to trouble, and shall kyl you, (Mar)
they shall deliver you up to the councels, and synagoges, and ye shall be beaten,
and brought before Princes and kings for my sake. (Luk) But this shall happen
unto you for a witness. (Mat.) Then shall many be offended, and shall betray,
and hate one another. And many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive
many, and because iniquite shall have the upper hand, ye love of many shall wax
cold, and abate. But who so endures unto ye end, the same shall be saved. And
this gospel of the kyngedome shall be preached in all the world for a witness
to all people, and then shall the end come. (Mark) Now wha^ they shall led
you, and deliver you up. (Luke) Be at a point therefore in your hearts, that ye
take no thought how ye shall answer. (Mark.) For it is not yr y^ speak, but
the holy ghost. (Luke) For I (Mar^) in ye same hour (Luke) will give you mouth
and wysedo^, against the which al your adversaries shall not be able to resist.
(Mar) One brother shall deliver another to death, and y^ father the son, and
ye children shall rise against their fathers, and mothers, and shall help them
to death, (Luke) ye shall be delivered up, even of your elders, brethren,
kynsfolkes, and friends: and ye shall be hated of every manne for my names sake,
and yet shall not one here of your head peryshe, hold fast your souls with
paryence.

Of the coming, and persecucion of Antechrist. Math. xxiiii. Mark, xiii.
Luke. xxi. Capitu. C. xxxiiii.
WHen ye therefore shall se the abhominacion and desolation, mathe.
where of it is spoken by Daniel the prophet standinge in the holy place
(mark) where it ought not, Dani. 9. b
(Mat) whosoever reads it, let him mark it well, (Luke) that the desolation of
Jerusalem is at hand. (math) Then let them, which be in Iewry, fly unto the
mountains, and let him which is in the house top, not come down to ^et
any thing out of his house, and let him which is in the field not turn back
to fetch his clothes. (Luke) And let such as be in the midst thereof, depart
out: and let such as be in the countries, not come therein: for those are the
days of vengeance, that every thing which is written, may be fulfilled. But
woe unto them that are with child: and to them, that give suck in those days,
(Math) but pray ye that your fiyghte be not in the winter, nor in the
Sabbath. (Luke) For there shall be great trouble upon earth, and wrath over
this people, and they shall fall through the edge of the sweard, and he led
captive among all nations. And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Heythen,
until the time of the Heythen be fulfilled.

Of the signs of the consumation of the world. Math. xxiiii. mar. xiii. Luc.
xviii. Ca. C. xxxv
ANd he said to his disciples, ye time shall come, Luke.
when ye shall desire to se one day of ye son of man, and shall not se it.
(Math) Then shall there be great trouble, (Mark) for in those days there
shall be such trouble as was not from the beginning of the creatures which God
created, unto this time, another shall be. And if the Lord had not shortened
those days, there should no man be saved. But for the electes sake, whom he
has chose^, he has shortened those days: then if any manne shall say unto
you: lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not, (Luk) goo not you, another
follow, (Mat) for there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and
shall do great tokens and wonders, (Mark) to deceive even the very chosen, if
it were possible: but take ye head, behold, I have told you all before.
(Math) Wherefore, if they shall say unto you: behold, he is in the wilderness,
go not ye fourth: heholde, he is in the chamber, believe it not, (Luke) for as
the lightening shyneth above from the heaven: and lights over all that is
under heaven, (Mat) so shall the coming of the son of man be in his day: for
where soever a dead carcass is, there will the Aegles be gathered together.
(Luke) But first must he suffer many things, and be refused of this
generation.

Of the last signs of the consumation of the world. Mat. xxiiii. Luc. xxi.
Capi. C. xxxvi.
IMmediatlye after the trouble of the same time, math. Esaias. 13. b. Ezech. 32. b
shall the sun and the moon lose their light, and the stars shall fall
from heaven. (Luke) And there shall be tokens in the sun and moon, and
stars: and the people shall be in perplexite through the confusion and roaring
of the sea and waters, that men shall pyne away for fear, and for loking
after the things which shall come upon earth. (math) And the powers of
heaven shall move.

Of the coming of Christ the judge, diuerselye sygnified Math. xxiiii. Luke.
xvii. xxi. Mar. xiii. Cap. C. xxxvii.
ANd then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven, Math.
and then shall all the kinredes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the
some of man come in the clouds of heaven with great power and glory. And
he shall send his angels with the great voice of a trumpe, and they shall
gather together his chosen from the four winds, from one end of the heaven
to the other, (mar) from one end of the earth to the other. (math) Learn a
similitude of the fygge tree: when his branch is yet tender, and his leaves
sprung, (mar) ye know that the summer is nie, (Luke) but when these things
begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads: For your
redemption draws nigh: and he told them a similitude. Behold the fig tree,
and all the trees, when they now shute forth their buddes, ye se by them, and
perceive that summer is now at hand. (mar) So in like wise when ye se all
these things come to pass, (math) be ye sure, that it is nigh even at the
doors: (Luke) the kingdom of God. Uerely I say unto you, this generation
shall not pass, till all be fulfilled, heaven and earth shall pass, but my
words shall not pass. But take heed to your selves, that your hearts be
not ouerladen with excess^ of eatinge and with drunkenness, and with taking
of thought for living, and so this day come upon you unawares. For as a snare
shall it come on all them that dwell upon earth, (Math) yet of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the angels of heaven, (Mark) nor the son
himself, (Math) but only the father, even as it was in the time of Noe, so
shall the coming of the son of man be also: for as they were in the days
before the floude, they did eat, they drank, married and were married, even
unto the day that Noe entered into the ship, and they regarded it not till
the flood came and took them al away, (Luke) and destroyed them all, (Mat) so
shall also the coming of the son of man be. (Luk) Likewise also as it came
to pass in the time of Lotte: they did eat, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they builded: but even ye same day y^ Lot went out of
Sodom, it rayned fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. After
this manner also shall it go in ye day when the son of man shall appear. In ye
day whosoever is upon the roof, and his stufe in ye house, let him not come down
to fetch it: like wise he that is in the field, let him not turn back for it,
that is behind him. Remember Lottes wife: Whosoever goes about to save his
life, shall lose it, and whosoever lose it, shall save it. I say unto you: In y^
night shall two lie upon one bed, y^ one shall be received, y^ other shall be
forsaken: two shall be gryndyng together, (Mar) at the myl, (Luke) y^ one sha^be
received, y^ other shall be forsaken, (Math) two shall be in the field, the one
sha^be received, and the other refused, (Luk) and they answered, and said unto
him: where Lord? he said unto them. Whersoeuer the dead carcass is, there will
the Aegles be gathered together: watch continually therefore and pray, Luke ^^
y^ ye may be worthy to escape all this y^ shall come, and to stand before ye
son of man.

Of watch and prayer. Luc. xxi xviii. math. xxiiii. mark. xiii. Capit. C.
xxxviii.
HE told the^ a similitude, math. Luke. 18.
signifyinge that men ought always to pray, and not to leave of. And said:
there was a judge in a city, which feared not God, and stood in awe of no
man. And in the same city there was a widdowe, which came unto him, and said:
deliver me from mine aduersari. And he would not a great while: but afterward
he thought with him self: though I fear not God, and stand in awe of no man, yet seeing the wedow is so importune upon me, I will deliver her, lest
she come at the last, and rail upon me: Then said the Lord, hear what the
unrighteous judge says. But shall not God also deliver his chosen, that cry
unto him day and night, though he defer them? I say unto you, he shall
deliver them, and that shortelye. Nevertheless when the son of man comes,
suppose ye that he shall find faith upon earth? (Mark) Take heed, watch, and
pray, for ye know not when the time is. Like as a man that went into a
strange country, and left his house, and gave his servants authorite unto
every one his work, and commanded the porter that he should watch. Watch
ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house comes: whether he
comes in the evening, or at mydnyght, or about the cock crowynge, or in the
morninge: that he cum not suddenly and find you sleping. Look what I say unto
you, that I say unto al, watch. Luke. x^^.
(Luk) Let your loins be gyrded about, and your lyghtes burning, and be ye
like unto men, that wait for their Lord against he return from the marriage,
that when he comes, and knocks, they may straight way open unto him.
Blessed are these servants, whom the Lord (when he comes) shall find
waking. Uerely I say unto you, he shall girde up him self, and make the^ sit
down at the table, and shall go by the^, and minister unto them. And if he
come in the second watch, and in ye third watch, and find them so, blessed
are those servants. (math.) Watch ye therefore, for ye know not what hour
your Lord will come. (Luke) But be ye sure of this, that if the good man of the
house knew, what hour the thief would come: he would suerly watch, and not
suffer his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye ready also, for at an hour
when ye think not, shall the son of man come. But Peter said unto him: Lord,
tellest thou this symylytude unto us, or to al men also? The Lord said: how
great a thing is a faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord s^tteth over his
householde, to give them their duty in due season? Blessed is that servant
whom his Lord (when he comes) shall find so doing. (Mat.) Uerely I say unto
you, over al his goods (Luk) that he possesses, shall he set him. (Math.) But
and if the evil shall say in his heart. Tushe, it wylbe long or my Lord
come, and begin to smite his fellows, (Luke) and the maidens, and to eat and
drink, and be dronke^, (Mat.) to eat and drink with the dronken, (Luke) the
same servants Lord shall come in a day, when he looks not for him, and in
an hour that he is notaware of, and shall hew him in pieces, and give him his
reward with the unbelievers. (Math.) With ipocrytes, there shall be waylynge and
gnasshynge of teeth. (Luke) The servant that knows his Lords will, and
prepares not him self, another did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many strypes. But he y^ knows not, and yet does things worthy of strypes,
shall be beaten with few strypes. For look unto whom much is given, of him shall
much be sought: and look to whom much is commuted, of him shall much be
required, I am come to kindle fire upon earth, and what would I rather, then
that it were kind led already? Notwithstanding I must first be baptized with
a baptime, and how am I payned till it be ended?

Think ye that I am come to bring peace upon earth? I tell you nay, but
rather debate; for from hence forth there shall be at variaunce in one house,
three against two, and two against three. The father shall be divided against
the son, and the son against the father, the mother against the daughter,
and the daughter against the mother, the mother in law against the daughter
in law, and the daughter in law, against the mother in law.

Of the ten virgins, and ten talentes. Math. xxv. Luke. xix. Capi. Cxxxix.
THen shall the kyngedome of heaven be like unto ten virgins, Mat.
which took their lamps, and went forth to mete the bridegroom.

But five of them were folyshe, and five very wise. The folyshe took their
lamps, but took non^ oil with them. But the wise took oil in their vessels,
with their lamps. Now while the brydegrome tarried, they slumbred al and
slept. But at mydnyghte there was a cry made, behold the brydegrome comes,
go your way out for to meet him? Then arose all those virgins, and prepared
their lamps. But the foolyshe said unto the wise, give us of your oil, for
our lamps are gone out.

Then answered the wise, and said. Not so, lest there be not enough for us
and you: but go rather unto them that sell and by for your selves? And while
they went to bye, the brydegrome came, and they that were ready, went in with
him unto the marriage, and the gate was shut up. At the last came the other
virgins also, and said: Lord, Lord, open unto us. But be answered and said.
Uerely I say unto you, I know ye not. Watch ye therefore, for ye know
another the day, nor the hour, when the son of man shall come. Likewise as
a certain manne ready to take his journey into a strange country, called his
servants, and delivered his goods unto them.

And to one he gave five talentes, to another two, and to another one, unto
every man after his ability, and stra^ghte way he departed. Then he that had
received the five talentes, went and occupied with the same, and wanne other
five talentes. Likewise he that received two talentes, wan other two also. But
he that received the one, went and dygged a pytte in the earth, and hyd his
Lords money. After a long season came the Lord of those servants, and
rekened with them.

Then came he that had received five talentes, and said. Sir, thou
delyueredeft unto me five talentes. Behold with them have I won five
tale^tes mo. Then said his Lord unto him. Well, thou good and faithful
servant, thou haste been faithful over little, I will set the over much:
enter thou in to the joy of thy Lord. Then came he also that had received two
talentes, and said: Sir, thou delyueredest unto me two talentes, behold, I
have won two other talentes with them: his Lord said unto him. Well thou
good and faithful servant, thou haste been faithful over little, I will set
the over much, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Then he that had
received the one talente, came and said. Sir, I knew that thou art an hard
manne, thou reapest where thou haste not sown, and gatherest where thou haste
not strowed, and so I was afraid, and went and hid thy talente in the
earth: Lo, here thou haste thine own. But his Lord answered and said unto
him. Thou evil and slothful servant, know thou that I reap where I
sowed not, and gather where I strowed not?

Thou should therefore have had my money to the chaungers^ and then at my
coming should I have received mine own with vauntage.

Therefore take the talente from him, and give it unto him that has ten
talentes. For who so has, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundaunce.
But who so has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he has.

And cast the unprofitable servant into utter darcknes, there shall be
waylynge, and gnashynge of teethe.

Of the purgynge of the floor in the last judgment. Math. xxv. Capi. Cxl.
BUt when the son of man shall come in his glory, Math.
and all holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory.
And all people shall be gathered before him: and he shall separate the one from
another, as a shepherde deuideth ye sheep from the goats. And he shall set the
sheep on his right hand, and ye goats on the left. Then shall the king say
unto them that shall be on his right hand, come hither ye blessed of my father,
inheret ye the kingdom, which is prepared for you, from ye beginning of the
world. For I was hongrye, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink. I was harbourles, and ye lodged me: I was naked, and ye clothed me, I
was sick, and ye vysyted me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall
the righteous answer him, and say. Lord, when saw we the hungry, and fed
thee? or thyrstye, and gave the drink? When saw we the harbourlesse, and
lodged thee? Or naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we ye sick, or in
prison, and came unto thee? And the king shall answer and say unto them.
Uerely I say unto you. Look what ye have done unto one of ye lest of these
brethren, the same have ye done to me. Then shall he say also unto them that
shall be on the left hand. Depart from m^ye cursed into the everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels. For I was hungrye, and ye
gave me no meat.

I was thyrstye, and ye gave me no drink. I was harbourlesse, and ye lodged
me not. I was naked, and ye clothed me not. I was sick, and in prison, and ye
vysyted me not.

Then shall they also answer him, and say: Lord, when saw we the hongry or
thrystie, or herbourlesse, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and have not
ministered unto the? Then shall he answer them, and say. Uerelye I say unto
you: look what ye have not done unto one of the least of these, that same have
ye not done to me. And these shall go in to everlasting pain: but the
ryghteous in to everlasting life.

Of Christ's last returning from mount Oliuet unto Bethani. Luke. xxii. Math.
xxvi. Mar. xi. Cap. C xli.
THe feast of sweet bread, which is called Easter, drew nigh. mathe.
(Math) And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these words, he
said unto his disciples. Ye know that after two days shall be Easter, and the
son of man shall be delivered to be crucified. (Mark) And at even he went
out of Bethani with the twelve.

Of the Alablaster box of ointment. John. xii. Mark. xiiii. Math. xvi. Cap.
C. xlii.
THere they made him a supper (Mar) in the house of Simon the Leper, John.
(John) and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of hem that satte at the table
with him (Mark) and as he sat at the table, (Ioh) Mary took a pound of pure
and costelye Nardus, and anointed Jesus fete, and dried his fete with her
here, (mar) and she brake the box, and poured it upon his head, (Math)
sitting at the table, (John) and the house was full of the sauoure of the
oyntemens. (Mark) There were some that disdayned and said among them selves:
(John) then said one of his disciples, Judas Iscarioth Simons son, which
afterward betrayed him. Why was not this ointment sold for three hundredth
pens, and given to the poor? This said he, not that he cared for the poor,
But because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare that which was given,
(mark) and they grudged against her. (Math.) When Jesus perceived that, he
fayde, unto them. (mark) Let her in reaste, (John) this has she kept against
the day of my burying, (math) why trouble ye her? she has done a good work
upon me, (Mar) ye have al way the poor with you, and whansoeuer ye will ye
may do them good, but me have ye not always. She has done what she could,
she is come before to anoynie my body for my burial, (math) where as she
has poured thy? ointment upon my body, she did it to burye me. Uerelye I
say unto you, whersoeuer this gospel shall be preached through out all the
world, and that she has done, (mark) shall be told, for a remembrance of her.

How Christ was sold by Judas. Mat. xxvi. Mar. xiiii. Luc. xxii. cap. C.
xliii.
THen assembled together the hie prieestes, mathe.
and the Scribes, and the elders of the people, in to the palace of the hye
priest which was called Cayphas, and held a counsel, (mar) and sought how thy
might take him with deceate, and put him to death, (Luk) and were afraid of
the people. But they said, not on the holy day, lest there be an uproar in
the people. (Luc) But Satan was entered into Judas named Iscarioth, which was
one of the number of the twelve, and he went his way, (math) unto the hye
priests, (Mar) to betraye him unto them (Luc) And he talked with the hye
priests, and with the hie officers how he would betray him unto them. (mat)
And he said, what will ye give me, and I shall deliver him unto you? (Mark)
when they heard that they were glad, and promised, to give him money, (math)
and they offered him thyrty silver pens, (Luc) and he consented, (Math) and from
that time fourth, he sought oportunite to betray him (Luc) without any
rumoure.

Finis.
The third book of Christ's going out of the world.
Of the sendynge of Peter and John to prepare the passover. mat. xxvi. Mar.
xiiii. John. xiii. Luke. xxii Capitulo. I.
BEfore the feast of Easter, John.
(mark) the first day of sweet bread, when the Easter lamb was offered,
(Luke) and wherein the Easter lamb must be offered. (math) The disciples came to
Jesus, (mark) and said unto him. Where will thou that we go and prepare that
thou may eat the easter lamb? and he sent two of his disciples, (Luke)
Peter and John, and said. Go your way prepare us the Easter lamb, that we
may eat. But they said unto him. Where wylt thou that we prepare it? He
said unto them (Math) go your way into the city to a certain man. (Luk)
Behold when ye come in to ye city, there shall mete you a man bearing a
pitcher of water, follow him into the house that he enters in, and say to the
goodma^ of the house. The master sends the word,, (Mat) my time is at hand,
I with my dysciples must keep mine Easter with the. (mar) Where is the place
of my refection? (Luke) and the gesthouse wherein I may eat the Easter lamb
with my disciples? And he shall show you a great parloure paued, (mar) there
make ready for us. And ye disciples went forth, and cante into the city, (Luk)
they went their way, and found as he had said unto them, and made ready the
Easter lamb.

Of the eatinge of the paschall lamb at the Lords supper. Math. xxvi Mark.
xiiii. Luc. xxii Cap. ii.
ANd at even, math.
(mark) he came with the twelve (Luke) And when the hour came, he sat down,
and ye twelve apostles with him. And he said unto them. I have heartely
desired to eat this Easter lamb with you, before I suffer. For I say unto
you, that hence fourth I will eat no more thereof, till it be fulfilled in the
kyngedome of God. And he took the cup, gave thanks, and said: take this and
divide it am^nge you: for I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the
vine, until the kingdom of God come.

Of the washing of the disciples feet, and of the obscure manifestacion of
the traitor John. xiii. Cap. iii.
Jesus knowing that his time was come, John.
that he should depart out of this world unto the father, as he had loved his
which were in the world, even so loved he them unto the end. And after
supper when the deuell had already put in to the heart of Judas Iscarioth
Simons son, to betray him. Jesus knowing that the father had given all
things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went unto God, he
rose from supper, and laid away his upper garments, and took a towel, and
gird it about him: afterward he poured water in to a basen, and began to wash
the disciples fete, and dried them with the towell, that he was gyrded wythall.
Then came he unto Simo^ Peter, and he said unto him: Lord, shalt thou wash
my fete: Jesus answered and said unto him. What I do, thou know not now,
but thou shalt know it hereafter. Then said Peter unto him: Thou shalt never
wash my fete: Jesus answered him, if I wash the not, thou shalt have no
part with me. Simon Peter said unto him: Lord not the fete only, but she
hands also and and the head. Jesus said unto him, he that is washen, needs
not, save to wash the fete, but is clean every why^ And ye are clean, but not
all. For he knew his betrayer, therefore said he, y^ are not al clean. Now when
he had washen their fete, and taken his clothes, he satte him down again,
and said unto them: wot you what I have done unto you? ye call me master and
Lord, and ye say right therein, for so I am: if I then your Lord and master
have washe^ your fete, ye ought also to wash one another fete. I have given
you an ensample, that ye should do, as I have done to you. Uerely verelye I
say unto you, the servant is not greater then his Lord, nor the Apostle
greater then he that sent him: if ye know these things, blessed are ye, if ye
do them. I speak not of you all.

I know whom I have chosen, but that the scripture might be fulfilled. He
that eats my bread has lift up his hele against me. I tell it you now
before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he.

Of the institucion of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Math.
26. Mark. xiiii. Luke. xxii. Capi. iiii.
ANd as they did eat, Math^
Jesus took the bread, ((Luke) gave thanks, blessed it, brake it, and gave
it to the disciples, and said: Take, eat, this is my body, (Luke) which
shall be given for you: this do in the remembrance of me. Likewise also the
cup. (Matthew) taking it, he thanked, and gave it them, and said: Drink ye
all of this, this is my blood of the new testament. (Luke.) This is the cup
of the new testamente, which shall be shed for you, (math.) and for many, for
the remission of sins. I say unto you, I will not drink hence forth of
this fruit of the vine tree, until that day yt I shall drink it new with you
in my fathers kyngedome. (Mark) And they all drank thereof.

Of a more open detection of the trayter, and of his going forth. mat. xxvi.
mark. xiiii. John. xiii. Luke. xxii. Capi. v.
UErely verily I say unto you, he that receaueth whom I send, John.
receaueth me: and he that receaueth me, receaueth him yt sent me. When Jesus
had said thus, he was heavy in spirit, and testified and said. Uerely, verily
I say unto you, one among you shall betraie me, (Mar.) that eats with me.
(Joan) Then the dysciples looked one upon another: and were in doubt of whom he
spoke, (Mar) and they were ercedynge sorye, and each of them, (Mark) one after
another (Mat) began to say. Sir, is it I? He answered and said: He that
dyppeth his hand with me in the dyshe, the same shall betraye me. The son of man goes forth as it is written of him: But woe unto that manne, by whom
the son of man shall be betrayed. It had been better for that man, if he had
never been borne. Then Judas that betrayed him answered and said: Master, is
it I? He said unto him Thou haste said it. (Joan) But there was one among
his dysciples, that leaned at the table on Jesus bosom, whom Jesus loved: to
him beckened Simon Peter, that he should are who it was of whom he spoke: for
the same leaned upon Iesas breast, and said unto him. Lord, who is it? Jesus
answered. It is he unto whom I dip the soppe, and give it. And he dipped in
the soppe, and gave it unto Judas Iscarioth Simons son. And after ye soppe,
y^ deuel entered in to him. Then said Jesus unto him. That thou do, do
quickly: but the same wiste no man at ye table. For what intent he said it
unto him. Some thought, for so much as Judas had the bag, that Jesus
had said unto him, bye that is necessary for us against the feast: or
that he should give some thing unto the poor. When he had received the soppe,
he went out immediately, and it was night. When he was gone forth. Jesus said:
now is the son of man gloryfyed, and God is gloryfyed in him. If God be
gloryfyed in him, then shall God gloryfye him also in him self, and strayghte
way shall he gloryfye him.

Of the question which of the discyples should be greatest, and of the fore
telling of Peter's denial. mat. 26. mar. xiiii. Luke. xxii. Joan. xiii. Capi.
vi.
ANd they began to axe among them selves, Luke.
which of them it should be, that should betraye him. There rose a strife
also among them, which of them should be taken for the greatest. But he
said unto them: The kings of the world have dominion over the people, and
they that bear rule over them are called gracious Lords. But ye shall not be
so, for the greatest among you, shall be as the youngest, and the chefest, as a
servant. For which is the greatest, he that fitteth at the table, or he that
serves? Is not he that fitteth at the table? but I am among you as a minister.

As for you, ye are they that have byden with me in my temptacions. And I will
appoynte the kyngedome unto you, even as my father has appointed me, that ye
may eat and drink at my table in my kyngedome, and sytte upon seats, and
judge the twelve trybes of Israel. (Mat.) Then said Jesus unto them. This
night shall ye all be offended in me. For it is written, Zacha. 13. b
I will smite the shepherde, and the sheep of the flock shall be scatered
abroad. But after that I rise again, I will go before you into Galyle. Peter
answered and said unto him. Though al men should be offended in thee, yet
will I never be offended. Jesus said unto him, verelye I say unto thee.

(Luke) Simon behold, Satan has desired after you, that he might syfte you
even as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and wha^
thou art converted, strength thy brethren. (Joan) Dear children I am yet a
lyile while with you, ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the Jews, whether I
go, thither can ye not come. And I tell it you now. Simon Peter said unto
him. Lord, whether go thou? Jesus answered him, whither I go, thou canste
not follow me now, but thou shall follow me hereafter. Peter said unto him:
Lord, why cannot I follow the now? I am ready to go with the into prison, and
to death, I will give my life for thy sake. Jesus answered him. Will thou
give thy life for my sake? Uerely, verily I say unto thee. (mat) This same
night (Mark) before the cock crow two times, shall thou deny me thryse. But
he said yet more, (mat.) and though^ I should dye with thee, yet will I not
deny thee.

Likewise also said all the dysciples. (Luke) And he said unto them. When I
sent you without wallet, without scrip, and without shues, lacked ye any thing?
They said, no. Then said he unto them, but now he that has a wallet let him
take it up, likewise also the scrip. But he that has not, let him sell his
^oate, and bye a swearde. For I say unto you. It must yet be fulfilled on me
yt is written, he was counted among the evil doers. Esaias. 53. c
For look what is written of me, it has an end. But they said. Behold,
here are two sweardes. He said unto them, it is enough.

Of the first part of the Lords Sermon at Supper. Joan. xiii. xiiii. Math.
xxvi. Capitulo. vii.
Dear children, John.
I am yet a little while with you. A new commandment give I you, that ye
love together, as I have loved you, that even so ye love one another. By this
shall every man know that ye are my dyscyples. If ye have love one to another.
And he said, let not your heart be afraied, if ye believe in God, then believe
also in me. In my fathers house are many dwellynges: If it were not so, I
would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And though I go to
prepare a place. for you, yet will I come again, and receive you unto my
self, that ye may be where I am: and wether I go ye know, and the way know ye
also. Thomas said unto him. Lord, we know not whether thou go, and how
can we know the way? Jesus said unto him, I am the way, and the truth,
and the life. No man comes to the father but by me: if ye know me, ye know
my father also. And from hence forth ye know him, and have seen him. Phylyppe
said unto him. Lord show us the father, and it suffiseth us. Jesus said unto
him. Thus long am I with you, and haste thou not known me? Philip, he ye
sees me, sees the father, and how say thou then, show us the father?
beleuest thou not that I am in ye father, and yt the father is in me? The
words yt I speak unto you, those speak not I of my self, but ye father y^
dwells in me, he does y^ works. Believe me yt I am in ye father, and yt ye
father is in me, or else at y^ leest believe for the works sake. Uerely verily I
say unto you, he that believes in me, shall do the works that I do, and shall
do greater then these, for I go to my father.

And whatsoever ye ask my father, in my name, that will I do, that the father
may be praised in the son: if ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it. If
ye love me keep my commandments, and I will pray the father, and he shall
give you another comforter, that he may bide with you for ever, even the
spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, for it seith him not,
another does it know him, but ye know him, for he abides with you, and shall be
in you: I will not leave you co^fortles, I come unto you, it is yet alitle
while, the^ shall ye world se me no more, but ye shall se me, for I live, and you
shall live also. In yt day shall ye know, that I am in ye father, and ye in me,
and I in you. He that has my commandments and keeps them, y^ same is he yt
loves me, he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him,
and will show my own self unto him. Judas said unto him, not the Iscarioth,
Lord what is the cause then that thou will show thy self unto us, and not
unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto him: he that loves me will keep
my word, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will make
our dwelling with him, bu^ he that loves me not, keeps not my sayings. And
the word that ye hear, is not mine, but the fathers which has sent me. This
have I spoken unto you, while I was with you, but that comforter, eue^ the holy
ghost, whom my father has sent in my name he shall teach you all things,
and bring all to your remembrance, what soever I have told you. Peace I leave
unto you, my peace I give you, I give not unto you as the world gives. Let
not your heart be troubled, another let it be afraid, ye have heard that I
said unto you, I go and come again unto you: if ye loved me, ye would rejoice,
because I said, I go to the father: for the father is greater than I: and now
have I told you before it come, that wha^ it is come to pass ye may believe.
Here after will I not talk much with you, for the prince of this world
comes, and has nothing in me, but that the world may know that I love the
father, and as the father has commanded me, so do I. Arise let us god.

The remnaunt of the Lords sermon which he spoke after his departure from
the city, sometimes going and some times standinge. John. xv. xvi. xvii. capi.
viii.
I Am the true vine, John.
and my father is an husband man, every brau^ch that brings not fourth fruit
in me, shall he cut of: and every one that brings fourth fruit shall be
pourged, that it may bring fourth more fruit. Now are ye clean, because of
the word that I have spoken unto you, bide ye in me, and I in you. Like as the
branch cannot bring fourth fruit of it self, except it bide in the vine,
even so another ye also, except ye abide in me, I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, ye same brings forth much
fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. He that abides not in me, is cast
out as a vine branch, and it withers, and men gather it up, and cast it in
to ye fire, and it burns: if ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my father
praised, that ye bring fourth much fruit, and become my disciples. Like as my
father has loved me, even so have I loved you: continue in my love: if ye
keep my commandments ye shall continue in my love, like as I have kept my
fathers commandments, and continue in his love. These things have I spoken
unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be
perfect. This is my commandment that ye love together, as I have loved you.
No man has greater love, then to set his life for his friend, ye are my
friends, if ye do that I commau^de you: hence fourth call not I you servants,
for a servant knows not what his Lord does. But I have said: ye are
friends, for all that I have heard of my father, have I showed unto you: ye
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that ye goo and
bring fourth fruit, and that your fruit continue, that whatsoever ye ask
the father in my name, he should give it you. This I command you, that ye
love one another. If the world hate you, then know that it has hated me
before you: if ye were of the world, the world would love his own. How be
it, because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you from the world,
therefore theworlde hates you. Remember my word that I said unto you: the
servant is not greater then his Lord: if they have persecuted me, they shall
persecute you also: if they have kept my word, they shall keep yours also. But
all this they shall do unto you for my names sake, because they know not him yt
sent me: if I had not come and spoken unto them, the^ should they have no
sin, but now have they nothing to cloak their s^ne withal. He yt hates me,
hates my father also: if I had not done among them the works which none
other man did, they should have no sin. But now have they seen it, and yet
have they hated both me and my father: Nevertheless that the saying might be
fulfilled which is written in their law: they have hated me without a cause.
Psalm. 24 c.
But when the comforter comes whom I shall send you from the father, even
the spirit of truth which proceadeth of the father, he shall testifye of me,
and ye shall bear witness also, for ye have been with me from the beginning.

These things have I said unto you, Capi. 16.
that ye should not be offended? They shall excommunicate you, the time
comes that whosoever puts you to death, shall think that he does service
unto God. And such things shall they do unto you, because they have another
known the father, nor yet me. But these things have I said unto you, that
when the time comes, ye may think thereon that I told you: but these
things have I not said unto you from the beginning: for I was with you: but
now I go unto him that sent me, and none of you asks me whether go thou:
But because I have said these things unto you, your heart is full of sorrow.
Nevertheless I tell you the truethe, it is better for you that I go away, for
if I go not away, that comforter comes not unto you: but if I depart I will
send him unto you. And when he comes, he shall rebuke the world of sin,
and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on
me: Of righteousness, because I goo to the father, and ye shall se me no more.
Of Judgment, because the ^rince of this world is judged already. I have yet
much to say unto you, but ye cannot now bear it away: how be it. When the
spirit of truth comes, he shall lead you, in to all truth: For he shall
not speak of him self, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
and he shall show you what is to come: he shall gloryfe me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show unto you. All that the father has is mine,
therefore have I said, he shall receive of mine, and show unto you. After a
lyttel while, and ye shall not se me, and again after a little while, and ye
shall se me, for I goo to the father. Then said some of his disciples among
them selves: What is this that he says unto us: after a little while, and ye
shall not se me, and again after a little while, and ye shall se me: For I goo
to the father? Then said they. What is this that he says: after a little
while? We can not tell what he says.

Then perceived Jesus that they would ask him, and he said unto them: Ye
enquire of this among your selves, that I said. After a little while, and ye
shall not se me, and again after a little while and ye shall se me. Uerely,
verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice,
ye shall be sorry, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she
traueleth has sorrow, for her hour is come, but when she is delivered of her
child, she thinks no more of the anguyshe for joy that a man is borne in the
world. And now have ye sorrow also, but I will se you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy shall noman take from you. And in that day shall ye
ask me no question, verelye, verelye I say unto you, if ye ask the father
ought in my name, he shall give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in mine
name: ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be perfect: these things
have I spoken unto you by proverbs, nevertheless the time comes, that I
shall speak no more by proverbs, but I shall show you plainlye of my father.
In that day shall ye ask in my name, and I say not unto you, that I will
pray unto the father for you, for the father him self loves you, because ye
have loved me, and believed that I am come out from God. I went out from the
father, and came into the world: again I leave the world, and go to the
father. His disciples said unto him: behold now talkest thou playnelye, and
speak no proverb: now are we sure, that thou know all things, and
nedest not that any man should ask the, therefore believe we, that thou camst
out from God. Jesus answered them: Now ye do believe, behold, the hour
draws nigh, and is come already, that ye shall be scattered every man unto his
own and shall leave me alone, and yet am I not alone, for the father is with
me. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace, in
the world ye have trouble, but be of good comfort, I have overcome the
world. These things said Jesus, Capi. ^^.
and lift up his eyes toward heaven, and said, father the hour is come, that
^hou glorify thy son, y^ thy son also may gloryfie the. Like as thou haste
given him power over all flesh, that he should give everlasting life to as
many as thou have given him. But this is the life everlasting, that they know
thee, that thou only art the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
I have gloryfied the upon earth, and fynished the work, that ^hou gave me to
do. And now glorify thou me father by thy own self, with the glory which I
had or ever the world was. I have declared thy name unto y^ men whom thou
gave me from the world. They were thine, and thou gave them unto me, and
they have kept thy word. Now know they yt al things whatsoever thou have
given me, are of the, for the words which thou gave me, have I given unto
them, and they have received them, and known of a truth, that I am come forth
from thee, and have believed that thou haste sent me. I pray for them, and not
for the world^ but for them whom thou haste given me: for they are thine, and
all that is mine, is thine and what thine is, that is m^ne and I am glorified
in the: and now I am no more in ye world, and they are in the world, and I
come the: holy father keep i^ thy name those, whom thou have given me, yt they
may be one, like as we are. While I was with the^ in the world, I kept them in
thy name. Those yt thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost, but
that lost child, that the scripture might be fulfilled: but now came I unto
thee, and this I speak in the world, Psalm. 40 b and 10^. ^.
yt they may have my joy parfit in the^, I have given them thy word, and the
world hates them, for they are not of the world, even as I also am not of the
world. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that
thou keep the^ from evil: they are not of the world, as I also am not of the
world. Sanctify them in thy truth, thy word is the truth. Like as thou have
sent me in to ye world, so have I sent the^ into ye world, and for their sakes
I sanctify my self that they may also be sanctified in the truth.
Nevertheless I pray not for the^ only, but also for those, which through their
word shall believe in me, that they al may be one, like as you father arti^me,
and I in the, yt they also may be in us, y^ ye world may believe that you have
sent me. And the Glory which thou gave me, have I given them, that they may
be one, like as we are one. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou haste sent me, and
haste loved them, as thou haste loved me. Father I will that they whom thou
have given me, be with me, where I am, that they may se my glory, which thou
haste given me: for thou haste loved me, or ever the world was made. Ryghteous
father the world has not known the, but I have known thee, and these have
known that thou haste sent me, and I have declared thy name unto them, that ye
love wherewith thou haste loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

Of Christ's entering in to y^ garden, and of his prayer and captivity. Math.
xxvi. Mark xiiii. Luc. xxii. Ioh. xviii. cap. ix
When Jesus had thus spoken, John.
he went fourth with his disciples, (Luke) and he was wont, (Mat.) unto
mo^nte Oliuete, (Joan) over the broke Cedron, (Math) in to a town, (Mark)
called Gethsemani.

(John) Where there was a garden, in to the which Jesus entered, and his
disciples: but Judas that betrayed him, knew the place also. (Mat.) And said
unto his disciples, sit ye here, while I go yonder and pray. And he took with
him Peter, and ye two sons of Zebede, and began to wax sorrowful, and heavy,
(Mark) and fearful, and in an agonye. (Math) Then said Jesus unto them, my
soul is heavy even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me. (Luc) and
he gat him from them, about a stones cast: (Math) and he went fourth a
little, and fell flat upon his face, (Mar) upon the ground and prayed that (if
it were possible) the hour might pass from him: and said, Abba, my father,
all things are possible unto thee, take this cup away from me:
nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou will. (math) And he came to his
disciples, and found them a sleep, and said unto Peter. (mark) Simon slepest
thou, could thou not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye fall
not into temptacion: y^ sprit is willing, but the flesh is weak. (Mat) Again
he went the second time, and prayed, (mar) the same words saying, (math) O my
father if this cup cannot pass away from me except I drink it, thy will be
fulfilled. And he came again, and found the^ a sleep: for their eyes were
heuye, (mar) and they knew not what they should answer him. (mat) And he
left them, and went forth again and prayed the third time, saiynge the same
words, (Luk) he kneled down, and said: Father if thou will, take away this
cup fro me, nevertheless not my will, but thine be fulfilled. And there
appeared unto him an angel from heaven, and comforted him. And he wrestled
with death, and prayed the longer, and his sweet was like dropes of blood,
runnyng down to the ground: and he rose up from prayer, and came to his
disciples, and found them slepinge for heuinesse, and said unto them. What
sleep ye. (mar) Sleep on now, and take your rest, it is enough, (Luke) rise
and pray, that ye fall not in to temptacion, (math) behold the hour is come,
y^ the son of man shall be delivered into ye hands of sinners, arise, let us
be going, (man) behold he is at hand that betrayeth me. (John) Now when
Judas had taken unto him the company, and ministers of the high Priests and
ministers, he came thither with cressettes, with lanterns, and with weapens,
(math) while he yet spoke: lo, Judas Iscarioth one of the twelve came, and with
him a great multitude with sweardes and staves, sent from the high priests
and elders of the people. (Mark) And ye tray^ our had given them a token, and
said: whomsoever I kiss, the same is he, lay hands upon him, and lead him
away warely, (Mat) and he went before them, and came nie unto Jesus to kiss
him (Mar) and when he was come, he went strayghte way unto him, and said unto
him, (Math) hayle master, and kissed him, and Jesus said unto him, friend
wherefore art thou come? (Luc) Judas betrayest thou the son of man with a
kiss (John) Jesus now knowinge all that should come upon him, went fourth,
and said unto them: whom seek ye? they answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
said unto them. I am he, Judas also which betrayed him stood with the^ Now
when Jesus said unto them, I am he: and they went backwardes, fell to the
ground. Then asked he them again: whom seek yt? They said Jesus of
Nazareth. Jesus answered, I have told you, that I am he: If ye seek me, then
let these goo their way, that the word might be fulfilled which he said. Of
them whom thou gave me, have I not lost one: (math) Then came they, John.
17. b.
and laid hands upon Jesus and took him. (Luc) When they that were about
him, saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with
the sweard? (John) Simon Peter, (Luk) one of the^, (John) Had a swearde, and
drew it out, and smote the high Priests servant, and cut of his right ear.
(Luke) But Jesus answered, and said, suffer them thus far fourth. (John) And
the servants name was Malchus: then said Jesus unto Peter: put up thy
swearde in to thy sheeth. Shall I not drink of the cup, which my father
has given me? (Mat) for all that take the swearde, shall peryshe with the
sweard. Or think thou that I can not pray my father now to send me more
then twelve legio^s of angels? but how the^ should ye scriptures be fulfilled?
For thus must it be. (Ioh) And he touched his ear, and healed him: but Jesus
said unto the Priests and rulers of the temple, and to the elders that were
come unto him. Ye are come fourth, as it were to a murderer with sweardes and
staves: I was daily with you in the temple, and ye laid no hands upon me
(Math.) I satte and taught, and ye took me not, (Luke) but this is your hour,
and the power of darkness, (Math) but all this is done, that the scriptures
of the prophets might be fulfilled. But all the disciples left him and fled.
(John) Then the company and captain, and the officers of y^ Jews took Jesus.
(mark) And there followed him, a young manne, which was clothed in linen upon
the bare skin, and they held him, but he let the linen go, and fled naked
from the^.

How Christ was sent to Annas, and of Peter's first denial. Math. xxvi.
Mark. xiiii Luke. xxii. John. xviii. Cap. x.
BUt they that took Jesus, Math.
(Joan) bound him, and led him away first unto Annas, that was father in law
unto Cayphas, and hye Priest for that year, which gave counsel unto the
Jews, that it was good, that one man should dye for the people. As for Simon
Peter, he and another Dysciple followed Jesus a far of. The same disciple was
known unto the hye Priest, and went in with Jesus in to the high Priests
palace. But Peter stood without at the door. Then that other disciple which
was known unto the high priest, went out and spoke unto the da^sell that kept
the door, and brought Peter (Mat) in to the high priests palace. (Mar.) And
when he was within, (Luk) they kyndeled a fire in the myddest of the palace,
and sytting down together, (mat) Peter sat without in the palace, (Luke)
among them, whom when a certain damsel saw syttinge by the light, and when
she had well beheld him, she said: This same was also with him. (John) Then the
damsel that kept the door said unto Peter, Mark) when she saw Peter warmi^g
him, (Ioh) art not thou also one of this man's disciples? (Luke) Woman, (Mar) I
know him not, another can I tell what thou say, (math) Thou waste also with
Jesus of Nazareth. But he denied it before them all. (Ihon) I am not, (Luk) I
wot not what thou say. (John) The servants and officers stood by the fire
(for it was cold) and warmed them selves. Peter also stood with them, and
warmed him self. (Mark) And he went forth into the palace, and the Cock
crew. (John) The high priest asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine,
Jesus answered him, I have spoken openly before the world, I have ever taught
in the Sinagoge, and in the temple, whither all the Jews resorted, and in
secret have I spoken nothing. Why ask thou me? Ask the^ yt have heard,
what I have spoken unto them: Behold, they can tell what I have said. But
when he had thus spooken, one of the officers that stood by, smote Jesus on
the face, and said: aunswerest thou the high priest so? Jesus answered him, if
I have evil spoken, then bear witness of euel: But if I have well spoken, why
smytest thou me?

How Christ was sent unto Caiphas, and of Peter's second and third denial,
in Caiphas house, and of false witnesses against Jesus. Math. xxvi. Mark
xiiii. Luke. xxii. John. xviii. Cap. xi.
ANd Annas sent Jesus bound unto Caiphas the high preeste, John.
(math) Where the Scribes and the Elders were gathered together. As for Peter
he followed him a far of unto the high priests Palace and went in, and sat
with the servants that he might se the end. (Mark) but when he went out
at the door, a another damsel spyed him: and began to say unto them that stood
by, (Mat) to them that were there: This was also with Jesus of Nazareth. (Ioh)
Simo^ Peter stood and warmed him self: Then said they unto him: art not thou
one of his disciples? (Mar) and a little while after, another saw him, and
said. Thou art one of them, (Mat) and he denied it, and swear also, (John) and
said: (Luke) man, I am not, (Mat) I know not the man, and after a little,
(Luke) about the space of an hour, a another affirmed and said. Uerely this
was with him also, for he is a Galilea^. (mark) Again they that stood by
said, of a truth, thou art one of them, for thou art a Galilean, (Math) for
thy speech bewrays the. (Ioh) One of the high priests servants a kinsman
of him whose ear Peter had smitten of, said unto him, did not I se thee in
the garden with him ^ (math) Then began he to curse, and detest and swear.
(mar) I know not the man that ye speak of, (Luk) and immediately while he yet
spoke, (mar) ye cock crew again. (Luk) And the Lord turned him about, and
looked upon Peter, (Mark) then thought Peter upon the word that Jesus spoke
unto him: before the cock crow two times, thou shalt deny me thrice (Luc)
And Peter went out, and wept bytterlye. (Math) But the high priests, and
the elders, and the whole council sought false witness against Jesus, that
they might put him to death: and found none, though many false witness
stepte fourth. (mark) Some stood up, and gave false witness against him, and
said: We heard him say: I will break down this temple, that is made with
hands, and in three days build another not made with hands. But their
witness agreed not together. (mat) At the last there stepte forth two false
witnesses, and spoke, he said: I can break down the temple of God, and
build it again in three days, (mark) and their witness agreed not. And the
high Priest stood up among them, and asked Jesus, and said: Answerest thou
nothing to it that these testify against thee? But he held his tongue, and
answered nothing. Then the high priest asked him again, and said unto him:
(Mathe) I charge thee by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou be Christ,
the son of God, (mark) blessed, (Math) Jesus spoke, thou have said it,
(mark) I am, (Mat) nevertheless I say unto you, from this time forth it
shall come to pass, that ye shall see the son of man sytting upon the right
hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high
priest rent his clothes, and said: He has blasphemed, what need any more
witnesses: Lo, now have ye heard blasphemy, what thyncke ye? (Mark) Then
they al condemned him, that he was gi^tye of death, (Luk) the men that held
him mocked him, (Mathe) then spit^ed they in his face, (Luk) and blind felded
him, (Mathe) and smote him on the face with their hand, (Luk) and asked him,
(Math.) saying: Prophecye unto us Christ, who is he that smote thee? (Mark)
and the servants smote him on the face, (Luke) and many other blasphemies
said they unto him.

Of the third coming together of the elders, and how Jesus was delivered to
Pilate. Math. xxvii. Mar. xv. Luke xxii. xxiii. John. xviii. xix. Capi xii.
ANd when it was day (Mark) by and by (Math.) in the morning, Luke.
(Mark) the high priests, (math) and ye chief and elders of the people,
held a counsel against Jesus, yt they might put him to death. (Luke) And he
led him up before their counsel, and said. If thou be Christ, tell us. And
he said unto them, if I tell you, ye will not believe me, but if I ask you, ye
will not answer me, nether will ye let me g^. From this time fourth shall the
son of man sit at the right hand of the power of God. Then said they al,
art thou then the son of God? He said unto them: ye say it. For I am: hey
said what need we any further witness? we our selves have heard it, of his
own mouth. And the whole multitude of them arose, Luke. 13.
(mark) and bound Jesus, (Luke) and led him (John) from Caiphas into the
council halle, (Luke) unto Pilate. (John) It was early in the morninge. And
they them selves went not into the commen halle, lest they should be defiled,
but that they might eat the Pascall lamb. Then went Pilate out unto them.
(Math.) And they delivered him bound unto Pilate: the debite. When Judas
which betrayed him saw this that he was condemned to death, he repented him
and he brought again the thirtye silver pens to the high priests and
elders. And said, I have done evil, in that I have betrayed innocent blood.
They said: what have we to do with that? se thou there to. And he cast the
silver pens in the temple, and gat him away, and went and hanged him self. So
the high priests took the silver pens and said: it is not lawful to put them
in to Gods chest, for it is blood money: Nevertheless they held a counsel,
and bought with them a potters field, for to burye strangers in. Wherefore the
same field is called ye feld of blood unto this day. Then was that fulfilled
which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet saying. And they took thirty silver
pens the price of him that was sold, Iere. 12. b. Zach 11. ^.
whom they boughte of the children of Israel, and these they gave for a
potters field, as the Lord comman^ded me. As for Jesus stood before the
debite: (John) And he said, what accusacion bring you against this man? They
answered and said unto him: if he were not an euel doer, we had not delivered
him unto thee. Then said Pilate unto them. Take ye him: and Judge him after
your law. Then said the Jews unto him, it is not lawful for us to put any
man to death, yt ye word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, when
he signified what death he should die. (Luk) They began to accuse him, and said:
we have found this fellow peruerti^g ye people: and forbidding to give tribute
unto ye Emperor, and he says yt he is Christ a king. But Pilate asked him and
said: art you the king of the Jews? He answered him and said. Thou say it.
Pilate said unto ye high priests, and to ye people: I find no cause in this
man, but they were the more fearce, and said: he has moved the people in that
he has taught here and there all the land of Iewry, and has begonn^ at
Galile unto this place. Wha^ Pilate heard mention of Galile, he asked whether
he were of Galile. And when he parceaued that he was under Herodes
jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, which was also at Jerusalem inthose
days. When Herod saw Jesus, he was exceadinge glade, for he had long been
desirous to se him, because he had herd much of him, and hoped to se a miracle
of him. And he asked hi^ many things, nevertheless he answered nothing. The
hie priests and Scribes stood, and accused him sore: but Herod with his me^
of war despised him^ and mocked him, put a white garment upon him, and sent him
again unto Pilat^ Upon the same day were Pilate and Herod made friends
together, for before they had been at variaunce. Pilate called the hie
priests, and the rulers, and ye people together, and said unto them, ye have
brought this manne unto me, as one that peruerteth ye people: and behold, I
have examined him before you, and find in the man none of ye causes, where of
ye accuse him. Nor yet Herod, for I sent you to him, and behold, there is
brought upon him nothing yt is worthy of death. Therefore I will chaste^ him, and
let him louse. (John) Then entered Pilate in to the counsel hall again, and
called Jesus, and said unto him. Art you the king of ye Jews? Jesus answered:
say thou yt of thy self, or have other told it the of me? Pilate answered:
am I a Jew? Thy people and the high priests have delivered the unto me: what
have you done? Jesus answered: my ki^gdo^e is not of this world, if my kingdom
were of this world, my ministers would fight therefore, yt I should not be
delivered unto ye Jews. But now my kingdom is not from hence. The^ said Pilat
unto him Art thou a king then? Jesus answered: thou say it, for I am a
king. For this cause was I borne, and came into the world, that I should
testify the truth. Whosoever is of the truth, hears my voice. Pilate said
unto him: What is the truth? And when he had said that, he went out again
to the Jews, and said unto them. I find no cause in him. (Math) And when he
was accused of the hie priests and Elders, he answered nothing. Then said
Pilate unto him. (Mar) And asked him again, and said: answerest thou
nothing? (Math) Then said Pilate unto him, hear thou not how sore they
accuse the? (Mark) behold, in how many things they accuse the? (math) and he
answered him not one word, in so much that Pilate the debite marueled
excedinglye. At the solemn feast the debite was wont to deliver a prisoner
fre^ unto the people, whom they would, (Mark) and whom they would desire,
(Luke) he must needs let lowse. (Mat) And at ye same time he had a notable
prisoner, called Barrabas: (mar) and the people went up and prayed him that he
would do as he was wont. (Mat) And when they were gathred, together Pilate said:
(Ioh) ye have a custo^e that I should give one unto you louse at Easter (Mat)
whether will ye that I give louse unto you, Barrabas, or Jesus which is also
called Christ? For he knew well that they had delivered him of envy. But the
hie priests and the elders moved the people, that they should ask Barrabas,
and destroy Jesus. Then answered the debite, and said unto them: whether of
these two will ye that I give louse unto you? They said Barrabas (Ioh) yet was
Barrabas a these, (Luke) the which for an insurreccion made in the city, and
because of a murder was cast in to prison. Then called Pilate unto them
again, and would have let Jesus louse, (math) what shall I do then with Jesus
which is called Christ? They said all, let him be crucified: the debite
said, what evil has he done? but they cried yet the more, (Luke) crucify
him, crucify him. Yet said he unto them the third time: what evil has he
done? I find no cause of death in him, therefore will I chasten him, and let
him god. (John) Then Pilate took Jesus, and scourged him, and (Math) the
debites soudiours took Jesus in to the commune hall, and gathered the whole
multitude over him, and striped him out of his clothes, and put a purple robe
upon him, and plated a crown of thorn, and set it upon his head, and a
read in his hand, and kneled before him, and mocked him, and said: hayle
king of the Jews, spitted upon him, and took the read, and smote him upon the
head, (John) and smote him on the face. Then went Pilate fourth again, and
said unto them: behold I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know that I
find no fault in him. So Jesus went fourth, and did wear a crown of
thorn, and a purple robe. And he said unto them: behold the man. When the
hye priests and mynisters saw him, they cried and said: crucify, crucify
him. Pilate said unto them. Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no
giltinesse in him. L^ui. 24. c
The Jews answered him, we have a law, and after our law he ought to dye:
because he made him self the son of God. When Pilate heard that word, he
was the more afraied: and went again in to the commune hall. And said unto
Jesus: whence art thou? but Jesus gave him no answer. Then said Pilate unto
him, speak thou not unto me? know thou not, that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to louse the? Jesus answered. Thou should have no power
upon me, if it were not given thee from above. Therefore he that delivered me
unto thee, has the more sin. From that time for the Pilate sought means to
louse him. But the Jews cried and said, if thou let him go, thou art not
the Emperors friend: For whosoever makes him self a king, is against the
Emperor. When Pilate heard that word, he brought Jesus forth, and satte
him down upon the judgment seat, in the place which is called the
pauemente, but in the Hebrew, Gabatha. (Math) And when he satte upon the
judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying: have you nothing to do with
that ryghteous man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream,
because of him. (mar) It was about the third hour, (Joan) and he said unto
the Jews: behold your king: but they cried, away with him, away with him,
crucify him: Pilate said unto them. Shall I crucify your king? The high
priests answered, we have no king but the Emperor. (math) So when Pilate
saw that he could not help, but that, (Luke) with great cries, (Mat) there
was a great uproar: he took water and washed his hands, before the people and
said, I am unguilty of the blood of this ryghteous man, se ye thereto. Then
answered all the people and said, his blood come upon us, and upon our
children, Then (mark) Pilate thought to satisfy the people, (Luke) and gave
sentence that it should be as they required, and let louse Barrabas unto them
that for insurrectio^ and murder was cast into prison, whom they desired, but
gave Jesus over unto their will, (Mark.) that they might crucify him. (Mat)
The^ the debites soldiers took Jesus into the common hal, and gathered y^
whole multitude together (Mark) and clothed him with purple and plated a crown
of thorn, and crowned him withal, and began to salute him: hayle king of y^
Jews, and smote him upon y^ head with a reed, and spytted upon him, (Mathe)
and kneled before him, and mocked him, and after they had mocked him, (Mark)
they took the purple of him, (Mathe) and put his own clothes upon him.

Of the leadynge forth of Jesus to Caluarie, and of his crucifiynge. Matthew.
xxvii. Mark. xv. Luke xxiii. Joan. xix. Ca. xiii.
THey took Jesus and lead him away, John.
and he bare his cross, and went out to the place of dead men's sculles,
which in Hebrew is called Golgatha. (Luke) And as they led him away, they
took one Simon of Cyren coming from the town, (Mark) the father of
Alexander and Rufus, (Mathe) him they compelled to bear his Cross, (Luke) and
laid the cross upon him, to bear it after him. And there followed him a great
multitude of people, and of women, which bewailed and lamented him. But Jesus
turned him abouce unto them, and said: ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep not
over me, but weep over your selves, and over your children. For behold, the
time will come, wherein it shall be said: Blessed are the baren, and the
wombes that have not borne, and the pappes that have not given suck. Then
shall they begin to say unto the mountains, fall upon us, and to the
hills, cover us. For if this be done to a grene tree, what shall be done then to
the dry? And two other, which were misdoers, were led out also, to be put
to death, with him. (Mathe) And when they were come unto the place called
Golgatha, that is to say by interpretacion, a place of dead men's sculles,
they gave him to drink wine, (Mark) myxte with Mirre, (Mathe) and Galle. And
when he had tasted thereof, (Mark) he would not receive it. (John) It was the
day of preparynge of the Easter, about the sixte hour. (Luke) They crucified
him even there, and the two misdoers with him, the one on the right hand, and
the other on the left. (John) But Jesus in the myddest. (Mark) Then was the
scripture fulfilled, which says, he was counted among the evil doers.
(Luke^) But Jesus, said: father forgive them, Esaias. 53. b.
for they wot not what they do. (John) Pilate wrote a superscription, (Mark)
of his cause, (John) and set it upon the Cross, (Mat) over his head. Luke)
And above over him was written this superscription with letters of Greek,
Latin, and Hebrewe. (Math) This is Jesus (John) of Nazareth, king of the
Jews. This superscription readde many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus
was crucified, was nigh unto the City. The^ said the hye priests of the Jews
unto Pilate, write not King of the Jews, but that he said: I am King of the
Jews. Pylate answered, what I have written, that have I written. The
soldiers when they had crucified JESUS, took his garments, and made four
parts to every Souldyer one part, and the coat also. As for the coat, it
was unsown from above wrought through and through.

Then said they one to another, let us not deuyde it, but cast lottes for it,
who shall have it, that the scripture might be fulfilled, (Math) which was
spoken by the Prophet. Psalm. 12. d
They have parted my garment among them, and cast lottes upon my vesture.
(Joan) This did the soldiers in deed.

How they derided Jesus upon y^ Cross, and of his words, and of the signs
after his death. Mathewe. xxvii. Mark. xv. Luke. xxiii. John. xix. capit.
xiiii.
THey that went by, reuyled him, and wagged their heads, and said: Thou that
breakest down the temple of God, Matthew
and buildest it in three days, help thy self, if thou be the son of God,
come down from the cross. The hye Priests also laughed him to scorn,
(Mar.) among them selves with the Scribes, (Mat) and Elders, saying. He has
helped other, and can not help him self. If he be the king of Israel, let
him come down from the cross, and we will believe him, (Luke) let him help
him self now, if he be Christ the chosen of God, (Mathe) He trusted in God,
let him deliver him now if he will have him: For he said, I am the son of
God. (Luk) And the soldiers also mocked him, and said: if thou be the king of
Jews, then help thy self. (Mathe) The Murderers also that were crucified
with him, cast the same in his teeth. (Luke) And the people stood, and
beheld. And the rulers mocked him with them, and said: He has helped other,
let him help him self now, if he be Christ ye chosen of god. The soldiers
also mocked him, went to him, and brought him vinegar, and said: if thou be
the king of the Jews, then help thy self. And one of the misdoers that
hanged there, blasphemed him, and said: If thou be Christ, then help thy self
and us. Then answered the other, rebuked him, and said: And thou fear not
God also, which art yet in like dampnacion. And truly we are therein by
right, for we receive according to our deeds. As for this man, he has done
nothing amysse. And he said unto Jesus: Lord remember me, when thou come
into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: Uerelye, I say unto thee. To day
shalt thou be with me in Paradise (John) There stood by the Cross of Jesus,
his mother, and his mothers sister Marye the wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalene. Now when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple standing by, whom
he loved, he said unto his mother: Woman, behold thy son. Then said he to
his disciple: Behold thy mother. And from that hour, the disciple took her
unto him. (Matthew) And from the sixth hour, there was darckenes over the whole
earth unto the nynthe hour, (Luke) and the Sun was darckned, (math) and
about the nynth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said: Hely, Hely,
lamah hasaphthani, that is, my God, my God, why haste thou forsaken me? But
some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said: he calls Helias.
But the other said: hold, let us see whether Helias will come, and deliver
him. (John) After that when Jesus knew that al was performed, that the
scripture might be fulfilled, he said: I am a thriste. There stood a vessel
full of vinegar. (mat) And immediatlye one of them ran, and took a sponge and
filled it with vinegar, and put it upon a read. John) They filled a sponge with
vinegar, and wound it about with Isope, and held to his mouth. Now when Jesus
had received y^ vinegar, he said: It is finished. (Luke) And Jesus cried
aloude, and said: Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, and when he
had so said: (John) He bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost, (Mathevve)
and behold the Uayle of the temple was rent in two pieces, from above till
beneath, and the earth quaked, and the stones rent, and the graves opened, and
many bodies of the Saynctes that slepte arose, and went out of the graves
after his Resurrection, and came into the holy City, and appeared unto many.
But the Captain and they that were with him and kept JESUS, when they saw
the earthequake, and the things that were done, (Mark) and that he gave up
the Ghost with such a cry, (math) they were sore afraid, and said: Uerelye
this was Gods son, (Luke) and he praised God, and said: verelye this was a
just manne. And all the people, that stood by and beheld, when they saw what
was done, smote upon their breasts, and turned back again. But all his
acquayntaunce, and the women yt had followed him out of Galile, (Mark) stood a
far of, and beheld al these things, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and
Mary of James, and the mother of Joseph and Salome, (mat) and the mother of the
children of Zebede, (Mark) which had followed him when he was in Galile, and
ministered unto him, and many other that went up with him to Jerusalem.

Of the Lords buryall. Mat. xvi. Luke xxiii. John. xxix. ca. xv.
THe Jews then, John.
for as much as it was the day of preparinge that the bodies should not
remain upon the Cross, on the Sabbath (for ye same sabbath day was great)
besoughte Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken down. Then came the soldiers and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other that was crucified with him: But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: But one of the soldiers
opened his side with a spear, and immediatlye there went out blood and water.
And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true. And he knows that
he says true, that ye might believe also. For this is done, that the scripture
might be fulfilled: ye shall not break a bone of him. And another scripture
says: * They shall^ see him whom they have pearsed. Exodus 12 g zacha. 12. c
(Mathevve) When it was even, (Mark) for as much as it was the day of
preparynge, which is the fore Sabbath, (Mathe) there came a rich man of
Aramathia, (Luk) a city of the Jews, (Math) called Joseph, (mark) a noble
Senator, (Luke) which was a good just man, (Mathe) which was also a disciple
of Jesus, (Ioh) but secretlye for fear of the Jews, (Luk) and waited also for
the kingdom of God: The same had not consented to their counsel and deed,
(Mark) he went boldly unto Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus. But Pilate
maruayled that he was dead already, and called the Captain, and asked hi,
whether he had been dead long: and when he had gotten knowledge of the
Captain. (Joan) Pilate sufferd him, (mark) he gave him the body, (Mat) and
commanded that the body should be given him. (mar) Joseph bought a lynnen
clothe: (John) He came and coke the body, (Mar) and took him down, and
wrapte, (Mat) him in a clean linen clothe, (Ioh) There came also Nicodemus
which before came unto Jesus by night, and brought of Myrre and Aloes myngled
together, about an hundredth pound wayght. Then they took the body of Jesus,
wound it with lynnen clothes, and with the spices, as the manner of y^ Jews is
to bury. And by y^ place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in
the garden a new Sepulcher of Joseph's, (mar) which was hewn out of a rock,
(John) where in was never man laid. There laid they Jesus, because of the
preparynge day of the Jews, for the Sepulcher was nigh at hand. (math) And
Joseph rolled a great stone before y^ door of the Sepulcher, (mat) and went his
way. (mar) But Mary Magdalene, and Marie Joseph beheld where he was laid,
(Math) sitting over against y^ Sepulcher, (Luk) and it was y^ day of preparing,
and the Sabbath drue on. The women y^ were come with him out of Galile, followed
him, and beheld the Sepulcher where his body was laid: but they returned, and
made ready the spices and annoyntmentes. And upon the Sabbath they rested,
according to the law: (Math) the next day that followed the day of the
preparynge, the hye priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate and said:
sir, we have called to remembrance, that this deceauer said, while he was yet
alive. After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the
Sepulcher be kept unto the third day, le^te peradventure his disciples come and
steal him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from dead, and so shall
the last error be worse then the first. Pilate said unto them. There have
ye watchme^, go your way and keep it as ye ca^. They went, and kept y^
Sepulcher with watchmen, and sealed the stone.

Of the lords resurrection, and how the women came first very earlye to the
grave. Mat. xxviii. Mark. xvi. Luc. xxiiii. John. xx. Cap. xvi.
ANd when the Sabbath was paste, Mark.
Marie Magdalene, and Marie James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might
come and anoynte Jesus. And very earlye. (math) Upon the evening of the
Sabbath, which dawneth the morrow of y^ first day of the Sabbothes. (Joan)
When it was yet darcke, (Mark) upon one of the Sabbothes, they came to y^
Sepulcher, when the sun arose. And said one to another, who shall roll us
the stone from the door of the Sepulcher? It was a very great stone. (Math) And
behold there was made a great earthquake, for the Angel of the lord descended
from heaven and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and satte upon
it. And his countenance was as the lyghtninge, and his clothing white as
snow. But the watchemenne were troubled for fear of him, and became as though
they were dead. (John) Marie Magdalene and the other Marie came to the
Sepulcher, and saw that the stone was taken from the Sepulcher. Then ran
she, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciples whom Jesus loved, and
said to them. They have taken away the lord out of the Sepulcher, and we
cannot tell, where they have laid him. (Luke) The women which had prepared
the spices, and certain women with the^, found the stone rolled away from the
Sepulcher, and went in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And it
happened, as they were amassed thereat, behold there stood by them two me^ in
shyninge garments. And they were afraid and cast down their faces to the
earth. Then said they unto them: what seek ye? the living among the dead?
He is not here, he is rise^ up. Remember how that he told you when he was yet
in Galile, and said. The son of man must be delivered into the hands of
sinners, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. And they remembered
his words, (math) go your way soon, and tell his disciples. (mark) and
Peter, that he will go before you in to Galile: (Math) so, I have foretold it
you, (Mar) there shall ye se him, as he said unto you. And they went fourth
in all the haste, end fled from the Sepulcher, for there was a trembling and
fear come upon them: another said they any thing to any man for they were
afraid. (Luke) And when they were gone from the Sepulcher, they told all this
unto the eleven, and to all the other. It was Marye Magdalene, and Iohanna and
Mary James, and the other with them, that told this unto the Appostles. And
their words seemed unto them, as though they had been but fables, and they
believed them not. (math) And when they were gone, behold, certain of the
watchemen came into the city, and told the hie priests every thing that had
happened. And they came together with the elders, and held a council, and
gave the soldiers money enough and said: say ye, his disciples came by night
and stale him away, while we were a stepe: and if this come to the de^ycie, we
will still him, and bring it so to pass, that ye shall be safe. And they took
the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is noysed among the
Jews until this day.

How that Peter and John came to Christ's grave, and of the two disciples
going to Emaus Ioh. xx. Luke 24. ca. xvii
THen went Peter fourth, and the other disciples whom Jesus loved, John.
and came to the Sepulcher, they ran both together and that other disciple
outranne Peter, and came first to the Sepulcher, and looked in, and saw the
lynnen clothes laid, but he went not in: then came Simon Peter, after him,
and went in to the Sepulcher, and saw the lynnen clothes lie, and the napkyn
that was bound about Jesus head, not laid with the lynnen clothes, but
wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also that other disciple
which came first to the Sepulcher, and he saw and believed: for as yet they
knew not the scryptures, that yt behooved him to rise again from the dead.
Then went the disciples again together. (Luke) And behold, Emaus is from
lerusalem. 40. stades. 115. mile.
two of the^ went the same day to a town, which was threscore furlonges from
Jerusalem, whose name was Emaus. And they talked together of al those things
that had happened.

Of the first appearing showed unto Marie Magdalene at her second coming to
the Sepulcher. Math. xxviii. Mar. xvi John. xx. Capi. xviii.
MAry Magdalene came to se the Sepulcher, (Ioh) and she stood before the
Sepulcher, Math.
and wept without. Now as she wept, she looked in to the Sepulcher, and saw
two Angels in white garments, sitting the one at the head: and the other at
the fete, where they had laid y^ body of Jesus. And they said unto her:
woman, why wepest thou? She said unto them. They have taken away my lord, and
I wot not where they have laid him: and when she had said that, she turned
her self back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus said unto her: woman, why wepest thou? Whom sekest thou? she thought it
had been the gardener, and said unto him: sir, if thou have borne him hence,
then tell me where thou haste laid him, and I will fetch him. Jesus said unto
her: Marie. The^ turned she her about, and said unto him. Raboni, that is to
say, master. Jesus said unto her. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended
unto my father: but go thou thy way unto my brethren, and say unto them. I
ascend up to my father, and to your father, to my god, and your God. (Mark)
But Jesus when he was risen up early upon the first day of the Sabbath, he
appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven deuels,
and she went and told them that were with him as they mourned and wept.
(John) I have seen the Lord, and such things has he spoken unto me. (Mar)
And when they heard that he lived, and had appeared unto her, they believed it
not.

Of the second appaeringe to the women in the way, returning the second time
from the sepulcher. And of y^ second appearing to Peter, going the second time
to y^ sepulcher. Mat. xxviii. Mar. xvi. Luke xxiiii. Capi. xix.
ANd the women came to the Sepulcher. Luke.
(mar) And goinge in to the Sepulcher: on the right hand they saw a young man
syttinge, which had a long white garmente upon him, and they were abashed.
But he said unto them. Be not ye afraid. I know that ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth which was crucified, he is risen, he is not here, (math) come and se
the place. (Mark) where they laid him. (Mat) And they departed from the grave
in all the have with great joy, to bring his disciples word. And as they were
going to tell his disciples. Behold, Jesus me^ them, and said: God speed
you. And they went unto him, and held his fete and fell down before him. Then
said Jesus unto them: be not afraid go your way, and tell my brethren, that
they go into Galile, there shall they see me. (Luk) They told all this unto the
eleven, and to al other. But Peter arose and ran to the sepulcher, and
stouped in, and saw the lynnen clothes laid by them selves.

Of the fourth appearing showed in Emaus to the two disciples. And that he had
already appeared to Peter. Luke. xxiiii. Matthew. xvi. Capitulo. xx.
ANd it happened y^ as they talcked, Luke.
and disputed with themselves, of al those things that had chanced. Jesus him
self drew nigh, and went with them. But their eyes were holden that they
should not know him. And he said unto them: What manner of co^municacions are
these y^ ye have one to another, as ye walcke and are sad? Then answered the
one, whose name was Cleophas, and said unto him: art y^ only a stran^ger at
Jerusalem, not knowi^g what is come to pass there in these days? And he said
unto them: What? They said unto him. That of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
prophet, mighty in deed and word, before God, and all the people. How our
high priests and rulers delivered him to the conde^pnation of death, and
crucified him. But we hoped that he should have delivered Israel. And besides
al this, to day is y^ third day, y^ this was done. Yea, and certain women also
of our company, which were early at the sepulcher, and found not his body,
came and told, that they had seen a vision of angels, which said he was
alive. And certain of them, which were with us, went unto the sepulcher, and
found it even so, as the women said, but him found they not. And he said
unto them: O ye fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets
have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
also into his glory? And he began at Moses and all the Prophets, and
expounded unto them all the scriptures that were spoken of him. And they drew
nigh unto the town, which they went unto: And he made as though he would have
gone further. And they compelled him, and said: Abide with us, for it draws
toward night, and the day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with
them. And it came to pass, when he sat at the table with the^, he took the
bread, gave thanckes, brake it, and gave it them. Then were their eyes opened,
and they knew him. And he vanished out of their syghte. And they said between
them selves. Did not our hearts burn within us, when he talcked with us by
the way? While he opened the scriptures unto us? And they rose up the same
hour, turned again to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together,
and those that were with them, which said: The Lord is risen of a truth,
and has appeared un to Simon. And they told the^ what had happened by the
way, and how they knew him, in breaking of bread. (Mark) These they
believed not also.

Of the fyfte appearing showed to his disciples in the day of his
resurrection, Thomas being absent. And of Thomas incredulity. Luke. xxiiii.
John. xx. Capitulo. xxi.
BUt while they were talking thereof. Luke.
(Ioh) The same Sabbath at even, when the disciples were gathered together, and
the doors were shut for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst
of them (Luke) and said: Peace be with you, but they were abashed, and
affrayed, supposyng that they had seen a spirit. And he said unto them: Why
are ye abashed, and wherefore rise such thoughts in your heartes^ Behold my
hands and my feet, it is even I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit
has not fleashe and bones, as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken,
he showed them his hands and his feet. (John) and his side. (Luke) But while
they yet believed not, and for joy wondered, he said unto them: Have ye any
thing here to eat? And they set before him a piece of broyled fyshe and an
honye comb. And he took it, and did eat it before them, and gave them that
remained. And he said unto them: These are the words, which I spoke unto you:
while I was yet with you, for it must all be fulfilled, that was written of me
in the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. Then opened he
their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures, and said unto
them. Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and the third
day to rise again from the dead, and let penance and remissions of sins be
preached in his name among all nations. And to begin at Jerusalem. As for
all these things ye are witnesses of them. Then were the disciples glad that
they saw the LORD. Then said Jesus unto them again: Peace be with you.
Like as my father sent me, even ^o send I you. And when he had said that,
he breathed upon them, and said unto them. Receive the holy ghooste, whose
sins so ever ye remitte, they are remitted unto them: And whose sins
soever ye retain, they are retained.

But Thomas one of the twelve, which is called Didimus, was not with them
when JESUS came.

Then said ye other disciples unto him: we have seen the Lord. But he said
unto them: Except I see in his hands the prynte of the nails, and put my
finger into y^ place of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not
believe.

Of the syxte appearing, showed after eyghte days unto the disciples. Thomas
being present. And that god did many things which are not written. John.
xx. Capitulo. xxii.
ANd after eyghte days, again his disciples were within, John^
and Thomas with them. Then came Jesus, when the doors were shut, and stood in
the myddest, and said: Peace be with you. After that said he unto Thomas:
Reach hither thy finger, and see my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and
put it into my side, and be not faythlesse, but believe. Thomas answered, and
said unto him: My Lord, and my God. Jesus said unto him: Thomas, because thou
have seen me, y^ haste believed. Blessed are they that see not, and yet believe.
Many other tokens did Jesus before his disciples, which are not written in
this book. But these are written that ye should believe that Jesus is Christ
the son of God, and that ye through belefe might have life in his name.

Of the seventh appearing showed unto seven disciples at the sea of Tiberias.
And how Jesus askte Peter three times whether he loved him Ioh. xxi. Capitu.
xxiii.
AFter that showed Jesus him self again at the sea of Tiberias. John^
But on this wise showed he himself. There were together Simon Peter, and
Thomas which is called Didimus, and Nathanaell, of Cana a city of Galile: and
the sons of Zebede, and two other of his disciples. Simon Peter said unto
them: I go a fyshynge, they said unto him: we also will go with the. They
went out, and entered in to a ship straight way: and that same night took
they nothing. But when it was day, Jesus stood on the shore: but his disciples
knew not, that it was Jesus. Jesus said unto them: Children have ye any
thing to eat? They answered him: No, he said unto them, cast out your
net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. Then they cast out,
and could no more draw it for the multitude of fyshes. Then said the disciple
whom Jesus loved, unto Peter: it is the Lord. When Simon Peter heard that it
was the Lord: he gyrded his mantel about him, for he was naked, and sprange in
to the sea. But the other disciples came by ship, (for they were not far
from land, but as it were, two hundredth cubits,) and they drue the net with
the fyshes. Now when they were come to land, they saw coals laid, and fish
thereon, and bread. Jesus said unto them: bring hither of the fyshes, that ye
have taken now, Simon Peter stepped fourth, and drew the net to the land,
full of great fyshes: an hundredth and three and fyftie. And for all there were
so many, yet was not the net broken. Jesus said unto them, come and dyne,
but none of the disciples durst ask him, who art thou? For they knew, that
it was the Lord. Then came Jesus and took the bread, and gave it to them, and
the fyshe likewise. This is now the third time that Jesus appeared unto his
disciples, after that he was risen again from the dead. Now when they had
dyned, Jesus said unto Simon Peter: Simon Ioha^na, love thou me more the^
these do? He said unto him: yea Lord, thou know that I love thee. He said
unto him, feed my lambs: he said unto him again the second time: Simon
Iohanna, love thou me: He said unto him, yea Lord thou know that I love
thee. He said unto him: feed my sheep. He said unto him the third time,
Simon Iohanna, love thou me? Peter was sorry because he said unto him, love
thou me? And he said unto him, Lord thou know all things? thou know
that I love thee. Jesus said unto him, feed my sheep, verily, verelye I say
unto the: when thou wast young thou gyrdest thy self, and dyddest walk
whither thou would: but when thou art old, thou shalt stretche fourth
thy hands, and another shall gyrde the and led the whyther thou would not:
but this he said, to signify, with what death he should glorify God. When he
had spoken this, he said unto him: follow me: Peter turned him about, and
saw the disciple following him, whom Jesus loved. Which also leaned upon his
breast at the supper, and said: Lord who is it, that betrayeth thee? When
Peter saw him, he said unto Jesus: Lord, but what shall he do? Jesus said
unto him: If I will that he tarry till he come, what is that to thee? follow thou
me. Then went there out a saying among the brethren: this disciple dies
not. And Jesus said not unto him, he dies not: but if I will that he tarry till
I come, what is that to the. This is the same disciple: Which testifies of
these things, and wrote these things, and we know that his testimony is true.

Of the eyghte apearynge showed unto the eleven disciples in Galile. Math.
xxviii. Capitulo. xxiiii.
THe eleven disciples went unto Galile, Math.
in to a moutayne, where Jesus had appointed them. And when they saw him, they
fell down before him: but some of them douted. And Jesus came unto them,
talked with them, and said: Unto me is given all power in heaven, and in
earth. Go ye your way therefore, and teach all nations, and baptyse them, in
the name of the father, and of y^ son, and of the holy gooste. And teach them
to keep all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And lo, I am with you
every day, unto the end of the world.

Of the nynthe and tenth aperynges showed unto the disciples upon the ascencion
day. Mar. xvi. Luke. xxiiii. cap. xxv
AT the last, Mark.
the eleven sitting at the table, he showed him self unto them, and rebuked
their unbelief, and the hardness of their hearts, because they believed not
them which had seen him risen. And he said unto them: God ye your way in to
all the world, and preach the gospel unto all creatures, whosoever believes and
is baptized, shall be saved, but whosoever believes not, shall be damned: As for the
signs and tokens, which shall follow them that believe, these are they. In my
name shall they cast out deuels, speak with new tongues, drive away
serpents, and if they drink any deadelye thing, it shall not hurt them. They
shall lay their hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. (Luke) And
behold I will send upon you, the promise of my father: But ye shall tarry in
the city of Jerusalem till ye be endewed with power from above. But he led
them out unto Bethani, and lift up his hands, and blessed them. (mar) And
after he had spoken unto them. (Luke) It came to pass, when he blessed them,
he departed from them, and was carried up in to heaven, (Mark) and sytteth at
the right hand of God, (Luke) and they worshipped him, and turned again to
Jerusalem. with great joy: and were continuallye in the temple geuynge praise
and thanks unto God. (mark) And they went out and preached every where:
and the Lord wrought with them, and confyrmed the word with signs following.

The conclusion of the Evangelical historye. John. xxi. Capitulo. xxvi.
Many other things did Jesus: John.
which if they should be written every one, I suppose the world should not
contain the books that were to be written.

Finis.
The titles of the first book.
OF Christ's eternal generation Capitulo. i. Of the Annuntiation and conception
of John y^ baptist ca. ii. Of the conceptio^ of our Savior. ca. iii How Mary
visited Elizabeth ca. iiii Of the birth and Cirumcisio^ of John the baptist
capi. v. Of the temporal genealogi of Christ cap. vi Of the Natiuite of Christ
cap. vii Of Christ's circumcision cap. viii Of the coming of the wise men.
capi. ix Of the presentacion of Christ in the temple. capi. x Of his flyte
into Egypt, and occision of the Innocents, and of his returning out of
Egypt. ca. xi Of John's habitacio^ in the desert. ca. xii Of the finding of
Christ in the temple. Cap. xiii Of the autorite of preaching and baptisynge
given unto John of God. Capi. xiiii Of John's testymonyes of Christ. Capitulo.
xv
The tytles of the second book.
Of Christ's baptyme. cap. i. Of ye genealogy of Christ. cap. ii. Of Christ's
fasting and temptation. cap. iii. Of other testimonies of John, of Christ.
cap. iiii. Of the first vocation and calling of the disciples by the which
they were called to the simple knowledge of Christ. cap. v. Of the mutacion
and chaungynge of water into wine. cap. vi. Of his first coming to Easter,
and of the dryuyng out of those that did sell in the temple. cap. vii. Of
Nicodemus. cap. viii. Of the complaynte, that Jesus did baptize. cap. ix. Of
John's incarnation. cap. x. Of the beginning of Christ's public predication.
cap. xi. Of the second vocation of the disciples, by the which they were
called to Christ's familiarite. cap. xii. Of the third vocation of the
Apostles, by the which they are called to the discipleshyp of Christ. cap.
xiii. Of the healynge of a certain Demoniake, in the synogage of y^ city of
Capernaum. cap. xiiii. Of the healing of al diseases cap. xv. Of Simons mother
in law cap. xvi Of the calling of Mathewe. ca. xvii. Of the election of the
twelve disciples unto the apostleshippe done in mount Thabor. And of the first
part of Christ's sermon made there, contayninge eyghte Beatitudes, and
certain cursynge. cap. xviii. What Prelates ought to do in word and deed,
and that Christ came not to break, but to fulfill the law. cap. xix. Of having
patience, and of showing liberality to our neighbors. cap. xx. Humayne praise
is not to be looked for in doing of good works. cap. xxi. Of the manner of
prayinge and forgeuyng. cap. xxii. Of the manner of fasting, and that we should
not treasure up in earth, but in heaven. cap. xxiii. Of doing of mercy, and
that we should not judge, and of the trust and confidence of prayer. cap.
xxiiii. Of the narowe way, and conclusion of the Lords sermon made in mount
Thabor. cap. xxv^ Of y^ leper which was hea^ed. cap. xxvi. Of the centurions
servant. cap. xxvii. Of y^ widows son revived. ca. xxviii Of a craftye
scribe, and of two y^ would fellow Christ. cap. xxix. Of the quiet^nge of the
sea, at Christ's commandment. cap. xxx. Of. ii. Demoniakes, which were
healed. cap. xxxi. Of him y^ was healed of y^ palsy ca. xxxii Of y^ feast in
Matheus house. ca. xxxiii. Of the reuiuyng of the archsinagoges daughter, and
of her that was diseased with an issue of blood. cap. xxxiiii. Of two blind
men illuminated, and of the domme Demoniake. cap. xxxv. The disciples are
commanded to pray ye lord of the harvest to send workmen. Capitulo. xxxvi.
Of the sendyng forth of ye twelve Apostles to preach with power, to heal the
diseased. cap. xxxvii. Of John's interrogacion. Art thou he that shall come.
cap. xxxviii. Of the maledictions of y^ cities, unto y^ which Christ had
preached, cap. xxxix. Of the apostles retourning to Christ. Capitulo..xl. Of
the sendinge forth of the seuentye^ and two disciples. cap. xli. Of the
coming again of the seventy and two disciples. cap. xlii. Of the Samaritane
that took cure of the woundyd. cap. xliii. Of Mary Magdalens conuertion. cap.
xliiii. Of Marthas ministry and service. cap. xlv. Of the doctrine of prayer.
cap. xlvi. Of the woman of Samaria. cap. xlvii. Of the rulers son. cap.
xlviii. Of the woman which ministered unto Christ and of the parable of the
sower, and the exposition thereof. captu. xlix. Of the parable of tares, and of
mustarde sede. cap. l. Of three parables in the house. cap. li. Of the Lords
coming to Nazareth where he rod, and that the Nazarithes would have cast
him down headlynge. cap. lii. Of John the Baptist death. cap. liii. Of the
re^ection of five thousand men. cap. liiii. Of Christ's deambulation upon the
Sea. cap. lv. Of the predication of Eucharistia, for the which certain went
back and departed. cap. lvi. Of the rubbing of the ears of corn upon the
Sabbath day. cap. lvii. Of the healing of the wythered hand. cap. lviii. Of
Herodes saying that John was risen and did miracles. cap. lix Of the domme
devil. cap. lx. Of the Jews requiring a sign from heaven. cap. lxi. Of the
woman that lyfted up her voice. And of the Lords mother and brethren which
sought him. cap. lxii. Of the checkynge of the Pharisees. capi. lxiii. Of the
brother which desired Christ to deuyde the Heritage. cap. lxiiii. Of the rich
man, which would make wyder his barnes. cap. lxv. Of the poole probatike. cap.
lxvi. Of the Galileans which were slain, and of the fygge tree. cap. lxvii. Of
the crooked woman. cap. lxviii. Of y^ interrogation made unto Christ whyther
few should be saved. And that Herod sought to kyl him. cap. lxix. Of him that
was healed of the dropsye: and of Christ's exhortacion to humility. cap. lxx.
Of calling the poor, to the feast. And the parable of a great supper. cap.
lxxi. That for Christ's sake, we must hate our parents. cap. lxxii. Of the
feast of Tabernacles. And predication of Christ's passion. cap. lxxiii. Of the
woman deprehended in adulterye. cap. lxxiiii. Of Christ's words in the
treasurye. Capitulo. lxxv. Of another communication of Christ, for the which
they would have slain him. cap. lxxvi. Of him that was borne blind.
capitulo. lxxvii. Of Christ's sermon, I am the good she pherde. cap. lxxviii.
Of the dedication. cap. lxxix. Of the reprehention of the Jews tradition. cap.
lxxx. Of the woman of Canane. cap. lxxxi. Of a deaf and a domme man, which
was healed, and of many other. ca. lxxxii. Of the second refection of the
people with seven looues. cap. lxxxiii. Of the Jews asking again a sign
from heaven. And of avoiding of the Pharisees leven. cap. lxxxiiii. Of a blind
manne healed at Bethsaida. cap. lxxxv. Of Peter's confession of the true faith
cap. lxxxvi. Of bearing the cross after Christ. cap. lxxxvii. Of y^ lords
tranfiguration. ca. lxxxviii. Of y^ dom and lunatike spirit, who^ Christ's
disciples could not heal. ca. lxxxix. Of the disciples desyringe their faith
to be increased. cap. xc. Of the payment of didragma cap. xci. Of the disciples
contention, which of them should be greatest. cap. xcii. Of him that cast out
deuels, and followed not Christ. cap. xciii. Of. iii. parables, y^ sheep and
grote y^ was lost, and of y^ prodigal son. cap. xciiii. Of brotherly
correction. cap. xcv. Of the wicked servant unto whom all the dettes was
forgeuen. capi. xcvi. Of Christ's coming into the costs of Iewry. And y^ his
disciples should not fear those y^ kill the body. cap. xcvii. Of the cause,
why a man should forsake his wife. cap. xcviii. Of young children which were
brought unto the Lord, cap. xcix. Of the young man that asked what he should
do to possess eternal life. cap. i. Hard it is for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of heaven. cap. ci. Of reward of those that leave al, and follow
Christ. cap. cii. Of the laborers quotidiane penye, which were sent into ye
vineyarde capitulo. ciii. Of the unrighteous steward. cap. ciiii. Of the rich
glotton. cap. cv. Of the reuiuynge of Lazarus. capitulo. cvi. Of the
conspiracy made against Jesus. And of his going to Ephriam. capitulo. cvii. Of
his departing from Ephraim to Jerusalem. cap. cviii. Of the ten Lepers healed
in the way. Capitulo. cix. How the Samaritans received not Christ. cap. cx.
The peticion of the children of Zebebe. cap. cxi. Of the illumination of the
blind, before he went into Hierico. And of Zacheus, and of the ten pounds.
capitulo. cxii. Of two blind men, which received their syghte at his
departing from Hierico. cap. cxiii. Of blind Bartimens, which received his
syghte betwixt Hierico and Bethani. cap. cxiiii. When that the Lord after his
return from Ephraim, came to Bethani. ca. cxv. Of the sitting upon the ass.
ca. cxvi. Of the glorious receauynge of Christ upon Paulme sunday cap. cxvii.
How Jesus wept upon Jerusalem, and of the casting out of those y^ sold.
Capitulo. cxviii. Of the Heathen which sought to see Christ. cap. cxix Of the
cursynge of the fygge tree. And of the third eiection of those that ^olde, and
of the Pharise and publicane. capitulo. cxx. Of the disciples admiration upon
the witherynge of the fygge tree. Capitulo. cxxi. Of the question of John's
Baptyme. Capitulo. cxxii. Of two sons, of the which y^ one accomplished his
fathers will. Capitulo. cxxiii. Of the vineyarde, which was let out to the
husbandmen. cap. cxxiiii. Of the wedding garment. cap. cxxv. Of paying tribute
unto Caesar ca. cxxvi Of the woman which had seven husbands. capit. c. xxvii
Of the first commandment, that is, of the love of God. capit. cxviii Of the
interrogacyon whose son Christ is cap. cxxix Of hearing the Pharisees
doctrynes capitulo cxxx Of diverse and many woes ca. cxxxi Of the Jews
obstinarye. And of the wyddowe which offered two mi^es. capitulo. cxxxii Of
the buyldinge of the temple: and of the thretenynge of the destruction of the
same. cap. cxxxiii Of the coming, and persecution of Antechriste. cap.
cxxxiiii. Of the signs of the consumacion of the world capit. cxxxv. Of the
last signs of the consumacion of the world cap. cxxxvi Of the coming of
Christ the judge diversely signified. cap^ cxxxvii Of watch and prayer ca.
cxxxviii Of the ten vyrgins and ten talentes capitulo cxxxviii Of the
purgynge of the flower in the last judgment capi. cxl Of Christ's last
returning from Mount Oliuete unto Be^hani. capitulo. cxli Of the Alabaster
box of oyntmente. capitulo cxlii How Christ was sold by Judas. capitulo.
cxliii
The titles of the third book.
OF ye sendinge of Peter and John to prepare the paseouer. capit. i Of the
eating of the paschall lamb at the Lords supper. capitulo. ii. Of the
washinge of the disciples feet, and of the obcsure manifestacio^ of the
traitoure. capi. iii. Of the institucion of the sacrament of the body and
bloods of Christ. capitulo. iiii. Of a more open detection of the traytoure,
and of his goinge fourth, capitulo v. Of the question which of the disciples
should be greatest, and of the fore telling of Peter's denial capitulo. vi.
Of the first part of the Lords sermon at supper cap. vii The remnaunt^ of
the Lords sermon, which he spoke after his departure from the city,
sometimes going, sometimes standing. cap. viii. Of Christ's entringe into the
garden. And of his prayer, and captivity. Capitulo. ix. How Christ was sent
to Annas, and of Peter's first denial. cap. x. How Christ was sent to
Caiphas. And of Peter's second and third denyal^ Caiphas house. And of false
witnesses against Jesus. cap. xi. Of the third coming together of the
elders, and how Jesus was delivered to Pilate. cap. xii. Of the ledynge forth
of Jesus to Caluarye. And of his crucifyinge. cap. xiii. How they deryded
Jesus upon the cross, and of his words, and of the signs after his death.
cap. xiiii. Of the Lords buryall. cap. xv. Of the Lords resurrection. And how
the women came first very early to the grave. cap. xvi. How that Peter and
John came to Christ's grave. And of y^ two disciples going to Emans. ca. xvii.
Of the appearing, showed unto Mary. Magdalene at her second coming to the
sepulcher cap. xviii. Of the second appearing to the women in the way
retournynge the second time from the sepulcher. And of the second appearing
to Peter going the second time to the sepulcher. Capitulo. xix. Of the
fourth appearing, showed in Emaus to the two disciples. And that he had
already appeared to Peter. cap. xx. Of the fifth appearing showed to his
disciples in the day of his resurrection, Thomas being absent. And of Thomas
incredulite. cap. xxi. Of the syxte appearing showed after eyghte days unto
his disciples Thomas being present. And that God did many things which are
not written. cap. xxii. Of the seventh appearing showed unto seven disciples
at the sea of Tiberias. And how Jesus asked Peter three times whether he loved
him. Capitulo. xxiii. Of the eyghte appearing, showed unto the eleven
disciples in Galile. capitulo. xxiiii. Of the nynthe and tenthe apperinge
showed unto the disciples upon the ascension day cap. xxv The conclusion of
the evangelical history capi. xxvi
Finis.
A.
ABraham desired to se my day. ii book. ca. lxxvi Adulterers should be
stoned. ii. book capitulo. lxxiiii Abide in me, and ye shall obtain that ye
ask. iii. book. capitulo. viii Agree with thine adversary. ii. bo. ca. xix A
great Prophet is risen among us. ii. book. cap. xxviii A^gles will gather
unto dead carcases. ii. book ca. cxxxv. cxxxvii Amayde shall bring forth a
child. i. book capitu. vi Alms must be done secretly. ii. book capitulo xxi
Alms does cleanse all things. ii. book capitulo. lxiii. Al things are
possible with God. i. bo. capitulo. iii. ii. book. capitulo. cx. iii. book
capitulo (...) All things are given unto the son. ii. book. capitu. xlii.
iii. book. capitulo. iii. Al sins shall be forgeueuen. ii. bo. ca. lx All
Judgment is given to the son ii. bok. capi. lxvi. All things are possible
to him that believes. ii. book cap. lxxxix. All people shall be gathered before
the Lord. ii. book cap. cxl Al y^ y^ father has is mine. iii. bo ca. viii All
y^ is mine is thine. iii. book. cap. viii. All that take swearde shall perysh
with the swearde. iii. book cap. ix Al power is given to Christ. iii. b. ^.
xxiiii Amend or ye shall all peryshe. ii. book capitulo lxvii Angels speak
unto the shepherdes. i. book capit. vii Angels apeare to Joseph i. book. ca.
xi Angels shall cast those to the fire that do iniquite. ii. book. capit. l.
li Anna both fasted and prayed. i. book. ca. x An euel ^re must be burnt. i.
bok. ca. xiiii Anger brings one in danger of judgment. ii. book. capi. xix
Annoynting with oil heals. ii. book captulo xxxviii As ye measure so shall
ye be measured. ii. book. ca. xxiiii. xlix Art thou he that shall come? ii. bo.
capitulo. xxxviii. Aunswerest thou the high Priest so? iii. book. cap. x.
Archelaus raygned in Iewry. i. b. ca. xi. the Axe is put to the tree. i. bo.
cap. xiiii. Ask, cry, and ye shall have. ii. book. Capitulo. xxiiii. xlvi.
B.
Barrabas, a notable prisoner. iii. book. Capitu. xii Believe and be saved. ii.
bo. cap. viii. Believe in the son and have life. ii. bke. Capitulo. ix. Believe
only. ii. bo. ca. xxxiiii. Believe my works ii. bo. cap. lxxix. Believe, and do
greater works then Christ. iii. book. cap. viii Be at quietness with thine
adversary. ii. book cap. lxv. Behold, here are two swerdes iii. b. c. vi
Behold, the lamb of God. ii. b. cap. v. Behold a right Israelite. ii. bok.
Capitulo. v. Behold thou are made whole, synn^ no more. ii. bo. cap. lxvi. Be
mercyful. ii. bo. cap. xxiiii^ Beelzebub chiefest of the deuyls ii. book
Capitulo. lx. Blasphemye against the holy ghost. ii. book. cap. lx. xcii.
Beware of coueteousnes ii. bo. ca. lxiiii. Beware of the Pharisees leven. ii.
bo. Capitulo. lxxxiiii. xcvii. Beware of excess of meats. ii. book. Capitulo.
cxxxvii. Byndynge and lousynge. ii. book. Capitulo. xcv. Blessings and
cursings. ii. bo. ca. xviii. Blessed are the eyes. etc. ii. book. Capitulo.
xlii. xlix. Blessed is the womb that bare thee. ii. bo. cap. lxii Blessed are
the kepers of the word of God. ii. book. ca. lxvi. Blessed are they that
watch ii. book. Capitulo. cxxxviii. Blessed are they that do the things,
which they know iii. bo. cap. iii. Blessed be the baren iii. bo. ca. xiii,
Blessed be they that believe and see not iii. book. cap. xxii. Blind Barthimens
ii. bo. ca. cxiiii. the Blind fall in the dytche ii. b. c. xxiiii. By what
authorite do thou these things. ii. bo. cap. cxxii. Bloody issue. ii. bo.
cap. xxxiiii. Bread of life ii. bo. cap. ^vi. Brydegrome shall be taken away ii.
bo. Capitulo. xxxiii. the Brother may marry his brothers wife. ii. book. cap.
c^xvii. Buylders must cast wether they may perform it ii. book. cap. lxxii.
Bra^che that brings not forth fruit in me shall be cut of iii. bo. cap. viii.
C.
a Candle under a bushel^ ii. b. ca. xix. xlix Capharnaum. ii. bok. cap. xi.
xxxix. Care not for your life ii. bo. ca. xxiii. Care not for to morrow. ii.
book. capitulo. xxiii. Call the poor to the feast ii. book. capitulo lxxi.
Cast not the childrens bread to dogs ii. book cap, lxxxii. Cayphas
prophesied. ii. bo. cap. cvii^ Cast out the net on the right side of the
ship, iii, book cap, xxii, Cephas ii, book, cap, v, Cast not pearls before
ii, bo, ca, xxiiii Christ's generation. i, bo, ca, vi, Christ birth i, bo, cap,
vi. Christ's presentacion, i, book, cap, v Christ's circumcision i. bok. ca.
viii. Christ's temptacion ii. bo. cap. iii. Christ's meat is to do the will of
his father ii. bo. ca. xlvii. Christ's fleashe is very meat ii. book.
Capitulo. lvi. Christ's brother ii. book. cap. lxii. Christ's words are
spirit and life. ii. book cap. lvi. Christ's woorckes bear witness of him.
ii. book. ca lxvi. Christ's brethren believed not in him. ii. book cap. lxxiii.
Christ's transfiguration. ii. book Capitulo lxxxviii. Christ's coming ii.
book. capitulo. cxxxv. cxxxvii. Christ's sweat was like drops of blood iii.
book cap. ix. Christ's side was opened. iii. book. capitulo. xv. Christ's
sepulcher was watched and sealed. iii. book. cap. xv. Christ was laid in a
maunger. i. bok. capitulo. vii Christ was borne at Bethled i. b. ca. ix. Christ
to many is a fall i. bo. cap. x. Christ waxed strong in spirit i. bo.
capitulo. ^vi. Christ fled into Egypt. i. book capi. xi. Christ was called
out of Egypt. i. bo. capitulo. xi Christ shall pourge his flower i. book
capitulo xiiii. Christ shall burn ye chafe. i. bo. cap. xiiii Christ fasted.
xl. days. ii. books. cap. iii Christ Baptiseth with the holy gooste ii. book
capit. iiii Christ came to the marriage. ii. book capi. vi Christ turns
water into wine. ii. bo. capitulo vi Christ must be lifted up. ii. book. ca.
viii Christ baptized. ii. book. cap. ix Christ begins to preach. ii.
book. capitulo xi Christ taught the people out of a thyp ii. book capi. xii.
xlix Christ taught in the temple upon the Sabbath. ii. book. xxiii. lxviii
Christ taught with power. ii. book. capitulo xiii. xxv Christ commanded the
spirits with power. ii. book capit. xiiii Christ took our infirmites. ii.
book capitulo xvi Christ came to preach. ii. book. ca. xvi Christ apoi^teth
the twelve. ii. b. ca. xviii Christ came to fulfill the law. ii. bo.
Capitulo. xix Christ a wine bybber and a glotten ii. book capit. xxxviii.
Christ was nursed at Nazareth. ii. bo. capitulo. lii. Christ Joseph's y^
carpenters son. ii. book. capit. lii. Christ walked upon the sea. ii. bo. ca.
lv Christ is the lyuinge bread. ii. book capitulo capit. lvi. Christ looked
upon them with wrath ii. book. capit. lviii Christ shall come of the sede of
David. ii. book ca. lxxiii Christ is the light of the world. ii. book. cap.
lxxv Christ does nothing of him self. ii book cap. lxxvi Christ is the
door. ii. book. capi. lxxviii Christ is ye good shepherd. ii. b. ca. lxxviii
Christ leuyth and takes his life of him self. ii. book cap. lxxviii Christ
pays tribute. ii. book. cap. x^i Christ is in the myddest of them that are
gathered in his name. ii. bo. ca. x^v Christ took children in his arms and
blessed them. ii. book capitu. x^ix. Christ is the resurrection and the life
ii. book. cap. cvi. Christ wept upon the city ii. b^c. cxviii. Christ endures
for ever ii. bo. ca. cxix. Christ drives out the money chaungers ii. bok
cap. cxviii. cxx, Christ the son of David. ii. b. ca. cxxix. Christ is the
only master ii. b. ca. cxxx. Christ came not to judge the world. ii. book.
cap. cxxxii. Christ foretells the destruction of the temple ii, book, cap,
cxxxiii, Christ foretells the persecution of the apostles. ii. book. cap.
cxxxiii. Christ comes to kyndle fire upon earth, ii, book, cap, cxxxviii.
Christ is come to bring debate upon earth ii. book. cap. cxxxviii. Christ shall
set his shope on his right hand ii. book cap. cxl. Christ washed his
disciples feet. ii. book. cap. iii. Christ looked upon Peter iii. bo. cap. xi.
Christ cast out of Mary Magdalene seven druyls iii. book. cap. xvii. Christ
was carried up unto heaven iii. book cap. xxv. Children of this worlde^ ^ ii. b.
c. ciiii. Compel them to come in ii. book. capitulo lxxi. Commandments ii.
book cap, c, Come and see the place where they laid him, iii, book cap, xix,
Come ye to me that are heavy laden, ii, book, cap, xlii, Confession of sins,
i bo, ca, xiiii, Coufesse Christ, and he shall confess the, ii. book cap,
lxxxvii, cxvii,
D.
David did eat the ii, book, ca, lvii, Delycate lyuers ii, book, ca, xxxvi,
the Dead shall hear y^ voice of the son of God, ii, book, cap, lxvi, Depart
from all the wor^kes of iniquity ii. book cap, lxix, Despise Christ and
despise his father, ii, book, cap, xxxvii, Despise no little ones ii, book, ca,
x^ii, Deny Christ, and he shall deny thee ii, book, cap, xcvii, the Dead rise
agyane, ii, bo, ca, cxxvii, the Deuyls knew Christ to be the son of God, ii,
bo, ca, xvi, Deuorcement, ii, book, capitulo, xix, xcviii, ciiii, Did not our
hearts burn within vs^ iii, book cap, xx, Do as ye would be done unto ^.
book. capitulo. xx. xxiiii Do as the pharisees command you. ii. book.
capitulo. cxxx.
E.
Eat such as they set before you. ii. bo. capitulo. xli Elizabeth was old
and baren. i. book capitulo. xxiii Elizabeth conceueth John. i. bo. ca. ii. iii
Elizabeth hid her self. i. book. capitu. ii Elizabeth is delivered. i. book.
capitu. v Elias was sent to Sarepta. ii. bo. ca. lii Elias shall restore all
thing. ii. book capitulo. lxxxviii Eye for eye, toothe for toothe. ii. book
capitulo. xx the Eye is the light of the body. ii. bo. capitulo xxiii. lxi
Endure to the end, and be saved. ii. bo. capitulo. xxxvii. cxxxiii Enter in by
Christ, and be saved. ii. book. capi. lxxviii Every man must be salted with
fire ii. book. capitu. xcii. Every offeringe must be seasoned with salt. ii.
Ca. xcii Except ye se wonders, ye believe not. ii. book. capit. xlviii Except
I se in his hands. etc. iii. book. capitulo. xxi
F.
the Father is not known but to the son. ii. book capitu. xlii the Fathers
will. ii. book capit. lvi Father is greater than I. iii. bo. ca. vii Father
forgive them. iii. book. capi. xiii Father in to thy hands. iii. bok. ca.
xiiii False prophets. ii. book. capi. xxv. cxxxv. faith has made the safe.
ii. book. capitulo xxxiiii. xliiii. cxii Faith as a grane of mustarde sede.
ii. book. capitulo. lxxxix. xc Faithful in little. ii. book. cap. c. iiii
Faith remoueth mountains. ii. book. capitulo cxxi Fear not those that kyl the
body. ii. bo. capitulo xxxvii. xcvii Feed my sheep. iii. book. capit. xxiii
Fyshers of men. ii. book. capitulo. xiii Finger of God. ii. book. capi. lx
Fygge tree. ii. book. capi. lxvii. cxx the First shall be y^ last. ii. book.
capitulo xcii. cii. ciii Fire from heaven. ii. book. capitulo. cx. First and
second commandment ii. book. capitulo. cxxvii Fill the water pottes. ii.
book cap. vi the Form of prayer. ii. bo. cap. xxii. xlvi Form of baptising.
iii. book. cap. xxiiii Forgive and beforgeuen. ii. book. capitulo xxiii. cxxi
Form of fasting. ii. book. ca. xxiii. Foes of our own household. ii. book.
capitulo xxxvii Folowinge of Christ. ii. bo. ca. lxxxvii Forgive your brother
from your hearts. ii. book. capi. xcvi Fornicacion causes deuorcemente. ii.
book. capi. xcviii Flesh profits nothing. ii, bo. cap. lvi Frelye ye have
received. ii. bo. ca. xxxvii Fruits of penance. i. book. capi. xiiii Fruits
give knowledge of the tree. ii. book. ca, xxv
G.
Gabaranites. ii. book capi, xxxi the Galilians receive Christ. ii. bo.
capitulo. xi. Gather treasure in heaven. ii. book. capitulo xxiii the Gate to
perdicion is large. ii. bo. capitulo. xxv Gather up the broken meat. ii. book.
capitulo liiii Give him that asks. ii. bok. capi. xx Give accomptes of thy
stewardeshyp. ii. book. capit. ciiii Give the Emperor his. ii. b. ca. cxxvi
Give us of your oil. ii. book. ca. cxxxix Geldinges of three sorts. ii. bo.
ca. xcviii Go to the lost sheep of Israel. ii. book capitulo xxxvii Go thy
way and sin no more. ii book capitulo. lxxiiii Go and show your selves to
the priests. ii. book. capitulo. cix Golgatha. iii. book cap. xiii Good works
must be seen. ii. book capitulo. xix Good men bring forth good fruit ii.
book. capitulo. xxv the Gospel is preached to the poor ii. book. capit.
xxxviii Good wine. ii. book. capitulo. vi God made all things. i book. cap. i
God took flesh of Mary. i. book. cap. iii God scatters the proud. i book.
ca. iiii God exalts the humble. i. book, capitulo iiii God has redeemed his
people. i. book capit. v. God is able of stones to raise up children i. book.
cap. xiiii God sent his son to save the world. ii. book capi. viii. God
gives not his spirit by measure ii. book capitulo. ix God has given his
son al things ii. book. cap. ix God sends his rain to good and bad. ii.
book. xx God is kind to the unthankful. ii. book capi. xx God will reward
the secret geuer openly. ii. book. cap. xxi God or ever we ask, knows our
need. ii. book. ca. xxii God is a spirit. ii. book. cap. xlvii God hereth no
sinners. ii. bo. cap. lxxvii God hears those that worship him ii. book capit.
lxxvii God is good only. ii. book. capi. c God be merciful unto me a sinner.
ii book capit. cxx God is God of the living and not of the dead. ii. book.
capit. cxxvii God shall deliver his chose that cry unto him. ii. book. ca.
cxxxviii Gods mercy endures for ever. i. book capitulo iiii Gods love to the
world. ii. bo. cap. viii. Gods house, is a house of prayer. ii. bo. capitulo
cxviii. cxx Gods word shall not perish. ii. book. capitulo cxxxvii Gods
commandment is life everlasting. ii. book. capit. cxxxii Grace comes of
Christ. i. book. capitulo. xxv
H.
HAters of light. ii. book. cap. viii Have ye eyes and se not. ii. b.
capitulo. lxxxiiii. Have patience with me. ii. book capitulo. xcvi. the Harvest
is great. ii. bo. cap. xxxvi. xli Herod slew the innocents i. book. capitulo
xi Herod feared John. ii. bo. capitulo. x. Herod made his birth supper. i.
book capitulo liii Herodians daughter daunseth ii. book capitulo. liii He that
has two coats. i. book. capitulo. xiiii He that is of the earth, is
earthye. ii. book. cap. ix He casts out deuels through the chief deuel. ii.
book ca. xxxv. He that is not with me is against me ii. book. cap. lx He that
humbles him him self shall be exalted. ii. book capit. lxx. cxx. cxxx He that
is of God, hears his word ii. book. cap. lxxvi He is old enough ask him.
ii. book. capitulo lxxvii He that is washen, need not to wash but his fete.
iii. b. cap. iii He that keeps the commandments loves Christ. iii. book.
capit. vii He that hates me, hates my father. iii book capit. viii Heaven and
earth shall peryshe. ii. book capitu. xix. ciiii Heaven was shoute. iii.
years, and vi. months. ii. book capi. lii Hell gates ii. book. capit. lxxxvi
Hell fire goes not out. ii. bo, cap. xcii. Help my unbelief. ii. book. ca.
lxxxix Here is Christ, or there. ii. bo. ca. cxxxv He brethed upon his
disciples. iii. book capitulo xxi Hold fast your souls with paci^nce. ii.
book. cap. cxxxiii. Honor father and mother. ii. book, capitulo lxxx How
often shall I forgive my brother ii. book cap. xcv Humilite makes one great in
heaven. ii. bo capi. xcii
I.
Iairus. ii. book capi. xxxiii I am not worthy. etc. ii. bo. capitu. xxviii I
am not come to call the ryghteous. ii book cap. xxxiii I am not come to send
peace, but a swearde. ii. bo. ca. xxxvii I am the way, the truth, and the
life iii. book capi. vii Jacobs well. ii. book ca xlvii I have not found so
great faith in Israel. ii. book capi. xxvii I have pleasure in mercy. ii.
book. capitulo xxxiii. lvii I have sinned against heaven and before the. ii.
book capi. xciiii I have prayed that thy faith fail not iii. book capitu vi
Idle words. ii. book capitulo. lx I cannot come, ii. book capi. lxxi I and the
father are one, ii, be. cap, lxxi I se men goinge as if I saw trees, ii book,
cap, lxxxv If thou canste do any thing, help us ii. book. capitu. lxxxix It
is not good to mary. ii. bo. cap. xcviii Iniquite shall have the upper hand.
ii book. cap. cxxxiii It wylbe long or my Lord come. ii. bo. capitulo cxxxviii
I will not drink of the fruit of the vine. iii. bo capit. ii In my fathers
house are many manti^ns. iii. book ca. vii In secret have I spoken nothing.
iii book. capt. vii I go a fyshinge. iii. book ca xxiii Increace our faith.
ii. book. capitu. xc. If I may touch his clothes, I shall be whole. ii. book.
capi. xxxiiii It was never so seen in Israel. ii. book capitulo xxxv Jesus
kingdom has no end. i. book capitulo. iii Jesus shall save his people. i.
bo. cap. vi Jesus apposeth the doctors. i. bo. ca. xiii Jesus was obediente to
his parents. i. book. cap. xiii Jesus increased in wisdom. i. book capitulo
xiii Jesus whypt the merchants out of the temple. ii. book. ca. vii Jesus
baptized not ii. book. cap. xl Jesus sl^pt upon a pyllowe ii. book. capitulo.
xxx. Jesus rebuked the seas ii bok. capitulo. xxx. Jesus saw the faith of
them ii. bo. capitulo. xxxii. Jesus wrote with his finger ii. bo. capitulo.
lxxiiii. Jesus a prophet mighty in word and deed iii. book. cap. xx Jesus
came to his disciples, the doors being shut iii bo. ca. xxi. Jerusalem shall be
destroyed ii. bok. capitulo. cxviii. Jerusalem shall be left desolate ii. bo.
capitulo. cxxxi. John Baptist was great before God. i. book. cap. ii. John
drancke no strong drink i. bo. capitu. ii. John turned the people to the
Lord. i. book. cap. ii. John spryngeth in his mothers womb. i. book. cap.
iiii. John is circumcised i. book. cap, v. John had the hand of God with him
i. book. cap. v John was called a prophet i. bo. cap. v John gave knowledge of
salvation. i. book cap. v. John inhabited the desert. i. bo. cap, xii. John a
witness of light i. bo. capitulo. xiiii. John preached the baptyme of
penance. i. book. cap. xiiii. John's meat and garments. i. book. capitu.
xiiii. John's confession of Christ i. bo. catulo. xv. John baptized in Enon.
ii. bo. capitulo. ix. John rebuked Herod ii. book. capitulo. x. John is cast
into prison ii. bok. capitulo. x. John is more then a prophet ii. bo. capitulo.
xxxviii. John drancke no wine, ii. bok. capitulo. xxxviii. John is beheaded ii.
book, capitulo. liii. lix. John did no miracles. ii. book. capitulo. lxxix.
John was taken for a Prophet ii. bo. capitulo. cxxii. Jonas sign and token.
ii. b, ca. lxi. lxxxiiii Joy in heaven over a penitent sinner. ii. book. cap.
xciiii. Joseph Mary's husband i. bo. cap. vi. Joseph was a perfect man i. book.
ca. vi. Joseph was minded to put Mary from him. i. book. cap. vi. Judas was a
thief and had the bag. ii. bo. capitu. cxlii. Judas repented him and made
restitution. iii. bo. ca. xii. Judge not after utter appearaunce ii, book.
capitu. lxxiii. Jews meddle not with the Samari. tans ii. book. cap xlvii. the
Jews manner of buriynge iii. bo. capitu. xv.
K.
the Kingdom of heaven is at hand ii. book. cap. xi. the Kingdom of heaven
belongs to children ii. book. cap. xcix the Kingdom which is divided shall
be desolate. ii. bo. cap. lx the Kingdom of God comes not with outward
apearau^ce ii. b. ca. cxxviii Kings have dominion over the people. iii. bo.
cap. vi.
L.
the Laborers are few ii. bo. cap. xli the Labourer is worthy of his reward.
ii. book. cap. xli. Labor not for the meat that shall perish. ii. book. cap.
lvi. the Law judges no man before he be heard ii. book. cap. lxxiii. Lazarus
in Abraham's bosom ii. book capitulo. cv. Lazarus came forth ii, bo. cap. cvi.
Legion of deuyls ii. bok. cap. xxxi. Lend to him that will borowe. ii. bo.
capitu. xx. Lend, and look for no gain ii bo. capitulo. xx. Let slyp your
nets ii. book. cap. xii. Let the dead burye the dead ii. bo. capitulo. xxxi.
Let no man put a sonder that god has coupled. ii. bo. ca. xcviii. Life is more
then meat ii. book. capitulo. lxv. Leave al things for Christ's sake. ii.
book. cap. lxxii. Lord if thou will thou canste heal me. ii. book. ca. xxvi.
Lord open unto us. ii. bok. capitulo. lxix. cxxxix. Lord remember me, etc.
iii. bo. ca. xiiii. Lord go from me. ii. bo. ca. xii. Lose thy life and find
it ii. book. capitulo. xxvii. lxxxvii. cxxxvii. Love your enemies. ii. book.
cap. xx. Love together as I have etc. iii. b. c. vii. to Love God and thy
neighbor is more then al offeringes ii. bo. ca. cxxviii. Look what ye have
done to one of these etc. ii. book. cap. cxl. Lottes upon Christ's vesture iii.
book. capitu. xiii. Lust not after another man's wife, ii. book. cap. xix.
M.
Man lives not only by bread ii. bo. capitu. iii. Manne must be borne of
water and the spirit ii. bo. cap. viii. Man has nothing but from heaven. ii.
book. cap. ix. Man shall be rewarded according to his deeds. ii. book. cap.
lxxxvii. Man and wife one s^^ash ii. b. ca. xcviii. Manna. ii. book. cap. ivi.
Many are called few are chosen ii. bo. ^pitu. ciii. cxxv. Make you friends with
unrighteous Mammon. ii. book, cap. iiii. Mary is blessed among women. i. book.
capi. iii. iiii. Mary found grace with God i. b. ca. iii. Mary bare the son of
God i. bo. ca. iii. Mary the Lords handmayden i. bo. capitulo. iii. Mary
visits Elizabeth i. bo. ca. iiii. Mary the mother of God i. book. capitulo.
iiii. vi. Mary for her belefe is blessed i. bo. capitulo. iiii. Mary was married
to Joseph i. bo. capitulo, vi. Mary was with child by the holy Ghost. i. bo.
cap. vi. Mary is delivered i. bok. ca. vii. Mary and Joseph seek Jesus i. bo.
ca. xiii. Mary found Jesus in the Temple. i, book. capi. xiii. Mary Magdalene
kysseth Christ's feet. ii. book. ca. xliiii. Mary has chosen a good part ii.
bo. capitulo. xlv. Mary Magdalene was delyuerd of seven deuyls. ii. bo. cap.
xlix. Martha. ii. book. cap, xlv Master here is good being for us ii. bo
capitulo. lxxxviii. Mathewes conversion ii. book, capitulo. xvii. Mathewe made
Jesus a feast ii. bo. capitulo. xxiii. Men love darkness more then light. ii.
book. cap. viii. Men of Niniue ii. book. capitu, lxi. Men's diverse opinion of
Christ ii. bo. capitu. lxxiii, Messiah. ii. book. cap. v. Mynstrels. ii. bo.
ca. xxx. iiii. My yoke is easy ii. bo. cap. xlii. My soul is heavy unto
death iii. bo. capitulo, ix. the Mouth speaks of the abundance of the
heart ii, bo. cap. xxv. lx. Mastarde seed, the least of all seeds. ii.book.
cap. v. Much shall be required of him that has much. ii. bo. ca. cxxxviii.
N.
Naaman is cleansed of his Leprosve. ii.book. cap. lii. Nathaniels confession
of Christ ii. bo. capitulo. v. Names of the twelve Apostles ii. book. capitulo.
xxxvii. Nazareth brings nothing that good is. i. book, cap. v. the Nazarites
thruste Christ out of their city. ii. bo. cap. lii. Nicodemus came to Jesus
by night. ii. book. cap. viii. No man has seen God i. bo. ca. xv. No man can
serve two masters ii. bo. capitu. xxiii. ciiii. No man puts new wine in
old bottels ii. book. cap. xxxiii. No man comes to Christ except he be
drawn. ii. book. cap. lvi. No man has hindered us ii. be. cap. ciii. No man
knows of the latter day ii, book. cap. cxxxvii. No man comes to the father
but by me. iii. book. cap, vii. No man shall take your joy from you iii. book,
tap. viii.
O.
Offenses are to be avoided ii. bo. ca. xc. Of thine own mouth I judge thee
ii. book. cap. cxii. Old wine is better then new ii. bo. book. ca. xxxix. One
thing is necessary. ii. bo. cap. xlv. One sows another reapeth. ii. bo.
capitulo. xlvi. Out of Galile arises no prophet. ii. book. cap. lxxiii.
Osanna in ye highest ii, b. ca. cxvii. cxviii.
P.
Parable of the sower. ii. bo. capit. xlxix Parable of tares and of mustard
sede. ii. book capitulo. l Parables of y^ treasure, perle, and net. ii. book
capitulo. li Parable of sheep. ii. book. cap. xcii. xciiii Parable of the
Pharise and Publycane. ii. book capi. cxx. Parable of the vineyard. ii. b. ca.
cxxiiii Parable of the marriage. ii. bo. capi. xxv Parable of the ten virgins
and ten talentes ii. book capit. cxxxix Peter's mother in law. ii. book. cap.
xvi Peter walked upon the sea. ii. bo. cap. lv Peter has power to bind and to
lowse. ii. book cap. lxxxvi. xcv Peter rebukes Christ. ii. bo. ca. lxxxvi
Peter is reproved. ii. book. capit. lxxxvi Peter followed afar of. iii. book.
capitulo. xi. Peter wept bytterly. iii. book. capit. xi Peace be unto this
house. ii. book. capitulo. xxxvii. xli Peace be with you. iii. book. capitu.
xxi Perfectness requires three things. ii book. capit. c Pitchard of water.
iii. book ca. ix Pilate lefe tenant of Iewry. i. book capitulo xiiii. Pilate
and Herod were made friends. iii. book capi xii Pilates wife. iii. book capit.
xii Pilate washed his hands. iii. bo. ca. xii Physician heal thy self. ii.
bo. capit. lii Plants not planted by God, shall perysh. ii. book. cap lxxx
Pluck the beam out of thine eye. ii book ca. xxiiii Poor men ye shall have
always. ii. book cap. cxli^i^ Possess no gold. ii. bo. cap. xxxvi Poole of
Siloe. ii. bo cap. lxxvii. Pray secretly. ii. book capi. xxi Pray, but babble
not much. ii. book capitulo xxii Pray the Lord of the harvest to send mo
laborers. ii. bo. cap. xli pray alwayse and leave not of. ii. book capitulo
cxxxviii Pray that your flyte be not in the witer. ii. book. ca. cxxxiiii
Praise not thy self. ii. book. capi. lxxvi Prophet is nothing set by in
his own country. ii. book. ca. xlvii. lii Prophets cannot perysh without
Jerusalem. ii. book. capitu. lxix Pharisees and their properties. ii. book
capitulo cxxx. cxxxi Power from above. iii. bo. ca. xii Put up thy swearde.
iii. bo. ca. ix
Q.
the Queen of the south. ii. bo. cap. lxi
R.
Rabby. ii. book capitu. v Racha. ii. book. capi. xix Rachel bewayleth her
children. i. book capit. xi Rebuke thy brother between him and the alone. ii.
book. cap. xcv the Reward of those that leave all and follow Christ. ii. bo.
capitu. cii Receive Christ, and receive his father. ii. book cap. v Receive
the holy ghost, iii. book. capitulo. xxi Receive a prophet and have the
reward of a prohete. ii. b. capi. xxvii Remove hence to yonder place. ii. bo.
capitulo lxxxix Reconcyle thy self to thy brother, and then offer thy gift.
ii. book. capitulo. xix Resist not euel. ii. bo. capitu. xix Rejoice that your
names are written in heaven. ii. bo. capitu. xlii Rest upon the Sabbath day.
iii. book capitulo xv a Brusen Read. ii. book. cap. lviii Rich men come
hardlye to heaven. ii. book. ca. c. ci Rise we shall at the latter day. ii.
book capitulo cvi Rivers of water of life. ii. bo ca. lxxiii
S.
Saduces deny the resurrection. ii. book capitulo cxxvii Salt that has lost
his saltness. ii book capi. xix. lxxii Salute no man. ii. bo. capi. xl
Sa^omo^s temple was a buylding. xliii years. ii. book capi. vii Solomon was not
clothed like unto a Lyly. ii. bo ca. xxiii. lxiiii Sandales. ii. bo. cap.
xxxvii Satan knew Christ. ii, book. capitulo lviii. xiii. xvi Satan fell
down from heaven. ii. bo. capitulo xlii Satan was a muderer from the
beginning. ii. book. ca. lxxvi Satan is the father of lies. ii. book capitulo
capit. lxxvii Satan has desired to syfte you as wheat iii. book ca. lxxvi
Scripture cannot be broken. ii. book. capitulo. lxxix Seek the kingdom of God.
ii. bok. capitulo xxxii. lxv Search the scripture. ii. book. capit. lxvi.
Seventy and two disciples. ii. book. ca. xli Servant that knows his ma^ers
will. ii. book. cap. cxxxviii Seek ye the living among the deade^ iii. book
capi. xvi Shake the duste of your fete. ii. book capitulo. xxxvii. xli. Shall
Christ at his coming find faith upon earth? ii. b. ca. cxxxviii Show thy
self to the Priest. ii. bo. capitulo. xxvi. Sheep among Wolves ii. book ^.
capitulo. xxxvii. xii. Sheep which are not of this fold. ii. book. capi.
lxxviii. She cries after us ii. book. cap. lxxxi. She has done a good work
upon me. ii. book. cxlii. Syrenus lifetenaunte of Siria i. bo. capitulo. vii,
Simon a just man. i. book. capitulo. x. Sit in the lowest rowme. ii. bo. cap.
lxx, Simon of Siren. iii. bo. capitulo. xiii. Signs which shall follow them
that believe. iii. bo. ca. xxv. Soldiers do no violence. i. bo. ca. xiiii.
Soul take now thy rest, eat, drink, and be merye. ii. bo. ca. lxv Sun and
Moon shall loose their light ii. book. ca. cxxxvi. Sorrow shall be turned
into joy iii. book. cap. viii. Slau^ders must needs come ii. b. ca. xcii.
Spirits have another fleash nor bones iii. book. cap. xxi. Stones shall cry.
ii. book. capitulo. cxvii. thy Speech bewrays thee. iii. book. capitu. xi.
T.
Take no thought what ye shall speak. ii. book. cap. xxxvii. Take thy cross,
and follow ii. b. ca. xxxvii. Take heed how and what ye hear ii. book. cap.
xlix. Take no thought for your life. ii. bo. capitulo. lxiiii Take no thought
for living. ii. book capitulo cxxxvii Take this, and divide it among you iii.
book. cap. ii Take eat, this is my body which shall be given for you. iii. bo.
cap. iiii Tell me where thou haste laid him. iii. book ca. xvii The taxacion
of the world. i. book. capitulo. vii The holy spirit in a bodily shape. ii.
bo. cap. i The tree is known by his fruit. ii. bo. capitulo liiii The people
would have made Christ a king. ii. book capi. xxv. The work of God. ii. bo.
capi. lvi The testimony of two is true. ii. book. capitulo lxxv The things
which defyle man. ii. bo. capitulo lxxx The son of man shall be delivered to
the hie prestes. ii. bo capi. cviii The son of man is come to save men's
souls. ii. bo. cap. cx The son of man came not to be served, but to serve.
ii. bo. capi. cxi The son of man must be lift up. ii. book capit. cix. The
greatest among you shall be as the youngest. iii. book cap. vi The holy spirit
shall rebuke the world of. iii. things. iii. bo. cap. viii Thabita cumy. ii.
bo. capi. xxxiiii That defyleth not that goes into the mouth. ii. book capi.
lxxx That which is hie among men, is abomination before God. ii. bo. cap.
ciiii This is my beloved son. ii. bo cap. i They have no wine. ii. book ca.
vi They that were soft clothing. ii. book capitulo xxxviii They se and decerne
not. ii. bo. cap. xlxix They are last which are first. ii. book capitulo lxix
There are. vi. days where in men ought to work ii. bo. ca. lxviii There is but
one God. ii. bo. ca. cxxviii Thorns choke the word. ii. book. capitulo xlix
Thou shalt not tempte thy Lord God ii. book capitu. iii Thou shalt only
worship and serve God. ii. book. capit. iii Thou art Christ the son of the
living God. ii. bo. ca. lxxxvi Thou ar^ Peter, etc. ii. book capitulo. lxxxvi.
Tidings of great joy. i. bok. capitulo. vii. Tribute money. ii. book.
capitulo. cxxvi. Truth shall make a man fre ii bo. capitulo. lxxvi. Thou fool.
ii. book. cap. xix. Touch me not iii. book. cap. xvii. To day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. iii. book. cap. xiiii. the Tower of Siloe. ii. book.
capitulo. lxvii. Two or three witnesses stablythe all matters. ii. book. cap.
^cv. Two shall lie in one bed. ii. book. capitulo. ^xxxvii.
U. W.
the Uayle of the Temple. iii. book. capitulo. xiiii. Virtue went out of
Christ. ii. bo. capitulo. xviii. Walcke in the day, and thou shalt not
stumble. ii. book. cap. cvi. Wash before meat ii. book. cap. lxxx. Watch and
pray. ii. b. ca. cxxxvii. cxxxviii. Water of life ii. book. cap. xlvii. We have
seen merueylous things to day ii. book. capitu. xxxii. We have pyped unto
you. ii. bok. capitulo. xxxviii. We are unprofitable servants ii. book. cap.
xx. We receive according to our deeds iii. book. cap. xiii Wedding garmente.
ii. book. capitulo. cxxv. Weep not over me, but over your children. iii. book.
ca. xiii. What women did offer when they were churched. i. bo. cap. x. Weeping
and gnashynge of teeth. ii. bo. ca. xxvii. l. li. lxix. cxxv. cxxxviii. cxxxix.
We have labored all night ii. book. capitulo. xii. Weep not ii. book. cap.
xxviii. xxxiiii. What man ought to do, to inherit everlasting life. ii.
book. cap. xliii. What is that among so many. ii. bo. capitulo. liiii. What
the father does, that does the son. ii. book. capitulo. lxvi. What can a
man give to redeem his soul. ii. book. cap. lxxxvii. Wise men come to adore
Christ, and of their oblation. i. book. cap. ix. Wise as Serpents. ii. book.
capitulo. xxxvii. the Wydowes offering ii. bo. ca. cxxxii. Why was not this
ointment sold? ii. book. cap. cxlii. Why speak thou them by Parables, ii,
book, capit. xlix.l. Why Christ came down from heaven. ii. book. ca. lvi. Who
so does evil hates the light. ii. book. cap. xiiii. Who are the least in
the kingdom of God. ii. book. capitulo. xix. Who so puts his hand to the
plow. ii. book. cap. xxix. Who can forgive sins, but only God. ii. book.
capitulo. xxxii. Who so has ears to hear let him hear. ii. book. ca.
xxxviii. xlix. l. Whosos has, shall have more. ii. bo. capitulo. xlix. cxii.
Who so synneth, is the servant of sin. ii. bo. cap. lxxvi. Who so keeps
Christ's word, shall not dye. ii. bok. cap. lxxvi. Who so curses father and
mother, shall dye. ii. book. ca. lxxx. Who so loves his life shall lose it ii.
bo. capitu. cxix. Who so is of the truth, hears my voice. iii. book.
cap.xii. Who so believes and is baptized, shall be saved. iii. book. cap. xxv.
Whose sins so ever ye remytte. iii. book. capitu. xxi. Who shall roll away
the stone^ iii. book. cap. xvi. Who is y^ greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
ii. bo. ca. xcii. Woe unto the world because of slanders, ii. book. ca. xcii.
Woe unto him by whom slander comes. ii. bo. cap. xcii. Woe unto Pharisees and
Lawers. ii. bokoe. cap. cxxxi. the Worckemanne is worthy of his meat. ii. bo.
cap. xxxvii. Worship God in spirit. ii. bo. capitulo. xlvii. Worckes of the
world are evil ii. bo. capitu. lxxiii. Where I am there shall my servant
be. ii. book. cap. cxix. With out me ye can do nothing. iii. book. capitu.
viii. Whom soever I kiss, the same is he. iii. book. capit. ix. the Whole
need no Physician. ii. book. capitulo. xxxiii.
Y.
Yea, yea, nay, nay. ii. bokoe. capitulo. xix. Ye shall seek me, and not
find me. ii. book. cap, lxxiii. Ye shall weep and lamente. iii. bo. capitulo.
viii.
Z.
Zachary walcked in the commandments of God. i. book. capitulo. ii. Zachary
was smytten domme. i. bo. capitulo. ii. Zachary speaks again, i. book.
capitulo. v. Zachary prophecieth. i. book. capitulo. v. Zacheus. ii. book.
cacapitulo. cxii. Zebedes chyldrens peticion. ii. book. Capitulo. cxi.
FINIS.
Imprynted at London by Nycolas Hill, for Wyllyam Seres, and Abraham Uele.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno Domini. 1553.


