A DEFENSE OF THE CENSVRE, GYVEN UPON TWO BOOKS of william Charke and
Meredith Hanmer mynysters, which they wrote against M. Edmond Campian priest,
of the Society of Jesus, and against his offer of disputation.

Taken in hand since the death of the said M. Campian, and broken of again
before it could be ended, upon the causes set down in an epistle to M. Charke
in the begyninge.

Sap. 3. The sovvles of the just are in the hand of God, and the torment of
death shall not touch them: they seemed to the eyes of foolish men to dye,
but nevertheless they rest in peace. An. 1582.

Cum Priuilegio.

The corrector of the prynt unto the gentle reader.
TO the end this page should not go emptye, I have presusemed (without the
Authors knowledge) to put down for young scholars the true declynynge of a
Novvne, HERETIC: whereof we have more experience in these days than old
Gramma^ians had. I may chance hereafter to set furthe some examples for
declaration of every part hereof: but in the mean space, he that will read
but this treatise follovvynge, shall see the most points verified in M.
Charke and his companyons.

NOMINIS HAERETICI REALIS DECLINATIO.
Singulariter Nominatiuo Superbus. Genitiuo Temerarii. Datiuo Mendaci.
Accusatiuo Pertinacem. Vocatiuo Seditiose. Ablatiuo Atheo, vel Libertino.
Pluraliter: Hij and hae Impudentes, per omnes casus.
In English thus.
The singular number, AN HERETIC
In the Nominative or first case (to begi^ne withal) (he is Provvde. In the
Genetiue case he growethe Malepert. In the Datyue case he becomes a ^yar. In
the Accusative case he waxethe Obstinate. In the Vocative or preaching case he
is Seditious. In the Ablative or endinge case he proueeth an Atheist, or else a
Lybertine.
The plural number, In both genders, Impudent, throughowte all cases,
THE SETTER FORTH OF THIS book unto William Charke Minister.
IT may be (M. Charke) that you have expected now somewhat long, or at
leastwyse remained in some suspense of this defense of the Censure, or
reioynder to your replye. Which Ce^sure, being written (as I have heard) in
eight or nyen days space at the most: this defense thereof has now had the
stay, more than of so many months, before it come to light. But the cause
thereof is easy to Judge, especially to you, which (for the most part,) are
priuye to the same.

In general, every one can imagine by him self, how difficult a thing yt is
in England at this day, for a Catholic man to write any book: where nether
liberty, nor rest, nor library, nor conference, nor being is permitted him.
And in particular, thus much I must add, which you alredie in part do
know: that soon after the publishinge of your reply to the Censure, the
Author thereof addressed him self to a defense, and had in great part
dispatched the same, ready for the printe, in such sort as the rigorous time
of your persecution permitted him. But God sufferinge at that very instant;
that the said print so long sought, and much feared by you; should be taken:
there was taken, lost, and dispersed ther-withall; not only all furniture
there ready for this book, but also for sundry other things, partly printed;
and partly in printing; concerning our defense of truth and equity, against
your falsehood and violent oppressions.

This disturbance, and loss being fallen out by gods most holy and fatherly
permission: and the Author of the Censure having nether time, nor place, nor
books, nor leisure to begin again, nor any hope of print when he should
have done the same: being also necessarily called away at that very time, to
a place somewhat farof, upon urgent business: he resolved utterly to give
over the said attempt of defense, partly upon the difficulties now alleged,
and partly for that in very deed your reply (M. Charke) seemed sufficientlye
to answer yt self, being so obscure in many places, as most men without the
Censure might not understand yt: and so weak otherwise, as yt needed little
confutation of others. These were some causes: but in deed (as I understand)
the principal and chief cause was, for that M. Campian (the greatest
occasion, and subject of the Censure) was now also even at that time fa^len
into your hands, according as you had long wished: and therefore it was to be
looked, that according to reason, and all your own promises, he should be
disputed withal openly, publicly, and freely: and so the chief matter of
the Censure, and your replye (without any more writing) dispatched and taken
away.

But after, when it came to hearing of the world abrode^ how courteously you
had used this learned man with torments, both before and after his
disputatio^s: and how without all indifferency or law of reasoning, you
handled him in your conference in the Tower: and how finally you made him
away by cruel death, without any show, or shadow of particular crime
committed by him, against prince or country: and that your self (M. Charke)
as a conqueror of your adversary, followed him in person to the place of his
Martyrdom, with bygge looks, stern countenance, proud words, and merciles
behauyour, (for all these things were commonly reported:) true it is, that
diverse godly men were moved therwithall (and the Author of the Censure, among
other) to take in hand again the Answer of your book: as well for the honor
of Christ his martyr now in rest: as also for declaration to the world, of
what value you are in reason, learning, and weight of argument by writing:
which are so fearse and violent upon gods Saints at home, in death and
torments: and so Pompeous in gate and speech unto the people: for gatheringe,
or retayninge some credit unto your cause.

This (I say) shall appear partelye by this book. And for these
considerations was it taken in hand, after the late death of Good M. Campian.
Mary yet, (as it was like enough to fall out) your spies, searchers, and other
persecutours disturbed the writer thereof, before he could end the same: as may
appear to the reader by the sight heerof. For this part being come to my
hands, and perceiving that the author could not (^or this present) go
forward with the rest. I thought it best to bestow this upon you, (M Chark)
thereby to find you occupied, (if it please you to answer it) until the other
part also come to be set forth.

Thus brokenlie we are enforced to deal, through the extremity of time, as
you see. VVherin, you having gotten the start before us in the favor of our
Prince, you follow the same with such vehemency, and straytnes, as you allow
us no one jot, either of curteousie, or humanity, or of reasonable
indifferency. You exclude us from speech, conference, writing, printing,
disputing, or any other dew trial of our cause. You watch, spy, search,
examine, and persecute euerywhere. You attache, drive away, putt in prison,
rent on rack, put to death those which speak, or write, or stand in defense
of truth against you. You leave no Innes, tauernes, fields, stables, barnes,
douecotes, or palaces unsearched for us. And how then is it possible to answer
you by writing? Or what maruayle is there, if we offer you some times half a
book for the whole? I doubt not but what soever extremity or cruelty you use
(which shall be no greater, nor longer than God will permit:) yet you are sure
always to be answered by some means or other, that God will provide.
Hitherto you have had little quiet repose in your intrusio^ upon gods Church,
we contynuynge still our claym^ and title. And hereafter you are like daily to
have less, (as I hope) until your heresy be rooted out again, as all her
sisters have been heretofore.

It is a great argument to the people, that the credit of your cause is now
crushed even in your own conceytes, seeing you fly openly, and without shame,
all kind of quiet trial what soever: and with furye move the magistrate
only to violence against us. Which though we be ready to be are with all
humiltie, according as God shall give us patience: yet will we never yield to
you thereby in your heresies: but in the myddest of our afflictions will we
resist your falshoode, more than before. This (I think) you saw in the late
martyrdom of good M. Campian, and his companions: who, though they dyed
most joyfully, protesting their innocence in all and singular the slanders
devised against them: though (I say) they protested pure innocence therein,
both in thought word and deed: and that, upon the eternal damnation, or
salvation of their own sowles: though also they forgave most frankly from
the very bottom of their hearts, all their unjust accusers, condemners,
tormentours, executioners, and you also ministers, who of their death and
torments were the only, or principal instigatours: yet did they amyddest
all that humility, modesty, and Christian charity, detest with all possible
vehemency of their sowles, all and singular your false and foul heresies: and
so dyed most constant, pure, and innocent martyrs of their Lord and Master
Jesus Christ. Whose blood I dowbt not, but will fight against your errors
and impiety, many hundred years after both you are past this world together.
And albeit, if they had lived (especially two of them) being endued with such
gifts, and rare parts, as they were, (which with you were great causes of
hastenyng their deaths,) they might (no dowt) have done much service in gods
Church, and hurt to your cause: yet could they never have done it so strongly,
as they have, and do, and will do by their deaths: the cry whereof works
more forciblie both with God and man, tha^ any books or sermons, that ever
they could have made. Wherefore, I can say no more, but that they were well
bestowed upon you. You have used the^ to the best. Our Lord and his holy name
be blessed therefore. And I beseech him of his infinite mercy to pardon your
great offenses i^ the pouring out of their blood.

And now to speak a word or two (M. Charke as to your own person in
particular: there are tw^ things, which principally in this matter concern
yo^ The one is your writing here answered: the other; your behauyour and
demeanor toward your aduesarie, after that by gods permission he came to be
with some reach of your ministerial power and authortie. The one of these
shall so^ewhat declare the oath. For towching the first, the discrete reader
shall easili^ learn by this book, that what vaunt so ever you mak^ unto your
friends, or how great soever your owt-facing of M. Campian might seem to be
in the Tower (...) London, by reason of your high place, gaye apparel, great
words, assistance of friends, countenance ^f authority, applause of
protestants standing by: yet sh^l it appear, that you are not that man in
deed, either f^r substance of learning, or fidelity in dealyng, which y^u
would be content to be taken for in the world abro^e. For, as for learning,
there are showed so many broad examples here, of your gross ignorance, and
that in^erye common matters, both of divinity, and philosophy: as no man
that has judgment can frame my other opinion of your skyll therein, than as of
a t^ing utterly ungrounded in any of these two sciences: wherein it is well
known that M. Campian was most excellent, and co^sequentlye, you had little
cause to seek triumph over him, as you did, in this matter.

Mary as touching the second, which is false dealing to deceive: you may have
the principality, not only over him, who had (to say the truth) no talent
at all therein: but even above the chief masters of your own side, most
expert in that faculty. For I assure you, that of all shameless men that ever I
read (whereof this age, God amend them, has brought forth many) you may wear
the garland, for both audacitie, and constancy in auouchyng open untruths
against your own conscience. The treatise following will make this plain, y
almost infinite examples. Yet one or two (for a taste) will not omit to touch
in this place.

Martin Luther, after his apostacy from the Ca^^olique church, gave counsel
to all good wives, that ^ad cold husbands, See this handled at large
afterward in the defense page 56. and 57.
to lie pryuilye with the next of ^ynne, or other that were of stronger
complexion. And because he was yet in some fear of the pope, if he soulde
openly have putt in execution this doctrine: h only counseled husbands for
the time, to give teir secret co^sents hereunto. Mary afterward, when ^artin
became so strong as he feared the Pope no mo^e, for that he was now pope of
Germanye him self: ^e said, that now he would give other counsel ^owt this
matter. Here M. Charke breaks of: and ^^lleth into a sharp and bitter
inuectyue against the ^ensurer, for charging Luther with a foul doctrine^ ^at
after he recanted. This seems a very reasonable dfence. But what are the
words that immediatlye foow in Luther? forsoothe, that now he would do
w^^se than before: for now he would compel the poor hubandes to grant there
wives that liberty, or else wo^lde he tugge them by the locks of the head. And
ca^ there be any more shameless dealing than this of M. Chark? has that man
any conscience (trow you) wh^^e against his own knowleige would put this
decey^ in printe? here can be no ignorance: for the words followed
immediately, which of purpose he left out. What conscience then has this
man in defending his cause?

See of this after: page 120.
An other example may be this. There was a controversy between the Censurer and
M. Charke, whether concupiscence after baptism be sin in the regenerat,
without consent. And the Censurer, to prove that it is not, brings S.
Augustins Authority in many plain places: whereby M. Chark being sore
oppressed, fyndeth no other relief of his credit with the reader, but to forge
a place of S. Austen to the contrary, by corruption: and so he does For where
as S. Augustine says, that concupiscence is not so forgyuen in baptism, that
it is not: meaning thereby that it is not so taken away by baptism, but that it
remaynith still to tempt us: M. Charke to deceive the reader foysteth in this
word (sin) to S. Austens text, reciting his words thus: Concupiscence is
not so forgyuen in baptism, that it is not sin: By which addition of the
word (sin) the matter seems to stand clear on his side. And this also
can not be excused by ignorance: but shows open and wilful malice in the
man.

I pass over many of these and such like tryck^s: which can not proceed of
negligence, simplicity, or ignorance: but must needs be effects of
sett-malice. As where he reportinge diverse untruths against the Jesuits out
of Gotuisus, (as he now says:) concealed the author in his first book. And
now, though upon necessity he confess the same: yet fynding the things there
reported, in his conscience to be false: where as his Author cites always
two Jesuits books for proof of the same: that is, Ce^sura Coloniensis,
(which is not to be had in England,) and Canisius his great Catechism (which
every man may have and read:) M. Chark quoteth the page always in Censura
Coloniensis, which he is sure can not be seen: and concealeth the page cited
likewise by his Author in Canisius: for that his reader turning to Canisius his
places, should find the falshoode both of M. Charke and his Author. And
Sometimes also, when Gotuisus did not belie the Jesuits sufficientlye: M.
Charke without blushing will falsify his words, to make them more odious: as
where Gotuisus his words are, that the Jesuits say the scripture is as it
were a nose of wax: Vide postea Ar^.^
M. Chark says, their words are, the scripture is a nose of wax. Infinite
such things you shall find in the treatise foloweing: which proves
manifestlye that point whereof I spoke before: to wytt, that M. Charke is a man
of no synceritie in matters of controversy: but purposelye bent, both
wittinglie and willingly, by all means possible to deceive. And thus much (M.
Chark) concerning your writing.

As for your other behauyour toward M. Campian in the Tower of London, and
else where: I mean not greatly to stand upon: It was such as might be looked
for at a man's hands of your making, or degree The Censure somewhat noted your
inciuilitie in words, which you had uttered against him before in your book.
But that was nothing to the contemptuous usage of so learned a man in open
audience, with barbarours threatenyng of that further cruelty, which then you
had in mind, and now have putt in execution upon him. But above all other
things, that was most ridiculous, and fytt for a-stage, which you thought was
excellent, and became you well: and that was your often turning to the people
and requesting them to rejoice, and thank the Lord, that he had given you such
an argument against the papists, as now you had to propose^ And then when
great expectation was moved, and the argument came forth: it proved not worth
three eggs in May: for that M. C^mpian dispatched it oftentimes in less than
half three words. These are the comedies that you exercise to get applause
of the people vvithall. For which cause also, you had M. Norton the
Rack-maister at your elbovve, to repeat and urge your argument for you to the
purpose. Surely it is pity that you durst not make these fevve disputations
publik, where more men might have laughed, and been witnesses of your folly:
especially of that in the end: when being now brought to a non plus in
argueing, and thervpo^ the people beginning to depart: you (M. Charke) caused
the doors to be shutt, and no man to be let out, until with one consent, they
had joined with you in prayer to thank the lord for your victory that day
gotten upon M. Campian.

O M. Chark, how greedy are you of a little vainglorie? and how vain are the
ways by which you seek yt? think you that men have no Judgment in the
woorld abroad? Trow ye not that many smylde in their sleeves to behold this
hypocrisy? no, no, if you had parted with M. Campian, but at an even hand: as
you joined with him, with all inequality: we should have had books of Triumph
set ^oorth, before now. And this secret of yours all the people of England
does know. Doctor Fulke did but look into vvisbyche castle the last year
past, See afterward in the defense page 2.
and framed to him self but a certain imagination of a victory, for that
those learned prisoners contemned his conference: and behold he printed
presently a pamphlett in his own praise, as after is shevved. And what then
would you and your brethren have done abovvt these disputations with M.
Campian, if you had thought yt any way able to abide the view? And yet (as I
said) you know the inequality, vvherby you dealt with that man, being but
one, vnbookt: unprovided, vvearyed with impriso^ment, and almost dismembered
with the rack, threatened and terrified with death to come: appointed only
to answer, and never to oppose. All this you know, and the world both
knovveth and meruaileth at yt abroad. Mary we marvel not, who know your
purses. For that we are sure, and dare auowe to your faces, that you will
never deal with us at even hand, or upon equal conditions, while you live.

And here (M. Charke) because we are now fallen into this matter: I am in the
name of all my fellow Catholics to renew our public challenge of equal
disputation to you, and to all your brother ministers again. You see M.
Campian is gone, whom you named in this matter our only Champion. You see
also that M. Sherwyn is made away with him, whom you are wont to say (for
more abasement of the other) to have been far better learned than M. Campian
him self. But how soever that was, both of them have you dispatched, and
thereby (in your opinion) greatly weakened our cause. Yet notwithstanding we are
the same men that we were before: yea much more desirous of this trial than
before. Wherefore, we request you now at length, yea we conjure you, either for
truth sake, if you seek yt: or for your own credites sake, if ye will
retain it: that you yeald us after so much suit and supplication, some equal
trial, either by writing, preaching, or disputing. There is no reason in the
world (but only fear) that may move you to deny us this our request. For
the reason [of state] which you allege (M. Charke) in your replye is most
vain. For what can a peaceable disputation granted us for religion, indaunger
your state: but only (that you would say) that this disputation may chance
to discover your errors, and so make the hearers deteste your state of heresy?
For other danger there can be none to your state. And if you had the truth
with you (as you pretend) whose property is, the more to show her self, the
more she is examined: you should much increase your state, by this public
trial. For that you should both gain more to your parte^ by opennyng the
said truth: and also confirm many of your own side, that now iustlye do
waver upon this open discovery of your fear in trial.

Wherefore once again I say unto you ministers: obtain us this disputation,
though it be only but for a show, thereby to hold and maintain your
credites. We protest before God, that we seek it only for the trial of
Christ his truth: for search vvherof we offer our selves to this labor,
charges, and peril of life. We ask for our safties, but only such a
vvarrant from her Majesty, as the late Council of Trent did offer unto all
the protestants of the wolrd: whereof you have the copy with you. We will
come in what kind and number, at what time, to what place you shall appoint.
If you will have your own country me^: they are ready to come. If you will
have strangers to dispute in your universities before the learned only: there
shall not want. For your selves, we give you leave to call all the learned
protestants of Europ for your defense. We will take only our own country
men, if you permit us. We give you leave to oppose or defend: to appoint
questions: to choose out controversies: to begin or end at your pleasure: and
to use any other prerogatyues that you please: so that they impugn not the
indifferency of trial. What can you allege why you should not accept this?

If you had lever make this trial in other countries, than at home before your
own people, as perhaps you had: choose you what protestant state you list, and
procure us therein the foresaid saftie from the prince, and we will nether spare
labor nor cost, to meet you therein also. Or if this seem hard, or like you
not: then take you but the pains, some number of you, to come into any
Catholic kingdom, or country, where you best please: And we will procure
what security soever reasonable you shall demand for your persons: And more
then that, we will bear your expenses also, rather than so good a work shall
remain vnatte^pted. And if you can deuyse any other condition to be performed
on our parts, which I have left out: do you add the same: and we will agree
(by the grace of God) to fulfill it. If we offer you reason: than deal
somewhat reasonably with us again. For all the world will cry shame, and
begin to discredit you, if you will nether give nor take, upon so great odds
as here are offered you. If you dare not venture with disputatio^s: yet grant
us certain sermons, to encounter with you upon this matter. Or if that also be
to dangerous: procure us but a little passage for our books: at leastwyse you
(M. Charke) shall do an honorable act, to obtain license of free passage for
this book, until it be answered by you, to the end that men having read
this over, may be the better able to conceive your answer, when it comethe.

THE ANSWER TO THE PREFACE TOVCHINGE DISCERNINGE of Spirits.
Master Charke besides the matter in question, makes a praeface to the
reader, touching the utility, necessity, and way of tryeing spirits:
alleginge the words of S. John, whereby we are willed not to believe every
spirit, 1. John. 4.
but to try the spirits whether they be of God. Which (he says) he and his
fellows offer to do: and we refuse. But that this is clearlie false, and a
formal speech only, without truth or substance: our deeds do testify:
which are always (with indifferent men) as good as words. Our books are
extant, whereby we have called to trial all sectaries of our time, as they
rose up, and showed new spirits: as Luther, Corolostad, Swinglius, Munster,
Stankarus: and Calvin, whom our adversaries follow as one of the last. And now
in England, if we had not been willing or rather desirouse of this trial of
spirits: we would never have labored so much to obtain the same of our
adversaries, Which part more desirethe trial of spirits.
in free printing, preaching, or disputation: and much less would we have
adventured our lives in coming and offering the same to the^ at home, with so
unequal conditions on our side, as we have done, and do daily, for the trial
of truth. And if all these our offers and endeavors, joined with so many
petitions and supplications for trial, have obtained us nothing hitherto, but
offense, accusations, extreme rackings, and cruel death: me think M. Charke
had little cause to make this preface of our refusing trial, and their offering
the same: except it were only for lack of other matter, and to keep the
custom of sayeing somewhat in the beginning.

But perhaps M. Charke will say, that although we offer trial, yet not
such, nor by such means, as in his opinion is lawful, sure and convenient.
When we come to the co^bate: then remains it to be examined, which part
does allege best means: which shall be the argument of this my answer to this
preface. Who do offer best means of trial.
And I will endeavor to show, that all the means of trial which M. Chark and
his fellows will seem to allow in word, (for they offer none in deed) are
neither sure, possible, nor evident: but only mere shyftes to avoid all
trial: and that we (on the contrary part,) do not only allow, but also
offer, all the best and surest ways of trial that ever were used in Gods
church, for discerning an heretical spirit from a Catholic.

The only means of trial which M. Chark will seem to allow, Only
scripture.
is the scripture: whereto only he would have all trial referred: and that
which can not be tried therehence by him, must stand untried. And then, as if
we refused all trial of scripture, he uses his pleasure in speech against us.
But this is a shyft common to all such as M. Chark is. And the cause thereof I
will declare immediatlye. Li. 2. de nu. and concup. ca. 31. and li. 3. cont.
don. cap. 15.
S. Augustine does testifye it of the heretics of his time. And all the
sectaries of our days do make it plain by experience, referring the^ selves
in words each one to the holy scripture only, for maintenance ^f there
errors, and denyeing all other means of trial, whereby the true meaning of
scripture may be known.

The causes of this shyft in all new teachers are principally three. Three
causes of appealinge only to scripture
The first, to get credit with the people by naming of scripture, and to seem
to honor it more than their adversaries do, by referring the whole trial of
matters unto it. The second is by excluding councels, fathers, and auncitours
of the church, (who from time to time have declared the true sense of
scripture unto us,) to reserve unto them selves liberty, and authority to
make what meaning of Scripture they please, and thereby to give color to
every fancy they list to teach. The third cause is, that by chalenging of
only scripture, they may deliver them selves from all ordinances or doctrines
left unto us by the first pillars of Christ his Church, though not
expresselie set down in scripture: and thereby assume authority of allowinge
or not allowing, of comptrolling or permittinge, what soever likes or serves
their turns for the time. So, Martin Luther after he had denied all testimony
of man, besides him self, he begins thus about the number of Sacraments:
De captiui. Babylon. in initio.
Principio neganda mihi sunt septem sacramenta, and tantum tria pro tempore
ponenda. First of all I must deny seven sacraments, and appoint three for the
time. Marie this time lasted not long: for in the same place he says, that if
he would speak according to the use of only scripture, he has but one
sacrament for us: Cap. de Sacram.
that is, baptism. But yet the confession of Auspurge, which pretends to
follow Luther in all things, In aeditio. vlt. loc. co^.
does allow three, by only scripture. Mary Melancthon (which professes
only scripture more than the rest, and would seem to know Luthers meaning
best of all men, for that he lived with him) holds four, In institut.
by only scripture: and John Calvin holds two.

Com. in Amos.
Again, by only scripture John Calvin fownd the title, of head of the
church, in king henry, to be Antichristian, which now, our folovvers of
Calvin in England do find by only scripture to be most christian. Vide
Ench. Eck. and Luth. cont. latom. de incendiariis.
Mary yet the Magdeburgians by only scripture do condemn the same still. In
like sort, by only scripture the protestants defended a great while
against Catholics, that no heretics might be burned, or put to death,
whereof large books were written on both parts. But now our protestants in
England, D. Fulk against Bris. mot. pa. 98

Artic. 28. cont. loua^. to^. 2. vvitte^b ^o. 503.

Against Br. mot. pa. 82.


having burned some them selves, have fownd (as they write) that it is evident
by scripture that they may be burned. Luther by only scripture, found that
his folowers, and the Sacramentaries could not both be saved together: and
therefore he condemned the one for arrant heretics. Doctor fulke finds by
the same scripture, that both parts are good Catholics, and neither of them
heretics. Finally, how many things does M. VVhittgift defend against T.
Cartwright to be laufull by scripture^ as bishops, deanes, archedeacons,
officialls, holy days, In his defense of his answer to the admoninition.
and a hundred more, which in Geneua are holden to be flatt contrary to the
same scripture? So that this appellation to only scripture brings good case
in many matt^rs. For by this a man makes him self Judge, and Censurer, not
only of all fathers, doctors, councels, histories, examples, presidents,
customs, vsages, prescriptions and the like: but also of the books of
scripture, and sense it self, reserving all interpretation unto him self. But
Catholics, albeit they give the sovereignty to scripture in all things: yet
bindinge the^ selves to other things beside, for the better understanding of
the meaning of scripture, (as to councels, ancient fathers, tradition of the
Apostles, and primative church, with the like) are restrained from this
liberty of chopping and changing, affirming and denyeinge, allowinge and
misliking at their pleasures. For albeit they having wits as other men have,
might draw some problable appara^ce of scriptures to their own devises, as
every heretic hitherto has done: yet, the ancient interpretation of holy
fathers, and received consent of the church not alloweing the same, it would
prevail nothing. Mary the selfe-willed heretic, The adva^tage that
heretics have by only scripture.
that rejects all things but scripture, and therein allows nothing but his
own exposition, may run and range, and devise opinions at his pleasure: for
he is sure never to be convicted thereof, allowinge no man to be judge of his
interpretation, but only him self, or some of his own opinion. This we see
fullfilled in all heretics, and sectaries that now live: whom it is
impossible so to convince by only scriptures, but they will always have some
probable show, whereby to defend them selves and their own imaginatio^s. M.
Charke therefore chanting so much upon this point of only scriptures,
treads the pathe of his forefathers, and pleads for a pryuilege of ease:
which whether we will allow him or no, he enters upon it, of his own
authority, and draws scripture to every devise of his own brain, so
violently, as a man may take co^^^ssion to see yt. I shall have many examples
hereafter in this answer: but yet one, which is the chief ground of this his
preface, I can not omit.

1. John. 4.
After he had proved ovvt of Saint John, that we must try spirits, and not
believe every new spirit: (which is true:) he will needs allege owte of
the same Apostle a full and plain rule (as he terms it) whereby to discern
and try his and our spirits. The rule is this: 1. John. 4.
Every spirit which acknovvlegeth Jesus Christ to have come in flesh is of
God: and every spirit which dissolueth Jesus, is not of God, but of
Antichriste. Here now may be seen what difference there is in exposition of the
scriptures. For the ancient fathers interpreted this place, (as of it self it
is most evident) ^o be given as a rule against the Jews, which denied Christ
to have taken flesh: Diuersit^e of inte^pretations.
Also against Ebion, and Cherinthus, heretics, now gone into the world, as
forerunners of Antichriste, and dissoluing Jesus: that is, denieing his
godheade: and consequently denyeing the son of God to have come in flesh.
Tom. 7. vvittemb. Fol. 414.
Martin Luther interprets this place to be understood of M. Charke and his
fellows: sayeinge, That spirit is not of god but of Antichriste which
dissolueth Christ's flesh in the sacrament. But to us Catholics how can it be
by any devise wrested, who neither deny Christ to have come in flesh, nor
yet do dissolve the name of Jesus, by any doctrine of ours? But yet, Mark how
M. Charke interprets this place: and confess, that he has a singular grace
in abusing scripture.

M. Charks grace i^ interpretinge scriptures.
What soever spirit (says he) shall confess Christ to have come in flesh
as a prophet, alone to teach (as papists do not, teaching traditions besides
the written word:) also, as a king alone to rule (as papists do not,
defending the popes authority:) also, as a priest, alone to sanctifye (as
papists do not, upholding the Mass:) this spirit is of God, and the other of
Antichriste. Is it marvel if these men build what they list upon scripture,
when they can fovvnde so many absurdities upon one sentence thereof? I would
here ask first, whether M. Chark thinks that we exclude Christ, when we
allow prophets to teach under him kings to reign under him, preests to
sanctify under him, or no? If he think we exclude Christ: he is to fond to
reason against sensible men, knowing not what they hold. But if he think we
allow prophets, kings, and preests under Christ only, and in his name: how
can he call this the spirit of Antichrist? do not the scriptures allow
Prophets and teachers under Christ in the church? Ephesians. 4. Act. 5? Also
kings and rulers (though puritanes would have none) 1. Pet. 2. Act. 2? Also
may not priests sanctify by the word of God. 2. Timo. 4? How then are these
things accounted Antichristian? do not protestants teach the same? what deep
Mysteries of puritanisme are these, Their mysteries are the overthrow of all
governors: as M. VVhi^g. proves against M. Cartv^. Tovv^h^ng the mass.
Christ is a prophet alone, a king alone, a priest alone?

Again, I ask what do the traditions of Christ and his Apostles (for of
those only we talk when we compare them with scripture) impeache the
teaching of Christ and his Apostles? what does the spiritual authority of
the pope under Christ, diminishe the kingly power, and authority of Christ?
how does the preesthode of me^ as from Christ, or the sacrifice of the Altar
instituted by Christ, disgrace Christ's presthoode, or his sufficient sacrifice
ones for all offered on the cross? There is noted in the Margent, the epistle
to the Hebrews, Heb. 7. and 9.
where it is said: that, that sacrifice on the cross was ones offered for
ever for our rede^ptio^. Which we both grant and teach in that manner as
then it was done: but yet that impeacheth nothing this daily sacrifice of ours,
which must be in the church until the end of the word, (as Daniel
prophesied, Dan. 12.
) and that in every place amongst the Gentiles: (that is, in all the world)
is Malachie fore-tolde, Malac. 1. In declar^. Anath. 11. Au^. 20. co^. faust.
c. 21. Naz. ora^. 1. in Iulia^. Hom. 17.
being called, by Saint Cirill and other fathers, incruentum sacrificium: the
unbloody sacrifice: which being one and the self same with that which was
offered once upon the cross, is appointed by Christ to be offered daily in
remembrance and thanks giving for that bloody sacrifice, as Saint Chrisostom
does prove at large upon the epistle to the hebrews: whom, and other his like
if M. Chark and his fellows would not disdain to read and believe: they would
be a shamed to cavil, and blaspheme gods mysteries as they do. But for a
large and full answer of this common objection of theirs, owte of the epistle
to the hebrews, towching Christ once bloodilie offered for all: I refer the
reader, among many other, to certain particular ancient and learned
fathers, of the primative church; who do handle this objection, and answer
it of purpose. In ca 8 ep. ad Hebr.
The one is Theodoret bishop of Cyrus, who handles this question: why
Christians do now use to sacrifice in the new testament, seeing the old law
with all sacrifices were abolished, by the one sacrifice of Christ? Ep. 23.
ad Bonif.
The other is S. Augustine, who proposes this dowbt: how we sacrifice
Christ every day upon the Altar, seeing he is said to be sacrificed once for
all upon the cross? And then he answers it, both fully and largely, in
that sense as I have said before: So that this objection was a common thing in
the primative church, and commo^lie answered by every writer, which M. Chark
and his fellows do make so much a do about now, crieing out that we deny the
virtue of Christ's passion, the effects of his offices, and the like. See the
same answered also by Eusebius, li. 1. demonst. euang. cap. 6. and 10. And by
Theophilact. in cap. 5. ad hebr.

And so, having answered now the substance of all that which M. Chark has in
his preface, The adversary admits no trial.
I might here make an end, but that I have promised to show how we offer him
and his felows most reasonnable means of trial, and that they in deed
admit none at all. For what is it to name scripture in words, when all thee
controversy is about the sense thereof, wherein they admit no Judge but them
selves? if we bring scripture never so plain, yet will they shift it of, with
some impartinent interpretation: And what remedy or further trial have we
then? I will give an example or two for instruction of the reader in their
procedings. The most of the ancient fathers wrote books in praise of
virginity above wedlock, and used to prove it by the sayeing of Christ:
Math. 19.
There be Eunuchs which have gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven,
he that can take it, let him take it. Also by the words of S. Paul: 1. Cor. 7.
he that ioynethe his virgin in marriage does well, and he that ioynethe her
not, does better. Which words being alleged against Martyn Luther, Lib.
de votis Monast. in initio.
who preferred marriage (yea though it were of a vowed Nun) before virgnitie:
he answered it thus: that Christ by his words terrified men from virginity
and continence, and S. Paul by this speech did diswade them from the same. Now
what could be replied in this case trow you?

An other example may be towching S. John Baptist: Of S. John Baptist. Lu. 1.
and 3. Math. 3. Marc. 1.
of whom the scripture says, first, concerning his place of living, that he
was in the wilderness until the day of his appearing to Israel. Seco^dlie,
touching his apparel: John was appareled with the hears of Camels.
Thyrdlie, touching his diet: his meat was locustes and vvilde honey. Of
which three things, the old fathers of the primative Church did gather a
great and singular austeritie of S. John's life, and do affirm with all, that
Eremits and Monks, and other religious people did take their pattern of
strait living from him. Cent. 5 c. 6. page 711.
For which cause S. Chrysostom does often call S. John Baptist Monachum, and
principem vitae monastice: a monk, and prince of Monastical life: which
protestants being not able to abide, do rage marvelously against S.
Chrysostom: condemning him of rashenes and falsehode, for vsinge those terms,
wherefore they fall to interpret the alleged words of scripture far
otherwise, sayeinge: that by the desert wherein he lived until he began to
preach, is understood nothing else, Sarcer. in ca. 1. Lu. and mag. Cent. 1 li.
1. ca. 20.
, but his private life at home in his fathers own house. And for his
apparel (say they) of Camels hear, it was not strange apparel, but usual to
Mountain men, Mariorat. in ca. 3. Math.

Cytraeits in ca. 3. Math. COSMIOS. EVPORISTOS.


that is vndulata^ says another:) Water chamblet, hansome, and decent,
albeit somvvhat plentiful in that country. And lastly, touching his diet of
locusts and wild honey: it was no hard fare, (say they) for the locustes were
creuises, Ma. C^^. 1. l. 1. c. 4. et 6
cast away by the fishers of Jordan, as unclean by the law, but eaten of
John, by the liberty of the Gospel. And the wild honey was no unpleasant
thing as the fathers do imagine: In cap. 1. Math.
but it was (say Cossius and Strigelius) that pleasant Manna which
Apothecaires use to keep in their shoppes: In cap. 1. Marc.
So that, according to these men, all that austeritie of life, which the
scriptures so particularly do recounte, and all antiquity does wounder at,
in S. John Baptist, comes but to this: that he was brought up privately in
his fathers house, cladde in cha^blette, and fed with creuisses and sweet
Manna. What great hardness was this?

A third example may be about the controversy of real presence in the
sacrament: for which we bring plain words of scripture, out of four
diverse places of the new testament, Mat. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
where the same words are repeated without exposition or alteration: to
wit, hoc est corpus meum: this is my body: Which words did seem so plain
and clear for the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, to all
antiquity: as no man might without great offense, doubt thereof, as the words
of S. Ambro. Lib. 4. de sacram. c. 5
, and S. Ciril. Catach. 4
, are. And (as the same Ciril. Li. 4. in Io. cap. 13. In Ancorano.
, in an other place proves at large) to ask only quomodo how it may be, is
the part of an unbelieving Jew: saying God was able (as he says) as well to
do this, as to turn the rod of Moses into a serpent. To which purpose
also holy Epiphanius says, that albeit the host seem to us of a round
form and inse^sible: yet who soever believes it not to be the very true
body of Christ, seeing he has said it is: excidit a gratia and salute. Ho.
83. in Math. and 60. ad pop. Antioch.
Such a one is fallen from grace, and salvation. And S. Chrisostom says, we
must not believe sense and reason in this matter. Sed quoniam ille dixit, hoc
est corpus meum, credamus, etiamsi sensui absurdum esse videatur. But because
Christ has said this is my body, we must bele^ue it, although it seem
absurd to our sense: Hom. 24. in epist. ad Cor.
Hoc idem corpus cruentatum, lancea vulneratum, and quod in caelum extulit.
This is the very same body, whose blood was shed, and which was vvounded
with the spear, and which he carried up with him to heaven. All which
notwithstanding, our adversaries have found out a new exposition of these
words, this is my body, affirming, that it must be construed, this is only
the sign of my body. For the which construction, as they have neither
scripture, nor ancient father for their warrant or example: so agree they not
amongst them selves of this exposition. For Luther in his time, numbreth up
eight diverse and contrary expositions of Sacramentaries upon these words,
In confess breui. tom. 2. germ. fol. 257.

Claud de San. l. 1. rep. 1. de Euch.


coming from eight diverse spirits of the devil, as he affirms. And a
learned bishop of our time has gathered 84. given by diverse sacramentaries
upon the same: So that, once go out of the high way, and there is no end
of erringe.

And because I have here made mention of Doctor Luther, a man by M. Charks
opinion, illuminated singularly by the holy ghost, and compared to Elias by
the common phrase of all protestants: I will repeat here what he had revealed
to him by his holy spirit touching this interpretation of M. Charke and his
fellows.

First, he writteth thus to the protestants: The letter begins thus:
Charissimis in Christo ami cis and Christianis Argentinae.
that is, to the true Christians, as he calls them, of Argentina: This was
an honest man in the mean space, which labored to pervert this sacrament,
thereby to hurt the pope.

Luthers latin words are, ex capi ^e vertiginoso confictis.


Hoc diffiteri nec possum, nec volo, si Corolostadius etc. This can I not, nor
will deny, but if Corolostadius, or any man else could for this five years,
have persuaded me, that there had been nothing in the sacrament but bread and
wine: he should have bound me to him by a great good turn. For I have taken
great care and anxietie in discussinge this matter, and have endeavored with
all my power, and sinovves stretched ovvte, to rydde my self of the same. For
I did well see, that by this thing I might hurt the pope more than in any
other matter. But I do see my self captive, no way being left to escape. For
the text of the gospel is too plain and strong, and such as can not easelie
be overthrown by any man, and much less by words and gloses devised by a
pha^tasticall head. For I my self (God forgive me for it) am too prone to
that par^e, so far forth as I can perceive the nature of my own Adam.

Again, the same prophet in an other place, after many most detestable words
uttered against M. Chark and his parteners, says thus: Epis. a. I0. har^agium
Tipographum. Argentinense^: cuius etiam mentionem vide apud Biblioth.

Gesneri fo. 501.


his spiritibus credat doceri veritatem: si quem perire delectat etc. Let him
believe that these spirits do teach the truth, who deliteth to damn him
self, whereas in deed they began not their doctrine, but by manifest lies,
and now do defend the same only by lies, diuulging the same by corrupting
other men's books, not vouchsafing to hear the anguishes of our consciences,
vuhich cry, and say, the words of Christ are clear and manifest: Mat. 26.
eat, this is my body. And again, in a certain treatise entitled Tom. 7.
vvittemb. page 380.
against the phanaticall Spirits of sacrame^taries: He says, talking of this
interpretation of the words: This is my body: Age ergo quando adeo sunt
impudentes etc. Go to then, seeing they are so impudent, therefore I will give
them a Lutheran exhortation: accursed A Lutheran exhortation.

O pleasant Martin.


be their charity and concord for ever and ever. And after coming to the
exposition of the said words he says thus. Doctor Carolostad vvresteth
miserably this pronoune (this:) Svvinglius makes lean this verb (is:)
Oecolampadius tormenteth this word (body:) other do boucher the whole
text: and some do crucify but the half thereof: so manifestly does the
devil hold us by the noses. And again in the same work: he has these
words. To expound the words of Christ as the sacramentaries do, (this is
the sign of my body:) is as absurd an exposition, as if a man should
interpret the scripture thus. In the beginning God made heaven and earth,
Genesis 1.

Currucam cu^ ossibus.


that is, the Cuckovve did eat up the Titling or hedge Sparrovv, together
with her bones Again, in S. John: John. 1.
And the word was made flesh that is, a crooked staff was made a kyte.
This was the opinion of holy Luther towching our adversaries interpretation, or
rather evasion, and shift: which I have alleged somewhat more at large
against M. Chark, for that he esteems and defends the man, as a rare
instrument of the holy ghost. Which if it be true: then woe to M Charke and
his comparteners, whose spirit is so contrary to this man's holy illumination.

By this now it appears, that the controversy is not between us, which part
provoke to scripture, and which does not: but (as it has always been
betwixt heretics and Catholics) which part alleges true meaning of
Scripture: which thing according to the council of wise Sisinius to
Theodosius the Emperor, Socrat. li. 5. hist. ca. 10.
we desire to be tried by the Judgment of ancient fathers, indifferent in
this matter, for that they lived before our controversies came in question. But
our adversaries will allow no exposition but their own: whereby it is easy to
defeat what soever is brought against them either scripture or doctor.

For examples sake, Examples of shifting scriptures and doctors.
to prove that we may lawfully make vows, and are bound also to perform the
same being made: we allege the plain words of the prophet: vouete and
reddite domino: vow ye and render your vows to god: how will the adversary
avoid this, think you? M. Fulke answers: Psalm. 75. Against the rock. page
153.
this text belongs only to the old testament. But what may not be wiped
away from us that live under the new testament by such interpretations?
Again, to prove that there is some state of life of more perfection in
Christianity than other, we allege the clear saying of Christ: Math. 19.
Si vis perfectus esse, vade, vende quae habes, and da pauperibus, and habebis
thesaurum in caelo, and veni, sequere me: If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell
all thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have a treasure in heaven,
and come, follow me. What answer have they trow you to this? M. Fulke
answers: Against the rock. page 154.
this was spoken only as a singular trial to that young man alone, and not
to others beside him. What a devise is this? May not he as well say also, that
the other words immediately going before, were only spoken to this young
man: to wit, Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua mandata: if thou wilt be saved,
keep the commandments: and so deliver all his gospellers from the burden
thereof? what difference is there in these two speches of Christ, seeing they
are both spoken to that young man, and both in the singular number, as
infinite other things of the Gospel are to other particular persons, as to
the Cananaea, to the Adulteress, to Nichodemus, to the Ce^turio, to Zachaeus,
to the blind, deaf and others, which notwithstanding are common to all, in
that they touch either life or doctrine?

The like absurd shifts I might repeat in a hundred other points. What can
be more plain than the words of scripture: Jacob. 2.
videtis quoniam ex operibus iustificatur homo, and non ex fide tantum? Do you
see how that a man is justified by woorks and not by faith only? But yet it
avails nothing. Why so? they avoid it by interpretation. S. James (say
they) understands of Justification before men, and not before God. D. Fulke
loco citato.
O poor devise: S. James has in the same place, (talking of faith without
works:) Nunquid poterit fides saluare eum? Can faith without woorks save
him? does S. James mean here of salvation before men, or before God? Again,
when S Paul says, Romans 2.
factores legis iustificabuntur: the doers of the law shall be iustyfied:
which is the very same thing that S. James in other words says, that me^
shall be justified also by woorks: Does S. Paul mean before men or before God?
If you say, before me^: the text is against you, which has expressly, apud
deum, before God. The like euasio^ they have when we allege the words of S.
Paul: 1. Cor. 7.
qui matrimonio iungit virginem suam, been facit: and qui non iungit, melius
facit: he that joins his virgin in marriage does well: and he that joins
her not doethe better. Whereof we infer, that virginity is more
acceptable, and meritoriouse before God, than marriage, allthough marriage be
holy. No (say our adversaries) S. Paul means only, that he does better
before men, and in respect of worldly commodities, but not before God. But
this is absurd: for they grant the former part of the sentence (he that
joins his virgin does well) to be understood before God: for that it is
said also in other words, non peccat, he does not sin: which must needs
be understood in respect of God. How the^ can they deny the second clause, (
and he that joins her not, does better) not to be understood in respect of
God also, and in respect of merit and reward in the life to come, especially
whereas Christ promises the same reward to virginity in an other place,
where he says, Math. 19.
there be Eunuchs which have gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven,
he that can take it, let him take it?

You may see now by this little (and I might show by many mo examples) how
bootelesse it is to bring scripture, when we agree not upon the interpretation.
How protestants deny all fathers.
What then? shall we bring the ancient fathers and doctors of the primative
church, for the understanding of scripture? shall we interpret it as they do?
understand it as they understood it? No, that our adversaries will not agree
unto, but only in matters indifferent and owte of controversy. Where soever
in matters of controversy between us and them, the old fathers do make
against them (as in all points they do:) there will they deny their
exposition. For example: The consent of ancient fathers (is alleged against
M. Fulke) attributing superiority to Peter, upon the words of Christ: Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock will I buyld my Church: Math: 16.
but he auoydeth it very lightly, thus: It can not be denied but diverse of
the ancient fathers (otherwise godly and learned) were deceived in opinion
of Peter's prerogative. Against the rock. page 242.
S. Ambrose, Jerome, Chrisostom, Cyrill, and Theodoret are alleged for
expounding a piece of scripture against M. Fulk, Ioh. 5. about Antichrist. How
does he shift it? thus: Against the roke. page 291.
I answer, they have no ground of this exposition. S. Jerome with all the
ecclesiastical writers are alleged for interpreting of the words of Daniel
cap. 7. against the protestants: Ibidem.
M. Fulke, I answer, that neither Jerome, nor any ecclesiastical writer
whom he follows, has any direction out of the scripture for this
interpretation. S. Austen is alleged for interpreting David's words: he has
placed his tabernacle in the Sun: of the visibilitie of the church: Fulke:
Psalm. 14. Against the fortress pa. 52. Against purg. page 262.
Austen does vvrongfullie interpret this place. S. Ambrose, Ephraim, and Bid
are alleged for interpretation of certain scriptures. Fulke: Gods word is
so pitifully wrested by them, as every man may see the holy ghost never
meant any such thing. S. Chrysostom is alleged for certain interpretations
of scripture: Fulke: Against purg. page 237.
he alleges in deed scripture, but he applies it madlie: and yet he often
applies it to the same purpose^ alas good man. The consent of fathers is
alleged for interpretation of certain places of scripture, of the
prefiguration of the cross of Christ. Fulke: Against the cross, page 146.
The fathers do rather dally in trifeling allegories, than sovvndlie prove
that the cross was presigured in those places.

I might here make up a great volume, if I would prosecute this argument, to
show how these new doctors do contemn and reiecte all authority, antiquity,
wit, learning, sanctity of our forefathers, How protestants reject the
interpretation of their own vvriters
and of all men (in effect) that ever lived beside them selves: yea, of their
own new doctors and masters also, when they come to be contrary to any new
devise, or later fancy of theirs. This is evident in Luther rejected by his
offspring about the real presence, number of sacraments, images, books of the
Bible, order of service, and the like: LVTHER CALVINE
Also in Calvin rejected about the head of the church in England, and about
all the government thereof in Geneua. And I could allege here diverse
examples where he and Beza both are rejected by name in diverse points, both
of puritanes and protestants in England, when they differ from them: but that
this preface would grow to be too long. Wherefore I may perhaps (if this
book come not otherwise to be too great) add a short table or appendix in
the end, to show by examples the unconstant dealings of our adversaries herein,
and that in very deed, when all is done and said that may be, The final
conclusion of protetestants for trial.
and all excuses made that can be devised: the very conclusion is that, only
that must be taken for truth which pleases them last of all to agree upon:
and their bare words must be the proof thereof. For those books only be
scripture in the bible which they appoint: and in those books, that only is
the true sense which they give out: the fathers erred in all things where they
differ from them: the new doctors, (as Luther, Calvin, and the rest) saw so
much only, of the truth, as they agree with them, and no further. This is
the sayeing of our adversaries: this is the saying of all the other sectaries
of our time: this has been the sayeinge of all heretics from the
beginning: and this must needs be the sayeinge of all heretics for the
time to come. For, except they take this way: it is impossible to stand or
increase against the Church. And by this way a man may begin what heresy he
will to morrow next, and defend it against all the learning, wit, and truth of
Christendom. Adioyne now to this, that our adversaries (notwithstanding all
request suit, offer, or humble petition that we ca^ make) will come to no
public disputation, or other indifferent and lawful judgment: but do
persecute, imprison, torment, and slaughter them which offer the same: and then
let the reader judge whether they desire and offer just trial or no, ^ M.
Charke affirms.

Now for our parts (as I have said) we offer unto them, The variety of
trial. that Catholics do offer.
all the best, surest, and easiest means that possibly can be devised, or that
ever were used in Gods Church for trial of truth, or discovering of heresy.
For, as for the books of scripture, seeing we must receive them upon the credit
and authority of the ancient Church: Books of scripture.
we are content to accept for canonical, and allow those, and none other,
which antiquity in Christendom has agreed upon. Next, for the contents of
scripture: Expresse-vvoordes.
if our adversaries will stand upon express and plain words hereof, we are
content to agree thereunto, and we must needs be far superiors therein. For
what one express plain text have they in any one point or article against us,
which we do not acknowleige literallie as they do, and as the words do
lie? but we have against them infinite, which they can not admit without
gloses, and fond interpretations of their own. For example sake, we have it
expreslie said to Pete^ (that signifies a rock) upon this rock will I buyld
my church: Supremacy.
Math. 16. they have no where the contrary in plain scripture. HEGOVMENOS.
We have expresselie (touching the Apostles) he that is great among you let
him be made as the younger. Luc. 22. they have no where, there is none greater
than other among you. We have expresselie: this is my body: Real presence.
Math. 26. you have no where, this is the sign of my body. We have
expresselie, the bread that I will give you is my flesh Io. 6. they have no
where, it is but the sign of my flesh. Justification.
We have expresselie, a man is justified by works and not hy faith only,
Jacob. 2. they have no where, a man is justified by faith alone: No, nor that
he is justified by faith without works, talking of works that follow faith,
whereof only our controversy is. We have expresseselye, whose sins ye
forgive are forgyuen: whose sins ye retain, they are retained, Ioh. 20.
Absolutio^.
They have no where, that priests can not forgive or retain sins in earth.
We have expresselie. The doers of the law shall be justified, Romans 2. They have
no where, that the law required at Christians hands is impossible, or, that the
doing thereof justifies not Christians. We have expresselie, Vovv ye, and
render your vows, Psalm. 75. Vows.
they have no where, vow ye not: or, if you have vowed, break your vows. We
have expresselie, Traditions
keep the traditions which ye have learned, either by word or epistle, 1 Thessalonians. 2. They have no where, the Apostles left no traditions to the church
vnwritte^. We have expresselie, if thou vvilt enter into life, keep the
commandments: Commandments.
and (when he said he did that allredie) if thou vvilt be perfect, go and
sell all thou haste, and give to the poor, and follow me: They have no where,
that either the commandments can not be kept, or that we are not bound unto
them, or that there is no degree of life, one perfecter than an other. We have
expresselye, work your own salvation with fear and trembling Philip. 2.
Works
They have no where, either that a man can work nothing toward his own
salvation, being helped with the grace of God: or that a man should make it of
his belief, that he shall be saved without all doubt or fear. We have
expresselie, do ye the vvoorthie fruits of penance. Luc. 3. Penance.
They have no where, that faith only is sufficient with out all
satisfaction, and all other works of penance on our parts. We have
expresselie, that every man shall be saved according, to his vvoorks, Apoc. 20.
They have no where that men shall be Judged only according to their faith. We
have expresselie, that there remains a retribution, stipend, and pay to
every good work in heaven. Marc. 9. 1. Cor. 3. Apo. 22. Psalm. 118. They
have no where that good works done in Christ, do merit nothing. We have
expresselie, it is a holy cogitatio^ to pray for the dead. 2. Machab. 12.
Prayer for the dead.
They have no where, it is superstition or unlawful to do the same. We have
an express example of a holy man that offered sacrifice for the dead. 2.
Machab. 12. Sacrifice for the dead.
They have no example of any good man that ever reprehended it. We have
expresselie, that the affliction, which Daniel used upon his body, was
acceptable in the sight of God. Dan. 10. They have no where, Voluntary
corporal afflictions.
that such voluntary corporal afflictions are in vain. We have
expresselie, that an Angel did present Tobias good works, and alms deeds
before God. Tob. 12. Alms.
They have no were, that Angels can not, or do not the same. We read
expresselie, that Ieremias the p^het after he was dead prayed for the people
of I^rael. 2. Match. 15. Prayer of saints.
they have no where the contrary to this. I leave many things more that I
might repeat. But this is enoughe (for example sake) to prove, that albeit our
adversaries do vaunt of scripture: yet when it comes to express words:
they have no text against us in lieu of so many as I have here repeated
against them: nor can they show, that we are driven to deny any one book of
the Bible, nor to gloss upon the plain words of any one plain place of
scripture, as they are enforced to do.

But now if they will not stand only to plain and express words of
scripture, Necessary collections upon scrippture.
but also (as in deed they must) to necessary collections made, and inferred
of scripture: then must we refer onr selves to the ancient primative
church, for this meaning of Gods word. For it is like they knew it best: for
that they lived nearer to the writers thereof (than we do) who could well
declare unto them, what was the meaning of the same. And then our adversaries
well know, how the ancient fathers do ground purgatory, prayer to saints,
sacrifice of the Altar, use of the cross, and other like points of our
religion, (besides tradition) upon the authority of scriptures, also expounded
according to their meaning: albeit our adversaries deny the same to be well
expounded.

If our adversaries will yet go further for the trial of our Spirits: we are
well content, and we refuse none that ever antiquity used for the trial of a
Catholic and heretical spirit. The old heretics Samosatenus, Arrius,
Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutiches were tried and condemned by the counsels of
Antioche, Nice, Constantinople, and Chalcedon: Counsels
and other heretics by other councelles since. We are content to refer our
selves to all the Christian counsels that ever have been sense Christ dyed.
And all men know that the last most learned godly and general council of
Trent was gathered for that purpose, and offered all safeconduct to our
adversaries to come thither to trial: but they refused it.

Doctors of the old Church.

Li. 1. contra Julian. c. 2.


Besides this, the ancient fathers have used diverse times, diverse other means
of trial: As first, by referring the matter to the trial of old doctors,
which lived before the controversies began. This mean used S. Austen against
Julian the pelagian, and produces the consent of fathers, both of the east,
and of the west Church until his time: and there asks him, who he is that
dares to oppose him self to the credit of these men: to call them blind: to
say they were deceived: where as they were the very lights of the city of
God? The like way did Theodosius the Emperor take by the counsel of
Sisinius, and suggestion of Nectarius, to bring the Arria^s heresy to some
end, as Socrates writes. Socr. li. 5. hist. ca. 10.

Li. 2. contra here.


And Epiphanius I sayethe, this is enough to say against all heresies: Ecclesia
Catholica haec non doeuit: Sancti pa^res haec minime receperunt. The Catholic
Church has not taught this, the holy fathers have not admitted this. Now,
how our adversaries do fly this means of trial, they are not ashamed to
confess it openly.

The Catholic Churche^
An other way is to consider which is the Catholic or universal Church, or
great multitude of Christians, out of which the one part first departed. This
way used S. Austen against diverse heretics, as namely against the
Manacheis, when he says: Multa sunt quae in Catholicae ecclesiae gremio me
iustissime teneant: Cont. ep fundam. cap. 4.
tenet consensio populorum atque gentium, and tenet ipsum Catholicae n^men:
There are many things which upon good cause do hold me in the lap of the
Catholic Church: for the very consent of people and nations does hold me:
Also the very name of Catholic church holds me. And Vincentius Lirinensis
living about the same time writes to the same effect against heresies. In his
book against the profane innoua^io^s of all heresies: in the beginning
In ipsa Catholica ecclesia magnopere curandum est, vt id teneamus quod vbique,
quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum: etc. Sed hoc ita demu^ fi^, sv sequamur
vniuersitate^, antiquitate^, consensionem. Sequemur autem vniuersitatem hoc
modo: si hanc vna^ fidem veram esse fateamur, quam tota per orbem terrarum
confi^etur ec^lesia: Antiquitatem vero ita, si ab hiis nullatenus sensibus
recedamus, quos, sanctos maiores ac patres nostros celebrasse manifestum est:
Consensionem quoque itidem; si in ipsa ve^ustate, omnium vel certe pene omnium
sacerdotum and magistrorum definitiones sententiasque sectemur. We must
greatly take heed, in the Catholic Church, to holde^ that which has
been believed in every place, always, and of all Christians etc. And this we
shall do, if in our belief we follow universality, antiquity, and consent.
We shall follow universality, Universality.
if we confess that only faith to be true, which the Church spread over all
the world does confess: we shall follow antiquity, Antiquity.
if we depart not from that meaning and sense of scripture which is evident
that our forefathers and ancestors have held: we shall follow consent, Consent.
if we embrace the definitions and opinions either of all, or of the most
part of priests and teachers in antiquity. The like way does S. Jerome take
against the Luciferians: and other fathers against other heretics. And how
quicquelie our adversaries spirit were tried by this way of Antiquity,
universality and consent, all men that have understanding may Judge.

An other way there is also, and much used by the fathers against heretics:
and that is, Succession of Popes.
to prove their religion by the succession of bishops in the Sea of Rome:
wherein the successor always, teaching the doctrine of his predecessor, it
must needs be a strong argument to prove the descent and continuance of one and
the same faith from the Apostles time. Contr. ep. fundam. cap. 4.

John. 21.


This argument uses S. Austen in the place before alleged: Tenet ab ipsa sede
Petri Apostoli, (cui pascendas oues post resurrectionem dominus commendauit)
vsque ad praesentem episcopa^um successio sacerdotum. The succession of preests
in the Church of Rome eue^ from the chair of Peter (unto whom our lord after
his resurrection commended his sheep to be fed) unto this byshoprik that now
is, does hold me in the Catholic Church. The same way of trial he uses,
and much more at large, in his hundred three skore and fyueth epistle, where
he reckons up all the byshopps of Rome from Peter unto Anastasius (which
was bishop in his time,) and thinks this a good proof against the donatists,
that none of those held or favored their opinion. The like way of trial used
Optatus Mileuitanus against the same donatists before S. Austen, Li. 2. cont.
Donatist.
reckoning up all the byshopps of Rome until SIRICIVS, that satte in his time.
The same way of trial used holy Irenaeus, Li. 3. cont. haer. cap. 3.
before either of both these men, against the heretics of his time,
reckoninge up all the bishops of Rome, until Eleutherius that held the Sea in
his time, addinge that by this succession, he did confovvnd the pride of all
heretics that durst to teach otherwise than this See had held. And after,
concluding thus: est plenissima haec ostensio, vnam and eandem viuificatricem
fidem esse, quae in ecclesia ab Apostolis vsque nunc sit conseruata and tradita
in veritate. This is a most full proof, that one and the self same
quickninge faith has been delivered in truth, and commended from the
Apostles unto this day. But now this way of trial I know our adversaries will
not admit.

Infection^ with old heresies.
An other way of trial is to examine what part does hold any old
condemned heresy. For as an heretic having once lost the habit of faith
given him in baptism, is easily moved to cope with any heresy new or old
that comes in his way, and serves his turn: so most certain it is, that
the true Catholic church can never admit or defend any heresy. 1. Tim. 3.
For otherwise she could not be the pillar of truth. And we believe with
holy Athanasius in his creed: that he which holds not the faith vvholye in
all points shall perish eternally, how soever our adversaries do salve the
matter in their prophets Berengarius, Husse, VVikliffe, and Luther, whom they
say to have been holy men, and yet to have erred in diverse points of faith,
Mark this gentle reader.
and to have held their erreurs obstinately to the day of their death. But
we believe the contrary, as I have said. And therefore who soever could show
but one confessed heresy to be defended by our church, there neded no more
disputation about the matter.

But now for the right use of this way of trial, Two conditions.
there be two conditions to be observed of his part which will object an old
heresy to an other. The first is, that the party do in deed hold that
thing which he obiecteth, and not a certain likeliehoode of it. For that
were to slander, and not to object. Injurious dealinge of our adversaries.
As when our adversaries do object to us the heresy of Pelagius about free
will, it is a mere slander. For we hold that man's will being prevented and
helped with the grace of God may work well: but he held that it could do the
same by the power and force of nature, without the help of gods grace, as S
Augustine proves at large in his book of free will. The like injury they do
us, in many other things, which they object against us: as the heresy of those
which did sacrifice to our lady, and the like, which we do not. The second
condition is that the heresy objected be in deed such as was accounted and
condemned for an heresy, in the primative church, and not only that an
heretic held it. For heretics do hold diverse truethes always together
with falsehode: And for lack of this condition do our adversaries often abuse
the simple people. As M. Fulke oftentimes says: prayer for the dead is an
heresy, because the Montanists (which were heretics) held it. But let him
prove that ever this was accounted one of Mo^tanus his heresies, and the^ he
proves somewhat. But that he can never do: for he grau^teth, Austen, Ambrose,
Chrisostom, Ierom, and others ^o have used prayers for the dead, who
notwitstanding were great enemies to Montanus, and all his errors. Wherefore
this is a very malitiouse kind of abusing people. And I here say again,
that let him and all the protestants in the world prove, that we do hold in
deed, but any one thing, which was accounted an heresy in the primative
church, and we will grant that we are not the Catholic Church, but that in
all other things we err besides.

Protestants do hold old heresies.
But we in charging them withdraw heresies do observe always the foresaid two
conditions. As for example, we charge them with the opinion of Aerius,
which denied prayer for the dead: And that they hold this very same
opinion, they will not deny: And that it was accounted an heresy in the
primative church: Aug. li. de he. ad quod vult. haere. 53. Epipha. haer. 75.

Against Brystoes motives pa. 15.


we allege for vvitnesses S. Augustine and Epiphanius. How do they avoid
this? No way, but by sayeinge that Augustine and Epiphanius were deceived, in
recording that for an heresy which was none: for that is M. Fulks answer:
which is to condemn all that age: for that those holy fathers wrote down
heresies as they were taken in those days by the church. The like we do about
vigilantius: whose opinions were (among others) that Saints were not to be
prayed to, nor their relics to be honored: Now that the protestants hold
this, no man dowteth: And that this was accounted heresy in the primative
church, Li. cont. vigilantium.
we cite S. Jerome for a witness which wrote against him. What shift is
there here? None, but to deface S. Jerome and commend vigilantius, and to deny
it to be an heresy: for so does, M. Fulke, Against the motives. pa. 54.
sayeing further, that Jerome rather raileth than reasons, and that
vigilantius was a good man, and his opinion sovvnd. The like order we take in
a number of other old heretical points, which we charge them withal: as may
be seen in the tables and books set out of this matter. Now if our adversaries
could bring us to any such confession of heresy, the matter were ended. But
they can not: and therefore I know they will never admit this way of trial.

The last way of trial (whereof I will speak at this time) is to consider the
manners of old heretics, The manners of old heretics.
and to compare the same with ours. And here I would have also the former two
conditions observed: To wit, that we consider such qualities only as were
accounted heretical in them: that is, proper to heretics: and to examine
them truly without partial affection in our selves. For example: Lib. 2.
cont. lit. Petil. cap. 51.
S. Augustine does note it as an heretical property in the donatists to hate
the Sea of Rome, and to call it cathedram pestilentiae, the chair of
pestilence. Does this agree to protestants, or to us? As also the defaming of
the said See, sor the evil pretended life of some particular men? De vnitare
ecclesiae. cap. 12.

Li. 3. contr. lit. peti. c. 4.

Lib. 2. ca. 9. contr. epi. parm. and ep. 169. ad Eusebius.

Li. 1. cont. maximinu^.

Lib. 6. cont. Donat.

Victor depersecutione vandalica.


As likewise he notes it as an heretical trick in them, to persuade the
people that the visible church had erred, and oppressed the true church,
banishinge her from the sight of the world. Do not our adversaries say the
very same? Also he notes the same heretics for hatinge and condemninge the
life of monks, as also for dravving Nonnes out of their cloisters, and
ioyninge them selves with the same in pretended vvedlocke. Finally he notes
it as heretical in the Arria^s, to appeal from traditions to only
scripture. Now before S. Augustine, Optatus noted it as heretical in the
donatists to break aultars whereupon the body and blood of Christ were
kept, as the words of Optatus are. And about the same time Victor Vticensis
wrote his story against the vandall heretics: where he sets furthe most
lively the state of our time, by the manners and behauiours of those
heretics, in breakinge chalices: profaning of holy Chrisme, spoylinge of
church vestime^ts, throweing the blessed sacrament of the altar on the
ground, with other most horrible abuses to the same, not to be repeated: in
prohibiting mass to be said by edicts and proclamation, and a hundred things
more: which are the very exercises of our adversaries now. The like things in
many points does S. Basil object as sacrilegious against Julian the Apostata
and his folowers: Orat. 1. and 2. in Iulianum.
wherefore I think our adversaries will not admit

(...) (...) The cause inforcinge the author to break of: page 1.2.3. M. Charks
untruth and hypocrisy page 5.6.7.8. A Challenge to M. Charke and all his
brother ministers for disputation: page, 9. 10.11. Why protestants appeall
to only scripture. pa. 13. The dissension among heretics of our time upon
only scripture. page. 14. Protestants do admit no trial at all: page. 18.
An absurd and heretical interpretation of scripture, touching S. John Baptist
his place of lyuinge, apparel, and diet. page. 19. Evident testimonies of
scriptures and fathers for the real presence in the sacrament: page. 20.
Luthers mislyking of Corolostadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius and others
touching the real presence. page 22. M. Fulk his arrogant kind of answering.
page. 25. The protestants kind of trial is, only that to be truth, which
they will have to be truth: page. 26. Catholics offer many kinds of trial
of spirits. pa. 27. As, by books of scripture and the express word thereof
Ibidem. By necessary collections upon scripture. page. 29. By Counsels. page.
30. By doctors. Ibidem. By the Church, and her notes: Ibidem. By sucession of
Bishops. page. 31. By agreement of the doctrine of our adversaries with old
heresies. page. 32. 33. 34. By agreement of our adversaries with ancient
heretics in manners: page. 35. How heretics falselie accuse Catholics of
old heresies: page. 33. How all heresy is Beggarie: page. ^6. How the
Catholic cause is honorable. page. 36. 37. Why the Author has put down
the Censure it self in this defense which follows: page 37.
A DEFENSE OF THE CENSVRE AGAINST WILLIAM Charke, minister.
THE CENSVRE.
THE PREFACE.
THERE came to my hands two books of late, in answer of M. Edmund Ca^piane
his offer of disputation: the one vvryten by M. Hanmer, the other by M. Charke:
of both which, (under correction,) I mean to give my short Censure, until
such time as either he, to whom the matter appertains, or some other do
make more large and leardned reply: Aduertising notwithstanding the reader,
that in mine opinion, this offer of M. Campian, and so many other as have been
made, required not so much answering in vvriting, but shorter trial in

THE DEFENSE.
HERE, even at the very entrance, the replyer leeseth his patience, for that
we require short trial in disputation. Who is Campian (says he) or who
are popish religion, that has nothing to uphold it but tyranie, nothing to
defend it but lies, nothing to restore it but hypocrisy and rebellion? O M.
Charke, remember your self. We now but begin: you will be far out ere we
end, if you tread the first step with so much choler. If the very naming of
disputations make you sweat: what will the thing it self do, if it should be
granted? you began very hoote with M. Campian in the Tower, but his quiet
behauyour cooled you with shame. He took at your hands reproaches and injuries,
yea torments also, and death it self, with more patience, tha^ you can bear a
most reasonable and just request But (say you) what can they get by
renevveing the battaille, so often and so lately refused by their fathers and
captains? and you note in the margent D. Watson, and M. Fecknam. Entitled: a
conference between M. D. fulk, and the papists i^ vvesoiche castle.
We know (M. Charke,) the foolish vain pamphlet set fourth by D. Fulke in his
own comme^dation, touching his being at wesbiche castle, and conference with
the learned and reverend fathers, imprisoned there. But as they did wisely in
contemning his pride, coming thither upon vanity, without warrant for that he
offered: so beside the falsehode of that scrolle, discovered sense by letters
from the parties the^ selves, there is nothing in the same, that turns not to
your own discredit: being confessed therein, that after you had deprived the^
of all books, yea their very written note books, The manner of protesta^tes
disputations.
(which to learned men are the store house of memory:) you asked them whether
they would come to Camebrige to dispute or no, if leave peradventure might be
procured? And because they co^te^ned so peart and cockishe a merchant, that for
matter of glory, cam^ to pose them without authority: therefore you publishe
both in books and sermons, that these learned men refused disputation, where
as, at the very same time, and both before and sense, hothe we and they have
sued by all means possible, to be admitted to a lawful, equal and free
disputation, either in Cambrige or any place else, that shall be appointed.

What dealing is this? what proceeding M. Charke? where are now the lies and
hypocrisy you talked of? on which part do they appear? As for tyra^nie
(being an odious word) I will say nothing, nor will not turn it to you
again: let racking and quartering of those that offered disputation be
accounted scholasticall reasonning with you. But this I must say to you
ministers, for your good: that it were far better, you confessed your fear
in plain words, than so much to manifest it in deeds, and thereby to
discredit the rest of your sayeings.

seeing there can be had nothing from them but words etc. And for him self,
he refers men to his answer. But for M. Hanmer he answers, that he has
brought more reason with his words, than may well be answered by me. But
suppose all this were true, and that both his words and M. Hanmers also were
reasonable words: yet are they but words in respect of the desired
disputation, which is a deed. And so me think the Censure does offer them
no injury. But how reasonable M. Charks words are, it appeared partly by
the Censure, and shall do better by this defense. For M. Hanmer, of M. HANMER.
as I thought him then, not worthy of particular answer: so much less do I
now, remaining worse satisfied by his second book than by his first. But yet,
as I omitted him not in the Censure when occasion was offered: so will I not in
this defense: allthough finally I must confess, that albeit I am not willing
to increase a proud humor where alredie it does abound: yet do I attribute
more to M. Chark, than to him, for some discretion in answering to the purpose.

But, for that M. Charke will needs so frendelie take upon him the avouchement
of M. Hanmers doeinges, as though he had not enoughe to defend his own: I
will out of a heap of foolerie and falsehoode, (pached together by M. Hanmer,
after the fashion of their sermons) allege a few things: requiring M. Charke
in his next writing, to answer for the same. And if he find it somewhat hard:
Let him blame his own tongue, for meddling in matters which he might have
avoided. Nether will I touch any thing now, mentioned before in the Censure,
for that these things shall have their own place to be discussed after. Now
purpose I only to note a few points of many, Entitled an answer to a
Jesuits challenge.

In 2. these. 2


which shall declare sufficiently the man's constitution. He has in his first
book fol. 12. That lyra says: Ab ecclesia romana, iam diu est quod recessit
gratia: Which he interprets thus: It is long sythence the grace of God is
departed from the church of Rome. Whereas the words are Graecia, Greece,
and not grace, signifyeinge, that the Greek church was long since departed
from obedience of the church of Rome. How will you excuse this M. Charke? For
suppose there were any corrupt book that had (by error) Gratia, for Graecia
(which I may scarce imagine:) But yet to help him to an excuse, suppose it
should be so: yet lyra his whole discourse upon S. Paul's words, 2. These. 2.
nisi venerit discessio primum: Except a reuolte be first made, the end of the
world shall not come: with all the circumstances, and other examples there
alleged of the Romans empire, must needs have showed him (if he have sense,)
that he talked only of the country of Greece, and not of the grace of God.

Entitled the Jesuits Banner. A foul lie.
In this second assertion of his second book, he attributes this sentence to
the Jesuits: All and every the things contained in holy scripture are so
vvrapped in obscurities, that the best learned can gather thence no certain
knovvleige. This is impudent. For they have the plain contrary in the very
places by him cited to wit, that not all, but some places, are hard in
scripture: as is to be seen in Payuas Andrad. li. 2. page 12. Diego Payuas
Andradius de orthodoxis explicationibus.
which words also M. Hanmer without shame alleges.

In his eleventh assertion he says thus: The Jesuits hold, that there be
many things more grieuouse and more damnable, than those that repugne the
law of God, and yet the law condemns them not, namely, traditions, man's
laws, and precepts of the church. But this is shameless also: for the
Jesuits do teach the clean contrary: to wit, that what soever is sinnne,
is (...) condemned by the law of God, and what so ever offends the law of
God, if it be done wittingely and with consent of heart (for otherwise it
offendethe not the law,) is sin: In opere catechistico. page 350.
and this may be seen in the definition of sin extant in Canisius, a
Jesuit. And for traditions, they hold that if they be such traditions as
came from Christ and his Apostles: then is the wilful breakinge of such
traditions, sin directlye against God him self. But if they be but
traditions or precepts of the church: then the breach thereof (as also of all
other our superiors commandementes) are offenses against men: but yet
consequentely also against God: for that he has commanded men to obey their
superiors, which rule them, and that in conscience as S. Paul proves. Romans
13.

In his fiftenthe assertion he says: Most false.
The Jesuits say, that justification is none other, than the seeking or
searchinge of righteousness or (to speak philosophicallie) a motion unto
righteousness. But this is folly, besides malice, shewinge that he knows not
what he speaks him self. For the Jesuits have no such word: but do give
a more learned description of our justification, than (I think) he can
conceive: which is this: The description of our justification.

Gal. 4.

Tit. 3.


Iustfiication is the translation of a man from that state wherein he was
borne the son of the first Adam, into the state of grace and adoption of the
children of God, through the second Adam Jesus Christ our Savior: Canis. page
748. What shall we now say of this man?

In his Nyententhe and Twentieth assertions, he says that the Jesuits hold a
tvvofolde Justification, a first and a second: This is true: but what more? And
that our works are necessarily required for the first justification, and do
merit the amplification of the second: This is clearlie false: and except this
man be besides him self, I marvel what he means by this shameless
behauyour. For the Jesuits do teach the quite contrary: to wit, Iustificari
nos gratis, quiae nihil eorum quae iustificationem praecedunt, sieve fides, sieve
opera, ipsam iustificationis gratiam promeretur: Canis: in op^re C^te. page 764.
These are their very words, which are englished thus: we are justified
freely with out works: for that nothing goinge before our justification,
whether it be faith, or works, does merit us the grace of our justification.
Which words also of these fathers, do convince M. Hanmers other slander
in the 21. assertion, where he says. The Jesuits, hold that the works that
are before justification, are meritorious: Which is most false: for besides
the place alleged, they teach the plain contradictorie thereof: to wit, that
merit proceeds only of grace in them, that are now justified. Canis. page,
786. So that you see this man has no conscience what, or how, or wherein he
lies. I omit many examples more of his malice: Assert. 26. and 27.
as where he says, that Jesuits hold, that the lords prayer may be said to
saints, and that their relics may be honored cultu latriae, with the
honor due to God him self. Assert. 2.
Also where he falsyfyeth manifestly the Council of Trent, sess. 4. cap. 1. By
puttinge (51) to their words, about traditions, and so perverting the whole
meaning. But I will add only an example or two of his ignorance, and then
let the reader judge whether folly or malice be greater in this minister.

The unlearned ^olye of Meredith Hanmer.

Li. de vera reli. c. 14. lib. 1. ^etr. c. 13. sess. 6. c. 18

Ierom. in expos. simb. ad Dam. Augu. ser. 191. de tempore^


In his fiueth assertion against the Jesuits he cites as blasphemous this
sentence of theirs. Sin is so voluntary, as if will were not, it were no
sin: Where as this sentence is not theirs, but S. Austens, and that twice
repeated in two several books of his: Vsque adeo peccatum voluntarium est
malum, vt nullo modo sit peccatum, si non sit voluntarium. Again, in his eigth
assertion he cites this sentence (as blasphemous) of the council of Trent:
We accurse them that say, the commandments of God to be impossible to a man
justified, and in state of grace. Where as the very same is both in S.
Jerome, and S. Augusten: whose words are: Execramur blasphemiam eorum, qui
dicunt impossible aliquid homini a deo esse praeceptu^. Again, in his seventh
assertion he reprehendeth the council of Trent, for affirming, that, all
sins are quite taken away by baptism, and not rased only: Sess. 5.
where as the very same is, word for word, in S. Augusten: Dicimus baptisma
auferre crimina, non radere. Li. 1. cont. 2. ep. pelag. c. 13.
By which is evident, that this man has either redd little, or borne little
away, besides certain notes of raylinge, as appearethe: And therefore I
thought it nedelesse to answer him any further. Now therefore will I return to
the Censure, which breeflie gives the effect of both M. Hanmer and M. Charke
his book as follows.

THE CENSVRE.
Meredyth Hanmer answers more quietly, The effect of M. Hanmers book
plainly, and more good follow like, excepting a foul lie, or two, vvherof
I must tell him when place

THE DEFENSE.
To this no man in particular answers any thing. M. Charke letteh it stand,
and M. Hanmer only says in general: Cap. 1. In ini^io.
That these are vnreuerent speeches against his persone^ Which I deny: for
that only is to be counted personal reproach which touches manners, and
this only concerns his fashoode and folly in doctrine. And for his person
God knows I hate it not, but could be content to wish him as good a
personage, as he desires, so it might be without the hurt of his parisho^ners.
But yet, that I may not seem to have given this censure of his book, without
all cause: I will breefelie run over the principal points more good fellow
like: For that he draws not all things to treason as the other does, but
joins familiarlie with M. Campian, calling him his fellow student in Oxforde,
Fol. 2.
though him self were but a poor ladd, when M. Campian was of credit and
woorshipp in that place. And finally he persuadeth: M. Campian to take part
of felicity with him and his fellow ministers, Fo. 5. and 26
to leave his vows to be performed by other Jesuits beyond the seas, and
joining with them, to aba^donne this austeritie of life, and to taste, how
svveete the lord i^: which is as much to say, as to take a wife and a
ben^fice, and other sweet morsells which commonly fall to ministers lottes in
England. Is not this spoken like a good fellow, trow you?

the foul lie or two, that I charged him withal, they are to have their
place of examynatyon after. That, he was not like to be one of the disputers,
if the: was hut only my conjecture. Marie yet since, the sequel has proved
it true: for there has been disputation, and M. Hanmer no disputer. gathered
out of Sleidan, friar bale, and others, and uttered from the pur^ose, and
without just occasion: do appear in every page of his book. he oppugneth
and confirms m^ni^ things, neither said, nor denied, nor thought of by M.
Camp^an: and consequently frames his adversary in the ^ayer: I might show by
many examples throughout his book, as fol. 6. where he proves by many
authoriti^s, that the place makes not a man holy, if he have no spirit:
Impertine^t matters followed by M. Hammer
but who denies this? also. fol. 7. where he labors to confirm, that under
a holy garment there may lurk wickedness: but what then? Also, fol. 9.
where he bestirreth him self vehemently, to show by scripture and doctors,
that we must obey superiors and temporal magistrates: who dowbteth of this?
And yet this course he holds throughout that little book, which were to
long to repeat in particular. And therefore I might well conclude, that, this
book was to small purpose, other than to

THE CENSVRE
William Charke deals more subtilie: The effect of M. Charks book.
for he reports the Challenge only for his purpose, and that also sometimes
falsified, except it came corruptly to his hands. He vtereth also much more
malice, by dravving every thing to disloiltie and rebellion, which is done by
the Catholics for conscience and religion. He flattereth the higher states,
which can pleasure him, palpably. He vvearieth his hearer with the infinite
repition of the worn out terms, of pope and popery. He exceeds in
invention of rayletiue speech. He undertakes all manner of lies without
blushing, and ventureth upon any assertion what soever, for the bringinge of
the Jesuits in discredit with the reader.

Upon this answer therefore of M. Charke, I mean to enlarge my self a little,
i^ brotherly charity, not omitting to remember also the other, where
occasion The order and division of this book.
Secondly, touching the man whom he answers. Thirdly, touching the matter
or demand propounded. Lastly, touching the Apostata brought in, for the
defacing of Jesuits and the Catholic religion.

THE DEFENSE.
All those things appertaining to the Censure of M. Charks book, though
misliked and denied by him, yet for that they come after to be verified, in
their particular places: I pass over now without examination: only
aduertising the reader, that thexceptio^ he takes to be large or short, touch
or pass by, answer or omit at my pleasure, is a causeless quarrel. For
that I chose this method of necessity, as well for M. Charks ease in
replyeing, as for mine own in answering: and especially for the readers
commodity, in understanding the whole matter, when the pithe of all that,
which lay dissolutelie before in his book, environed with long and bitter
inuectiues, embreued with spiteful and contumelious speeches, and every way
cast about with odious accusations, light suspicions, insufficient collections,
and vain surmises of treasons, rebellions, dissimulations, practices, and what
soever else a fond malitiouse head could devise to object, should be drawn out
clearlie and orderly to four general points, and therein, indifferently and
without cholar be examined to the reader. The which thing if I have not
performed my desire was at least to perform, and my endeavor shall be now to
supply any thing that wanted then. Albeit I persuade my self, that nothing
was omitted then of any weight or importance in M. Charks book, as may well
appear both by his and M. Hanmers replies. Now then let us enter upon the
first part of the division set down by the Censure.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CENSVRE, touching the Society of Jesuits.
THE CENSVRE
Master Charke imployeth all his power, and labors painfully, to bring in
defiance the oder of Jesuits, containyng most notable, learned and virtuous,
men. For the which purpose he uses diverse means: and first his ordinary
way of railing, by calling them. Nickenames against Jesuits.
A blasphemouse sect, new and detestable Jesuits, a weak and shameful order,
Scorpions, heretics, Iebusites, poisoned spyders, wicked monkish friars, and
frierlie monks, scoutes to rebellion, frogs and caterpillars of Aegipt,
absurd and blasphemous doctors, bellows to kindle persecution: of Beggarly
estate, traitors, swarms of grasshoppers, noisome beasts. To whom M. Hanmer
addethe, That theye are the brood of a cryppled soldier, and of the lowsiest
order of all. All which, I let pass without aunsvvering, for that it
proves nothing but one, which is, that they lack all Christian and honest
modesty, which abuse so much so many good men, whose vvisdome, learning,
and honestye of life is better known to the world, than any such railers
can be credited to the contrary.

THE DEFENSE.
To all this M. Charke answers by this confession, I acknouleige my labor
employed to bring in discredit the Jesuits, And again, also, I grannt the
speeches which in all hatred of popish practices I vtered: And yet he
complains grieuouslie in his preface that the papists, fashion is, to
discredit the men for their doctrines sake. But let us pardon him this, for
that he confesses hatred to have been the cause, Yet notwithstanding I do not
see, how any learned or common honest man, and much less a pretended
preacher of gods word, can justify such uncivil and outrageous terms
against his brother, by any pretense of Christianlike or tolerable hatred: such
as M. Charke (I suppose) would here insinuate: And that which he would seem to
allege for his excuse in the reply, that, for ten lines of railing,
gathered against him, he might have gathered ten leaves against me: is
neither to the purpose, nor true. Not to the purpose: for that if I had
answered him with bitter speech again, being provoked by his example and
injury: what excuse had this been for him which began without example?
Seco^dlye, it is apparentlie false, that he says of me, and excusable by no
other figure, than by the license of a lie. For if we talk, of leaves as
printers account them: there are but half ten in the whole Censure. But if
he take leaves, as they are folded in that book: yet ten leaves, do take up
a good part thereof. Which if I filled up with railing terms only, such
as now I have repeated out of M. Charke: I do confess my self to have been
ouerseene, and fault worthy in writing. But if it be not so^ as the reader
may see: the^ M. Charks tongue has ouerslipped in foloweing rather the
Rhetorical phrase of line and leaves, than the fathefull report of a true
accusation.

I may not pass over this matter so soon. For that I think it of importance
to discrye the spirits of us that are adversaries in this cause. You know the
sayeing of Christ, ex abunda^tia cordis os loquitur. Mat. 12. Luc. 6.
Our mouth speaks according to the abundance of our heart. I mean, a man may
be known by his speech, as S. Peter said to Simon Magus, upon his only
speech, In fell amaritudinis, and obligatione iniquitatis video te esse. Act.
6.
I see thee to be in the very gaul of bitterness, and in the bondage of
iniquity. And the scripture is plain in this point. Qui spiritum Christi non
habet, hic non est Christi. Romans 8.
He that has not the spirit of Christ appertains not to Christ. Now then,
if we consider the quiet, calm, and sober spirit of Christ, and of all godly
Christians from the beginning, and the furiouse, reprochefull, and unclean
spirit of Satan, and all heretics, from time to time: and do compare them
both with the writings of Catholics and gospellers at this day: we may
easily take a skantlinne of the diversity of their spirits. I will not talk
here of every hoote word uttered in Catholic books by occasion of the
matter, (neither is this in question) for both Christ and his Apostles, and
many holy fathers after them, used the same, some times upon just zeal,
especially against heretics, with whom old S. Anthony (as Athanasius
writes being otherwise a milde^ Saint) could never bear to speak a
peaceable word. Athan. in vita S. Anthonii Eremitae.
But for railing, and foul scurrilitie, such as protestants use ordinarily
against us, and among them selves, when they dissent, I dare auowe to be proper
to them, and their ancestors only.

What more venomous words can be ymagined tha^ those of, THE PROTESTANTS
Railing and scurrilitie in vritinge. Hanmers s^urrilitie.
Scorpions, poisoned spyders, and the like, used by M. Charke against reverend
men? M. Hanmers terms of lovvsie and crippled, are but Ieastes. For I passed
over his scurrilitie, where he said in his first book: The first of your
gentry was Ignatius the creeple, standinge under Pompeiopelis tovver, and
geeuinge the pellet ovvt of his tail. What a shameless slouuen is this, to
write? Show me Allen (if thou cannest) for thy guts (says D. Fulk:
Against purgatory page 241.

D. Fulks tallent in railing.

In his rete^tiue against the motyues.


) is not this a Ruffianlike spirit, in a preacher of the gospel? But if you
will see more of this man's spirit: read but his answers to D. Bristow, D.
Allen, and the rest. Against. M. Bristow he has these words, with many
more. Lewd losell, unlearned dogbolt, traitorous papist, shameless beast, of
blockish wit, impudent Ass, vauntparler, barkinge dog, and most impudent
yolpinge curre, leaden blockish and doltish papist, proud hypocrite, of
stinking, greasy, antichristian, and execrable orders, blunderinge, blind,
boosting bayard, blasphemouse heretic, blockheaded Ass. And in his two
books against. M. D. Allen, besides the former speeches, and other infynitelye
repeated, he has these: In his answer to the book of purgatory and prayer
for the dead.
Brazen face, and iron forehead. O impudent blasphemer, brainlesse brablyng
Sycophant, rechelesse Ruffian, unlearned Ass, skornefull caytise, desperate
dicke. O horrible blasphemer. O blasphemouse, barkinge, horrible hellhounde. In
his book that bears a show of answer to M. D. Stapleton, he uses these
terms amongst other: Entitled AN OVERTHROVVE of Stapleto^s for^resse of
faith.
Canckered stomach papist: senseles block: worthy to be shoren in the pole
with a number of crowns: popish svvyne: popish boares, gods curse light
upon you: brazen face Stapleton: blockedded papist: shameless dogged of stomach
slaunderer: of gross and beastely ignorance: dronken flemminge of dovvaye:
more like a block than a man.

Thus much he has against these learned and reverend men, whereof each one,
for many respects may be counted his equal, to say the least, and therefore
in common civility, setting a side all consideration of gods spirit (whereof
these good fellows make vaunte above other men,) these terms or the like were
not to be used, as in deed amongst the gentiles they were not, nor of any
honest or Christian writer since. I might repeat a great deal more of this
ministers scurrilitie, against many men, whom (forsoothe) he answerethe: (for
as one said well of him, he is the protestants common post horse, to pass you
any answer without a bait, to any Catholic book which co^methe in his
way,) but it were to long and lothesome to repeat all, only hear more what
he sayethe in his book against M. Martial, Entitled. A REIOYNDER to Martials
replye.
and by that, judge of his style against the rest. He callethe him by one vile
name or other in every page of his book, as, dogbolt lawyer: vvranglinge
petifoggar: egregious ignorant usher: goose: ass: prating proctor, meet for a
bo^me court: arroga^te hipocrite: impudant ass: blockhedded and shameless
ass: blasphemous beast: fylthie hog, beastely grunter, shameless dog, and
blasphemous idolatour, raylinge Ruffian, and slanderous devil. And is there any
jot of Christian modesty or gods spirit in this man? is he (to speak
indifferentely) more fytt for a pulpitt, or for an ale benche? surely, if the
pott were not at hand, when he wrote this: he discouerethe a foul spirit
within his breaste, but yet not unmeet for a man of his occupation.

And this now of the scollars: but think you that the masters were not of the
same spirit? read John Calvin and you shall see that his ordinary term
against his adversaries in every chapter almost, John Calvin his spirit in
raylinge.
especially when he speaks against his superiors, as bishopes and the like,
is to call them Nebulones knaves: which word beside the foul gaul whereof
it proceeds, is an unseemly term, even as that of M. Fulke, when he
calls a counceller to an emperor Rascal Staphylus: Against Stapletons
fortress page 75.
It is unsitting, and argues excess of fond and foolish malice. For if an
enemy of mean condition should call an English counceller rascal: should he
not discover thereby his own raskalitie, and lack of wit?

But of all other Martin Luther, Luthers prerogative in railing. Romans 8.
as the first father of all these new imppes, had primitias spiritus, the first
fruits of this spirit in full measure, (even as the Apostles had of the holy
spirit) to the end, he might imparte due portions to his children and
successors. I could allege infinite examples in this kind, but that I desire
to be short, and shall have occasion to touch some part of the same in other
places after. Only as it were for a taste, I will cite some few out of his
boo^e written against our most noble and famous king Henry, the eight, the
most learned, and wittiest prince that ever England had. But yet, hear what
the fu^ious spirit of this our new prophet uttered against him, and then
consider whether he could be of God or no. The book is extant to be sold in
England, Lib. cont. regem An. To. 2. wit. te^b. fo. 331.
and I will note the leaf, to the end I may not be imagined to feygne, or
aggrauate any thing. First then, in his preface of that to Sebastian Sc^ike
Earl of passune, he defaceth his Majesty intolerablie, sayeing: that he is an
envious mad fool, babbling with much spettle in his mouth. Then at length,
coming to the book it self, he says that the king is more furious than
madness it self: Fol. 333.
more doltish than folly it self: endewed with a blasphemouse and railing
mouth: with an impudent and whorishe face: full of dastardie: and without any
one vain of princely blood in his body: a lyeing Sophist, compounded only
of ygnorance and poisoned malice: a damnable rotten worm: O impure spirit of a
prophet.
who when he could not avoid the venemouse poison and Sneuell of his envy,
by his lower parts, sought occasion to vomit it up by his fylthie mouth: it
were a shame for any beastly whore to lie as he does: a basilisk, and
progeny of an adder: to whom I do denounce (says he) the sentence of
damnation: Fol. 334.
this mad buggish Thomist: miserable bookmaker: Fol. 335.
a God lately borne in England: I say plainly, this HARRYE lies
manifestelye, and shows him self a most light scurrill? Of this crime do I
luther accuse this poisoned Thomist: I talk with a lyeing scurrill, covered
with the tytles of a king: a Thomisticall brain: a clownish wit: a doltishe
head: a bugge and hipocrite of the Thomists: Fol. 337.
most wicked, folish, and impudent HARRYE: this gloriouse king lies stoutelie
like a king: and here now must I deal not with ignorance and blockishenesse
only, but with obstinate and impudent wickedness of this HARRYE: Fol. 338.
for he does not only lie like a most vain scurre, but passes a most
wicked KNAVE in detorting of scripture: How intolerable is this in a renegate
friar.
see whether there be any spark, in him of an honest man? surely he is a
chosen vessel of the devil. I would to God pigges could speak, to judge
between this HARRYE and me, But I will take asses that can speak. Judge you
(ye Sophists of the universities of Paris Louan, Fol. 339. See the pride of an
apostata against three famous universities.
and Coolen) what this HARRIES^ logike is woorthe. I am ashamed (HARRYE) of thy
impudent forhead, which art no more a king now, but a Sacrilegiouse thyefe,
against Christ's own words. I will faygne here certain kinds of fools and
mad men, to the end I may set out my king in his colors: and show that my
bedleme king, does pass all bedlemnesse it self. What need had I of such
pigges to dispute withal? thou lie in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegiouse
king: this block my Lord Master HARRYE has taught together with his asses
and pigs: Fol. 442.
and now he is mad, and cries and foemeth at the mouth: neither could I
with all my strength make this miserable king so filthy and abominable a
spectacle to the world, as he by fury makes him self: what harlot ever
durst brag of her shame, as this most impudent mouth of his does? Fol. 345.
this fool must have a dictionarye to learn what a sacrifice is: Oh unhappy
that I am, to be enforced to leese time, with such monsters of folly, and can
not get a learned man to contend with me.

I leave infinite despitefull, slaunderouse and scurrile words, which this
impudent apostata uses against his Majesty, and some are so dishonest, as I
am ashamed to english them: as where he says: Fol. 333.
Ius mihi erit Maiestatem Angelicam stercore conspergere. And again. Sit ergo
mea haec generalis responsio, ad omnes sentinas insulsissimae huius laruae.
Fol. 337.
Again, Haec sunt robora nostra aduersus quae obmutescere coguntur, Henrici,
Thomistae, Papistae, and quicquid est fecis, sentinae, latrinae impiorum, and
sacrilegorum eiusmodi: Sordes istae and labes hominum, Thomistae and Henrici,
sacrilegus Henricorum and asinorum cultus: furor insulsissimorum asinorum, and
Thomisticorum porcorum: os vestrae dominationis impurum and sacrilegum. And a
hundred more sentences like. Whereof if ever good or honest man (and much
less a prophet) used the like: I am content to be of the protestants
religion: but if never either ruffian, or rakehell, used such speech to a
prince before: then may we be sure, that this man was no elect vessel of God,
which has no part of his spirit in him.

I might here repeat the like spirit of his in writing against the
Caluinists, Luthers speech against Caluinistes and of Caluinistes against him.
Tigurini tract. 3. co^t. supremam Lutheri confess^onem.
and the Caluinists against him, but that I have occasion to speak somewhat of
it afterward. But yet one place I will cite in stead of all the rest, and that
is of the church of Tigurine against Luther, whose words are these Nos
condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam etc. Luther calls us a damnable and
exe^rable sect. But let him look that he do not declare him self an
archeheretique, seeing he will not, nor can not have any society with
those, that confess Christ. But how marvelously does Luther here bevvraye
him self with his Ergo luther had devils: which after Charke denies.

Et nunc and semper and in saecula saecul^rum. In sathana si^tum, and
supersathanasiatum, and persathanasiatu^ Page 61.


devils? what filthy words does he use, and such as are replenished
with all the devils in hell? for he says that the devil dwells both
now and ever in the Zuynglya^s, and that they have a blasphemouse breast
insathanized, supersathanised, and persathanized, and that they have besides a
most vain mouth, over which Satan bears rule, being infused, persused,
and transfused to the same: did ever man hear such speech pass from a
furiouse devil him self? Hitherto are the words of the Tigurine
Caluinistes, which may easily refute M. Charks shameless lies in defense of
Luther, as after shall be showed. And here would I have the reader to consider
with what conscience Charke does call Luther a holy and deuyne man a little
after, and whittaker in his book against M. Campian callethe him, a man of
holy memory, saying the Tigurine Caluinistes, who say their masters do
call him an archeheretique and a furious devil: is not this open disimulation
and blinding of the people? but heerof you shall see more after, when we come
to speak of their dissension. And this shall be enough of this matter for this
time. Now we come to examine whether the Jesuits be a blasphemous sect or no,
as M. Charke calls them, and the Censure denies: for thus it follows upon
that which went before.

OF sects and sectaries.
THE CENSVRE.
Mary I cannot let pass to tell M. Charke, that to call the Jesuits, Iesuytes
no Sect.
A blasphemous sect, seems not only levved, but also unlearned. And as for
their blaphemies, they come to be examined after: but how they may be termed A
sect, I cannot see. For if living more straightly then the common sort, 1. and
2.
in apparel, diet, or order of life, do make a sect: then not only
Jesuits, 4. Reg. 1. 4. Reg. 2. Dan. 1. Marc. 1.
but Elias, Elizeus, Dani^l, and John Baptist, are also to be called sectaries,
for that they are reported in the scripture to have led a different and more
strait life in those points, than the common sort, and yet are commended in
scripture for the same. But if sectaries are only made (as in deed they are)
by cutting them selves of, The description of sactaries.
in opinion of religion from the general body of the Catholics church, as
branches from the tree, and by holding a several faith in religion to them
selves: then can not Jesuits (by your own confession) be any sect, who
differ not one Jot in opinion of religion, from the universal Catholic
church, but (as you say) defend every little point of the same, be it never
so untrue or absurd in your sight. Wherefore, vnlearnedlie you call them a
sect, as also unseemly you skoffe at their name of Jesuits, The name of
Jesuits.
which they challenge not to them selves, nor ever use it in their vvritings
or speech, but only naming them selves, a Society dedicated peculiarly to
the honouringe of the name of Jesus, by preachinge the same in all places of
the world, without any reward, and with what danger bodelie soever.

THE DEFENSE.
The answer to this is somewhat confuse and vnorderlie. But I will reduce it to
the order here set down. To the examples alleged he says: As for the
examples of Elias, Elizeus, Daniel, and John Baptist, they are no less
vvickedlie than vnlearnedlye alleged to auovve the Jesuits order. This is a
hoote entrance (as you see) joined with a manifest cauille. For these examples
are not alleged to auow the Jesuits order absolutely, but in one point
only of different life from the common sort: which point notwithstanding is
fownd also in other besides Jesuits. But mark his reason. OF ELIAS and
whether he be a pattern of monks.
What are you able (says he) to bring out of the word of God, why Elias
should, after more tha^ two thousand years, be brought in for a patron of
friars? I answer, first, as before, that these examples are only brought to
prove, that different apparel, diet, or strait order of life, do not make
sectaries, as you have affirmed, and now can not defend: and therefore having
nothing else to say, you make these vain and idle interrogatio^s, in stead of
proofs. For you ask again, what was there in Elias, Elizeus or Daniel,
that may liken them to Jesuits? I answer, there was (to our purpose now in
hand) different manner of life from the common sort of men, which
notwithstanding made them no sectaries, as you would have the Jesuits to be,
for that cause. To this I add (which is more than I need) that S. Ierom.
proves plainly that Elias and Elizeus were the beginners, Ep. 13. ad paulinum
and ep. 4. ad rusticum.
captains, and patrones of Monks, and monastical life, whom he calls (for
that cause) Monachos veteris testamenti: monks of the old testamen: Elyas and
Elyzeus monk^ of the old testament. Ge. 2. 3. 4.
The same, has Sozomenus of Elias L. 1. Hist. cap. 12. Now deal you with
these men (M. Charke) about the matter. And as for the number of two thousand
years, which you cite so preciselie, as though antiquity should let these
prophets to be examples of monastical life: It is an argument worthy such
a divine as you are: for by that reason, nether Adam could be a patron of
married men, nor Abell of Shepheardes, nor Cain of husbandme^ne, nor Enoch of
citizens, nor Iabell of dwellers in Tents, nor Iubal of Musicians, nor
Tubalcain of smithes: for that they lived twice as long a go as Elias did. And
yet the scripture says they were begynners and patrones of all these things:
Genes. 2.3.4.

OF S. JOHN Baptist whether he were a president to monks.
To the example of S. John he answers: John Baptist that may seem to make
most, makes nothing at all for you: for that it is to be thought he was an
extraordinary and a perpetual Nazarete, and therefore his calling warranted
him for his austere and extraordinarye attire, and die^, which restraint, or
the like, is not now laid upon those which teach in the church. You always
do wilfully mistake the question, M. Charke. For we affirm not that
extraordinary austeritie of life, is laid upon any man of necessity, but
only that it is, lawful, and makes no sect, when it is voluntary taken and
used. Moreover if we grant S. John were a Nazaret, yet that proves not, that
all his austeritie of life was laid upon him by necessity of that vocation, as
may appear in the book of Numbers: Cap. 6. Plin. li. 5. c 17. not. hist.
where the life of a Nazaret is described: and Pliny with Josephus describing
the life of Esseans much harder than the Nazarets, do mention no such great
austeritie, as the scriptures do in the life of S. John Baptist. Joseph. li.
2. ca. 7. de bello Iudaico.
Wherefore though he were a Nazaret, yet most of his austeritie was
voluntary, and so might be an example, and platform to Monks, especially
seeing Nazaretes also did make a religious vow, for their dedication to God (as
our religious people also do use) as appears in the book of Numbers. Cap. 6.
And finally that S. John was a Monk of the new testament, and a pattern of
Monastical life, (though this be more than I am bound to prove, all these
fathers foloweinge do testify with one consent. S. Ihon a monk of the nevve
testament.
S. Gregory Nazianzen: orat. de S. Basilio. S. Chrysostom, ho. 1. in Marc S.
Jerome ep. ad Eustochium Cassianus, collat 18. cap. 6. Sozomenus li. 1. hist.
c. 12. Isidorus li. 2. de divine. offic. ca. 15. Theophilact in cap. 1. Luc.
Nicephorus, li. 8. Hist. c. 39. and others.

Next after these examples he reprehendeth my description of a sectarie,
THOVCHINGE the true definition of a sectarie.
sayeing: that it bevvrayeth great want of learning, for that it confounds
heretics with sectaries, and makes no distinction between the general and
the special: for all heretics are sectaries (says he,) but all sectaries
are not heretics. For learning here I strive not: let the opinion thereof
fall where it best lyketh the reader to place it. But in matter of truth M.
Chark is greatly over seen in this place, and does vnwoorthelie challenge the
credit of a learned man for this answer: having incurred two gross errors in
the same. For first among divines and Ecclesiastical writers, The difference
betvvyxt heresy and a sect.
an heretic and a sectarie is all one, and there is no general and special
between the^, as he imagines. Which appears also by the scripture it self.
For act. 28. where both the latin translation and their English has a sect,
the greek has heresy, So likewise gal. 5. the same you may read act. 24.26.
and 2. pet. 2. And if in old time there were any difference between these
words among the gentiles: heresy was the more general: clean contrary to
that M. Charke imagines. The signification of heresy more general then of a
sect.
For that heresy (signifyeing an election of some private opinion) was the
general name to all the particular sects of philosophers. As to the sect of
Stoikes, platonikes, peripatikes and the like: as most learnedlie do note S.
Ierom: in cap. 3. ep. ad Tit. And Isodorus l. 8. etym. cap. 3. Theophilact, in
ca. 2. ep. ad col. And Tertulian. l. de prescript: So that this was a great
over sight in M. Charke.

The second argument which M. Charke uses to prove a difference between a
sect and an heresy, and so to overthrow the definition, is, A fond argument.
for that if one man (says he) cut him self of in opinion, he shall not be
called a sect except there be many. But he shall be called a sectarie M. Charke:
as also for the same cause, he shall be called, not an heresy, but an
heretic. I marvel where your wit was, when you devised this difference
without a diversity. But you adioyne to this, two examples of scripture: the
one of the Corinthians sharply rebuked of Schism by S. Paul, for that, one
said he was of Paul, an other of Apollo, an other of Cephas, an other of
Christ: 1. Cor. 1.
who notwithstanding did not differ in matters of faith (say you:) but therein
by your leave, you are greatly deceived. For albeit S. Paul does use the
greek word Shisme in that place, Schism.
which (in his proper signification) is but a degree to heresy, (as S.
Augustine proves by example of the donatists, Ad quod vult. hae. 69.
first shismatikes and after heretics:) yet schism in his large and ample
signification (whereby it signifiethe all division) co^prehe^deth not only,
heresy, but also all error of faith, whereby men are divided in belief,
Heresy. Error.
which is not always heresy, except it be defended against the church with
obstinacy. And such schism o^ division in belief was the schism of the
Corinthias, (as S. Austen well notes) for that they erred in a point of faith,
Tract. 5. in Ioh.
esteming the virtue and power of Baptism, not to depend only of Christ, but
of the dignity of the Baptiser. The erroneous schism of the Corinthians. 1.
Cor. 1.
And therefore, one bragged, as baptized of Paul, an other of Apollo, an other
of Cephas: and some (following the truth in deed) said, that by what minister
soever they were baptized, yet held they only their Justification and
sanctification of Christ, as co^curring equally with all his ministers in
Baptism. This is S. Augustens Catholic exposition, and besides this, The
exposition of S. Paul's words. 1. Cor. 1.
the words of the text do manifestly prove the same. Is Christ divided
(says S. Paul?) that is, does he impart him self more in one man's baptism
than in an others! or does he not equally and wholly concur in every of
his ministers baptism? Again: was Paul crucified for you? to wit, thereby
to be able to sanctify you of him self, by his baptism? Or were you
baptized in the name of Paul? No: but in the name, power, and virtue of Christ,
who only sanctifies in every baptism. I thank God that I have baptized
none among you, but Chrispus, and Caius, and the house of Steven, less any
man might say that you were baptized in my name. By this it appears plainly
that the Corinthia^s were divided in matter of faith, about baptism.
Wherefore, as this example makes nothing to the purpose, for which it was
brought: so is it fondly and malitiouslie applied by you against Catholics,
who say, I follow the rule or order of life of Benedict, I of Augusten, I of
Basil, I of Francis: wherein there is no difference of faith at all: An example
No more to this purpose (thoghe the matters be unlike) than if you ministers
should say among your selves in the contrary sense of liberty, I will live
unmarried after the order of my Lord of Canterbury: I will take a wife after
the platform of my Lord of London. I will have two wives together, after the
fashion of M. Archedeacon of Salesburie: I will have a wife and a wenche
besides, after the custom of some other archedeacon and preacher in England.

Your second example is of the phariseys, who were a notorious sect (say
you) and yet did not cut of them selves by heresy from the church. Heresies
of the pharisees
Wherein again you ouerslipp fowlie. For in that they were a notoriouse sect,
they held particular heresies, as the passing of souls from body to body,
and the like, whereof you may read in Joseph: L. 2. de bello Iudaico, cap. 7.
and in philastrius in his catologe of heresies upon the word phariseus. HOW
THE PHARISEES were a sect in two senses.
And this is to be understood of some of the pharisees. For other wise I
confess that the pharisees were sometime called a sect or heresy, in good
part, for that they defended the immortality of the soul, and were divided
thereby from the Saduces, A sect or heresy may sometimes be taken in good
part. Act. 26.
who denied the same: act. 23. And in this sense spoke S. Paul, when he said
before the Judgment seat (towching his life past before his conversion) I
lived a pharisey, according to the most certain sect of our religion. Where
is to be noted, against M. Charke again: that S. Paul in greek uses the
word heresy, which in his general signification, importinge only a choice
of any opinion (as I have noted before) might be taken in good sense, even as
this word Tyranny, Tyrannis.
might, and was taken of the old writers, though now by use and appropriation,
both the one and the other be taken in evil part. And (to the end M. Charke
may confess his oversight in this matter) I will allege him the words of
one of his own doctors, M. Fulke by name: who of this matter says thus.
Against Bristovvs Motives. page 14.
S Paul him self openly acknouleged that he was a pharisey, when nothing
was understood by the name, but one that believed the resurrection of the
dead, although the term of pharisey was otherwise the name of a sect of
heretics, which maintained many damnable errors, from which the Apostles
were most free.

By this now is defended the definition of sectaries given by the Censure: and
overthrown that fond new definition devised by M. Charke, and called by him a
truer definition, according to the true etymology of the word: M. Charks
definition of a sect.
to wit, A sect is a co^pagnie of men that differ from the rest of their
religion, in matter or form of their profession. Touching the true etymology,
which he speaks of, I can not tell what he means, nor (I think) him self.
For in greek the scripture uses the word heresy for i^ (as has been
showed) which can yield no etymology, to maintain this definition. And in
Latin, Secta must needs come, either a secando or a sectando: both which
being referred to matters of the mind (as necessarily they must) do include
always a diversity of opinion, as has been showed: and M. Charke can not give
one example to the contrary, for the maintenance of this absurd definition of
different form in profession etc. Whereby he would make all them sectaries,
which differ in any external form. By which reason, all their own
bishops, ministers, Judges, lawyers, and the like, are sectaries: and all
diversities of states are sects. Great absur^^^^^^
For is there not a different form in making of a byshope and of a minister?
is not there diversity in their authorities? in their apparel? in their
state, and form of life? notwithstanding that both do profess ministry of
the word? The lay man and the preacher, do profess one religion, and yet
is there no difference in the form of their profession? is the ministers form
of apparel, of preaching, of ministering the sacraments, of obedience to his
byshope, of observing the statuts of college or church wherein he is, nothing
different from any other lay man? or is he a sectarie for this? who would say
this, and much less print yt, but only william Charke?

I leave the beginning of his definition as too too childish and ridiculous for
him, M. Charcks fond oversight.
that professes learning, where he says: a sect is a company of men: as if
a man should say, an heresy is a compauie of men: or an opinion is a company
of men: or a frencie is a company of frentike men. When S. Paul says: I
lived a pharisey according to the most certain sect of our religion: Act. 26.
will ye say, he meant, according to the most certain number of men of his
religion? or rather according to the most certain divided opinion of his
religion? for the number of phariseys were not certain. Again, when S. Paul
says: Gal 5.
the vvoorks of the flesh are manifest, as sects etc. Will you say here
multitudes of men are works of the flesh? where as the greek has heresies?
So like wise, 2. Pet. 2.
when S. Peter says) of false prophets) they bring in sects of perdition, in
greek heresies of perdition: will you say, multitudes of men of perdition? I
omit many other examples in scripture, which do convince your absurdity, and
besides that, do prove our principal point, that sects and heresies are all
one. Although I am not ignorant, that in common speech, this word sect, may
improperlie signify the men also which profess the same, but not in a
definition, where the proper nature of each word is declared.

Whether the Jesuits be a sect by M. Charks definition.
After this new definition set down, M. Charke proves the Jesuits to be a
sect, by the same, for whose disgrace only he devised it. His collection or
argument, is this: Seeing therefore the Jesuits receive a peculiar vow to
preach, as the Apostles did, every where: to do it of free cost: to vvhipp
and torment them selves after the example of a sect called by the name of
vvhippers, and condemned long a go: seeing thy are divided from all others,
and do follow the rule of Loyolas: it appears plainly they are a sect. A
substa^tial conclusion, for a man of your making, These be like the conclusions
ye made in the tower against M. Campian. I mean not of your last conclusion,
to dispache him at Tiburn, for that was unanswerable, although nothing
foloweing of the premises: I mean of your pretended dysputations with him.
But to our matter: what is there in this illation that can make the Jesuits a
sect, if it were all granted to be true? that they vovv to preach as the
Apostle did? You know, the scripture does allow and commend the dedication of
a man's life by vow to gods service: Number. 6. Psalm. 131. What then? To preach
every where and at free cost? This you should be a shamed to say, saying
Christ him self commands it to his Apostles: Nath. 28. Mark. 16. Math. 10.
Teach all nations: preach the gospel to all creatures: you have received
it freely, give it freely And S. Paul gloryeth much that he had taught the
gospel of free cost. 2. Cor. 11. What then makes them sectaries? To vvhipp
and torment them selves, if it were true? why? for what reason? It is written of
S. Paul by him self, that he chasteyned his own body. 1. Cor. 9. yea and
that he carried the bra^ds of Christ in his flesh. 2. Cor. 4. And the
scriptures do talk much of mortyfyeing our members: of crucifyenge our flesh,
Coloss. 3. Gal. 5. and 6. Romans 12.

Chastizing of our bodies.

Mat. 3. Marc. 1. Heb. 11.


and the like: and never a word of pamperinge the same. And ecclesiastical
stories do make large mention of great severity of the ancient fathers and
Saints herein. As of the severity in life of S. John Baptist and other Saints
Also of the Saints of the old testament: who went about (as S. Paul says) in
camels hears, in goats skins, and the like. And he that will see great store
of examples gathered together out of all antiquity about this matter: let him
read but one chapter of Marcus Marulus de castigatione corporis per flagella,
Ca. 10. li. 3.
of chasteyning the body with whippes.

S. Ierom. testifyeth of him self (by an occasion given) to a secret friend,
Ep. 22. ad Eustoch
of his: But you will say S. Ierom. was no protestant.
That his skin, was now become as black with punishment, as the skin
of an Ethiopian. And Ioannes Cassianus that lived about the same time, has
infinite examples of the practices of holy fathers in this point. And albeit
Peter Martyr a renegate friar, after he had now coped with a wenche, does
jest at S. Basil and S. Gregory Nazianzen, for the hard handling of their
own bodies: In ca. 16. li. 3. Reg.

An offer of coolinge physic to the ministers of England.

In London. In Banberie.


yet there is reason to think, that they knew what they did as well as he. And
if you ministers of England would use a little of this salve sometimes also:
possible, the world would go better with you, and fewer Eatons should need to
stand on the pillorie, for lyeing with their own daughters: and fewer hynches
fly the country for rauishing of young gyrles, especially being preachers,
and having wives of their own besides: And many other foul enormities (in
this kind) would easier be avoided. But if you will not practice this remedy
your selves, for contristing or making sad the holy ghost within you, as
your phrase is: yet impute it not as Schism and heresy to them which use it
moderately, as you may imagine the Jesuits will, being not fools, nor having
iron bodies, but sensible, as yours are.

And as for the last reason you add, of their following Loyolas his rule of
life, and that they are divided from others: and made schismatikes thereby: I
have showed before, that being but a particular direction of life and manners,
grounded on the scripture and practice of ancient fathers, and allowed by the
superours of the Church: it can be no matter of sect or heresy, nether are
Jesuits separated from others by this, but rather nearer joined with all the
godly: for that virtue is but one, and he that leads the most virtuous
life, is joined nearest to Christ, and to all good Christians.

Charks belyeing of the Jesuits.
And this now may be answered, supposing that all were true that you report in
this place of the Jesuits life and vocation, which is not so. But as well
here, as commonly in all other places, you lay down some invention or
addition of your own malice^ against the^. As for example: In this place, it
is most false that you affirm of the^: that they take a peculiar vow to
whippe and torment them selves. There was never any such vow either taken or
talked of, much less is it true, that they take that vow to do it (as you
say) after the example of a sect called by the name of vvhippers, condemned
long ago. You are a great enemy to whippers (M. Charke) and you think yt
good sleepinge in a whole skin. I do not blame you for it. Nether are you a
greater mislyker of all whippers in general, then I am in particular, of those
whom you here name: Gab. prateol. in haer. de flagellantib.

Ger. tract. cont. flagel.

The heresies of vvhippers.


for they were heretics, (as you may read in prateolus and Gerson) teaching
that the baptism of water had now ceased, and the baptism of voluntary
blood, by whipping, was ordained in place thereof: without which none could be
saved: and therefore they whipped themselves ope^lie: teaching also many other
heresies beside: for which they were condemned. And what does this make
against the sober and moderate chastiseme^t, which good men use in secret, upon
their own bodies, at such time as they esteem them selves (for mortification)
to need the same? was there ever honest man but your self, would have
objected so impertiment a thing in print? but you make me laugh when you say a
sect condemned long ago. How long ago I pray you (M. Charke) or by whom
were they condemned? the storye is evident: they began in Italy about the
year of our Lord 1273. Pratcolus vbi supra.

Alphon. lib. 3. cont. haeresee.


under pope Gregory the tenthe, and were condemned both by him and his
successors. And is this condemnation authentical with you? if it be: you know
Luther and Calvin were condemned by like authority. And thus for lack of
matter, you lay hold on any thing though it make never so much against your
self.

The last point is about the name of Jesuits, THE NAME of Jesuits.
against which, for that you quarelled much, the Censure did show that the
name was not taken to them selves of arrogancy (as you objected) but given
them by common speech for breuities sake, where as their true name in deed,
by foundation of their order, was, societas nominis Jesus: a society dedicated
to the name of Jesus. Now against this you reply, that I do call them Jesuits
in" my book. But what is this to the purpose? is it not lawful for me to
follow the common phrase of speech? or because I call them so, does that
prove that they challenge that name to them selves? Secondly you say that
Turrian a Jesuit calls them so: and what if he did, foloweing the common
manner of speech? does that convince that they appoint that name unto them
selves? but yet you are too too impudent to attribut this to Turrian,
especially with such vehement asseueration as you do. Impude^cie.
For I have read the two chapiters by you alleged twice, and that with as
great diligence as I could: and albeit he does call them by the name of the
society of Jesus fyftie times in the same: Turianus in apologetico cap. 1. and
5.

Fond exclaming for nothing.


yet does he not once name them Jesuits. Wherefore this shows with what
conscience you write. And this being so: let the reader judge what cause you
had to cry out in these words: What blasphemy is this, to abuse the most
blessed name of Jesus, for a color to their blasphemous practices? Every
thing is blasphemy with this angry gentleman, though it be but the mouinge
of a straw but hear his reason: They dravv to them selves alone (says he)
the confortable name of Jesus, which is common to all: No, (Sir william) you
may have your part, if you exclude not your self. For when any men leaves
all other cares and business to serve the Queen only: An evident example.
(for examples sake,) and professes the same by some special name of her
Majesty's devout servant: does he iniurye other subjects hereby? or does he
take from them their interest in her Majesty? But the truth is, that malice
would have you say somevvhat against Jesuits: mary their good life and virtue
excludes you from matter: you might have done well to have consulted with
Eldertons Entitled. Gentle girckes for Jesuits to be-come true Israelytes.
ryme, who proves that they can not be called Jesuits, for that they can not
raise the dead, cure the lame, restore the blind, nor walk upon the
water, as Jesus did. Which proves also, that they can not be called
Christianes: for that Christ did the same things, and they can not: Nor yet old
Elderton (I think) him self.

OF religious men, and their vocation.
THE CENSVRE
Base and beggarly monks and friars, popish orders, Monks and friars.
and the like: wherein you follow the (2.) old heretics In psa. 132 Li: 11.
hist. cap. 3.
and Rufinus of the Arians. And petilian the donatist, following the same
spirit, scoffed at S. Austen for being a friar, as S. Austen him self vvriteth
in these words. Li. 3. cont. li. Petil. ca. 40.
After this, Petilian proceeded on with his slau^derouse mouth, to speak evil
of monasteries, and of monks, blaming me also for that I had set forth this
kind of life, the which life either he knows not, what it means, or else
feigneth him self not to know it, though it be notorious to all the world. S.
Austen says this kind of life (of monks and friars and other religiouse
men) was notoriouse and known to the world in his time, both in respect of
the famous men, that had lived in the same, as Anthony, Paul, hilarion,
Basil, Nazianzen, Martin, Austen him self, and others: as also of the infinite
books and treatises which holy fathers of the primative Church had written
in defense and comme^dation of that kind of life: Books written in the
comme^dation of monks and friars.
as Athanasius in the life of S. Anthony the Abbote: beside a peculiar
treatise entitled: An exhortation to monks or to Monastical life: S. Basil
also vvrote a great volume entitled, Co^stitutions or laws for monks: beside
diverse other treatises of that argument, written both by him self, and by
Gregory Nazianzen. S: Chrisostom has fouer homilies extant in commendation
of the life of monks: and two whole books, of the comparison between the
Mounke and the king, vvherin he prefers the life of the monk, before that
of the king. Also he vvrote a book against you (M. Charke) entitled: Against
the blamers of Monks and Monastical life. Johannes Cassianus a little after,
vvrote 12. books entitled, Of the laws and ordinances of Monks. Seuerus
Sulpitius vvrote a dialogue contaynyng the notable conversation of the Esterlie
monks, with S. Martin Abbot of eyghtie monks. And finally, S. Austen (for I
will come no lovver) has written many treatises of Monks, commending
highly that excellent kind of life, and defending it against the detractions
of heretics of his time.

Let any man read his hundred thyrtie seven epistle, vvherof the title is,
That for a few evil monks we should not infame all monks. In which epistle
he shall see all the slanderous arguments of all heretics, against this
kind of me^, ansvvered. Wherefore M. Charke and his fellows in condemning and
deprauing the lives of monks and friars, follow their ancestors, and make
war with all the Saints of Christ his holy Church, who have so much
reuere^ced and commended the said life. In like manner, by calling them so
often, Base and Beggarly, he shows what, spirit he is of: Luc. 9. Ioh 11.
Mat. 19.
that is, far differing from the spirit of Christ, whose voluntary poverty
is noted in the scripture, and the same most highly commended by him, to all
his folovvers.

THE DEFENSE.
Of the word religious D. Tho. secunda secu^dae. q. 18. art. 1.
To this in effect is replied very little, beside a vain cauyll or two, and
certain ordinary euasions. for first, he misliketh greatly, that Monks,
Nounes, and the like, are called religiouse people, as though they only
(says he) had religion in them. But this is a mere cauyll. For these were
not called religiouse by antiquity, for that they only had religion in
them, but for that they made profession of more perfect folovveing of Christian
religion, than others, by removing worldly impedimentes, according to the
counsel of Christ touching perfection: Marc. 10. 1. Cor. 7.
Mat. 19. and 16. and Esa. 56. where chastity, voluntary poverty, and
abnegation of our own will, are commended and counseled to perfection, and
the countraries thereof in other places of scripture shevved to be great
impedimentes. Now the vanity of this old heretical quarrel against
religiouse, may be shevved by a thousand examples. When we say, learned men,
we mean only such as make profession of more excellent and deep learning,
than the rest: and yet, we mind not thereby to exclude all other men from all
learning and knowledge, besides them. When we call ecclesiastical persons,
the clergy, that is, (according to the signification of the word) the lot
or inheritance of God, C^EROS.
as all antiquity has called them, namely the first council of Nice,
almost in every Canon: And Origin and S. Ierom. prove the use thereof out of
the tvvelueth chapter of Jeremy: Orig. ho. 7. in Iere. Hier. in 12 Ierem.
we mean not hereby, to exclude other Christians from all inheritance of
Christ (as such a vvrangler as Sir william, might cauyll:) but that these men
are more peculiarly, dedicated to gods service than other. The like, when we
call only twelve Apostles: (which signifies sent) we mean not that none
were sent by Christ but they only: For we read of diverse others sent by him
also Math 6. and Luc. 10. which in that sense are truly also Apostles: but
we mean that those twelve were principally sent, and therefore by a
certain excellency, only called Apostles. By which examples and infinite
more it appears, that this man vveygheth not what he says, so he say
somevvhat.

The second thing which he answers is, Of Good and euel religious.
that he is not like the old heretics, for that they dispraysed the good,
and he only spoke against the badde religious people: As also S. Augustine him
self and Barnard does. Which I confess: and if M. Charke would stand to this
his sayeing: we should quickly be at an end for this controversy: For we all
speak against, and condemn evil monks, as we do also evil pryests, evil
bishops, evil princes: And we say that their damnation shall be far greater
than the rest. But yet, we neither condem^e all to be evil, and much less
(for the wickedness of some) do we condemn the whole state, and order of
life. And in these two points we dyffer, as well from the old heretics (as
may appear by S. Augustine alleged in the Censure,) as also from M. Charke
and his fellows: who both condemn all religiouse people, of our time to be
lewd, (which is wicked presumption clean contrary to the scripture
forbydding to judge, Romans 2. and 1. cor. 4.) and for their supposed evil life,
do also condemn their whole vocation: Against S^^pleton page 96. and
which is an heretical sophistry, as S. Augusten proves ep. 137. I confess
(says M. Fulke) there were colleges of virgins and Monks within the first
six hundred years, after Christ, but they differed as much from your Nonnes,
as these from honest women: and as much from your popish boars, as Angels
do from: devils. If I had not named this doctor: you might have known him, by
his tongue, especially if you have any skill in ruffianlie speech: But by
this you see that these men's last refuge against Monks and Nonnes, is to say
they are not like the old monks and Nonnes of the primative church: and the
differences you shall now hear out of M. Charke: It is a plain injury
(says he) ^o match those ancient monks of the primative church wi^h
those of the popish orders. For the old Monks lived in their houses without
vows, as students of divinity in colleges: they were ho^ie, painful, and
learned: ^hey labored with their hands: their societies were Nourices of
good learning and godly life, to furnish afterward the church: vvhereto
being once called they ceased to be Monks, and left their Monasteries.

WHETHER THE State of our monks and No^^es be the same as was in the
primative church
Here are in effect, four or five differences given between our monks and
those of the primative church, to prove that their states of life are not the
same. All which (except only the first) if they were proved or granted as
they lie, do not prove one jot of diversity in their state of life, though
somewhat in their manners. As we may easily grant, that the men of no state
do live so perfectly now, in their vocation, as they did in the primative
church: and yett this does not alter their state or vocation. For example: If
I should reason against the bishops of England, as M. Charke does against
Monks: 1. Cor. 4.
our bishops are not so learned painful and holy as they of the primative
church were: ^hey do not labor with their hands, as the first bishops did,
they do not go a foot, preach of free-cost, watch, pray, and fast, as
they did: therefore they are no bishops, or their vocations is not the same that
the others was: is this a good argument? no surely, nor you shall never find
it used by a Catholic man. For by this means we might overthrow all states,
seeing that they live not so well as man of their calling in the primative
church did. We can distinguish between the life of men and their vocation or
state of life. And though we mislike the one, yet we can permit the other.
Only troublesome heretics from the beginning (to engarboyle common
wealths) have impugned the states of life, Heretical consequences.
for the vitiouse manners (either true or supposed) of some private men: as for
that some pope lived evil, therefore no popedom, no authority to be granted
him. For that some monks or Nonnes have lived wickedlie, and contrary to their
vocation: therefore no monks or Nonnes are to be permitted.

And this is now upon supposall, that all were true which M. Charke says of
these differences: Charks bold slaunderinge of all religious people.
which is nothing so. For with what modesty, or conscience can he, sitting in
England, give sentence of all the monks and friars in Christendom abroad,
that they are unlearned, vnpainfull, and unholy, having never had experience
of all their lives him self, and seeinge so many learned woorks written by them
daily? he might hear (if he were in these places) infinite preachers of them
(through out Europ and further) with great example of virtue, to labor
painfully in gods church: argues not this an intolerable and indiscrete
malice then, to condemn them all so peremptorily as he does? And as for
laboring with their hands, though it be not necessary ^o any, if they be
occupied in greater matters: yet there is no monastery where in some do not
exercise that function also: those I mean, which are not otherwise employed
in service of the church, preaching, or ministringe of the sacraments. And
for the last point, of not yielding ministers to serve the church: It is too
open and apparent a slander. For as I have said of preachers: so may I say of
bishops, chosen every where out of monasteries to govern in gods church. And
Pius Quintus within the space of five years, chose 70. learned men for bishops,
out of one only order of religious men, besides all other. Wherefore this man
(as you see) talks of all Christendom, from his poor benefice by London, as
barbers are wont to do, of common wealths, by report only of such as
frequent their shopps to be trimmed.

TOUCHING RELIGIOUS VOWS.
But in deed the first difference which he puts is to the purpose, and of
great importance: (I mean touching vows) if yt were true, that is, if he were
able to prove that the monks of the primative church, made no vows as he
affirms. For I do confess, that the making of those three vows, of
poverty, obedience, and chastity, are the essential points of a religiouse
life. And therefore if old monks did not vow: I confess their state of life,
was not the same with that of our religious people at this day, And therefore
M. Chark should have proved this point substantiallie: and then in deed he had
done some what. But he brings not so much as one syllable for the proof
thereof besides his own credit, which is not woorthe half a syllable in this
matter against monks, whom he hates so insatiablie. But yet mark his
subtilitie. S. Augustine does make mention of some things by him named, De mor.
eccl. cap. 31 de opere monach^ c. 14. and 15. Cogginge and foystinge.
as for example, of the holy conversation and labor of monks in his time:
under pretense whereof M. Charke q^otethe him in the margent, and places the
quotation over right against the matter of voweinge: that under that shadow, he
might tell a lie or two, with some credit, as he has done. For S. Augustine
has no one word against the voweinge of Monks in his time: but cleene
contrariewise he testifies the same most plainly. As for example, In Psalm.
75. circa fine^.
where he shows a reason to a monk why he could not live out of his
monastery, as other do, without damnation, he says to him: Questione vel
regula 14. fusius explica^a.
Illi non vouerunt, tu vouisti: they have not vowed, thou have vowed., And
S. Basil before him confirms the same sayeing, that Monks in their
profession, solenni se voto obligabant Deo: Did bind them selves to God by a
solemn vow, which to break, was, sacrilegii se sce^ere obligare: To
inwrappe them selves in the heinous sin of sacrilege. Ep. 6. ad Theodorum
lapsum. Heb. 13.
The same does S. Christsostom teach, writing to a monk that would gladly
have take a wife, and alleged for him self S. Paul, (as our men do) that
marriage was honorable in all men. But S. Chrisostom answers: honorabiles
fateor nuptias at vero in te adulterii nomen a^cip^et, si volueris vnquam (quod
abs^t) nuptias cogi^are. I confess, that marriage is honorable in others,
(says he:) But in thee it shall be adultery, if ever (which God forbid,)
thou showldest think on marriage. Nay, he adds further: Adulterio illud peius
aff^rmo: I do affirm it to be worse than adultery.

The like have they of Sanctimonialls or Nonnes, Nonnes.
in respect of their vow. Sanctimonialis si nupserit (says S. Augustine)
Christi adultera reputabitur: In psa. 83.
If a Nonne marie she shall be esteemed as adulteress to Christ And S. Iero^.
says, Lib. cont. Iouinian.
damnationem habebit, quia primam fidem irritam fecit: she shall be damned, for
that she has broken her first fayeth. And S. Cypria^ says. She commits
incest. Li. 1. ep. 11.

Li. de vir. cap. 29.

Li. ad vir. lap. cap. 5.

De bono v^ duitatis c. 9^

Ibid. ca. 8.


Chrisostom says: Intolerabili scelere se astringit: she byndeth her self
with an intolerable wicked deed. S. Ambrose says: she commits spiritual
adultery, for punishment whereof no death can be devised severe enough.
Finalie, S. Augustine says. Etiamsi non nubat, velle nubere damnabile est:
Albeit she marie not, yet is it damnable unto her, to have but a will of
Marriage. Wherefore he gives this counsel generally to all, Proinde quae se
non continent, nubant antequam continentiam profitean^ur, antequam Deo voueant:
quod nisi reddant, iure damnantur: Therefore, they which can not co^taine, let
the^ marry before they profess continence, before they make their vow to
God: the which vow except they keep, they are justly damned.

What will M. Charke say now to this, and to much more that might be brought
for this matter? may not he blushe to have made (in sayeinge that the
religiouse of the primative church made no vows) so open and manifest a lie?
but he cacheth hold of a he^me of my garment, sayeing, that how soever the
matter go otherwise, yet all the vvisdome of your Censurshipp can not make our
Augustine a friar. Which is your Augustine (M. Chark) I can not tell, but if you
mean S. Augustine the holy doctor, that I last alleged: me think (by that he
says) you have small cause, to call him yours. If you should ask my lord of
hereforde, or any other cuppled friar in England: I think he would skarce
call him his. But I know you say this in disclaming of the other S. Augustine,
which was our first Apostle, and planter of Christian faith in England.
Against purg. page 333. and against stapl^t: pa. 14. Against bristoe page 19.
and against staplet. page 1.
Whom M. Fulke terms a proud, cruel, and unlearned Monk that perverted
the Saxons, and corrupted the sincerity of our country, by vvorkinge of
lyeinge and false miracles And S. Bid a credulouse and fabulouse man which
comm^nded Austen so much. A small reward for so great a benefit. But I would
feign know of you (M. Charke) that are a preacher, why you do give out this
difference and distinction to your folowers of Augustine the doctor, and
Augustine the Monk: were they not both Monks? does not S. Augustine the
doctor confess it of him self here in the Censure alleged? if that do not
suffice: read the same confession of him self in diverse other parts of his
works, as in ep. 89. and tract. 1. de com: vita clericorum: and read Possidius
in his life, who lived 40. years with him, and adds, that diverse of S.
Augustins Monks, instituted many monasteries in his life time. Whether S.
Augustine were a friar or no.
But (say you) he was no friar. In deed the english names of friar or Monk
were not then extant, for that we were not yet Christians. But the Latin names
frater and monachus were attributed to him, as may appear in the places
alleged. Which, joined with the vows, whereof I spoke before, do prove the
thing, what soever you may wrangle of the English name. But what require you
more to make him a friar after the english fashion? if you will have me guess
at his apparel, it were hard; and nothing pertinent, for that only the
vows make the vocation, as has been showed. yet S. Ambrose makes mention de
nigro cucullo, and c^ngulo ex corio: Scr. 94.
Of the black hoode, and the girdell of leather, that S. Augustine did wear.
Now they which know the habit of Austen friars, let them consider how nighe
this goes to that matter. Albeit (as I said) the weed little imports, when
we have the substance of the vocation.

The last words of the Censure touching Christ's spirit of voluntary
poverty, Of the voluntary poverty of Christ.
offe^dith greatly our replyer. The example of Christ (says he) is alleged
most blasphemouslie against his Majesty. Still the word blasphemy, must be
one. But what is the reason? when did Christ ever vvhipp him self says M.
Charke? Yet the choler of whipping is not past from M. Charks stomach. But I
answer: he had no rebellion in his flesh as we have, by reason of the conflict
of concupiscence left us: for resisting whereof we use mortification of our
body, according to S. Paul's counsel, coloss. 3. Neither is it necessary
that we should do nothing in this kind, but what we read expresselie Christ
to have done: Albeit, to give us also example herein, Marc. 6. and 9. Luc. 6.
we read of his great fasting, and long prayeing, with lyeing all night on the
ground, which not withstanding I think you ministers will not imitate. But you
add: Christ frequented public assembleys, and was sometimes entertained at
great feasts. Yea marie, this is for good cheer: this is more pleasant than the
doctrine of the whippe. And did you never hear (Sir) of religiouse men invited
also to a feast or assembly? You are wont to call the^ belly gods for that
cause: and how is this ^tile so soon changed? O malice, how blind and
frantike art thou? But you ask again. Sap. 2.
What worldly blessings given him by his father did he at any time abandon?
how does his example recommend voluntary poverty? I ask you (M. Charke) if
he that was Lord of all, chose to live of alms, and of such things as were
sent him: Luc. 14. Math. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 18. and 12.
as the scripture signifies Io: 12. Luc 8. was not this voluntary poverty in
him self? And he that counseled men to renounce all they possessed, for his
service, and to give all to the poor, that would be perfect: did not he
recommende voluntary poverty to other, though he commanded it not? If the
Apostles left all propriety, and did live in common, Act. 2. Act. 4. and 5.
as the scripture notes: and many good Christians chose to sell all they had,
and to offer it to that community (though not upon constraint as S. Luke
testifies:) And if Ananias and Saphira for breakinge their vow of poverty,
made with the Apostles (as S. Basil and S. Ierom, S. Basil. ser. 1. de insti.
monach. S: Ier. ep. 8. ad demetriadem.
and other ancient fathers do testifye,) were so terriblie punished by death,
for the terror of all vow breakers: then no dowt, but this was done either by
the example, or by the recommendation of Christ, which you make so strange,
as you stick not to affirm it, Anabaptistical condemning of propriety. Good
God, how far may fond fury drive a man, that has no guide? In c. 19. Mat.
and ep. 8 ad deem. In reg. fusius explicat: interrogat. 9. Li. 17. de ciui. c.
4.
I pray you read but S. Ierom, upon the words of Christ, go and sell all:
Also S. Basil upon the same words: As also S. Chrysostom upon the words of
S. Paul. Sa^utaete pris^am: and perhaps you will alter your judgment,
espiciallie if you will credit S. Augustine, who proves out of the same
chapter, that the Apostles them selves votum paupertatis vouerunt, made a
vow of poverty.

But as for the worldly blessings which you talk so much of in this and other
places of your booke^ I know that all creatures are blessings of God, but yet
all use of all, is nether commanded, nor commended to all. You know who
says: All things are lavvfull, but all are not expedient. 1. Cor. 6. and 10.
The carnal Jews were much entysed by those blessings in the old testament:
but in the new testament, you shall never find Christians either allured to
the^, or dandled and smothed in them, as you do your folowers: but rather to
the contrary, many threats and hard sayeings are uttered against richemen,
Mat. 19. Marc. 10. Lu. 6. and 18 1. Tim. 6. Apo. 18. Romans 16.
and such as live in pleasures and ease of this woorlde. And therefore your
often repeating, and tickling fleshly hearts with naming carnal and worldly
blessings, proves you (if I be not deceived) to be one of them, whereof the
Apostle says: they serve not Christ, but their own bellye, and do seduce
innocent hearts by svvete words and blessings.

THE CENSVRE.
Thirdly, you endeavor to bring the Jesuits in contempt by their obscure
conception (as you term it) from one Loyal as a Spanyard, and had not their
fulll creation and commission until about thirty years past, from pope paulus
quartus. Wherein you err: for it was from Paulus (1.) 1.
tertius, the third pope before Paulus quartus, and the third pope after leo
decimus, in whose time Luther began. So that there is not much difference,
between Jesuits and protestants, in their antiquity of name, marie in matter
very great: for the protestants faith and belief began at that time: but
the Jesuits, following with humility the faith which they fovvnd in the
Catholic Church, only began a strayter kind of life in manners and
behavior, The true life of Jesuits.
than the common sort of people used: for reformyng of whose vices, they
dedicated them selves to God, and to all kind of labor, pains, travail, and
peril, with abandonyng all worldly pleasures, and all possibility of
preferme^t in the same, so far forth, as none of that Society has, or may
take any spiritual or temporal livings, or commodities what soever, though
diverse great princes have pressed them often times with the same, but of free
cost they preach and teach in all places where they are sent, with all
humility of spirit, and without intermedling with matters of estate, as
shall be shevved more hereafter. Wherefore M. Charke offers them the greater
vvrong in charging them with the contrary. M. Hanmers notoriouse lie.
And M. Hanmers impudency is the more to be wondered at, who blusheth not to
put in print so notoriouse an untruth in the sight of all the world, and to
repeat, urge and amplifye the same so often in his book, sayeing, that one (2)
2.
Theatinus a Jesuit hypocriticallie got to be Cardinal and pope, Vide Iaco.
payuam: li. 1. de ortho. explicat.
meaning thereby Paulus quartus, called before Johannes Petrus Caraffa of the
order of Theatines, and not of Jesuits, which all the world knovveth to be
two several and distinct orders of religion. And therefore M. Hanmer with
friar Bale, whom he cyteth in the margent, may be ashamed of so false a
slander, both toward the man, and also the religion.

THE DEFENSE.
Little defense needs here, for that the replyer has nothing in effect to
say, beside a railing sentence or two against the Jesuits: saieing, that they
eat the sins of the people. Os^e. 4.
Whereas these me^, nether taking any charge of souls upon the^, nor receiving
any tithes or other commodities for the same, (both which things M. Chark
does) the reader may easily Judge, whether her or they stand more in danger
of that sentence. His error of taking Paulus quartus for Paulus tertius, he
excuses by sayeing, that kemnitius writes so. But this rather accuses tha^
excuses the fact, adjoining also wilful malice to the error, which might
have seemed before of ignorance only. For he had read ke^nitius reproved for
the same by Andradius, Li. 1. ortho. ^xpli.
(as he confesses) which was sufficient, being in so manifest a matter, as all
christendom can bear witness of the same. And he easilye discovers his
conscience of kemnitius his false and absurd writing of the Jesuits, in that
he passes over, as unanswerable, the lie objected to M. Hanmer, taken out of
ke^nitius also, about the said Paulus quartus whom he calls Theatinus. But
M. Hanmer, HANMERS LIE.
for saving his honestye, answers it, mary with such success, as men that
take in hand to amend old tubbes by knockinge, wherein often in stead of
stoppinge one hole, they make many. For first he says, that in denyeinge
Paulus quar^us to be a Jesuit, I confess him to be an hypocrit. Behold a new
crack. For my answer in the Censure shows the contrary. Secondly he
says, that I will have only Andradius payua a Jesuit and a partial
writer, to be of more credit in this matter, than many other learned men.
Behold an other breach and that a great one. For payua was no Jesuit, nor
could write partiallie in this matter, being a matter only of fact, and that
public to all the world. For it is as evident and well known that Paulus
quartus was never Jesuit, as it is, that the king of France was never
franciscan friar. And although diverse Lutherans of germany foloweing
kemnitius his error, and their own blind hatred against Popes, have written
the contrary: yet (the matter being so apparent) it little imports, seeing
there may be alleged ten sor one, to the contrary, if the thing were
doubtful, or worthy dicussing.

THE CENSVRE.
But because M. Charke obiecteth against the Jesuits, Loyolas and Luthers life.
their first father Loyolas, whom contemptuously he calls a soldier: And
M. Hanmer, a cryppled soldier, which lived in the same time with friar
Luther, progenitor of the protestants: Let us consider in two or three
words, the difference between these two men: whereby it may appear,
which of them had the better spirit, and whether of them may more justly
give credit and commendation to their folovvers. The lives of them both are
exta^t, written by men of their own times, which knevv them and lived with
them, and therefore I shall easily discharge my credit, for that which I shall
out of these vvriters report of them.

IGNATIUS DE LOYOLA was a gentleman of a noble house in spain, Ignatius the
beginner of Jesuits.

Vide Laco. payuam li. 1. orthodo: explicat and Pe. Mass u^. in vita Ignatij
de Loyola.


which yet remains, who being chief captain of Po^peiopolis, and
d^fending it against ^he frenshmen, in the year 1536, was hurt and taken
^ris^ner by the same. But afterward being perfectly ^ealed, and courteously
restored to liberty again, and ^ovv in great possibility of honor and
preferment in ^is country, resolved him self to serve God, only for the
time to come, and to take pains for the gayning of heaven. VVhereupon leaving
all his friends, and distributing all that he had to the poor: stole away
from the Court, and be took hyms^lfe to a maruailous strait life, and after
he had with continual labor of many years, gotten learning, and gained many
souls from sin, unto virtue, and from the devil unto almighty God, by his
example of austere life and godly persuasions: there adjoined them selves unto
him, nine others of diverse nations in the university of Paris, to the like
trauelsome life for gayning of souls. Which kind of life was afterward
(after diverse examinations and probations of their spirit and purpose) alovved
and confirmed by pope Paulus ter^ius, and so consequently (diverse vvhorthie
men leaving the world, and taking upon them that order of life) was made a
distinct order, of religious men, in the which this Ignatius both lived and
dyed with singular example of all humility, virtue, and holiness, but
especially in zeal of gayning of souls and recalling men from sin, and his
posterity after him has by imitation of the same virtues, brought forth
infinite fruit into the world.

Luther beginner of the new gospel.

Vide Joan. Cocle: in vi. Lutheri. and Lindan. lib. de fug. Ido. ca, 8. and 9.


MARTIN LVTHER vvalking in his youth in a certain medovve, was stricken with a
thunder boolt, and thereupon sodaynlie for very fear made him self an Austen
friar, where after in the Abbay of Erford, serving in the church upon the
third sunday in lent, when the gospel was read of the deaf and dumme devil
thrown ovvt by Christ, he suddenly fel^ down on the pauement, and the devil
cried horribly out of his mouth, sayeing: I am not, I am not dumme, I will
speak yet unto the world. After this, upon a certain emulation and
contention, between him and the friars of S. Dominiks order, he left his
religion, cast away his habit, broke his vows, married a Nonne, and by little
and little began to preach strange new doctrines, especially tending to all
liberty and carnalitie, as for example sayeing.

There is no sin but incredulity: nether can a Luthers do strine.
In his book de capt. babil. ca. de bapt.

The ten commandments appertain nothing to us.

It is a false opinion, and to be abolished, that there And this he said,
because the other three gospells spoke too much of good works.

If any woman can not, or will not prove by order lib. de matrim. in epithal
super 1. cor. 7.

If the wife will not come, let the maid come.

Matrimony is much more excellent than virginity.

Christ and S. Paul did not counsel, but dissuade lib, de vot. Monast.

It is as necessary for every man to have a wife, as lib. de vot. coniug, and
in assert. art. 16.

All Christians are as holy, and as just, as the mother Sermon. de Tri. de B.
Maria, and com. ep. 1. pet.

THE DEFENSE.
M. Charke, as wantinge matter of just reply i^ this place, wriggleth at the
begi^ning to and fro, to avoid the force of this comparison between Ignatius
and Luther, sayeing: That it is impertinent: But the reason thereof is laid
down, in the Censure: And as for the fond arguments which he would enforce
out of my meaning, to prove, that Ignatius might begin a society, and
Luther distayne their gospel. (Which notwitstanding he grants not to be
set down expresselie in the Censure,) I leave to M. Chark, as poor devises
to solace his own miseries with all in this his distress, when taking upon
him to make a book, and his promise being past to his friends of the same, he
now fyndeth nothing to fill up pages, except he wander out, to such Idle
imaginations, as never came in the Censurers head to think upon. But at
le^gthe, yet, let us hale him to the matter, and see what he says. For
Ignatius, (he says) I will pass over. For Martin Luther (before he comes
to the matters objected) he exclameth greatly against me for alleging
Coclaeus, Hosius, Lyndanus, and Saints, as witnesses in my reports, being
(as he says) of our religion, and enemies to Luther. But consider (I beseech
you) the equity of this complaint. If I did allege these men's Judgments
against Luther in matters of controversy: his exception might seem to have
some reason, but saying I allege them only in matter of fact, known to
other men as well as to them selves: why should M. Chark take the matter so
greuouslye? by this reason no story should be credited, if the reporter were
of a contrary religion. I say not this to Justify all histories. John
Sleidan a famous liar.
For it is well known of the eleven thousand lies written by Sleidan in favor
of the protestants, and refuted by Bartholomeus Latomus, even by the testimony
of them, which were present at the doings, as shall be showed after. But when
there is no reason, nor proof, to deny a fact reported by such men, as now I
have named, whereof the most were Germans, and knew Luther well, and the first
of them lived with him, Cocleus.
and took upon him self to write the particular story of his life, while
Luther lived, and to set it forth, when all Germany could reprehend him, if
it had not been true: And the other being reverend and learned bishops, and had
great means and occasions to know the truth of the factes they write: why
should M. Charke take it so impatiently, and think it such unjust dealing, to
allege their authorities, not in matters of judgment and doctrine (as I have
said) but only in report of facts, which they could not devise of them
selves, without damnable wickedness, nor report to the world without open
shame, and reproof, if the things had been false?

But let us examine the reports them selves, perhaps they will yealde some
occasion of Iustyfieinge their reporters. And first (to discredit mine Authors
with all) M. Charke begins with a report of his own, and not of mine:
Whether Luther were begotten of a devil.
sayeinge, that I left out for shame the report of Prateolus, that Luther was
begoten of a devil. But yet this is nothing to the discredit of the other
four Authors named before, if Prateolus had reported amiss of Luther, and I
concealed or passed over the same. For nether could I in that little book, nor
was it necessary for me to recite what soever I found written of Luther.
Secondly, M. Charke greatly bewrays his falseholde in this point, and
justifies our true dealing. For Prateolus follows not the fashion of
protestants in affirminge absolutelye, The difference of protestants and
Catholics in reportinge.
what so ever they hear, or can imagine against us: but rather the good
conscience of a Catholic man, which is to lay down things as in deed they
are, without adding or amplifieing the same. He says then, that diverse men
had written this thing of Luther, and a matrone of Lipsia in Germanye did
affirm yt. Gab. prateol. lib. 10. de haeres. page 27.
But he him self neither affirms nor denies it. His words are these: Su^t
qui Lutherum scribu^t ex incubo natum, qui eius ma^rem balnei publici seruulam
oppressit^sed nescio cuius sit fidei: fides sit penes lipsicam illam Matronam,
cui matter eius fuit notissima: There are, that write Luther to have been borne
of an Incubus (that is of a filthy spirit abusing women in place of man)
which oppressed his mother, when she was a servant in a common bathe in
Germany: but I know not of what credit it is: the credit depends of that
matrone of lypsia, which reported yt, and knew well his mother.

Here now you see the modesty of Prateolus his report, and the bold
impudency of w: Chark; in sayeing that he avouches that, which (as you see)
he avouches not. But yet, whether M. Charkes impude^cie or folly were greater,
I can not tell, in making mention of this thing, being so foul a matter
against their first prophet. For what will he say? that it is false? yet at
least there remains a shameful suspicion, upon the report of diverse
writers, and the asseueration of a Matrone, which belike had it of the
confession of Luthers mother her self. And the probability of the thing
seems not have been so great in those days, as Erasmus believed yt, which
yet, by M. Charkes Judgment, was no papist. For in his purgation ad epistolam
Lutheri non sobriani. That is, to Luthers dronken epistle, he alludeth to the
same, sayeinge, Mirum est impio and blasphemo sermoni non addidisse de
ineubonibus etc. It is maruayle that Luther had not added somevvhat of
Incubons, or filthy spirits that abuse vvome^, to the rest of his wicked and
blasphemouse speech.

But now if M. Charke will stand upon the denial, not so much of the fact,
as of the nature of the thing it self, as impossible, that spirits can so
abuse lewd women that will consent to their lusts: I will oppose S. Augustine
against him, Li. 15. de ci ui. dei. c. 23.
who says, it were impudency to deny yt, and proves it by many ways, as
also Ludouicus viues does upon the same place of S. Augustine. What then
has M. Charke gained by mentioning of this which I left out?

Whether Luther were stricken with a thu^der. bolt.
Touching the matter of the Thunder bolt, though M. Charke denies it stowtely,
and (as Lyndans report only) would seek to discredit the same by obiecting
certain things against Linda^, which are not true: yet is it not B. Lyndan
only that does report it (as he well knows) but the consent of other
writers besides. Prateol. co^haer. li. 10. an. 1517.
Prateolus his words are these. Martin Luther after the study of law,
when he had been strycken down in the feeld with a blow of lightnyng, and
terrified by the death of his companion, professed him self an Austen friar.
Here are touched two things: his stryking down, and the death of his
companion: which could be no ieste. And albeit there appeared in his body no
wound of the thunder bolt (as M. Chark cauyleth:) yet might he be strycke^
down with the fear thereof. And Mela^cthon him self, who otherwise
dissembleth most diligently all matters turninge to the dishonor of his
Master: yet makes he mention both of this fear, and also of the death of
his companion, and grants it to have been one principal motive of his
entrance into religion. In praefat. tom. 5. operum Lutheri, vvitte^b. anno.
1562
His words are these: Hos terrores seu primum, seu accerrime sensit eo anno,
cum sodalem nescio quo casu interfectum amisisset: Luther felt these terrors and
fears, either first, or most sharply that year, wherein he lost his
companion, slain, I know not by what chance.

Nay, Martin Luther confesses the matter him self, This epistle was written
21. of Nouemb. 1521. and is prefixed before his book. De votis monasti cis.
tom. 5.
in an epistle to his father John Luther, to whom he yields a reason of his
runninge out of religion, by his unlawful entrance thereunto: Memini nimis
(says he) praesente cum iam placatus mecum loquereris, and ego de coelo
terroribus me vocatum asserere^. Neque enim libens and cupiens fiebam monachus,
sed terrore and agone mortis subitae circumuallatus voui coactum and
necessarium votum. I do remember too well when you being pacified, talked
with me present, and I affirmed that I was called by terrors from heaven to
enter into religion. For I was not made a friar willingly, and of my own
desire, but being environed with terror, and with the agony of sudden
death, I made a vow upon necessity and enforcement. Here the matter is
evident by Luther him self, which M. Charke so confidentlie denies, and
cries out against bishope Lindan for reporting the same: Belyinge of Lyndan.
sayeing: That he will not believe Lyndan in this, no more than he will
believe his report that the Caluinistes do worship the Image of the devil.
De fugiendis Idolis.
In deed he says that Caluinists do adore their own imaginations suggested
by the devil, above all authority or proof besides, (as all other heretics
do) and in that sense do honor the devil. Again, he says that in the
year of our lord 1572. when Caluinistes went to overthrow a monastery at a
town called Leyden in flanders: they erected the sign of the devil in their
public banner, which never Christians did before. If M. Chark could have
refuted any of these particulars: he should have done well. But by his general
report, though he seek to bring Lyndan in hatred: yet it turnethe to his own
discredit, and releeueth nothing his cause in hand. The devil cryeyng out of
Luthers mouth.


For the devil crieing out of Luthers mouth, though M. Chark woolde seem to
deny yt: yet brings he not one syllable in disprofe thereof: and so many
particulars are put down by Coclaeus, who lived with him: as every man may
see that the matter was evident. And no protestant in Germany (where the
matter was done, as where also (being Lutherans) they do esteem Luthers
honor more than Caluinistes do) never yet has been able to reprove the
same. But now come we to the doctrines of liberty and carnalitie, which the
Censure affirms Luther to have taught, after he had once coped with a Nonne.
Luthers lyeinge with a Nonne in the lord.
Which M. Charke after his ministerial phrase expresses in these words.
When the lord had opened his eyes, thinkinge him self no longer tied to his
unadvised and superstitiouse vovv, he married in the lord, and all this was
laufull. But how soever you name the lord (M. Chark) to cover this lasciuiouse
lechery of a renegate friar with his vowed lady: yet I have showed before,
out of the ancient fathers, that this pretended marriage, on both parts was
esteemed worse than adultery in the primative church: whereof he that will
see more, let him read. S. Basil de monast. constable. cap. 22.34. and 35. Also
quest. 14. fuse explicat. Also S. Augustine in Psalm. 78. and 99. also Concill.
Chalced. cap. 26. Also fulgentius de fide ad Pet. ca. 3. And finally S. Leo.
ep. 92. ad Rusticum.

But now to the doctrines them selves, Of Luther carnal doctrines.
in which I will be as short as I may in defense of my reports, being most
true, as shall appear by luthers own words, and that in those books of his,
and editions which are to be had in England publicly: So that the
adversary shall have no more refuge to say he can not find the book. And as
M. Charks untrue dealing has been indifferently discryed by that which went
before: so shall it be much more by these doctrines of Luther. And because
both M. Hanmer and M. Charke have taken upon them seuerallye to answer the
same: I will couple them together, where soever they have any thing woorthe the
notinge, aduertising the reader by the way, that whereas Luther has diverse
editio^s of his woorks, and diverse of them diversely translated, Why the same
book in Luther sometim^s has diverse titles.
out of duche into latin: he must not maruayle if the same book some times
have diverse titles, though I mean now to cite them under such names (as nighe
as I can) as they are to be seen, in the editio^ of wittenberge set furthe,
and as I have seen them my self in England by melancthon Anno 1562.

The first doctrine.
First then, No sin with Luther but increduli^ie.
I affirmed Luther to teach, that there is no sin but incredulytie: neither
can a man damn him self, (do what mischefe he can) except he will refuse to
believe. M. Hanmer denies not this doctrine: but defends it: M. HANMER.
only addinge, that I have racked Luthers words upon the tentors of
prejudice: and then shows at large how all sins do lie sooking in the
root of incredu^itie. Which is some what too fine for me to understand. M.
Chark goes further, sayeing: M. Charke
I may plainly pronounce that in this place you do in words and matter
report an open untruth: For M. Luther has no such doctrine. Here is no
agreement in the deffe^ders, the one grau^tinge it, and the other so flatly
denyeynge the same. But who would think M. Charke could answer thus without
blushing? De capt Babil. c. de Ba. to. 2. vvittenb.
hear Luthers own words: Ita vides quam dives sit homo Christianus, sieve
Baptizatus, qui etiam volens non potest perdere salutem suam, quantiscunque
peccatis, nisi nolit credere. Nulla enim peccata eum possunt damnare nisi sola
incredulitas: So thou see how rich a Christian man is, who can not leese his
salvation (though he would) with never so great sins, except he will not
believe. For no sins can damn him but only incredulity. Again, in the
same tome he says: Page 73.
Infidelitas sola turbatio est conscientiae: only infidelity is a trouble of
conscience. Is not here now as much as I have said? If nothing must trouble
a man's conscience, but only unbelief: then nothing is sin but only
unbelief. Again, if a man can not leese his salvation if he would, never so
feign, (by committing never so great sins) except he will not believe: then
may a man do what he will, so he fall not into incredulity. But yet to shame
these shameless men; a little further, and to show the wicked licentiouse
doctrine of this loose apostata: hear more what he says in an other place.
Nihil prauum facit praeter infidelitatem. Nothing makes a man evil besides
infidelity. Concione. prima super dom. post trini.
And a little after he concludes thus: Ex hiis omnibus sequitur, quod nullum
vsque in terris sit peccatum preter incredulitatem: Of all this that I have
said, enseweth that there is no sin any where upon the earth besides
incredulity. Now let the world judge whether I have reported Luther amiss,
or whether M. Chark be a true man, in denyeinge the matter so absolutely and
with such vehemency as he does, affirming that Luther nether in words or
matter has any such thing. Will you believe him in other things which faceth
a lie so openly in this. But a lack the poor man must say somewhat, for
credites sake in their broken cause.

The second doctrine.
The ten commandments by Luther appertain nothing to us.
Secondly I reported Luther to say, the ten commaundeme^ts appertain nothing
to us: Which very words both M. Hanmer and M. Charke do grant to be in
Luther. Marie they make long discourses upon his meaning, whereby it is easy
to putt on a colorable defense or excuse upon any thing. But let the reader
consider^ how these words do sownd in the ears of the people, especially
being joined with the doctrine goeing before, of only unbelief to be sin.
And albeyt it be true which M. Chark shows out of S. Paul that we are not
under the ceremonial law of the Jews any longer: Yet this can not verifye
luthers words that the ten commandments appertain nothing to us. No, nor
that which M. Hanmer alleges out of Luther as interpreting him self,
sayeing, that the te^ne co^mandementes appertain to all, but not for that they
were commanded by Moses: but for that they are written in the nature of
every man: For that by this means they should no more appertain to us than
unto g^ntiles, into whose nature also they were write. But S. Augustine does
prove that the ten commandments do appertain to Christians, Tract. 3. in
Johan.
not only more than unto Gentiles, but also more than unto the Jews them
selves, to who^ they were prescribed by Moses. And Christ says, talkinge of
this part of the law, called Moral: Math. 5. Romans 3.
I came not to break the law, but to fulfill yt. And S. Paul says: We do
not des^roye the law by faith, but do establishe the law thereby.

The third doctrine.
Thirdly, One only true gospel by Luther.
I reported of Luther that he said: It is a false opinion and to be abolished,
that there are four gospells. For the gospel of John is the only fair,
true, and principal gospel. This report M. Hanmer grants wholly. M. Chark
grants the effect of the first and chief words, but the latter,
concerning S. John's gospel he finds not: And thereupon thinks that Luther
never wrote any such preface to the new testament as I cite, and therewithal
inueigheth against me, as citing at large, and often times books which are
not found: as that de missa angulari: Also as layeing down one title for an
other, and the like. For answer whereof and other such cauylls of our
adversaries against us in citing of Luthers works, Touching variety in
alleaginge of Luthers works.
yt is to be noted, that Luther wrote not all in latin, but many things in
duche, which are notwithstanding alleged by many men in latin, skillfull in
the duche tougue^ After this, diverse men translated diverse parts of Luthers
woorks, and gave them titles according as yt seemed good to them, as may
appear by the diverse titles alleged here by M. Chark and me, of the self
same work. Beside this, there be diverse prints and editio^s of Luthers
woorks, which do greatly vary. VVhereupon has ensewed great quarrel in
Germany between the roughe and the soft Lutheranes, about the false and
corrupt edition of Luthers works. And this treatise, VValteru^ con^ra
au^ifabrum de corrupta editione operum Lutheri. An. 1566.

In Catalogo de libris lutheri. In blibliotheca sua. fol. 503.


which M. Charke dowteth of, de Missa angulari so printed, and alleged by all
learned men hitherto, is now come furthe (except I be deceived) in the edition
of wittenberge (thoghe much altered) under this title de Missa priuata, and
unction sacerdotum. Mary yet Gesnerus a Caluinist makes mention of five
treatises de Missa priuata, which are not to be gotten in England, as I
imagine: and yet it were no reason to say therefore, that no such treatises were
ever written by Luther, as M. Charke does. Further more, Luther him self often
changed his own works: as the same Gesner testifies that the book which
he wrote against king henrye in latin, was nothing like that he wrote before
against the same in duche. Beside this, diverse other did alter Luthers
works, both Suinglians and lutherans even in Luthers own time, thereby to
draw him to their devises, and parts. Ep ad ^o. haruagium tipographu^
Argen^ine^ sem.
And of Suinglians, Luther him self complains greuouslie, against Martin
Bucer. And of Lutherans, it appears not only by the contention above named,
abovvt the corrupt edition of Luthers works: But also by the often altering
of the confession of Augusta, written by Luther and Melancthon, and accounted as
a Gospel among the Germane protestants, yea preferred before the Epistles of
S. Paul, Alas^o in epistola sua ad regem Poloniae. In harmonia confess.
Augustanae.
as Alasco a Caluiniste does write, but yet many times altered, as ye may see
in Andrew fabritius, which has putt furthe all the editions from the
beginning, much differing and repugning one from an other: by all which
appears, that heretics do prepare them selves starting holes for all
needs.

But now to the matter: Albeit M. Charke and M. Hanmer do gloss upon the
words of Luther, and would have him say only, that the four gospels were
but one gospel, and the like: yet the matter is plain to him that is not
partial, that Luther speaks in detraction of the three former gospells: for
which cause he says in the place by M. Charke alleged, In enarrat in epist.
pet. Tom. 3. vvitenb.
you may more rightly call the epistles of Paul a gospel, than those things
which Matthew, Mark, and Luke have written. Which signifies some toothe
against these three gospells. Now for the last point touching S. John's Gospel,
it is to be seen i^ the preface by me alleged: which if you can not find: it
is not my fault. It was oversight then for M. Chark to say that no such
preface was ever written.
For that such a preface is extant, and that in latin: if you will not believe
me: read but the Index of Luthers latin works in Coclaeus, where you shall
find it named: As also in Gesnerus (one of your own religion) in the Cataloge
of Luthers woorks, fo. 504. suae bibliothecae. And in that preface you shall
read, not only so much as I have affirmed: but also these words: The
epistles of Paul and Peter do far pass the three gospells of Matthew, Mark,
and Luke: The great impudency of our adversaries.
Which yet more proves Luthers evil opinion of those three gospells. And
immediately it follows: Iacobi autem epistola, prae illis straminea est: The
epistle of James is of straw, in respect of those of Paul and Peter: which I
have added, In his answer to M. Campians first reason.
to show the intolerable impude^cie of you and your fellows in the Tower
against M. Campian: for that he could not presently show out of your books,
where these words were written by Luther: especially of M. Whitaker: who
(to the admiration and laughter of all other nations) has set forth in
latin, that Luther never called the Epistle of S. James Stramineam, a stravven
epistle: this is that (I say) that makes men to think, that you are given over
to a desperate resolution, to mayntaine an evil cause, even against your own
consciences, when you blush not to auow such open untruths. The same also
has Luther in his preface to S. James epistle in the duche testament, as more
at large is shevved in the answer to whitaker.
For I am sure that whitaker being a reader in divinity could not choose but
have read those words alleged by learned men, above an hundred times
against Luther: and yet he denies them as confidentlie, as if he had never
heard of the matter. What may be said to such men?

Whether ^. Ihon dohe speak ^esse of good works ^ha^ the for^er three
Euangeli^tes.
For my anotation, anexed to Luthers words: expounding them as uttered against
the former three gospells, for that they speak to much of good vvoorks:
though you affirm it to proceed of want of exercise and judgment in
scripture, (wherein you think your self only to excel:) yet is it most
true and discried by Luther him self in the place alleged, and argues in you
some ignorance joined with more pride, in not knowing, or dissembling that
these three gospells have many things touching good works, (contrary to
Luthers bare faith and credulity,) which are not set down in S. John
expresselie: as of the necessity of the commandments, and life everlasting,
given for keeping the same Math. 19. Of the pay due unto good woorks Math 20.
Of the retribution which they shall have in the resurrection of the just Luc.
14. Of the reward of every cup of water given for Christ: Math. 10. Marc 9.
And many other the like, which are not set down expresselie in S. John:
though I know, he writing with the same spirit, could not but have many things
to the same effect.

The fovvrthe doctrine.
^ovv Lu^^er tea^^eth the ^ood wife ^^ lie with ^^er hus^a^ds ^rother.
The fowrthe doctrine of Luther was, If any woman can not or will not prove by
order of law, the insufficiency of her hus^and: Let her request at his hands
a divorce: or else (by his consen^) let her privily lie with his brother, or
with some other men. This M. Hanmer utterly denies, and calls it my
shamel^sse report, with other most bitter words, as if their had never been
any such things written by Luther. 1. Hammer.
Mary M. Charke takes an other way in answering. For he ^ Charke ^^ Goodly
^^^reement: ^t yet such ^ comm^^^^ is in ^^ending ^^is.
confesses the whole matter, but seeks to return the shame thereof to us.
True it is (says he) Luther gave this evil counsel, but as he answers
him self, he did it when he was yet among you But now (says he, speaking
of the time after his conversion) my mind is to geeue other counsel. And
then M. Charke (as having taken a great advantage against me) exclaymeth with
all his force: What holy vvritings can be free from your foul reproaches, if
you will thus read a piece of a sentence against the manifest purpose of the
writer? Extreme impudency of a lyeing mynister.
You have reason M. Chark: and if the matter go so clear against me, as you
make yt: I ask no perdone, but let me be discredited for ever. But if you have
showed here such a piece of wilful and shameless dishonestie, as can not be
excused: how will you look your own friends in the face hereafter? Let us
then examyne the matter. First I grant that Luther says, that he vvrote this
counsel for confessors, or such as heard confessions, when he was yet in
fear of the pope. For so are his words. But yet that this was after his
Apostacy from the Catholic Religion, or (as you term it) after his
conversion to your Gospel, (for many years after he stood in fear of the
pope, and said nothing against confession): Ser. de Matrim. tom. 5. vvittem.
fo. 120.

Ergo he was no papist when he vvrote this.


yt appears evidently by his whole discourse in the place alleged: where he
says plainly (beside other things) that the papists did seek advantage
against him for this opinion of his, and to that end did misreporte his
words (as he says:) besides, you know that papists teach no such
doctrine, but the plain contrary, and therefore he could not ma^dare literis
as his words are that he did: that is, he could not put in vvriting and
publishe such a doctrine among us, but he would have been resisted presently,
if he had been of our church at that time. So that this shyft of youres is
evidently false: that he wrote it when he was a papist, For albeit, he being
not yet sufficientely fortified with fryndes to defend him stood in fear of
Antichrist, as he terms him, and consequentely durst not break any further
to the open execution of this beastely doctrine, as afterward he did: yet had
he left papistrie, as you call it, a good while before, as appears by his
own words; and by computation of the time wherein he wrote this book.

But now to the second point, which is the cheifest. You affirm (and I
confess) that Luther says: But now I would give other counsel: But what?
would he revoke that he had said? speak M. Chark, or else you are shamed.
Would he revoke his sentence (I say) being now out of the fear of the
pope^no: M. Charke his notable false dea^ing.
but he will do much worse. For whereas before he did but counsel the
husband to permit his wife to lie with an other: Now being pope him self of
Germany, and out of fear of the pope of Rome, he will compel him to yt. And
how, trow you? as the pope of Rome does compel me^, by excommunication? No,
but by taking him by the locks (for those are his ruffianlie words) he would
towze him except he did yt. I will recite luthers own style, that you may see
where true and false dealinge is.

Thus then he gives the wife counsel and authority to speak to her
husband. Ser. de matrim. vt supra.

Mark Luthers counsel to a ma^s wise.


Ecce marite, debitam mihi beneuolentiam praestare no^ potes, meque and
iuuenile corpus decepisti etc. Faue quaeso vt cum fratre tuo, aut proxime tibi
sanguine iuncto, occultum matrimonium paciscar, sic vt tu nomen habeas, ne res
tuae in alienos haeredes perueniant: ac sine vt spo^te tua a me decipiare,
quemadmodum and tu praeter voluntatem meam imposuisti mihi. Perrexi porro,
maritum debere in ea re assentiri vxori: quod si renuat, ipsa clandestina fuga
saluti suae consulat, and in aliam profecta terra^, alii etia^ nubat. Consilium
tale iam tum impertii, cum adhuc me detineret pauor antechristi: nunc vero
secus long consulere animus esset, talique marito, qui adeo mulierem deludat
dolis, vehementius lanificium (immissa manu) conuellerem, vt vulgo dici solet.
Idem de muliere iudico, quamquam id rarius sit quam in viris. In english thus:
Behold husband, you ca^ not perform the frendshipp you owe me, and you have
deceived both me and my youthful body: be content (I pray you) that I
bargain a secret marriage with your brother, or with some next of your kynne,
in such sort as you may still bear the name, to the end your goods may not
pass to strange heirs: And permit your self to be deceived willinglye of
me, as you have deceived me against my will. And I went yet further (says
Luther) and affirmed that the husband ought to give consent to his wife in this
matter: and that if he refused: then she might provide for her health by
secret flyeing from him: and goeinge into an other country, might marie an
other. This counsel I gave when I was yet in fear of Antichrist. But now my
mind should be to give far other counsel, Here M. Chark breaks of the
sentence as though no thing followed.
that is, layeing my hands upon the locks of such a husband that should so
craftelie deceive a woman, I would shake him (as the proverb is) and that
vehemently: and the same is my Judgment of the woman also: albeit it falls
out more seldom in women than in men to need this counsel.

Now let the reader Judge, whether M. Charke be a true man or no, in cutting of
the words that followed immediately in Luther, after the sentence by him
alleged: Consider-also what a face MEREDITHE HANMER. has, in denieing the
whole matter, and sayeinge that Luther has no such thing.
and notwithstanding, with a most impudent face to cry out, and insult
against me, as reading a piece of Luthers sentence, against the manifest
purpose of the writer? can this be excused from extreme impudency, and most
wilful falsehoode against his own conscience? Let him defend this if he can
with all the helps and devises of his fellows: or else let the reader by this
one point of open dishonestie discovered, Judge of the rest of their dealings
with us, and of their slaundering of us without all conscience, in their
sermons, where they are sure not to be controlled. Luthe^ goes on to inueigh
against that It may be Luther had some kinseme^ i^ whose vviues, he would
have some i^terest by this do^trine.
husband, that would not in this case permit his wife to lie with an other, he
being not hable to serve her turn him self, and concludes egregie deberee
solucre eiusmodi imposturam: that he ought to pay sweetly for deceauing her so.
And in an other place he says: Exegesi. ad c. 7. ep. 1. ad Cor. tom. 5.
Erasm. Alber. li. contra Carolost. Doct:
that if a man have ten wives or more ^ledde from him upon like causes, he
may take more: and so may wives do the like in husbands. VVhereupon Alberus
(one of your own religion) notes, that JOHANNES Leidensis took many wives,
and one KNIPPERDOLLINGE took thirtene for his part. So that this doctrine was
not only taught, but also practiced upon Luthers authority.

The fifthe dostrine.
Fyftlye, Luther is reported to teach, If the wife will not come, let the
maid come.
If the wife will not come: let the maid come. To this M. Hanmer answers:
You ^ather upon Luther an impudent slander being not in deed his own
words, but alleged by him as spoken by an other. M. Charke grants them
absolutelye, to be Luthers own words, but seeks an interpretation for
Luthers meaning: sayeing, In this place Luther speaks of a third cause of
divorce, when the vvoma^ shall obstinatlye refuse her husbands company. So
that these men do little care what they answer, so they say somewhat: and we
may see how trymlye they do agree. But the truth is, they are Luthers own
words delivered to the husband to use to his wife: as the words before were
for the wife to use against her husband: and they can not be excused either by
M. Hanmers shameless denial, or by M. Charks impartinent interpretation: thus
they stand in Luther: Sermon. de Mat. tom. 5. vvittemb:
Hic nunc oportunum est, vt maritus dicat: si tu nolueris, alia volet: si
domina nolit, adueniat ancilla. Here now is opportunity, for the husband to
say to the wife: if you will not, an other will: if the mistress will not,
let the handmayde come. And that this was practiced in Germany, In profess.
Cathal. impressa Colon. 1580.
(to all kind of lasciuiousenesse) yea among the ministers them selves
Sebastian flaske (a preacher once of Luthers own family) does testify. And
when you are not a shamed to defend the doctrine: you are more bold than the
Lutherans them selves, who for very shame do suppress the Germane book,
Crom. lib. 1. colloquioru^. Smide. apud staphylum, in 2. defens. apol. cont.
Smidelinu^.
wherein it was written, as Cromerus a Germane testifies. And Smideline has
no other way to answer it against Staphilus, but to ask, why Luther might
not retract this, as S. Auste^ did mani^ things? but yet proves not that ever
he offered to recant it. Now whereas you seek to cover this dishonest doctrine
of your prophet, by alleging two positions of the Catholics about deuorse in
marriage, as absurd in your sight as this: the one, that a man may deuorce him
self from his wife, for being a bondvvoman, if he kuevv it not before the
marriage: the other, that he may do the same for covetousness in her, by Peter
lombards: opinion the first is true: and allowed by all laws of nature,
Civil, and Canon, and that upon great reason: for that he which marieth a
bondwoman unwittingly, leeseth his free choice by ignorance, Can. si quis
ingenius: 20. q. 2. and Ca^ si foemina. 29. q. 2.
nor can not have power over her body (as marriage requires,) she being in
bondage to other. Also he can not beget childeren but bond, cum partus
sequatur ventrem: And co^sequentlie can not bring them up, at his pleasure,
nor instruct them necessarily: which things do repugne to the state of
marriage. The second, albeit it be but the sayeing of one man, yet his meaning
is, that if this covetousness, or other notoriouse vice of the wife, should
break out to the husbands notable damage, or danger, (as if she should fall
to stealing, or the like:) then he might dimittere eam (as lombards words
are:) that is, dimisse her from his company: but not dissolve the knott of
wedlock: as both S. Thomas does expound it 3. p. q. 59. art. 6. and
Dominicus Sotus in 4. sent. did. 39. art 4. But yet what are all these things
to the lasciuiouse doctrine of Martin Luther?

The last four doctrines.
The other four doctrines foloweing, for that you graun^ them as they lie, and
think them sownd enough to ^tand with your gospel: I need not to repeat, in
particular, or allege other places, where Luther holds the same. By your
Censure they are curra^t, Catholic, and good. But yet in the first where you
prefer matrimony before virginity, Matrimony before virginity.
yt may be noted of the reader for examples sake, how far you differ from the
spirit of the primative church, which condemned this position, as an
intolerable heresy, in IOVINIAN and others, only to make equal matrimony
with virginity: as appears by S. Jerome in his two most learned and
vehement books against Iouinian: and by S. Augustine, recounting the 82.
heresy of his time. Ep. 81.
And by S. Ambrose also in his epistle to Syricius the pope, and by other
fathers. And if this ancient church, (which our adversaries in words will
grant to be the true and pure church) did detest this heresy in IOVINIAN,
HELVIDIVS, and BASILIDES: I mean, to affirm matrimony paris esse meriti cum
virginitate, as their words are: that is, to be of equal meritt with
virginity: what would the same church do to M. Luther, and M Chark, for
preferringe marriage before virginity? And if (to omit all others) S. Cyprian,
Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose Chrisostom, and S. Augustine, Cyp. de disc^pl. virg.
Basil. praefa^ione ad ascetica.
did write whole books in commendation and preferment of virginity above all
other states of life, comparing it to the life of Angels, and affirming the
dignity thereof, to be incomparable: what would they have said, if they had
heard the base scurrill, and impiouse words of M. Luther de natura statuum in
sese, Luther exeges: ad c. 7. ep. 1. ad cor. vvitten. fo. 107.
as his own explication is: that is, of the very nature of these two states
in them selves, with out respect of abuse or good use: to affirm (I say)
matrimonium esse velut aurum, the state of matrimony to be as gold: and the
other state of virginity and continency to be vti Stercus ad impietatem
promouens. Like stinkinge dung promoting to impiety. Esa. 56. v. 4. Math. 19.
v. 12. 1. Cor. 7. v. 38.
Can any thing be spoken more abject, or more co^tradictorie to the scriptures,
and fathers than this? can hell be more opposite to heaven, tha^ the carnalitie
of this apostata to the spirit of all saints?

Again in your second doctrine, where you affirm that Christ and S. Paul did
not counsel but dissuade virginity to Christians: Whether Christ and S.
Paul did dissuade virginity. 1. Cor. 7. Matt. 19.
can any thing be more contrary to Christ and S. Paul's sayeinges, or the
ancient fathers interpretation of their words? I have no precept from
Christ, but I give counsel (says S. Paul:) he that marieth his virgin does
well, but he that marieth her not, does better: Is this to dissuade or to
counsel, M. Chark? There be Eunuchs which have gelded them selves for the
kingdom of heaven: he that can take yt: Let him take yt, says Christ: does
this dissuade or rather provoke to virginity and co^tinencie? Quasi hortantis
vox domini est (says S. Ierom) and milites suos ad pudicitiae praemium
concitantis, qui potest capere capiat, qui potest pugnare pugnet, superet ac
triumphet. Com. in c. 19. Math.
It is the voice of our lord, as exhortinge and styrring up his soldiers to
the reward of chastity: he that can take it, let him take yt, he that can
fight, let him fight, conquer and triumph. With S. Jerome do agree all the
holy fathers in this exposition: And william Charck can not bring me one in
this case to the contrary: that is, to speak for preferment of him and his
wife before virgins.

The third doctrine, Whether a woman be as necessary as meat and sleep.
touching the necessity of a woman to every man, to be as great as the
necessity of eating: drinking or sleeping, (which also imports that he may
not well miss her four and twenty hours to gether,) I marvel you were not
a shamed to maintain: especialie if you add that other sentence of Luther to
it: Sermon. de matri. edi. vvitenb. fo. 126.
verum est profecto eum lenonem esse oportere qui matrimonium fugiat, postque
marem and faeminam co^mixtionis and multiplicationis causa deus condidit. It is
true verily, that he must needs be a bawd that flies matrimony, seeing God
has created man and woman for copulation and multiplications sake. A wise
reason of a lecherouse apostata: for by this, every man must either couple and
multiply, or else be a bawd. How say you then of your present
superintende^tes of Canterbury and Salesburie? will you say they are bawdes?
Nay, how say you to all those true holy bishops named before, of the
primative church, as Athanasius, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrisostom, Basil, and
Austen, who, both lived without women them selves, and wrote several books
in the praise and commendation of that life, were they all bawdes without
exception?

For your last doctrine whereby you hold your selves, and all Christians, to be
as holy and just as the mother of God and the Apost^es were: Pride the badge
of heresy.
I marvel not. For if you had not this badge of intolerable pride, you should
not be known to be as you are. And albeit you would seem to mollify the
matter, by sayeing, Sermon. de naetiui^. B. marie.
all are aequall in respect of Christ, notvvithstanding there may be
inequality in their guysts. Yet Luthers words are plain: omnes Christiani
aeque sancti sunt ac matter dei: all Christians are as holy, as the mother of
God. And (to exclude your gloss of inequality of guyfts) he adds, Com. in 6.
^. ep. 1. Petri
pares sumus Petro and Paulo and deiparae virgini, bonaque omnia habemus ta^
largiter quam illi: we are equal to Peter and Paul, and to the mother of God,
and we have all goodness as plentifully as they had. If all (M. Charke) then
was there no inequality in measure, Whether all men be equalye holy and
just.
as under hand for a mollifycation you would seem to grant: but yet in deed
you may not, in this our case. For we talk of the measure of those things
only, which make men more just and holy: that is, of grace and merit: The
which if you grant to be more in measure in the saints, than in your selves:
then grant you them to be more holy, and so, flatt against your own position
here defended. If you deny yt: and make them no more holy the^ your selves, or
any other Christians (as in deed you do:) then (besides the apparent
absurdity of the thing,) have you against you S. Ciprian de disciplina virg.
S. Ierom. li. 2. cont. Iouin. S. Augustine de S. virg. cap. 26. And Theodoret in
c. 15. ep. 1. ad cor. which prove of purpose both by scriptures, examples,
and theological reasons, that the merits of men and rewards are unequal.
Also S. Ambrose in ca. 6. Luc. S. Chrisostom hom. 22. in ep. ad hebr, S.
Augustine l. 22. de ciuit. ca 30. And S. Gregory hom. 15. in Ezech: which
prove expresselie, the in equality of grace given to men in this life, and
different glory correspondent to the same grace, in the next. Also you have
against you all the primative church, which condemned your opinion for a
flatt heresy in Iouinian as S. Augustine testifies in heresi 82. and S. Ierom.
l. 2. co^tra Iouin. which church also condemned the same heresy in a Council
of Aphrica called Thelense, almost twelve hundred years gone, approved by S.
Ambrose in an epistle of his to Siricius the pope: Am. ep. 81.
where also he adds: agrestis vlulatus est diuersoru^ gradus abrogare
meritorum: yt is a barbarouse howling to abrogate the degrees of diversity of
merits. And the same Ambrose answers your friuolouse objection, that God is
no acceptour of persons, 2. Gal. 2: Ambros. in c. 3. ad Ga.
thus Acceptor deus personarum non est, sed meritorum atque virtutum: God is no
acceptor of persons, but yet an acceptor of merits and virtues. Finally,
albeit you rail at Dionysius Areopagita for this matter, calling him, bastard
Denice, whose legitimation (besides infinite other testimonies) was acknowleged
in two general councels: not much less than a thousand years gone: Council.
co^st. act. 4. ca^. 2.
yet the matter is plain by experience, if not otherwise. For if he be just
and holy according to S. John's definition, qui iustitiam facit: 1. Io. 3.
that workethe righteousness: (which comprehends all manner of virtues and just
life:) then your neighbors (I wene) will bear witness, that you ministers
are somewhat behind S. Peter and S. Paul, and the mother of God, in holiness
and rigtuousnesse of life, what soever you say in your own commendation, to
the contrary.

And thus now have you seen these nyene points alleged (for examples sake)
out of martyne Luthers doctrine, which M. Charke calls, divine and clear
doctrine and, defended by him faithefully, as he says, against my slanders.
But whether I have justified my reports or no, so often named false and
intolerable slanders by M. Chark: I leave to the judgment of my very
adversaries them selves. But whether M. Charke have defended fai^hefully or no:
the former disco^rses have declared. And finally, whether the doctrine be
divine and clear, as M. Chark affirms: I refer it to the consideration of
the discrete and godly reader. For clearenesse I will not strive: for you see
yt is uttered with full mouth (according to his fashion) from Martin Luther:
but surely for diuinesse I see little therein, except M. Chark mean black
divinity, such as Martins familiar could teach him: whereof we shall have
presently more occasion to entreat.

Marie to call it licentiouse and carnal doctrine (as the Ce^sure did) me
thinks there was great reason. The conclusion of the premises.
For if a Christian man can not damn him self with any sin except he will
refuse to believe: And if the ten commandments appertain nothing to him:
Again, if to keep virginity and resist the pleasures of the flesh be neither
commendable (for that marriage is far better:) nor possible, seeing a wife is as
necessary as meat drink or sleep: beside this, if when he has tasted one
wife, he may upon causes, lie with her sister, or the next of her kynne: and if
these would be obstinate, he may take the maid in stead of the mistress: and
with all this, may be (notwithstanding) as holy, and as just as ever was
Peter, or Paul, or the mother of God her self: if all this (I say) be true, as
Martin Luther warranteth us, Math. 7. Luc. 13.
and william Chark defends: who can complain of the hard way to heaven? who
can say iustelie, the gate is strait, seeing this good friar, and his friend
have eased yt so favorably? but now let us hear the rest of the Censure.

Other doctrines of Luther, and of Calvin and Beza.

THE CENSVRE
I Leave other infinite beastly (1.) 1.
doctrines which he taught: for the invention whereof he had much conference
with the 2.) 2.
devil him self, whom bishop Lindan, Lib. de f^g. Idol. c. 8. Lib. de
missa. a^gu^. page 228. to. 7. and lib. de missa priua.
and diverse others vvrite^ to have been seen talk bodyly with him, by men of
very great credit. And Luther him self confesses in his works, that he had
often and familiar speech with him, and that he was first moved by him to
write against the Mass, in the year 1534. He also describes his voice,
sayeing, that it was so terrible, huge, and dreedefull, that he was like to
dye diverse times, after the nights conference with him. And that diverse men
were slain by such conference. Notvvithstanding it was his chance to
escape, albeit (as he says) he did eat more than a bushel of salt together
with this devil. But yet nevertheless he was deceived in the end, as all
men are that deal with such Marchantes (3.) 3.
For Luther goeing one night drou^ke to bed (as Hosius vvriteth) was found
there the next day dead, Hosius li. 1. de here is. Claud. de Saint. li. de reo
eucha. Linda. lib. de fag. id. cap. 8.
slain (as it thought) by this familiar devil. For he was a pitiful creature
to look on (as Saints describes) all black, with his tongue lyeing out,
as a man strangled And this was the end of Luther after almost thirty years
living in all kind of sensuality, pride, and dissension, not only with the
Catholic church (4) 4.
but also with his own brood, Luth. ep. ad Arge^^. and ep ad Io. Har.
Bucer^ ep. ad Luther.
and offspring Carolostadius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and Zuinglius, parents of
the protestants religion, whom he persecuted, cursed and condemned, to the
very pytt of hell, for damned heretics, as yet appears in his books
written against them. Wherefore, whether the protestants, or the Jesuits, may
be more a shamed of their first father, let the indifferent reader judge (5.) 5.
There is the like life or worse, written of Calvin by a fenshe man that
lived with him, of the same religion at that time, and was translated into
English by a country man of ours, and had been put in prynt ere this, had not
my Lord of London, by an evil chance, gotten the copy in to his hands.

THE DEFENSE.
M^ Charke would have men think that I use but a Rhetorical figure, in
sayeing, that I pass over many other absurd doctrines of Martin Luther:
whereas in deed (by his sayeing) I have cited all I can. But I am sure, he is
not of that mind him self, having read some part of Luthers works, as
appears by his reply: wherein are to be seen; so many gross absurdities,
Absurdities of Martin Luther.
as never the like in any man that ever wrote. Which has happened by the
special providence of God, to discover the spirit whereby this new prophet was
directed. For matter of licentiouse liberty the examples before recited may
suffice, for a taste. In matter of ribauldrie I could allege more: of
scurrilitie infinite: of shameless falsehoodes, without number. But I will
note only one or two things of impiety, as they lie together in one
treatise, that you have in England, and defended way to all dissolutio^, As
for example, In assert. ar. 36. condem. ^er ^^^. 10. In assert. ar. 36.
when he holds that the very just man in every good work does sin
mortallie: How does he discourage all men from doeinge good? when he says, A
man has not in his power to do evil: how does he encourage all lewd people
^o^ wickedness, delivering them from the fault thereof? When he teaches, In
assert. ar. 34.
that to fight against the Turk is to resist god him self: what a pathe
makes he to the Empire of infidelity? When he reprehendeth the pope for
defining beside scripture animam esse immortalem: In assert. ar. 7.
that the soul is immortal: and calls it porte^tum sterquilinii Romani: A
monstre of the dunghill of Rome: what ground of impiety does he not lay?
when he affirms and maytaineth, De capt. Bab^^. tit. de B^pt.
that neither man nor angel on earth can lay any one law upon any one
Christian, further than he will him self: What foundation does not he
overthrow of all Christian common wealths?

Whether Luther had bodily conference with the devil. See before page 18.
it is a wonder to see with what face M. Chark can deny it, (as he does) and
rail at the reverend bishop Lyndan for reporting the same: seeing the Tigurine
Caluinistes (as I have showed before) do give testimony of it: and Luther also
confessethe it him self, in the places alleged in the Ce^sure. And albeit M.
Charke has a shyft to say, that he can not find the book of Luther cited
de Missa angulari, alleged (as he confesses) by all the learned of our age
against Luther: yet can not his impude^cie be covered: for that he quoteth him
self an other book of Luthers, Gesner. fol. 503, s^ae biblioth.
entitled de Missa priuata and unction sacerdotum if it be not the very
same, somewhat altered:) wherein (though translated by Iustus Jonas, Martin
Luthers own cook, Fontacus in Chron. anni. 1554.
and consequ^ntlie sawced to his masters toothe:) yet might he see the
principal points of this conference set down (at leastwise at one time,)
where Luthers words are these Con^igi^ me semel sub mediam noctem subito
expergesieri. Ibi Satan m^cu^ coepit eiusmodi disputationem: Audi (inquit)
Luthere The devil knevv Luthers humor of pride.
doctor perdocte and ce. It happened that once I awaked about mydnight (says
Luther,) and then Satan began this disputation with me: Harken (says he)
right learned doctor Luther. And then the devil lays down five long
arguments against the mass, adding in the end: Here is the protestants
fashion of disputation sent down by their master.
Age, prome, vbi scriptum est, vbi iussit aut praecepit hoc deus? Go to now,
show me, where is the Mass written in scripture? where has God commanded yt?
After this, Luther puts his own answers to the devil, and the deuilles
replies: to which in process, his being not able to answer, finally yielded,
to banishe the mass upon the devils appointement. And this was the honorable
beginning of Luthers conversion, The beginning of protestancye from Satan
and of all protestancie, by the express words and confession of the first
beginner him self.

But here william Charke has a shyft for this foul matter, sayeing, that
this conference of Luther with the devil, was no other than such a
temptation or conflict, as Christ and Saint Paul had with Satan: that is, it
was no bodily conference, but a spiritual fight in mind, says this
minister. O fond and blasphemous evasion. Suppose it had been only a
spiritual temptation in mind, such as the conflictes of Christ and S. Paul
were: yet the comparison is impious: for nether Christ, nor S. Paul did ever
yield to the persuasions of the devil, as Martin Luther did in banishing the
mass. And this is the difference between evil and good men in this life: that
both being assaulted with persuasions from the devil: the one yields to
them, Luthers conferens with the `deuyll. was bodylye.
and the other resistethe.

Seco^dlie, it is evident, that this co^fere^ce of Martin Luther was more than
spiritual: as appears by the deuilles preface, wherein he calls the friar,
right learned doctor, according to the vein of pride wherewith he saw him
puffed up, and thereby redye to receive his impressions. The same appears
also, by the sound of Satan's voice described in the place alleged in the
Ce^sure: but especially, De missa pri^ata and vnc. sacerd, vbi s^p^^.
for that in this place Luther confesses some of his fellows to have been
slain by this conference. For these are his words: Et ego plane persisasus
sum Emserum, and Oecolampadium, and similes, ^iis actions horribilibus and
quassationibus subito extinctos esse. And I am plainly persuaded that Emserus
and Oecolampadius, and the like, were killed suddenly with these terrible
blows and shakinges of the devil. Finally, See before in the Ce^sure the
place quoted.
the bushel of salt, which Luther confessethe him self to have eaten
together with this devil, proves that he had bodily conference with him: And
that this Satan was become now very gentle and familiar to Luther, albeit he
was churlish and killed other his companions.

Of M. Luthers death.
as he callethe them: the co^ntrarie being written by men more indifferent, as
he says. And in the margent (in counterpease of all my witnesses) he
quotethe only John Sleidan, a lutheran, and the protestants historiographer.
Touching the cr^dit of Ihon S^eidan.
But what reason is there why one Sleydan should be preferred before so many
learned men, and reverend bishops, that have auowed the matter, who lived in
Luthers time, and many of them were Germans, and did know both his life and
his death? especially, seeing of all the historiographers, that ever took
pen in hand, John Sleydan is the most infamous for lyeing, as may appear in
particular by Fontanus and Pontanus, that have discovered the same: as also by
Gaspar Genepaeus, who has done the same most substantiallie, and of purpose.
And more than all the rest, In epitome germanica, colon^ An 1558. edit.
Bartholomeus latomus, a singular learned man, has set forth a book of the
Eleven thousand lies of John Sleidan: And Gropperus (one of the rarest men
that ever our age had) commonly calls John Sleidans story das lugen buck:
that is, the book of lies. The fame thereof coming at a time to the ears of
Charles the Emperor, (which had best cause to know how matters passed, being
chief agent therein him self,) caused diverse parts thereof to be read i^
his hearing, and in the presence of his captains: who hearing so infinite
untruths reported, could not contain, but often would interrupt the reader,
sayeing, there the knave lies: And a little after again, Iindan in Ruardo.
there the knave lies. And so finalie rejecting the book, he commanded one
Gulielmus Mule^aeus a most eloquent man to refute the same. So that Sleidan
alone is not sufficient to ouer-beare so many witnesses in this case, wherein
he was most partial, that is, touching Luther: he being luthers scholar, and
writing purposelie both at his appointement, and in his commendation.

But yet because you shall not want a sound testimony also in this matter: I
will allege you IVSTVS JONAS, Luthers dear friend and cook, as partial
toward him as Sleydan him self, but only that being at his death, and
writing a book of the same, by the providence of God, he uttered this point
among other. For thus Pontacus writes. Pontacus Burdegal. in chron. anni 1544
Martinus Lutherus, quem tertium Eliam quidam ausi sunt vocare, cum been potus
and H^laris in lecto cubuisset, mane repertus est mortuus. Iustus Jonas eius
coquus, libro de eius vita and obitu, refert cum Paulo ante mortem. sibi and
Caelio and aliis qui tunc aderant dixisse: Orate deu^ pro domino deo nostro and
eius eua^gelio. That is: Martine Luther, whom some dare call the third Elias,
goeing to bed well typpled, and merye, was found dead the next morning [being
the first day of March, the year of our Lord 1544, Luthers death.
and the 63. year of his age] Iustus Jonas his cook affirms in a book
written of his life and death, that he said to him a little before his death,
and to Celius and others that were present, do you pray to God, for our lord
and God, and for his gospel. Here now by Iustus Jonas his report, Luther
prayed for Christ at his death, which either you must a-scribe to dronkennes,
or to some worse affection, he being in his perfect wits, as the author
affirms. And this shall be sufficient touching the death of doctor Martine
Luther.

And now we come to Luthers disse^tion with his own brood, as the Censure
says: that is, to his deadly war with his own folowers, and to the
discord between Lutheranes and Zuinglians, which our English protestants do
bear men in hand, to be all one in faith, and of one church: and M. Charke
here in this place, (with the same foreheade, as in other matters) affirms
most confidentlie that they had alvvayes a singular care of unity in the
gospel: And cites for proof thereof) an act of co^corde agreed upon at
Marpurge Anno 1529. But this is intolerable impudency. Brentius in appendice
ex luthero.
For Brentius him self, (who was present at yt) writes that the Zuinglians
were there vanquished, and demanded with tears to be called brethren of the
lutheranes, only thereby to color a concord. But yet Luther would not
grant it. In admonitione vltima ad Iac^bu^ west fall.
The very same (touching luthers hardness) confesses Calvin to westfalus,
superintendent of hamborough, and Boquinus a Zuinglian, confesses the same, as
Brentius proves in the place before alleged, by the testimony of lauatherus
also a Zuinglian: so that I should maruayle (M. Chark) that you were not
ashamed to allege this act of concord of Marpurge: Ludouic lauat. in hist.
de orig. controuer. Sacrament.
but that I consider, you must needs say somewhat. No (M. Charke) not only in
this meeting of Marpurge, did your men disagree, and become more enemies than
before: but also in all other conuenticles after, even unto this day, have they
dissented in opinions more and more: as is evident to them which do read
the stories, and acts of their meetings set out in print. So that in very
deed, this one mark of disagreement is sufficient to show what spirit they
are of.

After this synod of Marpurge they met together at Swabache, and after that
again at Smalcald, the 12. of December, S^eid. lib. 7. lauat. in hi.
controuer. sacram.
but without any effect of union or agreement, as both Sleidan and lauatherus
do testify. After that, they had diverse meetings, talks, conferences,
disputations, synodes, conuenticles, at diverse places and times, but always
departed more enemies than before, Jacob. vadian. lib. 3. Apho.
as you may see in particular set down by vadian in his aphorisms. After
this, in the year 1557. upon the fowerth day of September there met at worms
in Germany 12 Catholics, and 12. ministers, A notable story of the
protestants agreement.
appointed by the former Council or dieta of Ratisbone, to treat of certain
conditions to be observed on both parties, in practice of their religion. And
when the first question was proposed, what articles of faith each part would
have allowed by public authority: the Catholics agreed presently: marie
the ministers fell out, and thereupon a day or two was allowed them to agree,
but they grew further and further in dissension for sixtene days together,
Amsford. in confess. purae doct. euang.
and the seuententh day, they were further of than at the beginning. For then
had seven of the twelve excommunicated the other five for heretics, and as
utterly disagreing from the Confession of Angusta. Nicol. Gallus inthesibus.
Lauat. in hist. sacram: Surius in hist. A solemn conuenticle.
Mary yet those seven could in no wise agree among them selves, what articles
only were to be received, and what to be excluded, and so, that meeting was
brocken of, without effect. This story do write both Amsfordius, and Gallus,
Lutherans: and Lauatherus a Zuinglian. And Surius a Catholic.

After this again in the year 1564. in the month of April, there was a
solemn meetinge or sinode between the Lutheranes and Caluinists, at Mulbrune
in Germany. Acta collo quii Mulbrunensis tam a pala tinis quam
vvittenbergensibus edita.
And on the Lutheranes part the duke of wittenberge was president for the
temporaltie, and Smidelyne prolocutor for the clergy. For the Caluinistes was
president the County palatine of Rheine, and Boquinus was speaker. But after
diverse days spent in disputing, chafing, and chiding, they departed less
agreed than before, one part calling the other sectaries, and heretics, as
you may read in the acts of that meeting set forth in print, The louinge and
courteous spe^che of protestants amongst the^ selves.
as well by the one party, as by the other, but each side notwithstanding
reportinge the thing for their own vantage, and blaminge the other. And thus
much for solemn meetings and public acts of concord, declaring the
singular unity of protestants in the gospel.

Now for the intercourse of loving letters and godly vvritings between
lutheranes and Caluinists, (which M. Charke names, but cites none) for
proof of their singular unity. Yt shall appear how true it is, by that
which I will here allege out of their own writings one against an other.
And first, I have alleged before the loving words of Luther toward
Caluinists by the very testimony of the Tigurines the^ selves, See before
page 17. and 19. Tract. 3. cont. Luth. suprem. co^fessione^. Luther. ep. ad Io.
Hargrauium. Luth. tom. 7. vvitten. fol. 380. 381. 382. Act. 28. co^t. loua^.
to. 2. vvittenb. sol. 503.
whom he calls, an exec^able sect. replenished with the devil,
insathanized, supersathanized, and persathanized And they call him again, an
archeheretique, and a ^urious devil, which has no communion with the
saints of God. Luther again calls Bucer, a blasphemouse monster of the
sacramentarie spirit: and all sacramentaries miserable and blasphemouse
heretics: adding further: I do protest before God and the world, that I
do not agree with them, nor ever will, while the world stands, but will
have my hands clear from the blood of those sheep, which these heretics
do drive from Christ, deceive, and kill. And again in the same place, cursed
be the charity and concord of sacramentaries, for ever and ever, to all
eternities. Again, in an other place he pronounces of them: H^ereticos serio
ce^semus, we censure them in earnest for heretics. And after that, he
pronounces them as most certainly to be damned, how soever they believe
some articles a-right, and do pronounce them truly, with their lyeing and
blasphemouse mouth, as his words are. And finally, two years before his
death, he denounced an open excommunication against them all, sayeing, Luth.
in respon. ad maledic. scri. regis Angliae.
who soever will not believe the bread to be the true and natural body of
our lord, let him abstain from me, both by letter, vvriting, and speech,
neither let him expect any communion with me, for he shall but leese his
labor. And this was the agreement of this holy and learned man Martin Luther
(as M. Charke calls him.) And this was his intercourse of loving and godly
speech and vvritings toward the Zuinglians: that is, toward M. Charke and
his fellows in England.

Of the agreement of Lutheranes and Zuinglians.
But now if a man would speak of the intercourse of louinge letters between the
Lutheranes and Zuinglianes after Luthers death: it were infinite. But yet he
that desires to know somewhat thereof: let him read but Brentius against
Bullinger: westfalus against Calvin: Calvin against Stankarus: Heshutius
against Beza. Also the several books of Sneppius, Alberus, Timannus,
Stolzius, Kemnitius, Marbachius, Vigandus against the Zuinglians. And the
vehement treatises of Ochinus, Alasco, Boquinus, Clebitius, Bullinger, and
Peter Martyr against the Lutheranes. This Brentius him self testifies, in
recog. proph. and apostol. doctrine. pa. 4. and 64. Calvin. co^t. Iac.
vvestfalum.
Bullinger calls Brentius puffed spirit, slaunderer, scurril, iester, Mome,
impure, impudent and furiouse Eutychian, light and brainelesse sophist. Calvin
writing to the ministers of Germanye, and hoping to gain them to his part
against westfalus, called them, honorable brothers, and most faithful servants
of Christ. But when he saw they took part against him: he calls them,
Knaves, Giants, Monsters, Beasts, Asses, Deuylls. Heshutius writing against
Calvin, calls him cruel tyrant, crastie, perfidiouse, and contemptuouse
Epicure, rechelesse liar, vvanton and impudent sycophant, one that handled the
scriptures as other men do Ouids metamorphosis. Heshu: in desen. cont.
Caluinum. lib. de ^i. and mediat. Note this figure of speech.
The same heshutius called Beza, a Beast, a Cyclops, a Harlot set to sale: and
generally all Caluinists, impudent knaves. Stankerus of a third sect, writes
thus: I do set more by one Peter Lombard, (which notwithstanding he
contemns) than by a hundred Luthers, two hundred Melanctons, three hundred
Bullingers: four hundred Peter Martyrs, and five hundred Caluines: All
which if they were pound together in a mortar, and afterward pressed never so
hard, you could not vvringe ovvt one ovvnce of true divinity from them all.

It were infinite (as I said) to prosecute this matter of the protestants
singular unity in the gospel: The praectise of protetestantes love and
unity, one toward the other.
and of their loving and godly speeches one to an other. But the practice does
better declare it than words can. Look therefore into the states where they
bear rule: and see how one does embrace the other: or rather how one does
persecute the other. In Germany where one is superior, the other may not live
^ferior. Within these eight years all were Caluinists in the County Palantins
Dominions, while he was so him self: and a Lutheran could not be suffered to
live quietly there. As appears by the example of doctor Heshutius, a
Lutherane, who after his disputation in the university of Hidelberge, was
thrust out by head and shoulders, and the Catechismes of Luther and Brentius
floung out of the Church, In hist. sacram.
as Lauatherus a Zuinglia^ does report. But now this prince being come back
to Lutherisme again: out are thrust the Caluinists, as well there, as also in
other places of Germany, where the Lutheranes are governors. The younger
princes of Saxony and Earls of Mansfeild (being Lutheranes) made a public
decree against all Zuinglians, the year 1559, condemning them by the name of
execrable heretics, as lauatherus also writes. And it is well known that
the duke of Saxony, that now is (named Augustus) about eight years gone did
cut of the head of his chief counsailer called Cracouie, for that he was
convicted secretly to favor the Caluinists, and to practice their brynging
into Saxony. Also the banished Caluinists of france being retired to
frankeforde in Germany (a free City, and of Lutheran religion) hoped to have
license to live, according to their conscience, in that place. But they could
not, (with all the entreatie and frendshipp they might use) obtain the same:
but were by bublike edict (bearing date the two and twentieth of April, in the
year 1561) commanded to depart the City, or else to abstain wholly from all
exercise of their religion, seeing it was heresy, and differing from the
confession of Augusta. This whole story is set forth by one Franciscus
Philippus, where you may read it at large.

And to give you yet an example more near home, our English Merchant
venturers had great traffik at Ha^borough, and profited (no doubt) the city
much, whereof VVestfalus was superintendent. But yet by all the means and
favor that ever they could procure, they could never obtain of the
Lutheranes, free exercise of Caluines religion in that city: No, nor so much
as to keep a The Secretary of the company was permitted to read certain
private service for a time but no minister could be granted them, though the
queens letters of England were gotten in their behalf.
minister of their own sect at home in their house priuatlie. And (that which
is more) the prelates of Saxony, did so much detest our men's religion, as
when any English men were sick, they would not come at them, being requested:
nor (being dead) would allow them any Christian burial, in their churches
or church yeardes, but caused them to be So were buried (among other) the
foresaid Secretary of the company, and also the deputy, named Cloughe,
which dyed^ there: At what time the preachers of Hamborough inueighed most
eagerly against all English men for their religion.
cast out in other places and hid under ground, without the presence of any
one Lutherane, that would come at yt. And finally our English men have lost
their pryuileiges there, and have abandoned the city, and are changed now to
Emden. This is evident and true: and all Merchants in England (of that
company) can tell thereof. And therefore what soever M. Charke writes of their
singular unity in the gospel: the reader may see how he is to be credited.

Touching the life of Calvin (whom M. Charke calls a holy Saint, and
aduaunceth with a long, large, Of the life of John Calvin.
it was the lords good will, that the translation of his life should fall
into my Lord of Londons hands, and so be supressed. But (M. Charke) it may
come yet in time: not as a libell (as you term it) but as a true testimony
from him which knew the man, and lived with him, both in Geneua, Berna, and
Lausanna thirty years gone and more, whose name is M. Jerome hermes Bolseke,
doctor of phisik: which science he practiced in Caluines time, The writer of
Caluins life.
at Geneua and other places there about, and of late years in lions, four and
twenty miles of Geneua, where he yet lives in great credit of wisdom,
learning, and honesty, and is most ready to iustifye any thing that he has
written to the woorlde. This book is entitled A Story of the Life Manners,
Doctrine, and Death of. Io. Calvin.
His book of Caluines life was written in the year of our Lord 1577, and
dedicated to Monsieur of Epinac, archebyshop and Earl of lions: And in the
beginning he has this protestation. I am here for love of the truth to
refute Theodore Beza his false and shameful lies in the praise of Calvin, his
Master, protesting before God and all the holy court of heaven, before all
the would, and the holy ghost it self: that neither anger, nor envy, nor
evil will, has made me speak, or write any one thing against the truth
and my conscience.

First therefore this reverend man shows how John Calvin was borne at
Nouiodunum, John Caluins birth.
or Noion in Picardie, the year of our Lord 1509. In his youth he was an
execrable blasphemour of God: and coming at length by shyftes to be a priest,
and to have the cure of a certain chapel in Noyon, he was taken and
convicted of the horrible sin of Sodomie: and was in great danger to have
been burnt a live for the same, Calvin burnt with a hoote li^ly for Sodomie.
but that the Byshope of Noyon, taking compassion of the man, procured the
punishment to be moderated: and so in stead of death, he was burnt with a
hoote Iron in the showlder, which iron had in it the prynt of a lylly, which
is the marcke of the crown of france. VVhereupon for very M. whitaker
thinks it no shame but rather glory: for thus he answers it. If Calvin
were bra^ded S. Paul also was bra^ded, c^^paring Caluins brandes for Sodomie
vv^th S. Paul's brandes for Christ. page 62. against M. Campian.
shame, (having sold away his benefice) he departed from Noyon into Germany
and Italy, changing his name from Cauuin to Calvin, as Luther did from Luder
to Luther. Thus much the whole city of Noyon, did testifye unto M. Bertilier,
Secretary of the Council of Geneua, under the hand of a public and sworn
Notarie. And the testimony is yet extant to be seen, as the author says,
who has read it, with many others.

After he had wandered a while in Italy, being assisted with some alms of the
duches of ferrara, he returned back to Basil, Strausburge, and Lausanna, and
began to play the minister and preacher: And from thence, he came to Geneua:
and there joining with two most seditious ministers, named Caluins first
assistants in Geneua.
FAREL and CAVRALD, began by a thousand devises, to work great tumults, and
innouations in the city. And albeit, not only the magistrates of Geneua, but
also the Lords of Berna (who have some superiority over Geneua) were greatly
against him at the beginning, (though Zuinglians them selves) yet Calvin ceased
not to use such excitation of the people against the^, as they were feign to
banish him out of their terretorie: And so they did and pronunced the same
sentence of banishement, both in their prive coouncell of two hundred, and
also in their general council: and caused it to be registered in their
records called the Rouge, with the true causes of the same, the year of our
Lord a thousand, five hundred thertie seven, the two and twentieth of April,
being Easter monday. Calvin banished from Geneua.
Of which sentence Calvin understanding, by friends of his, where he lay
secret in the town, changed his apparel and fled pryuilye the same day
from Geneua to Strawsburge. And this is extant under the public records of
the city (as I have said) though Beza has not been a shamed to publish the
contrary.

But in process of time, by infinite practyzes that the used, and by the
earnest suit of some noble men, both duche and frenshe, whom he had made
Caluinists: he was recalled to Geneua again. And the^, layeing a surer plott
than before, (by bringing in many strangers into Geneua,) he made his party
so strong, as he became as absolute lord of the town, while he lived, cutting
of all his enemies by devises and sleights: Caluins behavior tovvards^ his
adversaries.
as Castellio, Caroly, Bernardin Ochin, and Peter Morand, Ministers, whom he
caused to be banished: as also diverse of the nobility: and among them,
Perrinus, chief governor of the city with Petrus VVandalus, the Balthasars,
and others, whom he made to fly for safegarde of their lives: for that he (by
forged letters and infinite other inventions) had brought them in suspision of
betrayeing the city, first to the king of france, then to the duke of Alvay,
gouuernour of Millan. But the noble men goeing to Berna cleared them selves
before the Council there: Caluins brood have not forgotten this trick.
and by good hap got the Italian, which, suborned by Calvin, had accused them
of treason in Geneua, affirming that he was sent as a spy from the Duke of
Alvay, to vewe the city, and to treat with those noble men, for the taking
thereof: and having affirmed thus much, he was sent away pryuilie into Italy
again, disguised in apparel, and his reward paid him in his purse. Whereof
these noble men having intelligence by their secret friends of Geneua, caused
the way to be laid for him, and (by gods providence ^ooke him at Vienna in
Dolphine, and caused him to be brought back to Berna: where he plainly and
truly confessed all the matter to be forged, and by whom he was induced, and
by what reward, to do yt. Whereupon the Lords of Berna gave furthe a
public testimony, (under their common notaries hand) of the whole matter,
and of the innocence of these men. But yet Caluins faction of strangers was
so strong in Geneua, as they could never be restored during his life.

Caluins cruelty in revenge.
Diverse such examples are showed of the tyranny and cruelty of John Calvin,
against those that any way offended him. As against Montouset a Lutheran,
(Almner to the Queen of Nauarra,) Caluines chief benefactrix,) whom he made
to fly Geneua, for speaking a word or two against his partial distribution
of the Queens alms, This Ioh. Calvin him self confesses in his letters to
vire^us. An. 1546, the Ides of February. The death of Seruetus and cause
thereof.
sent in great quantity to the poor protestants of that City, and for the
most part, imbezeled and devoured by Calvin him self, as this man avowched.
Also against one Peter Ameau, whom he made to walk throroughe the city naked
in his shirt, with a torche in his hand, and to ask him openly forgiveness,
for that he had spoken at a supper certain words in his dishonor, sayeing,
that he did not see why Calvin should be so much esteemed in Geneua, as he was,
and preferred before all other that ever wrote. Also against Seruetus,
otherwise called Michaell villanouanus, doctor of phisik in Vienna of
dolphinie, an heretic, but yet envious of Caluins glory: whereupon he wrote
from vienna to Geneua, thirty epistles directed to Calvin, together with a
little book in written hand, the year of our Lord 1546: wherein he had
gathered together certain faults escaped Calvin in his institutions. Which
thing Calvin took so greuouslie, as prese^tlie he began to purpose his
death, (as him self opens in a secret This letter was written the 12. of
Februarye 1546, and was found in the study of viretus by the magistrates of
lausanna, after he was ru^neavvay from thense, as after shall be mentioned.
letter to his dear friend Petrus viretus, minister of Lausanna) And thereupon
began to accuse him of heresy: bnt yet disse^bling his intention, allured
him to come to Geneua, as he there confesses. But Seruetus not trusting his
words, kept him self thence, until the year of our Lord, 1553: at what
time, meaning to go into Italy, he thought to pass secretly throrough
Geneua, and to stay there but one night, which was Saturday. But yet being
weary, and knoweing the laws of Geneua to be, that no passingers may be
molested for three days, resolved to stay there Sunday. Whereof Calvin by
chance having secret intelligence, presently sent his man Nicholas to arrest
him: and the next day, he sent his brother Anthony Cauuin to enter an action
of death against him: Heretics do hold one doctrine no longer then it
seruethe their turns.
which action John Calvin followed both by him self and by his friends so
vehementlye, as within few days after, he caused Seruetus to be burnt alive in
the marquet place, with a soft fyar for his greater torment. VVhereat many
protestants were offended and greuouslie skandallized: for that Calvin had set
furthe a book a little before, to prove that no heretic ought to be put to
death for his religion.

Now for other behavior of Calvin, Caluins ambition and vain glory.
as for his intolerable ambition and pride, there are many examples given: as
that, to make him self famous he devised diverse letters, and other works
in praise of him self, and published them under the name of one Galasius and
others: and sending them to PETRVS VIRETVS minister of Lausanna to be spread
abroad by him: he being well acquainted with Caluins style, espied the devise,
and was greatly offended therewith, and wrote to Calvin, that he would discredit
him self by such doeings. But Calvin answered, that it was expedient it
should be so done, for-the credit of their cause: and that he meant to write
shortly as much in the commendation of VIRETVS him self, and FARELVS also,
VVherwith VIRETVS was pacifyed. These letters with one and fowertie more were
found in the studdie of viretus (after his runnyng away from Lausanna) and
showed to the Lords of Berna: who could never abide Calvin after ward, for
this manifest declaration of his vainglorie and pride. The same Calvin, after
he had broken down the images, and rased the pictures of Christ and all Saints
in Geneua: he caused his own picture to be drawn, and set up in diverse
places of the city: and used also to give little pictures and images of him
self to gentlewomen, and gentlemen to carry about their necks. And when one
told him, that some thought much of this: A holy answer,
he answered: he that can not abide yt, let him brust for envy.

Chap. 13.

Caluins raising of a dead man.


An other example of his intolerable pride and vain-glorie is this that
follows. One called Brulle of the town of Ostune, being made a protestant,
came with his wife to dwell at Geneua, and for that he was but poor, he
procured many letters in his commendation to Calvin, for his relief of the
common purse, which he obtained. And being thereby, made a fast friend unto him,
and very familiar: Calvin on a time bracke with him and his wife, in a matter
of great secrecy, which might turn the gospel to great credit, and them
selves to great gain, if they would do it faythfullie. And this was, that the
husband should feyne him self sick, and so to dye, and that he would seem
(by the word of the Lord) to raise him again. Which they were content to
do And so all circunstances being agreed upon, and the day appointed for his
death, yea and the very hour: John Calvin that day invited of purpose, many
gentlemen to dynner, and after dynner walked out with them, and kept him self
always near the door of that feined sick man, Intolerable hypocrisy.
for whom he had caused much prayer to be made in the city. At last when the
hour was come, the good wife came out cryeing, that her husband was dead.
Whereupon Calvin requested the gentlemen to go in and see him. And there, he
falling down on his knees, as rapt with zeal, began to pray vehemently, and
to trouble him self in spirit, after the imitatio^ of Christ, Ioh. 11. and 13.
desiring the rest to pray with him, which they did. And then Calvin breaking
out in great fervor, desired the Lord for more manifestation of his gospel,
to restore that man to life again, and therewith in great vehemencye took the
man by the hand, and willed him again, and again, in the Lords behalf to
rise. But he moved not, vvherat the good wife maruailing, removed quickly the
clothe from his face, and fownd him both dead and cold: at which sight she
being greuouslie astonished, cried out, that her husband was murdered, and
falling into a rage, ran upon Calvin, exclaming that he was a deceyuer, and
so opened the whole matter to the standers by: who remained much amazed to
hear her tell such particulars, as she did, but yet for not discrediting the
cause, they rebuked her: but she continued cryeinge out still. Calvin said,
she was mad, or else the devil was entered upon her, and so left both her
and the house. But yet soon after, he caused her to be banished the city, and
to stop her tongue the sooner, she was married to a minister, named Cowldrye,
about Ostune. But yet all that sufficed not to stay her speech, but that ever
more she continued in the same tale.

The like event almost had he in coniuring an evil spirit out of the body of
a certain gardener, Caluins casting out of deuylls, vide in vita Bezae. page
12.
belonging to a citizen of Geneua, called Domen Faure, in whose house, the said
Gardener being greuouslie possessed (as I have said:) Monsieur Calvin would
needs go to the house after his accustomed proud fashion, accompanied with
many gentlemen and others, and would presume, as the preacher and servant of the
lord, FRED. STA PHILVS counsailer to the E^perour, being a young man, and a
protestant also, was with Luther in the vestrye of aparishe church in
vvittenberge, when he took upon him to conjure the devil out of a maid sent
thither from Misnia. But this devil so dressed Luther, as seeking to run out
again at the door, he could not, for that the devil had so fastened yt
both within and without, as Luther was feign to stay there in great
torment, and in danger of a homelye chance, while tools were in fetchinge
to break down the door. Staph. apol^ 2.
to cast out the said devil: But god refusing to give testimonye to fashoode,
suffered the devil to bear the man possessed, with great violence upon
Calvin, and to beat him with his fyst, to scratche him with his nails, to
byte him with his teeth, and to torment him in most terrible manner. Nor all
the people present were Able to resist him: and in the end Calvin hardly, and
with much a do escaped a way with his life, all beaten, scratched, and most
pityfullie handled, he being, besides the hurt, almost out of his wits with
fear. This was done in the presence of many people, whereof diverse are yet a
live, and do testifye the same, that Monsieur Calvin would never after go
again to cast out deuylls.

Caluins lasciuiousnes. Ex cap. 14.
Touching the lasciuiouse dealing of this prophet, there be many examples put
down in the book, gyuing open signs of his loose behaueour, and importing
great suspision of foul dishonestie, both with man and woman kind, thoghe he
had always a wenche of his own. His diet was very dayntie, both for rare
meats, choice wynes, variety of dishes, and furniture of service. Monsieur
Caluines day menes.
And when he would show so much favor to any man, as to go forth and dyne or
suppe with him a broad, always a silver pott of his own wine must be carried
with him, for his own mouth. He had also a baker that made bread of purpose
for him only, of fine flower wette in rose water, and myngled with sugar,
Cynomome, and Aniseseeds, beside a singular kind of Biskette made for him
self alone. And this was so known ower all Geneua, that, all excellent bread
was co^monlye compared to the bread of Monsieur Calvin. Whereof the Lords of
Berna having good information, The Author was then ph^sitian at Berna.
were greatly scandalized and offended, thinking that never any of the old
prophets took such care of their bodies as this new prophet did. By which
means he came to be so wanton with woman kind, as many sca^dalouse things fell
out, Ex ca. 15.
which I pass over, referring my reader to the foresaid book it self. As the
gentlewoman of Mongis which stealyng from her husband at lausanna, went and
made residence at Geneua with Monsieur Calvin, whether her husband durst not
follow her. Also the young strange gentlewoman that took a house nigh Geneua,
where Calvin used to lie when her husband was from home, and the servant found
his place in his mistress bed, and the like: Yet one prank I can not let
pass, touching a very noble man called James Bourgongne Lord of fallaise, A
notable pranke of Monsieur Calvin.
who for religion came and lay at Geneua, with his lady, a goodly
gentlewoma^ whose name was Iolland of Bredrode. This man being very sickly in
Geneua, and much in the Physicians hands, would have Monsieur Calvin come and
visit him often, which he willingly did, but more for the wives sake than for
the man's, as appeared after: for besides many significations of his good will
toward her: in the end he opened him self fully unto her, telling her in
great secrecy, that this man was but a burden unto her now, and could do
her no more service, being rather as a dead man than alive. Wherefore (says
he) if you will follow my counsel, let him go (lady Iolland,) and he being
dead, we two, we two, will marry together. Which the lady took in
great disdain, and for avoiding of further inconuenie^ce persuaded her husband
to forsake Geneua presently, and to go to Lausanna: where they being arrived,
she opened the whole cause and matter unto him, and to many other her friends
besides. And the Author says, that he heard all this from the mouth of the
same lady her self, in the presence of her said husband, and of many other
honorable personages then present.

I leave infinite matters of other quality, as of his singular cosonage,
especially toward the Queen of Navarre, by diverse feygned and contrary
letters, and the like: which the reader may see at large in the book. Caluins
sickness and death.
But yet at last after all this Ioylitie and shysting for the time, death came
on him in the end, and paid him home for all. Beza confesses (says our
Author) that he was greatly tormented before his death with all these diseases
together: the ptisick, the cholik, the Astma, the stone, the gowte, the
hemoroids, and the megrim in his head. But he leaves out that which was the
principal: and that is, the horrible disease of life and worms, which did
eat his whole body over: An^iochus, and Herod, and diverse other enemies of god
dyed this death.
and the most lothesome ulcer in his fundame^t and privy members, which did
stynck so outragiouslie, as no man might abide to be near him. And this they
do testifye which were about him even unto the last breathe in his body. And
they add (says our author) and do confirm yt by diverse witnesses, that he
dyed swearing, and cursing, and namyng the deuylls, through desperatio^ of his
extreme paynes^ and most pityfully bewayling the time that ^uer he had studied
or written book. And all this has this author published with much more
touching the life and death of John Calvin.

s^^ha life of Theodore Beza.
The same author has set forth this present year, 1582. an other history of
the life and ma^ners of Theodore Beza, successor of Calvin in his chair of
Geneua: and has dedicated the same book to the honorable Magistrates,
counsailers, and other gouuernours of the said city, of Geneua, for that they
can best tell whether most of the reports be true or no: or at leastwyse, may
learn the same, as most of all it behooves them. And he says, that he
has done it in the time of Beza yet living, to the end he may refute it, if
any thing be said amysse. Jerome her mes Bolsec. in his book of the life and
manners of Theodore Beza.
First therefore, to let pass other insinite things: he shows how Beza was
borne at vezels in france, whose father was lyeuetenant for the king in that
city, and when he came to dye, seeing the most wicked disposition of his
son, gave to him his curse, and under the hand of a public notarie, and in
presence of many witnesses, did disinherit him, and disclame him for his son.
Yet had he brought him up in study of learning, both at Paris and Orleans,
and had procured him to be made prior of Lo^giumey. But he saw that he turned
all to wickedness, without hope of amendment. He began as his master
Calvin did.
And albeit he abounded in all kind of vice: Yet the excess of carnal sins
did pass all other in him, wherewith he did not only offend God him self, but
infected also all other whose company he used. This appears (beside other
testimonies) by an infamouse Epigrame read in comparison of the two sins, of
adultery and Sodomie, and between a boy which he abused, and a man's wife of
Paris that he kept in dishonestie: the boy he calls AVDEBERTVS, and the
harlot CANDIDA, Beza his dishonest Epigram.
though her true name were Claudia. The Epigram begins thus: Abest Candida,
Beza quid moraris? Audebertus abest, quid hic moraris? And then he goes on,
examinyng which sin he may love best, and in the end prefers the horrible
sin of Sodomie with his boy, before the pleasure of his harlot Ca^dida. And
he did not only make these fylthie verses, but also did put the^ in print,
the year 1548 under his own name, and Robert Stephanus of Paris did prynte
them.

VVhereat the Council of Paris was so much offended, that an arrest was
granted furthe to apprehend Beza. The manner of Beza his vocation to the
ghospel.
Which he understanding of, first of all, sold his Priorie for redye money in
hand: and then presently (before the matter was known,) did let out the same
to other fermers for five years, taking also money before hand. When he had
done this: he stole away, and came secretly from vezels to Paris, and there
agreed with Ca^dida (which was a Taylers wife, dwelling in Cale^der street)
and she stealing what she could from her husband ran with him to Geneua:
where they were received by Calvin, and much made of, and Beza soon after
placed by him, as chief minister and public reader of divinity in Lausanna.

When this was known, the parties to whom Beza had sold and leased his
priory, fell together by the ears, who should have it, and much money was
spent about the suit, in the court of Paris. The poor Tailer, who had lost
his wife, (and some goods besides) could not tell which way to look, nor
where to complain. Afterward, in the year 1561, when the king of France had
granted a free disputation to the protestants at Poysie, The conference at
Poysie.
and safe conduct to all them that would come, (whereat Beza was also as one,)
both the foresaid Tailor and the buyars of his benefice, came thither to meet
with their Merchant: But by reason of the kings safe conduct, the poor Tailor
(having no friends) was prohibited to ps^cute the matter against Beza, so
that he was feign to let go his wife: and Beza keeps her for his wife at
this day. But the fermers making more friends, the^ the tailor could, got a
hundred crounes delivered them, by the hands of one MATTHEW LAVNOY a minister,
and one of their cheifest disputers at that time, but sense returned to the
Catholic faith, has opened their dealinges, in many books.

Monsieur Beza being now in credit in Geneua, and reader of divinity in
Lausanna, followed his old manners still, in seekinge new and fresh baytes,
notwithstanding the presence of Candida: for having begotten his servant with
child, A notable devise and present shift of Beza.
(which was young and fair, called Claudia,) and fearing lest the matter
should come to the magistrates ^ares, feigned both him self and the maid to
be sick of the plague, whereby none should dare to come unto them, and so
obtained, of PETRVS VIRE^VS minister also of lausanna, that they might both be
placed in two chambers of his in an utter gardyne, which was granted. And then
he caused a poor young man that was a barboure to come unto him, and persuaded
him to take a gross quantity of blood from Claudia the maid, and moreover
to give her a strong purgation, which he did: and thereupon she was soon
after delivered of her child dead, which they buried in that gardyne, as the
same harbor afterward confessed, Beza kills his own child and together
hazardethe the life of his harlote. O impious abusing the majesty of God.
and the author heard it from his own mouth. But in this mean space,
whilst those, things were in doeinge, Beza (to cover matters, and to deceive
the people the more,) made certain spiritual songs of the great pains, which
he suffered by vehemency of the plague, and sent them to be printed at Geneua,
where as in deed he was not syck at all.

After this trouble of Child birth was past, Beza with his master Calvin, as
long as he lived, and after his death, he alone, employed him self to all
kind of wickedness, not only at home, but also abroad. And first the
conspiracy, for taking the young king of France at Amboise was contrived from
Geneua, and one Villemongis a noble man (fled from digieon in France a little
before, for counterfaiting the kings broad seal) was sent from Geneua, as
chief in this matter. And after that, infinite treaso^s appeared from Geneua:
as for the taking of Lions, Orlea^s, Poytiers, and other Cities: The Duke of
Gu^se murdered by Beza his appointement.
which all, or the most part, came from Beza his head, as diverse parties
executed have confessed. Also sone after, he devised the death of the noble
Duke of Guise, and committed the execution thereof to one Pultrot, who did it
in deed, at the only motion and persuasion of Beza, as he openly protested
at his death. And at the very same time, to stir men up the more to
sedition, he putt forth diverse most poisoned books, entitled by diverse
names as for example, one called the frensh furies: Seditious books set
forth by Beza.
an other, The truth. An other: The Watch: An other, the uvaking bell. All
which tend directly to move troubles, seditions, wars, rebellio^s,
murders, and the like. Also, the life of S. Katheryne of Florence, which in
show, is only an infamouse Libell against the Queens mother of france, but
in deed is a defacing, and most opprobriouse infaming of the king, and all the
nobility, that are not Caluinists.

And as this man was busy a broad, so was he not Idle at home, in establyshing
his own dominion, in Geneua. For which respect, he caused Merlyn, the cheifest
learned minister of that city, and in deed far better learned than him
self, Beza his tyranny. in Geneua.
namely in the tongues, to be deposed from his ministry, and to void the
city. The like he did by an other called Gaigneur, and for the same purpose,
he caused the Lord of Pacye (though a protestant) to leese his head, without
all cause, foloweing herein his Master Calvin, who had a facility in cutting
of all them which any way resisted him. For this end also he joined gladly
with all strangers, that fledd to that city, for the same or like causes as
he had done him self: that is, for horrible wickedness. For that he was sure,
that such men durst never go home again, and therefore must needs be fast
friends unto him: that is, as he calls them Zealous folowers of the gospel.
So the fore named Ville-mongis flyeing to Geneua for having counterfayted the
kings seal (as I have said) became most Zealous upon the sudden: The furniture
of Geneua for the gospel.
So one Nicholas hanuoyre, merchant in Anwerp, runninge away with three
thowsa^d pounds of other men's goods, fledd to Geneua, and was received
ioyfuly, and assoyled from restitution, and his daughter married to Anthony
Cauuin, John Caluins brother. So the Lady of Clells in Dolphinie runnyng away
in her husbands absence, with one county Iulio of Atien, an Italian, who had
been naught with her before: she came to Geneua bringyng with her as much
goods of her husbands as she could get, and although her husband, the Lord
of Clells, pursued her and claymed justice at Geneua, both against her, and the
adulterer: yet could he get none, but only the consistory of ministers,
upon deliberation determined that he might marye again, when he could get an
other wife, for that he was never like to have this, being now more fytt for
County Iulio than for him.

The like happened in one Contour, a notable adulterer, who took away the
wife of one Pise, a Citizen of Mascon, and brought her to Geneua, and nether
the Citizen nor any friends that ever he could make, could get any justice
or restitution of that wife: but that under pretense of zeal to the gospel,
both were maintained in Geneua, against all reason, conscience, and honesty,
she having left many children with her former husband, desolate by her
departure. And all this is done by the counsel, doctrine, and authority of
Monsieur Beza now in Geneua: who having entered there with his master Calvin
for refuge of their fylthe, (as has been declared) have reformed the City to
their own humors, and have made yt a receptacle for all desperate and
monstruouse malefactors in the world.

A brief consideration upon the former lives.
And thus (M. Charke) upon occasion given by your self, you have heard somewhat
of the first begynners or restorers of your gospel, whom you call holy men
and saints of God. And surely they ought to have been so. For we never read
since God had first a church, that he made reformation in the same, (such as
you pretend,) but by rare and singular virtuous men. But now if these your
late reformers, whom you must needs affirm to have been endewed with the
holi^ ghost, above other men, were but meanly or co^monlie honest, and that
in external behauyour at least: we could be content to let it pass. But if
(as it is evident) they were so lewd, and notoriousely evil, as they may
contend even with the very worst, and out cast of the world: then is it hard
for any sensible man to believe, that they were endewed with the holy Ghost
above other, and that God would choose them so singularly, to control and
r^fourme the whole church beside. And to make a brief recapitulation of this
matter: Six men only have been the begynners, Six men the reformers of all
our English religion.
increasers, and perfecters of all the reformation which now you have in
England. The first of all, was Luther: whose vocation life and doctrine has
in part been touched before: and he confesses expresselye him self, Lib. de
mis. priua. and vnct. sacer. Artic. 28. cont. Lo^a. To 2. wit. fol. 503.
without gloss, that the first motion thereof came from the devil him self
in proper person. Luther had three first and principal scholars: that is,
Corolostadius, Oecolampadius, and Zuinglius, which first began the religion of
Sacramentaries, and are accursed by Luther: as damnable heretics for the same.

The first of these three being archedeacon of wittenberge was thought so
evil a man by Luther him self, COROLOSTADIVS.
as was unworthy to live amongst Christians, and so by his procurement, he
was banished out of all the dominions of the Duke of Saxony, An. 1525.
and so ended his life miserably in laboring the ground, OECOLAMPADIVS.
as your own historiographer Sleidan writes lib. 5. The second was so lewd a
man, as by Luthers affirmation he was slain by the devil him self. An. 1531,
October. 12
Lib. de missa priuata and vnct. sacer. or as (some other think) killed him
self with his own hands: VLRICVS ZVINGLIVS. in li. subsi. de euchar.
Lindan. dial. 3. dubit. The third having received the proofs of his new
doctrine of the sacrament, from a spirit in the night (as him self writes,
and confesses that he knew not wether he were black or white) lived in such
sort as he was detested by Luther, and finally stirring up the Zuisars, his
country men to war, one against the other, (that is, the Tugurines against
the five pages) was slain him self in the fyeld, An. 1531. October. 9.
and after his body burned: against whom Luther made many inuectiues after his
death. Sleidan li. 8. Surius in histor.

The fyfthe reformer was John Calvin, CALVIN.
whereof came the Caluinists: who, how good a man he was, the story before of
his life declares. Caluinistes differ from Zuinglians in religion.
And that he differs from Zuinglius in religion, (which M. Fulke in all his
writings most impudentlie denies) may appear by the 15. articles of heresy
which Andreas Zebedeus, preacher of Nion, and Johannes Angelus preacher of
Burtin, both Zuinglians, did take upon them to prove against Calvin before the
Magistrates of Berna (Calvin him self being present) upon pain of burning, if
they proved them not. Whereupon proceeded the decree of those Magistrates the
year 1555, and third of April, that none of their dominions should go to
c^municate with Calvin at Geneua. Pontas^in Anno, 1555. The last of your
reformers which has brought your doctrine to perfection, that is, to
puritanisme, is Beza, BEZA.
of wose singular virtues you (M. Charke) above others have greatly to
rejoice, for that you show your self in your reply a most zealous Puritan.

But now after all these matters discussed, M. Charke, to discredit all that
hitherto had been said, brings in a false report of Lyndan (as he says)
touching the foul death of Martin Bucer, Touching the death of Bucer.
in Cambrige. And for proof hereof, he alleges a sentence of M. Carre (then
a protestant) in his epistle to M. Cheek (a protestant also) containing some
commendation of the death of M Bucer. But I ask you (M. Charke,) why do you
accustom to belie men so? have you no conscience in so doyngs? For shame
report as you find, and no otherwise. Lyndan avouches it not as you say:
But only he reports as he had heard: for his words are these: Lindan. de
fug. ido. cap. 11.
M^rcatores quida^ Coloniae, non ignobiles, narrant: certain woorshipfull
marchantes of Colen do report. you see he avouches it not: why showld you
him belie so falselie as you do? I have noted now this in you diverse times: I
hope yt will do you good against you write again: And this of the report. But
for the matter, yt is of small importance, how soever yt be. For as Lyndans
authority were little auaylable against you, if he had affirmed yt, as he does
not: so M. Carrs authority writing at such a time, and upon such occasion,
and for such an end, and to such a man as he did: Pontacus Burdegale^sis in
chron anni 1551.
is not of great weight with me, for the denial. Let the matter be as it
will, it little imports us. Yet one historiographer of our time does write,
that some of Bucers own disciples have reported, that he dyed a Jew denyeing
Christ to be the Messiah.

What soever his death was, Martin Luther writes that he was a very untrue
and wicked man: Luther. ep. ad Io. Har. typ. arg.

This is testified of bucer by lauatherus a Zuinglian in hist. sacr.

And by functius, a sectarie, in chron. also by the acts themselves of that
Synod set forth in print.


yea, (more then that) that he was a very Monster. And for his constancy in
doctrine, you have little cause to brag so of him. For first, of a Dominican
friar he became a Lutheran. After that, he bacame a Zuinglian, as appears ep.
ad Norimb. ep. ad Essingenses: And thirdly, in the Sinod Holden at Luthers
house in wittenberge the year 1536, he came back again to be a Lutheran,
recantinge openly both the article of baptism of infants to be unnecessary:
(as he had written before upon the third chapter of S. Mathewes gospel) and
also the article of the supper, as he testifies of him self, upon the sixth of
John: and 26. of Matthew, Where he asks pardon also of God and of the
Church, for that he deceived so many with the heresy of Zuinglius, as he
calls yt: and yet notwitstanding, a little before in his epistle to them of
Norimberge, he affirms the doctrine of Zuinglius to be most divine, and
delivered immediatlye by Christ from heaven: Bucers inconstancy.
and Luthers doctrine to be new, and repugnant to the scriptures. Also in his
epistle ad Essingenses he calls the Lutheranes, fanatical and furiouse
teachers. But did this third or fowerth recantation hold, think you? no
surely. For coming into England, he bacame a Zuinglian again, (as you will
not deny) and in that opinion dyed, as you say: but I think he might dye a
Jew well enough, as pontacus writes, for any reason I see to the contrary.
For he, which had so many times changed his faith, seems to have had no
religion at all (by lykelyhode) in his heart, and therefore might easily both
dowt and waver, not on^lie in points of the Catholic, Lutherane, and
zuinglian religion, but also of the Messiah and Christ him self: as diverse
write, that some of his scholars have reported. Wherefore, though I passed
over this man as scarce worthy mentioninge: yet have you gained little by
bringinge him in, as far as I can see: And therefore let us now return to
the Censure again.

Of the Jesuits doctrine.
THE CENSVRE.
Fourthlie, you will needs bring the Jesuits in discredit by certain
blasphemous doctrines, which you say they hold, in a book written by
common consent, called Censura Coloniensis: out of which you have, for example
sake, put down thirtiene blashemies, in their own very words (as you
say) noting the leaf, and adding the clean contrary doctrine out of the
word of God. Badde dealing of william Charlke.
And that men should know that you deal playnlie, and bring their very
words, and no syllable of your own, you have put their sayeings down, in
a different Roman letter. But (M. Chark) in brotherlye charity, let me reason
the ma^ter a little with you. Are you not ashamed of this falsehode? did you
not think that this your book might be examined by some man or other? in deed
you have all the printes to your selves, and your searchers are so vvatchefull,
as nothing ca^ pass their hands, to the discoueryng of your doeings, and
therefore you may both say and print what you will. And our ears may well
burn on this side the sea, and our hearts revv, at the shameless untruths
which we hear and see uttered there among you daily: But we can not remedy
it, and this that I write now, I make account, yt may asvvell perish, as
diverse things of greater importance have done heretofore. But surely me
thinks a wise man, that had care of his soul, might see the light at a
little hole, and descrie the conclusion by a fevv premises. If you in so short
a pamphlet utter so many, so manifest, so inexcusable untruths, as I will
now show, which notvvithstanding you might reasonably doubt least perhaps
they might be disclosed: what will you, and your fellows dare auouche in
your sermons, speeches, and discourses, which you are sure shall never come to
examination? But now l^tt us consider these wicked blasphemies of the
Jesuits: with whom if you have dealt truly and honestly, then let all be
believed which you speak daily of us. If you have done otherwise: then the
same malice which drove you to abuse your self toward them, may also
iustelye be suspected in the rest of your doeings, and sayeings toward us.

THE DEFENSE.
Sir william, in this place as a byrd taken by the leg for lyeing, and a
fether or two pulled of his pride, by exaggeration of the ^ame, beats him
self greatly to get out, and thrusts his head in every hole to be gone.
And first he says, I have reported most intolerable slanders of Martin
Luther upon the credit of three or four vvitnesses: And why then might not he
report these things of the Jesuits, upon the credit of one Gotuisus? But the
differences of these matters shall appear after: And how I have justified
both my self and my Authors in my reports about Luther, the reader has now
seen. If M. Charke can discharge him self so, he shall pass blameless.
Secondly he says. I have made four lies without shame in one sentence.
Most ridiculous a^cusations.
For (says, he) we have not all the printes to our selves, as may appear by
this your book imprynted. Our searchers are not so vvatchefull as nothing can
pass: for this your book has passed. We can not say or prynt what we
will: for it must be with examination and pryuilege. You are not beyond
sea, as you would have us believe: for it is now known this book was
written in England. These are four manifest lies, this is the Judgment of
God against you. Do not you take pity of this poor minister, that stowpeth
to so miserable helps for his relief?

But this door not serving his turn to get ou^, he runs to an other. You
charge the magistrates and learned byshopes (says he) as if they were
careless, what doctrine is delivered unto the people. Yea marie, this is to
the matter, for if you ca^ make the state to answer for your doeings, you may
lie by authority, and no man with safety shall dare to control you^ I have
seen a gentleman named M. Pasye, who had a custom, that when he went after
his Lord, and had played some pranke with his companions, in such sort as he
feared a blow coming toward him again: he would step before his master
and say: beware Sir, there is one that will strike you. The dealing of our
adversaries in dravveing all matters against the state.
Even so deal you ministers in your generation, with us that are of the
Catholic part. When you have excited us, by demands, offers, chalenges, and
prouocations: when you have styrred us with lies, slanders, reproaches, and
other injuries: if you see any little rebuffe draweinge toward you again: you
step with facility behind the clothe of estate, putting her Majesty, her
Magistrates, and the whole realm between you and us, sayeing, that we offer at
them, and not at you: we impugn them, and not you: whereas in deed, in many
things, there is nether word, nor thought that touches them: And in the
matter of religion it self, wherein they are amiss, we seek to do them
good, by discryeing of your falshoode. But yet you, as not able to defend any
one thing your selves, draw them always as principal to every matter,
though never so far of from their affairs. Shall I give an example besides
your self (for you do it almost in every leaf?) M. Howlet complaynethe of
these our wicked and loose times: In the preface to the reasons of refusal.
which is common (as you know) to all that live in the^. Doctor Fulke to
scrape a little favor from the court, and to make the other odiouse: cries
out against him, In his answer to Hovvle^ fol. 3.
for that he had not consideration of her Majesty's singular virtues, and
others of high estate under her. Was there ever parasite that flattered so
palpablie? when men accuse the times, must they except princes, by name, or
else be accounted traitors? what Apostle, what ancient father did ever so?
but we pardone your necessity: extreme poverty dryueth you to these shyfts:
which I thought good once to note to the reader, that I may not trouble my
self with them in every place where they are used.

The third hole where at this afflicted bird seeks to wring out, is by
layeing all his lies upon one Go^visus, from whom (as he says) he took
these reports against the Jesuits: Tovvching Gotvisus.
adding notwithstanding for preventing of after clappes, that he promised not
to myngle no sillables of his own: nor to deliver the scripture, in precise
words as it lyethe, but rather as he says, in full weight of true sense and
matter. And thereupon he makes a solemn protestation of his true dealing. But
I will show and prove, (notwithstanding this hypocrisy,) that, admitting this
liberty which M. Charke requires, of chopping and changing in his reports:
yet, that he is a false man, and malitiouslie meant to deceive in the same: And
if I prove not this, let me be taken for false my self. And I do most
willingly stand to my offer made before, which M. Charke takes hold of, that
if these reports, as they are here laid down, and denied by us, can be
verified, either in words or true sense against the Jesuits: let all be
believed which they speak daily against us.

And that you may take some foresight of M. Charks untrue meaning even now at
the beginning: his falshoode appears first in that, Diverse vvayes vvherby M
Charkes falshode appears.
he citing his reports out of an other man, against the Jesuits, without seeing
their book, (as he says,) did not in all the whole discourse so much as once
name, or quote his author Gotvisus, either in text or Margent: the cause
whereof shall appear after. And albeit he now says, that Gotvisus was quoted
in most of his books: yet I dare scarce believe him, for that I could never
yet happen upon any that had him quoted: And if some had it, why not all?
Secondly, Li. deprecipuis capitibus theologiae Iesu^tarum: In orthodoxis
explicationibus.
he had seen the most of these reports set down by ke^nitius against the
Jesuits, (from whom it seems that Gotuisus borrowed them) and refuted by
Payuas a learned Portugal, and convinced of so manifest forgerie and
falshoode, as kemnitius to my knoulege durst never to defend them again, nor
any other for him. How then could M. Charke without shameless false meaning,
lay down the very same reports again without namyng his author, or seeing
the book whence they were cited, especially having (besides many other)
Canisius a Jesuit before his eyes in England: In opere catechistic^. Dona^us
Gotuisus de fide I su and Iesu^arum.
which teaches the very contrary, as after shall be showed? Thyrdlie, his
author Gotuisus in the most of these reports cites not only the Censure of
Colen, but also the large Catechism of Canisius for his proof, which was
common in England to be seen, and whereby M. Charke must needs know that
Gotuisus slaundered the Jesuits most impudentlie. For covering whereof M. Chark
not only suppressed the quotation of Canisius, and cited only the Censure
of Colen (which he knew was not to be had in England) but also supressed his
chief Author Gotuisus him self (which no writer uses in such matters of
importance) to the end the reader might not by him learn out the quotations of
Canisius, and thereby discover the falshoode. And this was the true cause of
the omission of Gotuisus his name. And is not this most wilful treachery?
Lastely, M. Charke, as not contented with this, does help out often times the
reports of Gotuisus (being but short and breef sentences) with new
falsifications, of his own, or with fraudulent recital, when they seem not
of them selves to sound absurdlie enough against the Jesuits. And can this be
excused from malitiouse and false meaning? Now the^ let us see whether these
things be so in deed or no.

Of the nature and definition of sin. The first Article.

THE CENSVRE.
First therefore, you report the Jesuits to say: It is not sin what soever is
against the woord^ of God. Censura Colon. leaf 44. (1.) These voordes are
guylefullie A faulty definition. of sin.
Sin is what soever repugneth to the law of God, The which definition, the
Censure of Colen affirms uot to be in all respects perfect, but that
diverse words should be added to the same: as for example, in stead of that
he says (Sin is what soever etc.) (2.) He should have said, Sin is an
action: for that Jacob lay with Lya, Gene. 29.
which was not his wife, yet because he knevv it not, but thought her to be
Rachel his wife, he sinned not. So that, the perfect definition of sin, is
not that which Monhemius did putt down, and the protestants follow: but
rather that which the Jesuits, together with S. Augustine, and other learned
fathers have set down: Aug. li. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 19.

The true definition of sin.


to wit, Sin is a humane act, voluntarily and wittinglie commi^ted
against the law of God. And this to be understood of actual sin properly.

THE DEFENSE.
False dealing^ so^vved by an example.
That these words are guilefullie reported out of the Jesuits doctrine, may
appear by this example. A learned counsailer having discoursed upon the laws
of our land, and showed that albeit, all breach of public laws does tend
against the Prince and common wealth (as in deed it does:) Yet every such
tra^sgression is not treason, but some felony, some trespass, some no offense
at all, being done without malice, will, or knoulege: would you not think him a
maliciouse wrangler, that should come and frame this odious proposition upon
the others large discourse, it is not treason, what so ever is against the
Prince and common wealth? For, albeit these words may be verifyed in a good
sense (as the Censure says of M. Charkes report) yet, being laid down
barelie without sheweing the occasion and discourse, they sownde odiouslie, as
though what soever were done against the Prince and common wealth were no
treason. In like sort deal these heretics with the Jesuits, who do show,
that albeyt every sin does repugne the law of God: yet every thing that so
repugneth is not equally sin, but some venial, some mortal sin, and some
no sin at all, if it be without will or consent: as the first motions of
concupiscende are. Whereupon our adversaries come and frame this odiouse
proposition, before set down: to wit, it is not sin what soever is
against the word of God: without expoundinge how and in what sense it was
spoken.

And to let you see M. Charks nypping and shufling in this one little line to
make it sownd more odious, Kem. pa. 16 Go^uis. pa. 245.
tha^ either kemnitius or Gotvisus (from whom he took it,) do deliver the
same: The Jesuits words are reported by them thus: the Jesuits (say they) in
their definition of sin, do say, Peccatum est, non quicquid legi dei
repugnat, Sed etc. Sin is, not what soever repugneth the law of God, but
etc. And then follows the rest of the Jesuits definition, towched in the
Censure. And thus is it reported by M. Charks Masters. But he, to make it seem
more absurd in ignorant men's ears, lays it down absolutely thus: yt is
not sin what soever is against the word of God. As though the sentence
ended there. Also as though it were no part of a definition. Again, he
changes the place of the negation, which in framing of propositions alters
often the sense. Arist. lib. peri herminias.
So: for peccatum est, non quicquid etc. he sayethe non est peccatum quiquid
etc. And lastely, for repugneth the law of God: he puts, It is against the
word of God. And all this to help out a little suspicion of absurd doctrine
in the Jesuits: which argues in him a dishonest intention: though for the
doctrine it self in the Jesuits meaning, I think the Censure has
sufficiently defended it: and what soever M. Charke has thereto replied, shall
now be examined: notinge by the way, that M. Charkes common, and only refuge
of credit, to say, we must either absolutely grant, or absolutely deny
all these propositions (fathered on the Jesuits) is ridiculous and most
vain. For we admit so much of them, as either in word or sense the Jesuits
ever uttered: and the rest either coined, falsified, wrested, or otherwise
abused by you, we turn home again with shame upon your selves.

But now to the defense of the Jesuits definition of sin, against which M.
Charke has diverse impertinent objections, which serve to spend time, but yet
they must be answered ( Whether sin be an act or no.
) First then, to prove that sin is no act, he obiecteth, that injustice is a
sin, and yet no act To which I answer, that injustice may betaken for an
act, and so properly a sin, as if a man would say yt was great injustice to
putt to death so innocent and learned men, as M. Campian was, and those that
dyed with him: here injustice signifies an iniust act. But if you take
injustice for an habit only: that is, only for a procliuitie, or facilicie
to an iniust act: The difference of vitium and peccatum in divinity Lib.
cont. Iul. pelag. cap. 18.
then you must learn, that as well this, as all other evil habits are called
by divines vitia, non peccata, vices and not sins. For that an evil habit
may be in a man without sin, except by consent to yt he bring forth an evil
act: as S Augustine proves in the habit or procliuitie to dronkennes,
contracted before a man's conue^sition, and remaining after the same, it is no
sin except it bring furthe some act of dronkennes, ethe^ in consent or
operation. And the like is to be said of all other evil habites or
inclinations, which may remain in the mind, without any act: and
consequ^^lie without sin, Cap. 14. de trin. cap. 7.
as experience teaches: and as S. Austen also proves in an other place. For
in a good man after his conversion, there may remain evil habites, called
vitia, as procliuitie to lie, to steal, to carnal sin, or the like: and yet
are they no sins, except they bring furthe some act, either of consent in
heart, or of operation in work. So that you see, how injustice (as it is an
habit, that is, only an inclination or procliuitie to do unjustly) may be
in a man without sin. For that it is no sin of it self, without an act,
as has been showed. And this point perhaps you learned not before.

The sin of omissio^. Ezech. 33. 1. Re. 2. D. Tho. 22 q. 79.
Secondly, you object against this first member, that the sin of omission is
a sin: as where Hely was punished for not chastising his children, and the
watchemen condemned for omitting to sound the trompette, which notwitstanding
was no action, say you. This is a common objection, borrowed of our own
schoolmen, and answered by the same. Every omission that is a sin (M.
Charke) implies some action, that is cause, either directly or indirectlie of
that omission, Chriso. ho. 16. inep. ad ^ph. and ho. 36. de vnc. and vitiis.

Ambros. ser. 18.

Basil. com. in illud Lu. 12. destrua^ horrea.

Every omission includethe an act.


and so is principal part of the sin: as S. Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Basil
do prove. I say directly or indirectlie: and I will give examples of both.
First then I say, that I being bound (for example sake) to go to church at
a certain hour, I may make a resolution with my self, that I will not go:
and then this act of resolution in my mind, called no litio, is the direct
cause of this omission, and the ground of the sin. And this was the sin of
Hely, and of the watchemen before mentioned: whereof: the one determined not to
punish his childeren, and the other not to sound the trompet, though they
saw the enemy coming, as the text shows. Secondly, I may omit this
goeing to the church at the hour appointed, not upon any resolution made to
the contrary: but for that I do set my self to do some other action at
that time, (as to write, or the like) whereby I do occupy up the time wherein
I should go to church, and so do committ that omission without any
particular resolution, that I will not go: and in this case the action of
writing, committed in the time when I should have gone to church, is the
indirect cause of this omission, and the ground of the same, being done
wittinglie at such time as it should not. And so we see that every omission
includes an act, either directly or indirectly, goeing before, and causing the
said omission. As also appears plainly by the Peccatum est factum dictum vel
concupitum contra aeter nam dei legem^
definition of sin so often repeated out of. S. Austen l. 22. contra Faustum
cap: 27. and out of S. Ambrose li. de Paradiso capi. 8.

And that which M. Charke adds for over throw of my instances, sayeing: that
not devils, but the evil in devils not evil men but the evil in men does
repugne against the law of god, is too too chyldysh and absurd to come from
him that profess the Learning For I am sure there is no young scholar, which
has studied Logik in Cambrige, but knows that, actio tribuitur toti
concreto, and non ac^identi inhaerenti: that action is attributed to the whole
co^cret, and not to the accident inhere^t. Although the accident inherent be
ratio formalis of the action. As for example: the physician is said to cure his
patient, and not the Physic in the physician, though he do it by his physic.
The unjust judge synneth in gyuing wrong sentence, and not the injustice in
the judge, and for proof whereof, the judge shall be damned, and suffer torments
for it, and not the quality of injustice in him. The like is in devils, and
in all evil men, who do properly repugne against gods laws, and do sin
properly, and not the evil within them. And the contrary thereof is old
heresy, as may appear by S. Augustine writing against some that said, Aug.
^om. 8. fo. 665. Genes. 1.
not we, but the darkness within us, have offended. Nether is it contrary to
this (as M. Charke imagines) that all things were created good by God. For God
created not lucifer a devil, but a good Angel: nether Herod an evil man, but
a good. Their own lewdness made them evil. Therefore, albeit wicked men and
deuylls be evil, and do repugne the law of God: yet the creatures of God are
not evil, at leastwise as they are creatures of God: for that, God (as I have
said) created them not evil.

Whether sin be a reasonable action.

Li. 3. aeth. c. 3. li. 3. de anima. text. 46. and 54. Tom. 6. de fide cont.
Manach. c. 9. and 10. li. 1. de ser. do. in mo^te,


Secondly you reprehend, that I call sin an humane or reasonable action: and
you would rather call yt (as you say) an unreasonable action, which argues
in you some lack of reason. For what? does not all election both good and
badde proceed of reason? does it not proceed ab intellectu practico, which is
the seat of discourse and reason, as the philosopher proves? is M. Charke so
unlearned in all foundation of philosophy? Does not S. Augustine prove of
purpose, that peccatum fit ab anima rationali, that sin proceeds from the
mind endewed with reason? again, that consentio ad peccatum fit in ratione?
that consent to sin is made in reason? what say you by the good moral
works of the gentiles, as their justice, their temperance, and the like,
which you (though falsely) do Judge to be sins, for that they proceeded not
of faith? were they all unreasonable actions? But you object against this out
of S. Paul what so ever is not of faith is sin: therefore, (say you)
whether it be reasonable or unreasonable it is sin. Romans 14.
Iumpe: by this a horse might be a sinner, for that his actions proceed not of
faith. But I answer to S. Paul, with S. Ambrose. Amb. in. ca 14. ad To.
that he means, who soever does a thing against that which faith
prescribes, that is, against a man's own conscience and judgment, he sins.
But yet, that all moral good works of infideles (as justice, liberality,
and the like) were not sins, S. Augustine proves at large against M. Charke
lib. de spir. and lit. ca. 26.27. and 28. And S. Ierom. in cap. 29. Ezechielis.
Finally, to return and conclude our purpose, S. Aug. proves against the
Manaches, Cont. secu^d. Manach. c. 15. and 16.
that, peccatum est defectus voluntarius animae rationalis. Sin is a
voluntary defect of a reasonable mind, and therefore is it a reasonable action.

But what do I talk of voluntary? Whether sin be voluntary.
M. Charke denies sin to be voluntary. What shall I say? It were infinite
to stand and prove every principle of divinity against so perverse and
obstinate a man. And the^ proverb is common: a long eared creature may deny
more in an hour, than the best learned in the world can prove in a year. But
he that will see long and large proofs of this, with infinite scriptures and
reasons for the same: let him read but S. Augustine in any of these places.
li. de duabus not. c. 11. de spiritu and lit. ca. 31. Et li. 3. de lib. arb. c.
18. and li. de vera relig. c. 14. and lib. 1. retract. c. 13. and 15. li. 4.
confess. c. 3. and in diverse other places, where he repeateth often these
words: Li. de vera reli. ca. 14. and li. 1. retrac. c. 13.
Sin is an evil so voluntary, as it can be by no means sin, except it be
voluntary. And Christ him self proves the matter evidently, when he says:
that those things which do defile a man do come from the heart. Matthew. 15.
v. 18. But yet here M. Charke has two objections. First, original sin is
not voluntary, (says he) ergo all sin is not voluntary. This albeit (it be
not to the purpose: the Ce^sure talking only of actual sin, as it
professes:) yet is it most false, and never divine said so before William
Charke, but only the pelagians, who thereby would have taken away original
sin from infants (as having no will) as S. Augustine testifies: Li. 3. cont.
Julian. c. 5.
which (as well in that place, as in the first book of his retractations. c.
13.) he proves most leardnedlie, that original sin is voluntary in us, by
the first voluntary act of our first father, How original sin is
voluntary
in which act we all did sin voluntarily, (that being an universal act
of all mankind contained in Adam) as also the Apostle confirms, sayeing of
Adam, In quo omnes peccauerunt: Romans 5.
In whom all have sinned.

Numb. 35.
His second objection is of the city of refuge, appointed by God among the
Israelites, for them that had killed a man unwillingly, whereof he would
infer, that unwilling manslaughter is a sin. But I am ashamed of M. Charke,
that professinge skill in scriptures, does so ignorantly allege them,
against their plain meaning, and against him self. For that chapter shows
at large, how these cities of refuge were appointed among the leuits, The
causes of the cities of refuge.
for indifferent trial of manslaughter, least the next of kynne to him which
was slain, (called there the revenger of blood) should revenge the act
upon the kyller, before the matter were tried. But when the thing was now
examined in the city of refuge, by sufficient witnesses, as the scripture
appoints: then if it were fownd that the slaughter was committed willingly,
and of hatred: then the murderer was delivered into the hands of the revenger
of blood, to be slain for the same. Slaughter done with out consent of will
is innocentie.
But of unwillingly and without malice: liberabitur innocens de vltoris manu
says the text: the innocent shall be delivered from the hand of the revenger.
But yet he shall not depart from that city until the death of the high
pryest. For that, In Isaaco colligato. Rab. Moys. in Morech. Neuo chapter li. 3.
ca. 40. Rab. Leui. i^ ca. 20. Nu.
(as Rabby Isaac Arameus writes) the high pryest (whose cities these of
refuge among the Leuits were) had interest and dominion upon this man, by the
law of Leuits, during his life, for the benefit which he had received by the
place of refuge. To which also Rabbi Moses, and Rabbi Leui Ierson do add an
other reason: for that if he should have returned presently among the kindred
of the man killed: his very sight might have styrred the^ up to reuengement
upon him again after the trial passed. But in the death of the high pryest,
the public sorrow was so great, as all men forgate their private injuries.
and did use commonly to forgive one an other all offenses, say these learned
Jews. And now I ask again, why M. Charke brought in this example? Does not
this make clear against him, prouinge that manslaughter unwillingly done is
no sin: but innocence? if not manslaugter: how much less other smaller
actions are clear from sin, when no consent of will is yielded?

Against the clause of the definition, which says, Two kinds of ignorance.
which I grant, but he speaks of culpable ignorance, whereof a man him self
is the cause: as his example of persecuting Saul does show, whose ignorance
(although it were not so wilful as of many persecuting protestants at this
day, who of purpose refuse to know the truth) yet, Ep. 77. ad hugo. de S.
vict.

1. Cor. 15.


as S. Bernard well notes, it could not be but culpable in him: as also him
self does confess. For that he being learned: in the old testament, if he
would have conferred patiently with the Apostles, he might have seen that
they taught nothing but correspondent to the ancient scriptures of God. But we
speak here of inculpable ignorance, called invincible, by the term of
schoolmen: for that it was not in the doers power to avoid it, nor he fell
into it by his own default. As if an English man, being in India in service of
the Prince, An example of i^uincible ignorance.

Au. li. 3. de lib. arb: ca. 22. Chriso. ho. 26. in ep ad Romans


should be commanded by proclamation made in westminster hall to appear there
at a certain day, and he (as not hearing of the same) should not appear this
man is excused by invincible ignorance. And so in all other cases. S. Augustine
and Chrysostom prove of purpose, and most learnedlie, that this kind of
ignorance (which in deed is only proper and true ignorance) does excuse
from sin. Yea God him self proves it by the example of Abimelech king of
Gerare, whom he excuses from sin, Genesis 20.
for that he had taken away Sara Abraham's wife, upon ignorance, and in
simplicity of heart, thinking her to be Abraham's sister, as the text says.
The like simplicity of heart and inculpable ignorance, was in Jacob, lieing
with Lia, in stead of Rachell, as the Censure shows. Genesis 29. Jacob sinned
not in lyei^g with Lia.
And albeit M. Charke most impiously Ioynynge herein with Faustus the
Manachie, dares condemn the holy Patriarche in a double sin, as Faustus
did: yet S. Austen defends notably this holy man's innocence, both against
that and this heretic, in his two and twentieth book against Faustus, Ca.
47.49. 50.51.52. Lib. 16. de ciui. c. 38.
through many chapiters together: as also in his book of the City of God. And
with S. Augustine do take part S. Justin the martyr l. de verit. Christi
religionis: and Theodoret q. 84. in generat. and lyranus upon the very same
place of genesis. In cap. 29. Gen
And what one word can M. Charke now peep against all this?

To conclude therefore, though M. Charke has picked out certain obiectio^s of
our own books, made and answered by our selves against the learned definition
of the Jesuits, (as in deed they have no other arguments, but such as we
lend them our selves): yet has he (as you see) not infringed, but
establyshed that definition thereby, and has bewrayed in him self great
wantes, in holdinge, M. Charks positions about sin.
that sin is no act: that no evil men do sin, but the evil in men: that
sin is not voluntary: that it is no humane or reasonable action: that it
requires nether will nor knowledge in the doer: that fools and mad men may
as properly committ sin, as others, (for all these are his positions) by
which he may as well defend, that beasts and unreasonable creatures may
committ sin, and be sinners: Au. tom. ^ 5. fo. 137. aedit. paris.
which S. Augustine thinks to be so absurd as no man of common sense will
affirm the same. But what do I allege S. Augustine, whom M. Charke rejects
here by name about the definition of sin? Let us return therefore to the
Censure. And see what is further brought about this matter.

THE CENSVRE.
But now how does M. Charke overthrow this doctrine? forsoothe thus.
Contrary to this (says he) is the words of God. 1. Ioh. 3. the
transgression of the law is sin. You seem to have made a vow (M. Charke)
not to deal plainly in any one thing. Can you not allege one little sentence
without falsifyeing? The words of S. John are these. Every one that
sins commits iniquity, and sin is iniquity. Or (as you will
perhaps seem to enforce it out of the greek word ANOMIA) Sin is
transgression of the law. But why have you fraudulently turned it
backevvard? you knevv well the force of transposition out of Sophistry,
Transposition in alledginge of scripture.
that it changes all the meaning of the sentence. For if I say, Every man is
a living creature, it is true: but if I turn it backevvard and say: Every
living creature is a man, it is false. So these words, as S. John utters
them, are most true: Every sin is iniquity, or transgression of the law:
but as you utter them, they are false: to wit, that every iniquity or
transgression of the law, be it never so little, or done without either
consent or knoulege, or by a mad man, or brute beast, should be properly a
mortal sin. So that this first blashemie of the Jesuits comes not to be
so haynouse, as you would make it: but rather to confound your ignorance,
which understand not so clear doctrine, but hudle up matters as M. Campian
tells you: also to note your untruth in misreporting their words, and the
scriptures against them. And of this first depend the other two that follow.

THE DEFENSE.
For covering of falshoode in this place M. Charke is constrained to use a
falshoode or two more, according to the sayeing: that one lie is not
maintained, but by an other: things aequiualent (says he,) as for example,
the definition and the thing defined) may be converted, and one mutuallie may
be affirmed of the other: as the gospel is the power of God to salvation: To.
1. v. 16
And the power of God to salvation is the gospel: And therefore these two
words also, si^ne and transgression of the law. But I deny this
consequence: for transgression of the law is not the definition of sin, as
has been proved, nor is it equal in signification with the same, but reaches
further than sin, as the former discourse shows: And thefore it is but
absurdlie brought in again here, as a thing granted, seeing thereof is all
the contention. Secondly, let M. Charke look, lest he be deceived, when he
says the power of God to salvation is the proper definition of the gospel:
seeing, Christ him self (which notwistandinge is not the gospel, but author
of the gospel) is called by the same words in an other place DVNAMIS THEOV:
that is The power of god, 1. Cor. 1. v. 24.
and no doubt but to salvation, as M. Charke will not deny. Wherefore, though
it import not our matter at all, yet I think M. Charke was somewhat grossly
ouerseene in choice of this example.

After this, for some countenance of his fraudulent transposition, he says:
Io. 4. v. 24
as for the transposition, let the Apostles words be marked, sayeing, (God
is a spirit:) Yet the words lie thus in the greek text, (a spirit is God.)
Wherefore let not transposition seem strange to you. No more it does (M.
Charke) in common speech, and in a tongue that will bear it, as the latin and
greek does. But when we measure the weight of words or propositions, and
that in our English tongue (as in our matter it falls out) In Latin we say
Princeps est Pompeius. which we can not interpret in English, word for
word, a PRINCE IS POMPEY: But Po^pey is a prince. For that our tongue
admi^^eth not the praedicatio^ before the copula properly, as other tongues
do. 1. Io. 5. v. 7.
tra^spositions are fraudule^t, as in the very example which you allege, a
spirit is God: if you would infer thereof, ergo every spirit is God, as you
infer that every transgression of the law is sin: you should easily see
your own falsehood. For Angels also are spirits (as the scripture says), and
yet not Gods. And here for my learning I would know of you Sir, in what
tongue the Apostle says God is a spirit, different from which you say the
greek has a spirit is God? surely (M. Chark) you are over bold in your
auouchements of the script^re. For not only the greek, but also the latin
and Syriak has Spiritus est deus: and therefore, both fondly and falsely do
you attribute it, as peculiar only to the greek.

But M. Charke reserueth a sure card for the end, therewith to dashe all that
has been said before, and that is the sentence of S. John afterward, omnis
iniquitas est peccatum, all iniquity, (or He fraudulently translateth
transgression in this place, the greekvvoorde being changed. 1. Io. 3. v. 4.
transgression (says he) is sin. Which seems so plain against me, as he
greatly insulteth and triumphs, affirming that the victory by this one
sentence is gotten: but believe him not (good reader) for he thinks not so in
his own conscience, but well knows that this sentence makes greatly
against him, though he would deceive thee, with the bare sound and
equivocation of words. For in the former sentence, where is said, sin is
iniquity, S. John uses for the word iniquity, ANOMIA, in greek, which
signifies any transgression or variance from the law^, be it great or little,
as has been proved, and as the nature of the greek word imports, in which
sense it is most true, that every iniquity is not sin, as I have showed,
and as S. Augustine proves, of very purpose. l. 2. cont. Iul. pela. c. 5. And
alleges also S. Ambrose in the same opinion: Aug. li. 5. cont. Iul. c. 3. and
li. 6. c. 8.12. and 13.
as also Methodius apud Epiphanium her: 64. quae est Origenis. And S. Augustine
proves it in many other places besides: showing in our very case, how
concupiscence is iniquity, in the regenerat, but yet no sin. And this for
the first place. Now in the second place, where the same Apostle says every
iniquity is sin: he uses not the same general word ANOMIA. ANOMIA.
Which he used before, but ADICIA, ADITIA.

Arist. in praedicam. qualittias.


which is a more special word, and signifies an injustice or injury: as
the philosopher shows, assigning it as the contrary to Justice: and therefore
no marvel though this kind of iniquity be sin as S. John says, yea great
sin also, for of such only S. John talks in that place, 1. Io. 5.
sayeing, there is a sin to death, I do not say that any man should ask
for that all iniquity is sin etc. whereby is euydent, that the Apostle
takes not iniquity in this place (expressed by the word ADICIA) in the same
sense, wherein he took it before, using the word ANOMIA. Which M. Charke
well knoweing, shows him self a wilful deceyuer, in that he would delude
his reader, with the equivocation of the latin translation, which at other
times he rejects without cause or reason.

Small game.
Lastly, he charge me with alteration of the text of scripture, for
translating omnis qui facit peccatum every one that sins, where I should
have translated (says he) every one that does sin. This is a charge
worthy of M. Charke, that will play small game rather than sytt out. I pray
you sir, what difference is there in the two phrases, your wife spinneth, and
your wife does spinne? But you confess in deed there is little hold in
this, and therefore friendly you do pardon me, for it, and do conclude,
sayeing: you think perhaps to serve the Lord in your opinion, and I know I
serve the Lord. You are happy that have so certain knowledge of your good
estate M. Charke, M. Charks knoulege of his serving the lord.
though to utter it in this place I do not see what occasion you had. But I
pray you let me learn how you came to this knowledge: Not by Aristotle's
demo^strations (I am sure) which yett are the only means of certain science
properly. How then? by faith? but you know, that faith can assure nothing,
which is not revealed by the word of God. What part of gods word then,
teaches us that william Charke in particular serves the Lord a-right? but
you will say perhaps. Your spirit within you tells you so. And my spirit
(M. Charke) tells me the contrary. One of them must needs be a lyeing
spirit: and why not yours as well as mine? These are fancies (gentle sir
william) proper to heretical brains, to assure them selves such knowledge
above other men. Luther said many years after he was a protestant. ego credo
fortiter, imo ausim dicere, scio purgatorium esse: In disput. lyps. cum Eckio
quae adhuc extat.

Buc^r. ep. ad Norim. and epist. ad Essingenses and com. in 3. and 26. Math.
and Ioh. 6.


I believe stowtelie, yea I dare auowe that I know there is a purgatory. Yet
he denied it after. Martin Bucer when he was a Zuinglian knew (as he said) that
doctrine to be delivered from heaven: but yet afterward coming back to be a
Lutheran he protested openly that he knew it was most false. And again
returninge to be a Zuinglian: he knew it was true again, and the other false:
and yet all this while certain knowledge can not be false. If a man should ask
all the sectaries now living, they would say the same that you do of their
certain knowledge. Wherefore me think you might have spared these words of
your certain knowledge, which nether help your cause, nor hurt ours, any
further than the credit reaches of your own bare word, and that also in
your own commendation.

Of concupiscence. Art. 2.
THE CENSVRE.
2. Secondly you report the Jesuits to say: The second article.
Concupisce^ce remaining in the regenerate, although it be against the law of
God, yet is it not sin properlye in it self, or of his own nature. Cens.
fo. 38. (1) 1
you will needs help the Jesuits out withdraw that which makes for your
purpose. Where find you in them, the words ( Although it be against the
law of God?) They say, that albeit this concupiscence do stir or move a
man sometimes to do things which are repugnant to the law of God: yet if
no consent of heart be yielded unto it: it reaches not to the nature of a
mortal sin vvorthie of eternal damnation. (2.) 2.
And albeit S. Paul do sometimes call it sin: Romans 7.
yet means he not properly but by a figure, whereby the name of the cause
is of^entimes attributed to the effect: (3.) 3.
as the latin speech is called the latin tongue, because speech is the effect
of the tongue. So concupiscence being the effect of original sin, is called
sometimes sin, but not properly, but only figuratiuelie, Romans 8.
as also S. Paul calls (4.) 4.
Christ him self, Sin, because he was the sacrifice for sin. And all this
is S. Auste^s note, whose plain words in the same place are: Concupisce^ce
is not sin, in the regenerate, if consent be not yielded unto her for the
accomplishing of v^law^^ll works. Li. 1. de nu. and concup. c. 23. and 25.
and li. 1. co^^. ep. 2. pelag. c. 13. and li. 1 Retr. c. 15.
The same teaches not only S. Augustine in diverse other places, but also
all other fathers of the primative church, as Nazianzenus orat: de S. Lauacro.
Pacianus orat. de bap. Clemens Alexandrinus li. 1. pedag. c. 6 Ciprian ser. de
lot: pedum. and li. 2. ep. 2. and Ambr. li. 1. de vocat gentium cap. 5. So
that all these good fathers are partakers with the Jesuits of this blasphemy,
which you ensorce upon them. But how do you prove it to be blasphemi^^
Marie because Christ says: Math. 5.
who soever shall see a woman to lust after her, he has alredie committed
adultery with her in his heart But are you so ignorant M. Charke? Do you not
see that Christ by adding the words ( in his heart) means only of him
which gives consent of heart to his lust and concupiscence, and would put it
in execution if he had time, and place, and ability? but this is your common
alleging of Scripture.

THE DEFENSE.
The charge of helpinge out the Jesuits doctrine with these words although it
be against the law of God, he lays upon Gotuisus. Gotuisus page 264.
But I accept not this excuse. For he might have seen in Canisius page 184. and
73^. which Gotuisus cites also for the same, as well as the Ce^sure of Cole^
(and which M. Charke confesses to have read) that Gotuisus belyed the
Jesuits in his report for that there is no such thing in the places alleged
of Canisius, as by reading any man may see. VVhich^ declares evidently, that
you have no plain meaning, but a secret intention to deceive. As also when you
assure your reader, that I denyeing concupiscence to be a mortal sin
(according to the question between Monhemius and the Jesuits) do thereby
grant underhand that it is some kind of sin. Which was no more meant by
me, than you (denyeing before Martin Luthers marriage to be sacrilege) did mean
thereby to grant underhand that it was adultery, fornication, or any other
lesser sin of the flesh.

The exposition of S. Paul's words calling concupiscence improperlie sin,
Li. 6. c. 11. cont. Iulia^.
quia peccato facta est, because it was wrought in us by original sin: as S.
Augustine says: M. Charke rejects, calling it a wra^gling exposition, though
it be the exposition of the primative church, and so recorded by S. Augustine
in many places of his works: as lib. 1. de nuptio and concup. ca. 23. li. 1.
contr. 2. ep. pelag c. 13 lib. 1. retract. c. 15. li. 2. cont. Iul. c. 13. and
li. 6. c. 11. All which M. Charke (as better learned in S. Paul than Austen
and all the fathers of that time contemns as easily as if it were the
exposition of some unlearned boy, Charkes malepertenes with S. Austen.
and begins him self like a doctor to discourse anew, upon S. Paul's
meaning: mary (as it commonly falls out to such malapert merchants) he is
no sooner in, but he is over the ears in absurdities. For his discourse is
this.

S. Paul proves, (sayethe he) that though the law sturreth us to sin, yet
is it no sin. Romans 7. Ver. 12.14
Well: this makes for us. For so we may reason: that though concupiscence
do stir us to sin; yet is it no sin. But what infers he? VVeake
resonynge.
therefore (says he) if the law vvh^che is holy, do come in question
notvvithstanding of sin, for that it provoke our corrupt nature to sin:
how much more concupiscence: which is unclean in it self? This proves
nothing M. Charke but from the place, a disparatis, where commonly children
and distracted men take their arguments. For how holds this: if the law, for
sturring to sin: be called in question of sin, and be no sin: then
concupiscence for sturring to sin, must be called in question of sin, and
be sin in deed? but he will say (perhaps,) the force of the argument
stands in the words holy, and unclean, in this order: if the law, being
holy, be called in question of sin: what shall we say of concupiscence,
which is unclean? and what more can you say (M. Charke) than to call it in
question of sin, and that somewhat more than the law is called in question,
which is both pure and holy, and no ways either unclean or evil, or the
effect of sin, as we grant concupiscence is? and yet for all this not
properly sin, without consent of heart, as S. Augustine in the places alleged
proves.

And this now of consequent, supposinge the Antecedent were true, as it is
most false. For who will grant those absurd impious propositions: The law
sturreth us to sin: the law provoke our corrupt nature to sin? Romans 7.
S. Paul says, I had not known sin but by the law: but he never says,
that the law sturred him up to sin: but only, that it discovers sin
unto him, even as the looking glass discovers the spotte in a-mans face, and
makes us to see it, which we did not before, but yet procures not that
spotte. And S. Paul gives an example, sayeing, Exo. 20.
I had not known concupiscence, if the law had not said, thou shall not
covet. In which words, that he means of voluntary concupiscence, that is,
whereto either consent or delectation is yielded: S. Augustine besides the places
alleged testifies. li. 1. de nup. and concup. c. 29. li. de spiritu and
litera cap. vlt. li. 19. con: Faustum c. 7. and cont. 2. ep. petil. li. 3. c.
7. And it is most worthy of laughter, which M. Charke, for filling up a page
discourses of S. Paul's estate: sayeing. Paul co^pareth his sta^e before his
knowledge of the tenth commandment, with his state afterward. He knevv
other sins before, by the light of nature: but he knevv not co^cupisce^ce,
till he knevv the tenth commandment. I pray you Sir, what was S. Paul's state
before his knowledge of the tenth commandment? was not S. Paul borne a Jew?
2. Cor. 11. Phil. 3. Act. 22.
brought up from his youth in the law, at the feet of Gamaliel? how then could
he be ignorant in ^he tenth commandment, and yet be hable to discern other
sins by the light of natural reason? do you think upon your words
before you send them to the print?

S. Augustins example of the latin tongue M. Chark rejects, Au. li 1. de nup.
and co^ cup. c. 23.
for that the tongue is not such a cause of the speech, as original sin is
of concupiscence. But what a reason is this to reprove so learned a man as S.
Augustine was? for who knovveth not, (as I have showed before) that
compariso^s or similitudes are not of necessity, to hold in every point,
but in that only wherein they are compared. Though then the tongue be only
the instrume^tall cause of speech: and original sin, the formal cause of
concupiscence: yet is it sufficient to shevve that effects may take upon them
oftentimes the name of their causes: and consequently, asvvell concupiscence
the name of sin, as the tongue the name of speech. A^b. ser. 27. Au. li. 2.
de pecca. merit. c. 27. and 28.
Nether is it necessary (as M. Chark reasons) that every effect of original
sin should be sin in the regenerate: For that all our penalties (as hungar,
thirst, sickness and the like) are effects of original sin in us, but yet
not sins in them selves: as nether concupiscence in the baptized, whose
guylt is utterly taken away by baptism, as S. Ambrose and S. Augustine do
prove.

To like effect is alleged by the Censure the example of Christ called sin
in the scripture: not for that, Christ and concupiscence are like effects of
sin (as M. Charke quareleth:) but to shevve that a thing may be called sin
by the scripture figuratiuelie, and yet be no sin properly albeit, if we
consider Christ, as he was hostia pro peccato, a sacrifice for our sin: (in
which sense only, S. Paul calls him sin:) No man can deny, but Christ
so considered, was a certain effect of our sins also: that is, Christ
crucified, or the crucifieinge of Christ was a certain effect of our sins:
for that our sin was the cause of that death and sacrifice. And where you
control my quotation of the ^. to the Romans, as though there were no such
thing in that place: do you read but the third verse, and confess your
oversight. Orig. in hu^c locum.
And if you will not believe the text: read Origin, and S. Augustine: Augu li.
3. cont. 2. ^p. pe^ag. c. 6.
and they will tell you the cause why he is called sin by S. Paul in that
place.

But now for the ancient fathers alleged in the Censure, as partakers of the
Jesuits blasphemy: I maruaille M. Charke vouchesafeth to examine them, s^ing
in other places he contemns utterly their authorities, calling them my
bread zovvle of fathers. Mary here belike he has gotten some sleyght to
shyft them of, or at leastwise, some part of the^. For as for S. Cypria^ and
Pacian, he passes over without sayeing any word unto them. Ambr. li. 1 de
voc. ge^t. ca. 5. Clem. A^e. li. pedag. c. 6.
To S. Ambrose and Clemens Alexa^drinus, he answers, that they have no such
things in the places alleged: which is somewhat worse than passing over: for
it is a flatt vntruethe: seeing in those places (as the reader may see by
conference) they prove all sin to be taken away in the regenerate by
baptism, and the soul left pure and clean, as the light it self: which can
not stand, if concupiscence remaining be a foul sin, as M. Charke
affirms: but he adds, that Clemens in an other place has some what
against us: Clemens Ale. exho. ad gentes page 38.
to wit, that hy con^npiscence only a man commits adultery: which is
true, if a man give consent thereunto, as appears by Christ, Math. 5. But the
first motions only, without any consent or delectation in them, I marvel M.
Charke is not ashamed to call adultery: seeing Clemens in the same place
exhorts the gentiles to resist these motions of concupiscence, and not to
yield unto them, and so to avoid adultery: which he would not have done, if
these very first motions the^ selves (which are inauoydable) were adultery
without yielding any consent unto them.

To Gregory Nazianzen alleged in orat. de S. Iauacro, he answers, that
Nazianzen never vvrote any such oration as I dream of. But if he dreamed not,
yet I think at least he was half a sleep, when he wrote this: and either
understood not the books name, being written somewhat short (which were too
badde in so great ^ divine:) or else never saw Nazianze^s works (which were
worse:) or else not able to answer the place, would shyft it of with such a
sleyght, which were worst of all. That which he has for shyfting of S.
Austen, I understand not: his words are these: let the reader skanne them:
you were deceived (says he) in citing Augustine tvvyse, as having written but
one book de nuptiis and concupiscentia. Here, if he mean that S. Austen
has written but one book de nupt. and concup: and that I was deceived in
citing him twyse, as having written two books: then is S. Austen him self
against him: who says in his second book of Retractations, Cap. 53.
that he had written two books de nuptiis and concupiscentia. But if M. Chark
mean that I think S. Austen to have written but one book de nupt. and
concup. and so do err in citing him: he is deceived. For I cite him thus in
the Censure: li. 1. de nupt. and concup: which signifies the first book: and
no man cites a first book, which thinks not that there is a second.
Vherfore this fond charge either tastes of ignorance, or of great desire to
quarrel. Will you stand to it that S. Augustine has written but one book of
this matter? I would give a good thing, that I were by you while you read
this, to see whether you can blushe or no. But yet I call back my wish
again. For I think you would make me more a fearde, than I you a shamed: for
that your Purseuantes are stronger than our arguments.

And this is but concerning the quotation of S. Augustine: for about the text it
self M. Charks behauioure is a great deal worse: and such in very deed, as
if a man had care of his own soul, he would never trust such a fellow more,
that against all honesty, truth, shame, and respect, both of conscience and
^redit, falsifieth so learned a fathers writings against his plain and
evident words and meaning. For whereas S. Augustine alleged by the Censure,
and in many places else of his works says, Aug. li. 1. de nup. and c^cu. c.
23.
avouches, confirms, and proves, that Concupiscentia iam non est peccatum
quando ^lli ad illicita opera non consentitur: concupiscens now in the
regenerate is not sin when consent of mind is not yielded to unlawful
woorks. M. Chark answers: S. Augustins place is expounded by him self
afterward, sayeing Concupiscence is not so for given in baptism, that it is
not sin, but that it is not imputed as sin: Li. 1. de nu. and co^cup. c.
23. and 25.
this seems plain, and Augustine appears contrary to him self. But what
is the principal word in this sentence, that makes most for M. Charke? The
word, Sin, you will say: for that being taken away in the former clause, the
sentence makes quite against him. Well then, that word has he added of
him self, and yet has corrupted the whole sentence besides. For S.
Augustines words are these: Cap. 25.
quaeritur etc. si in parente baptizato potest esse (concupiscentia) and
peccatum non esse: cur eadem ipsae in prole peccatum sit? The question is
(says S. Augustine why this concupiscence is sin in the child (before it be
baptized:) if it be no sin in the parent now baptized? here you see by the
way, that it is holden as a matter out of doubt, that concupiscence is no sin
in the parent which is baptized: and the reason S. Augustine yeedelth
immediately in the answer: sayeing, Ad haec respondetur dimitti concupiscentiam
carnis in baptismo, non vt non si^, sed vt in peccatum no^ impute^ur, quamuis
reatu suo iam soluto, manet tame^ etc. To this is answered that the
concupiscence of the flesh is forgeuen in baptism, not that it is not, (or
remains not,) but that it is not imputed into sin. Yt remaneth still,
though the guylt be taken away.

Here now we see that S. Augustine affirms only that concupiscence is not
quite taken away by baptism, but yet the guilt thereof, is so that it is no
more imputed into the nature of a sin. The cause why it is left he utters
in diverse places, as when he says: Li. 11. de peccat. meri^. and remiss. ca.
4.
ad agonem manet, non sibi ad illicita consentientibus nihil omnino nocitura.
Concupiscence remaneth to fight withal, but yet in such sort, as it can hurt
us nothing at all, if we consent not to her unlawful suggestio^s. Secondly we
see that S. Augustine in this very place proves directly our very position,
that concupiscence in the baptized is not sin: also that it has no guilt:
and that it does hurt nothing without consent: vvherby M. Charkes lack of
Judgment and shame may be noted in bringing this place of all others against
us, and adding, that how soever the Jesuits distinguish, yet these sins (the
first motions of concupiscence) ^vhich by the Jesuits doctrine are so called
figuratiuelie (except we find mercy) will find no figurative condemnation.

Thyrdlie we may behold and lament the pityfull desperate resolution of our
adversaries, who seeing and knoweing their own weakness, Great impudency.
yet to cover their misery dare abuse, forge, and falsify plain authorities,
as in this place this shameless creature has done in so many points For
first, where as S. Augustine says Concupiscence is forgyuen in baptism: he
translateth, concupiscence is not so forgyuen in baptism. Secondly where as
S. Augustine says: it is forgyuen, not that it be not, or remain not: he
tra^slateth: not that it is not sin. Thirdly for imputed into sin: he
tra^slateth imputed as sin. Fowerthlie he cutteth of the words immediately
goeing before, where S. Augustine says concupiscence in the paren^ baptized is
no sin, as also the voordes immediately foloweing, and affirming, that
concupiscence remains, but without guilt, and consequently can not be
sin. Has this man any conscience, any truth? any good meaning? any spark
of grace? seeks he to instruct or to deceive? to prove and defend, or to
cover and dissemble? Is this he which protested such sincerity in his
dealing, as before God and Angels? is this the credit of a puritan protestant?
O how miserable are those people which hang their souls upon the trust of
such disse^bling and deceyuing men?

And this for the first place cited by M. Charke, for his sentence of S.
Augustine, for he cites two chapiters in one book: the first thereof has as
you have seen: the other has no one word tendinge that way, but clean to
the contrary. For S. Augustine lays down and proves our position of
purpose, in much more ample and vehement manner than I can against M Charke,
and shows it also by examples, how the Apostle called concupiscence sin
improperlie: Romans 7. ca. 23. li. 1. de nup. and concup.
vocatur peccatum quia peccato facta est, cum iam in regeneratis non sit ipsa
peccatum: Si autem vocatur lingua locutio, quam facit lingua, and manus vocatur
scriptura quam facit manus. Concupiscence is called sin: because it is made
in us by (original) sin, whereas it self is not sin now in the
regenerate: How S. Paul called concupisce^ce sin improperlye.
even as the speech which the tongue makes is called the tongue, and the
writing which the hand makes is called the hand. The very same has S.
Augustine against Julian the pelagian towching S. Paul's calling of concupiscence
sin, Li. 6. c. 11.
which in deed properly is no sin, except consent be yielded thereunto, as
there S. Augustine proves by the words of Paul him self. Wherefore M. Charke
does fraudulently allege his words against the same Julian, to prove that
all concupiscence is sin. For S. Augustine says only of concupiscence in
general, Li. 5. c. 3.
that it is sin, and the punishment of sin, and the cause of sin, which
is true of concupiscence in general, as it comprehends all her branches,
and all estates of men: for concupiscence is the punishment of sin in all
men: In them that give consent it is the cause of sin: in them that are not
baptized it is sin it self, whether they give consent or no. But yet is it
not needful that all these points should be verified in every particular
branch of concupiscence: An example.
as for example: Manslaughter in general comprehends murder, chance medley,
execution by Justice, and the like: and in respect of these branches a man may
say truly, manslaughter is wicked and prohibited by god^ law. And again,
manslaughter is good and commended by gods law, for both these are verified
in some of her branches. So in respect of diverse branches of concupiscence
S. Augustine might say concupiscence is sin, the punishment of sin, and
the cause of sin. But yet this is not true in every particular branch of
concupifcence, and namely of that branch we now dispute of: that is, of
concupiscence in the regenerat without consent: as a man can not say, that
every manslaughter is good, nor that every manslaughter is evil.

And the cause why S. Augustine used this sentence against Julian was, for that
Julian did praise concupiscence, as a thing commendable, for that it was a
punishment of God sor sin: But S Augustine refuteth that, sheweing, that
concupiscence in general, is not only a punishment for sin, but sometimes
also, and in some ^e^ it is sin it self, and the cause of sin: Lib. 2.
cont. Julian circa finem.
and thersore an evil thing, though no sin, without consent. For so he
says against the same Julian. Quantum ad nos attinet. sine peccato sen per
essemus, donec sanaretur hoc malu^, si ei n^nquam consentiremus ad malum: sed
in quibus ab illo rebellame, e^si non lethaliter, sed venialiter, tamen
vincimur, in hiis contrahimus vnde quotidie dicamus. Math. 6.
Dimitte nobis debita nostra^ As for us (that are baptized) we might be
always without sin until that day when this evil co^cupisce^ce shall be
healed, (that is in heaven) if we would not consent unto yt, Venial and
mortal sin.

Vide Au. li. 1. cont. 2. ep. pelag. c. 13. li. 2. de pecc. merit. c. 28. S^rm.
6. de verb. apost. lib. 1. de ciui. c. 25 In expos. prop. ex ep. ad Romans
prop^sitione 17. 45. 47. com. ad Gal. c. 5. de pecca. orig. c. 39. co^. 3. in
psalm. 118 and alibi.


to evil. But in these things wherein we are overcome by this rebelliouse
concupiscence veniallie at least, though not mortallie: by these (I say) we
geather matter daily to say, forgive us our trespasses.

Here Lo S. Augustine proves concupiscence to be evil, against the pelagian:
and yet not to be sin without consent, against the protestant. Thyrdlie, that
according to the mesure or degree of consent yielded, it may be either venial
or mortal sin against, M. Charke, a little before obstinatlie denyeinge this
distinction of sins. And finally, S Augustine does not only prove this our
p^sition purposelye in almost infinite other places of his works, but also
in his second book against Julian does confirm it, by the uniform consent
of other fathers of the Church, as of S. Ambrose, Nazianzen and others. What
then shall we say but only pity william Charke, which fyndeth Augustine the
doctor as hard against him in all points, as Augustine the monk.

The words of Christ alleged by you to overthrow our position: to wit,
Math. 5.
every one that shall see a woman, to lust after her, has now committed
adultery with her in his heart: are truly said of the Censure, to be
alleged by you, both ignorantly, and against your self. First, for that the
word heart there expressed, imports a consent, without which nothing
defiles a man, as may be gathered by Christ his own words, Math. 15. Marck.
7.
in an other place, sayeing, that the things which defile a man do proceed
from the heart. Secondly, for that, the words import a voluntary looking
upon women, PROS TO EPIDVMESAI AVTEN.
to that end to be inflamed with lust, as both the latin, and much more the
greek and Syriake textes insinuate: and S. Chrisostom interprets hom. 8. de
poenitentia, as S. Augustine also expounds them, sayeinge, Au. li. 1. de sermon.
domi. in monte ca. 23.
qui viderit mulierem ad concupiscendam eam: id est, hoc fine and hoc animo
attenderit, vt eam concupiscat, quod est plene consentire libidini. He that
shall see a woman to lust after her: that is, shall look upon her to this end,
and with this mind to lust after her, which is in deed fully to consent unto
the lust. Now what replieth Sir william to all this? surely nothing, but
makes along idle speak of praedicatum and subiectum, as pertinent to the
matter, as charing cross to byllingsgate. And in the end to quite the Lord
(as he says) most carefully from sin, he alleges S. James, sayeing,
Jacob. 1. v. 14. and 15.
that God tempts no man, but every man is tempted, drawn, and allured by
his own concupiscence: and then concupiscence when it has conceived,
brings forth sin. But what is this against us? Do we charge God with this
sin of concupiscence, when we deny it to be sin at all, except only when
a man consents to it? or rather do you charge God with it, when you affirm
it to be sin, as it is of nature, without consent? are we or you they, that
make God author of sin? is not Calvin condemned of our church for this
impretie? ^ Li. 1. just. 8.17. 18. Li. 2. inst. ap. 4. In com. li. reg. ca. 2.
(a) does he not hold, that God is author of sin, in diverse places of his
works? (b) Does he not condemn S. Augustine by name, for holdinge the
contrary? (c) Does not Peter Martyr his scholar hold the same? How then
talk you of quitting carefully the Lord from sin, as though he were
charged or accused thereof by us? what hypocrisy, what dissimulation, what
falshode is this in you?

Now the place of S. James (as commonly all other things that you allege)
makes singularly against your self. Hear S. Augustins exposition and
argument, which proves our position out of the same words. Aug. li. 6.
cont. Iul. cap. 5.
Cum dicit apostolus Iacobus, vnusquisque tentatur a concupiscentia sua
abstractus and illectus: deinde, concupiscentia cum conceperit parit peccatum:
profecto in hiis verbis partus a pariente discernitur. Pariens enim est
concupiscentia, partus peccatum. Sed concupiscentia non parit nisi conceperit:
non concipit nisi illexerit, hoc est ad malum perpetrandum obtinuerit volentis
assensum. When the apostle James says: every one is tempted, drawn away,
and Intised by his own concupiscence: afterward concupiscence, when it has
conceived, brings furthe sin: surely in these words the child is
distinguished from the mother: the mother that bears is concupiscence: the
child borne is sin. But concupiscence bears not except she conceive: and
she conceyueth not except she obtain the consent of him which is willing to
do evil. Now go (M. Charke) and acquit your self of gross folly and
ignorance, whereof you are convicted, which would so carefully quitte the
Lord of that, wherewith we never meant to charge him.

Of the first motions of concupiscence.
THE CENSVRE.
Thyrdlie, you report the Jesuits to say, The third Article.
That the first motions of lust are without hurt of sin Ce^s. 54. 89. It is
most true and plain, as they deliver it, but you, by clipping their words,
make every thing to seem a paradoxe. They say, the first motions of lust, if
they come of natural instinct only, without any cause given by us, are no
sins, so long as we give no consen^ of heart unto them. And the reason is
because it lies not in us, (they being natural) to prohibit them to come, no
more than it does, to prohibit our pulse from beating. And therefore seeing no
sin can be committed, without our will and consent of har^: (as I have
shevved before:) the first motions can be no more sins in us, than they are
in beasts, for the like reason. Nether is the tenthe commandment, (alleged
by you for the contrary doctrine, to wit, Exo. 20.
thou shall not covet) any way repugnant to this. For this commandment
forbyddeth consent to these motions, and not the very motions, which are not
in our power, as the Scripture it self signifies, when it says. Deuteronomy. 30.
Li. 1. de nu. and concup. ca. 23. Ecc. 18.
This commandment which I do give thee this day, is not above thee. And as
S. Austen learnedlie proves out of an other place of scripture, where this
commandment is expounded, to wit. Go not after thy concupiscence: That is,
consent not unto them, or follow them not.

THE DEFENSE.
The understanding of this article depends wholly of that which goes
before. For if no sin be committed, where no consent of will is, as has been
proved abunda^tlie in the two former articles: then can not the first motions
of lust or concupiscence, that come by natural instinct only, without any
cause given by us, be sin: if we yield no consent of heart to the same. And
this is so evident, both in reason, common sense, philosophy, divinity, and
authority of ancient fathers: as no man would have the face to stand against
it, but a man enforced thereunto, as M. Charke is^ S. Austen does prove the
matter purposelie in diverse places, who was not behind M. Charke in
judgment. You remember how many places I have alleged of his before: as that
among the rest: Li. 2. cont. Iul. circa finem. Li. 2. de gra. and pec. orig. c.
40.
We might be always without synne^ if we never did yealde consent to our
concup^sce^ce to sin. And in an other place, talking purposelie of these
first motions, he says: Quibus si non consentitur, nullius peccati reatus
comrahitur: unto which motions, if we give no consent of heart: no guylt of
sin is contracted by them. What can be said more effectually? Again he
says in an other place, that these first motions of lust are so fare of from
being sins, Ep. 200. ad Asell.
of their own nature, as Christians use not to ask God forgiveness for them,
except they be either negligent in repellinge them, or do yealde some consent
unto them. The very same he has in diverse other places: as concione 3. in
psa. 118 And Lib^ de perfect. iustitiae. cap. vlt. and yet more largely Li. 1.
cont. duas ep. Pelag: cap. 13. and in diverse other places: affirming that we
need not say for these sirst motions, dimitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive us
our trespasses. So that you see with what wit, or reason, this doctrine is
called blasphemous in the Jesuits, by VV. Charke.

But yet, though this matter be most evident in it self: Let us examine what
cauilles he seeks to frame some show or semblance of a reply. He
reprehendeth first, as superfluous, my addition of words, used for
explication sake, when I said, that the first motions were no sin without
consent: If they come of natural instinct only, without any cause given by
us. This explication (I say) he greatly reprehendeth: sayeing, This kind of
speech is called implicatio in adiecto.
I pray you, are not all the first motions of lust merelye natural, and
evermore of some cause given by us etc? In which fond interrogation, first he
includes two contraries. For if they be meerlie natural: then are they not of
any cause given by us. And if they be of causes given by us: then are they not
meerlie natural. For that, natura and voluntas are distinct agents: as he
ought to have learned in philosophy. Secondly, it is false, that all first
motions of lust are meerlie natural. For in lewed men they are often
voluntary: First motions voluntary sometimes.
as when a man applies his imaginanation purposelie to think of dishonest
things, and so sturreth the motions of concupiscence: also when a man
voluntarily does behold lascivious sightes, or reads wanton books, or the
like. In all which cases, though the motions of lust that rise, be natural in
the root, as divines term it: yet is their nearest and immediate cause
voluntary: An evident example.
and therefore are they not meerlie natural. A plain example heerof may be
this: that, if a furious dog should lie a sleep, and one should a-wake him
purposelye, knoweing the danger, and so should be bytten of him: this hurt
might be said to proceed from the dogs nature, as from the root or first
cause: But the immediate cause thereof was the man's voluntary awaking of him,
and not the dogs nature. So in the first motions of lust, though all be
natural in the root, or first cause of concupiscence, and many times they do
rise of the^ selves in the most godly that are, without any cause given by
the^ (and therefore says M. Charke most falselie, that all come of causes
given by us:) yet sometimes they are a-wakened and sturred up in us by those
means, which I have named. And then are they both voluntary and sinful,
and not otherwise. And for this distinction did I make that addition of waste
words, as M. Charke calls yt: but you have seen with what cause or
wisdom.

After this, he reprehendeth my comparison of first motions to the pulse,
Deceytful auoydinge of similitudes.
as a comparison without iudgement^ And his cheifest reason is, for that they
are not like to the pulse in all things: and this is his ordinaire answering of
all comparisons alleged in the Censure. Which is as substantial a way of
answering, as if a man should say, a cow and her cal^e are not like in heir,
for that they are not like in horns. What Gramarian almost knows not, that
similitudes are not of necessity to hold in all points, but only in that,
wherein the comparison is made? I compared therefore the first motions of lust
unto the pulse, in one only point: (as appears in the Censure) And that is,
that they both, as well the one as the other, are often times mere natural:
and the lust many times no more voluntary than the pulse: And is not this
true? or does M. Charke say one word against this? no surely: but goes and
proves at large, that in other things they are not like: which I never denied.

His second reason against my example of the pulse stands thus in his book:
Great^ surdities.
You can not conclude from that part of our natural soul, vvherby we have
life and sens^ only, to the part wherein our reason and affections are
placed, because the former is not in the same sort corrupted as the second.
Nether does sin so work in natural life and sense, as it does in the
heart by the corruptions and guyltines of the soul. The necessary actions of
life, (as eating, drinkyng, sleep, breathe) also the necessary actions of
sense, (as smellyng, seeing, hearing, feelyng, and the rest,) they are of the^
selves all free from sin, remaynyng as they were in man before his fall. By
this long discourse he would prove that the pulse; and the first motions of
concupiscence are not like in all points. Which I grant without proof. But
yet in this one reason he utters three foul absurdities, and most gross
errors.

The first is that he places concupiscence of the flesh (whereof we talk) in
the reasonable part of the mind, Concupisce^ce in what place it is.
and not in the sensityue part: which is as much, as if a man should appoint
seeing to be in the nose, and smellyng to be in the eyes. For the motions of
co^cupisce^ce are nothing else but the rebellio^s of our se^sitiue parts,
against the part wherein reason is: and how then are not they in the part
sensityue? are they not called the concupiscence of the flesh? Does not S.
Paul say the flesh coueteth (or has concupiscence) against the spirit?
Does not he say playnlie: Gal. 5. Romans 7,
I feel an other law in my members repugnyng to the law of my mind? Is
not here concupiscence placed in the members; and reason in the mind? what
intolerable ignorance is this in a preacher, yea in a conqueror of learned M.
Campian, eauen unto Tyborne?

But his second absurdity is yet greater than this; in affirmyng that the
sensual part of man is not so much corrupted by original sin, The
sensatiue parte^ of man more corrupted than the reasonable.
as is the reasonable part: which is clean false and the contradictorie
thereof is true. For albeit all parts be corrupted: yet the s^^sible part
more, by reason of the rebellyon of the sensityue part against the reasonable:
which I have named before, and every man by experience does find more
temptation in his sensitive parts: to wit, in his senses, imagination, and
other like parts, and members of his body: than he does in his reasonable
parts, to wytt, in his judgment, and will: especially good men, who find
great rebellyon often times in their sensual parts, though their judgment
be right, and their will most holy and firm. S. Paul felt this, when he said,
Romans 7.
O unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
And again: I my self do serve the law of God in my mind, but in my flesh
I serve the lav^e of sin: signifyinge thereby the violent rebellion of the
flesh. In which sense also it is said by the wise man: Sap. 9. Romans 7.
the body that is corrupted aggreueth the mind. And S. Paul sayethe, I do
not that uuhiche I would, but that which I hate. By all which is showed that
the inferior part of man (called the sensatyue part) is more corrupted, by
the fall of Adam, than the reasonable: Vide Au. in psa. 145 and li. 14. de
ciuit. c. 19.
for that by the force of concupiscence placed principally in it, it makes
war, and offerreth violence to the other. So that heerin also M. Charke was
fowlie ouerseene.

Necessary actions of life and sense corrupted by original sin.
His third absurdity is joined with flatt pelagianisme, where he says, that
the necessary actions of life and sense remain now in man, as they were
before his fall. Heerof S. Austen shall be witness, whose words are these: If
any man shall affirm that by the offense of preuarication in Adam, the vuhole
man, that is, man both in body and soul is not changed into worse etc: he
is deceived with the error of pelagians, and is contrary to the scriptures.
De eccles. dogm. c. 38.
The like teaches Prosper. lib. 1. de vocat. gent. ca. 7. Into these errors
and heresies falls M. Charke, whiles leaving the sure doctrine of the
Catholic Church, he deuiseth out new ways, (after the fashion of all
heretics) whereby to excuse natural actions from sin. We excuse them from
sin, and do say the cause to be, for that they are not voluntary: which
is one principal point required, as well in sin as in virtue, as has been
showed. M. Charke deuiseth, he can not tell what him self, in this point: but
only that he would not say willingly as we do, though he have nothing to
say besides.

But yet against this point of voluntary he obiecteth (once more,) original
sin: which (as he says) is not voluntary. But it has been answered
before; and showed, how it is voluntary, not only in men of discretion, but
also in infantes. Seco^dlie, he alleges out of Genesis; Ge. 6. and 8.
that the cogitation of man's heart is evil ever more. To which I answer, that
it inclines to evil by reason of concupiscence left in us: but yet is not
that inclination sin, without consent: as has been proved before. Thirdly,
he obiecteth the commandment; Deuteronomy. 6. Matthew. 22.
thou shall love thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
all thy strength. By which commandment, he imagines the first motions of
concupiscence to be also forbidden, Au. de spi. and lit. c. v^. li. 1. de do.
Christ. c. 2. li. de not. and gra. 69. li. 2. de pec. merit. c. 6.
and consequently to be sins: which is false. For (as S. Austen well
writes in diverse places) though we be sturred by this commandment to all
perfection that we can in this life: yet no more is enjoined us thereby under
pain of sin and damnation, but only that we do not yield consent to sin;
as has been showed before, in the Censure, and is now presently to be
examined more at large, in explication of the tenthe commandment: which
contains the very same meaning that this commandment does.

Upon all this that goes before, Catholics do repress lusts, an^ not the
protestants.
VV. Chark makes this conclusion against us. Therefore to say we must not; or
can not pull in the raynes of our first lusts etc, is in deed to teach a
beastly liberty, and to lay open the way to all uncleanness, without
controllement. Here now is showed the ordinary practice of all lyeing
heretics, and specially of protestants: whose fashion is to charge the
Catholic Church with odious conclusions, deduced of false principles devised
by them selves. For, which part does enlarge or pull in the raynes of our
lusts? the protestant, or the Catholic doctrine? surely, if to pull in or
enlarge the raynes of our lusts, be to give them scope, or to repress the
motions, as all men (I think) will confess: then consider, I pray you, who^
do this, either VV. Chark and his fellows, or we. Protestants doctrine.
They teach that these first motions of lust are natural, and do present
them selves unto us without our will: and when they do so come, we can not
let their effect, but that they work sin in us, whether we consent, or not
consent. So that by this doctrine, protestants do not only let out the
raynes, but do qwyte take away both raynes, and bridle out of our hands.
For if lusts come without our will, and work sin in us without our
consent: what raynes are there left in our hands to pull in? If they be sin
in me whether I consent, or not consent: shall I strive against a thing that is
impossible? who will not rather execute his lusts with pleasure, than resist
them with pain, if whether he consent, or not, they are sin? So that (in
deed) this is that libertine doctrine of protestants, which loses the
raynes, and lays open the way to all uncleanness: Catholic doctrine of
lusts.
as both by experience now appears in the world, and by reason is evident.
And our contrary doctrine is that, which pulls in the raynes of lust, and
lays the foundation of all virtue among Christians, if it be executed
accordingly. To wit, the doctrine vvherby we teach, that albeit these first
motions be natural, and do present them selves unto us many times, without
all fault of ours: yet always (by the help of gods grace that never wants)
it stands in us to admit, or reject them: to give consent or to resist to
their motions. And if we consent, they are sins: but if we consent not, but
vanquishe them: they are cause of merit and reward in heaven: though the
motions them selves, be infirmities and spots left in us by original sin.
And this makes men to strive and resist them, and to keep their minds clear
from consent, and finally to stand strongly in the spiritual battaill
between the flesh tempting, and the spirit resisting: wherein the protestant
fights not at all, for that he has no hope of victorie^ And yet (gentle
reader) consider their impudency in chargyng us with that beastly liberty
which they teach only them selves.

There follows now the tenth commandment: Exo. 20.
thou shall not covet: alleged by M. Charke, for condemnyng of the first
motions of lust. Which commandment the Censure expounds out of S. Austen,
Li. de nup. and concup. cap. 23.

Eccle. 18.


and by an other place of scripture, (which is the best manner of exposition
that may be) that it is meant only of consent: to wytt, that we must not give
consent to our lusts of concupiscence, nor follow them. So that this tenth
commandment, (by S. Austens exposition) makes nothing against the first
motions, which are without consent, but only against the lusts whereto we
yield assent. To this Sir William replyeth nothing, but only says Austens
opinion appears by the places alleged before. Which is true: for it
appears that S. Austen is most evident and flatt against M. Charke, and more
earnest, than I can be: And that M. Chark has no show out of him for one
syllable on his side, but only a place forged by him self, as has been
declared.

Next to this it pleases M. Charke to put down four manifest lies for
helpyng him self out with some show of matter: Abovvt the number and order of
the commandments.
sayeing, As the papists make of the tenth commandment two commandments:
so this felovve makes of two several breaches of two diverse
commandments, but one sin. Both these (I say) are slanders. For first,
the Catholics make but one commandment of the tenth commandment. But the
question is, which is properly and distinctlie the tenth commandment. For
the protesta^tes (for mayntaynyng of a cavil against the Catholics) will
have these two branches, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife. And: Deuteronomy.
5.
thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, fyeld, etc. to be but one only
commandment: that is, the tenth. And co^sequentlie, they will have these two
other branches: thou shall not have strange gods before me, And: thou shall
not make unto thy self any graven Idol etc. to be two distinct
commandments. But S. Austen contendeth in diverse places, Quaest. 71. in
exodus and concione. 1. in psa. 32.
that these latter two branches make but one only commandment: that is,
the first commandment: and that the second clause thereof, prohibiting the
making of Idols, is but an explication of the first clause, that prohibiteth
false gods. And therefore, that these other two branches, of coveting our
neighbors wife, And: of coveting his goods: do make two distinct
commandments: to wit, the nyenthe and tenthe: the nyenth prohibiting all
internal consent of heart to carnal sin: the external complishement and
work whereof is prohibited by the sixth commandment (after this account:)
which is, thou shall not committ adul^erie. And the tenth, prohibiting all
internal consent of heart unto covetousness: the external accomplishement
whereof is prohibited by the seventh commandment: which is, thou shall not
steal. So that by this account of S. Austen, and other learned men foloweing
his opinion, these two branches, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife,
and thou shall not covet thy neighbors house or field etc. do make two
distinct commandments, answering to the sixth and seventh, as has been
said.

The reasons why concupiscence of the flesh, and concupiscence of temporal
goods make two commandments.
And the reason of this opinion is, first, for that those two branches: thou
shall not have strange gods before me: and thou shall not make unto thee
any graven thing, or likeness to adore it etc, contain in deed but one thing,
and therefore can not make two distinct commandments, as the protestants
teach, but one only commandment. And consequently, these latter two must
needs make two sundry commandments: or else there could not be te^ne.
Secondly, for that the septuagint or 70. interpreters, do recite them
distinctlie as two commandments, in their greek translation, repeating the
verb twyse, as I before have alleged them. Thyrdlie, because it was most
couenient that the two general internal consents unto the two lusts of
Carnalitie, 1. John. 2.
and Covetousness called by S. John and distinguished by the names of
Concupiscence of the fles^e: and concupiscence of the eyes: should be
expresselye and particularly forbidden by two distinct commandments. For
that in these two fountaynes of poison, do lie the greatest and most
dangerous baytes of sin in this life. If you ask why the works forbidden
in the other commandments, A doubt resolved.
had not (for like reason also) their internal concupisce^ces of lusts
forbidden by distinct and several commandments? it is answered, that the
internal temptations against the other commandments, are nether so
frequent, nor so dangerous, as these are: and consequentely they are
sufficientlye prohibited, by the words set down in these commandments
them selves that prohibet the woorks: partly also their prohibitio^ may be
understood by the prohibition of these two internal concupiscences or lusts:
1. Ioh. 2.
for which causes is problable that S. John made mention of these two
concupiscences only, and not of any other, as in his sentence before alleged
apearethe.

And now albeit these reasons and the like did move S. Austen in his time, and
many learned men sense, to deuyde the ten commaundeme^ts in this order: yet
is not the matter, a matter of faith, nor so defined by the church, as a man
may not follow an other opinion, if yt seem more reasonable unto him. For the
ancient fathers had always diverse opinions about the division of the
decaloge, or ten commandments, without any difference of belief. For the
Hebrews (as Li. 3. ant. ca. 6. and 8.
Josephus, and Li. de decalog.
Philo with whom also agrees Li. 2. cont. haereses. ca. 42.
Irenaeus) do appoint out five commandments to the first table, concerning
the honor of God: and five to the second table, concerning the love of our
neighbor. But the Greeks, (as Ho. 8. in Exodus
Origin, in ca. 20. Exodus
Procopius, Li. 6. Stro^.
Clemens Alexandrinus, in ca. 26. Leuit.
Hesychius, with whom agree also S. in cap. 6. ephesians.
Ambrose, and S. in ca. 10. Ose.
Jerome,) do assign four to the first table, and six to the second table.
But S. Austen, and the most part of the latins foloweing him, do appoint
only three precepts to the first table, and seven to the second. And yet all
do agree upon ten commandments. By all which may be seen the shameless
dealing of M. Chark here, An. qu^st. 71. in exo. and alibi su. citat.
in charging Catholics to make two commandments of the tenthe
commandment: and much more the malicious calumniation, both of him, and all
his fellows, in affirming every where in all their books and sermons to the
people, that Catholics leave out the second commandment, Whether
Catholics leave ovvt the second commandment against Idols.
against graven Idols: where as they leave it not out, but do include it in
the first commandment, and that for the same reasons which moved S. Austen
to do the same, as has been said. These earnest, odious, and slanderous
accusations, which our adversaries in their own consciences do know to be
mere false, do argue nothing for them, but only great malice in their
hearts, singular lack of modesty, and great shame in their behauyour, and
extreme poverty, and necessity in their cause.

How one general sin may belong to two commaundeme^^es: that is, the
consent of heart to one, and the ex^ernall work to an other.
M. Charkes second charge, that I make the several breaches of two diverse
commandments but one sin, is also false. For I make them two distinct
sins, though they have one general name given them by Christ: that is, I
make the breach of the nyenth commandment (after our account,) which is,
thou shall not cover thy neighbors wife, to be mental adultery, if it go
no further, but only to consent of mind. And the breach of the sixth
commandment, thou shall not commit adultery, I make to be the sin of
actual adultery, when it breaks out to the work it self: which two
sins, though they agree in the name of aldulterie: yet are they distinct
sins often times, and one separated from the other, and co^sequentely may be
prohibited by distinst commaundementes^ And so in like wise I make actual
theft to belong to the seventh commandment, and mental theft unto the tenth.
This is my meaning (M. Charke): which you might have understood if you would,
and consequently have forborne so malitiouse falshode in misreporting the same.

There remains only to be examined about this article, the reason touched
by the Censure, and fownded on the scripture, for the confirmation of S.
Austens Catholic exposition of the commandment, Exodus 20.
thou shall not covet. Which law (says the Censure, forbyddeth only
consent of heart to the motions of lust, and not the very first motions them
selves, which are not in our power: and consequently, not comprehended under
that prohibition of the law: as the scripture signifies, when it says,
Deuteronomy. 30.
this commandment which I give thee this day is not above thee. To this M.
Charke answers, first, that our first motions are not altogether ovvt of our
power. For that the guyft of contine^cie does more and more subdue them.
Whether all motions of lust may be extinguished by mortification:
Which is true, if we understand of yielding consent unto them. But if we
understand of utter suppressing and extinguishinge of all first motions of lust
and concupiscence: (as M. Charke must needs mean, our question being only
thereof) then must we know, that, albeit good me^ do cut of by mortification,
infinite occasions and causes of motions and temptations, which wicked men
have: yet can they never (during this life) so subdue all motions them selves
of their concupiscence, but that they will rise often against their wills: as
S. Paul complayneth of him self in many places, and all other Saints after him
have experienced in their flesh: who notwithstanding, had the gift and
diligence of mortifieing their flesh, as much (I ween) as our ministers of
England have, who talk of continency and mortification (each one having his
yoke mate redye for his turn) as those good fellows do of fasting, which
sit at a full table, according to the proverb.

To the place of Moses, Whether the commandments, of God be impossible or
no.
he has no other shyft but to say: that the translation is false and
corrupt, for that Moses meant only, the law is not hydden from us, and
not, that it is not above our power, as yt is euidentlye declared (says he)
by the plain text, and by explication thereof in the Epistle to the Romans.
This says M. Charke: mary he proves yt nether by the words of the text,
nor by S. Paul's application. But if I be not deceived, S. Jerome (whose
tra^slatio^ this is esteemed to be, or else before him^ and corrected by him)
knew as well what the Hebrew words of Moses imported in the text, and also
how S. Paul applied the^, as william Chark does. S. Paul's application of that
part of this sentence which he towcheth, makes wholly for us as after shall be
showed. The law and commandments are not above us.
The Hebrew word of the text is NIPHLET coming of the verb PHALA: which, as I
deny not, but it signifies to be hidden: so signifies it also, to be
maruailous: to be hard and difficult: As appears psa. 139. and 2. Sam. 1.
where the same word is used. The same signifies the Chaldie word M^PHARESA
coming of the verb PHARAS, that besides the significations signifies also to
separate. The greek word HYPERONGOS signifies (as all men know) exceeding,
immesurable great: passing all mean: etc How then do not these three
words used in the three ancient tongues, having a negation putt before them
(as they have in the text) express so much as S. Ierom has expressed, by
sayeing, the law is not above thee? Do not all these words putt together
importe, that the law is not more hard, or difficult than thy ability may
reach to perform? or that, it is not separated from our power? that it is
not exceedinge our strength? would any horse but bayard, have been so bold
with S. Iero^, and with all the primative church, which used this our common
latin translation, to deface them all (I say) upon so light occasion? Would
any impudency have durst it, besides the pride of an heretic? If S. Ierom
will not satisfy you: Aug. li. de not. and gra. cap. 69.
take S. Austen: who ha^dleth both the words alleged of Moses, and also
the application used by S. Paul of part of the sentence: and proves out of
both, the very same conclusion that we do: to wytt, that the law is not
above our ability to keep it: and for confirmation thereof, he adds many
other textes of scripture, Math. 11. 1. Ioh. 5. Li. de not. and gr. c. 69
as, my yoke is svvete and my burden is light: also, his commandments are
not heavy, and the like: concluding in these words, we must believe most
firmelye, that God being just and good, could not command impossible things
unto man. And in an other place: Ser. 191. de tempore.
We do detest the blasphemy of those men, which affirm God to have
commanded any impossible thing unto man. The very same words of detestation
uses S. Jerome in the explication of the creed, unto Damasus byshope of Rome.
And the same proves S. Chrysostom at large in his first book of impunction
of the heart: and S. Basil his brief rules the 176. interrogation.

Of defacing of scripture. Artic. 4.
THE CENSVRE.
You report the Jesuits to say: All things not expressed in scriptures.
The holy scripture is a doctrine imperfect, maimed, lame, not co^taynyng all
things necessary to says and salvation: Cen. fol. 220. you are too shameless
(M. Charke) in setting forth these, for the Jesuits words. Let any man
read the place, and he shall find noe such thing, but rather in contrary
manner the holy scripture with reverent words, most highlye commended.
Notvvithstanding, they reprehend in that place Monhemius, for sayeing that
nothing is to be received or believed, but that which is expreslie found in
the Scripture. Things believed which are not in scripture.
For reproof of which heresy, they give examples of many things, which
both we, and our adversaries also do believe, which nevertheless are not
set down expreslye in the Scriptures, although perhaps deduced thereof. As
the perpetual virginity of our lady after to the Laodicenses, is feigned and
not vritten by him, seeing notvvithstanding S. Paul never mentions any epistle
written by him self to the Romans, but yet says, that he vvrote one to the
Laodicenses. Colos. 4.
All these things (I say) and many more, are believed by us generallye, and
yett none of them expreslie to be found in scripture.

THE DEFENSE.
To the charge of shameless belyeing the Jesuits, M. Chark answers nothing
but thus: A simple evasion.
how soever Go^uisus reporte^h or misreporteth the Jesuits, if I report him
faythfullie, it is no s^ame to me. But it is shame to your cause, (good Sir)
which can not be mayntayned but with lyeing on all hands. And yet must not
this shame light only on Gotuisus, as you would have it: (though you never
named him in your other books) but upon your self principally. First, for
that you had read this infamous lie refuted to kemnitius (of whom Gotuisus,
word, for word has borrowed it) by payuas Andradius, Payu. in orthodox
explicat.

In opere ca tech. Canisii, fol. 126. 160.161. 162.


and proved to be (as it is) a most shameless slander of his own, and no one
word of the Jesuits. Secondly, you must needs have seen (as no dowt but
you had) that Gotuisus reported an open untruth, by the four other places of
Canisius, which he alleges for the same, as well as the Censure of Colen:
All which four places any man that will read, (for the book is co^monlie to
be sold in England) shall see that Gotuisus is a shameless fellow, and you a
plain deceyuer, in that you cited only the Censure of Colen, (which you
knew was not to be had,) and suppressed Canisius, which is extant to confound
your vntruethe. These tryckes may admonish men that are not utterly wilful,
how you are to be trusted in other matters of greater importance, wherein your
falshoode can not be so easylie convicted to the sight of all men, as in this,
it is. Seek all the books that ever the Jesuits wrote (which are many) and
if you find in any one of them, any one of these three odious words,
wherewith you charge them: that is, imperfect, mamed, or lame, attributed to the
scriptures: I will yield in all the rest that you affirm of them.

But you have a shyft to cover your dealing heerin: and that is, that seeing we
hold, that all things necessary to salvation are not written in the
scripture: Therefore, we hold in effect (say you, though not in words) that
the scripture is imperfect, mamed, and lame. Which reason if yt were true:
yet were your dishonestie great in settinge forth so odious words of your
own fayning, for the words of the Jesuits. But mark how void of reason this
argument of yours is. An evident example.
If a marcha^t departing into an other country, should leave his
commandments with his servants, partly in writing, partly by word of
mouth: might the servants say, that he had left them a broken commandment
written? but if he should yet add further unto them: that if they dowted of any
thing, they should repair to his wife, and she should fully resolve them
therein: might not he justly account him self iniuried by the^, if they
notwithstanding should accuse him for leaving them an imperfect, maimed, and
lame commandment? No more is it any defect to scripture, or gods
commandment, (as S. Austen proves at large li. 1. contra Cresc. c. 32.) that
God has left certain things unwritten: for that we may receive the same by
tradition in the church, as that doctor proves: Luc. 10. Ioh. 14. Math. 18.
1. Tim. 3.
which Church Christ has commended unto us, as his espouse in earth, to be
heard and obeyed by us in all dowtes. The very same doctrine teaches the said
father li. de fide, and oper. ca. 9. and also ep. 66. ad Don.

To the twelve particular points set down by the Censure, as not contained
expresselie in scripture, and yet to be believed: M. Charke answers, that
seven of them are in scripture, and the other five, for that they are not in
scripture, The true state of the question.
they are not of necessity to be believed. But here is first to be noted,
that the question between us, and the protesta^tes is of express scripture
only and not of any far fett place, Of things not expressed in scripture.
which by interpretation may be applied to a controversy. For this contention
began between us upon this occasion: that when we alleged diverse weighty
places and reasons out of scripture for proof of invocation of Saints, prayer
for the dead, purgatory, and from other controversies: our adversaries
rejected them, for that they did not playnelie and expresselie decide the
matter. Whereupon came this question, whether all matters of belief are
playnelie and expresselie in scripture, or no? wh^che they affirm, and we
deny. And for proof of our part, we allege all these twelve particulars, and
many more, which are points necessarily to be believed, and yet not
expresselie in scripture. For answer whereof you shall see how this man is
distressed.

First he says that seven of them are contained in scripture: Marie he
flies from the question of expre^se scripture, and alleges places a far
of, whereof the question is not. For the Censure grants that many of them
might be deduced from scripture, but not so expresselie, as they are to be
believed. Two natures and two vvilles in Christ. Rom 1. 34 Math. 26.
But let us run over these seven points, contained (as he says)
manifestely in scripture. The first is of two ^^tures and two wills in Christ:
for which he cites these words: Of his son which was made unto him of
the seed of David according to the flesh. Also: not as I will, but as thou
vvilt. But how do these words prove evidently the matter in question? That
deductions heerof may be made from scripture (admitting the interpretation of
the Church upon the places alleged) I grant: but that interpretation of the
church being set aside, and the bare text only admitted: these places can
not conuicte an heretic, that would deny, either the distinct natures, or
distinct wills in Christ: as appears by the council of Constantinople:
where, after long stryuing in vain with the Monothelit^s about this matter out
of scripture, Syn. 6. Act. 4.
in the end they concluded in these words, we believe this, for that,
Apostolical and Eua^gelical tradition, and the doctrine of fathers have taught
it.

The second point is the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father and the
son equally. Proceeding of the holy ghost. Ioh. 15.26.
For this, M. Charke quoteth, when the holy ghost shall come which I will
send you from my father, the spirit of truth, which proceeds from the
father. But this proves not expresselie that the holy ghost proceeds
equally from the father and the son together: but rather seems to inclyne
to the heresy of the Greeks, that it proceeds only from the father: And
therefore the heretics which denied this equallye builded their heresy
especially upon this place, as S. Cyrill notes. Ciril. in ca. 15. Ioh. Athan.
in symb.
Again, this place tells not whether it proceeds by generation, or without
generation from the father, and yet we must believe it to be without generation.

The third point is, The union of the word. Ioh. 1. v. 14
the union of the word unto the nature of man, and not unto the person. For
which M. Chark cites: And the word was made flesh. But what is this to the
point? this proves, that the word took our flesh, but whether he took the
nature of man only, or the person only, or both together, it expresses
not. And here is to be noted by the way M. Charks lack of judgment, not
only in the matter, but even in the very terms of divinity. For he
reprehendinge my words as unsound, in that he understood the^ not, he
changes the^ thus. That the word did take the nature of man to be one
person, and not the person. Which are both fond and erroneous. For the
word took not the nature of man to be one person, seeing the word was one
person before he took that nature of man unto it self. Nether could the
nature of man be that one person, as M. Charke seems to ween: for so should
nature and person be confounded in Christ. But I think M. Chark never studied
yet these matters: and therefore he might have been less malepert in
reprehendinge, if he would.

The fowerth doctrine is of baptizinge of infantes. Baptizinge of infantes Ge.
17. 12.
For which, M Charke quoteth these words of Genesis: The infant of eight
years old shall be circumcised in mankind. This has nothing expresselye (as
you see) for baptism. And if we had nothing but this law, for our warrant in
baptizing of infantes: how chances it, that we baptize infantes, before or
after the eight day? also why baptize we infantes of woman kind also, which
were not circumcysed in the law? Beza was strycken quyte dumme in the
disputation of poysie in france with this demand, C^aud. de Saints in
Apol. aduers. Beza.
as the byshope Claudius de Saynctes reports: who was present. Wherefore I
had rather follow S. Austen, who contendeth, and proves that baptizinge of
infantes is only a tradition of the Apostles, and not left us by any written
scripture. li. 10. c. 23. super Genesis ad lit. And the same teaches Origin. ho.
8. in leuit.

Change of the Sabbothe day.
The fyueth doctrine which M. Charke auoweth to be in scripture is the change
of the Sabbath day into Sundaye. For which he cites these words out of the
revelations. Apo. 1. 10.
I was in spirit in our Lords day. But here is no mention of Sundaye or
Saturdaye; and much less of celebratio^ of either of them, and least of all,
of the change of the Sabbothe (appointed by God) into any other day. Is not
this change then of the Sabbath day appointed by the law, substantiallie
proved from this place of scriprure trow you?

Of the knovveinge of scripture.
The sixth point is about the four Gospels and epistle to the Romans: which he
says to be proved scripture, out of scriptute. But yet he quoteth no place of
scripture, where they are proved to be scripture: but only says, they are
proved ovvt of the vuoords, by the inscription, there expressing the names of
the vvryters thereof. But what a mockery is this? is the bare names of the
Apostles, sufficient to prove that they were written in deed by the Apostles?
who can prove out of scripture that these names were not counterfayted? The
feigned epistle to the Laodicenses, has it not the name of S. Paul, in it? and
begins it not with the very same style as his other epistles do? and yet
is it rejected as counterfaite, and that only by tradition. The feigned
gospel of S. Bartholomew, had it not his name in it? and yet was it not
rejected? Ho. in Luc.
The feigned Gospel of S. Thomas, had it not his name? Orig. ho. 1. in Luc.
and yet Origin says, he rejected it only, for that the tradition of the
church received it not. Epiph. li. 1. cont. here is. hebion. and li. 1. hae. 46.
Au. li. 28. cont. faust. cap. 2.
The three counterfeit Gospells among the hebrews, had they not as holy titles
as the rest? and yet they were rejected by tradition of the church as
Epiphanius shows. When Faustus the Manachie denied the Gospel of S. Matthew,
says not S. Austen: Mathaei euangelium prolatu^ aduersus faustum Manachaeum
per traditionem? The Gospel of Matthew was alleged against Faustus the
Manachie by tradition. What can be more evident than all this to prove our
opinion of the necessity of tradition, and to confound the fond madness of this
poor minister, that will have the bare titles of books sufficient to prove
their authority, and so certainly, as the true scripture it self (once
known) is to be believed?

The seventh doctrine which he holds to be expresselie in scripture is, that
God the father begatt his son only by understanding him self. The manner
how God the father begat his son.
Marye he cites no place fort it: but reprehending the darkness of the
words, (which notwithstanding are most plain, and usual to those which
have studied any thing i^ divinity:) he flies to an other matter: sayeing,
Ioh. 1. 1. Romans 9. 5.
we believe by testimony of the word, that Jesus Christ is the only
begotten son of the father: And for this he quoteth a place or two of
scripture: which needed not For we hold this to be expresselie in scripture,
more than in fortye places, That Christ is the son of God.
But the question is of the manner how this generation may be: which though
it appertain not to the simple to trouble them selves with all: yet the Church
must defend it against adversaries, who will object (as often they have done)
how can God (being a spirit) begett a son, and yet the son not to be
after his father in time, or nature, but equal with him in them both? what
mean you (say they) to hold that the holy ghost proceeds from the father,
and that the son proceeds not, but is begotten? why is it heresy to
say, that the son proceedet^ from the father, or that the holy ghost is
begotten? what difference is there betvveene these speeches? how does the
father begett? and the like. All these are points of divinity, and to be
discussed. And though M. Charke seems ignorant in them all, and not to
understand so much as the very terms them selves, most playnlie set down:
yet Catholic divines kuowe what the Church has determined heerin, against
heretics and infideles. And albeit these things be not expresselye set
down in scripture: yet are they no less to be believed tha^ the other
mysteries of the Trlnitie: VVherof I reckoned some small part only in the
Censure. VVhi^he notwithstanding I would not have troubled M. Charke withal:
if I had supposed him so gross therein as by examination I find him. A lack
poor sir william.

And by this you see how substantiallie he has proved all these seven points
to be expresselie in scripture. Protest^^ts lords of scriptures to make the^
say what they list.
If we should believe no more in all these mysteries, than is expressed in
scripture: our faith would be very obscure and confuse heerin. B^t these men
are wonderful lords of scripture. They can exclude what they will, and draw
in what they please. When we are to prove a matter to be founded on scripture:
no testimonies will serve, except they be so plain and evident, as by no ways
they may be avoided. But when they will have a thing in scripture: every little
guess at their pleasure is sufficient to prove yt. Hear^ D. Fulks words to M.
Bristoe, Against the motives pa. 98.
about certain lyk^ matters. For the division of parishes, excommunicacion,
suspension, public solennizing of Marriage, with the laws thereof, and
punishing of heretics by death, they are all manifestly proved ovvt of the
scripture. This he says; alleging no one place of scripture to prove it.
Lege Lutherum co^tra Latomum de Incendiariis:
And for the first four, I think the puritanes will hardly grant them to be
manifestly in scripture. And the last was for a long time denied by them
selves, to be either in scripture, or allowable by scripture, until now they
have burned some for religion them selves in England. But their former books
are extant to the contrary: and all their companions yet in other countries
(where they reign not as our protestants do now in England) are still of
opinion, that no heretic ought to be putt to death for religion.

And thus he auoydeth seven of the points objected, affirming them to be
evidently in scripture. For the rest (says he) of these twelve points, as
they are not ^uidentlie contained in the word: so a christian is not
absolutely bound to believe them. Heretical audacitie.
Behold the last refuge of a proud heretical spirit, in breakinge where he
can not otherwise get owte. Dare you (M. Charke) to set men at liberty, to
believe or not to believe, that the common creed was made by the Apostles:
which, In pr^em lib. de prin.
, Origin, ad praxeam.
, Tertullian, ep. 61. ad pa^.
, Ierom, in exp. simb.
, Ruffinus, ep. 81. ad Sir.
, Ambrose, ser. 181. de tem.
, Austen, and all the primative Church do so co^stantlie affirm to be their
doeinge? Dare you to set at liberty the observation of Easter day: which
Li. 5. hist. cap. 22. Sozom. li. 7 Ierom. cont. Heluid. Amb. ep. 81. and 79.
Aug. in Enchir. cap. 34.
Eusebius calls Apostolicam traditionem: A tradition of the Apostles: and
about which was so great stir in the primative church, and so many decrees
made in councels against heretics? But above all other, dare you putt at
liberty the belief of our blessed ladies perpetual virginity? Remember you
not that Heluidius was condemned of heresy, for denieing the same, in the
primative Church? Remember you not the solemn curse for this matter, of so
many holy Byshopes recorded and confirmed by S. Ambrose of Millan? I will
conclude and stop your mouth (if I can) with these words of S. Austen:
Integra fide credendum est etc. we must believe with a sound faith, blessed
Marie the mother of Christ to have conceived in virginity: to have brought
forth her son in virginity, and to have remained a virgin after her
childbyrth, nether must we yield to the blasphemy of Heluidius. Lo (M.
Charke) S. Austen makes it both a matter of faith, and the dowting thereof to
be blasphemy: how will you avoid this?

For the mention which S. Paul is thought to make to the Colossians of an
epistle written by him to the Laodicenses, Col. 4.16.
M. Charke denies it, and condemns both me and S. Ieroms translation of
ignorance: for reporting the same for that (as he says) the greek text has
only of an epistle written by S. Paul from Laodicea, and not to Laodicea. But
me thinks M. Charke should not object ignorance so pere^ptorilye to others,
except he were sure of his own opinion. If I had had no other vvarrantize for
my allegation, but only the old latin translation, being of such antiquity
as it is, and the matter of no importance to our purpose: yet ought I not so
rigourouslie to have been reprehended for the same. But besides this, I have
two editions in greek: the one of learned Paguine in folio, the other of
Plantyne in octauo: both which make playnlie for me. Then have I the judgment
of S. in c. 4. ad coll.
, Ambrose, and o^ in catalog. scrip. in ver. Paulus.
S. Jerome: which knew the true greek editions. Also the consent of li. 5.
contra Marcion
Tertullian, in Catal. haer. c. 89.
Philastrius, and li. 1. cont. haer.
Epiphanius a greek writer: which may be sufficient to wype away M. Charkes
bitter reproach against me in this matter.

Of the scriptures misalleaged for the contrary, by M. Charke.
THE CENSVRE.
But how do you now overthrow this doctrine, and prove it blasphemy, M.
Charke? By a place of S. Paul: Objection. 2. Tim. 3.
All (the) scripture (is) given, by inspiration of God, (and) is profitable, to
teach, to confute, to correct, and to instruct in justice, that the man of
God may be perfect, (and thoroughly) instructed to every good work. VVherof
you infer, that the Scripture is sufficient to perfection, but how
vvrongefullye, it shall now appear. And first I let pass your ordinary
misusinge of scripture, by adding five words of your own, in this little
sentence, to wit, (the, is, and, and, through^lie) which audacitie, if it
were in translating of Aesops fables, it were tolerable: but in the holy
Scriptures, where every word must be taken as from the holy Ghost, it is
impious. Secondly, this place makes nothing for your purpose: which I prove
by two reasons. The first is, because. S. Paul says not here, that the
Scripture is sufficient to perfection, but only, that it is profitable.
Profitable
Now you know, that a thing may be very profitable, yea nec^ssarie to an
effect, Neces^arie.
and yet not sufficient to do the same without all help: As meat is
profitable and necessary to maintain life, and yet not sufficient, without
natural heat, clothes, and the like. The second reason is, for that S. Paul
signifies in this place, that every part, or canonical book of Scripture,
is profitable to make a man perfect: but yet we can not say, that every part
or book is sufficient: for then, all other books of scripture besides that,
were superfluous. And that S. Paul means in this place, every several
canonical book or part of Scripture, by the words (Omnis scriptura:) it is
evident by that he uses the word, Omnis, and not Tota, which two words
how much they differ both in Greek and Latin, all Logisioners know. For
omins homo signifies, every man. And M. Charke him self, in this very same
sentence, has translated, Omne o^us bonum, Every good work: And yet
deceatefullye, has he tra^^lated Omnis scriptura, All the scripture. As though
S. Paul had meante only, that all the Scripture put together is sufficient
to perfection: which sense can not stand. First, for that all the Scripture,
at such time as. S. Paul vvrote this, vvanted diverse important parts, as the
Ghospel of S. John, the Apocalips, and some other, which were vvrite^ after,
and co^seque^^lie should have been superfluous, if the other before had been
^ufficient.. Secondly, Part of scripture lost.
because we lack at this day many parts of scripture, which of likelyhoode
were in S. Paul's time. As the book of Nathan the Prophet^ with the volume
of the Prophet Gad. 1. Paralip. vlt. The book of Ahias salonites, and the
vision of Addo the Prophet 2. Paral 9. Many of the Parables and verses of
Solomon, for he vvrote three thousand of the one, and five thousand of the
other, 3. Reg. 4. Also the epistle of S. Paul to the Laodicenses Colos. 4.
whereof it follows in M. Charkes own, sense, that if all the scripture put
together, is only sufficient to perfection: then our scripture, now lacking
diverse parts of the same, is not sufficient. And so me thinkethe, M. Charke
vvrestethe this place against him self.

THE DEFENSE.
After a long apology in defense of loose translatyng of scripture, (wherein M.
Charke will perforce retain opinion of honest dealing) he comes to refute
the first reason, about profitable and sufficient, and sayethe that sometimes
profitable may stand for sufficient. 1. Tim. 4.
As where the Apostle says to Timothy: Exercise thy self to god^ynes. For
bodilye exercise is profitable but to a little: but godlynes is profitable ^o
all things: having promise both of this life, and of the lif^ to come. Here
(says M. Chark) it can not be denied but by profi^able is mente suff^cie^t.
Which suppose were true: yet were it but a slender argument, of one particular
to infer an other. But (in mine opinion) M. Charke is utterly deceived in
this matter. For as S. Com. in hunc locu^.
Ambrose, S. ibidem.
Jerome, and S. de morib. Eccles. li. 1. cap. 33.

Piety. meriteth in all actions.


Austen do expound this place: S. Paul's meaning is to putt an antithesis or
difference between corporal exercise and piety: sayeing, that the one is but
little profitable, but the other (that is godlynes) has her promysse of reward
in all actions, taken either for this life, or for the life to come: Out of all
(I say) she reapeth commodity, and is profitable. For in all actions, which
are taken in hand for charity and love of God (which is true piety:) therein
is merit and reward, whether the actions be about matters of this life, or of
the life to come. And who would say here that profitable signifies
sufficient?

His second reason he frames in these words, upon the place of S. Paul
before alleged: that which is profitable to all the parts that may be
required to perfection, can not be but sufficient for the perfection of the
whole: but that the scripture is profitable in such manner, the Apostle does
fully declare, in rehearsing all the particular parts which are necessary:
as to confute, to correct, and instruct in justice: ergo the scripture is
sufficient. God help you (M. Charke:) I assure you: you are a simple one to
take controversies in hand. What boy in Cambrige would ever have reasoned
thus? If you had said, that which is sufficient to all the parts in
particular, is sufficient to the whole: you had said somewhat. But how
follows it, that what soever is profitable to all particular parts, should be
sufficient to all? have you not Learned that there is causa sine qua non,
which is not one he profitable, but also necessary to all parts, whereof it
is such a cause: and yet is not sufficient alone, either to the parts or to the
whole? As (for example,) the head is profitable, yea necessary to all the
actions of this life, as to sing, weep, dispute, and the like: for without a
head none can be done: and yet is not the head sufficient alone to perform
these actions: as we see by experience. For that every one which has a head
is not able to do these things.

His third reason and argument is taken from the words of S. Paul immediately
goeinge before in the place now alleged to Timothy: which are these, 2. Tim.
3.
for that thou have learned the holy scrip^ures from thy infancy, which can
instruct thee to salvation, through the faith which is in Jesus Christ. Lo
(says M. Charke) here the scriptures are said to be sufficient to salvation.
But I deny this. For the Apostle says they can instruct Timothy, and show
him the way to salvation, and can bring him also to it, if he will follow them.
But does it follow heerby that they are sufficient for the whole church? and
in such sort as all doctrine by tradition is superfluous? Every epistle of S.
Paul instructs a man to salvation, and would also bring any man to heaven,
that should follow the same exactlie. But is therefore every epistle of S. Paul
sufficient for the whole Church? (whereof only our question is) and are all
other supe^fluous? Again, it is to be noted, that S. Paul speaks here
principally of the old testament. For he speaks of the scriptures which
Timothy (being now a byshope) had learned from his infancy: which was
before the new testament was written. And will M. Charke say, that the old
testament is sufficient to Christian men (such as Timothy now was) for their
salvation, without any other write? You see this man like the hare in the nett:
the more he struggleth, the more he encombreth and intangleth him self.

To my two reasons in the Censure, to prove that S. Paul in the place alleged
spoke not only of all the whole scripture together, but also of every
particular book thereof, (which notwitstandinge can not be said to be
sufficient of it self without other) he answers in effect nothing: but for
excuse of his fraudulent translating Omnis scriptura: all scripture: where as
he translated omne opus bonum, every good work, even in the same sent^nce:
he alleges a place or two out of the scripture, where this word omnis
signifies all, as well as every one. Lu^. 21.
Which I deny not, but some times it may be: (especially in greek) but yet
that there is ordinarily a difference between these two propositions omnis
homo^est corpus: and totus homo est corpus: I ^row your logicians of Cambrige
(whereof you talk,) will affirm with me. And if there be ordinarily such a
difference, and your self observing the same in the former part of the same
sentence: why you showld alter your translation in the second part thereof, I
can not imagine, except you mente fraud.

But now to my two reasons. In the first, I say that S. Paul could not mean
to Timothy of all the scriptures together which we now use. For that, all was
not then written: as the Gospel of S. John, and some other parts. To this he
answers, that there was enough written then, for the sufficient salvation of
men of that time, and that the other parts added afterward were not
superfluous. But this is from the purpose. For I grant, that in all times when
there was least written word, yet was there sufficient for the peoples
salvation of that time. For God supplied it otherwise: that is, by word of
mouth unwritten. And this makes for us: for in such times the written word
was not sufficient without all other helps as you affirm it is: as (for
example) when only S. Mathewes Gospel was written, and nothing else of the
new testament: yet grant I, that this scripture was sufficient for that time.
For that, God supplied yt otherwise, by the words and speeches of his
apostles. So before Moses wrote the law, the patriarchs had sufficient for
their salvation: though they had either nothing, or very little written word.
And yet you can not say, that the written word of that time was sufficient
of it self, without all tradition by mouth. VVerfore this answer is against
your self, as also that is, which you frame to the second reason: affirming
that albeit diverse parts of scripture be wanting now, which was in S. Paul's
time: yet still it is sufficient which I deny not, being joined to the other
supplies that God uses. For God supplieth by tradition and word of mouth.
The true state of the controversy abovvt the sufficiency of scripture. Epiph
in haer. 61.
But whether in all times the only written word, that is extant, be
sufficient of it self to the whole Church, without all other helps delivered
by tradition: that is our question. And of times past, when the law was not
written, no man without impudency can affirm, that the written word was
then sufficient. And of our time, that is, after the writing of the new
testament, Epiphanius says: Non omnia a diuina scriptura accipt possunt,
quapropter aliqua in scripturis, aliqua in traditione sancti. Apostoli
tradiderunt. All things necessary, can not be had from the scripture: And
therefore the holy Apostles left unto us some things written and some things
by tradition. Which signisieth sufficiently what Judgment the primative
Church had of this matter: as more at large shall be showed in the article
foloweing: which is also of this same argument.

Of teaching traditions besides the scripture. Art. 5.
THE CENSVRE.
5. You report the Jesuits to say: That the want of holy Scriptures must be
supplied, by peeci^ge it out by traditions. Cens, fol. 220. Addinge to
scripture Deuteronomy. ^. Non addetis ad verbum etc.
This is coin of the former forge, all false, and noe one such word to be
found in all their book. But yet as though they had said so, you fight
manfullye against this your own s^ntence, saying in manner follovvinge:
Contrary to this is the law in Moses. Thou shalt not add to the words
which I speak to thee, nether shalt thou take from the^. But why do you
break the law M. Charke in reportinge the law? you have here added the
singular number in the Verb, and the plural in the Noune, and have taken
away the numbers which the law gyuer used, and changed the same at your
own pleasure, and that for a purpose which I could guess at. But let all
things be lavvfull unto you: what makes this law for your purpose? By your
meaning the Apostles and Eua^gelistes did offend, in adding any thing besides
the law of Moses, which is absourd. Nether did Moses in this place
(forbiddinge to add or take away) speak of his vvrytten law (for he had
not yet written it) but of those things which he delivered the^ by word of
mouth at that time, the which he willed them to keep and observe vvhollye
and perfectly, without chaunginge it by addition, or diminution, or by their
own corrupt gloses, as naughty men are wont to do: And this is the true
meaning of that place, and not as you would have it, that nothing should be
believed besides that which Moses set down: for a little after Moses him
self commands the l^vves to hear the Prophet which God should raise after
him, as him self, Deuteronomy. 8.
meaning thereby Christ.

THE DEFENSE.
Here again M. Charke disburdeneth him self upon Gotuisus: sayeing, If the
Censure of Colen has no such words: Gotuisus failed in vvriting their
book. Gotuis. ca. 1. antith. 2.
But gentle sir wiliam: this matter is not so shyfted of. You knew that
Gotuisus: took these words from kemnitius, against whom they were proved
false by Payuas, before you wrote your book, as the most of his other reports
were. How chances it then you would utter the^ again without seeing the
original, whether they were true or no? Beside this, Gotuisus cites Canisius
for the same words, Canis. in opere Cate. fol. 162.
where no one such word is to be fownd: why looked you not in Canisius to
see yt? or why had you not cited Canisius in your Margent, as well as the
Censure of Colen, which you well knew was not to be had? why did you conceal
Canisius, I say? can you be excused from wilful dishonest dealyng in this
matter? No, no, your desperate resolution is to-too evident.

But (say you) we hold the doctrine, though the Jesuits have not the
words. What doctrine M. Chark? that the want of holy scripture must be
peeced out by traditions? It is false. We speak not so vnreuere^tlie of the
scripture, as shall better appear by the article foloweyng. We do not teach
that the scriptures are wanting, or need to be peeced. It is your heretical
malice which deuiseth these words. Though both parts of gods word, that
is, both written and vnwritte^, be necessary unto gods Church: yet both of
the^ do stand in their full perfection assigned them by God: nether is the one
a mayme, or impeachement to the other: no more than is S. Lukes Gospel to that
of S. Matthew: or S. Paul's epistles to any of them both. For as you may not
say that S. Mathewes Cospell is maimed, for that S. Lukes is also admitted: or
that S. Paul's epistles are a peecing up of the former Gospells: no more can we
say that gods word left us by mouth in tradition is a ^ayme, or detraction
to that, which he has left us in writing: or that in writing to be a
disanullyng of that which we had by tradition: for that, both are parts of
gods word, and of equal authority: as shall be showed more largely in the
twelueth article, together with certain means how to know and discern the
same. Wherefore these odious speeches against the dignity of holy scripture
do proceed only from the malice of you our adversaries, and of no cause or
matter ministered by us.

After certain tryflyng speech to little purpose M. Charke concludes
peremptorily this article in these words. To conclude, it is a great
iniquity to add traditions, or your unwritten Great iniquity to add one
verity to an other, or to believe two verities together.
verities to the vvrytten word of God, whereunto no man may add: because
nothing is vvantynge: and to him that adds shall the curses written in the
book be added for ever, cityng in the Marge^t, the place of the Apocalips,
which says, that who soever adds or takes away from that book of
prophecy, shall incur the plagues written in that book. Apoc. 22.
But good Lord: when will these men leave to abuse the scriptures, and learn
to speak to the purpose? if we believe all that is written in that book of
revelations, and other things besides revealed unto us else where by God: do
we incur this curse of S. John thereby? S. John says nothing may be added
or taken away from the perfection of that most excellent and mystical book
of revelations: but did he mean heerby that nothing should be credited besides
that which is there written? S. John him self vvrote diverse things which
are not in the Apocalips: ^n exami. ^oncil. trid. ^ag. ^01.
yea by the judgment of kemnitius (a protestant) he vvroote his whole Gospel
after the Apocalips. And yet (I think) by this addition of his Gospel, he did
not run into the curses of that book. How the^ is this place alleged
against us for beleeuyng those things which our auncetours have delivered
unto us, as received from the mouth of Christ and his Apostles? how holds
this argument, no man may add to the book of Apocalips: ergo, no man may
believe a tradition of Christ, or his Apostles? May not a man as well infer,
ergo we may not believe the acts of the Apostles? But this is their common
alleging of Scriptures.

It is Lamentable to see the slight dealings of these men in matters of such
importance. It is a great iniquity (says Charke) to add traditions, or your
unwritten verities to the written word of God. What mean you (Sir) by
adding? who does add? or in what sense? If God left any doctrine by tradition
unto the Church, and our auncetours have delivered the same unto us,
especially those of the primative Church: what shall we do in this case?
shall we refuse yt? It seems dangerous: and I see no reason. For the same
men that delivered unto us the scriptures, and said, this is gods written
word, and said of other forged scriptures, this is not gods written word:
the same delivered unto us these doctrines, sayeinge, this is Gods word
unwritten. As for example, Li. 10. de genesis ad lit. cap. 23.
S. Austen, and in c. 6. ep. ad Romans
Origin do teach us that baptizing of infants is to be practiced in the
Church, only by tradition of the Apostles. S. Ep. 54. ad marcellam.
Ierom, and Her. 75.
Epiphanius tell us that the fast of the lent, and other the like is a
tradition of the Apostles. de Eccles. hier. cap. 7.
Dionisius, and de coronae milit.
Tertullian say, that prayers and ob^ation for the dead are traditions of the
Apostles. Li. de spi. S. cap. 27.
S. Basil teaches, that the consecration of the font before baptism, the
exorcisme upon those that are to be baptized, their anointing with holy
Chrisme, and diverse like things are delivered unto us by prescript of Christ
and his Apostles. Thus testify these men, and no man in the Church controlled
their testimony at that time: whereby it is evident that all that Church
believed it. Now, what shall we do, when these and many other like things are
delivered us by our forefathers, the doctors, and chief pyllers of Christ his
Church? shall we reject, and discredit them? wherefore? or upon what ground!
these men were nearer to the Apostles times than we are by many hundred years:
and therefore could better tell than we can, what the Apostles left by
tradition, or left not. Again, they were no dishonest men, and consequently
would not write a lie or deceive us wittinglie. And if they would: yet other
men would have controlled them. Why then should it be such iniquity in us
to receive and believe the traditions which they deliver us, as M. Chark says
it is? If they come from the mouth of Christ and his Apostles, as these fathers
do affirm: then are they part of Gods word also, as well as the other
which are written.

But you will say (I know) they come not from Christ and his Apostles. And
how (I pray you) can you prove that to me? why should I believe you rather
than these holy fathers, which lived so long ago? I do not see (fot example
sake) why I should believe a CHARKE, or a FVLKE coming but yesterdaye from the
Grammar School, before a Cyprian, a Tertulian, a Basil, a Jerome, a
Chrysostom, an Ambrose, or an Austen, especially in a matter of fact (as our
case is:) seeing they lived more than twelve or thyrtene hundred years nearer
to the deed doing, than these ministers do: and yet to this extremity am I
driven. For hearken a little how D. Fulck handles these men about traditions.
S. Cyprian is alleged against him, sayeing, that the mynglyng of wine and
water in the Chalice is the tradition of Christ him self Fulke: Against
Martial page 170.
but if Cyprian had been vell urged, he would have better considered of the
matter. Tertulian is alleged, sayeing, that the blessing with the sign of the
cross is a tradition of the Apostles: Fulke: Ibidem. pa. 178.
Tertulians judgment of tradition without scripture in that place is corrupt.
S. Basil is alleged for the same matter, affirmyng the custom of blessing
with the sign of the cross to be an Apostolical tradition: Fulke: Ibidem.
pa. 178.
Basil is an insufficient vvarrant for so vvoorthie a matter. S. Jerome is
alleged, sayeing, that Lent fast is the tradition of the Apostles: Fulke:
Against Bristoes motives. pa. 35
Jerome vntruelye ascribes that tradition to the Apostles. S. Chrisostom is
alleged, sayeing, that the Apostles decreed that i^ the sacrifice of the
Altar, there should be made prayer for the departed: Fulke: where he says,
it was decreed by the Apostles etc, he must pardon us for crediting him,
because he can not show it ovvt of the Acts and vvritings of the Apostles.
Against D. Allen For prayer 303.
But diverse fathers are alleged together beside Chrysostom for the same
matter: Fulke: Ibidem pa. 362. and 363.

A provvd question.


who is vvytnesse that this is the tradition of the Apostles? you will say,
Tertulian, Cyprian, Austen, Jerome, and a great many more. But I would learn
why the Lord would not have this setforth by Matthew. Mark, Luke, or Paul?
why they were not chosen scribes heerof, rather than Tertulian, Cyprian,
Jerome, Austen, and other such as you name? But this is a counterfeit
institution, and fained tradition. And in other place being urged by the like,
he discrediteth all antiquity: sayeing, Against Br. motyues page 36.
It is a common thing with the A^ncient vvriters to defend every ceremony
which was used in their time, by tradition of the Apostles.

Here now are set before me a pair of balances, with fulke and Charke in one
end: and Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Basil, Jerome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius,
and Austen, in the other end: for all these fathers (as you see) affirm
constanlie traditions of Christ and his Apostle, besides the written word:
Fulke and Charke deny the same. They allege particular examples: Fulk
opposes him self to them all. But which in reason should I rather believe?
You shall hear some of them speak. S. Basil the great was a man (I trow) to
be matched in credit with Charke the minister. His words are these: Li. de
spi. S. cap. 27.

Traditions of equal force with the written word.


Dogmata quae in ecclesia praedicantur quaedam habemus e doctrina scripto
tradita, quaedam rursus ex apostolorum traditione in mysterio, id est, in
occulto tradita accepimus, quoru^ vtraque parem vim habent ad pietatem, nec
hiis quisquam contradicit, quisquis sane vel tenuiter expertus est, quae sint
iura ecclesiastica: Among the doctrines which are preached in the church, some
we have opened to us by writing, and some again we have received, delivered
us by tradition of the Apostles in secret: both which doctrines are of equal
force to piety: nether does any man gaynsaye this, which has any little
knowleige in the laws of t^^ Church.

Here now are S. Basil and VV. Charke at an open combat about traditions, The
one says, it is iniquity to admit them: The other says, it is ignorance
to reject them. The one says, they are of no authority or credit at all: The
other says, they are of equal force and authority with the written word
of Christ and his Apostles. Whom will you rather believe in this case?

Li. 1. demo^. Euang. c. 8.
With S. Basil takes part Eusebius, sayeinge, Christi discipuli ad magistri
sui nutum, illius praecepta partim literis, partim sine literis quasi iure
quodam non scripto, seruanda commendarunt. The disciples of Christ at their
Masters beck, did commend his precepts to posterity, partly in writing;
partly without writing, as it were by a certain unwritten law. Mark here,
that tradition is called an vnvvrite^ law: and the things delivered thereby
are the precepts of Christ: and that they were left unwritten by the beck or
appointment of Christ him self.

Heresi. 61.
Epiphanius is yet more earnest than Eusebius. For writing against certain
heretics named Apostolici, which denied traditions, as our protestants do:
he proves it thus: 1. Cor. 11. 14.15.
Oportet autem and traditione vti: Non enim omnia a diuina scriptura accipi
possunt. Quapropter aliqua in scripturis, aliqua in traditione sancti Apostoli
tradiderunt, quemadmodum dicit Sanctus Paulus: Sicut tradidi ^obis: and alibi,
sic doceo, and sic tradidi in ecclesiis: we must use tradition also. For that,
all things can not be had out of Scripture. For which cause, the holy Apostles
have delivered some things to us in scriptures, and some things by traditions,
according as S. Paul says: even as I have left unto you by tradition: And in
an other place: This do I teach, and this have I left by tradition in
Churches. Here you see Epiphanius does not only affirm so much as we
hold, but also proves it out of Scripture.

Hom. 4. in ca. 2. ep. ad These.

2 Thessalonians. 2.


With Epiphanius joins fully and earnestlye S. Chrysostom, writing upon
these words of S. Paul to the purpose: State and tenete traditiones: Stand
fast, and hold traditions. Out of which clear words S. Chrysostom makes
this illation. Hinc patet quod non omniae per epistolam tradiderint, sed multa
etiam sine literis. Eadem vero fide digna sunt tam illa quam ista. Itaque
traditionem quoque ecclesiae fide dignam putamus. Traditio est: nihil quaeras
amplius. By these words of S. Paul it is evident, that the Apostles delivered
not all by epistle (or writing) unto us: but many things also which are not
written: And yet those are as worthy faith as the other. For which cause, we
esteem the tradition of the Church worthy of faith. It is a tradition:
seek no more about it. What can be spoken more effectualie against VV. Charke
than this? Is it now great iniquity to receive traditions, or no? how will he
avoid this uniform consent of antiquity against his fond malepeartnes,
condemning all traditions for iniquity? Here you see are the very words
auowed (as also in S. Basil alleged before) which these new masters do so
odiouslye exaggerate to the people daily, that we match traditions with the
written word of God. These words (I say) are here maintained both in
Chrysostom and Basil, affirming the unwritten traditions of Christ and his
Apostles to be of equal force, and authority with the written word of the
same: And yet I trow, were they not blasphemous for sayeing so, as these young
gentlemen are accustomed to call us.

And this now in general, that traditions are: that is, that diverse things
belonging to faith are left us unwritten, by Christ and his Apostles: Also,
that this sort of traditions are of equal authority with the written word:
because they are the vnwrite^ or delivered word. But now if any man would
ask me, Diverse apostolical traditions in particular.
what, or which are these Apostolical traditions in particular: I could
allege him testimonies out of the ancient fathers, for a great number: whereof
some examples have been given in the former article. But let any man read S.
Cyprian, Sermon: de ablut: pedum: Tertullian de coron: miiltis: and S. Ierom.
Dialog. cont. luciferianos: and he shall find store. And albeit, some thing
has been said of S. Austen before: yet will I add these few examples out of
him, for endinge of this article. He proves the baptism of infants by
tradition of the Church: S. Austens testimony for diverse particular
traditions.
lib. 10^ de genesis cap. 23. He proves by the same tradition, that we must not
rebaptize those which are baptized of heretics: li. 2. de bapt. c. 7. and
lib. 1. cap. 23. and li. 4. cap. 6. He proves by tradition, the celebration of
the pentecost commonly called whit-sondaye: epist. 118. c. 1. He proves by
tradition, that the Apostles were baptized. ep. 108. He proves by tradition
the ceremonies of baptism as delivered by the Apostles, Li. de fide and oper.
cap. 9. He proves by tradition of Christ and his Apostles, that we should
receive the blessed sacrament fasting. ep. 1^8. cap. 6. He proves by like
tradition the exorcisme of such as should be baptized li. 1. de nupt. and
concup. cap. 20. and li. 6. contra Julian. ca. 2. He proves by the same
tradition, that we must offer up the sacrifice of the mass for the dead li.
de cura pro mort. age^da. ca. 1. and 4. Sermon. 32. de verbis Apostoli.

I omit many other such things, which as well this learned doctor, as other
most holy fathers of the primative Church, do auouche, by only tradition
of Christ and his Apostles, without writing: which to believe or credit, if it
be such great iniquity and blasphemy, as VV. Charke will have us to esteem:
then were these ancient fathers in a miserable case, and this new minister in
a fortunate lot. But if the countenance of this new Sir do not surpass the
credit of those old Saints: I ween it will not be hard to judge how fond and
foolish his raylinge speech is against a doctrine so vniformlie received in
Christ his Church, as the doctrine of traditions has been from the beginning.

Whether the Jesuits speak evil of Scripture. Art. 6.
THE CENSVRE.
The scripture may be wrested to an evil sense.
You report the Jesuits to say: The holy Scripture is a nose of wax. Cens.
117 God forgive you, for abusing so much these learned men. Marie you take the
way to ouermatch both learning and truth too, if you may have your desire.
He that will read the place by you quoted, shall find the Jesuits, upon
occasion given them, to say in effect thus: that before the rude and ignorante
people, it is easy for a noughtie man, to vvreste the scripture, to what
interpretation pleases him best, for the flatteringe either of Prince or
people: even as a man may frame a nose of wax what way, or to what form
he list. And will you of this make them to say, that the holy Scripture is
a nose of wax? Christ is lykened to a serpent, Nu. 21. Ioh. 3. Math. 25.
and yet is no serpent: Also to a covetous Usurer, and yet is none: Nether does
the Scripture committ blasphemy in using such similitudes. But how prove you
(M. Charke) that the scripture may not be wrested into many senses before
the rude people, as a nose of wax may be into many forms? Because it is
contrary (say you) unto the words of David: Psalm. 18.
The law of the Lord is perfect, converting souls Suerly I would you might
be feed even for the saving of your credit (M. Chark.) to allege one place
without corruption. Do you translate, Lex domini immaculata: The Law of the
Lord is perfect in sense, so that it may not be wrested to a vvro^g
interpretation? This is marvelous. Immaculata signifies in these countries,
unspotted, void of filthe, or dishonestie, vvherevvith profane writings are
often times defiled: But the law of God is deuoyde of all such things, and
therefore conuerteth souls, whereas other writings do often times corrupt
them: But that Immaculata can not be translated, perfect in sense, it is
euidente by this, that every syllable and word in Gods Law is unspotted,
but yet not perfect in sense, and much less so clear, as it may not be
perverted to an evil meaning: vvherby your fraudulente translation is
discovered.

THE DEFENSE.
To avoid the reproach of belyeing and slaundering the Jesuits in this place,
Pay^ Andrad. orth. expl. lib. 2. page 104.
M. Charke has this refuge. I appealle (says he) from your Censure, to
Andradius plain confession. He defended the Iesuites^ in these points against
kemnitius, which you defend against me. This Andradius in handlyng this
article, does not at all cry ou^, as you do, but acknovvlegeth and defends
the matter vvithou^ such needles scoffs: What scoffs the Censure uses, or
what cryeing out there is in this article, the reader sees, and can Judge of
your report M. Charke. But that you are the same man, which you were before
(that is, most false and shameless in your avouchementes) it shall now appear.
You say here of Andradius two things: First, that he plainly confesses,
and acknowlegeth the matter: Secondlye, that he cries not out against
kemnitius for this report. And for both these things, you quote Andradius in
the hundred and fowertie page of his second book. As for the first, let any
man see the place by you quoted, and if Andradius confess any more of the
matter, than is set down in the Censure it self: let him believe you an
other time upon your word. For the second, it is to-too impudent. For albeit
Andradius had not altogether so much cause to take stomach against kemnitius as
I have against you, for making a greater lie than he did, as shall be showed: yet
let the reader vewe over but the two pages, page 102. and 103.
which go immediately before that which you cite, and he shall see nothing
else in them but a most earnest and sharp inuectiue against kemnitius, and all
other protestants, for malicious slaundering, and misreporting the ^esuites.
And among other things Andradius says there, that for a great^ time he took
pytie of the protestants, thi^king that they had erred of ignorance. But now
seeing their malice in forging open lies against their own consciences: that
is, which they must needs know and understand to be lies: his affection of
compassion was turned into hatred. This and much more has Andradius in that
place, against kemnitius, for shameless lyeing. And yet M. Charke says, that
he cries not out as I do, but c^fesseth all. What may be said to such?

But (as I said before) Andradius had not so much cause of Choler against
kemnitius, as I have against M. Charke: for that he does not only report
again an open untruth, which he knew to be a lie before he repo^ted it: but
also has corrupted, and falsified that lie, to make yet a greater lie. Which
thing that you may see, I will here lay down the very words both of
kemnitius, and of Gotuisus M. Charkes author: Shameless dealing of M. Charke:
Gotuisus in Antithetis: page 216.
for that their words are the self same: and Gotuisus took them syllable
for syllahle from kemnitius. Gotuisus words then are these: The Jesuits
say, that the holy scripture in those things which it contains and
settetb forth, is, as it were, a nose of wax, not yielding any certain and
immouable sentence, but such as may be wrested into any interpretation.
Censura Colon. fol. 117. and in opere catechestico Canisij fol. 44. For this
false report of kemnitius against the Jesuits, Andradius falls into the long
and vehement inuectiue whereof I spoke before. But what should I do here with
VV. Charke? or rather what should the reader think of him, for so great a
falshoode, as in this place he uses? for first he concealeth the quotatio^ of
Canisius fol 44, as well in his first book, as also in his second replye. And
the cause heerof is (as often has been noted before) for that the quoting of
Canisius, according as he found him quoted in his author, would have discovered
the lie, which M. Chark hoped to conceal by passing over Canisius, and cyting
only the Censure of Colen, which he was sure no man could find in England.
And is this dealing excusable?

Secondly, out of the large sentence of Gotuisus now repeated, M. Charke
took only three or four words, that seemed most odious, and yet falsified
too, thereby to make them more odious. For where as Gotuisus says, the Jesuits
hold the scriptures to be as it were a nose of wax: M. Cha^ke writes that
the Jesuits say, the holy scripture is a nose of wax, and quoteth for it
Censura Colen. fol. 117. which he knew was not to be had: and concealeth
purposelie both kemnitius, Gotuisus, and Canisius, where the forgerie was to
be discovered. What shall a man say of this ministers falsehood? shall we
believe any longer this puritan protestation of plain and simple dealing in
the lord? what hypocritical deceyuing of the reader is this?

And thus much for the slander and falshoode in reportinge. But now to come
to the matter it self: the Censure grants, that upon certain
circumstances the Jesuits do compare the heretical wre^ting and detorting of
scripture, unto the bowe^ng of a nose of wax into many forms. Mary the
circumstances of this comparison are these. First, that they speak not in
respect of the scripture in it self: but in respect of heretics and other
wicked men, which abuse scripture. Secondlye, they add, apud rudem populum, qui
iudicare non potest. This abuse and wrestinge of scripture happens commonly
before the rude and ignorant people, which can not judge of the deceyt.
Thirdlye, they adioyne, vt palpentur vitia principum aut vulgi. Heretics do
it to flatter the princes or people present, in their vices. By which words
they signify the favor of the hearers. All these circumstances the Jesuits
lay down, when they compare the scripture abused to a nose of wax wrested.
And who is so foolish but will confess, that a lewd and wicked man in an
ignorant audience, and where all men favor his doctrine (for that he
flattereth them in their sins:) may wrest and abuse the holy scripture (as
men are wont to bend a nose of wax) to what plausible sense it lyketh him
best? No mary (says M. Chark) it can not be. A ridiculous euasio^ 2. Pet. 3,
For albeit an hereretike may wrest and pervert the scripture, yet S. Peter
teaches that it shall be to his own destruction, and the scripture
notvvithstanding shall remain perfect and undefiled. As though we did hold
the contrary to this: or as though we did impute the wrestinge of the
scripture unto imperfection of gods word, and not to the malice of the
wrester: or as though we said that this wresting were not destruction unto the
wrester. Who ever heard such kind of answering? he says the scripture may
be wrested and perverted: and yet he will even with these words answer and
refute us, which hold also that it may be wrested. He sayethe the very same
that we do, and yet will he have men believe that he sayethe the contrary.
Where were your wits (sir william,) when you wrote this answer?

But you storm greatly against the comparison, sayeing, shall Jesuits
maintain this directly, or in directly in a k^ngdome, where the gospel is
preached? What else good sir? even in the kingdom of you ministers, and to the
confusion of your false named Gospel: which is nothing else, but the letter of
scripture perverted, and worse abused, and wrested by you to all errors and
licentiousnes, than ever waxen nose was yet bended to diverse fashions. It is no
fault of scripture that heretics abuse it.
It is no fault of holy scripture, that wicked men may abuse it. For the more
excellent a thing is, the more easy and pernicious is the abuse thereof. Christ
was the excelle^test benefit that ever God gave unto this world: and yet is he
called notwithstanding, Romans 9.
lapis offensionis, and petra Scandali: the stone of offense, and rock of
scandal: not for any fault or imperfection in him: In ca. 1. ep. ad Gal. In
verba. ps. 10. ecce peccat. etc. Iren. lib. 1. cont. haer. cap. 1.
but through the wickedness of such as abuse that benefit. So, when S. Jerome
does call the scripture alleged corruptly by Marcian and Basilides,
euangelium Diaboli, the devils Gospel, yielding this reason: that the Gospel
consisted not in the words of scripture, but in the sense. Also when S.
Austen calls the scripture, arcum haereticorum: The bow of heretics. And
Ireneus compares it abused by heretics, to a Jewel stamped with the form
of a dog or fox. Naz. ad Nicob. Tertull. de praescrip.
In Likewise when Gregory Nazianzen compares it to a silver skaberd with a
leaden swoorde within yt: Tertullian to the deceitful ornaments of harlots:
Vincentius Lyrinensis to poisoned herbs, Lyrin. contra haereses.
covered in the apothecaries shop, with fayer titles, and superscriptio^s on
the boxes where they lie: No doubt these fathers mea^t not by such
comparisons, to detracte any thing from the dignity and excellency of holy
scripture, no more than the Jesuits did in comparing it to a nose of wax,
abused and wrested by malicious heretics.

Luthers testimony
And I would know of M. Charke, for that he exaggerateth so much the
indignity of this comparison, how he will interpret his holy man Martin
Luthers own words: vvhi^he, after a long discourse to prove that all
heresies seek their foundation in scripture, are these. In postilla conc. 2.
in dom: 8. post trinitatem.
Quare verum est (sicut dicitur) Scripturam sanctam esse librum haereticum: hoc
est, eiusmodi libr^^ quo potissimum haeretici nituntur: Wherefore it is true
(which is said) that the holy scripture is an heretical book: that is,
such a book as heretics most of all lean unto. And a little after:
Haereseon liber biblia sunt: The bible is a book of heresies. Oh that the
Jesuits had used such words: how would VV. Chark and his fellows have
triumphed against them for the same? And yet (though Martin Luthers fashion
was to run over the shoes, in what soever he took in hand) I think he
meant nothing in these words, against the dignity of scripture. For he
adds in the very place alleged, Scriptura sancta haereseon liber est, non
sui causa, sed istorum nebulonum qui eam deprauant. The holy scripture is a
book of heresies, not of it self, but by the means of those knaves, which
do pervert yt. This is father Luthers sweet benediction upon sacramentaries:
vvherof (I trow) M. Charke will not deny him self to be one.

And thus you see that the Jesuits have not only truth and reason on their
side, to use that comparison: but also have examples in this kind: both of
ancient fathers, and of our adversaries them selves. What intemperat malice
then is this of william Charke, so to rave against them, for this one
comparison, used without all derogation of Scripture? if they had spoken evil
of any scripture in it self: if they had rejected any one book thereof, as
protestants do many: if they had discredited or defaced any one sentence
thereof, as Luther does most odiouslie the whole epistle of S. James: Vide
sixth. sent. li. 7. biblio.
if they should say any book of the scripture to be written with a profane
and ambitious spirit, as your D. Fulk does of the Machabies: Against purg.
page 209.
if they should ieste at the Angel Raphaell in the book of Tobie, as M.
VVhittaker does: or fall to that extreme impudency, as to reuyle in open
audience any holy person commended in sacred write, Against M. Campia^ pa. 18.
as you did (M. Chark) without shame, when you called that blessed woman of
God, Judith, unchaste Judith, in your disputations with M. Campian: if the
Jesuits (I say) should say, or do any of these things, as you are driven
to do: then might you justly accuse the^, and draw the^ into hatred, for
deprauing of gods word. But seeing they do not so, but altogether the
contrary: seeing they defend gods whole word against you, that offerre
violence to the same: seeing they maintain the number of books, which
antiquity has left the^: the vnwritte^ traditions that the Apostles have
delivered them: the Catholics expositio^s which ancient fathers have
assigned them: seeing they nether choppe nor change, nor corrupt nor put out,
nor co^te^ptuouslie reiecte any one thing, as you do infinite, for
maintainyng of your ruynous, and most impious cause: you endeavor in vain to
discredit them, by exaggerating one poor comparison or similitude, which they
upon occasion used, to express the wickedness of you heretics that abuse
scripture: and not to attribute any imperfection to scripture it self.

No man in the world ever spoke more reverently of holy scripture, than
Jesuits do. The Jesuits most reverent speech of holy scripture.
And whether they seek to execute it in life, as much as our ministers of
England or no: let them be judges that know both their conuersatio^s. I might
here allege infinite testimonies out of their works, how and with what
reverence they speak of scripture. But one place only of Canisius shall serve
for this time. He has written two large and learned volumes of the corruptions
of gods word, In prefat. ad lectore^, i^ li. de corruptelis verbi dei pro Io.
Ba.
by the heretics of our time, where he has these woo^des: Est ergo verbum
dei etc. Wherefore the word of God is (as holy scripture conteyneth) the
knovvleige of salvation: the clear lantern, and shynyng lamp: it is the
hydden mystery: the heauentlie Manna: the pure and proved gold: the learning
of Saints: the doctrine of all spirit and truth: the loking glass: the
liuelye fontayne: the sealed book: which book who soever do use well,
they are Gods scholars, they are spiritual, they are wise, they are just,
they only are made the friends, and heirs of almighty God. These are
Canisius a Jesuits words. And do these men speak baselye of scriptures, as
M. Chark here accuses them?

Psalm. 18. v. 7.
But now we come to examine the text alleged by M. Chark against the Jesuits
to wytt, Lex domini immaculata: "the law of our Lord is unspotted, or
vnd^filed: which M. Charke would have to signify: that the scripture is so
perfect and plain in sense, as no wicked man may wrest or abuse the same. For
which absurd reasoninge and wrestinge of scripture, he being now reproved by
the Censure: hear what he answers, and how he defends him self. The
Censure (says he) supposes me to have but one Bible, and that of the old
translation only, which has, [the law of the Lord is vndefiled] etc. but
the original has: [the law of the Lord is perfect.] And the best
translations have so translated it. your old translation goes alone. The 70.
follow the rest. Here you see that M. not immaculata: that is, undefiled or
vnspoted: but rather perfect, in

But here by the way would I have the reader to Mark, how much M. Charke
gets to his cause. If I should grant him all that he has here said:
surely he should gain only, that the law of God, is perfect. And is this
against any thing that we say or hold? or is it against the signification of
the word immaculata in the old latin translation, which he impugneth? Is not
a thing immaculate or undefiled also, called perfect? even as on the
contrary, a filthy or defiled thing, is called imperfect? If then we should
grant that the hebrew and greek textes had the word perfect in them, in
steed of the latin word immaculata: yet this does not condemn the old
translation for using the word immaculata, immaculate. For that immaculate (as
has been showed) signifies also perfect from spot: mary not perfect in that
sense, wherein M. Charke talks: and for proof whereof he alleged this
sentence: to wit, that because the law of the lord is perfect, therefore the
scripture can not be wrested: which is a most false and absurd illation upon
the word perfect. For S. Paul's epistles are persect together with other
scriptures: and yet S. Peter says that many men did wrest and deprave them.
2. Pet. 3.
But now let us consider the several four points of M. Charkes former
answer, which (as you see) if we should grant unto him, without
contradiction, yet had he gained nothing thereby. But let us examine them.

Touching the first which he answers: that is, about the variety of Bybles
and translations, which he has at home, I will not stand or contend with M.
Chark. Let him have as many as he please: the matter is, how well he
understands, or reports those Bybles, and not how many he has. The second
point is false, that the hebrew text disagreeth from the old latin
translation: as shall be showed after. The third is fond, that all the best
translations do differe from the old translation heerin. The old latin
translation.
For what best, or better, or other good latin translation has he, than the
old, which was in use in gods Church above thirtene hundred years past: as
may be seen by the citations of the fathers, which lived then? which was
afterward also ouervewed and corrected by S. Ierom? Ierom. ep. 102. and in
fine catalo. Augu. ep. 10. ad hieron.

Praefat. in Nouum tes. an. 1556.


which was also so hyghlye commended by S. Augustine? what other better
translation (I say) has william Charke than this ancient, which he so
contemns? except he will name some latter of our time, as of Erasmus, Luther,
or the like: which Beza him self notwithstanding affirms to be nothing
like the old tra^slatio^ for exactnes. The fowerth point which he adds is a
shameless lie, that the septuagint in greek do dissent from the word
immaculata in the latin. For their word is AMOMOS, AMOMOS.
which their own lexicon will expound unto them to be immaculate, innocent,
irreprehensible.

TAMAM or TAM.
To return therefore in a word or two to the original text, the hebrew word
is TAMAM, or TAM which the septuagint do interpret (as you have heard) AMOMOS:
that is, irreprehensible: and the ancient latin translation immaculata, Abouvt
the translation of immaculata.
immaculate. And what refuge then can M. Charke find here? I do not deny,
but that it signifies also, perfect: for that, what soever is irreprehensible
and without spott, may also be called perfect, as has been showed. But how
does this prove that it signifies to be perfect in sense, in such sort, as
it may not be wrested, or perverted? In the 118. Psalm where our ancient
translation has beati immaculati in via: An. 1549
your own englysh bible has translated it (M. Charke) blessed are those that
be undefiled in the way: and the Hebrew and greek words are TAM, and
AMOMOS, as in the other text. How then do you rail at our old ancient
translation for that wherein your new english bible does the very same? the
like you may see in infinite other places: as leuit. 3. v. 1. and 6. Also Number.
6. v. 14. Where sacrifices are appointed to be immaculate, according to the
ancient tranflation. And your english bible translateth it so too, sayeinge
they must be without blemishe: where the hebrew and greek words are TAM and
AMOMOS, as before.

By which is seen, that M. Charke cares not whether he runs, what he
forgeth, or whom he reprehendeth, so he may seem always to say somewhat:
And of all other shyftes, this is the last, and the easiest, and of most
credit, and least able to be spyed of his reader, (as he thinks) to inueighe
against the old latin translation, when he is pressed vnauoydablye with any
place of scripture alleged. For this shyft, besides the present covering of
the difficulty, yields also some opinion of Learning to his Master, gyuinge
men to understand, that he is skillfull in the learned tongues: whereas God
knows, the refuge is used for bare misery: as it always appears, when it
co^methe to examination. And this shall suffice for this sixth article.

HERE the Author was interrupted by a VVritte de remouendo, so as he could
not for this present pass on any further: as more at large is showed at the
beginning, in an epistle to M. Charke.
A BRIEF TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL matters contained in the defense of the
Censure.
THe folly and badd dealyng of Hanmer: page 3.4.5.6. How to discern a clean
spirit from an unclean: page: 11.12.13^ The ordinary fashion of heretics in
raylyng: as appears by Fulke, Chark, and Hanmer: page: 11.13.14.15.
33.34.35.36.38.158.159. And as appears by Calvin: page. 15. And by Luthers
raylyng speech against king Henry the eight: page, 15.16. 17. And against
Caluinistes: page, 17.18. What a sect and sectarie is, and how it may
differe or agree with heresy: page, 19.21.22.26. The Jesuits are no sect.
page, 19. The pharisees a sect, page, ^4. Charkes absurd ouersyght in
definynge a sect page. 25. Religious men odius to heretics: page
30.31.32.33. The religious vocation consists in three vows: pa. 38 The
monks of old time made vows. page 36. The religious state of these times,
and of the primative church all one insubstance: page. 38. Elias, Helizeus,
and S. John Baptist paternes of religious men: page. 19.20.21. S. Augustine a
religious man. page: 38. Austeritie of life and voluntary poverty practiced
by ancient fathers, and by Christ him self. page. 27.39. Marriage of votaries
is worse than adultery: page 37. 43.44^50. Luther for fear entered into
Religion: page, 49. His horrible doctrine and impiety: page 45. 51. and so
forth to the 66. page. His bodily conference with the devil. page. 68.69.
His dronken death: page: 66.70.71. The dissension of protestants.
74.75.76.77.92.93. John Calvin his falling into heresy: page 78. His burning
in the shoulder for Sodomye: page. 78. His ambition and vainglorie: page 81.82.
His manner in raising of the dead. page: 82. His casting out of a devil: page
83. His lascivious life and dayntynes: page 84. His horrible siknes, and
death. page. 89. Beza his wicked disposition, Simonie, and lasciuiousnes page
86^87.88.89. The six reformers of religion, what kind of men they were: page,
90.91.92. Bucer his inconstancy and death. 92.93. M. Chark ca^ not be
certain of his good estate, page 112. Luthers absurd doctrine, that a woman is
as necessary for man as meat drink and sleep: page, 63. The definition of
sin, page: 101. etc. to 109. page. Not only incredulity is sin: against
Luthers doctrine page 51. Sin is a reasonable action: page 104. Sin is
voluntary, page 105. Mad men and unreasonable creatures can not sin: page
108. Concupiscence is not properly a sin in the regenerate: page 116.117.
etc. M. Charks maruailous impudency in translating S. Austen: page. 121. It is
the opinion, not of Catholics, but of Calvin, that God is the author of
evil. page. 124. The first motions, how they are no sin: page 125. 126. The
true division of the ten commandments: page 132.133. Traditions of equal
force with the written word: page 159 160. Tradition is called an unwritten
law, page: 160. Fulks impudency in discrediting 8. ancient fathers, and all
antiquity, page. 158. 159. The sufficiency of scripture: page. 149. M. Charks
three fond reasons concerning the sufficiency of scripture page. 151.152. How
heretical wrestinge of scripture is compared to a Nose of wax, page. 66.
The faults correct thus.
Page 10. lin. 25. for embreued. Read, imbrued. Page 11. lin. 9. for oder.
Read, order. Page 12. in the margent for Act. 6. Read, Act. 8. Page 16. in
the margent for Fol. 442. Read. Fol. 342. Page 17. lin. 13. for Angelicam
Read, Anglicam. Page 18. lin. 16. for Caluinistes, who say their masters
do call. Read, Caluinist^ (who are their masters) do call. Page 29. lin.
26. for your. Read, you. Page 29. lin. vlt. for men. Read, man. Page 32. lin.
15. for Nounes: Read, Nonnes. Page 33. in the margent, Read Page 96. and 98.
Page 40. lin. 36. for Loyalas. Read, Loyolas Page 47. lin. 19. for Praeolus.
Read. Prateolus Page 61. in the margent, for ingenius. Read ingenuus. Page
64. in the margent. Read. council. constable. act. 4. can. 2. and conci. Nic. 2.
act. 1. can. 2. Page 69. lin. vlt. for actibus: Read, ictibus. Page 74. in the
marge^t. for page 17. and 19. Read, 17. and 18. Page 9^. lin. 6. for Burtin:
Read, Bursin. Page 102. in the margent: for cap. 14. Read, lib. 14. Page 103.
in the margent: for de vnct. Read, de virt. Page 138. lin. 2. for Niphlet:
Read, Niphleth Page 143. lin. 38. for years Read, days

